THE SOULS ASCENSION IN THE STATE OF SEPARATION.

Summarily delivered in a Sermon preached at Shenly in the County of Hertford,
the 21. of November, 1660. at the Funeral Solemnities of Mrs Mary Jessop, late
wife of William Jessop Esquire and since enlarged and published for common benefit.

By ISAAC LOEFFS. M.A.

Eccles. 3.21. Who knows the Spirit of Man that goes upward, and the spirit
of the beast that goes downward to the Earth?

London, Printed for N. Ranew and J. Robinson, at the Angel in Jewen-street,
1670:

TO My ever honored Uncle WILLIAM JESSOP, ESQUIRE.
SIR,
MY natural modesty and backwardness to appear in public, together with the
difficulty of obtaining the Press, have detained this short Treatise so long
from you, that you may well judge it unseasonable now to be presented unto you.
Yet considering the duty of that relation wherein I stand unto you through your
late dear Yoak-Fellow, whose death was the occasion of this Discourse; and the
obligation that is upon me by so many favors and undeserved kindnesses
received from you; as also the benefit which possibly may accrue to others from
so serious a Subject; I have ventured it abroad into the world, under the
protection of your Name, how weakly so-ever managed, and liable to the censures
of this scrupulous Age. However, I may hope, that, as Funeral Sermons, above
others, have an advantage upon Auditors by their sad occasion, so this also may
affect the impartial Reader by the weight of its Arguments. And although it was
first intended and promised you for a private present, and an acknowledgment of
that due respect, and unfeigned love, which I do and shall ever bear to your
self, and your Relations; yet I presume it will not be the less accepted,
because others are now made equal sharers in it. And my confidence herein is
the more strengthened by the consideration of that public spirit which you have
manifested at all times, by your willing and unwearied pains in the service of
your Generation; wherein your integrity and faithfulness have so eminently
appeared, that your name is known and honored throughout the Nation. But this
above all is your Crown, that in all your public employments, you have not
sought your self, and the advancement of your Family, so much as the honor of
God, the interest of his people, and the enlargement of the Gospel, by your
high esteem of, and the encouragement you have given unto the Faithful
Ministers of it, among whom I have been an unworthy Labourer. And blessed be
the Lord, who has made his Grace to abound toward you by his assisting and
supporting presence in all your pains and travels, whereby you have been
enabled so cheerfully to undergo the burden of your hard services; who has
also blessed your careful and conscientious endeavors for the promoting of
Godliness in your Family, and among your near Relations. One fruit whereof I
cannot but mention for your unspeakable comfort, concerning your dear Relation
taken from you, being present at her dissolution; who about to close her eyes
from her mourning Children and Friends, and all the visible things of this
life, did sensibly, joyfully, and openly acknowledge and declare her assured
and known interest in Christ, unto whom she immediately departed. Now the Lord
supply all your wants, and be your reward, and the blessing of your Offspring.
And if this poor present may add any thing of spiritual benefit and advantage
to your own soul, the souls of your relations, or any others, it will be the
rejoicing of

From my study at Shenly in the County of Hertford, Oct. 20. 1669. Your
unworthy Kinsman and Servant in the Gospel. ISAAC LOEFFS.

THe Reader is desired to correct these following mistakes, which escaped the
Press by reason of the Authors absence.
PAge 2. Line 27. for walk read. reach P. 5. l. 12. leave out not. P. 9. l. 13.
f. hand 1. head. P. 10. l. 3. f. always r. already. P. 22. l. 8. f. live r.
evil. P. 26. l. 5. f. Luther 1. Augustine. T. 43. l. 16. f. strange r. strong.
p. 120. l. 9. f. medicinal r. mystical. P. 125. l. 2. f. Christ, r. God. P.
129. l. 2. blot out in Scriptures.

THE SOULS ASCENSION In the State of SEPARATION.
PHILLIP. 1.24. For I am in a straight betwixt two, having a desire to depart,
and to be with Christ, which is far better.


MAN being in honor abides not, or lodges not all night therein, says
David, Psalm. 49.12. But becomes like the Beasts that perish; for that which
befalls the Sons of men, befalls Beasts; as the one dies, so dies the
other, so that a man has no pre-eminence above a Beast, says Solomon, Eccl.
3.19. Nevertheless, though he dies like the Beast, yet his Spirit retaining
the immortality of its essence, returns not to corruption with his body, but
is capable of a state after death and dissolution, according as the infinite
wisdom of his Creator does dispose thereof in a way of justice or mercy. For
the spirit returns to God who gave it. Chap. 12 7.
And because most men are so irrational and foolish, as either through
ignorance of their own nature and being, to deny the immortality of their
souls; or through delusion, and presumption to conclude the certainty of their
future felicity; judging all things by sense, and the present dispensations of
external and common providence: therefore it shall be my present design, in
handling this Text, to give unto you a private prospect through the gate of
death, toward the mountains and valleys of eternal happiness and misery, by
presenting unto you the secret and hidden way of the spirit and soul of man in
its sudden flight and motion, at the time and in the state of separation from
the corporeal and fleshy part, which falls from it toward its earthly center.
And forasmuch as the dissolution of nature does not only divide the two
essential parts of soul and body, but also the common rode of this temporal
life into two distinct paths, toward the greatest different states of
everlasting joy or sorrow; I shall labor to walk both in this subject; the
first in the doctrinal part, because it is the proper and plain scope of the
Text; and the other in the Application by way of consequence and deduction. For
which end and purpose, it will be necessary for me first to bring you to the
Text by the preceding parts of the Chapter and the occasion of this Epistle,
to which it has relation; and then by the Text to the matter intended. The
occasion of Paul's writing this Epistle to the Church at Philippi, was an
honorable Present the Church had sent unto him, being then a prisoner in Rome,
by the hands of Epaphroditus their pastor, by way of charity to supply his
present necessities: By whom having understood the state and condition of that
Church, and being affected with so great an expression of their love unto him,
he returned this sweet Letter and Spiritual Epistle. And in this first Chapter,
after his usual benedictory salutation, first he declares his thankfulness
unto God, for their spiritual estate and continuance in the fellowship of the
Gospel, unto the 5th. verse. Secondly his confidence in God, for the perfecting
of the work of grace begun, as he was persuaded through charity to judge in
them all, by their future and final perseverance, unto the eighth verse.
Thirdly, his prayer for their increase and abounding in fruitfulness, unto the
11. verse. Then from the 12. to the 18. verse, he labors to satisfy them
concerning the consequent events of his present sufferings; that they were
rather for the furtherance, then hinderance of the Gospel, which he proves by
two arguments. First, because the cause of his sufferings, which was the
preaching of Christ the Savior of the world, was hereby made known, and
divulged, both in Nero's Palace, and in the neighboring Cities. Secondly,
because by his sufferings many of the brethren were made more bold to preach
the Gospel: and notwithstanding there were some that preached Christ out of
envy and strife, thinking thereby to add to his afflictions, yet he was so far
from being troubled at it, that he rejoiced, because Christ was the more
preached. In the 19. verse the Apostle discovers the gracious and sweet frame
and temper of his own heart under his sufferings, in the firm confidence he
had, that all things should work together for his good, and turn to his
salvation, as the return and fruit of their prayers, and through the supply of
the spirit of God unto him, that he might hold out under his trials, according
to his earnest expectation and hope, that through his stedfastness and
boldness, both in life and death, Christ might be magnified in his body:
whereof he gives this reason, verse 21. For to me to live is Christ, and to
dye is gain. That is, if I live I shall honor Christ by my life, and if I dye
I shall honor him by my death, and that death shall be my gain, according to
his confidence before expressed, that it should turn to his salvation. But in
case he should live, he should have fruit of his labor, or it were not worth
the while to live, for to live is Christ, that is, he should preach Christ,
which would be the gain of others, as his death would be his own. Now in these
thoughts Paul is at a stand, what to choose or desire, whether to live or dye;
for being a Prisoner at Rome for Christ's sake and the Gospel, he might expect,
as well to dye, as to live; and being as it were indifferent to either, he
debates the case and controversy in his own heart, according to the words of
my Text, I am in a straight betwixt two, etc.

In which words we have three distinct parts.

First, Aequilibrium animi, the even balance of Paul's mind in respect of life
and death, For I am in a straight betwixt two. Secondly, Inclinatio
affectionum, the inclination of his affections, and desire; Having a desire to
depart, and to be with Christ. Thirdly, Status vel determinatio judicii, The
determination of the controversy, and the discovery of his judgment upon
mature deliberation; in the last words of the Text, Which is far better.
Before I lay down the intended Doctrine or Proposition from this Scripture, I
will briefly explain the terms of the Text, to justify the clearness of the
doctrinal deduction from the Text.

(...).
I am in a straight betwixt two. I am straigthly held on both sides, So Beza
translateth it; or I am pressed of two, according to the vulgar Latin. S. Paul
presents unto himself life and death, two different objects of his choice and
election, and both sub ratione boni, appearing unto him to be really good for
him; but which of these to close withal, and pitch upon, he knows not. Not
that it was in his power to live or to die, but if the Lord should give him his
free liberty to choose either, he was at a stand in his present thoughts, which
way he had best incline himself, as the case was now with him, being an Apostle
of Christ, and now imprisoned for him; whether it were absolutely better upon
all accounts, and all things considered, for him to die by a violent hand, or
to be enlarged as a further instrument for the promoting and propating of the
Gospel in the world. As it was David's case, when he was to choose one of those
three judgments proposed unto him, 2 Samuel 24.13, 14. Shall seven years famine
come in thy land? or will thou fly three months before thine enemies, while
they pursue thee? or that there be three days pestilence in thy Land? And
David said unto Gad, I am in a great straight; let us fall now into the hand of
the Lord (for his mercies are great) and not into the hand of man. This was his
straight in respect of evils, and he chose well, for he chose the least in all
circumstances, for the time, the nature, and the immediate inflictor of the
evil or judgment. But Paul's straight was in respect of good objects to be
chosen, and which of the two were the best, was his present controversy,
whether to depart and be with Christ, or to live and abide still in the die to
preach him: both would be for the honor of Christ, but the former would be his
own gain, the latter the gain of the Church; and his own private interest was
the less unto him, because if he lived, it was but the deferring of his
heavenly reward; and his affections sometimes were so strong, that, though it
was impossible, yet he could have wished a total deprivation thereof for the
Jews sake, Romans 9.3. I could wish, that my self were accursed from Christ, for
my brethren my kinsmen according to the flesh: Love desires impossibilities.
By all this it appears how great the Apostle's straight was betwixt living and
dying, as a needle hanging between two loadstones of equal force and power.
(...).
Having a desire, or greatly desiring, that is, in respect of his own
happiness, and his great love and delight in Christ, for whom he was now in a
suffering condition, to depart, that he might be with him. The word in the
original signifies a vehement desire, or an ardent and hot desire; and it is
observable, that he does not barely say he did desire, but having a desire,
which Beza translateth to contend in desire, Plus est animo ferri and
contendere, quam simpliciter cupere. Beza in locum.
answerable to that expression of our Savior Christ, Luke 22.15. With desire
have I desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer. So that in these
words we may consider Paul looking solely upon Christ and his immediate
presence, waving all former considerations, whereby this fervent desire was
limited and himself straightned: So that Paul's natural (if I may so call it)
desire and inclination was toward the Lord, and to be with him, which in it
self considered was earnest, agreeable to his earnest expectation, or
stretching forth of the hand in looking, as that word denotes in the 20. verse
of this Chapter.

To depart, (...); or to be dissolved, according to others; or to die, as the
Apopostle had said in the 21. verse, To die is gain. The Apostle seems to
strain himself for a word, that he might set forth so gainful a death, as he is
speaking of, which sometimes he calls a dissolving of this earthy tabernacle,
and an unclothing, 2 Cor. 5.1.4. Peter styles it a putting off of this
tabernacle. The spirit of God in the Holy penmen of the Scriptures, has set
forth the death of the Saints by pleasant and alluring expressions, as to
sleep, to be changed, to be gathered to the Fathers, and in this place, to
depart.

And to be with Christ. Paul was in Christ always by grace, and Christ
revealed in him by the spirit of illumination; he was a follower of Christ by
conformity and obedience, and came behind none of of the other Apostles in his
labor and sufferings for him; and as he desired to be found in Christ, so to
depart and to be with him, that he might immediately enjoy him, and enter into
the joy of his Lord and Master, unto whom he had been faithful in his ministry
and Apostleship. The state of happiness is often set forth in Scripture by this
phrase of being with Christ, and being with the Lord, Luke. 23.43. This day
shall thou be with me in Paradise. Romans 6.8. Now if we be dead with Christ, we
believe we shall also live with him. And 1 These. 4.17. Then we which are alive
and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the
Lord in the air, and so we shall ever be with the Lord.

Which is far better, (...).
or very much better, that is, in regard of himself it is better to die then to
live, though in regard of the Church for him to abide in the flesh, it was
better and more needful for them, as in the following verse. And in regard of
himself and his glory with Christ, it must needs be far better, if we consider,
as Paul did, that far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, which should
be the reward of his light afflictions, as he so them esteemed comparatively, 2
Cor. 4.17. For our light afflictions, which are but for a moment, work for us a
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; (...), it is beyond expression,
Christus and caelum non patiuntur hyperbolem.
And therefore our translation rendereth it, a far more exceeding, as Paul
here styles it, far better.

Having thus opened the words of the Text, I shall lay down one Proposition
only from these words of the Apostle, and handle that as suitable to this
present occasion and solemnity.

Doct. That it is the desirable and peculiar privilege of the Saints, to be
brought immediately to Christ by their departure hence by death.

In the managing of this doctrine or proposition, I shall endeavor to show and
clear these three general Heads; the handling whereof will take in the
substance and essential parts of the whole Text it self.

First, What is that death, in the nature and quality of it, that brings the
souls of the Saints departed immediately unto Christ.

Secondly, what is it, or what may be understood by this phrase, to be with
Christ.

Thirdly, how does the death of the Saints bring them immediately to Christ, at
their departure; and in what manner does the Soul depart to Christ.

First, What it that death, in the nature and quality of it, that brings the
Souls of the Saints departed immediately to Christ.

1. Negatively, Every death, or the death of every man, does not bring him or
his soul to Christ. It is not death barely and in it self considered, as it is
a privation of life, by the dissolution of nature, and parting asunder of soul
and body. Otherwise what were the privilege of Paul which here he so greatly
desired, more then of Judas the Traitor? but that Judas went not to Christ, but
to his own place, is evident, Acts 1.25. The godly and the wicked die alike in
respect of natural dissolution, Eccl. 2.26. How dies the wise man? as the
fool. As there is no visible distinction, or mark of difference between the
Godly and the wicked by the external things of providence in the course of
their lives, but all things fall out a like to all men, that no man might know
love or hatred by what is before him, but by what is within him, and upon his
heart: so neither can the righteous be discerned from the reprobates by any
visible character of the outward manner of their departure and dissolution. And
this will appear in the several kinds of death both are subject unto in the
course of providence, as also in the outward circumstances thereof. The godly
and wicked may both die of the same disease and distemper of body, as fever,
consumption, dropsy, yea the most painful diseases, as the gout and the stone;
and also of the most noy some and uncomfortable distempers, as the small pox,
and the plague it self, of which Hezekiah was sick unto death, 2 Kings 20.1.
Again, they may both die by a violent hand. Stephen was stoned to death, as
well as Achan. They may both also die by the same occasion and sudden
providence, as those, upon whom the tower in Siloam fell and slew them, Luke
13.4. Which did not argue, that they were greater sinners then others.
Moreover, they may both die in the full number of their days, and a wicked man
may live to be an hundred years old, and be accursed, Isai. 65.20. And though
wicked men sometimes, through the just judgment of God, do not live out half
their days, yet the godly may die in their youth and strength, and the Lord in
mercy take them away from the evil to come, Isa. 57.1. Lastly, they may die
alike in regard of the present peace and calm, or trouble and disturbance of
spirit; a godly man may want assurance upon a death bed, and a wicked may go
out of the world like a Lamb, with peace and presumption, and a quiet
dissolution, Psalm 73.4. There are no bands in their death.

2. But positively. That death which brings the Soul to Christ at the time of
departure out of this life, is to be considered, in relation to the state and
condition of the person in death, as holy, righteous and godly: So that it is
the quality of the person dying, that makes him happy in his death, whose death
is his gain, and his departure to be with Christ.

To this the Scriptures bear clear and rich testimony, Prove. 14.32. The
righteous has hope in his end, Ps. 37.37. The godly man is marked with this
privilege, Mark the perfect man, behold the upright, the end of that man is
peace. Balaam's wish strongly confirms it, Numb. 23.10. Let me die the death
of the righteous, and let my latter end be like his. And to add no more
quotations in so plain a case, Paul in my Text appropriateth this privilege to
himself, and such as he was, real Christians, true Saints, and unfeigned
believers. I am in a straight betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be
with Christ, and to me to live is Christ, and to dye is gain. Therefore look
what we are living, such we are dying. Death is but the term of life, and
changes not the state of the person, but the degree of that state. Grace must
be wrought here, but perfected hereafter in glory, which is grace consummate;
and if no grace here, no glory hereafter, for as the tree falls so it lies.
But if I should draw the curtains that are about these dying Saints, and
consider how they die that come to Christ by death, I would propose it unto you
briefly in two or three expressions, for the discovery of it and your
information in it, according to the Scripture. The Godly die in the faith of
Christ, believing in him and all the promises of God, which in him are yea and
amen, Heb. 11.13. These all died in faith, not having received the promises;
they die in the interest of Christ, and they are Christ's in death, as well as
life, Romans 14.8. Whether we live, we live to the Lord, and whether we dye we
dye to the Lord, whether we live therefore or dye we are the Lords. Yea they
die in union with Christ, Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, Rev.
14.13. This is that death, and the death of such as these are, is that
departure whereof Paul speaks in my Text; and how desirable it is, beyond
this present life it self, will further appear by the several and suitable
acceptations of the word (...), in the original, which we translate to depart;
in which word, as an alablaster box, the Apostle has enclosed precious
spikenard to anoint the Saints against their funeral: by which we shall
understand the gainful advantage of death to the godly, as it looks back to
this present life, as the terminus a quo, or the bounds from which they depart.

First, the word is used to loosen the cables of a ship, solvere rudentes, a
metaphor taken from mariners, who sail from one Bank or Port unto another; it
imports a flitting or sailing from the state of this present life, to our
heavenly country. Afflictions in the Scriptures are compared to waters, and the
world is a troublesome sea to the Saints, over which they sail through many
storms, till they come to shore: For through much tribulation we must enter
into the Kingdom of God, Acts 14.22. Many are the afflictions of the righteous;
and in the world ye shall have tribulation, says Christ to his Disciples, John
16. last. And all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, says Paul, shall
suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. But the death of the Saints, is the end of
their sorrows; and if we suffer with Christ, we shall be glorified together,
Romans 8.18. Then all tears shall be wiped from their eyes, and sorrow and
mourning shall flee away, when they shall arrive at the land of promise, the
Cape of good hope. Heaven is the Saints fair haven, it is called the bosom of
Abraham, Luke 16.23. Which Gregory Nyssen expounds to be like a bay, or bosom
of the Sea, into which a godly man, sailing from hence, puts in his soul, as
a haven free from danger and tempest, where it shall receive the fullness of all
good things.

Secondly, The word is translated [reverti] to return. Believers are sent forth
to labor in this world, and they are Christ's factors upon earth, for the
advancement of his glory and kingdom and the heavenly gain of their own eternal
happiness. They trade for heaven, by which their conversations are said to be
in heaven, Phil. 3.20. (...), our City life, or commerce, or our conversation
is in heaven, whence we look for the Lord Jesus Christ to come. They are
citizens of heaven, but they trade from home, in a far country, as merchants
seeking the pearl of great price, Mat. 13.44. Which having found, they returned
home richly laden with the treasure of the Gospel. Death is the souls return to
God, Eccles. 12.7. Then shall the dust return to the earth, as it was; and the
spirit shall return to God who gave it. Job says, he shall return thither,
Job. 1.21. Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return
thither. (...), which the Greek Scholies expounds (...), unto God. How joyful
is the return of the Saints to their heavenly home, and their happy rest, after
their laborious travail and restless pains in the works of their salvation,
attended with all the fruits of holiness and righteousness, as an evidence of
their faith and testimony of their obedience. Blessed are the dead which dye in
the Lord, even so says the spirit; for they rest from their labors, and their
works follow them, Rev. 14.13. As the wagons which Joseph sent for his Father
Jacob, and his household, brought them to the land of Goshen, and to the full
plenty of Joseph's provision; so death brings the Saints to their joyful
rest, and to Christ their heavenly Joseph. Death is the unharnessing of the
Saints at their final return to their full peace, and everlasting inheritance.
Solvunti^ sarcina and vincula.


Thirdly, the word is applied sometimes to the loosing of the cords of a tent.
Solvere sunos tobernaculorum.
Beleivers in this life, and while they are in the body, dwell as in tents and
tabernacles, in an unsettled and changeable estate, as pilgrims and strangers,
having no continuing City, and therefore often remove their tents, like the
Patriarchs of old, Heb 11.9, 10. Where the Apostle, speaking of Abraham says,
that by faith he sojourned in the land of promise, as in a strange country,
dwelling in tabernacles, with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same
promise, for he looked for a City which had foundations, whose builder and
maker is God. All the faithful are heirs of eternal promises, how mean and
contemptible soever they seem in the eyes of the world, as a gazingstock unto
them, among whom they sojourn for a time. As they are not of the world, so they
have little favor and respect from it; for therefore the world hates them,
John 15.19. No wonder therefore the people of God have always accounted
themselves strangers here, Psalm. 119.19. I am a stranger in the earth, says
David, hide not thy commandments from me. And Peter writing to the Jews, 1
Pet. 2.11. I beseech you, says he, as pilgrims and strangers, abstain from
fleshly lusts which war against the Soul. How welcome then is that
dissolution, that looseneth the cords of those tents, and pulls up their
tabernacles (for 2 Cor. 5.1. We know, that if the carthly, house of this
tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens) when the Sons of God, the heirs of promise,
shall no more have moveable dwellings, but abiding mansions, and that in their
Fathers house, John 14.2, 3. In my Fathers house, says Christ to his Disciples
comforting of them, are (...) many mansions; I go to prepare a place for you*
that where* I am there ye may be also.

Lastly, the word is also expounded, to be delivered [Liberari.] So Beza makes
it the same in signification with (...), Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from the body of this death, or from this mortal body. Or
as Diodate paraphraseth upon that Text, O that I were but out of this animal
and terrestrial life, during which sin does dwell in me, and through it I am
yet under the necessity of dying; and that I were transported into the liberty
of the glory of Gods children in the life of happiness. St. Paul saw a law in
his members warring against the law of his mind, and leading him captive unto
the law of sin and death, in the foregoing verse; under which bondage he
groaned for deliverance; and for the obtaining of it, looked upon death as the
only means conducible. The Saints are subject to sin while they are in he body,
because sin receives its power from the corruption of nature not wholly
mortified in this life; therefore called the law in the members, and the deeds
of the body, Romans 8.13. Our members that are upon earth, Col. 3.5. And the
lusts of the flesh, Gal 5.24 But the death of the Saints is the death of their
sins, whereby they put off the whole body of sin. O happy death, that brings
the old man of sin to his grave, and the new man in grace to his glory and
perfection! when the Soul shall be no more tempted unto sin, no more troubled
with sin, but perfectly freed from all motions, lusts, and inclinations to that
which is evil, by departing hence unto Christ.

Secondly, What is it to be with Christ, unto whom the Saints are brought by
their departing hence by death? That none of the Fathers and Saints of the Old
Testament were in heaven before Christ's Ascension, is but a Popish fiction and
delusion, contrary to the plain sense and express doctrine of the Scriptures,
as may appear (to name no more) in those two remarkable instances of Enoch and
Elijah, Genesis 5.24. And Enoch walked with God, and he was not, for God took him.
And of Elijah 2 Kings 2.11. And Elijah went up into heaven by a whirlwind. But
the question may be made, which I shall briefly answer, how these Patriarchs
and Saints could be with Christ, when Christ was not yet incarnate, neither
ascended into heaven.

For the Solution of this question, I shall only assert, and briefly prove,
that though Christ was not in heaven before his incarnation in his humane
nature, yet he was there with the Godly departed, and they with him in his
Divine nature. For the Divine nature of Christ being one with the Godhead of
the Father, and the Spirit, as it was coessential, so it was coeternal. In the
beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was God, John
1.1. And when Christ was on earch he speaks of himself, as being at the same
time also in Heaven, which must be understood of his Divine nature, John 1.18.
No man has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, who is in the bosom
of the Father, has declared him. So also John 3.13. No man has of cended up
to Heaven but he that came down from Heaven, even the Son of man, which is in
Heaven. And when he was to leave the world, in his prayer for himself, his
Disciples, and all believers, he thus petitioneth his Father, John 17.5. And
now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had
with thee before the world was. But in what manner the Divine nature of Christ
did put off its glory, during the time of his exinanition and humiliation upon
earth, I shall not take upon me to inquire, much less to clear so great a
Mystery when being equal with God, he took upon him the form of a servant,
having laid by his glory, as to the use, of it in the mystery of our salvation,
as learned Beza notes Ha autem gloria (quod ad usum illius ottinet in salutis
no strae mysterio) quodam modo sese abdicaverat filius in servi forma, durante
suae illius exinonitionis spatio. Beza in Johan. 17. verse 5.
But being out of all question, that Christ, is now in Heaven in his divine and
humane nature, and in both glorified, I return to show you the Saints
privilege of being with Christ, and what it is to be with him at the terminus
ad quem of the Souls motion in the state of Separation.

First, to be with Christ, is to be in the place where Christ is, or to be
locally present with Christ: And that Christ is personally and locally in
Heaven, I will not seem to suspect your faith, by being numerous in Scripture
quotations, Acts. 1.11. The Angels say to the Disciples, Ye men of Galilee, why
stand ye gazing up into Heaven? this same Jesus which is taken up from you into
Heaven, shall so come in like manner, as ye have seen him go up into Heaven.
And Peter tells the Jews, Acts 3. 21. That the Heavens must receive him until
the time of the restitution of all things Stephen saw him in Heaven when he was
suffering for him, Acts 7.56. Behold I see the Heavens opened, and the Son of
man standing at the right hand of God. And the Apostle Paul lays it down as
an infallible truth to all beleivers, Col. 3.1. If ye be risen with Christ,
seek the things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God.
Now Christ has told us, that where he is, there we shall be also, John 14.2.
And if any man will serve me, let him follow me, and where I am, there shall
also my servant be, John 12.26. Now is it not a desirable, as well as a
peculiar privilege, to be with Christ? Christian, wast thou never affected in
reading the Evangelical story of Christ, with the singular privilege which the
Disciples of our Lord had, in their immediate attendance upon him, and
continuance with him, to hear and see what they saw and heard, and to be his
bosom friends and familiar companions? and did thou not wish in thy heart,
that it might have been thy happy lot, to have been one of them? How much more
comfortable and glorious will it be, to be with him in Heaven? The presence of
Christ on earth was a joyful presence to the Disciples, for while the
Bridegroom was with them they could not mourn, Mat. 9.5. But when he told
them, that he should be taken from them, their hearts were filled with sorrow.
It was one of Luthers three wishes, that he might have seen Christ in the
flesh, Paul preaching, and primitive Rome in its flourishing condition. Content
thy self a while, thou precious soul, that love him, and his appearance; thou
shall shortly see him with his Father, and thy Father, and abide with him for
ever: and thou, that have been ravished with-the sweetness and powerful
influence of his spiritual presence in his Ordinances, wherein thou shall in
the end of thy days drink with him of the wine of the Kindom of God, pressed
from the clusters of the heavenly Canaan.

Secondly, to be with Christ is to be glorified with Christ, and to possess the
same glory, which Christ has with the Father. Christ charge Mary, who had
the honor first to see him after his Resurrection, to forbear his bodily
presence, saying, touch me not, for I am not yet ascended unto my Father, John
20.17. But go, and tell my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my
Father, and your Father, and to my God, and your God. And being ascended, he is
set down at the right hand of the Majesty on High, Heb. 1.3. Or on the right
hand of the throne of the Majesty in the Heavens, Chap. 8.1. Now Christ's throne
shall be the Saints throne, as he has promised, Rev. 3.21. To him that
overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame,
and am set down with my Father in his throne. Christ has prayed his Father,
and declared this as his Will to his Father, John 17.24. Father I will, that
these whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my
glory, which thou have given me. And shall they only be spectators of it? shall
not the beholding of the glory of Christ in Heaven be as powerful to change the
Saints into the same glory, as seeing his glorious Image? 2 Cor. 4.18. For we
all with open face beholding, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed
into the same Image from glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the Lord; or
as it may be rendered, even as by the Lord the Spirit, for the Lord is that
spirit, v. 17. And this is no less, then what Christ has assured us of by his
own grant, and promise unto us, Joh. 17.22 And the glory which thou gave me,
I have given them that they may be one, as we are one. To show you therefore,
what this glory of Christ is, whereof every bel^iver shall be a partaker with
him: It is a spiritual and full possession and enjoyment of God himself in
perfect union and immediate communion with him. For so far as we can discern
and understand things, so far above us and remote from us, in their nature and
excellency, and as they are revealed unto our capacity in the Heavenly records
of Divine writ, the glory of Heaven seems to be the highest degree of
spirituality. God is presented unto us to be a spirit, John 4.24. And if we
cloth the nature of a spirit, with the Attributes of God, as they are made
known unto us by himself, it is the highest conception we can have of him. For
God is a Spirit, or a spiritual substance, most Holy, most Wise, Eternal,
Infinite, as that holy and famous writer of ours has described, or defined
him. The Angels are Spirits, or ministering Spirits, Heb. 1.14. The Souls of the
Saints in Heaven are Spirits, the Spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.23.
And if we may judge (as we say) the body by the foot, ex pede Herculem, or of
the glory of Heaven, and of the Soul, by the glory of the body, as it is
already glorified in Christ, and others with him, or as it shall be glorified
after the Resurrection, even the body of all beleivers, it will appear still,
that the spirituality of the Heavenly state is the glory of it. The Apostle
Paul speaking of Christ's coming from hence to raise the body, and to glorify
it, says Phil 3.21. That he shall change our vile body, and make it like unto
his glorious body, by the power whereby he is able to subdue all things unto
himself. So that look what manner of body for glory Christ's body now is in
Heaven, such shall our bodieds be; and what the glory of his body is, appears
by the spirituality of it after his Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.44. It is sown a
natural body, it is raised a spiritual body, if not in substance, yet in
quality. And if the nature of grace in the Saints on earth be spiritual, and
the fruits of the spirit in them, constituting them a spiritual people, Gal
6.1. Whereby they are blessed with spiritual blessings in heavenly places or
things; it will follow that the state of glory must be a spiritual state for
the, soul, in a higher degreee of spirituality, glory being grace consummate,
as grace is glory inchoate. Now the soul is raised unto the glorious degree of
perfection and spirituality in the heavenly presence of Christ, by being filled
with the fullness of God, and that by comprehending the highth, and length, and
depth, and breadth of the love of God which here passes knowledge, but is
fully made known in Heaven by the beatifical vision of God himself letting out
his love without measure into the soul, whereby it is sublimated, and
transformed into the likeness of God, 1 John 3.2. For now are we the Sons of
God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be: but we know, that when he
shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. We shall not
see him only in his name, his word, and works, but in his nature, not his back
parts, but his face. Now we see through a glass darkely, but then face to face,
(...), now we know but in part, but then I shall know as I am known, 1 Cor.
13.12. This is the blessed rewards of the pure in heart, that they shall see
God, and without holiness no man shall see him.

Thirdly, to be with Christ, is to be with them that are with Christ, and to
have fellowship with the heavenly society of Angels and Saints in the presence
of Christ, Heb. 12.22, 23. Ye are come unto Mount Zion, and to the City of the
living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels,
and to the general assembly and Church of the first born, which are written in
heaven, -- and to the spirits of just men made perfect. First, to be with
Christ, is to have society with all the blessed Angels of God, who worship
Christ in heaven, Heb. 1.6. He says, let all the Angels worship him. The sight
of Angels on earth, did sometimes strike fear into the hearts of Saints, and an
apprehension of death into them: as when Gideon saw the Angel, Judges 6.22.
When Gideon perceived he was an Angel of the Lord, Gideon said, Alas, O Lord
God, for because I have seen an Angel of the Lord face to face, therefore he
thought he must dye as appears by the foregoing verses An so Manoah, when the
Angel appeared unto him, and did wondrously, Judges 13.23. Manoah said to his
wife, we shall surely d^e because we have seen God, or an Angel of God for it
is said before Manoah knew, that he was an Angel of God. But some of the
Patriarchs and Saints entertained Angels with joy, as Abraham did the three
Angels in the plain of Mamre, Genesis 18.8. who accepted his invitation, and did
eat before him what he had dressed and provided for them. Likewise the two
Angels which came to Lot in Sodom, Genesis 19.1. He made them a feast, and they
stayed with him all night. Surely that man is greatly honored of God, unto
whom in favor he thus sends his Angels; which the Author to the Hebrews
makes use of, as a motive unto Christians to hospitality, Heb. 13.2. Be not
forgetful to entertain strangers, for thereby some have entertained Angels
unawares. What will that honor be then to the Saints in heaven, to be
entertained with Angels, and to dwell with Angels, and to have familiarity and
fellowship with an innumerable company of glorious Angels, yea with those
Angels that have been made ministering Spirits for their good! Heb. 1.14. Are
not they ministering spirits sent forth to minister for them, who shall be heirs
of salvation? with those Angels that rejoiced at their conversion, Luke 15.10 I
say unto you, says Christ, that there is joy in the presence of the Angels of
God over one sinner, that repents. Yet this is not all, beleivers after death
shall not only be, and dwell with the Angels in heaven, but be also as the
Angels Angels of God, Math. 22.30. They shall live as Angels, without these
earthly comforts, and comfortable relations, they shall neither marry nor give
in marriage; they shall be like the Angels themselves, moving up and down as
the Angels, and joining in consort with the whole Quire of Angels, in singing
Hallelujahs to him that sits upon the throne of eternal Majesty.

Secondly, they shall have full and perpetual fellowship with glorified Saints,
and Spirits of just men made perfect. Communion with Saints on earth in Gospel
fellowship, whereby beleivers enjoy the comfort of the unity of the spirit each
with other in spiritual administrations, is one of their great privileges in
Christ; which the Apostle exhorts the Ephesians to maintain and keep in the
bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.1. Which he also urges as a motive to the believing
Philippians, to persevere in mutual love and condord, phil. 2.1, 2. If there be
any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the
spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like-minded,
having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind. Yet there is a great
defect in the society of Christians one with another here below, besides the
intermissions thereof; partly through difference in judgment and opinion,
whereby their affections are in a great measure quenched and withdrawn each
from other; and partly through corruption of nature, and occasional offenses,
depriving them of the mutual benefit and advantage of each others gifts and
graces. However let not these accidental inconveniences and obstructions beget
in you low and mean thoughts of this holy fellowship; but remember how your
hearts have been warmed, your affections quickened, your resolutions confirmed,
and your hands strengthened, by the presence, and close and spiritual communion
ye have had with the people of God in the mysteries of Christ; that your esteem
may be preserved, and your love so far increased, as to abound more and more to
the precious Sons of Sion, and coheirs with you of the everlasting inheritance:
Considering that ye shall shortly live together with Christ, when ye shall
enjoy the society of all the faithful that are with him, those whom ye have
never seen, but have loved in the spirit, upon the reports of their graces;
with the Patriarchs and Prophets, and the cloud of witnesses gone before you,
and that shall believe in Christ to the end of the world; and what a joyful
meeting will there be of the children of God, when they shall dwell together in
their Fathers house, being made perfectly one, as God and Christ are one! What
a solemn assembly will there be in heaven, in the presence of God himself, when
the whole Church of the firstborn shall keep a perpetual Sabbath, and God
shall be all in all. And how magnificent and glorious will be the heavenly
Festivals of the righteous, in celebrating the marriage of the Lamb, when they
shall all come together, and sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in
the Kingdom of God.

Fourthly and lastly, To be with Christ, is to have eternal life with Christ,
for Christ gives his sheep eternal life, and they shall never perish, John
10.28. And this is his promise, which he has promised us, even eternal life, 1
John 2.25. Therefore, says Paul, we know, that if our earthly house of this
tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. This is no other then the Fathers
house, which is built upon eternal foundations, an everlasting rock, the rock
of ages; the eternal Godhead, and the unchangeable essence of God himself is
the support of it. There is nothing properly eternal, but the divine nature;
for as time is the measure of motion, and the continuance of successive and
changeable creatures, so eternity is the immensurable duration of the immutable
essence of God, who only is from everlasting to everlasting, without shadow of
turning, or the least variation in being So that the Saints shall receive, and
enjoy their eternal life and happiness with Christ, by the eternity of God
himself, who is the only true God, and eternal life, 1 John 5.20. As their life
is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3. So it is communicated unto them through
Christ, who lived by the Father, and now lives with the Father, and that for
ever more, Rev. 1.18. I am he that lives, and was dead, and behold I am alive
for evermore; And because I live, ye shall live also, John 14.19. Nay, beloved,
this eternal life is begun already in your hearts, by the spirit of God in you,
as a well of water springing up to eternal life, John. 4.14. By the knowledge
of the true God; and Jesus Christ, which is life eternal, John 17.3. And by
faith in Christ, John 6.47. He that beleiveth on the has everlasting life. But
your full possession thereof shall be after the dissolution of the tabernacles
of your mortal bodies, when ye shall never suffer change more, so as to see any
weakness, or the least inclination to corruption; Then mortality shall be
swallowed up of life, 2 Cor. 5 4 As the drop is swallowed up in the ocean, and
the small dust in the huge mountain, so shall the short moment of this present
life be forgotten, when the bright morning of eternal joy shall break upon your
souls, and the righteous shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of the Father.
This is that life and immortality, which is brought to light through the
Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be sober and
hope to the end, for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation
of Jesus Christ, unto whom ye are hastening, waiting for the day of your
departing hence, that ye may be with Christ, which is far better.

Thirdly, How does the death of the Saints bring them immediately to Christ a
their departure? and in what manner does the soul depart?

The Apostle joyneth his departing and being with Christ together by a small
copulative particle, as if the soul were as soon with Christ after dissolution,
as we can speak so short a word, even in the next moment: which is the third
general head to be handled. In the explaining whereof, I shall take it for
granted, that the soul is immortal, and dies not with the body, but
immediately appears before God, according to the apprehension of St. Paul in
my text, who therefore desired to depart, that he might be with Christ. For
were not the soul immortal, and that in Paul's perfect judgment, it had been
far better for him to have lived then dyed; for to him to live was Christ, but
in case he had dyed, he could not have been with Christ, according to his
desire, had not his soul survived his body. Therefore subscribing to the
judgment of so great an Apostle, I shall wave the needless controversy, and
proceed to the explication of this last question in hand; the truth and manner
whereof will appear in these following demonstrations. I. Demonst. First, the
Souls of the Saints are spiritually and inseparably united unto Christ. He that
is joined to the Lord, is one spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. The spirit of Christ
dwells in beleivers; and though the body be dead, or mortal, because of sin,
yet the spirit is life, because of righteousness, Romans 8.10, 11. The spirit of
Christ in the soul is a principle of eternal life, by conjunction of the soul
with Christ, whereby we are quickened together with him, through which both our
spiritual and eternal life is secured, the union of the soul with Christ being
inviolable. Therefore our life is said to be hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3.
Cum Christ. and in Deo est exira periculum esse. Calv.
and is out of all danger of ever being separated; for who or what shall
separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus? Romans 8. latter end, I am
persuaded, says Paul, neither life, nor death, etc. As the hypostatical union
of the Godhead, and humanity of Christ, could not be separated by his death, so
neither the mystical and spiritual union between Christ and the soul, by the
death of the Saints: For he is the head of his body the Church, whereof every
true believer is a living member, unto whom they are so really, spiritually,
and immediately united, that no state, condition, or power whatsoever can sever
or dis-joyn them. And though every unfruitful branch may and shall be taken
away, and cut off from Christ the true vine, by final Apostasy, Ecclesiastical
censure, or the judicial sentence that shall pass upon every hypocrite, when
God shall require, and take away his soul; every true and living branch shall
abide in him for ever, through the skill and care of the Father, the great
husbandman: And if we consider the relation, which Christ stands in to all
the Saints, of a husband to his spouse, contracted together by an everlasting
covenant, betrothed in loving kindness and faithfulness, and joined together by
the eternal spirit of grace, through which they enjoy the sweet embraces and
mutual expressions of their conjugal union and affections; how can it be
imagined, that the Spouse of Christ, or any particular Christians, should by
their dissolution be deprived of so near a relation and firm union; for the
soul being a spirit, and incapable of suffering the least alteration in its
essence by the death of the body, from which it is only separated as the life
thereof, it must of necessity retain, and still possess its spiritual beauty,
and all supernatural, and heavenly privileges in and with Christ, whereof it
is far more capable, and that more fully and perfectly, to receive, being
separate, then in the present body.

II. Demonstr. Secondly, the souls of believers are by a natural force and
necessity detained from their desired presence with Christ, while they are
present in the body: and thus the death of the Saints brings them to Christ,
by releasing their souls from the ties and bonds of an absented estate.
Therefore are we always confident, says the Apostle, knowing, that whilst we
are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord; we are confident, I say,
and willing, rather to be absent from the body, and present with the Lord, 2
Cor. 5.6, 8. The body is the Saints natural home, wherein, by a natural
necessity, they are kept absent from Christ; and yet a forced absence, in
regard of their desires to be with him, and to change their bodily home for an
eternal house. The Philosophers called the body animae carcerem and pistrinum,
the prison and gaol of the soul; if so, how welcome should death be to the
righteous, that sets this prisoner free, and enlarges the souls
confinement! But how the soul, being set at liberty and delivered from the
natural bond and relation to the body, is immediately present with Christ, I
shall explain with what clearness and brevity I can, for the making good of
this second Demonstration.

First, the soul and body in the Godly, as in all other men, are joined
together by the God of nature, in the creation of them, as essential parts of
one person; the humane nature consisting of body and soul, which God himself
breathed into the humane and organical body, and whereby man became a living
soul, Genesis 2.7. It is also a received maxim in natural science, that, in the
propagation of the humane nature, the soul of man is immediately created, and
that not out of the body, but in the body, into which it is infused in the very
creation of it; and so one man is said to beget another, not that he does
generate the soul, but the body, and the union of both; God concurring as the
first and universal cause, with the secondary and particular causes, in their
natural acts and motions. Which union of the soul and body being natural, as of
two essential parts of the whole, though the soul being a spirit has a
subsistence, being separate from the body by dissolution, yet it is but a
separate part, and remains as a part during the time and continuance of its
separation, having a natural inclination to be reunited to its own body,
without which it cannot be perfectly happy, though in heaven it self, in all
degrees; for notwithstanding the fullness of the glory of God in heaven, whereof
it is partaker, in the presence of Christ, yet being but a part, it wants the
natural perfection of its relation, and receives its happiness and glory but
according to the measure of a part, waiting for the redemption of its body.
Whence we may conclude, that the natural state and condition of the sold of
every man is to be in the body, and there it is in its proper habitation, as
the Apostle says, we are at home in the body, 2 Cor. 5.6. So that how strange
soever the desire of a gracious soul may be, to be with Christ, and to be
absent from the body by departing hence; yet it is naturally and necessarily
detained, till the death of the body leave it free, as in a be-widdowed estate,
to remove to Christ its wellbeloved, and to the Father of spirits, for a time
to visit those mansions, wherein it shall abide for ever in the fullness of
glory, with the assumed body made more suitable and spiritual for it at the
resurrection. It appears also from hence, that it is no less then wilful
murder, and consequently a breach of a great command, voluntarily to endeavor
or hasten the dissolution of these two united parts of body and soul; nature
and grace commanding and commending the use of all lawful means, and that by
physic, as well as food, and other natural helps, to preserve this present
life, until God, in the course of providence, shall make a separation.

Secondly, Believers while they are in the body are absent from the Lord
Christ, both in respect of local distance, and also of the nature and manner of
their communion with him. For Christ is in heaven and they upon earth, and
their communion with him now, though it be spiritual and joyful, yet it is weak
and dark in comparison of an immediate presence; For we walk by faith, not by
sight, 2 Cor. 5.7. Which faith being the substance of things hoped for, and the
evidence of things not seen, begets in the heart a fervent love, and an
unspeakable joy in an absent and unseen Savior, 1 Pet. 1.8. Whom having not
seen ye love, in whom, though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice
with joy unspeakable, and full of glory. Nevertheless the communion the Saints
have with Christ, through faith and hope in him, is but weak and dark here, in
comparison of what shall be in heaven, when they shall be with him; and these
graces appropriato this present life and state, shall cease through immediate
vision and fruition, whereby their love shall be perfect in the presence of its
object. For faith apprehends Christ by spiritual knowledge, which is the
sight in the eye of faith; and the highest degree of knowledge the soul is
capable of here in heavenly things, is but obscure to what it shall be
hereafter. What we see through many mediums, is but darkely seen; and though
mediums may be helpful to natural sight, in case of weakness of the organ, or
distance of the object, yet such a sight falls short of a strong and clear
inspection of something near at hand, and at a due distance. Thus it is in
regard of the souls apprehension and knowledge of spiritual things, which being
at a great distance, and far remote in their nature and perfection, we look at
them, as through a glass, and that darkely, 1 Cor. 13.12. For we know in part,
and we prophecy in part, and now see through a glass darkely, but then face to
face. We see the things of God and of heaven through the glass of the Word and
Sacraments, and the glass of the works of Providence, in which glasses we may
be said to see these things also, as by reflection of their image, according to
that other expression of Paul, 2 Cor. 3.18. For, we all with open face,
beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image:
this also is dark in respect of the sight of the maked face, or substantial
glory of Christ, in a direct line, and without reflection; for though it be with
open face, the vail of natural ignorance and blindness being taken away, yet it
is not face to face in the appearance of Christ nakedly and immediately unto
us. But what this darkness of knowledge is in this life, I shall in a few words
more explain. The mysteries of heaven, and of God, and Christ, are revealed
unto us in the Scriptures, according to our capacity of understanding them; and
the Lord condescending to the nature of man, speaks unto us after the manner
of man. Now the nature and kind of knowledge, which is proper unto us, is not
intuitive, but discursive; the rational soul using the organs and senses of the
body, for the attaining of its knowledge and understanding: So that we know all
things in a sensible manner, according to the first species and impressions
made in the understanding, which it receives from the senses, and from thence
the understanding, by discourse, and reason, forms the notions of spiritual
and insensible beings. And hence it is, that in most things that incur: not
immediately into the senses, our knowledge is so dark and dubious, that in
natural science we agree not, but dispute principles themselves. In like
manner, God reveals spiritual and invisible things, and the great mysteries
of the Gospel unto us, wherein he speaks our language, and presents
heavenly things unto us in earthly forms: as when he reveals and describes
himself, it is as having the members of our bodies and the passions of our
minds, which we art to understand figuratively, and not literally, least we
become guilty of blasphemous thoughts, and carnal apprehensions of God. And
thus when our Savior instructed Nicodemus in the mystery of grace, and
conversion to God, he tells him, he must be born again, John 3.5. Nicodemus
understood him at first literally, and rather wondered then believed; wherefore
Christ reproves him, verse 13. If I have told you earthly things, and ye
believe not, how shall ye believe, if I tell you of heavenly things. Not that
regeneration is an earthly thing, though it must be a state upon earth, and
wrought while we are here: but Christ's meaning is, if I have spoken to you of
these heavenly and spiritual things in an earthly manner and sensitive way, by
parables and similitudes, and yet ye understand me not, so as to believe; how
shall ye believe, if I speak in a spiritual and heavenly Dialect and Language?
Now if we understand heavenly things only, as they are revealed (for they are
therefore so revealed, that we might understand them) what dark and low, what
short and weak apprehensions have we of them? Therefore a gracious soul
desires to be absent rather from the body and present with Christ, that it
might fully know and understand the hidden things of eternity, and hear such
words, with Paul in the third heaven, which are unutterable, and therefore
could not tell whither he was in the body, or out of the body, 2 Cor. 12.2, 3,
4. I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago, whether in the body I
cannot tell, or whether out of the body, I cannot tell, God knows: Such a
man, one caught up to the third heaven, and I knew such a man (whether in the
body, or out of the body, I cannot tell, God knows) how that he was caught up
into Paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to
utter. Hence it appears, that there is an incapacity in humane nature, in the
present state thereof, to apprehend and express the glory of heaven in the
presence of Christ; and therefore it is probable Paul was out of the body
during this revelation unto him, for he repeateth those words twice, whether in
the body, or out of the body, I cannot tell. But which of the two it was at
that time, it mattereth not so much, in that he is so clear in the Text, that
for the attaining of such a condition, he absolutely declares his desire to
depart and to be with Christ, which all Christians conclude with him to be far
better.

Thirdly, the souls and spirits of the Saints loosed and separated from the
body, are swift and instantaneous in their motion to their appointed and
desired place of bliss and happiness. For the motion of Spirits, they being
without material and corporeal parts, cannot be successive, and so measured by
time, and therefore it is in an instant. As the motions of Angels from heaven
to earth, and from earth to heaven, are in an instant, so the motion of the
soul from the natural body to the presence of Christ in heaven, is also in an
instant. But to speak also to every ordinary capacity, and to the unlearned, as
well as learned in such natural principles, I shall illustrate this truth by
Scripture instances and similitudes. The Angel Gabriel was caused to fly
swiftly unto Daniel, when he was speaking in prayer, Dan. 9.21. Where the
motion of an Angel is set forth by the notion of the fowls of the air, that
fly and move exceeding swiftly. And because such motions of spirits are not
discernable by sense, but are only to be conceived by the mind; for the help of
such a conception, I shall propose the motion of body and soul together in
some, that did visibly ascend into heaven. As that of Elijah who ascended up to
heaven in the sight of Elisha, 2 Kin. 2.11, 12. And it came to pass, as they
still went on and talked, that behold there appeared a chariot of fire, and
horses of fire, and parted them both asunder, and Elijah went up by a whirlwind
into heaven: And Elisha saw it, and he cried, my Father, my Father, the chariot
of Israel, and the horsemen thereof, and he saw him no more. We must conceive
here, that Elijah was in an instant, or in the twinkling of an eye,
transformed out of the natural qualities of his earthly body, and changed into
spiritual; in which condition he was suddenly carried up into heaven. And the
swiftness of his motion in ascending appears in this Scripture, in that it is
compared to the motion of fire; there appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of
fire. Now fiery motions, or the motions of fire, are exceeding swift; as the
motion of light, or of lightnings from East to West, in a moment. He is said
likewise to go up to heaven by a whirlwind. The wind is exceeding swift, as
well as strong in its motion; therefore God is said to fly upon the wings of
the wind, Psalm. 18.10. And of all winds none so swift as the whirlwind. Neither
is it to be neglected, that Elijah cried after him, my Father, my Father, as if
he were presently taken out of his sight. The like instance we have of our
Savior, when he ascended up into heaven in the view and presence of his
Disciples, Acts 1.9. While they beheld, he was taken up, and a cloud received
him out of their sight. In both these instances we cannot but imagine, that
both Christ and Elijah were quickly, or in a moment, at the end of their
heavenly journey. And if the motion of a spiritual or glorified body be so
swift, how much more the motion of a separate soul, which is a pure Spirit?
Finally, we may in some degree apprehend the motion of the soul in its essence
by the motion of its faculties: and how soon the soul can be in heaven and with
God and Christ in its thoughts, we may judge by the spiritual and sudden
ejaculations of the heart, whereby heavenly Christians are often and secretly
ascending and descending between heaven and earth, and God and their worldly
employments.

Lastly, Christ in heaven is the center of all sanctified and gracious souls,
unto whose presence they tend in their separate motion. Though the Divine
nature, or Godhead be the center of all things, as the cause and fountain of
all beings; yet because the glory of God is not every where alike manifested,
but in heaven, where Christ is personally present, even at the right hand of
God, therefore the term and center of the souls motion after separation is
immediately unto him. As Christ is the immediate object and term of our
spiritual approaches unto the throne of Grace, by whom we have access unto the
Father, and that by a new and living way conservated through the vail of his
flesh: So the humanity of Christ being finite, upon which our thoughts are
first placed, does more easily stay and fix the soul, then the infinite essence
of the Divine nature, which being incomprehensible does rather swallow up and
overwhelm our weak faculties. Therefore Bernard opening that Text of Solomon,
Prove. 25.27. according to the Hebrew, from which our translation too much
varieth, exhorts Christians not to gaze too long upon the Divine Majesty,
least they be overcome of the glory; as to eat much honey is clogging to the
stomach. And as the Saints before Christ's incarnation prayed toward the
temple, the type of Christ, where the presence of God visibly manifested did in
some measure contract and limit the omnipresence of God to their hearts and
apprehensions in worshipping of him. In like manner Christ in heaven is the
fixed period, term and center of the Souls motion and approach to its glorious
and heavenly state; through whom and with whom we are glorified together, as
coheirs of God with him. Therefore Paul desired to depart, and to be with
Christ, that is, to depart unto Christ, as the terminus ad quem, or center of
his soul in departing. As Stephen when he was stoned called upon God, saying,
Lord Jesus receive my spirit, Acts 7.59. As the stone moves naturally
down-ward to the earth, so a gracious soul moves upward to Christ, who is the
center of the Saints, as he is the head of the body, the corner stone of the
building, the rock of their strength, the fountain of all fullness, and their
everlasting rest and peace. But to conclude this second Demonstration. As
natural things tend to their center, by a direct motion, so the souls of all
believers, are directed in their motion to Christ at dissolution, by the
Ministry of Angels; as in the Parable of Lazarus, Luke 16.22. And it came to
pass, that the beggar dyed, and was carried by the Angels into Abraham 's
bosom. Whether the soul be carried by Angels, only by conducting it in its
motion; as we are said to carry a friend to an unknown place, by directing in
the way: or whether by assistance in the motion, and defense, they being mighty
in power, it is not much material to determine, since the soul moving according
to the motion of its Angelical guides and companions is in an instant brought
unto Christ its desired end and rest.

III. Demonst. Thirdly, All the Saints stand in near and unchangeable relations
unto Christ, through regeneration and spiritual adoption unto God; the full
comfort and privilege whereof they cannot enjoy, while they are present in the
body. So that though death parts the nearest friends, and dearest relations
on earth, yet it brings heavenly and spiritual relations together. The force
of relation is very strong, relations being of the least entity, but the
strongest efficacy; witness the strong affections and cords of love, whereby
persons naturally related are tied to each other. What bowels have Parents
toward their Children, and Children again unto them? What indeared affections
between loving yoke-fellowes? And how strong is the bond of brotherly love? All
which long after, and endeavor the mutual presence each of other. Such are the
relations, and much more powerful, between Christ and every beleiver. Not only
God himself, but Christ is their Father, and they his children, Isa. 9.6. His
Name shall be called the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace. He is their
Husband; and they his Spouse: 2 Cor. 11.2. I have espoused you to one husband,
that I might present you as a chaste Virgin unto Christ. He is their Brother,
and they his Brethren, unto whom they are conformed, Romans 8.29. That he might
be the firstborn among many brethren. Many other relations are mentioned in
the Scriptures between them; he is their King, and they his Subjects; their
Captain, and they his Soldiers; their Friend, and they his Favorites, their
Lord and Master, and they his Servants; and their Shepherd, and they his Flock.
And what engagements and affections soever there are in any or all these
relations in the Bond of nature, there is much more in Christ and the Saints,
through the God of Grace, and the powerful efficacy of the Spirit of Christ
that dwells in them. But yet being absent from each other, while beleivers
are present in the body, they desire to depart, that they may be with him. And
what a joyful greeting there is in heaven at the meeting of them, let the
Angels of heaven declare, who are eye witnesses thereof. Welcome then that day
and hour, when the messenger of death shall call, and bring the children to
their Fathers house, their Spouse to her Beloved, and the Sons of God to the
first begotten: When the loyal Subjects of Christ shall be crowned, and the
spiritual Soldiers receive the price of their reward; when the true friends of
Christ shall enjoy their Redeemer, who loved them to the death; and the
faithful Servants shall enter into the joy of their Lord; when the sheep shall
return to their Shepherd, who has given unto them eternal life, that they
should never perish.

IV. Demonstr. Fourthly, the greatest promises made to beleivers in the
covenant of Grace, are of the life to come, which they cannot inherit till they
depart, and are with Christ. Thus Godliness is profitable to all things, having
promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come, 2 Timothy 4.8. The
Saints are heirs of great and precious promises, which are summed up in that
general promise of eternal life, 1 John 2.21. This is the promise which he has
promised us, even eternal life. Which promise, and all the promises of God, are
yea and amen in Christ, the Mediator of the Covenant established upon better
promises: Through which, though the heirs of promise have strong consolation
in regard of the immutability of God and his counsel and oath, wherein it is
impossible that he should lie, yet most of them are yet in hope, and not in
hand, and therefore through patience they wait for them, till they come to
Christ, the heir of all things, with whom they are joynt-heires; bearing up
their hearts in the mean time with the hope set before them, Heb. 6.19, 20.
Which hope we have (says the Apostle) as an anchor of the soul both sure and
steadfast, and which enters into that within the veil, whither the forerunner
is for us entered, even Jesus made an High Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedech. Thus beleivers wait in hope for what they see not, and receive
not in this present life; as the Patriarchs, Heb. 11.13. Who dyed in the faith,
not having received the promises, but having seen them afar off, and were
persuaded of them, and embraced them, and confessed they were strangers and
pilgrims upon earth. Therefore, beloved, be not slothful, but followers of
them, who through faith and patience inherit the promises, Heb. 6.12. For ye
have need of patience (says the same Apostle) that after ye have done the will
of God, ye might receive the promise, Heb. 10.36. Which promise is no other
then the Crown of life and righteousness, which Christ the righteous Judge
shall give unto all those that love his appearing.

Thus we have showed you, though in a weak measure, the glorious privilege of
the Godly in their death, in that their death brings them immediately unto
Christ, according to my Text, For I am in a straight betwixt two, having a
desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better.

I am come at length to the Application of this Doctrine and Subject; and that
I may be profitable to all, and divide the word of God, so, as to give every
one his portion, I shall weild this Text as a two-edged Sword, striking both
ways, to the godly and ungodly, to Saints and sinners, to beleivers and
unbeleivers.

Use. I. First it may serve to inform us from hence, of the sad, miserable, and
woeful state, of every carnal, sinful and Christless soul, that shall dye in
such a condition. It were happy for wicked men, if they might never dye, but
for ever enjoy the mean portion of creature comforts, which they have in this
world, though they are infinitely short of the glory and happiness of the Godly
with Christ in heaven. But to have your portion here, and that for so short a
season, as the time of this present life only, how inconsiderable is it to the
eternity of the Saints felicity with Christ, and the eternity of your own
misery in Hell torments? Therefore Christ in the parable brings in Abraham
thus speaking to the rich man in Hell, Luke 16.25. Son remember, that thou in
thy life time receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things; but
now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. The Prophet David also praying for
deliverance from his enemies, describes them by their temporal blessings,
Psalm. 17.13, 14. Deliver my soul from the wicked, which is thy sword, from men,
which are thy hand, O Lord, from the men of the world, which have their portion
in this life. Let not therefore the people of God envy the prosperity of the
wicked; for they have but the crumbs and broken meat that your heavenly Father
gives to strangers and enemies, yea to Dogs, for so the Scripture calls the
wicked, Rev. 22.15. Without are Dogs, and Sorcerers, and Whore-mongers, and
Murderers, and Idolaters, and whatever loves and makes a lie. And let the
fear of death bridle and restrain the rage and riot of all profane persons;
considering how soon your present joys shall be at an end, and your endless
sorrows commence, when God shall lay your honor in the dust, and require your
souls from you. Why tremble ye not at the sight of an enclosed corpse, and the
open grave before your eyes? Ye also shall surely dye, O ye covetous
worldlings, wretched drunkards, profane swearers, unclean adulterers! ye proud
and gaudy vanities, put your heads into the dust, and stretch forth your hands
and feel those cold and dry skulls and bones, and lay it to heart before ye lie
down in sorrow. And for the awakening of your sleepy consciences, who look and
see no further, then to what is obvious to your senses, like a brutish people,
and a generation of sottish and foolish men; give me leave to deal faithfully
with you, according to my present design, in showing you, what is on the other
side the Grave, and the deplorable estate of every carnal heart in death, as
soon as the soul has taken its leave of its sinful body and house of clay.

First, Every wicked and ungodly soul is miserable in death, in that it is
deprived of the happiness of heaven, and the glory thereof in the presence of
Christ; for as it is the Saints privilege in death to depart unto Christ, so
on the contrary it is part of every sinners punishment to depart from him.
Matthew. 7.23. Depart from me, ye that work iniquity. How will your hopes perish,
and your hearts break, when ye shall find heaven gate shut upon you, and Christ
himself deny your knockings and entreaties with I know you not. Matthew. 25.12.
Be not deceived any longer, but know, that neither fornicators, nor Idolaters,
nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor
thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall
inherit the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. And such are some of you. Friends,
what think ye of perishing, and being banished from the presence of the Lord
and the glory of his power? when ye shall weep and gnash your teeth because ye
shall see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of
God, and your selves shut out, Luke 13.28. Ye shall see indeed the righteous,
whom ye have despised, and persecuted, and reproached, solacing themselves in
their full plenty, and rejoicing in their everlasting inheritance, all the
treasures of heaven being opened unto them; but ye shall not be able to pass
that (...), or great gulf of separation, that is and shall be fixed between
them and you, so as to approach their presence, or to partake of their joys.
Augustine moves a question, why the rich man could see Lazarus in Abraham's
bosom, and Lazarus could not see the rich man in hell? and he gives this
answer to it; because he that is in the dark may see him that is in the light,
but he that is in the light cannot see him that is in the dark. Heaven is a
place of light through the presence of the glory of God, and of Christ the Son
of righteousness, wherein all the righteous shall shine as the Sun, and
therefore called the inheritance of the Saints in light, Acts 26.18. But the
state of the wicked shall be darkness and blackness of darkness, a total
deprivation of the light of the countenance of God, and the comfortable
presence thereof; from which they shall be driven into the remotest distance of
place and condition; and therefore it is called (...) outer darkness, Mat.
25.30. Cast the unprofitable servant into outer darkness, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. And though this be the greatest loss imaginable,
yet it is the least of your woe, in regard of the torments ye shall suffer in
the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone. And so I proceed from the
punishment of loss to the punishment of sense and torment.

Secondly, Every wicked man shall be miserable in his death, in respect of the
state of his soul, which death shall bring it unto without Christ. And the
state of a damned soul after death, and the manner of a sinful soul entering
into condemnation and torment after dissolution may somewhat be discerned by
these following steps and degrees. In opening whereof, I shall wholly wave the
question about the place of hell, and torment, as a nicety rather then a
necessary Subject for serious Auditors.

First, Every wicked and unbeleiving person dies in the guilt of all his sins
unpardoned. Remission of sins is a privilege peculiar to beleivers through
faith in Christ Jesus; faith being the condition of the promise, and the
application of the death and righteousness of Christ for justification, Romans
3.25, 26. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, through faith in his
blood, to declare his righteousness, for the remission of sins that are past,
through the forbearance of God; that he might be just, and the justifier of him
that believes in Jesus: But he that believes not is condemned already,
because he has not believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God, John
3.18. So that unbelief leaves the soul under the guilt of sin, and seals up
the final condemnation thereof. Whereupon Christ tells the unbelieving Jews,
that they should die in their sins, John 8.21, 24. Then said Jesus again unto
them, I go my way, and ye shall seek me, and shall dye in your sins: whither I
go ye cannot come, I said therefore unto you, that ye shall dye in your sins;
for if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins. A wicked man
carries all his sins to the grave with him, which for number are as the hairs
of his head, and for nature damnable and defiling; he dies clothed and clogged
with sin; and the guilt of all his sins that ever he committed in thought,
word, or deed, cleave to his soul. It is dreadful to consider* what a mass and
mountainous bigness the sins of a poor carnal wretch arise unto if we lay them
together: his original sin, actual sins, sins of omission and commission, his
secret sins, and open and scandalous sins; his whole life has been a trade of
sin, and whatsoever proceeds from him is sin; the ploughing of the wicked is
sin, and his prayer is turned into sin: And to his own sins personally
committed, we may add his other men's sins, either occasioned, countenanced or
allowed: Now multiply these by their particulars and individuals, and measure
all by their sinful circumstances, and then judge of the guilt of every sinful
ma that dies in unbelief, and without pardoning grace through the blood of
Christ.

Secondly, The conscience of every wicked man is awakened immediately after
death and dissolution to a continual sense of the guilt of all his sins.
Natural conscience in carnal men is for the most part peaceable and silent in
this present life, delight and custom in sin hardening the heart and searing
the conscience, which they labor to keep asleep, by diverting the thoughts to
worldly objects, or to satisfy, by a formal profession attended with some
outward performances. But as soon as ever the soul of an unregenerate person is
separate from the body, this lion awaketh and sleeps no more, the faculties
of the soul being always in act and exercise, in a separate state, whereby his
sins shall be always before him, and set in order before his eyes, upon which
his conscience shall reflect continually without diversion, or intermission.
Then the sins you have labored to forget and cast out of mind, shall be
brought to remembrance, and ye shall ever behold them, for which conscience
shall charge and accuse you, and in the fresh remembrance of them you shall lie
down self-condemned for ever. This is the worm that never dies, Mark 9 48. But
shall gnaw your hearts to eternity.

Thirdly, Hereupon the soul of a wicked man shall tremble at the sight and
presence of God. That the soul of every man, and consequently of the wicked,
shall see and approach the powerful and immediate presence of God in his Divine
nature and essence, upon their dissolution, is apparent, in that the spirit of
man is said to go upward, Eccles. 3.21. And to return to God, who gave it,
Chap. 12.7. As also by the particular judgment immediately consequent upon
death, whereby God appearing to conscience, decideth and determines the
eternal state and condition of every soul, preparative to the last and glorious
appearing of Christ at the great and terrible day; who shall then judge the
whole world, and the soul and body together. For it is appointed unto men once
to ye, and after this the judgment, Heb. 9.27. Which may include this
particular judgment after death, whereof we are speaking, as well as the last
and general judgment: yet some restrain it to the particular only. But in what
manner the soul of a wicked man shall see God, take in a few words. Death being
the unclothing and putting off off the earthly house of the body, the soul
remains naked in respect of that clothing, which nakedness of the separate
souls of the Saints is covered and clothed upon with the glory of their house
in heaven, 2 Cor. 5.3. In which state of nakedness, wherein the souls of the
wicked abide, the soul must needs be quickly and powerfully apprehensive of
God, and of any impression and influence of God upon it; as the body being
naked of its clothing, is tenderly sensible of heat or cold, and any thing that
approaches unto it. For the foul being separate from the body, receives its
object no more through the senses of the body, but in an immediate way of
discovery of them. We know also that the Lord does sometimes immediately wound
the spirit of man, while it is in the body, by letting fall the drops of wrath
upon it, and thereby tormenteth it, which David calls the rebukes of God, Ps.
39.11. When thou with rebukes do correct a man for iniquity, thou make his
beauty to consume away like a moth. Moreover, if the soul being a spirit, and
separate from the body, can converse with spirits, as the Saints with Angels,
and the damned with Devils, much more with God the Father of spirits, who can
discover himself unto them, as he pleases. But take heed of mistaking here;
for though a gracious and and sanctified soul reconciled unto God, has to do
with him, as a father, in the apprehension of his love, through which it has
comfort and joy in communion with him; yet it is not so with the sinful soul of
that than that dies in his sins; which apprehends God only, as he appears
to it, in wrath and displeasure, for without holiness no man shall see the
Lord, that is, with peace and comfort, Heb. 12.14. Now consider, ye that forget
God, can ye see and behold the wrath of his countenance? do ye not tremble in
your very thoughts of him? Surely the presence of an angry God will make every
guilty soul to fear and tremble at his feet, when they shall be brought before
him by his Sergeant Death. The apprehension of guilt and of God together made
Adam and Eve to run behind the Trees for fear, when they heard the voice of God
in the garden, Genesis 3.8. Moses, though a Favorite, yet when he saw the
appearance of God in the thundrings and lightnings and earthquakes, the smoke
and fire, and heard the sound of the trumpet upon Mount Sinai, he said, I
exceedingly fear and quake, Heb. 12.21. When Elijah apprehended God was in the
still small voice, he wrapped his face in his mantle, and went out, and stood
in the entering of the ^ave, 1 Kings 19.13. When Job came to see God with his
eyes, he abhorred himself in dust and ashes, Job 42.6. The judgments of God
made holy David's flesh to tremble, Psalm. 119.120. My flesh trembles for fear
of thee, I am afraid of thy judgments. The glorious vision which Isaiah saw,
how did it work upon that holy Prophet? Isaiah 6.5. When he saw the Lord
sitting upon a throne, and cried woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man
of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips, for mine
eyes have seen the King ^he Lord of Hosts. And if these Saints, so eminent for
grace and holiness, have trembled at the presence of God manifested unto them
in love and mercy, how shall the unner and ungodly stand in his sight? Do
thou believe there is a God? If not, thou shall see and believe; but remember,
that the Devils believe and tremble.

Fourthly, The soul of a wicked man thus trembling before God, the holiness of
God breaks forth in wrath upon the soul to punish and torment it. For the
soul appearing before God in the guilt of all its sins which are the greatest
contrariety and opposition against the holy nature of God, who cannot but
glorify himself, and vindicate his holiness; the justice of God, in the
execution of his infinite and unsatiable displeasure, can no longer be
suspended, but stirs up his fury as fire to prey upon the soul. Thus fitted
for destruction: The day of patience is now over, wherein the Lord waited upon
this soul, in the ministry of the Gospel, and in the use of all means, to gain
it in; wooing it by tenders of grace and mercy, and warning it, by foretelling
this present misery. What fair opportunities and rich advantages, has all
wicked and ungodly wretches to prevent this condemnation, and to escape the
wrath of God, while the glorious Gospel of the great God is preaching to them;
wherein grace is upon the knee, and mercy stretches forth her hands, Christ
stands knocking at their hard hearts, and his messengers cry aloud to their
deaf ears. No wonder therefore if now patience abused turn into fury, mercy
slighted stir up indignation, and contempt of favor heighten displeasure, and
hereby wrath is treasured up against the day of wrath, Romans 2.4, 5. Or
despisest thou the richer of his goodness, and forbearance, and long suffering,
not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance; but after thy
hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the
day of wrath, and the revelation of the righteous judgment of God. God is a
consuming fire to all such dry and combustible souls, seizing upon them as
straw and stubble in their approach unto him; like Nadab and Abihu, when they
offered strange fire before the Lord, which he commanded them not, Lev. 10.2.
And there went out fire from the Lord, and devoured them, and they died before
the Lord. O that the sinners in Zion were afraid, and that fear might surprise
the hypocrites! Consider, who among you shall dwell with the devouring fire,
and who among you shall dwell with everlasting burnings? The wrath of the Lord
is the lake of fire and brimstone of which the Scripture so often speaks;
this is hell it self, wherein God himself is the tormentor, who by his wrath
kindles those unquencheable flames, Isa. 30.33. For Tophet is ordained of old,
yea for the King it is prepared he bath made it deep and large: the pile
thereof is much wood; the breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone
kindles it. In this Scripture the Lord denounces hell to King Sennacherib, in
describing whereof the Prophet alludeth to the fires in the valley of Hinnon,
wherein those Idolaters burned their children in sacrifice to Moloch; and that
the parents might not hear the cry of their children, they beat up their
ta^rets or drums: and from the name of Toph or drum, the place was called
Tophet. So in hell there shall be no pity or compassion of God to the cries of
burning souls. And this is the punishment of old ordained, not only for
Sennacherib, but all the ungodly; which is said to be deep and large. As the
dimensions of Gods love to his people in heaven are highth, length, depth, and
breadth, in all which love passes knowledge, so are the dimensions of his
wrath to the damned in hell, which we are not able to conceive; the heat
whereof is intolerable, as of a fire made with much wood, and eternal, through
the stream of wrath for ever flowing forth from God the fountain of wrath to
the wicked, the hot breath of whose mouth kindles and blows up the
everlasting flames of their endless sorrow and torments.

Fifthly, the soul under this consuming wrath of God lies down in everlasting
despair of ever being released, or in the least measure releived or eased.
Eternity in torments makes them unsupportable, though in themselves they were
not so heavy and burdensome; how much more intolerable will that punishment
be, that is both in nature, as well as duration, so insufferable? And if the
pains of wrath but for one hour in hell cannot be recompensed with all the
wealth of the world, who would venture the eternity thereof for the pleasures
of sin, which are but for a season? The damned in hell apprehend the
endlessness of their torments, by the immortality of the soul, the demerit of
sin, and the unchangeableness of God from whom they suffer. If the soul could
be consumed or annihilated by its torments, if sin could be expiated by any
measure of sufferings, or if God could repent, or be moved to compassion, there
might be hope in hell; but all these are impossible: For God changes not,
guilt diminishes not, the soul wastes not, therefore the worm never dies,
and the fire is never quenched, Mark 9.48. And to seal up this bottomless pit
upon such miserable souls, we may add, that if there might be any help in this
case, either Christ must suffer once more to expiate Gospel disobedience, as he
suffered for legal, or time must be called back again for these tormented ones
to enjoy once more the Gospel which they refused. But neither of these can be
imagined. Christ will no more leave the bosom of his Father and his glory,
having offered one sacrifice for ever, and being set down at the right hand of
God, from hence expecting, that all his enemies should become his footstool,
Heb. 10.12, 13. For if we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of
the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful
looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the
adversaries, verses 26, 27. And who can call time again that is past? If God
should bring the Sun back upon the dial, by a contrary motion, through all
those minutes of time it has gone from the beginning of the creation, and of
its motion in the firmament, time would still go forward, by the Suns going
backward, and it would measure succeeding time by its retrograde motion. So
that to call time again that is past, is one of those impossibilities, which
God himself cannot do, because it implies a contradiction. Therefore this
shall aggravate the misery of the soul under the wrath of God, that the
sufferings are easeless, endless and helpless; wherein the wicked shall bewail
their lost seasons never to be regained, and their precious time never to be
redeemed. Despair is written upon the gate of hell, whence there is no
returning; Omnia te adversum spectantia, no prints appearing of the feet of any
that have come from thence.

Sixthly, the Soul of a wicked man, thus desparing under the implacable wrath
of God, shall stir up it self against God, through malice and despite in sin,
to curse and blaspheme him to his face. For the soul being an immortal spirit,
cannot be only passive, but active, under its intolerable sufferings; the
object whereof being God, and sin, and punishment, or God punishing it for sin;
and all the acts of the soul being purely evil and sinful without the least
mixture of good, the soul must of necessity be so far from an humble
acknowledgement, confession, and godly sorrow, as to discover and act all
manner of vexation, fretfulness, reluctance, and opposition, under the anguish
of its hopeless condition. And this may be demonstrated if one consider the
nature of a carnal heart and spirit, and the tendency thereof, which does
naturally end in this degree of sin. 1. There is a natural enmity in every
carnal soul against God, which remains for ever in it, where grace does not
subdue, and mortify it. The carnal mind is enmity to God, Romans 8.7. And it is
not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. So that this enmity is
discovered in this life, by acts of sin, and wicked works done by carnal men
against the holy and righteous will of God; and consequently abiding in the
soul after death, it will in like manner manifest it self to eternity, the Soul
being wholly void of all sanctifying and renewing grace. Secondly, This enmity
will more fully act after dissolution, by the total withdrawing of the spirit
of God, whereby in this life it was limited and restrained. God sets bounds
to carnal men in this life, to keep the world in some degree of peace, for the
more quiet habitation of his people, without which their lives on earth would
be altogether disquiet and uncomfortable, through the rage and fury of the
wicked. But in hell there is not so much as restraining grace to dam up the
fountain of corruption from breaking out and flowing forth in its full strength
and liberty. Thirdly, the greatest sufferings whatsoever have no power to
suppress or destroy corruption and carnal enmity, as in themselves considered.
It is a sanctified affliction, through the love of God, that purges and takes
away sin from his children, who by his chastisements are made partakers of his
holiness. But the torments of hell are the execution of the fierce wrath of
God, wherein there is not the mixture of one dram of love; God intending the
destruction, and not the salvation of the soul, in taking vengeance upon it. So
that the sinful habits, and habitual enmity of the soul, are increased and
blown up to the highest degree of malice by despair under eternal punishment.
Fourthly, To this we may also add, that to be given up to sin, is one of the
greatest Judgments of God, and therefore may be a part of, or at least an
adjunct to the torments of the damned. God sometimes punishes sin with sin, by
hardening the heart for its hardness, and searing the conscience for its
senselessness, and giving up to believe a lie, for not receiving the love of
the truth, as also he gave up those Idolaters, who imprisoned the natural light
and knowledge of God, to uncleanness, vile affections, and a reprobate mind,
Romans 1. Now the highest degree of sin God gives up a carnal man unto in this
life, is the sin against the holy Ghost; which is to sin with malice, and to
do despite unto the spirit of grace, Heb. 10.29. When a reprobate heart shall
grow to that hardness in sin, as to sin under conviction, and to revenge it
self upon God and the spirit of God, by committing sin upon the account of sin,
or because it is sin; otherwise it cannot be a wilful sinning after receiving
of the knowledge of the truth. This being the highest degree of sin upon earth,
the formality whereof is malice and revenge, we may easily be persuaded to
believe, that hell is full thereof, where this malice is more stirred up by
despair under these torments, then it can be in this life; and where the souls
of the wicked vent their malice against God, by blaspheming and cursing him to
his face, which is the proper discovery of it; as desperate malefactors
sometimes in their torments curse both Judge and Executioner. And for the proof
of this, I shall only argue the the case from two or three Scripture instances.
First, of Job, whom Satan supposed to be but a hypocrite, and tempt^ God to
afflict him, with this confidence that he should curse him to his face, Jo^
1.11. The Devil well knew what over whelming afflictions would work upon carnal
and sinful heart, even to curse Go^ to his face; and had not Jobs sincerit^
through the power of God upheld an^ preserved him, the Devil had had his
design, and Job had cursed God, as well a^ the day of his birth. Another is of
thos^ wicked ones, of whom the Prophet ^saiah speaks, Isai. 8.21. And th^^
shall pass through it hardly bestead an^ hungry; and it shall come to pass,
that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret themselves and curse their King
and their God, an^ look upward. Whence it appears, tha^ when God upon earth
punishes a people for their wickedness, with some extreme calamity, under
which they despair, looking upwards and seeing no help, the wickedness of their
hearts will through madness and malice break out into cursing of their King,
and their God, whether true of false. Which appears yet more clearly in the
prophecy of the pouring forth of the vials of the wrath of God upon the
Antichristian party, in several plagues and punishments, for their final ruin
and overthrow, Rev. 16.9. And men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed
the name of God, which has power over these plagues, and they repented not to
give him glory. And verse 11. They blasphemed the God of Heaven, because of
their pains and their sores, and repented not of their deeds. Likewise verse
the last, They blasphemed God because of the plague of the hail, for the plague
thereof was exceeding great. Much more will a sinful soul blaspheme in hell
where despair is the torment of those torments. Which Christ himself seems to
put out of all question, speaking of the sufferings of hell, when he says,
There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Math. 8.12. and 13.42, 50. That
is against God, through fretfulness and malice, for so the phrase of gnashing
the teeth is taken in other Scriptures. Psalm. 37.12. The wicked plotteth
against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth. So the Jews did upon
Stephen, Acts. 7.54. When they heard these things, they were cut to the heart,
and gnashed on him with their teeth. So that as the Saints in heaven bless God
with Praises and Hallelujahs, so the damned in hell howl under pain and curse
him: and thus in hell sin shall be perfected, as well as grace in heaven; and
every wicked and graceless soul shall sin under suffering, while it is
suffering for sin.

Lastly, Hereupon the wrath of God is further provoked, and heightened, by the
actual sin of a wicked and desperate soul under its torments. So that to make
this everlasting punishment of a damned soul in hell unspeakable miserable, the
sufferings thereof are not only eternal, as they are the just reward of sin
committed in this life against an infinite God, whose justice can never be
fully satisfied, but by the eternity of the punishment; but they are also for
ever increased and renewed by enraging provocations of malice and blasphemy,
whereby the soul requoi leth aagainst God, through anguish thereof. By this we
may conceive how exquisite the torments of the wicked will be hereafter, the
soul eternally sinning, and continually adding fresh oil to the flames of
wrath; for sin kindles wrath, and wrath kindles hell, and hell kindles sin,
and sin again wrath, and so for ever. This is the work and action between an
infinite God, and a poor unhappy soul to eternity; God punishing, and the soul
sinning, and the soul sinning, and God punishing; in which torments the body
shall partake with the soulafter its resurrection, being united again, and made
so far capable to endure its torments, as not to be dissolved, or destroyed, by
the extremity and eternity of them. Thus sinful and wretched man shall be ever
dying, weeping, yelling, howling and sinning, under the intolerable pangs of
the second death, Rev. 21.8. The fearful, and unbeleiving, and the abominable,
and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars,
shall have their part in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone: which
is the second death. Repent therefore and believe the Gospel, turn from your
sins and forsake your ways, that ye may escape this judgment of God, for now
is the day of salvation, through the forbearance of God, who would have have
all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth.

From this Text and Doctrine we may be again informed, upon what grounds the
people of God may desire their dissolution. How desirable a privilege the
departure of the Saints is, has been already opened; but for further direction
in it, I shall here make up the banks, to keep these desires in their right
channel, which otherwise are ready to break out into unlimited and unlawful
currents. Therefore to satisfy this case of conscience concerning the desire
of death, let every precious soul consider these following Propositions.

First, It is altogether unwarrantable for beleivers to desire dissolution out
of mere passion, under the forest trouble, affliction, or trial. It is usual
for carnal men, upon discontent, to wish they might dye; who also under the
burthensomness of corporal distempers, often desire a release from their
present pains, not knowing or considering, that thereby they shall immediately
fall from their beds into hell. This also is incident to the Godly, through
infirmity, whose passions in this case are not excusable. Thus it was with that
holy Prophet Elijah, when he was forced to flee from the rage and persecution
of Jezebel, who threatened to take away his life, 1 Kings 19.34. And when he saw
that, he arose and went for his life, and came to Beersheba and left his
servant there; but he himself went a days journey into the wilderness, and
came and sat down under a juniper tree, and he requested for himself, that he
might die, and said, it is enough now, O Lord, take away my life, for I am no
better then my Fathers. Elijah's passion under this persecution, being now
alone, tired and weary probably with his journey, as well as assaulted and
troubled with slavish fear, was the ground of this his request and
supplication. Now if we compare with this story the expression of S. James,
presenting Elias as an example of the prevalency of prayer, we may judge, that
this passion was an infirmity in this Prophet, James 5.17. Elias was a man,
subject to passion as we are; and he prayed, etc. The like instance we have of
Job, who through passion gratified Satan so far under his temptation, as to
curse the day of his birth, and also through vexation of spirit under his
afflictions to wish and long for his grave, Job. 3.20, 21, 22. Wherefore is
light given to him that is in misery, and life unto the bitter in soul? which
long for death and it comes not, and dig for it more then for hid treasures;
which rejoice exceedingly, and are glad when they can find the grave. Take also
the Prophet Jonah for an example hereof, who, after he had preached destruction
to Nineveh, according to the word of the Lord, and saw not the execution
thereof according to his prophecy, was discontent at the patience and
repentings of God toward that City, and besought the Lord he might dye, Jonah
4.3. Therefore now, O Lord, take I beseech thee my life from me, for it is
better for me to dye, then to live, for which the Lord checketh him in the next
verse, do thou well to be angry? And in the 9, and 10. verses. When the Gourd
was withered, and the Wind and Sun beat upon him, that he fainted, he wished he
might dye again, and passionately replies to Gods second rebuke of him, I do
well to be angry even unto the death.

Secondly, Every Christian, looking upon death as a privilege, and means to
bring him to Christ, ought no further to desireit, then with submission to the
will of God, and a willing subjection to his work and service in his
generation. To hasten death by unlawful means is no less then self murder, as
has been already proved; and hereby the desire thereof is in some measure
limited, preservation of life by all lawful means being a duty incumbent upon
all. Our times and seasons, life and death, are in the hands only of God, the
wise disposer of all things for the good of them that love him; between whose
will and ours there ought to be a perfect conformity in relation to all changes
and dispensations. Christ escaped from the Jews, when they often sought to kill
him, because his hour was not yet come; but then he refused not, but accepted
that bitter cup, which his Father gave him to drink. When Job had recovered
himself from under the power of his passion, he besought the Lord to appoint
him a set time, and he would wait, Job 14.14. All the days of my appointed
time will I wait till my change come. We must not run home before we have done
our work, but mind our work as well as our reward. God has appointed a
particular service for every beleiver in his generation, which he should labor
to finish, with David, before he falls asleep. Acts 13.16. For David after he
had served his own generation, by the will of God fell asleep. Saint Paul
declaring to Timothy the near approach of his dissolution and departure,
forgets not to mention the finishing of his work in the Gospel, 2 Timothy 4.6,
7. I am now ready to be offered up, and my departure is at hand. I have fought
a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. But till it was
finished, he was willing to abide in the flesh, notwithstanding his great
desire to depart and to be with Christ, as in the words following my Text.
Nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you. And having this
confidence, I know I shall abide and continue with you, for your furtherance
and joy of faith.

Thirdly, This being minded, it is lawful and warrantable for a gracious person
to desire to depart and to be with Christ. Who among all the heirs of promise,
does not desire the possession and enjoyment of his hopes in Christ, his
deliverance from sin, sufferings, and sorrow, and the full fruition of all the
glory and happiness of his heavenly portion and inheritance? Let the spiritual
echoes and silent answers of all true born Israelites resolve this question;
whose hearts are enlarged to rejoice in the hope of the glory of God, unto
which they are begotten, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.
This makes the greatest afflictions of the Saints in this world so light unto
them, while they look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which
are not seen, 2 Cor. 4.18. And therefore reckon with Paul, That the sufferings
of this present time, are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall
be revealed in them, Romans 8.18. Hence are those earnest groans and longing
desires of the righteous to be uncloathed, and clothed upon with their house
from heaven; wherein they symbolize and sympathize with the whole creation,
which desires to be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the
glorious liberty of the sons of God, Romans 8.23. And not only they, but our
selves also, which have the first fruits of the spirit, even we our selves
groan within our selves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of
our body.

Use 3. Use of inquiry. If it be the desirable privilege of the Saints to be
brought immediately unto Christ, by their death, then it may be profitable and
useful for us to inquire into the causes, why many Christians are so far from
desiring it, and cheerfully submitting unto death, as that they tremble at it,
and seem to slye from it. What is the reason that they are still in bondage to
the fear of death, notwithstanding the sting thereof is taken away by the
destruction of sin, and the grave perfumed as a bed of spices by Christ's lying
therein: Now therefore, for satisfaction to this case, and withal to remove
and cure this uncomfortable distemper, I shall lay down briefly some of the
chief causes, whence this fear may arise.

First, it may arise from a natural principle of self-preservation. For God
has planted this instinct of nature in every part of the creation, to labor
to preserve its being, and secure it self from dissolution. Hence it is that
nature, abhorring avacuity* or emptiness in any part of the universe, because
it tends to destruction, for the preservation thereof, causes in the
creatures motions contrary to their inclinations; causing the air to descend to
fill up vacuities in the earthly element, and the water to ascend, contrary to
its nature, to supply the room and absence of the forced air, which we see in
several experiments and ordinary inventions. And this principle appears in
every particular creature, naturally avoiding whatsoever threatens or tends
to its destruction. But to come nearer to the case of humane dissolution. We
naturally shun whatsoever we apprehend may offer violence to us, and are
subject to sudden passions at the approach of cruelty; yea nature put in mind
of a weakness in any part of the body, makes strongest reparations and
fortifieth that place where a breach was made: a broken bone well set becomes
stronger then before. And hence it is that through fear we decline any eminent
danger, and labor to preserve our natural beings, resisting dissolution, as
the greatest natural evil. Therefore the Philosopher called death (...) the
most terrible of terribles; and Job, the King of terrors, Job. 18.14. This
natural fear was in Christ himself, as he was man, when he approached his death
and sufferings; who through a conflict of nature desired to be delivered from
them. Mat. 26.39. O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me.
And yet there was no sin in it, because it was a natural desire, and that for a
moment, suddenly overcome by reason and deliberation, or a short suspension,
quickly subdued by a voluntary submission. and firm resolution, the spirit
being willing, but the flesh weak in Christ himself But grace does not only
teach to deny self but is also powerful to subdue our natura wills and
inclinations to the will of God, as it was also in Christ, nevertheless not my
will, but thine be done.

Secondly, It may proceed from immoderate love, and inordinate affections to
the world, and the things of this present life. And there is a great proneness
in believers themselves, to ^ive too much liberty to earthly and worldly
affections, and to take too much delight and content in the good things of this
life, which are but bona corporis, the goods of the body. These things are
snares unto us in our life, and as stocks to the feet of the soul at the time
of departure. How loath are we to let go our tenure and hold of these delights
upon a sick bed; to take our last farewell, and shake hands with near and dear
relations; to have our eyes closed, and no more to be opened upon these visible
comforts; and to suffer the pillow to be drawn away from our heads, that we may
yield up our spirits to a more easy and free passage? Certainly, if we were
more crucified to the world, and strangers in it, we should far more willingly
leave it; whereas, through the love of it, we are still hoping for a longer
time and continuance in it, and that God would still add either more years to
our days, or at least more days to our years. Were not the stakes of our
worldly delight drove so deep and strongly fastened in the earth, our earthly
tabernacles would more easily be dissolved. The creatures in themselves are
good; and life is not only sweet in it self, but as it is also, ratio
possidendi, our tenure of them; they are but for one life, without renewing the
lease thereof. Therefore for the loosening of these cords and stakes, consider
how much better one Christ is, then all the creatures; and one God, then a
thousand worlds; and the glory of heaven, then the superficial varnish and
beauty of the whole earth. If ye be Christians and risen with Christ, take the
Apostles counsel, Col. 3.1, 2, 3. (...), seek those things which are above,
where Christ sits at the right hand of God; and (...), set your affections
on things above, and not on things on the earth, for ye are dead, and your life
is hid with Christ in God. When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall
ye also appear with him in glory. Therefore (says he) mortify your members
which are upon the earth, inordinate affections, evil concupiscence, and
covetousness which is Idolatry. Christians, take heed of fastening your
affections here; it may be Christ may require you should testify your love to
him, by suffering for his sake and the Gospel, and that unto the death: and if
worldly affections discompose the spirit, and render beleivers unfit for a
natural dissolution, how much more will they entangle in a time of persecution.
And what will it profit a man, if he gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul? For says our Savior, whosoever will save his life, shall lose it, and
whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it, Matthew. 16.23, 24.
Remember, that Christ is your life, and the cause and fountain of life, and if
you lose life it self for him, you will find it again in him; nec propter vitam
vivendi perdere causam, venture not the losing of Christ himself for this life
sake. This was Paul's present case and condition in my Text; he was willing to
suffer, and by suffering for Christ, to depart unto Christ, which is far better.

Thirdly, This fear of death may flow from a want of a clear evidence of an
interest in Christ. When a Christians evidence for heaven is dark and dubious,
the white stone slurred, and the new name hardly legible; when neither his own
spirit, nor Gods spirit bears full witness, or give in a clear testimony to
adoption and reconciliation; in this case eternity is terrible, and the face of
death, and its appearance, exceeding ghastful. Sometimes the death of the Godly
is a straight passage, and a dark entrance, when together with the pangs of
dissolution, the guilt of sin appears to conscience, the wonted favor of God
is withdrawn, by removing his supporting presence, and the Devil by strong
assaults and temptations takes advantage of weakness to vex and disquiet the
soul striving, and struggling for support and comfort. Methinks I hear such a
heart cry out in the words of the Prophet David, Psalm. 39.13. O spare me, that
I may recover strength, before I go hence, and be no more seen. It is exceeding
hard for a Christian to venture to launch forth into eternity upon
uncertainties, and without a hopeful, at least, if not a full and satisfactory
persuasion of happiness and salvation. In this case the soul has no other
help, but to roll it self upon mercy, by renewing the acts of faith upon
Christ, to stay it self upon God, though hiding his face, and strongly to rest
and rely upon the rock of ages. And let this comfort and support in such an
hour of trouble and trial, that when thou droppest into eternity, and seem
to fall in the act of dissolution into eternal sorrow, then the everlasting
arms are ready to receive thee, and as soon as ever death closes the eyes of
thy body, thy soul shall see the glorious face of God himself, to thy
everlasting, though unexpected joy. Therefore imitate and follow the steps of
Christ thy forerunner, who in the same condition of desertion exercised faith
upon the cross, saying, Mat. 27.46. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

Fourthly, The Saints may be subject to the fear of death, and not cheerfully
submit unto it, from their ignorance of the state of heaven, and their
happiness with God hereafter. It is a received axiom ignoti nulla cupido, we
cannot desire what we do not know and apprehend. And though the greatest part
of what we know here, be the least part of what we know not, but shall know
hereafter, for we know but in part; yet most Christians are guilty of neglect
and unexcusable ignorance, in that they might know far more of the state of
heaven then they do. It is true what the beloved Disciple and Apostle asserts,
1 John 3.2. Beloved, now are we the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear
what we shall be but we know we shall be; like him for we shall see him as he
is. The Scriptures are not altogether silent in revealing So the glorious
inheritance of the Saints. that though we are not able in our understanding,
while we are in the body, to behold so great a glory, had it been fully
revealed; yet so much is revealed thereof unto us, that we may in the promises
thereof discern and contemplate, as we do the glory of the Sun by its
reflection in still waters. For as it is written, 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen,
nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God
has revealed unto them that love him; but as it follows in the next verse,
God has revealed them unto us by his spirit; for the spirit searches all
things, yea the deep things of God; among which are profunda coeli, the high or
deep things of heaven. It would be endless to gather together those pieces of
heaven, which like rich pearls and sparkling diamonds lie scattered up and
down the Scriptures. Let every high and heaven-born soul look more after his
portion, and spend more i am in surveying that inheritance incorruptible,
undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in the heavens for him. This will
sweeten the thoughts of death, and strengthen the soul to encounter the King of
terrors. Who would not endure the strongest pains for heavenly pleasures? who
would not shoot this gulf for eternal gain? who would not dare to dye once,
that he might live, and never dye more? yea who would not depart, that he might
be with Christ?

Use. 4. Then suffer the word of exhortation: and first, let every natural men
accept of a friendly call to provide and prepare for the day and hour of his
dissolution. Consider wherefore thou art come into the world, and how thou
may close thy days in peace. Wherefore has God given thee a being, and
breathed into thy nostrils the breath of life? Why did not she that bare thee
miscarry before she had reckoned her months, that thou wast not the untimely
fruit of the womb? why wast thou not stifled in the birth, and the long
expectations of him that begat thee frustrate with the news of a stilborn
child? or why diedst thou not in thine infancy, as a blossom withered through
sudden blasting? By how many preventing and preserving providence has thy
life been renewed and continued unto thee, that thou still drawest thy breath,
and swallowest thy spittle? what account can thou give of the golden talent
of time God has betrusted thee withal, upon every moment whereof depends
eternity? Call to mind the days that are past and gone, and shall return no
more, and examine the short periods and divisions of time never to be recalled;
which thou have spent either idly and impertinently, or for the most part
sinfully and profanely. Art thou born to sin? or do thou therefore sin, that
thou may shorten thy days, by hastening to fill up the measure of thine
iniquity? why should thou dye before thy time? Is there no measure of sin, or
bounds of profaneness, that thou drinkest in sin, as the fish the water, and
drawest iniquity with cart ropes and the cords of vanity? O make not so much
have to hell, thou will be there too soon; but turn at reproof, and to day,
whilst it is called to day, harden not thy heart: who knows what a night may
bring forth, or whether thine eyes shall see the light of another day? Compose
a while thy wandering unsettled thoughts, and if thou can be serious at such a
solemn assembly and sad occasion, tell me if thou can venture this night thy
eternal condition to be determined upon thee by a sudden dissolution? Art thou
ready to be uncloathed, and to lie down in the dust of death? or do thou not
tremble at the thoughts of it, as a poor sinful creature, amazed, distracted,
and confounded in thy self through the fear of death, and hell that follows
it? Oh cast not away so precious a soul, though thou have hitherto made it a
servant to sin, and a drudge to Satan. If thou knew the worth of an immortal
spirit, thou would not barter it away to the Devil for such short and empty
pleasures, nor expose it to the rapine of vain lusts to be defiled and
deflowred; but on the contrary, by all means and unwearied pains, seek the
deliverance and salvation thereof from eternal misery, and everlasting ruin,
which shall be inevitable, without true and unfeigned repentance. That I may
now catch thee in thy fall, and pull thee out of the fire, and through
compassion save a soul from death (for knowing the terror of the Lord we
persuade men) oh resist not the counsel of God to thy destruction; but accept
of direction from an unworthy labourer in the Lords vineyard, who shall rejoice
to become an instrument of bringing thee in to God, that thou may be
translated from the power of darkness into the Kingdom of his dear Son.

First, Search the Scriptures, and make them the impartial judge of thy
condition. Examine thy heart and ways by the infallible touchstone of the word
of God, and try the rectitude or declination of thy soul by this line and
plummet. The word of God is the true standard and exact balance of the
Sanctuary, by which, if thou would not be deceived, thou may know thy
present, and consequently thy future estate to eternity. Therefore open this
book, and in obedience to this present call of God unto thee, take and read,
and judge thy self, that thou may escape the final condemnation and
judgment of God, when this book, with the rest of those books mentioned by
Saint John in his Revelation, shall be opened, Rev. 20.12. And I saw the dead,
small and great, stand before God, and the books were opened; and another
book was opened, which is the book of life; and the dead were judged out of
those things, which were written in the books, according to their works.
Friend, God will not judge thee by another law and rule then what he has
revealed unto thee; for he is righteous in judgment. And though the heathen,
that have not this law of God revealed unto them, shall be judged without it,
even by the light of nature, and the law of their own consciences, whereby they
are a law unto themselves, yet they that have it, shall be judged by it, Romans
2.12, 13, 14, 15. For as many as have sinned without law, shall also perish
without law; and as many as have sinned in the law, shall be judged by the law,
etc. And think not to plead ignorance in that day, for that will be but to
plead guilty also, where God has afforded so much means of knowledge. For God
has not cast thy lot and habitation in a land of darkness, but of light, and
under the plain and powerful ministry of the Gospel, under which thou can
not be ignorant, unless thou shuttest thine eyes against the truth, and love
darkness rather theu light, that thou may sin more securely. Therefore
supposing, through charity, that thou art not wholly ignorant and unacquainted
with the mysteries of the Gospel, and the rule of righteousness contained in
the holy Scriptures, let me engage thee to a self examination by them, as being
able to make thee wise unto salvation. But give me leave however to put that
question to thee, which Paul put to King Agrippa, Acts 26.27. King Agrippa,
beleivest thou the Prophets? Beleivest thou the Scriptures? if thou beleivest,
why tremblest thou not at the wrath of God proclaimed, and his judgment
denounced against sin, and sinners? But how can thou believe, and still
persevere in profaneness, and a wicked and licentious conversation? Suppose
thou should see one of thy old acquaintance and companions in iniquity now
in torments, arise out of his grave, and hear him relate with trembling and
astonishment the miserable estate of the damned in hell, and the unexpressible
pains they endure there, and withal, falling prostrate at thy feet, with cries
and tears beseech thee to repent and accept of the riches of mercy now offered
unto thee in the Gospel, that thou might not perish in the same condemnation
and destruction; would not this scare and affright thee, or work in thee a
serious reflection upon thy sinful condition? Now has not the eternal God, and
Jesus Christ, the faithful and true witness, declared the same unto thee by the
word of truth, which cannot be broken or changed, and do thou remain still
secure and obstinate? It is to be feared, if thou beleivest not the report of
God, that thou would not believe the report of man, though God should
miraculously call up the dead to warn thee. As Abraham told the rich man in
hell, entreating him to send Lazarus from the dead unto his Fathers house, to
his five brethren, to testify unto them least they should come to that place
of torment, Luke. 16.29, 31. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear
them; and if they hear not Moses, nor the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded though one rose from the dead. Hearken therefore not only to Moses
and the Prophets, but to a greater then Moses, to Christ and his holy Apostles,
by whom the counsels of God, and his good, and perfect, and acceptable will,
are sufficiently made known unto the Sons of men. For the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance
on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2
Thessal. 1.8. Let every soul then enquire after God, and examine the evidences
of his salvation, the grounds of his hope, the fruits of repentance, the signs
of regeneration, and the Scripture marks and characters of a sound and saving
faith in Christ Jesus. For without faith it is impossible to please God,
without holiness no man shall see him; and without repentance, and regeneration
no salvation. Therefore be not deceived, but search the Scriptures daily
whether these things be so or no.

Secondly, set the fear of God and his wrath before your eyes continually.
Consider O ye Sons of men, in whose presence ye are at all times, yea when ye
are most retired from the eyes of men; who can strike you dead in the act of
sin, though never so secretly committed; stand in awe therefore and sin not,
for the patience of God to every carnal soul persisting in rebellion and
disobedience, is but a present suspension of eternal wrath, which may suddenly
break forth, and begin in temporal judgments upon them. And take heed of
interpreting the silence of God to be his allowance of sin; for because
sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of
the Sons of men is fully set in them to do evil, Eccle. 8.11. Whereas if the
Lord should execute his wrath immediately upon every profane person in the act
of sin, what fear would surprise your hearts? who would swear a profane oath if
he were sure to dye as soon as the word is out of his mouth? who would commit
adultery, if he were to be thrust through with a sword in the act of his
uncleanness? who would steal his neighbors goods, if he were persuaded, he
should be immediately stoned to death? what drunkard would venture upon excess,
if he apprehended every immoderate draught to be so much deadly poison to
destroy him? Or who would exalt himself against God and his people, if he
believed, that the earth would presently open her mouth, and swallow him up
quick? And is the wrath of God less fearful, because through patience it is
deferred in the execution of justice, and recompense upon ungodly men? For ye
are not only by nature the children of wrath, but because of these things
comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. Ephesians. 5.6.
Therefore let no man deceive himself with vain confidence and presumption, as
if God had said in vain, that he will render to every man according to his
deeds. Unto them that are contentious, and obey not the truth, but obey
unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every soul
of man that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile, Romans 2.8, 9.
O that ye would set the Lord before your eyes, and his consuming displeasure,
when ye are venturing upon any act of folly and iniquity: possibly this might
restrain corruption, and check your violent lusts, ready to break out into
practice and actual commission. What are the damned suffering in hell, for the
same sins that ye are committing daily? Bethink your selves how ye shall endure
those torments; or rather, that ye may escape them, labor to foresee them, and
present them to the face of your stout and headstrong corruptions. When the
temptation is before you, the place present, and the company of evil workers
ready to join with you in any unlawful and sinful enterprise or design,
remember that hell is kindled, and the flames thereof ascend for ever. Is not a
fiery furnace hot enough; or a bottomless pit deep enough to terrify your
senseless spirits? Or can ye endure to be ever burning in that furnace, and
ever falling in that pi^? Our Savior tells those that offend his little ones,
Matthew. 18.6. That it were better a millstone were hanged about their necks, and
they cast into the bottom of the sea. Were there any hope for such to arise
from perishing under the mighty waters? And is there not much more weight in
the infinite wrath of an omnipotent God, to sink you down to the nethermost
hell, and to keep you under the foaming billows and raging and roaring waves
of the Lake of burning brimstone? O that ye would consider this, ye that forget
God, least he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you, Psalm.
50.22. Venture not the day of Gods displeasure, and provoke no longer
omnipotency to appear against you, least the roaring lion seize upon the prey;
and say not peace and safety, for sudden destruction shall come upon the
wicked, as travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape. Cease
your mocking, ye that scoff at the threatenings of God, that say, let him make
speed and hasten his work, that we may see it, and let the counsel of the holy
one of Israel draw nigh and come, that we may know it, Isai. 5.19. How soon the
Lord may come in wrath and judgment upon you, ye know not; and all that spend
their days in vanity, shall go downto the grave in a moment. How soon does
the cloud arise which at length covers the whole heavens, and the rattling
thunders make you tremble, and the white flashings of lightning turn you into
dark holes to hide your heads? how fair a morning had the wicked Sodomites,
when the Sun arose so gloriously upon their City, and by and by a shower of fire
and brimstone turned all into ashes? And how did the security of the old world,
deceive them, when they took no warning by Noah the preacher of righteousness,
nor by the building of the Arc, until the fountains of the great deep were
broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened, and the deluge came; the
floods increasing, and covering the tops of all mountains, so that their was
no help in their distress, but all perished together in those swelling waters,
Genesis 7. latter end. And dare ye still scoff at the messengers of the Lord,
saying, where is the promise of his coming? Are not the heavens and the earth
kept in store, and reserved unto fire, against the day of judgment, and
perdition of ungodly, men? And this day of the Lord will come also, as a thief
in the night, in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and
the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also, and the works that
are therein shall be burnt up. The Lord is not slack concerning his coming, but
is long suffering to you-ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance. Therefore seeing that all these things shall be
dissolved (when heaven and earth shall be in flames) what manner of persons
ought ye to be in all holy conversation, and godliness, 2 Pet. 3.9, 10, 11.

Thirdly, Then labor to get an interest in Christ before ye die. What rich
provision has God made for immortal souls, in sending the Lord Jesus Christ
into the world, to suffer under the imputation of sin, that he might reconcile
the disobedient and rebellious hearts of men unto himself? And how often has
this Gospel been preached among you, That God so loved the world, that he sent
his only begotten Son, that whosoever should believe in him should not perish,
but have everlasting life, John 3.16. Therefore we are ambassadors for Christ,
as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye
reconciled to God. How willing is Christ to save your souls, and to redeem you
from wrath to come? Oh let not your unbeleif frustrate the grace of God,
thereby depriving your selves of the benefit thereof so freely offered and
fully revealed unto you. Is not the golden Scepter of grace held forth, and the
royal Standard set up, and proclamation made to sinners to turn and live? How
will ye escape if ye neglect so great salvation? O ungrateful, and unworthy
wretches, who disdain and slight such reports of mercy, and the rich mystery of
Gods good will toward men in Christ, which the Angels admiring bow themselves,
and stoop down to look into! 1 Pet. 1.12. Hearken, O ye unbeleivers! Is it not
a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ came into the
world to save sinners, whereof ye are the chief? What is the meaning of so many
public Assemblies every Lords day, and our occasional comings together upon
this, or any other providential call? what is the meaning that so many are set
apart, and make it their study and labor to preach unto you, whom ye openly
see in their Pulpits spreading their hands, and hear them with so much zeal and
fervency crying aloud, spending their very strength, and hazarding their
healths, and life it self, in their unwearied pains? Is it not Christ whom we
preach, and in whom ye say, that ye believe? How can ye believe that wallow in
the mire of your unclean and polluted conversations? How can ye believe, that
commit iniquity with greediness, and blush not at your open sins and
profaneness? How can ye believe, that make the world your God, and prefer the
trrash of the earth before the treasures of heaven? How can ye believe, that
seek the honor and praise, and favor of men more then the honor that is of
God, that ye may be great upon earth; and get a name which shall be written in
the earth? Is it not true that all men have not faith? ye say ye believe, and
ye have faith, can your faith save you? can a dead faith, a feigned faith a
fruitless and a workless faith save you? Can ye prove, or show a true faith
without works? Give me leave to try your faith in regard of the object of it.
Do ye believe in the Lord Jesus Christ? Do ye believe in that Christ, who
from the beginning was promised to the sore-fathers, who saw his day, and
rejoiced? who in the fullness of time appeared in our flesh, made of a woman,
and under the law, and took upon him the form of a servant; who suffered so
much shame, and reproach by the contradiction of sinners, and at last an
accursed death, the death of the cross, for the satisfaction of divine justice,
and appeasing of the wrath of God, so highly provoked by the sins of men; who
arose from the grave, having overcome and broken the bands of death, to assure
unto us our justification; who lastly ascended into the highest heavens, and is
there interceeding for his people, and ruling and reigning till he overcome all
his enemies, whence he shall come again and appear the second time without sin,
unto the final judgment of the world, and the full salvation of all that
believe in him? Why then do ye say in your selves, or is it not the language of
our unbeleiving hearts, who shall ascend into heaven to bring Christ from
above, and who shall descend in to the deep to bring up Christ again from the
dead? What strange fancies have ye in your minds of Christ, and beleiving in
Christ? Is not your faith a fancy? O that the word of faith were nigh unto you,
even in your hearts, the word of faith which we preach! And that ye would
believe our report, when we preach Christ, and him crucified, as we have
evidently set him forth cruc^fied among you. Besides, if ye had faith, as a
grain of mustard seed, it would soon manifest its self by the growth of it, and
the fruits that proceed from it. It would be a Christ prizing faith, a heart
purifying faith, a world conquering and crucifying faith, it would be a Saint
loving, and a soul humbling faith; it would work in you the fear of God, and
the fear of sin, a love to the truth, and to every ordinance of Christ; it
would make conscience tender, and the heart sincere, and upright with God; yea,
it would render holiness beautiful, and lovely, and all the ways and commands
of the Lord delightful and easy; besides it would make future things present,
and present things absent, and as if they were not, and yet the beleiving soul
inherits all things, and possesses all things.

The exercise of faith is a pleasant, joyful, and glorious act, through the
transcendent and unspeakable excellency of Christ the object thereof. Now if
these things be a mystery unto you, and your hearts wholly strangers unto them,
look into the Gospel more seriously, and acquaint your selves further with the
riches of the mystery of Christ, even the riches of mercy, and the unsearchable
treasures of Christ, and be no more faithless, but believe. If ye were but
sensible of the wants of your souls, as ye are of the straights and necessities
of your bodies, it would not be so hard to persuade you to come to Christ the
great treasury of all supplies; who has gold for the poor, and eye salve for
the blind, and white raiment for the naked, Rev. 3.13. Now are not ye thus poor
and blind and naked, and consequently wretched and miserable? And how freely
does Christ offer himself to become all fullness unto you, who is made of God
unto all that believe, wisdom and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption? 1 Cor. 1.30. what sure foundation can ye build upon, if Christ be
not the corner stone, and rock of your trust and confidence? and to whom will
ye go for eternal life, if ye refuse him, and reject the counsel of God, by
persisting in unbeleif and impenitency? I can assure you from the word of God,
that other foundations can no man lay, then is laid by Jesus Christ. 1 Cor.
3.11. Neither is there salvation in any other for there; is none other name
under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved, Acts 4.12. To day
therefore, whilst it is called to day, harden not your hearts, and refuse not
him that speaks from heaven, lest you perish in your unbeleife; but lay hold
upon this strength of God, that ye may make peace with him, and ye shall make
peace, Isai. 27.5. For he is our peace, by whom we have access with boldness
unto the throne of grace; and he is able to save unto the uttermost all those
that come unto God by him, Heb 7.25. O sinners! believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, and ye shall be saved every soul of you; your sins shall be blotted
out, and your iniquity shall be remembered no more; and receive him, who is
ready to receive you, and to bless you with all spiritual blessings, that ye
may be the children of God, and heirs of the promises, and of eternal life in
the kingdom of heaven.

Secondly, The exhortation is also to all Christians; for to such my text has
a more special relation, even to those, who with their hearts believe, and love
the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity; who though peradventure they cannot so
freely with Saint Paul desire to depart, yet in case of departing unfeignedly
desire to be with him. And because some of us are come to this place at this
time, as Abraham at the cave of Machpelah, to bury the dead out of their sight,
and are mourning for the departure of a near relation; I shall speak a few
words unto them, before I come to direct and counsel Christians in general.

And I shall only exhort you, freely to resign your relation to Christ, and not
to mourn, as those, that have no hope, which was Saint Paul's counsel to the
Thessalonians in the like case, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13, 14. which he presses with a
strong argument, for, says he, if we believe, that Christ died and rose again:
even so them also which believe in Jesus, will God bring with him; which
implies, that they are with God and Christ. It becomes all that fear the
Lord, to be silent in submitting to every providence of God. It is recorded of
Aaron, when his two Sons were slain by an immediate hand of God, and the fire
of his displeasure, that after Moses had declared the mind of God unto him, he
held his peace, Levit. 10.3. When David understood the death of his child, for
which he mourned so exceedingly during the time of its sickness, he rose from
the earth, and washed and anointed himself, and went into the house of the Lord
and worshipped, 2 Samuel 12.20. The patience of Job is set forth in Scripture for
an example to all beleivers, who when he had heard out the relation of the evil
tidings, which his sad messengers brought unto him, of his great losses in
estate, and also of the sudden death of all his children, glorified God under
all, Job 1.21. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name
of the Lord. How then should Christians not only labor to submit, but
willingly and cheerfully satisfy and quiet their spirits, when they part with
Relations upon such Comfortable terms, that no sooner they are out of their
sight, but they are immediately with Christ! It is true, nature is strong in
her affections, and loath to let go the possession of any present comfort, and
therefore cannot but discover her passions, when she is bereaved of near
enjoyments. And this seems to be the ground of sorrow in the breach and
dissolution of natural bonds, even a long continued absence, or an imagination
of never seeing departed friends any more, if not a conceit of annihilation,
and that the dead are not, as ignorant persons are ready to entertain strange
notions thereof. But however natural men may immoderately mourn upon such
apprehensions of the state of the dead, or (which we may add) of the greatness
of their own loss in such a case, who know not how to value or prize a creature
comfort with any moderation, because they mind not a greater and better
portion: yet where nature has been at school, and under the teaching and
instruction of grace, in those, who understand, and are acquainted with the
truths of the Gospel, and the mysteries of Christ; how should all such manifest
a more noble and heavenly principle, ever the grace they have received, in
adorning their profession, and justifying the truth and worth of religion, by a
comely, gracious, solid and sweet behavior and demeanure of themselves under
such providence?

The faithful part with their spiritual Relations at their dissolution, upon
the grounds of heavenly promotion, wherein they should be more free, then those
that can take a joyful farewell of their nearest friends for the greatness of
earthly preferment. Let the Godly husband therefore rejoice under his sorrow,
and rather weep for joy that the wife of his bosom is translated into the
bosom of Abraham, and taken into the presence and embraces of Christ her
heavenly head and husband; now knowing her no more after the flesh, but in
Christ, in whom all natural relations are spiritualized by the medicinal union
of fellow membership in his body, which is the church and the spouse of Christ.
And let the offspring and children of such aparent no longer look with tears
upon the womb that bare them, the papps that gave them suck, and the tender
bowels of her that now cease to care for them; but unto the Lord, with whom
the fatherless find mercy, and the orphans succor and releif, when they put
their trust in him, and cast their cares and burdens upon him. How soon would
tears dry upon our cheeks, and our sighs and sobbs turn into songs, could we
see the heavens open, and not only Christ standing at the right hand of God,
but our dear and godly relations departed at the right hand of Christ, having
put off the weeds and rags of mortality and temporal misery, and being
clothed with the garments of praise, and robes of immortality and glory! Such a
sight the eye of faith can see, which periceth the heavens, and sees things
invisible. Therefore let us not think, that the Saints departed are less happy,
because we are incapable of beholding their heavenly advancement, like Jacob
deluded by Joseph's brethren, and his coat of many colors, which they presented
unto him as torn by wild beasts; whence he concluded, that he was not, though
yet alive, and in the way to be advanced to be Lord of Egypt, and the next unto
Pharaoh in the Kingdom. Our godly relations, though dead, are yet alive, and we
shall shortly go to them, though they return not to us. I shall say no more in
this case but what Christ said unto those, who followed him toward his death
lamenting him, Luke 23.28. Weep not for me, but weep for your selves and your
children. So weep we not forth dead in Christ, but let us weep for our selves,
and mourn over our dead hearts and their corruptions, that sin still dwells
in us, and we cannot honor Christ as we desire, nor do that which we would,
the flesh lusting against the spirit; and withal let us follow Christ on
earth, and the faith and footsteps of those who are with him, that when we
depart, we may also be with Christ, which is far better.

Thus I come at length to lay down some spiritual directions and counsels to
Christians in general, in reference to their comfortable and joyful departing
unto Christ at their dissolution:

Direct. I. Labor to rejoice in beleiving, and so to exercise and act faith
upon Christ, as spiritually to rejoice in him. This is a duty incumbent upon
all beleivers, though all do not at all times attain, nor keep up and maintain
this heavenly frame and sweet temper of spirit, but walk mournfully and
disconsolately, depressed by fear, and doubtings concerning their state and
condition in grace; dejected by corruption of nature, and the motions and
strivings of the flesh, the cause either of sinful falls, of distracting
infirmities, or else darkened and clouded by spiritual desertions and
withdrawings of the gracious presence of God formerly enjoyed, and the light of
his countenance sometimes lifted up upon them; vexed also by Satan troubling
their peace by his strong and powerful temptations, who envying their
comfortable and cheerful estate, endeavors what he can to disturb them,
though he cannot destroy them: besides the weighty and burdensome afflictions
where withal many gracious hearts are sometimes ready to be overwhelmed, had
they not secret supports under their oppressing trials. To these and to all
Christians, the Apostles exhortation is to rejoice in the Lord, Phil. 3.1. And
to rejoice in the Lord always, and again to rejoice, Chap. 4. verse 4. who
lays it down as a character of the true spiritual circumcision, to rejoice in
Christ Jesus, as well as to worship God in the spirit, Phil. 3.3. Joy is a
fruit of the spirit as much as love, faith, and other graces, among which it is
numbered, Gal. 5.22. And it is essential to the kingdom of heaven, and the state
of grace in the soul, which is righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy
Ghost, Romans 15.17. How then should all that are justified by faith, and have
peace with God through Christ Jesus, rejoice in the hope of the glory of God by
Christ, and in Christ himself the hope of glory! Who is there among all the
people of the Lord, that is not ashamed to say, he does not love Christ, and
does not so far at least testify his faith as to declare his desires to
believe in him? Beloved, do ye love the Lord and believe in him, and can ye
not also rejoice in him? Oh that I could say of all beleivers, as Peter of the
beleiving Jews, and the greatness of their joy in the incorruptible
inheritance, and in Christ, 1 Pet. 1.8. Whom having not seen ye love, and in
whom though now ye see him not, yet beleiving ye rejoice with joy unspeakable
and full of glory. Cheer up your spirits and lift up your heads and hearts, ye
drooping Christians, for your departure unto Christ is at hand, and your
salvation is nearer, then when ye first believed. And ye that are rich in
faith, and heirs of the kingdom, look unto the hope set before you, and endure
a little shame here, yea, glory in your tribulations, and rejoice in your
sufferings, for your redemption draws nigh. Know ye not in whom ye have
believed, who is able to keep what ye have committed to his charge, and to save
you to the uttermost? And rejoice that ye are made partakers not only of the
sufferings of Christ, but of his glory, who is ready to receive you into his
bosom, and to give you possession of a glorious inheritance prepared, reserved,
and secured unto you, having made you sons and heirs, and appointed you to be
Kings and Priests unto Christ and his Father.

Secondly, for the furtherance and help of your joy in the Lord, make your
calling and election sure. For hereby an entrance shall be administered unto you
abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, 2 Pet. 1.10, 11. It is an uncomfortable state for a Christian to hang
between heaven and hell, and in a moving balance betwixt hope and fear,
therefore we ought to give diligence, in the searching our hearts and examining
our hopes, that our evidences may be clear, and our hopes lively, through the
assurance of hope and understanding. Examine your selves whether ye be in the
faith; know ye not, that Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates, 2 Cor.
13.5. They that believe have the evidence and witness in themselves, the spirit
it self bearing witness with their spirits that they are the children of God,
Romans 8.16. But we must not expect the witness of the spirit of God without the
preceding witness of our own spirits, whereby our evidences are first signed,
and afterward sealed by the spirit of promise. For hereby we know, that we
dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his spirit, 1 John
4.13. Unto which knowledge we attain, by our reflection upon the fruits of the
spirit within us, as an earnest of the purchased possession for us. So that our
evidence arises and appears, by a diligent scrutiny and inquisition into the
work and principles of grace within us, and that by bringing the word to the
heart, and judging the heart by the word; by comparing truths with experiences,
and experiences with truths; from which premises the enlightened and sanctified
conscience draws the sweet conclusion of life and peace. And were we not too
much strangers to our selves, and guilty of neglect, and careless presumption
in the matter of our assurance, we might raise our comforts to a higher pitch
and maintain a better grounded joy and confidence then we do; who are ready to
content our selves with naked desires, weak, and staggering hopes, or at most
with a questionable probability of our salvation; yea how many professors are
there, who by the difficulty of the work of gaining assurance, either
discourage and cool their affections to it, or else by a conceit of an
impossibility thereof, voluntarily and totally neglect it, But ye, Beloved,
build not your hopes and comforts upon slight and shallow foundations, but
stir up your selves, and by all unwearied pains resolve to clear and
balance your accounts for eternity; especially making your calling sure, and
your evidence sound, concerning the truth of conversion and regeneration. This
will be the strongest hold, under Christ's protection, in the time of
temptation, to retire unto, and to preserve and relieve your hearts and hopes,
when Satan shall beat you out of all other Forts and outworkes of defense and
confidence, and cause you to retreat to your main-guard of conversion evidence.
To this end call to mind the birth day of grace, wherein you suffered the pangs
and throws of the new birth; and recount the experiences of Gods first love to
you, and your first love to Christ. How discernable was your change, when God
turned you from dismal darkness to his mavelous light, and raised you from
the jaws of death and hell unto the joys of heaven and salvation! when he
comforted you in your despair, and anointed you with joy and gladness in the
time of your sorrow, and mourning: when your imprisoned and confined hearts
were enlarged, and the Devil bound up from torturing and holding you captive
under his tyrannical and malilicious power; when the day of light and
understanding dawned in your hearts, and the glorious Sun of righteousness
arose with healing to your wounds, and health to your souls? But take heed of
satisfying your selves with this, that you have been converted to the Lord; but
for the strengthening of your confidence in him, and clearing your interest in
his love, bring forth of the treasury of your hearts things new, as well as
old; for the more testimonies, the stronger evidence, anst the surer comfort.
Therefore trace the footsteps of Christ's spiritual and powerful dispensations
toward your souls, in the process and continued course of mercy, and his
preventing, assisting and supporting grace: and reveiw the pillars and
monuments you have set up in your hearts, for remembrance of special kindness
and remarkable expressions of his love and faithfulness unto you, if you can
yet read them in Scriptures, not defaced, or blotted out through unthankful for
getfulness.

Take also a new survey of the carriage of your hearts toward the Lord. What
have been your desires after him? how have ye trusted in him, and cleaved to
him? what communion with him? what delight in him? what service have ye done
for him? how faithful have ye been to him? what have been your private
affections in duty, and your public zeal in your profession? how have you
improved his talents, and increased your spiritual stock of grace? what growth
in meekness, self-denial, patience, faith, love, knowledge, holiness and
purity? what is the present frame of your hearts after so much means, and
seasons of grace so long enjoyed? Is it more humble, more heavenly, more
unmovable and fixed upon God? And lastly, are ye more fruitful, and abounding
in the work of the Lord? Thus can ye manifest the truth of grace, by the
exercise of it, the growth and fruitfulness of it? hereby your joy shall be
full, and Christ's joy shall dwell in you, John 15.11. What a glorious evidence
hereby had the beleiving Thessalonians, to whom the Apostle Paul writes in
their commendation, that their faith grew exceedingly, and their love one
toward another abounded, 2 These. 1.3. Happy are they that can ascend this
mountain of assurance, and take a sight as from Mount Pisgah, of the heavenly
Canaan, crying out with Saint John in admiration, 1 John 3.1. Behold what
manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the
Sons of God; therefore the world knows us not. But if your evidences are
lost, or hardly legible, for the renewing ard preserving of them take this next
direction.

Direct. III. Thirdly, Then perfect holiness to the highest degree attaineable
upon earth. This is the Apostles counsel drawn from the great privileges and
promises of grace, 2 Cor. 7.1. Having these promises, dearly beloved, let us
cleanse our selves from all pollution of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness
in the fear of God. And because we deny, that any man can be perfect, so as to
be without sin, and all infirmities upon earth; for if we say we have no sin,
we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us; 1 John 1.8. Therefore take
this necessary caution, of proposing any measure unto your selves, thereby to
limit your utmost endeavors after the greatest measure of grace ye can
possibly attain unto; for therefore we have a perfect example set before us,
even God himself, that we should be perfect, as he is perfect, Mat. 5.48. And
also of Christ, that he that says he abides in him; ought also to walk even
as he walked, 1 John 2.6. That though we are not perfect, yet with Paul
forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things
which are before, we may press toward the mark for the prize of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.13, 14. Wherefore, beloved, laying
aside every weight, and the sin that does so easily beset you, run with
patience the race that is set before you, looking unto Jesus, the Author or
Leader, and the finisher of your faith, Heb. 12.1, 2. And since ye are dead,
and your life is hid with Christ in God, with whom ye hope to appear, mortify
your members which are upon the earth, and crucify the flesh with the
affections and lusts thereof; labor to conquer all your corruptions, to purge
out the relics of the old leaven, and to wash your hearts from iniquity, and
the vanity of your very thoughts and desires. Be exceeding careful to suppress
and quench every motion arising from the flesh, and to avoid whatever may
defile the conscience, and thereby cloud your comforts, and darken the light of
your inward joy and peace. And I beseech you, that ye would walk worthy of the
Lord unto all well-pleasing, in obedience to every command, and the strictest
rules of the Gospel; and that, as ye have at any time heard, how ye ought to
walk and to please God, so ye would abound more, and more, 1 These. 4.1. That ye
may at last stand perfect and complete in all the will of God, working out your
salvation hereby with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.14. Col. 4.12. Wherefore add
to your faith virtue; to and virtue knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness,
brotherly kindness, charity, that ye may not be barren nor unfruitful in the
knowledge of Christ; and tho rather give diligence herein, that ye may make
your calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 10.

Direct. IV. Redeem your precious time and the seasons of grace, for the time
is short, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.29. The time of life is short, the of
health and strength is short, and consequently the time of grace and the
opportunities thereof are short. Therefore see that ye walk circumspectly, or
exactly, redeeming the time or season, because the days are not only short but
evil, Eecl. 5.15, 16. And that not only in regard of the temptations and snares
thereof, but of the perils and afflictions, the troubles and tribulations, that
attend the last days of the world. Our Savior knowing the day of his working
and ministry to be short, having but a while to remain upon earth, took all
occasions to finish his Fathers work, who sent him into the world, John 9.4 I
must work the work of him that sent me, while it is day; the night comes, when
no man can work. And is not your night, Christians, coming on, and your Sun
near setting, when the light of this present life, shall vanish and give place
to the darkness of death? O that ye would keep an eye upon (...) and the
swiftness of that motion, which will suddenly have measured your appointed
race! And be not slack in the work of the Lord, but double and redouble your
diligence, that ye may be ready for the Masters call, and the Bride-groomes
coming. What a blessed condition is that soul in, that can say with Saint Paul,
2 Timothy 4.6, 7. I am now ready to be offered up, and my departure is at hand, I
have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith! But
is it not otherwise with many poor souls, who could wish for another life to be
renewed unto them, for the discharge of their trust they have neglected; the
improvement of mercies, which they have slighted; the filling up of that space,
they have idly squandred; the gathering in of experiences, which they have
pretermitted; and for the laying in of a store and stock of grace and wisdom,
by such rich advantages of trade and heavenly gain and profit, which they have
lost and over slipped? Who now begin to look back with shame and sorrow upon
the time of youth and strength, and the years of plenty, and fullness of the
bread of heaven, bewailing their folly in not providing for the years of
famine, wherein they will be glad of the gleanings of such fruitful seasons.
Nevertheless lift up the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees, up and be
doing, and the work of the Lord shall prosper in your hands; gird up the
loins of your minds, and so run, that ye may attain, being swift to hear, not
slothful in business, fervent in spirit, continuing instant in prayer, that God
would fulfill in you all the good pleaof his goodness, and the work of faith
with power.

Fifthly, That ye may better redeem the present time of grace and mercy,
exercise your hope with all sobriety in the use of temporal comforts, and
enjoyments. Take heed of surfeiting your selves with the sweetness of creature
delights, lest your hearts should say, it is good to be here, and you sit down
ready to take your lot on this side of heaven. But be sober, and hope unto the
end, for the grace and salvation that is to be brought unto you at the
revelation of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.13. Ye that are the children of the day,
watch and be sober, and with Paul, whose example is imitable in this case,
labor to beat down your bodies, and to bring them into subjection, that ye be
not cast away, 1 Cor. 9.21. It is better to starve lust, then by pampering the
body to make provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof. Therefore
study contentment in a mean condition, in this world, having but food and
raiment to supply the bare necessities of this present life. A little will
serve for your passage, though all the world should not content you for your
portion; because ye are heirs of precious promises, and of a rich and glorious
inheritance, whereof ye shall shortly take possession in the life that is to
come, and in the enjoyment of God himself, in whose presence is fullness of joy,
and at whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore: Wherefore, if by
Christ, the world be crucified unto you, and you unto the world, and ye
overcome the world by the victory of faith, live above the vanity and emptiness
of fading and withering comforts, and look not at the fashion of the world
which passes away; but use the world as if ye used it not, because all these
things perish in the using, dye in the hand, and the beauty thereof corrupts
and vanishes while your eyes are set upon them. And let your moderation be
known to all men in respect of your care and contention for the things of this
life, for the Lord is at hand, who, if you cast your burdens upon him, will
sustain you, for he cares for you. Content your selves to live at his
allowance in your minority, and think not hardship unsuitable to your present
state; whereas if you were full, ye might forget the Lord, and less mind your
home and your Fathers house. But if the Lord has enlarged your present estate
upon earth, content not your selves in being rich, unless you are rich toward
God; and deny your selves in what is in your power to use and possess, that ye
may do good in your generation, and lay up for your selves a good foundation
against the time to come.

Direct: VI. Sixthly, For the maintaining of a holy sobriety of spirit, act
faith upon eternal promises, and the unseen glory of heaven. Nothing does more
support and bear up the hearts of the Saints, then to live by faith, and to
look over the pale of time to the things which are eternal: This will make
afflictions light, suffering easy, the world contemptible, and the hardest
labor and work for Christ and the Gospel comfortable. While we look not at the
things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen; for the things
which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen, are eternal, 2
Cor. 4.18. While faith feeds upon the promises of life and glory, and eyeth
the great reward of happiness and perfection, the soul faints not under its
burden, neither is discouraged at the greatest difficulties in the way of its
hopes; but becomes more lively and undaunted in contending with opposition,
that it may break through, and pass to the tree of life, which is in the midst
of the Paradise of God. Yea, how fully is the soul satisfied in beholding the
incomprehensible riches of eternity! that when it is taken up with the thoughts
and meditations thereof, it is ready to forget, that it is still in the body,
as being transported above the sphere of sensitive objects. This made David
cease to envy the prosperity of the wicked, when his heart was raised to a
sight of God in the Sanctuary, which so ravished his soul, that he brake out
into that expression, Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in heaven, but thee? and there
is none upon earth, that I desire besides thee? And this will ween your
affections and desires from earthly contentments, did ye often by faith visit
your heavenly mansions, and keep your thoughts upon Christ, and his
preparations for you, which the eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, neither
has the heart conceived, and yet not beyond the reach of faith, as it is the
evidence of things not seen.

Seventhly and lastly, Labor after a complying heart with the will of God
under every dispensation of providence toward you in this earthly tabernacle.
Be willing to live, or dye, to do or suffer, following every call of God,
whose infinite wisdom disposes of your conditions, and whose gracious power is
present to assist and streng then. Acknowledge the Lord in all your ways, and
he shall direct your paths, and commit your way to him, and he shall give you
the desire of your hearts. Take heed of self-will and sinful will in opposition
to the will of Christ, but lie prostrate at his feet, with a holy and an humble
resignation of your selves to his will and pleasure. And let nothing move or
terrify you, neither count your lives dear unto you, that ye may finish your
course with joy. Be contented with any condition, which the Lord shall allot
unto you, in your present pilgrimage and travails homeward; and let the
consideration of your approaching ascension unto Christ in the highest heavens,
sweeten every bitter cup which providence shall put into your hands, and
lighten every burden which God shall lay upon you, knowing that your sufferings
are only temporal, but your joys will be eternal, and that ye have all your
evil here, but your good things are to come. O forget not that your treasure is
in heaven; and where your treasure is, there let your hearts be also, that for
the joy that is set before you, ye may endure every cross, and despise the
shame of all your sufferings for Christ, counting the sufferings of this
present life, not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed
in you, when ye shall depart hence un^o Christ, which is far better; Not only
better then the present straights; troubles, tribulations, and afflictions
which attend the Gospel, the profession of Christ, and the state of Grace, but
better then the best and most honorable and comfortable condition, which the
Saints of God have ever enjoyed, or can expect to partake of while the
foundations of the earth remain. Which I shall only add by way of motive to
what has been said by way of counsel, that to depart and be with Christ is far
better (...), and that in comparison with the three degrees o excellency
attainable in this earthly state. First, it is better then life, and all the
comforts of life, which the world can afford, in pleasure, profit, or honor.
For all these things are short and uncertain, and at least but created delights
and creature enjoyments, which Saint John describes by the lust of the flesh,
the lust of the eye, and the pride of life, 1 John 2.15. And labors to take
off our affections from them by an argument drawn from the love of God. And if
the loving kindness of God to his people here, be better then life it self,
Psalm. 63.3. How much more the fullness of his love communicated without measure
in the life that is eternal? Secondly, it is better then all the service, which
the Saints can do for God and Christ in their most perfect obedience here
below Yea though we could say with Saint Paul, to us to live is Christ, yet to
dye and be with Christ were gain and far better; and though in keeping of his
commandments there be great reward, and the godly have great peace therein,
yet their happiness hereafter shall be the crown of their holiness here, and
their reward with Christ shall exceed all their labor and work for him.
Lastly, It is better then the most uninterrupted fellowship the Saints are
capable of with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, in their nearest and most
spiritual approaches, in the purest ordinances, or most heavenly meditations;
and that by how much the immediate and glorious presence of Christ and God
himself in heaven surpasses the clearest discovery and manifestations of God
to his chosen and precious and faithful people upon earth. Therefore le^ all
the Sons of God wait with joy for the day of their ascension, when they shall
depart unto Christ, who is ascended far above all things; that he might fill
all things. And that your hearts may be filled with joy, and that ye faint not,
implore his spiritual presence with his lovesick Spouse, Cant. 2. last. Until
the day break and the shadows flee away: turn my Beloved, and be thou like a
Roe, or a young Heart upon the mountains of Bether.

FINIS.

