September 29. 1642.
THat no Soldier or any other person shall discharge any Piece, great or
small, betwixt the hours of nine of the clock in the night, and six in the
morning, except in case of necessity.

That if any Alarm be in the night time; that then, all the Inhabitants of the
said City and Liberties, shall forthwith hang out lights, at the doors of
their several Houses.

That none of the Officers belonging to the Trained Bands, do lodge out of the
City; dureing these times of imminent Danger.

That upon any general Alarm by night or day, the Colonels, other Field
Officers and Captains, with the several companies of the Trained Bands of the
said City, (completely Armed and well furnished with Ammunition) are forthwith
to repair to their several Alarm places, herein after mentioned, and there
to attend, until they shall receive further order.

Companies. Allarum-Places.
Collonell Atkins. at The Pump within Algate. Lieutenant Collonell Rawden. at
Billings-gate. Serjant Major Manwaring. at London-stone. Captain William
Tucker. at Tower Dock. Captain William Tomson. at The Bars without Algate.
Captain Edmund Hooker. at Crutched Friars. Captain Heriot Washborne. at Bridge
end by Magnis Church. Collonell Pennington. at Bevis Marks. Lieutenant
Collonell Lingham. at Bishops-gate within. Serjant Major Davis. at Grace-Chu.
by Lumberstreet end. Captain Thomas Chamberlin. at The north end of Broad
street. Captain Thomas Player. at The Cundit in Leadenhall street. Captain
Edmund Harvie. at The Royal Exchange. Captain Christopher Whichcot. at The
Spittle within the Bars. Collonell Wollaston. at The West end of Cheapside.
Lieutenant Collonell Venn. at Newgate within. Serjant Major Geere. at Ludgate
within. Captain Richard Turner. at Puddle-Wharse. Captain Ralph Harrison. at
Aldersgate-str. by Long-lane end Captain Richard Cutbert. at Austins gate in
Paul's Chuyard. Captain Robert Tichburn. at Aldersgate within. Collonell Adams.
at The Poultry. Lieutenant Col. Edmund Foster. at Great Alhallows Church.
Serjant Major Carleton. at Watlinstreet by Bow Lane end. Captain Francis West.
at The Southend of Bred-street. Captain John Bla kwell. at Queen Hith. Captain
Richard Hacket. at Whittington-colledge hill. Captain William Underwood. at The
lower end of Wal-brook. Collonell Warner. at Alderman-bury. Lieutenant Col.
Matthew. Forster. at Old-Iury end by Coleman-street. Serjant Major Owen Row. at
Mooregate within. Captain Matthew Sheppard. at Criplegate within. Captain
Francis Row. at The north end of great Woodstr. Captain Robert Manwaring. at
The Cundit without Criplegate. Colonel Towse. at Fleet Cundit. Lieutenant
Collonell Wilson. at The north end of the Old Bailey. Serjant Major Buxton. at
Smithsi ld. Captain Richard Brown. at Temple-Barre, Captain Nathaniel
Camfield, at Holburne Cundit. Captain Thomas Goaer. at The Bars in Holborne.
And it is desired, that the Captains of Middlesex and Surry, who have
Companies lying in the Suburbs, will upon all such Alarums, draw their
Companies to the Several passages leading thereunto.


