THE LATEST AND TRVEST NEVVES FROM IRELAND;

OR, ATRVE RELATION of the happy victory obtained against the Rebels before
Droheda, and how the Earl of Ormond Sir Charles Coote, and Sir Simon Harecourt
sallying out of Dublin to Donshoglen with two thousand Soldiers; Slew two
hundred Rebels, and but 5. of them slain:

Related in a Letter from a Privy Councellor in Dublin, to Master Fenton
Parsons of Lincolns-Inne, Feb. 26. 1641.

WHEREUNTO IS ADDED Another Relation of an Overthrow given them by Sir Henry
Tichbourne, being related in a Letter to Sir Robert King Knight, Feb. 27. 1641.

LONDON, Printed for H.S. and W. Ley. 1642.

A Copy of a Letter sent from a Privy Councellor, to M. Fenton Parsons of
Lincolnes Inn, Feb. 26. 1641.
BAd news I know always comes too fast to you, but good news cannot. I love
to be the writer of none but good, it is our greatest misery that we see not
aid and treasure coming faster from England, and in such extremities as we
are in, it is our greatest happiness that God gives such courage to those few
men that are here as he does. Droheda was of late driven to that extremity
for want of victuals, that they were feign to kill the^r Horses and feed on
them, which food being harsh to them, their chief Commander, Sir Henry
Titchbourne Governor of the town pitying the Soldiers misery and his own
distress, resolving rather to die by the Sword, then to starve or let the
town be taken as long as he lived, one night with about 50. Horse sallied out
of the town, fell upon one of the quarters of the Rebels that lay before the
town, routed them, and killed of them about fourscore, and took two of their
Colors and four hundred Cowes from them, and brought them into the City of
Droheda, in that time when that City was in that lamentable condition for want
of victuals, the State here was not unmindfull of releeving them, and aiding
them the best they could, for of late the Kings Pinnace and nine small vessels
were sent thither with victuals and Soldiers to releeve them, but the Rebels
care to keep relief from coming to that City was such, that they had so
blockt and chained up the River, whereby the relief should have been brought
in, that there was no passage in or out by water, but God that provides for
his, and will never suffer the righteous to perish, sent such a storm, that
their works and endeavors they had used to stop up the river, were thrown
down, and the passage laid open the very night before the Kings Pinnace and
the nine small vessels got thither with relief, that when they came the
relief went in without any great trouble, or great danger: thus God you see
provides for the distressed; And not to keep from you the other service our
Dublin Soldiers have of late done, I must inform you, that the Earl of
Ormond, Sir Charles Coote, and Sir Simon Hartcourt with some of 2000. Soldiers
in Dublin marched lately out of Dublin to a place near Dunshoglen, 12. miles
from Dublin where the Rebels had entrenched themselves near a Wood very
strongly, but our Soldiers manfully beat them out of their Trenches, routed
them, killed about 200. of them, and but five of our men lost, whereof
Lieuetenant Richford was one, a man of a gallant spirit, and suffered by his
too much resolution; for had he not too eagerly followed them into the Wood he
had been alive for all that fight still. I cannot certainly inform you
whether any of Sir Henry Tichbournes men were lost in getting that relief they
did, nor have we any certain intelligence from Mounster.

Joyful News from Ireland, or a true relation of the great overthrow which
the English gave the Rebels before Droheda, etc.
Noble Sir,
IN my last to you, I signified to you, the difficulties which were like to
befall us by the relieving of Droheda, but God by his infin^te mercy has freed
us (I may say miraculously) from that hazard: for when our men there were
driven to that extremity to eat horseflesh, Sir Henry Tichbourne sallyed out
of the Town with only forty Musketeers, and f^rty Horse, and beat off four
hundred of the enemies, killed above threescore of them, recovered fourscore
Cowes and Oxen, and two hundred Sheep; burned four towns, and brought home two
of their Colors; Besides, I must relate unto you Gods abundant goodness unto
us, in that the night before the relief and succors which we sent by Sea from
Dublin to them, should have entered into the Harbor of Droheda, (which was
strongly fenced over with a Chain and several boats) there happened a storm
which broke their chains, and gave our men so free a passage, as with little
difficulty they came safely to the town. The Rebels were gathered at
Kilshalgham within seven miles of Dublin, above two thousand men, where they
were settled in a very strong wood. My Lord of Ormond carried out part of our
Army, and beat them out of that great strength (for they would not come into
the Champaine) and killed above a hundred of them, without any considerable
loss of our side, only Captain James Rochfort, a most gallant and courageous
Gentleman. This was an act of great bravery, wherein Sir Charles Coote did, (as
he does always) beyond expectation, exposing his person to as much danger as
any man living could* and in truth he is a gallant man, full of courage and
good affections, and deserves great encouragement from that side. Our soldiers
are in great want of money, which causes a general want of all other
necessaries, yet notwithstanding God has infused such courage into them (for
undoubtedly it is his work) that they think there is no danger so great, but
they may attempt it.

Colonel Munke is arrived here with my Lord Lieutenants Regiment of fifteen
hundred foot, and Sir Richard Greevill with near four hundred horse, which
puts much heart into us, and makes us look big upon our neighbors, yet we
grieve we cannot be able to relieve our friends in other parts; but I hope when
our full succors shall come, we shall not only defend this place, but add
comfort to our poor distressed friends abroad.

The enemy though their numbers be very great, even beyond belief, yet their
hearts begin to faint, and I believe they repent their furious madness.

If my Brother be in London, I pray you impart this Letter to him, I would have
written to him, but that I thought he was at Chester, or in his way thither; By
the next he shall hear from me at large, and I shall likewise trouble you.

I must now only tell you, that I thank you for your care of those things which
concern me, and that I am, Sir, your most affectionate servant,

Feb. 27. 1641. Ed. Loftus.

Martii 7.
It is this day ordered forthwith, That this Letter be published in Print.

H. Elsing. Cler. P. D. Com.


