THE GROUNDWORK, OR FOUNDATION LAID, (or so intended) For the Framing of a New
Perfect LANGVAGE: And an Universal or COMMONWRITING.

And presented to the consideration of the LEARNED,

By a Well-willer to Learning.

Printed, Anno MDCLII.

The Introduction.
THe expression of the mind or thoughts, is either by the Tongue or Pen most
generally performed, in both these, as at present used, I have observed these
inconveniences.

1 Concerning language, which, for the common use it has with rational
creatures, should be in rules certain and easy, the contrary of which I have
observed in most Languages at present in use amongst the Nations of these
Western parts of the World, and more especially in those called Learned
Languages, which are, as it were, become common Languages, by reason of the
knowledge and learning by them divulged; and which should in all reason be the
easiest and certainest, both for the truer description of things, and the
easier attaining of the said Languages, which are but as the gates to Sciences,
and therefore should admit easy and quick entrance to the things themselves,
else it proves a greater discouragement in Students, or at best, a loss of
precious time.

The difficulty appears in the multiplicity of forms of the variations of the
Verb in its Moods, Tenses, Persons and Numbers: of the Noun in its Cases, and
of the Derivatives from the Radix, distinguished by their Terminations.

The uncertainty is manifested by those many Anomalies which the Grammar
mentions after its Rules, where having first taught Rules for speech,
proceeds to the increasing of them by the manifold Anomalies.

The expression by the Pen is either real representations of things, or
notionall, or accidental.

Real, is when to express a man, we draw the picture of a man, etc.

Notionall or Relative, when we represent fierceness by the figure of a Lion,
Watchfulness by a Dog, etc.

Accidental, is by figures stated at pleasure, to signify such things as the
figures thereof have no relation thereto, and that is twofold: either literal,
as when we represent the single sounds whereof words are composed by Characters
at pleasure: Or secondly, when whole words, or rather things, their actions,
qualities, with circumstances are described, and not sounds.

The former of these two is the most common in use, and of easiest attaining,
yet having its inconveniences, as wanting in extensivenesse, being limited to
the Languages, and jointly traveling with them; so that what is written
according to the sound of any Language, is not understood without the knowledge
of the said Language. But the latter has this advantage, that what is written
thereby, is understood by all alike; who notwithstanding understand not one the
others Language, the Characters intending by a general content, the
representations of things, and not of sounds. Which we see plainly demonstrated
by the figures of Number in Arithmetic, as likewise in other common received
Characters, as of Weights used by Physicians, etc. The preference of this last
is here likewise recommended, and the Groundwork of both this and a new
Language here following laid down, or at least so intended, all which is
presented to the consideration of the Learned.

If what is done prove only a motive to others of effecting the aim and
design of the Author, he has his desire, and remains their well-willers.

THE BEGINNING.
ALL words of speech may be comprised under three heads,

As words of Action, Quality, Help,
and these either Primitive, or Derivative.


By words of action, we mean such as are distinguished by the word [Verb,] or
by circumlocution, words signifying with time, as the words to move, to live,
to eat, to suffer. The denomination of words of action may seem somewhat
unproper, because some words coming thereunder, have rather a passive
signification, as to suffer, etc. but we shall not herein be too nice, it
bearing no great inconvenience to our intended purpose.

Bywords of quality, we intend such as express any circumstance of a thing, or
that which distinguishes one substance from another, as hot, cold, dry, sharp.

By words of help we intend such as express time, place, person, etc. as now,
then. where, who, etc.

The primitive words are such, as are of the first and simplest position, as
love, long, when, etc.

Derivatives are those as come from the said Primitives, and that either by
adding some common prepositions or terminations, or by conjunction of two or
more radixes together.

Concerning words of Action.
The Primitives of those words we suppose to be such as are indefinite neither
to Verb or Noune, or something that is neither Verb nor Noun, but that out of
which both proceed; for instance, the Latin Radix or primitive am, is
indifferent to Verb or Noun, and is made either by the additions, as am-o am-as
am-or am-icus, etc.

Of the Primitives, for abbreviation, there might be a derivation supposed, as
that of those which in the main end agree, but differ in Quality, Proportion,
etc. that which seems in signification to be the simplest, to be placed as
the Radix, and the rest as derivatives.

For instance.

1 Those which are in signification directly opposite, the worthier put for the
Radix, as to Curse, to Feed, to Live, to Bless, to Fast, to Die.


2 Those which have a graduall difference, as to Go, Run, Trot, Amble: to
Speak, Read, Preach, Call: to Smile, Laugh, etc.


Unto these might be added a derivation in respect to these following
consignifications.

1 a custom to act, as to be accustomed to swearing. 2 a similating of action
to imitate crying or singing. 3 an inchoation, to begin to do a thing. 4 an
incoinatio^ or desire Esurio Lat. 5 a diminution, to sing low. 6 a negation,
not to sing.

More of like consignifications might be added, of which these may serve as
instances.

The Verb, the first derivation has under it the distinction of Mood and
Tense.

Mood is the manner of expression, which is either Indicative or Imparative, as
for those other Moods, namely, the Optative, Potentiall, and Subjunctive, they
may be all supplied by the Indicative, with their signs added; as that, when.

The Imperative Mood is discernable without variation, from the Indicative
Mood thus.

1 By a post-posing of the personal auxiliary word, which in the Indicative
should be preposed; as

Imparative Go thou, Go we,


Indicative Thou go, We go.


2 By standing without the personal word; as

Go to the door.

The Infinitive Mood may likewise be known by the sign [ to] as teach him [to]
read.

The Tenses are three, Past, Present, Future.

The Present Tense being the first, will need no distinction in respect to the
other Tenses, namely, the Past, and the Future, which may have their
distinctionall additions. --

The Past Tense is commonly distinguished in three parts; Preterit. imperfect,
Perfect, Plus perfect.


The Imperfect and Perfect might without inconvenience be united in one, and so
have one distinctionall addition. --

The Plus perfect may remain distinguished, yet as a sub distinction unto the
Perfect Tense.

Unto the Future might be added a sub-distinction, and named the Conditional
Future; for instance,

If he had done that I should have loved him.

The distinction for Person and Number in the Verb is needless, it being
sufficient when the same is performed in the Noun, for instance, I love, we
love, ye love, they love.
What with more is needless.

Of Nouns.
The Noune, the second derivation, is either Common or Proper.

By Common, we understand those Nouns which are not proper names of things, but
common Derivatives from most Verbs, as Lover, Loved, Love, Loveliness, etc.

By Proper names we understand those names of substances, whether real or
fictitious, whereby they are distinguished in their species or individuums, as
Man, Horse, Table, House, etc. Peter, Thomas, Pretty, Palace, etc.


The common Nouns I have distinguished in nine distinctions, as follow.

1 The action denominated.
Amor Lectio Visio
2 That acts.
Amator Lector
3 On whom acted.
Amatus
4 Inclination to action.
Amorosus Audax Communicativus
5 Qualification to receive the actio^.
Amabilis Legibilis
6 The excess of the action.
Amabundus Drunk
7 Of or belonging to an action or thing.
Doctrinalis
8 The abstract of denomination.
Amorositas Docibilitas
9 The manner of being or acting.
Amorose Docibiliter.
Note that the eighth and ninth distinctions are double derivatives, and
appliable to the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh distinctions. --

The seventh distinction is likewise appliable to words proper, as to
denominate any one from the place of his birth, as from Rome a Roman, Naples a
Neapolitan, etc.


Or from his Calling, as a Clothier from Cloth-making, a Barber from Cutting of
beards.


There are four distinctions more, which because they seem more as Proper names
then Common names, we have placed them by themselves, as 1 The instrument
wherewith is chiefly acted, as
from to See the Eye
2 The time of action the hour of
Dining Supping
3 The place of action, as of drinking wine.
a Tavern of beer or ale, an Alehouse.
4 The substance of the action
Meat Drink


Of the nine distinctions of Nouns Common, the first, second, and eighth are
only Substantives, the rest all Adjectives; the four last distinctions are all
Substantives.

No distinction for Number is needful to the Nouns Adjectives, for their
number is sub-understood in the Substantives unto which they relate.

The substantives need likewise no distinction of Number, except they intend a
plural number Indefinite; as There were Men, which because no by-standing word
will express the plurality according to our position, therefore the plurality
is to be distinguished by addition in the word Man. But if the plurality be
defined by the words, One, Ten, many, etc. as ten pound, many pound.
the distinction in the words defining are sufficient without more.

The Verb passive is made of the third distinction of Nouns common before
mentioned, with the aiding Verb, to be; as I am beloved, Thou shall be beloved.


The proper names of things to give them signification, is the work, we
suppose, of a sound Philosopher, who from the knowledge of things and their
order in nature, should give them names accordingly, describing that in them by
their name, by which in the naming they may be known.

The Cases of Nouns, as the Genetive, Dative, and Ablative may be distinguished
by the signs, of, to, from, adjoined.

The Passive or Accusative will be known by its place in the order of Words, as
hereafter.

The second fort of Radixes

Are those of quality; as, hot, cold, etc.

The number of which might be diminished by a subordination as before in the
Verbs was noted, for instance,

First, the opposition in signification, as Hot, Cold, Soft, Hard, etc.


Secondly, the graduall difference, as Hot, Warm: Wet, Moist, etc.


Of these Qualitative words may proceed Verbs signifying action, using only the
Radix, without any consignificative words adjoined; as, I hot, or make hot, or
heat, I cold, or maki cold, etc.

Secondly, Verbs passive, but with a distinctionall addition; as, I become Hot,
Cold, etc.

Unto these Verbs might likewise be appropriated the consignifications before
mentioned; as, I am accustomed to make hot, to become hot, I begin to make hot
to become hot, etc.

Those Qualitative words have derivatives of the same nature with the eighth
sort of Nouns common; as, Hotnesse, Coldness.

Unto these Qualitative words, as unto the former names appellative, belongs
an augmentation and diminution, with their comparative and superlative degrees,
as Positive, Comparative, Suparlative Diminution, Augmentation. Diminution,
Augmentation. Diminution, Augmentation. a little man, a great man. a lesser
man, a greater man. least man, greatest man.

The Auxiliary Words.
The third sort of Radical words which are according to Grammar nominated,
Pronouns, Adverbs, Prepositions, Interjections, and Conjunctions.

The Pronouns,

I, thou, he, this, that, may be radical: the Plural, we, ye, they, these,
those, may have an additionall sign of plurality: From these may derivatively
proceed of the eighth sort of Common names: Ego-itas ipse-itas, etc

The other following sorts may be reduced to a certain number, and the number
probably lessened by a subordination as before.

The Nouns numerall might be thus described in Language. Suppose nine single
consonants for the nine first numbers from one to nine inclusive; and nine
Vowels for nine dignities, each increasing ten times the value of the other;
the first Vowell to consignifie only the single value of the nine Consonants,
in which place the second Vowell coming to consignifie the Decimall dignity;
the third, the Centenall; and so forth, this in conjunction you may express in
few syllables, and without reiteration a very large number.

The principles or Groundwork of our new Language and Writing proposed, the
application we thus prescribe.

First, we prescribe a collection of all the Radixes of the three sorts of
words before mentioned, wherein care should be had to ordain for Radixes none
but those which are really such. Secondly, rightly to order a subordination of
them as is before required; the same thus ordered should be the contents of the
first part of the Lexicon, and for the wording of those radical
significations, it will be prerequired to have ordained a certain number of
single sounds both of Vowels and Consonants, really such, and which may
constantly keep their stated sounds without alteration, out of which the
foresaid Radixes should be worded. Thus might these Radixes be ordered and
ranked, first, in their sounds in any known Language, thereto adjoining the new
invented words for the same. --

The second part of the said Lexicon should contain all the proper names of
things, given them according to the forementioned requisites. --

The second Book required to be the Law of this new Language and Writing,
wherein all the Rules aforementioned to be set down with such more as shall be
found requisite, which should be constant, never sufferieg the least deviation
when once stated: these Rules thus being not many, and being constant without
any Anomalies or exceptions, would be no great burden to memory. --

Note, For the wording of the Radixes, our advise would be, that all such
ordained words should be Monosyllables, containing a certain number of letters,
among which but one Vowell, and that never used but in the Radix, and in all
Radixes. Secondly, that all the distinctionall additions significative; be all
Consonants, and the Vowelling of them to be left at pleasure; also to place
them where he please, and to make one or more syllables as he shall please,
only that in so doing of them, he seem not to divide them in more words then
one. Secondly, that he divide not the Radix: Our reason for this liberty is,
that from the vowels have proceeded the greatest variations of Languages, whose
force therefore in this Language we advise to be abated. --

The different placing of words in several Languages, has produced no small
inconvenience to the learners of a new Language, who in that new learned
Language remain still subject to observe the order of their first known
Language, from whence often proceeds a harshnesse to the understanding of
such misordered sentences: To prevent which inconvenience, and to maintain, if
possible, the constancy of our new Language, we have endeavored by a
collection of the most, if not all the sentences or forms of speech, and in
them propounded an order for all the words; which, or a better, when obtained,
we would recommend as a constant rule to be observed, and to have its place in
our Grammar or Law of Language.

Sentences as we ordinarily express them. The same according to our proposed
order. Their distinction. John who loves Mary. John loves Mary who 1 The Noun
Agent or Relative. 2 The Verb. [Relative. 3 The Noun Patient.
A short stick Stick short 1 the Thing. 2 Its description or relation.
A rod of Iron Rod of Iron His Book Book his John's Book Book John's Is loved Is
loved 1 The Auxiliary Verb. 2 The Noun Adjective.
Is spent Is spent This man This man 1 The demonstrative. 2 The demonstrated.
That thing That thing I have seen the thing I have seen thing The word the
left out. It was done Was done The word it, there, left out. It happened Happened
There happened Happened William is loved of his father William is loved of father
his 1 The Noun Patient. 2 The Verb, 3 The Noun Agent.
John and Peter traveled together to Rome, Peter ran hastily to London John
and Peter traveled together to Rome, Peter ran hastily to London 1 The Agent.
2 The Verb. 3 The Manner. 4 The place.
Thomas is much loved of his Father Thomas is much loved of Father his 1 the
Noun Patient. 2 the Verb. 3 the manner. 4 the agent.
Thomas did beat his man very hard on the back with a stick Thomas did beat man
his very hard with stick on back 1 the Noun Agent. 2 the Verb. 3 the Noun
patient. 4 the manner. 5 the instrument. 6 the part suffering.
Yesterday John went to France idem When time is expressed, it should always
precede the action, etc. With him, idem The Auxiliary words, with, to, from,
etc. to precede the object. From him, To Spain. I love him not. I love not him.
1 The Agent. 2 The Verb. 3 The Negation. 4 The Patient.
Did use to say. idem 1 The Verb. 2 The Infinitive Mood.
There are people in the yard. In yard are people. 1 The place where. 2 The
Auxiliary Verb. 3 Who.
I give thee this. I give this to thee. 1 The Agent. 2 The Verb. 3 The Patient.
4 on, to, from, etc.
He held his hand on them He held hand his on them. Do ye help them? Interrog.
Help ye them 1 The Verb. 2 The Agent. 3 The Patient.
Help ye them. Imperat. Help ye them Whom ye know. idem 1 The Relative. 2 The
Agent. 3 The Verb.


For the plainer expression, and easier understanding of speech, it were best
to convert all participles in other manner of expression, neglecting the use of
them.

So much for application of the principles or grounds before proposed to our
new Language, now follows their application to our new writing: which as in
this Introduction is not to have relation to sounds but things, wherefore, for
all the radical words of the three sorts as they stand, for such in the
Lexicon are to have characters assigned them, which may be described anent the
words there set down.

Then in the Grammar are to be described those additionall marks for the
derivative distinctions, with rules for the use of them. --

Now that the Characters might be known, and readily found in the Lexicon, when
the signification of any of them are desired to be known, we have pitched on
this invention.

First, that ten single figures be invented, whereof, nine to signify the nine
single numbers, and one of them the Cipher. Suppose these or the like.

1 2 / 3 \ 4 -- 5 ( 6) 7 8 9 0

Out of these might be framed Characters signifying any number more or less,
as thus.

signifying 235 3568 9050

Or else instead of the Character for the Cipher, you might draw a stroke
through the Character of which the Cipher is to follow, thus

10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90.

And then if two Ciphers follow immediately one the other, then might you
describe the first of them this way, and the second as before, as for 900 for
9065


By these kind of Characters might you describe or Characterize all the
radical words comprised in the Lexicon, and in the order as they there stand;
applying to the first the Character; to the fifth, the Character, to the
fiftieth, the Character or, to the fivehundreth, the Character; and so forth.
Thus when the signification of a Character is required, knowing the order of it
by its number con-signified, you may find it out in the Lexicon: for in stance:

Suppose the Character whose signification we would know, to be, signifying in
number 569, and suppose in the Lexicon we look for the said number, and so
find its radical signification to Love, then the Grammar is supposed to have
told us, that the prick on the right side does signify the Past Tense* from
whence the signification may be concluded to be Loved.

The End.

