THE Double Eternity, OR, The Inevitable Choice.

Deuteronomy. xxx. 19. I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing,
therefore choose life.

LONDON: Printed by M. Clark for the Author. 1695.

To the Honored Madam GULDEFORD OF HEMSTED in KENT.
Honored Madam,
IT having been your daily Practice for these many Years, to set apart a
considerable time for Meditation on the Joys of Heaven and Pains of Hell, which
makes you fly the Sweets which end in so much Bitterness, and go cheerfully the
hard way which leads to such endless Happiness: A Meditation of this twofold
Estate will be no unwelcom Present; Tho your Ladyship has better Thoughts of
your own, and better Inspirations than Poets are acquainted with.

That, I know, in another would lessen the Value of the Present, but in your
Ladyship it increases it; for having improved the Thoughts, and mixed with them
Inspirations, you kindly believe the Author has more Part in them than he has,
and humbly believe your Self to have less part in them than you have; for it is
the Property of true Humility to build so high and lay the Foundations so low,
that there is no distinct seeing from the bottom to the top.

This is the Advantage those Writers have which fall into your Hands, and it is
such, that, considering it, I fear my little Present will seem made to your
Ladyship rather for Self Ends than to make any return for the many great Favors
I stand Indebted for. Yet that was the first thing in my Thoughts, when I
proposed to my self this small Address; and should be the last, if this little
Book of mine were but of Worth enough: But as it is, Honored Madam, be pleased
but to accept of it, and I am more indebted than before.

Honored Madam, Your Ladyships Most humble Servant J. L.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THIS Description of Heaven and Hell, is a part of Mr. Niewport's Poem
Dedicated to King Charles II. under the Title of Vivat Rex; And it being
capable, with Alteration of a World or two, to stand by it self, and make a
Title of its own, I have made it English, and Christened it with the Name of the
Double Eternity.

The Purity of the Latin, and the Excellency of the Thoughts enticed me to
translate it, and the shortness of it took off the fear of overmuch Trouble in
the Work, and the Usefulness of the Subject made me willing to Publish it. A
Man may read it that would not read a Sermon; and seeing in it the Rewards of
Heaven and the Pains of Hell better represented to him than ever he represented
them to himself, and conformable to the Word of God, he may come to think it is
no great business to keep Ten Commandments, to have so much for keeping them;
and think it too much for a little more of the Flesh and the World to take up
with the Devil at last, and so be converted in Verse, who had continued on
wickedly in Prose.

You may father suppose, if you think it is Puritanical to pretend nothing but
Godliness without mixture, that Vanity had a helping hand in the Press, and I
wish Profit had been there too; But I find the Prophet Isaiah himself having
things of this nature of sell, was forced to cry out, Come ye and buy without
money, and without Price; which makes me expect but a very indifferent Market:
However take it and make the best of it, and so farewell.

THE Double Eternity.
LOST in a Storm and wilder'd in the Night,
Long time I stretched my Eyes with useless Sight;
At length the Clouds disperse, the Heaven's clear
And Stars, the lovely night-watch, Stars appear,
The only comfort then, the only there.
Here taking Heart, I cast about my Eyes,
And viewed the opening beauties of the Skies;
Fixed Stars and Planets at their liberty:
But, oh, the distance of those Lights from me!
Yet they (faint Lights) move in a Sphere so low,
That less to Heaven than to Earth they show.
The total sum of Hope and heap of Bliss
Farther in Heavens inmost Region is.
That part goes backward a vast length of place.
Who Will wing these feet that move so slow a pace?
Or who will my shoulders wing? that I may fly
Above the Clouds, above the azure Sky;
Above the Region of the Moon and Fire,
And pass the distant Lights which I admire:
And at the Empyreal Palace set me down,
Where Heavens Darling (Happiness) does crown
Mortals immortal made, and to the Poor
Unlocks the Heavens everlasting Store.
Virtue alone this lump of Earth can raise,
And find us Wings to pass those untrod ways.
We leave our native Soil, House, Nuptial ties,
And follow father leading Avarice.
Then Stars of our bright Hemisphere are seen,
And that which once the utmost Bounds has been,
(The Hesperian Garden and the Caspian Sea,
And Colchos whither Jason's Ship made way)
Is now thought nigh. Our first Step is their last;
The Streights, as Suburb Journeys, now are past,
Where trav'ling Hercules himself stuck fast;
Where the Line equally the year divides,
And right between each Hemisphere decides:
Where the East-winds and West-winds are at home,
And in their Native Indies freely roam;
Where the North-winds about the Bear-star blow;
Their fiercest storms of Rain, and Hail, and Snow;
And where the South-winds no less fury show.
( Europe's a Prison) past all Bounds of old.
Through unknown Heats, unhabitable Cold;
Tho Rocks and Sands forbid and roating Sea;
We to the Winds our vows and sails display,
But mind not Heavens Gifts or Heavens way.
Ignoble Souls! The noble Seed of God,
Mad Avarice debases to a Clod;
And yet our greedy thirsty Avarice,
No Earth, no Sea of Gold can it suffice.
The World cannot hold Man's Heart, that holds all;
The great World is too little for the small:
And still the Self-dissatisfyed Mind
Labors for Breath and burns for what is behind.
Why surely then for greater things it is made,
And there is something greater to be had.
O Man what is it? Lift up thy mind, and dare
To cast off Earthiness and sordid Care.
Woe to the Miser, on his Breast he crawls,
For Earth and Dirt his greedy Hunger calls;
Cursed like the Serpent which deceived Eve.
But thou whose meanest part's from Earth, be n't Slave
To that, but upwards to the Heavens strive,
From whence thou do thy chiefest part derive,
And look upon them as thy native Home,
And form thy self as does thy self become.
O high large Dwelling! highest Seat of Peace,
Fullness of Bliss where all our Wishes cease.
The Presence Chamber of the Thunderer;
But Thunder-free, and free from Threat or Ire.
Death's fatal Sithe and Dart which fill with Fear
The sublunary World, fright no Man there:
No Sighs disturb that Air, no Tears their Joy,
No Gall the immortal Sweets that never cloy.
Besides, the glorious Body shines so bright,
That all its Raiment are its Rays of light;
A kind of Angel-Dress: and Angels wings
Move with a heavenly swiftness earthly Things.
Rain, Hail, Snow hurts them not, nor Dog Days heat,
Nor deadly Weapons any Fear create:
And Bodies gently slide, like Inspiration,
Thorough each other without separation;
Nor strength of brazen Bars can stop the way,
Nor solid Rocks the solid Body stay.
Had I a Thousand Tongues to praise the Place,
What were a Thousand Tongues in such a case?
Or were Apelles hand to labor here,
How little would his matchless Art appear?
Now because glittering Jewels, Gold and Plate
Make up the little Pride of Man's poor state,
To Heaven both the Indies strait must go;
As if in Heaven Gold would make a show.
Thus we transport from Earth the golden Ore,
To make the Stars, and pave the immortal Floor;
And Jaspers, Beryls, Rubies hence convey,
To make the Frontispiece of Heaven gay.
But, oh, thou better Nature, all that is fine
In Gold and Gems no Riches are of thine;
Thy Treasures, hid from Sense, nor Tongue nor Thought
Can tell; we speak but what by Sense is taught:
Beasts only know the Dainties of the Field,
Which the best Sallads to their Palats yield:
So what we see and feel we only know,
So far we can and cannot farther go.
Oh, what a Masterpiece must Heaven be,
Where God designed from all Eternity
To have his Art, his Riches, his large Breast,
And the All-Maker in the Work confessed.
Essential Happiness.
But, oh, what Torrent's that which in such streams
From God's Throne overflows to the extremes
Of Heaven! Say, ye Blessed, if we may know,
What Torrent's that? for it is famed below
As far as Earth; as far as Hell, which made
The burning Glutton hope a little Aid;
But 'twould not be; the burning Glutton cried
For one Cold Drop, and one Cold Drop's denied.
A Torrent it is, but of an endless Course:
That source of Life, that everlasting Source
Does to eternal Streams new Stores supply:
Who Drinks thereof Drinks in Satiety;
Quenches his Thirst, and yet is ever Dry;
Dry without trouble, full, yet never cloyed;
Wish and Possession is at once enjoyed.
Nigh to this Torrent a rich Beauty lies,
Of charming Form and Features, and her Eyes
Are brighter than the Sun: Her Angels call
By the sweet Names of Life Celestial.
Sincere Delight, and Rest Secure, and Peace
With soft Breasts open, and with Virgin face,
Are of her Train; and Blessed Eternity,
Known by her Crown of endless Majesty,
And by the Dress which circles round her Hair,
Of Heavens brightest Die, and richest Wear.
These Sister-Beauties fold in her Embrace,
And all together join to bless the Place.
Hence, as it is said, hence from this Life Divine,
Mankind and Angels take their Origin:
Angels, pure Spirits, free from all allay;
Men of mixed nature, Spirit half, half Clay.
Hence the first Draughts of Life, they say, are taken;
And when Heaven calls upon us for it again,
Back to its Fountain and first Cause it goes,
If no Crime stop, no Foulness interpose;
Then fixed on God immovable we gaze,
His Face Divine darts on us piercing Rays;
Which so reflect Gods Likeness back, that we
Turn living Image of the Deity.
The Rainbow from the Sun receives its light,
The Sun's kind Aspect makes it look so bright;
But being made of Clouds it melts away:
So God, the Angels bright Eternal day,
Here in this gloomy Place new Light creates,
And with it all our Darkness dissipates;
And Heavens Beauties sets in mortal sight,
Inflames the Heart, and fills it with delight:
But being Sinners mists and vapors rise,
And strait wet Sorrow showers at our Eyes.
But Heaven knows no Griefs, no Sin is there,
No Earth, no Vapors, Clouds or Rain to fear.
According to our little skill we try,
In mind to copy the Divinity;
But Sense with earthy Colors and false Dies,
Imposes on the Mind as well as Eyes:
But when the darkness of that lump of Clay,
Which shades Mortality is drove away
By Light Divine, Gods Beauties then appear,
Just as in the Original they are:
It Is not his Likeness, it is his very Face
Seen in it self, not in the Looking-glass.
Hence Love, Love equal to the lovely Sight,
The Good it sees, with infinite delight
Embraces, holds fast, clings to it, 'till it be
Made one with God by mutual Unity.
God infinitely differs from Mankind,
And more, if Man can yet be more behind.
For, uncreated Possibilities,
Innumerable Kinds and Qualities,
Which in their Causes fertile Womb lay hid,
God can bring forth as well as those he did.
So many Ranks of things, so many Classes,
And Distance infinite, The Almighty passes,
And joins us to himself; it is Love unites;
Vision and Love: O Love! O vast Delights!
O everlasting Joys! Torrent of Peace!
Heaven of Heavens! Where all Wishes cease,
Beholding God for ever face to face.
O Earth-born, down-look'd Creature, where so fast?
Are Heavens Treasures come to this at last?
Men to the Indies run, bid Stars adieu,
Leave God for Gold, and Heaven for Peru,
And they that stay at home sell Heaven too.
But stand a little; stand, and look, and think,
Whilst you have yet a foot upon the Brink:
Stand, and look down into the Pit of Hell,
Where the dead Sinner and damned Angel dwell.
But look not there for fiery Pools, or Lakes
Flowing with Tears, or Fury's Hair of Snakes,
Or treble Walls, or famed Ixion's Wheel;
(All Fables) there are other Things to feel.
Other Fires and Tears there are to fear;
Men's guilty Minds are their own Vipers there:
God's doom irrevocable walls them in;
Eternity, which ever's to begin,
Moves in an endless round the wheeling Pain,
That ever turns, ever returns again.
But, oh, the loathsome Dungeon's horrid Night!
Was I born to behold the breathing Light
Of Heaven, and the Suns bright warming Ray?
O pleasant Sun! Sweet Heaven! Light of Day!
O Light thou Mother of Delight! thou Morn
Of Gods Creation, and his fair Firstborn,
Whom he loves best; whom thou resemblest most
Of all the numerous Created Host.
O Light! Nor Light, nor Heaven here is seen;
It burns: but there is a The Voice of the Lord divides the flames of fire. Ps.
28.7. Which is thus interpreted by Basilius.
Voice that comes between
The Fire and Flame, and cuts away the Light;
Darkness burns Hell, and Flames all over Night.
In these foul depths of Night, these Dungeons deep,
Full of black Horror guilty Souls shall weep,
That once neglected Heaven, God, and Grace;
And call to mind in vain the better Place:
To Self and all things lost, forsaken quite.
And that no Pain be lost for want of Sight,
Darkness, to be more cruel, yields her Right.
The Fiend that Rules in Chains, sits on a Throne,
Made up of Guilt and great Damnation;
King of the Damned, and his own Punishment.
Weak bankrupt, hopeless Fury, deadly Want,
And Fear, and Rage tearing her bloody Jaws,
(Foul Guard of Guilt) are all the Guard he has.
An ugly Snake, his chiefest Cause of Woe,
Meets Head and Tail and round his Head does go;
His Brows with this sad Wreath, this Garland's bound;
Long Evil folding in an endless round.
He is all over Pain, no Part is free;
And so are all the Damned as well as he.
Does the Gout tear the Feet with raging Pains? The Pain of Sense.

Does Stone or gnawing Gravel Heat the Reins?
The Guts at least or Head is free: But here
All Parts complain of Burdens, none can bear.
A living Death they live, they live and die
Both at a Time, and both Eternally.
Each Good the more it lasts the more it grows;
And by their lasting too we measure Woes.
Great Pain is to it self a speedy Cure;
The greater it is, the less it will endure:
It cannot be great and long, Man has not strength;
But Hells vast Pains are of an endless length.
The Fire never kills and never dies,
But with it self ever it self supplies:
Implacable Destruction, Torment extreme,
Hells worst of Furies, Gods avenging Flame.
The Saying's strange, Mark 6.
That every one shall be
Salted with fire; Here Is the Mystery;
As Salt preserves, so shall that Fire do;
With Pain preserving, salt and burn them too:
That fiery Salt force to the Burnt inspires,
And makes them fire-proof t'eternal Fires.
O Penance, give me Sighs and weeping Eyes!
O force of Tears at which Hellfire dies.
But see, lost Soul, whence art thou tumbled down; The Pain of lost Happiness.

That Sight in Tears the Eyes shall ever drown:
The Ministers of Light shall always be
The Ministers of Tears for an Eternity.
They see the happy Mansions, seat of Peace;
Bound in Hells Dungeon, closed within the Place,
Nine times about by Depths that none can pass:
They see the blessed Angels Station,
Filled with New-comers from our Plantation:
They see a joyful numberless Embrace;
Love pressing heart to heart, and face to face.
But these are Sweets enjoyed by him alone
The Book of Life has made a Denison
Of Heaven: Golden Book! let others be
Cried up for Beauty, Art, Antiquity;
These Virtue polish, and eternal Love.
The Light of Glory is that supernatural Light, necessary to raise the natural
Faculty of the Mind to that supernatural Act, the Vision of God.
Not to my Eyes, but Ears that Light above
(Which from its Glory takes its Price and Name)
Has often come, come by the way of Fame.
The bright East never such Glory had to show;
And all the First days fertile Light could do,
(The Parent of each other glorious Light)
It never could bring forth any thing so bright;
It Is Gods own Luster, that which shone about
Michael and's Army, fighting against the rout
Of Rebel Angels: it is the Suns bright Ray
Which never sets; that Light which shows the way
Into the very innermost abode,
And all the pleasures and the Sweets of God.
But Hell must have no share in this; black Smoke,
Dark Clouds, thick Steams the Sight of Heaven choke,
And Hell more dreadful make: What a Sight
Are these black Monsters of eternal Night.
I dread the Thought on it: Oh, what Looks! what Blows!
What biting Serpents to increase our Woes!
What Fires overspread the burning Plain!
How fertile is the horrid place in Pain!
Alas, it is more than Horrid: Hence they Groan,
Roar out and Rage, and make a dismal Moan.
O Sleep, Death's likeness, if, as Poets tell,
Thou do in everlasting Darkness dwell;
Upon my Eyes shed, from thy charming Rod,
Kind Poisons, Ladanum and Diacode;
And make me lose my self for one short Wink,
And, for a Moment neither feel nor think.
If any stupifying Lethe flows
In Hell, amdist their thoughtful sleepless Woes;
Ah may it wash my Cares, and make the Pain
Less tyrannizing, and compose my Brain
To rest, that Sleep may steal upon my Grief,
And Rob me of my self; a welcome Thief.
But, oh, no Sleep, no Lethe Cares allays,
But frightful Objects rush in every way
Upon the Mind, and weary't night and day.
No way to shun the hateful Sight they fear,
Where ever they turn their Eyes the Plague is there.
Hence comes that Worm, which in their restless Breast, The Worm of Conscience.

Deep in the Heart and Soul is said to nest;
And gnaws eternally the immortal Food,
And sucks the everlasting-wasting Blood;
No after-Sighs and Tears do any good.
The Gate which open was to all the Crimes
Through all the East, West, North and Southern Climes,
That Gate is shut; with unrelenting hand
The Iron hinge is turned, and so must stand.
No hope! All Is gone! Hope is Pain's sole relief,
Either as showing Fruit or end of Grief:
Grief holds to that; Where is the Fruit of Woe?
Hells Pains are fruitless; Where Is the end? Round go
The wheeling Torments with return of Pain,
Still coming round to be endured again.
Infinite is the heap of Misery;
A mass of Ills that fill Eternity:
The Stars and untold Sands put in one sum,
Are nothing to the Years of Pain to come.
Swift Hours stand, and lay aside your Wings,
Your Wheels, your restless Motion, useless things;
Times Race is ended, Heavens Course is done,
Nor Wheels of Heaven stir, nor Wheels of Sun;
But the swift Wheel of Pain runs as before,
Age after Age, and never shall give over.
FINIS.

