2 Timothy: Ca: 4 V. 7. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I
have kept the faith.

Siste gradum Viator; Paucis te volo: Hic situs est Daniel Featlaeus;
Impugnatuor Papisimi; Propugnator Reformationis; Instigator Assiduae-Pietatis
Tam Studio, Quam Exercitio Theologus-Insignis; Disputator Strenvus; Concionator
Egregius (...) Facete Candidus Candidus Facetus Omni-Memoria-Dignissimus D D
Featiaeus Qui Natus Charltoniae educatus Oxo: Aetatis Suae 65. Obijt Chelseiae
Aprilis 17 Sepultus fuit Lambethae Aprilis 21 Anno Salutis 1645.



A SERMON PREACHED AT LAMBETH, APRIL 21. 1645.

AT THE FUNERAL Of that Learned and Polemicall Divine, DANIEL FEATLEY, Doctor
in Divinity, Late Preacher there* WITH A short Relation of his Life and Death.

By WILLIAM LEO, D. in Divinity, sometime Preacher at Wandesworth in Surrey.

PROVE. 10. 7. The Memorial of the Just shall be blessed, but the name of the
wicked shall rot. LONDON. Printed for Richard Royston, dwelling in Ivie-Lane.
1645.

In Obitum Reverendi Viri, DANIELIS FEATLII, Sacrae Theol. Doctoris, and
Eccles. Anglic. propugnatoris Acerrimi.
HOc in sepulcro dormientis conditur
Veneranda Featleii cinis.
Inter silentum claustra taciturnus jacet,
Magnum modo Dei Oraculum.
Jacet Ille, tantus Galliae and Romae pudor,
Quantus decor Britanniae.
Quos ille Agonas, quae tulit certamina
Exterminandam ad Haeresin?
Ecclesiae geminas mamillas Anglicae,
Baptisma and Eucharistiam;
Purus ab omni muniit Contagio,
Parenti Alexicacus suae.
Obstruxit Anabaptista, feralis Draco,
Fontem patentem Infantulis;
Monstru^ sed istud multiceps, Cadmus sacer,
Moriente dextra contudit.
Quot transmarinae e Pellicis gremio mala
Adnavigarunt Angliam;
Quicquid Socinus, quicquid Arminius for as;
Familistae, vel Brunnus, domi;
Inimica quod vel Lingua, vel Praelu^ tulit;
Sceleris puerperium frequens;
Tot dira capita, tot renascentes Hydras,
Stravit Britannus Hercules.
Exile corpus terere, non poterat frequens
Arena, Praelum, Pulpita.
Pusillus Atlas in labores sufficit,
Vegetior a certamine.
Languente Pietas nimia pro morbo fuit,
Pro Phthisi Amore tabuit;
Sensim peribat, corporis partem sui
Praemisit assidue Deo:
Et cum tot annos praedicans, vitae suae
Attriverat spiraculum;
Elinguis Anima murmr exit languido,
Dixitque inauditum Vale.
Quis Pontificios jam latebris extrahet
Tenebriones Urbicos?
Quis nunc in aciem provocatos conteret
Rationis acri Malleo?
Ille, Ille palmam Victor Assiduus novam
Accensuit meritis suis.
At cum peregit opera militiae suae,
Ruente Roma: contudit
Sectariorum conglobatum exercitum,
Et posuit Animam in vulnere.
Sic, sic, Sacerdos Magne, voluisti mori,
Victoriae Holocaustum, Deo.
Nec unus in vita, nec in morte unus es,
In te sita est Ecclesia;
Ruat haec necesse; cui basis facta est cinis,
Cujus Columna pulvis est.
Jaces, manipulus frigidae terrae brevis,
Mysterium Theologiae.
Sic Disciplinas universas noveras,
Uti nemo pene singulas.
Vires operibus miscet and veneres suis
Perita scribendi manus;
Ut inter Artium haereas discrimina,
Logicumne legis an Rhetora.
Peritura nullo saeculo erexit suae
Monumenta pietatis: precum
Ephemerin reliquit, ut nostris adhuc
Superesset in votis pius.
Non Praeficaru^ pompa celebrat hunc Rogum,
Avita non insignia.
Ancilla Pietas, juncta famulitio Precum,
Gemebunda praeit Anteambulo.
Stipata gregibus Artium Theologia
Insequitur atro syrmate;
Tumulo superstant Haereses, Anathemata;
Opima spolia, Schismata.
Nunc, nunc litandum est; sontium busto super
Cadat Hecatombe criminum.
Iterum resurgat error, Antaeus licet,
Retundet e scriptis Pugil.
Ite, ite Iambi funebres; liceat satis
Lugere, quem laudo parum.
Ite, ite Musae flebiles; vestro fluunt
Damno minores Lachrymae.
O anima coelo reddita; ut te nos sacram
Meditando patimur extasin!
O innocens umbra, O cadaver sanctius,
Quam Tu sepulcrum consecras!
Non occidisti, fallimur; periit Tibi
Non Vita, sed Mortalitas.
Ascend Victor; Te salutat undique
Numerosa turba Syderum.
Animae frequentes, pars gregis nuper Tui,
Quas vindicasti ab Haeresi,
Ut te stupendis plausibus circumvolant,
Et gratulantur hospiti!
Chorus Angelorum, quibus eras spectaculum,
Mundi in Theatro praelians;
Io Triumph, concinunt; geminant Io,
Et Euge perpetuum Tibi.
Sic, sic, Beat, splendidam in Pompam trahis
Coeli universos ordines:
Tantumque frueris tu Deo, quantum sibi
Sperare fas sit optimo.
E Schola Regia Westmonast. sic flevit F. Gregory.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Scripsit (...) Io: Harmarus Oxoniensis.

A SERMON PREACHED at the Funeral of Dr FEATLEY.
APOC. 4. 6. the former part. (...).

Et in conspectu sedis tanquam mare vitreum simile crystallo. Erat etiam ante
thronum mare vitreum simile crystallo. Beza. And before the throne there was a
sea of glass, like unto crystal.


IT is not my mind nor meaning, neither was it ever my manner, I having now
preached the Gospel seven and forty years, in Court, City, Country, and beyond
the Seas, to trouble mine Auditorie with any long, or large beginnings.

The Context is a Vision of the incomprehensible Majesty of the eternal and
ever-living God, which takes up all the whole Chapter, wherein Gods celestial
throne, his Session, his heavenly attendance, both Seraphicall, and
Cherubicall, his awful presence, his diffused, and displayed glory, in,
before, and about his Throne; his unspeakable Praise, and his infinite
Magnificence is pencild and pourtrayed to life in all his Attributes, and
Proprieties, most graphically in Mosaique work and wonderment.

The Text is a Revelation, and an obvious Demonstration what was, and is before
the throne of God. The parcells of my Text may be four: For herein is a
Throne, a Sea, what manner of Sea, a Sea of Glass, and a resemblance of what
it was like, even like unto crystal.

You will demand of me, What is meant by this throne? I answer, it is Heaven,
where God is in his excelling glory. What is this sea of glass? The world.
What is the resemblance? Like unto crystal, but not crystal.

You happily will ask me further concerning these pieces. Why Heaven is
decyphered by a Throne? For that here on earth Kings have Thrones of Equity,
Justice, Judgment, and other Regal, Royal, and Princely Prerogatives; yet
they and we all, with all the world, shall appear before the glorious throne
of Jesus Christ, to give an account of what we have done here in our bodies, be
it good or evil. Why is the world set out by a sea? For that it is restless
as the sea is. Why a sea of glass? For that it is brittle like glass. The
world is as made of glass, Ubi splendet, frangitur, where it is more shining
and resplendent, there it soonest cracks and breaks. And lastly, why resembled
to crystal? For two respects: The first, in relation to the men of the world,
who are gulled, and deceived by it; the world seeming unto them to be all
crystalline, when God knows, and all godly ones find by experience, that it
is glassie, slippery, brittle, and no preciousnesse in it at all. The second is
in relation to God: Crystal is transparent, we all know; how much more is this
world, and all the things of this world, with all the actions, transactions,
words, and the very imaginations of the thoughts of all men's hearts are open,
overt, and obvious to the knowledge and sight of the great Jehovah Jireth, who
orders them all according to the counsel of his most sacred and secret will.

I will spend no more precious time in spelling of the Text; you now (I
conceive it) understand it as well as my self. The point of Doctrine that I
learn out of this Text in the Result of it, is couched in this short breviate,
and proposition.

All the passages of this world wherein we live, are very dangerous Doctrine.
as a Sea; ever transitory, brittle, and slippery, as a sea of glass; never
satisfactorie, albeit it glitter, and shine like crystal; and ever open,
overt, obvious, and transparent to the Revel. 2. 24. (...).
sight and censure of Almighty God, be they couched never so hellishly deep,
though they be sunk even to the deeps of the devil.

Accommodate me I desire you with your Christian patience but for the space of
one hour, and by that time by Gods favor I shall quit this glassie sea, and
show you the Port of our happiness, Heaven. And give me leave in the
Doctrinall part to speak freely to your heads, and in the Practique to put it
home to your hearts by the evidence of the Word contained in the holy lines of
sacred Scripture, and in the power of the Spirit, according to the model of
that knowledge of God that he has imparted unto me. The first piece of my
Doctrinall part is thus:

That the passages of this world are passing dangerous as a sea, 1.
Resemblances.
proved and expressed in four resemblances.

First, in respect that this world (as the sea) is subject to sundry and
frequent storms. You all know what storming is; It is grown a Military term,
Such a City, Town, Cittadell, and Castle was stormed.

1. Daniels Vision shows it; Daniel spoke, and said, I saw Dan. 7. 2.
in my vision by night, and behold, the four winds of the heaven strove upon
the great sea. That is to say,

1. The South wind of prosperity. What is there any storm in that? Oh how many
and mighty puffed up with the pomp of this world do forget God, and have their
portion with the wicked, who shall be turned into hell, and with them all the
people that forget God! Psalm. 9. 17.


2. The storm of adversity caused by the North Wind of affliction, deeps and
distresses, oh how many and mighty has that wind sunk! Saint Augustine was
accustomed to say to such as came unto him for advise, support, and counsel in
several disgusts of conscience: Assuredly my friends, through hoping and
despairing, the sons and Sperando, and desperando, misere^ pereunt homines:
Sperando male in vita, desperando pejus in morte.
daughters of men do miserably perish; by hoping foolishly and cursedly all
their life, that all shall be well with them, albeit they walk in the
stubbornness of their own hearts, against all the blessed means, and motions
of Gods blessed Word and Spirit; and despairing like hel-hounds in the end of
their days.

3. There may come a storm out of the East, neither good for man nor beast,
and yet may be an especial inspiration of some common grace. Christ has
pronounced a blessing to the pure in heart, for they shall see God: O Mat. 5. 8.
blessed Puritanes! They do see God already in his Works and Word, and shall
see him hereafter in a beatifical vision. But what say you to this of the
Wiseman in his Proverbs, There is a generation pure in their own conceit;
Prove. 31. 12.
and yet are not purged, and purified from their wickedness?

4. Yea the case may so fall out, that all the rest of the winds may breathe
fairly, and yet on a sudden a black cloud, and storm may appear out of the
West, and overset all. In brief, a Disgust may arise out of all the 32. points
of the Seamans Compass and Chard, and ruin us in this sea of the world, in a
trice, be we never so conceited of our safety and assurance.

The second passage is, That this sea of the world is very, 2.
and passing dangerous, in respect of the many, and manifold rocks, shelves,
syrtes, and sands that lie hid, and covered in the Sea.

The Divine shows you a map of this world, and points to it, saying, All that
is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the 1 John 2. 16.
lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but of the
world. What, all things in this world? Yea all. Behold, I will show a truth.
The Astronomers conceit, that the heavens are turned upon the two Poles, to
wit, the Artique, and Antartique Poles. I admire not their conceit, this I am
sure I know, and we all here are experienced in, that all the actions,
affections, and imaginations of the thoughts of all men and women tend either
to profit, or pleasure, or both. Oh how many for these ends and purposes have
run themselves upon the rocks of witless and worthless security! Others
upon the shelves of proud and Luciferian presumption have ruinated themselves.
Others have sunk themselves and theirs upon the syrtes and sands of miserable
Desperation.

The third passage is, That the sea of this world is passing 3.
dangerous in respect of the many sea monsters that are in it.

The Prophet Daniel saw this in his Vision. And four Dan. 7. 7*
great beasts came up from the sea, diverse one from another. The first was like
a lion, which are the proud, known and discovered by their high looks, lofty
words, and stroting incesse. The second was like a Bear, which are the
voluptuous, and filthy unclean persons, men and women. The Bear licks his
dirty paws, and the strumpet wipes her mouth, and licks her whorish lips, and
says, I have done no evil, when she has sold her soul to the devil, and
sunk her body into a gulf of uncleanness. The third beast was like a Leopard,
a mongrell beast coming of a Lion and a Pard, and this is the covetous wretch,
who being neither fish, nor flesh, nor good red-herring, neither good to God,
nor to man, nor to himself. The fourth beast is not named, but deciphered to
have teeth of iron. This is no other beast, but hellish and diabolical malice,
which rends, tears, and tyrannizes over the proud Peacocks, the stinking
voluptuous Bear, and the amphibious Leopard.

The fourth passage is, That the Sea of this world is passing 4.
dangerous in respect of the inconstancy thereof. Sometimes in siraquedry and
excess, lifting worldlings up to heaven upon her billows, and anon sinking
them down (as it Psalm. 107 27.
were) to hell, as the holy Psalmist tells you.

The Philosophers tell us, that the Moon is Mistress of Tantum constans in
(...) itate sua.
the Sea, and the Moon is ever constant in her continued inconstancy. The
Moon never shines long with one and the same countenance, but still she is
either in her wane, or in her increment. Ay me! how fit a semblance is this
Moon a Mistress of the Sea; and the inconstancy of the Sea and Moon an absolute
Demonstration of this Sea of slippery and brittle glass? Thus have we made
good the fitness of the Resemblance, That the Sea of this world is passing
dangerous in four respects: Namely, by reason it is subject to every disgust
of the air, blow the wind out of what quarter you will. Secondly, dangerous,
in respect of the many rocks, shelves, syrtes, and sands. Thirdly, dangerous,
in respect of Seamonsters: And fourthly, dangerous, in respect of this worlds
constant inconstancy.

The second piece of the Doctrinall part of my Proposition 2.
is this, That all the passages in this world are ever transitory, and always
fleeting.

The holy Divine St. John is very plain, and passing peremptory in this, The
world passes away and the lust thereof, 1 John 2. 17.
but he that does the will of the Lord, abides ever. We all know, that we are
all in passage; the world is either leaving us, or we the world; peradventure
this night, who can tell how soon this voice may be heard at your chamber
window: Thou fool, this night shall they snatch thy soul from thee; whose are
those things then that thou possessest Luke 12. 17.
now? If not to night, yet the wise man tells you, They have wings, and asks
you this question, Will thou set thy hears Prove. 23. 5.
upon that which is not? For riches take unto them wings, and fly away. Jeremy
tells the Muck-worme, that he is like the foolish Partridge, which sits abrood
on eggs, and never Jer. 17. 11.
hatcheth them: So the fond worldlings have riches, and enjoy them not. And the
holy Psalmist burns the foolish worldling in the forehead with a Behold the
man, Psalm. 52. 7.
who took not God for his strength; but boasted and blessed himself in the
multitude of his riches.

The third piece of my Proposition is this, That all the 3.
passages of this world are never satisfactory.

They that drink Seawater, do never quench their thirst, but are dry and
thirsty still. Whose eye was ever satisfied with seeing? whose ear with
hearing? whose scent with smelling? whose mouth with eating? Men may satiate
their senses, but never satisfy them. The Prodigal was not satisfied with his
revelling and excess, though he brought his noble to nine pence, and his nine
pence to nothing. The Scholar is never satisfied with his knowledge. He that
increases his doctrine, increases Eccles. 1. 18.
his dolor. Nor yet the honorable, either in the state Ecclesiastical, or
Civil. Nor the opulent man Eccles. 5. 19.
with all his fullness. See the antiphony of those that have nothing, and those
that have too much: They both cry out, O what shall we do? So cried the fool
in the Luke 12.
Gospel, when his increase was bigger then his barn. And so complained the
poor Prodigal, when he had not one Denier to help himself withal; if he had
not had a good Father to go unto, and remembered him at last cast, the poor
starveling had eaten husks with Swine, and pitifully perished.

The fourth and last piece of the Doctrinall part of my 4.
Proposition, is this, That all the passages of this world are always open,
overt, obvious, and transparent to God with whom we have to do. The sweet
Singer of Israel expostulates this truth with his God; Whither shall I go from
thy Spirit? or thy presence? If to heaven, thou art there in thy displayed
glory: If to hell, thou art there also in thy judgments Psalm. 139. 8.
on the wicked in torments: If to Sea, thine hand must guide me there too. If I
think the darkness shall hide me; the dark night to God is as clear as the
brightest day. The Heb. 4. 13.
Spirit of God tells you; That there is no creature that is not manifest to his
sight, and all things are open and naked to him with whom we have to do. And
the Book of the Revelation of Jesus Christ, says, That Gods eyes, like flaming
fire, Revel. 1. 14.
run to and fro through all the world. This last piece of the doctrinall part of
my Proposition, as it is a terror and trembling to the wicked, all whose
cursed and crying wickednesses are open to his all-seeing eyes: so it is a
cordial and comfort to the godly, knowing and considering, that their heavenly
Father sees and beholds all their pressures, vexations, and distresses that
they endure, and lie under in this slippery, brittle, and boisterous Sea of the
world.

Would you know the reasons of these particular truths? Reasons.
As first, why the passages of this world are so dangerous? The reasons are
ready. It is because the raging Sea is not subject to so many disgusts, either
of dangerous rocks, storms, shelves, shallowes, syrtes, sands, Seamonsters,
and other encumbrances, as this restless world is, that is fraught with
dangers and incarnate devils.

What find we here but brevity in all our Contents? as the Prophet Esaias
Evangelizeth: It is even as when a hungry Esa. 29. 8.
man dreameth, and behold he eats; but he awaketh, and his soul is empty: Or
as when a thirsty man dreameth, and behold, he drinks; but he awaketh, and
his soul is faint. Oh how many are there in this Sea of glass, whose whole
course of life is but a dream, and when death comes, they are awakened, and
never till then in all their life, and their souls are empty of all comfort,
and fainting, dye, and their places*know them no more!

What find we here but levity? the very wicked confess as much, saying, We
have wearied our selves in the ways of wickedness, and the ways of the Lord
we have been strangers to.

What find we here but Cymmerian blindness* millions selling away their
interest to Heaven for nothing?

What find we here, but multitude and vast magnitude of all sorts of
iniquities, transgressions, and sins? God himself complaining by his Prophet
Amos with a witness: Behold, says the Lord, I am pressed under you, as a Amos
2. 13.
Cart is pressed that is full of sheaves.

What meet we here daily but with deceitfulness on all hands? the world it
self is all glass, and where it glittereth most, there it cracketh and
breaks soonest.

What do we find the world to be in our experience of it, but a bitter pill
candyed over with sugar? a golden cup like the whores in the Revelation, full
of dismal and Revel. 17. 4.
deadly poison? No marvel then that the Prophets, Princes, and Preachers of
the world have left behind them such lamentable notes and votes of their
wearisomnesse in the experience of things here below. Jeremy that Prophet of
Lamentations cries, Oh that mine head were a well of waters, and mine eyes a
fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the
Daughter of my people! O that I had in the wilderness a lodging place of
waifaring men, that I might leave my people, and go from them, for they be all
adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men! I recommend Jer. 9. 1, 2.
the whole chapter to the reading and meditation of every sober Christian, to
fit his soul, and tune his heart to the woeful tone of this tumultuous
Sea-world.

David a King tunes his pipes with this doleful Ditty, O that I had wings like
a Dove! for then would I flee away, and be at rest. Lo then would I wander
far of, and remain in the Psalm. 55. 6.
wilderness. I would hasten mine escape from this worlds windy storm and
tempest.

Paul the Preacher of the Gentiles exclaimes and says, O wretched man that I
am, who shall deliver me from this body Romans 7. 24.
of death! And had he not found a deliverer, he had sunk under that bitter
agony.

You will further enquire, Why the passages of this 2.
world are ever so transitory, and brittle? I answer briefly, This fretfull Sea
of glass is like an angry Lady, that will turn away her servant for a very
Glass breaking.

And why are they never satisfactory? For that the 3.
heart of man is a triangle, and the world is a circle, and a circle can never
fill a triangle. Nothing in this world can satisfy man's triangle heart but the
holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity. One touch of the Power of God the Father;
one glimpse of the rays of the wisdom of God the Son, in whom are hid all
the Treasures of wisdom and knowledge; and one drop of the gift and grace of
charity from God the Holy Ghost satisfies, contents, and cheeres the whole
nature of the regenerate man.

But why are all the passages of this world always 4.
open and overt to the sight and censure of the eternal God? How can it be
otherwise? It is impossible but that he that made the eye should see: Shall not
he that made the heart, shall not he, I say, understand? When the whole world
before his Throne is Crystalline, open, naked, and diaphanous to the Lord our
God. His allseeing eyes see, and discern the imaginations of the Genesis 6. 6.
thoughts of every man's heart that lives.

Shall I request this favor at your hands? That you would be pleased to turn
to the first chapter of John's Gospel, and read from the 45. v. to the end of
the Chapter, and observe and meditate of that heavenly conference there between
Jesus Christ our blessed Savior, Philip of Bethsaida, and Nathanael; Philip
finds Nathanial, and says unto him, We have found the Messiah: Come and
see. Jesus saw Nathanael coming unto him, and said, Behold a true Israelite,
in whom is no guile. Nathanael says unto him, Whence know thou me? Jesus
answered and said unto him, Before that Philip called thee when thou wast under
the fig tree, I saw thee. Nathanael is ravished and cries out, Rabbi, Thou art
the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel. Many there knew Nathanael to be
an Israelite, but none saving the Lord Jesus knew him to be such an Israelite
in whom was no guile.

Thus far have I spoken unto your heads in the Doctrinall part of my
Proposition; Give me now leave to speak to your hearts in the practick part
thereof, and so I shall incline toward an end.

The first Use of the Doctrine, is of heavenly affection, The practice. 1.
tending to earnestness of zeal, and longing after Heaven; Forasmuch as we
find nothing here below but a Sea restless, a brittle being, and a slippery
standing.

What are we? or who are we here present this day, and understanding what the
frame, fashion, and garb of this world is by the sacred Oracle of the text,
and would not now cry out with Esaias to our God in Heaven, Oh that thou would
rend the Heavens, that thou would come down, that Esa. 64. 1.
the Mountains might melt at thy presence, and that the Nations might tremble
at thy power? What are mountains here, but the mighty in the earth, that set
themselves against the Lord? Bow thy Heavens, O Lord, and come down: Psalm. 144.
5.
touch the Mountains, and they shall smoke. Yea, be the mountains never so
vast, so lofty, so exalted above measure, one touch of his finger shall shake
them all to pieces. Yea, though a rebellious Absolon that had swelled against
his Father like to an Olympus, God comes down in his power, and gives him but
a touch, and he and his haughty Rebellion passes away in a smoke that
vanishes; he hangs between heaven and earth, as unworthy of either, and all
his swelling presently abates like a blown bladder with the prick of a pin.

1. To my Brethren of the Ministry here present, I speak and beseech you to
preach to this decaying world, That we all in it wax old as does a garment, and
as a vesture God will change us, and we shall be changed; but he is the Psalm.
102, 26.
same, yesterday, to day, and for ever, and his years shall Heb. 13. 8.
have no end.

2. To the Laics I say this, It is an observation of the Physicians, that we
are now of shorter stature, and of less livelihood then heretofore.

3. Is there an Astronomer here? tell him that Stadius, Copernicus, and
Reinoldus affirm peremptorily, that the very Heavens are decayed, the Sun less
orient in his splendor, the Moon more pale, and the Stars more dim.

4. Art thou a Muck-worme? Know that Philip Melancthon a choice Divine in his
time, being contemporary with Martin Luther, left this observation behind him,
That the earth is grown so old, that it is like a womb barren with age.

5. To whomsoever here present, that has any Christian sense and feeling, I
would have him know, that the whole Creation groaneth, and travaileth in pain
together until now. And not only they, but we our selves which have the
first fruits of the Spirit, even we our selves Romans 8. 22, 23.
groan within our selves, waiting for our full and final redemption, as Paul
preaches.

6. Happily there may be here present some Jesuit, or Jesuited spirit, whose
learning lies all in the Directories of Machiavels Prince, Bodins Commentaries,
and Lypsius Politiques, whose Primer is couched in this one principle,
Religentem esse oportet, religiosum nefas: Let me tell that Statizer, I am no
Platonist, whose learning is hid in final and fatal numbers; affirming, that
no State ever continued above 500. years, without some fearful fate or
final fall. But (ay me!) we understand better by experience of times past,
that that Principle is not true, as the State of the Venetians and the French
Monarchy abundantly confute; Yea, the boys in School conclude, That Numeri,
qua numerus, nulla vis, nulla efficacia.

But mine endeered and most Christian Auditory, I will make bold with you, (and
surely I cannot give you a more glorious title if I did study to give you ten
thousand) to signify what gives me satisfaction in this point; even the
Prophet Daniels interpretation of Nebuchadnezzars vision in a Dream. The
Vision was this: An Image appeared to the King, whose head was of fine gold,
his Dan. 2. 31, 32, 33.
breasts and arms of silver, his belly and thighs of brass, his legs of
iron, and his feet part of iron and part of clay. This head of fine gold,
breasts and arms of silver, belly and thighs of brass, legs of iron, and
the feet part of iron and part of clay, were the four Monarchies of this world,
this glassie Sea, like Crystal. The head of fine gold was the Monarchy of the
Assyrians and Babylonians. The breasts and arms of silver, were the Medes and
Persians. The belly and thighs of brass signified the Monarchy of the Greeks
and Macedonians: And the legs of iron, and the feet partly of iron and partly
of clay, pourtray unto us the last Monarchy of the Romans and Germans. The
three first Monarchies, to wit, of the Assyrians and Babylonians, Medes and
Persians, Graecians and Macedonians, are long ago slipped away in this slippery
and brittle world: And the last of the Romans and Germans is now at a very
low ebb; for it is come to a titular Emperor, and that is all that remains
of the House of Austria, and at this very day ready to return to their prime
and pristine commencement, to be Comites de Kyburgh; only the proud Spaniard
ventures at all to uphold their tottering state and low condition.

Assuredly no expectation at all remains, but when the stone hewed out of the
rock of our sins shall fall upon the remaining stumps, and then down falls
all the Gold, Silver, Brass and Iron upon the feet of clay, and so then, this
Sea of Glass in Chaos antiquum confundetur.

And verily, my Prayer is, and shall be this, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly,
and stretch out thine hand, close up the two eyes of this dying world, the Sun
and the Moon, that we may attain that heavenly Jerusalem, where there is no need
of either, but the glory of the Lamb of God, the Lord Jesus, shall be our
exceeding glorious recompense of reward for ever.

The second Use of the Doctrine is mournful, sad, and 2.
sable, even of lamentation, for the witless wights of this glassie brittle
seas inhabitants.

Oh how many sots are there in this restless sea of the world, who albeit they
see, and may discern this truth in a vision, and revelation of Jesus, yet think
of nothing, but seek here for their content, and care for nothing but here to
find their Requiem for their souls! Behold (blessed in the Lord) their
extreme folly. Some seek, and conceive hope that they shall find it in the
lust, and brutish lustfulnesse of the flesh: and what is that, but the foame of
this sea? and what tends it to, and ends in, but fordid luxury, which brings
us to rottenness, pox, and penury? This foame dwells in drunkenness, vomit,
and spewing, in riot and excess, which ends in filthy annihilation, fit for
the draft-house, and nothing else. Others seek their Requiem in this restless
sea, in the lust of the eyes, which is riches, and the pomp of the world, which
the Scripture calls Fantasy. When King Agrippa and Bernice his wife Acts 25.
23.
came in to hear Paul, the Greek speaks thus, (...), What are these but
Conchyliamaris, the shells of this glassie sea, which do weary us in seeking
them, befoole us in the possession of them, and vex us to the heart when we
must part with them? Others seek their Requiem in the pride of life; and what
are all the pleasures of this life, but the billows of this sea of glass*
wherewith some are lifted up to vain glory? that feather, which children and
fools labor to catch in the streets, and abundantly sweat for it, and know
not what to do with it when they have it, but set it flying again. Others it
lifts up to Honors; and yet his Lordship must say to rottenness, Thou art
my father and mother, and to the worms, not of the earth, for they scorn to
come nigh thee, but to thine own skinworms, (as Job speaks) You are my
brothers and sisters. Some Job 17. 14.
are lifted up on the billows of their policy and learning, whereas we know
that the prudent and politic dye as well as the ignorant and foolish. Others
are lifted up upon the billows of their beauty, which with a gleame of the Sun
will be burnt, with three fits of a Spanish Calenture will be discolored, with
old age furrowed with wrinkles, and with three days of death made hideous.
Others pride themselves in their gay garments, which every week grow out of
fashion, as the world it self does. Is it not a strange thing that a Malefactor
should be proud of his halter that must hang him? Surely our clothes may put us
in mind of our evil doing; for had we not fallen from God by our evil doing, we
had had no use of raiment. In a word, what are all our pleasures, but Lilia
terrae, like the Lilies of the field? what gold and silver, but Ilia terrae,
the garbage of the earth? and what are honors and promotions, but Ludibria
venti, feathers for the wind to play withal?

The third Use of this Doctrine is of Expostulation. 3.


Have, and do we not too too often forget where we are? verily we have, and
do so still. Ay me! we little consider that we are poor passengers in this
sea of glass; we are in this world, and this world is a sea of glass,
restless as a sea, and brittle as glass: our Port and Haven is Heaven, every
one of us is his own Pilot to guide his own vessel. The Pilots place is to sit
in the stern of his ship: Why there? To see how she steeres. That true
Christian Passenger that sails toward heaven, will ever be minding his end,
sitting in the stern, and considers how his Ship steeres toward the Haven of
Heaven. Never do any sail in safety in this restless world, but they that in
their voyage have the Rudder in their hand, and the Compass and Sea-Card in
their eye, that is to say, think and meditate of their end, and steer toward
heaven.

The fourth Use of this Doctrine is of holy Resolution. 4.


What is that? Surely to resolve as the holy Divine advises, Not to love the
world; for if we do, the love of God is not in us* Can any man love a
traitorous and treacherous Judas, which (if you confide in him) will betray you
with a kiss? And if the world smile upon you, take heed, lest the next thing
you hear of, be not some plot of villainy to ensnare thee. Can any wise man
love the place where Satan domineeres? If this our Gospel truth be hid from any
here, it is hid to them that are lost. Are not they lost that can 2 Cor. 4. 3*
4*
neither be found in heaven, nor in the earth, nor yet in the sea? The god of
this world, which is the Devil, has blinded the minds of them that believe not
this truth, lest the light of the glorious Gospel truth of Jesus Christ, who is
the image of God, should shine unto them. The whole world, says the holy
Divine Saint John, lies in wickedness; and our little world, 1 John 5* 19*
this Island wherein we dwell, is on fire about our ears, and yet neither the
worlds malignity, nor yet our own misery, can quicken us to a lothing of this
restless and brittle sea of glass.

But would you learn how to avoid this Traitor that will Judaize with you, this
dominion of Satan, and this house on fire? I shall do my endeavor to satisfy
your desire in this point.

You all know, that whatsoever the shavelings of Rome say, we have a Church,
and it is a principal piece of the holy Catholic Church, which we profess
to believe, that is scattered far and wide upon the surface of the whole
Universe; and to this Church we have given our names. Christian is my name, and
Catholic is my surname. We are shipped by Baptism: If a tempest arise, cry
upon Christ, as the Apostles did, in a storm. If the Ship of our state be
ready to be swallowed up of the waves, fly unto Christ, if he be asleep,
awaken him with our cries. Concutitur fides, non excutitur; our faith may be
shaken, but never shaken off: therefore never cease, but cry, and cry aloud
that we may be heard, and being heard we may be delivered; and being delivered
we may glorify God. If the wind roar, Christ will rebuke it, and there shall
follow a great calm.

The fifth Use of the Doctrine is to take a review of the 5.
Text.

If this world be in experience to us a Sea of glass like unto Crystal; This
Crystalline resemblance deceives none but children and fools, who are deceived
with shows, shadows, and resemblances: But we are men endowed with reason
and experience. How are we fitted and furnished for our voyage? Where Is our
Tackles? Have we our Maine mast ready, that is to say, our faith, Heb. 11. 6.
without which it is impossible to please God? there is no walking or talking
with God without it. Where Is our Anchor and Sails, the Anchor of hope, and the
Sails of good works? What wind do we sail by? no wind under the cope of
heaven, but the gale of Christian Charity can arrive us at the Port of Heaven:
But sailing with that gentle gale, we need not fear any danger between this
and Heaven: For if a Whale by the way should swallow us, as it did Jonah; or a
wind called Euroclydon, which caused Paul's ship-wracke, at the Island then
called Melita, now Malta. In both dangers we should be safe, the Whale must
cast us upon the Land, and though the Ship were wracked, yet either by
swimming, or by some broken fragments of the Ship we should surely come safe to
Land.

The sixth use of this Doctrine, is of Discovery.

The holy Apostle gives every one in particular a Christian Caveat, Let him
that stands, take heed lest he fall. If my Text be a vision unto you, it has
discovered how slippery our station is: I beseech you therefore, when you have
forgotten me, yet remember my Text, and forget it not lest you slip, and
slide, and fall, like the house built upon the sands, the fall whereof was
great.

The Royal Preacher tells us, that God has set the Eccles. 3. 11.
world in the heart of man, to the end that he should consider the
deceitfulness and uncertainty of it. Shall a man love that which Christ never
prayed for? I pray for mine Elect, I pray not for the world: That is, I pray
Joh. 17. 9.
not for the Muck-worms and Mammonists of this world. And if the grace of God
be in us, we shall daily bless and thank God for the Lord Jesus, who has
given himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present
evil world, according to the will of God and our Gal. 1. 3, 4.
Father.

They that remember not this discovery of the world, have not known God, as
John testifies. The Mammonists Jo. 17. 25*
of this world cannot endure to hear or think of death, and yet when they
lose the things of this glassie world, they murder themselves with worldly
sorry: St. Paul is a witness of this truth, saying, The sorrow of 1 Cor. 7. 1.
this world causes death. The Mammonists and Muckwormes of this world brag,
boast, and pride themselves with the things of the world. Saint Paul was
otherwise minded; God forbid (says he) that I should pride my self in Gal. 6.
14.
ought or any thing in the world, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world.

It is no marvel that so few love Preachers, and gain so little or nothing by
the frequent and powerful preaching of Gospell-truth. Paul shows us the
reason 2 Timothy 4. 10.
why Demas forsook him, He was in love with this present world.

Saint Peter gives the Muck worms, Mammonists, and lovers of this world their
fearful, fatal, and final doom, 2 Pet. 2. 20.
showing first how we may escape the pollutions of this world; and then how
dangerous a relapse and backsliding is: For, says he, and puts the case thus;
If the Muck-wormes and Mammonists of this world have escaped the pollutions of
the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are
again entangled 2 Pet. 2. 20.
therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them then the beginning;
for then they become Wells without water, Clouds that are carried with a
tempest, to whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever. For the Lord
Christ Jesus sake (blessed Auditory, you holy people of the Lord) remember my
Text when you see not me, That our standing is very slippery upon this Sea of
glass. Remember that all the actions, transactions, and all the imaginations
of all the thoughts, purposes and intentions of all hearts are before the
Throne of God open and manifest to his sight and censure. The Lords Throne is
in heaven. His eyes behold, his eyelids try the children of men. The Lord
tries the righteous, but the wicked and him that loves violence his soul
hates. Oh remember that the Lords Throne is for ever; and that his Throne is
in heaven, and the earth is his pedestoole. Oh remember that thou swear not by
heaven, for it is the Throne of God: For he that swears by heaven, swears
by the Throne of God, and by him that sits thereon. Oh remember that we must
all appear before the Throne of Jesus Christ, and render our accounts. Oh
remember what favor the Lord Jesus has purchased for us, that we may come
boldly to a Throne of grace, and obtain mercy, and find grace to help in
time of need. Oh remember what the Lord Jesus has promised, even that his
Saints on earth sit with him in his Throne in heaven, even as he is sat down
with his Father in his Throne, Psalm. 11. 4. Heb. 1. 8. Mat. 5. 13. Heb. 4. 16.
Rev. 3. 21. And the God of heaven grant us the Protomartyrs vision, that we may
be so full of the Holy Ghost Act. 7. 55.
that we may have but one glimpse of the glory of God and Jesus standing at his
right hand, and that we may see this by the eye of our most precious faith. 7.


The seventh and last Use of the Doctrine is of motion, and we need not seek
far for a persuading and convincing motive, when we may but cast our eye
aside, and look upon this present and emergent occasion, which is both sad and
sorrowful, even the decease of a worthy servant to the Lord Jesus, whose sad
Elegy I shall endeavor to couch in as few words, as a passage of such moment
may be epilogized in, yet I hope so much as may awaken and stir us up to
consider where we are, and what our condition is here, unless it be so with
some of us, that we are asleep in death, and will not be moved nor removed from
our brutish slumber for whatsoever may be said or done.

I confess indeed, that this task had been fit to have been undertaken by
some strong, young, and skillful Champion of the Church, and not imposed upon
an old, weak one, an Emeritus miles, and almost a Silicernium, a man mere
Edentulus, one so far from eloquence, that has not so much as Elocution: But
cum nemini obtrudi potest, itur ad me, when I had not thirty hours time to
prepare my self to the business; yet rather then I would wave the memorial
of mine endeared friend, I resolved to undergo the censure of the judicious for
my plainness and simplicity.

Truly I could willingly take up the lamentable cry of Elisha for Eliah, He
crying, O my Father, my Father; and I lamenting, Oh my Brother, my Brother, the
Chariots of Israel and the horsemen of the same; for we have lost a chief
Chariot of our Churches, and an Horseman of the State, not of the Pike, but of
the Pen: But why should I, or any lament for him? of whom I may say to you all
that Distick which old Ennius said at his death, and that with a very little
alteration: Nemo illum lachrymis decoret, neque funera fletu Faxit. Cur?
volitat docta per ora virum.

I beseech you therefore have a little patience, and I shall only speak of
two passages: First, of his Christian living amongst us, and then of his sweet
leaving of us.

1. He was an Academique by birth, he was borne of Charlton upon Otmore.
honest parents within three miles of Oxenford, that Mother and Mistress of
Universities. His breeding up was also there, in Corpus Christi College, an
happy Seminary of very many famous and learned men; I mention one for all, that
is Doctor John Reinolds, whom I have heard styled beyond the Sea in the
Universities of Rostochium, Grominga and Leidon, thus, That famous Oxford of
Learning, worthy Dr. Reinolds.

2. As he grew up in years, he lived in favor with God and man in an
unreproveable holy life and conversation, honored for Arts and Sciences, and
had all Degrees that the University does afford, conferred upon him, Ex merito
and congrul, and condigni, both for his congruity of good manners, and
condignity of singular knowledge.

3. He was commended for a Chaplain to the Lord Edmonds, Leiger Legate, Lord
Ambassador for his sacred Majesty to the French King, where being at Paris he
disputed with the Jesuits, who albeit they contemned him for that he was of so
low a stature, yet admired him for his ready answers, and acute distinctions:
The Jesuits in that contempt of theirs had forgot what that ancient Father
Jerome said of Saint Paul, That although he was of a very little and low
stature, yet for all that, that Homo tricubitalis ascendit in coelum.

4. Some seven years sithence I had a son Fellow of Trinity in Cambridge, who,
being Traveller for his College, I kept at Paris for a time, habitu
dementissimo, in an uncouth habit, that he might not be known, and he resorted
daily, and had conference in the Cleremont with the Jesuits, and with them of
the College of Sorbon, but more intimately with Sirmundus and Petavius two
prime Jesuits, whom (as he has told me) remembered Doctor Featley oft-times
in their conference with reverentiall respect for his accute and ready
Disputation.

5. All his Sermons in a great Book in Folio show how sound he was at heart,
and discovers the plots of the Romish Sectaries in abundant manner. He also
made a Supplement to that worthy Knight Sir Humphrey Linde his Book, which he
left unfinished at his death, and vindicated that worthy Knight from the
scandals and aspersions of that Romish railing Rabshakeh.

6. He writ against Arminius, and all of his rabble, showing demonstratively
that their Tenets they had from the patches and pieces of Pelagius, that Welsh
Heretic, a Monk of Bangor, whose name was Morgan; for Pelagius in Latin and
Morgan in the Welsh Idiome signify both one and the same party, that is to
say, Mor-gan. Mor, is more, and began, is juxta mare, or Accola maris: One of the
Shires of South Wales being called La Morganshire, for that it is situate all
along the Sea coast.

7. He wrote a little Tract called The Sea-Gull, against a gross imposture,
and showed it me in Peter-house, what time I came to visit him there, with Sir
Geo: Sands, Knight, my Countryman of Kent, with others.

8. He wrote a little before his death against the Anabaptists, In Peter-house
Entitled, The Dippers dipped, sold by Rich: Royston in Ivic-lanc.
(a book seasonable and necessary for these unsettled, wanton times) and in the
very frontispice of that Book discovers fifteen species of them.

9. After his return out of France, he was recommended by the University of
Oxford, to Doctor Abbots, chief in the Church of England, to be his Chaplain;
where he loitered not, neither ceased to write against Rome, as often as ought
did peep out of the Press of the whore of Babylons trash. Neither was his
learning only Polemicall, but pious also, as his Meditations, and Hand maid to
Devotion do witness: and in that time he was Chaplain, he was the means
under God of the conversion of a Spanish Friar.

10. His nature was meek, gracious, affable, merciful, as appeared in his
sincerity toward the poor, when as he and I had the honor with Doctor Temple,
Doctor Bernard, Master Francis Tailor, and others, to be returned and joined in
the Commission for pioususes, with worthy Sir John Lenthall, Knight, and other
Justices of Surry.

11. His intimate acquaintance and mine were of thirty seven years duration;
and one and twenty years of which time we lived loving friends and neighbors
but 3. miles distant from one another.

12. We served together in three Convocations, to wit, the last two of King
James of precious memory, to whom we had the honor to be Chaplains in
Ordinary, and the first of King Charles kept at Oxford: All which time he
strongly set himself against all that had any smack of Rome, or Romish
superstition.

13. In which Convocations, five and forty of us, whereof he was chief, made a
solemn Covenant among our selves to oppose every thing that did but savor or
scent never so little of Pelagianisme, or Semi-Pelagianisme. And being elected
by the Clergy of Surrey for to be a Clerk of the Convocation for this present
Parliament, and hearing me make Protestation in the face of that Clergy, (an
occasion being offered) in these terms, Atque odi ego Arminianismum ac
Bellarminianismum, came and embraced me in his arms, and said, Well said good
brother, I protest and will swear the like.

Ay me, much more might be said of his Christian living and carriage amongst
us, but I hasten to his Christian leaving of us.

1. He was not idle, no not to his very end. After he came to Chelsey, by the
favor and grace of the Parliament, to take the air, for the cure of his
infirmities, I resorting unto him with a visit, found him very ill affected
with the Asthma in saburra stomachi, and with the Dropsy, which was on the
left side of his face, and was fallen into his left leg, insomuch as I
perceiving that he spoke with great shortness of breath, and much difficulty
to utter his words in our conference, I requesting him to spare his speech, I
related several passages unto him, which he much rejoiced in, and so it took
up the rest of the time I then stayed with him.

2. Within less then a week after this my visit of him there was a rumor
spread, that he was distracted of his wits, which when I heard I hasted to him,
as soon as he heard in his chamber that I was there, he speedily came down to
me into the Hall, where after embracings, as our manner was, we sat down and
talked.

Truly I durst not tell him what I heard concerning the rumor, but after a
little pause he told me himself of it in this manner, Wot you what Brother,
why, they say I am mad. Now absit, quoth I. He replied, My case is like
Sophocles the Tragedian, whose sons accused him for a mad man, and therefore
by their law he by the sentences of the Judges, had his Quietus est, no more to
trouble himself with the affairs of his state: Hereupon Sophocles that wrote
Tragedies even to extreme age, recited to the Judges a Tragedy of his own
making, which he had then in his hand, called Oedipus Coloneus, and asked the
Judges after he had read it unto them, Whether that Tragedy did scent or savor
any whit of madness or distraction; Upon this question the Judges changed
their minds and judgments, and quit him from the accusation of his unworthy
sons: So, says he, I shall leave such notes behind me, quoted in this time
of my weakness, for Nulla dies sine linea, no sober man will think or
conceive to be the meditations of a mad man.

3. But when I perceived that this rumor did somewhat affect him, I said, I
hope Brother this false report need not trouble you awhit, it is usual in this
sorry world for worthy men to hear of evil, when they are most busied in
goodness. How was that most judicious and sound Divine Mr. Calvin used by
foolish Surius, and malicious Bellarmine, who reported, that he dyed of the
Pthiriasis, the lousy evil, such as Herod dyed of, Act. 11. ult. when it was
but an ordinary disease called the Phthisis, or Tissick? How was Theodorus de
Beza used, when it was reported at Rome, that Beza was dead, and a little
before his death, that he had revolted and fallen back to Rome; yea, and a lying
Libell, printed at Rome, flew into all parts of Christendom, entitled, Tota
Geneva Catholizat. But Beza lived to answer that Pamphlet with a Treatise
called Tota Roma Critizat Cretizatque: For Paul in his Epistle to Titus, cap.
1. says, The Cretians were always liars, evil beasts, slow bellies, etc. and
cited unto them the Greek verse out of one of their own Poets, to manifest it,
(...). Yea, further, Saint Paul makes this verse Scripture, by his attestation
in the words following after it, (...) that is to say, this witness is true.

4. Further, he told me that he was writing still, and I encouraged him with
(...). Indeed the lively voice in preaching moves more, yet a man's writing
teaches more. For it gives a man leave to pause on it, and does not strike the
ears only, and then away: Words have wings; (...). Writing reaches those
that are far off, words those that are near: Words reach only to them that
are alive, writing to them that are unborne: He that speaks, profits his
own congregation; but he that writes, profits all: he that speaks, for
an hour; but he that writes, for ever. After this I departed from him, and
saw him no more, for within six days after I heard he was dead, and by
credentiall witnesses am assured, that he departed this life a sound and
faithful Protestant, living and professing at end, That he dyed in the Faith
and Religion of the Church of England, established by many Parliaments.

5. Thus he ran this course, and was faithful and painful unto death; and
God, I make no doubt, has washed his soul in the blood of the Lamb, and has
given him a Crown of life, which shall never be taken from him; I leave him in
the hands of his God, in whom he ever believed, and ever carefully served. I
now return to the gentle Reader, and certify thee, That he was ever the same
man, never dismayed with pains taking, not unlike the Palm Timber, which
never bends under never so great a lading, but rises upward against it; and
as the children of Israel shrunk not down under their labor howsoever it were
increased: Wherefore all that knew him, gave glory to God, saying, Surely the
Lord has done great things for him, and by him. I do not give him half his
due, as they know that knew him; yet happily more, then every one that knew us
both, do or may think fit to be spoken of him, but truth is truth whosoever is
the speaker, and of the abundance of the heart the mouth will utter, and the
Pen will write howsoever it be taken. I hope I shall not seem absurd to any
sober Reader, for in all I have spoken I yield nothing so to flesh and blood,
neither have I stretched my self beyond his measure, as the Apostle speaks.
Dr. Bucer called himself Pila fortunae, and surely this Doctor and I being
together at Oxford of the Convocation house in the first Parl. of K. Charles,
he falling sick there, and he himself, and others his friends, verily
conceiving, that his sickness had been the Plague of Pestilence, his falling
ill happening that very week wherein 5000. and diverse hundreds dyed in
London; he was constrained to quit Oxford, and to go for Lambeth: But how
harshly and hardly he was used by a great man of the Church that shall be
namelesse, Animus meminisse horret, luctuque refugit. For in a manner he was
driven thence, and we were constrained to get him an house, and two poor men
traveled with him, the one of the one side, and the other on the other side
did support and stay him up all the way, he traveling on foot pace, and so
brought him home to Lambeth. When we took our leave of him at Bullington
green, he said, Valete amici, nunc temporis ego, ut olim Bucerus sum pila
Fortunae, quae non est omnibus una: Orate pro me, rege, lege, grege. Iterum
valete in Domino Jesu: And so went on his journey, saying with the Psalmist,
Lord thou tellest my flittings, note these things in thy book, O Lord. And now
the world being not worthy of him, and he weary of it, is translated into
heaven, but so, that as Elias being carried up in a fiery Chariot, did let fall
his Mantle from him for Elisha's comfort and behoof; So our Featley burning
with zeal for Gods glory, and for the good of his Saints, has left behind
him several tokens of his Learning and love to diverse Friends.

Let God be honored for lending his Church such choice vessels, to carry
abroad his Name, and to publish his Truth against all opposers, and surely he
deserves of us to be had in everlasting remembrance.

But now I call my self to my remembrance, let me have your patience, and I
shall relate one more which I had almost utterly forgot. At my return out of
Germany I with four Merchants of Hamborough, and two of my people coming to
Embdea, took into our Wagon a Licentiatus in the Civil, or Imperial Law,
who was traveling to Grominga an University of East Frizeland, and by the way
I asking him, what other Universities he had seen, told me, that he came lately
from Paris in France, and taking out a Diary which he had about him, showed me
a little Breviate taken there of a Conference and Dispution between the Jesuits
of the Cleremont, and one Doctor Featley of the Church of England, a man that
his very Antagonists did give much respect unto; and moreover told me, that
most of the Universities thereabouts held him in such reputation and honor,
that in their Tables using to hang in their Schools of the most famous
Schoolmen, he, viz. Dr. Featley was numbered one; and coming to Grominga,
whiles we refreshed our selves there, and hearing us say, that we were bound
for Swartz-sluce, and so for Amsterdam that night; he therefore knowing I
could not stay, went into their Schools, and brought me a copy of the
School-mens names down to Dr. Featleys time, and gave it me, which I took
together with the title given unto him, and am bold to insert it in this place.
As,

Doctor Alexander Halensis Irrefragabilis. Doctor Aegidius Romanus
Fundatissimus. Doctor Bonaventura Seraphicus. Doctor Franciscus Mairoius
Illuminatus. Doctor Henricus Goethales Solennis. Doctor Johannes de Bacone
Resolutus. Doctor Johannes Duns Scotus Subtilis. Doctor Tho. Aquinas Angelicus.
Doctor Guliel. de Rubione Cherubicus. Doctor Daniel Featleius Acutissim.
acerrimusque.
There were some more in the List, but I took no more then would serve my
purpose; only among them I perceived there were three of our own Country
besides this Dr. Featley. The one was John Duns Scotus, born far in the North
near Scotland, whereupon his Antagonists called him Scot in scorn, conceiving
that because his tongue did (...), therefore his head must needs (...): but
they were marvellously mistaken, as it appeared to all the learned where he was
known.

2. Alexander of Hales, (the most ancient School-man) was born in
Glocestershire at a place which I well know, called Hales, near the Town of
Winchcomb and Sudley Castle, of old the inheritance of the Butlers, Earls of
Ormond, and now the Mansion House of the Brugges Lord Chandos.

3. Johannes de Bacone was sometime Fellow of Merton College in Oxford, and
afterward of Brazen nose College there.

Lastly, gentle Reader, give me leave now I have said what I had to say
touching this emergent occasion, that I may conclude with thee.

My Text is a Discovery on what manner of station we stand upon in this world.
Verily not one that heard it preached, or read it, unless he be like a sponge
which sucks in all both good and bad, of all that he hears and sees: Or like
an Houre-glasse that takes it in at one ear, and out at the other: Or like a
wine-sacke that retains the lees only, and lets the good wine run out; when
as they should be like those that sift the Corn, casting out that which is
nothing worth, and retaining the clean Corn; drinking in all good, as the
earth does a sweet shower of rain, or a drift of rain, which returns not
until it has fructified and made a barren ground fertile.

I know nothing more convincing to mortify a man, then to look upon the
Revelation of the Text, and be resolved what this world is, even a Sea of
glass like unto Crystal, as a Sea restless and tumultuous, casting up foam
and dirt. Oh that we had never known in our Country, how nearly the rage of
the Sea, and the tumultuousnesse of the people resemble one the other. He that
discernes it not in the Meditation on my Text, I refer him to read the 19.
Chap. of the Acts, wherein he shall observe in reading, 1. Of no small stir; 2.
Of men full of wrath, and crying out, Great is Diana of the Ephesians; 3. That
the City was filled with confusion; 4. A crying out, some one thing, some
another; 5. That the major part knew not wherefore they were come together.
This is the world, and I would to God we had not woeful experience thereof in
this kind. That Christian that does not see this as in a vision in my Text
unless he make further trial, I will tell him in fine a facetious relation to
shut up this sad Elegy that I heard often (as occasion was offered) by an
ancient Parliament Knight of Devonshire of one of his Neighbors, who being a
Copyholder of some 30. pound per annum, and dwelling by the Sea side near
Plymouth, observing that certain of his Neighbors trading to Sea, came home
gallant and rich, and lived in a very plentifully manner; he would to Sea that
he would, against all his friends minds; sold his Oxen, Horse, Sheep, his Land
for a time, made up a stock, left his wife and children with her father. To Sea
goes he, the Freight returned was Figs. A flaw of wind comes, the Ship is
endangered, they must lighten the Ship, as Paul's companions did, Act. 27. when
they were constrained to cast out the wheat which was their lading, into the
Sea: So here, over-boord go the Figs, this poor Yeoman cries out, O there
goes over-boord all my Oxen, and names them by their names. Home he comes
poor, his Neighbors pitying his folly, one lends him an Ox, another an
Horse: after some few years he picks up his crumbs again, and being at Plough
on a very fair and calm day, cries Hoe to his boy that did drive: He stands
still, looks on the Sea, for he dwelt (as I said before) at the very Sea side,
and saw it as smooth as a Smelt, and said, Wennom on you, how is it you look so
smooth? you long for more Figs do you? your smooth looks shall never deceive me
again I warrant you; drive away. Semblably twill be his dole, who will not
believe his God. Credit se formae, Deo non voluit* He trusted a few boards put
into form, and would not trust to the ever-living God. The very God of peace
and love sanctify you thoroughly out, and I pray God make us all wise to
salvation, and preserve us all, and our children in the saving grace of Jesus.

Amen.
FINIS.

