JOYFUL NEVVES FROM IRELAND, OR, A TRVE RELATION Of the great overthrow which
the English gave the Rebels before Droheda, sent in a Letter bearing date the
27 of February, to Sir Robert King Knight at Cecill House in the Strand.

And ordered by the Parliament to be Printed.

LONDON, Printed for John Frank, and are to be sold at his shop next door to
the Kings head in Fleetstreet, 1642.

Joyful News from Ireland, or a true relation of the great overthrow which
the English gave the Rebels before Droheda. etc.
Noble Sir,
IN my last to you, I signified to you, the difficulties which were like to
befall us by the releeving of Droheda, but God by his infinite mercy has freed
us (I may say miraculously) from that hazard: for when our men there were
driven to that extremity to eat horseflesh, Sir Henry Tichbourne sallied out
of the Town with only forty Musketeers, and forty Horse, and beat off four
hundred of the Enemies, killed above threescore of of them, recovered
fourscore Cowes and Oxen, and two hundred sheep; burned four towns, and
brought home two of their Colors; Besides, I must relate unto you Gods
abundant goodness unto us, in that the night before the relief and succors
which we sent by Sea from Dublin to them, should have entered into the Harbor
of Droheda, (which was strongly fenced over with a Chain and several boats)
there happened a storm which broke their chainer, and gave our men so free a
passage, as with little difficulty they came safely to the town. The Rebels
were gathered at Kilshalgham within seven miles of Dublin, above two thousand
men, where they were settled in a very strong wood. My Lord of Ormond carried
out part of our Army, and beat them out of that great strength (for they would
not come into the Champaine) and killed above a hundred of them, without any
considerable loss of our side, only Captain James Rochfort, a most gallant
and courageous gentleman. This was an act of great bravery, wherein Sir Charles
Coote did, (as he does always) beyond expectation, exposing his person to as
much danger as any man living could; and intruth he is a gallant man, full of
courage and good affections, and deserves great encouragement from that side.
Our soldiers are in great want of money, which causes a general want of all
other necessaries, yet notwithstanding God has infused such courage into them
(for undoubtedly it is his work) that they think there is no danger so great,
but they may attempt it.

Colonel Munke is arrived here with my Lord Lieutenants Regiment of fifteen
hundred foot, and Sir Richard Greevill with near four hundred Horse, which
puts much heart into us, and makes us look big upon our neighbors, yet we
grieve we cannot be able to releeve our friends in other parts; but I hope
when our full succors shall come, we shall not only defend this place, but
add comfort to our poor distressed friends abroad.

The enemy though their numbers be very great, even beyond belief, yet their
hearts begin to faint, and I believe they repent their furious madness.

If my Brother be in London, I pray you impart this Letter to him, I would have
written to him, but that I thought he was at Chester, or on his way thither; By
the next he shall hear from me at large, and I shall likewise trouble you.

I must now only tell you, that I thank you for your care of those things
which concern me, and that I am, Sir, your most affectionate servant,

Feb. 27. 1641. Ed. Loftus,

Martii 7mo.
It Is this day ordered forthwith That this Letter be published in Print,

H. Elsing Cler. P. D. Com.

