(...) OR The Vocal Music IN PSYCHE, WITH THE INSTRUMENTAL Therein Intermixed.

To which is Adjoined The INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC IN THE TEMPEST.

BY MATTHEW LOCK, Composer in Ordinary to His MAJESTY, and Organist to the
QUEEN.

Licensed 1675. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

LONDON, Printed by T. Ratcliff, and N. Thompson for the Author, and are to be
Sold by John Carr at his shop at the Middle Temple Gate in Fleet Street,
MDCLXXV.

To the Most Illustrious PRINCE JAMES Duke of MONMOUTH.
May it Please Your Grace.

THe AUTHOR having made PSYCHE Yours by his Humble Dedication, these
Compositions with the same Submission Prostrate Themselves to your Grace, who
gave them Life by your often hearing them practiced, and encouraged and
heartn'd the almost heartless Undertakers and Performers.

MY LORD,

I humbly beg your Graces Pardon for this Presumption, and your Favor that I
may Subscribe my self,

Your Graces, Most Obliged Humble Servant,

MATTHEW LOCK.

PREFACE.
THat Poetry and Music, the chief manifesters of Harmonical Fancy, should
produce such discordant effects in many, is more to be pityed than wondered at;
it being become a kind of fashionable wit, to Peck and Carp at other Men's
conceptions, how mean soever their own are. Expecting therefore to fall under
the Lash of some soft headed, or hard hearted Composer (for there are too many
better at finding of faults then mending them) I shall endeavor to remove
those few blocks which perhaps they may take occasion to stumble at.

The first may be the Title, OPERA. To this I must answer, That the word is
borrowed of the Italian; who by it, distinguish their Comedies from their
Opera's; Those, a short Plot being laid, the Comedians according to their
different Theams given, Speak, and Act Extempore; but these after much
consideration, industry and pains for splendid Scenes and Machines to
Illustrate the Grand Design, with Art are composed in such kinds of Music as
the Subject requires: and accordingly performed. Proportionable to which are
these Compositions (the Reader being referred to the Book of the whole work for
the particular Excellencies) Their nature for the most part being soft, easy,
and, as far as my ability could reach, agreeable to the design of the Author:
for in them you have from Ballad to single Air, Counterpoint, Recitative, Fuge,
Canon, and Chromatick Music; which variety (without vanity be it said) was
never in Court or Theater till now presented in this Nation: though I must
confess there has been something done, (and more by me than any other) of this
kind. And therefore it may justly wear the Title, though all the Tragedy be not
in Music: for the Author prudently considered, that though Italy was, and is
the great Academy of the World for that Science and way of Entertainment,
England is not: and therefore mixed it with interlocutions, as more proper to
our Genius.

Another may be, The extreme Compass of some of the parts. To which, the Idols
of their own imagination may be pleased (if possible) to know, that he who
Composes for Voices, not considering their extent, is like a Botching Stult,
who being obliged to make Habits for men, cuts them out for Children. I suppose
it needs no Explication.

The next may be, The extravagancies in some parts of the Composition, wherein
(as among slender Grammarians) they may think fixed rules are broken: but they
may be satisfied, that whatever appears so, is only by way of Transition from
Time or half-Time Concords, and covered by the extreme Parts: or to suspend the
Ear and Judgment, for satisfying both in the Cadence.

Then, against the performance, They sing out of Tune. To which with modesty it
may be answered, He or she that is without fault may cast the first Stone: and
for those seldom defects, the major part of the Vocal performers being ignorant
of Music, their Excellencies when they do well, which generally are so, rather
ought to be admired, then their accidental mistakes upbraided.

The next (and I hope the last) is, or may be, Why after so long exposed, is it
now Printed?

First, to manifest my duty to several persons of Honor, who expected it.

Secondly, to satisfy those Lovers and Understanders of Music, whose business
or distance prevent their seeing and hearing it.

Thirdly, that those for whom it was Composed (tho perchance ignorant of the
Quality) by the quantity may be convinced, the Composing and Teaching it was
not in a Dream; and consequently, that if the Expense they have been at, do not
answer their big Expectation, the fault's their own, not mine.

Finally, (by way of Caution) to prevent what differences may happen between
them, and whoever they may have occasion to employ for the future, that on
either side there be no dependence on good Words or Generosity.

The Instrumental Music before and between the Acts, and the Entries in the
Acts of Psyche are omitted by the consent of their Author, Seignior Gio.
Baptista Draghi. The Tunes of the Entries and Dances in the Tempest (the
Dancers being changed) are omitted for the same reason.

The Errata's in this Impression, which are not many, the Printer desires
pardon for, it being his first attempt in this kind; and hopes if it fall into
ingenious hands they will Correct them: and is confident what he shall undertake
for the future, shall be as free from Mistakes, as any thing that has hitherto
been published.

Sold by John Carr, Musical Instrument-seller, at his Shop in the Middle Temple
Gate in Fleet Street.
ALL sorts of Books, and Ruled Paper, Songs, and Aires Vocal and Instrumental
ready pricked, Lutes, Viols, Violins, Gittars, Flageletts, Castinets, Strings,
and all sorts of Musical Instruments,

And also Mr. Tho. Salmon's Essay to the advancement of Music, by casting away
the perplexity of different Cliffs, price 2s.

Also Melothesia, or certain general Rules for Playing upon a continued Bass;
with a choice Collection of Lessons for the Harpsicord and Organ of all sorts,
never before Published; all carefully reviewed by Mr. Matthew Lock, Composer in
Ordinary to His Majesty, and Organist to the Queen.

ACT. I.
PSYCHE retiring from her Fathers Court, is thus entertained by PAN, and his
Followers.
^ GReat Psyche Goddess of each Field and Grove, whom every Prince and every
God does Love.: To your all-Commanding hand Pan yields his Sovereign command.
For You the Satyrs and the Fawns shall nimbly trip it over the Lawns: For You
the Shepherds Pipe and sing, and with their Nymphs Dance in a Ring. Fruits
shall they bring, and pretty Garlands weave, and shall the Meads of all their
sweets bereave.


PAN. ^ Vertumnus and Flora their Tributes shall pay, and to Psyche shall
Dedicate this happy day. The Sylvans and Dryads shall dance all a round, And
PSYCHE dread Queen of this place shall be Grownd. My loved Syrinx and Echo
shall Sing and shall Play, and to Psyche shall Dedicate this happy Day.
Retornello. The Nymphs. And Pan who before all here did command, ^ now resignes
all his Empire to Psyches fair Hand.


Chorus and Violins. Retornello. ^ And Pan who before all here did com -- mand,
now resigns all his Empire to Psyches fair hand. The second time repeat this
soft, Retor. and Chorus again. And Pan who before all here did com -- mand, now
resigns all his Empire to Psyches fair hand. And Pan who before all here did
com -- mand, now resigns all his Empire to Psyches fair hand. mand, now resigns
all his Empire to Psyches fair hand.


After a Rustic Dance of Sylvans and Dryads, follows the Song of Eccho's
planted at Distances within the SCENES.
^ Loud. Soft. Softer. Great Psyche shall find no such pleasure as here, no
such pleasure as here, as here. Loud. Soft. Softer. Loud. Where her dutiful
Subjects shall all stand in awe, shall all stand in awe, in awe. Her frowns and
her Where her dutiful Subjects shall all stand in awe, shall all stand in awe,
in awe. Her frowns and her Her frowns and her Soft. Softer. Loud. Smiles shall
give us all Law, shall give us all Law, all Law. And from us of Rebellion she
Smiles shall give us all Law, shall give us all Law, all Law. And from us of
Rebellion she Smiles shall give us all Law, shall give us all Law, all Law. And
from us of Rebellion she ^ need have no fear. She need have no fear, no fear.
How happy are those that inhabit this need have no fear, She need have no fear,
no fear. How happy are those that inhabit this need have no fear, She need have
no fear, no fear. How happy are those that inhabit this need have no fear, She
need have no fear, no fear. How happy are those that inhabit this place where a
sigh is never heard, where no falsehood we meet, where each single heart a --
place, where a sigh is never heard, where no falsehood we meet, where each
single heart a -- place, where a sigh is never heard, where no falsehood we
meet, where each single heart a -- place, where a sigh is ne -- re heard, where
no falsehood we meet, where each single heart a -- grees with the face: no
Climate was ever so calm and so sweet, was ever so calm and so grees with the
face: no Climate was ever so calm and so sweet, was ever so calm and so grees
with the face: no Climate was ever so calm and so sweet, was ever so calm and
so grees with the face: no Climate was ever so calm and so sweet, was ever so
calm and so ^ sweet. So calm and so sweet, so sweet. sweet. So calm and so
sweet, so sweet. sweet, so calm and so sweet, so sweet. sweet, so calm and so
sweet, so sweet.

To beauteous Psyche all Devotion is due, all Devotion is due, is due,
Our humble Offerings she will not despise she will not despise, despise.
Since the Tribute is offered from hearts that are true from hearts that are
due, are true.
From hearts all devoted to Psyches bright eyes, to Psyches bright eyes, bright
eyes.
Chorus.
How happy are are they, etc.
Song of Envy and Furies.
Envy. ^ Nvy against Psyche such black storms shall raise, as all her powerful
beams shall never dispel beyond her strength, beyond her strength shall be her
suffering;


First Fury. ^ Her to the greatest misery I Will bring, and e're I Have done I Will
send her down to Hell. In Hell too late you shall re -- lent; and all your
arrogance repent.


Second Fury. ^ We Furies will torment your soul,


First. ^ and you shall weep and howl,


Second. ^ and at the sight of every snake tremble and quake.


Envy. ^ There you shall weep eternally, and to the quick shall feel each lash
we give. There you shall always wish to die, and yet in spite of you shall
always live.


Chorus. ^ There you shall always wish to die, and yet in spite of you shall
always live. There you shall always wish to die, and yet in spite of you shall
always live. There you shall always wish to die, and yet in spite of you shall
always live. There you shall always wish to die, and yet in spite of you shall
always live.


Simphony at the descending of Venus in her Chariot drawn by Doves.
Venus. ^ With kindness I your Prayers receive, and to your hopes success will
give. I have with anger seen Mankind adore your Sisters beauty, and her scorn
deplore, which they shall do no more, for their Idolatry ^ I Will so resent, as
shall your wishes to the full content. Your Father is with Psyche now, and to
Apollo's Oracle they will go, her Destiny to know. I by the God of wit shall be
obeyed, for wit to beauty still is subject made. He Will so resent your cause and
mine, that you will not repine, but will opplaud the Oracles design.


The end of the First ACT.
ACT. II.
The Song of Procession in the Temple of APOLLO, accompanied with Wind and
Strung Instruments.
^ Let Us to Apollo's Altar now repair, and offer up our Vows and Prayer, Let Us
to Apollo's Altar now repair, and offer up our Vows and Prayer, Let Us to
Apollo's Altar now repair, and offer up our Vows and Prayer, Let Us to Apollo's
Altar now repair, and offer up our Vows and Prayer, Let us in -- quire fair
Psyches Destiny. Let us in -- quire fair Psyches Destiny. Let us inquire fair
Psyches Destiny. Let us inquire fair Psyches Destiny. The Gods to her will sure
propitious be, if Innocence and beauty The Gods to her will sure propitious he,
if Innocense and beauty The Gods to her will sure propitious be, if Innocense
and beauty The Gods to her will sure propitious be, if Innocense and beauty ^
may go free. may go free. may go free. may go free. The Gods to her will sure
propitious be, if Innocense and beauty may go free. The Gods to her will sure
propitious be, if Innocense and beauty may go free. The Gods to har will sure
propitious be, if Innocense and beauty may go free. The Gods will sure to her
propitious be, if Innocense and beauty may go free. soft. Go on, and to the
Altar lead, and to the Altar lead. Go on, and to the Altar lead, and to the
Altar lead. Go on, and to the Altar lead, go on and to the Altar lead, and to
the Altar lead. Go on, and to the Altar lead, and to the Altar lead.


Chief Priest. ^ This hallou'd ground let no man tread, who is defiled with
whordom or with blood, lest all our Prayers should ^ be for them withstood. Let
none be present at our Sacrifice, but of an humble uncorrupted mind; The God
for wicked men will all our Vows despise, and will to all our wishes be unkind.


After a short Ceremony at the Altar, the Chief Priest goes on. ^ Son of Latona
and great Jove, in Delos born, which thou so much do love. Great God of
Physic and of Archery, of Wisdom, wit and Harmony, God of all Divinations too:
To Thee our Vows and Prayers are due, To thee our Vows and Prayers are due.


Chorus. ^ To thee our Vows and Prayers are due, to thee our Vows and Prayers
are due. To thee our Vows and Prayers are due, to thee our Vows and Prayers are
due. To thee our Vows and Prayers are due, to thee our Vows and Prayers are
due. To thee our Vows and Prayers are due, to thee our Vows and Prayers are due.


Chief Priest. ^ Thou gav'st the cruel Serpent Python death, depivd'st the
Giant Tyrion of his breath. Thou did the monstrous Cyclops too destroy, who
formed the Thunder which did kill thy Son.


Chorus. ^ Thou light of all our Life, and all our Joy, our offering with our
hearts are all thy own. Thou light of all our Life, and all our Joy, our
offerings with our hearts are all thy own. Thou light of all our Life, and all
our Joy, our offerings with our hearts are all thy own. Thou light of all our
Life, and all our Joy, our offerings with our hearts are all thy own.


Chief Priest. ^ By Sacred Hyacinth thy much loved Flowers, By Daphne's memory
we thee Implore thou would be present at our Sacrifice, and not our humble
Offerings despise.


Chorus. ^ And we for ever will thy praise advance, thy praise advance. Thou
author of al light and heat, let Pipes and Timbrels And we for ever will thy
praise advance, thy praise advance. Thou author of al light and heat, let Pipes
and Timbrels And we for ever will thy praise advance, thy praise advance. Thou
author of al light and heat, let Pipes and Timbrels And we for ever will thy
praise advance, thy praise advance. Thou author of al light and heat, let Pipes
and Timbrels sound, and let them dance, each day our worship we will repeat, each
day our worship we will repeat. sound, and let them dance, each day our worship
we will repeat, each day our worship we will pepeat. sound, and let them dance,
each day our worship we will repeat, each day our worship we will repeat. sound,
and let them dance, each day our worship we will repeat.


After a Dance of Priests with Cymbals, Bells, and Flambeaux, etc. The Chief
Priest with his Attendants mingle with the Dancers, Singers, and Instruments in
the following Song.
^ TO Apollo, to Apollo our Celestial King, we will Io Paean sing, Io Paean,
Io Paean, To Apollo, to Apollo our Caelestial King, we will Io Paean sing, Io
Paean, Io Paean, To Apollo, to Apollo our Caelestial King, we will Io Paean
sing, Io Paean, Io Paean, To Apollo, to Apollo our Caelestial King, we will Io
Paean sing, Io Paean Io Paean, Soft. Io Paean will we sing, Io Paean, Io Paean,
Io Paean, Io Paean, Io Paean will we sing, Io Paean will we sing Io Paean will
we sing, Io Paean, Io Paean, Io Paean, Io Paean, Io Paean will we sing, Io
Paean will we sing Io Paean will we sing, Io Paean, Io Paean, Io Paean, Io
Paean, Io Paean will we sing, Io Paean will we sing Io Paean will we sing, Io
Paean, Io Paean, Io Paean, Io Paean, Io Paean will we sing, Io Paean will we
sing

The Scene being changed to a Rocky Desert full of dreadful Caves and Cliffs;
Two despairing Men, and Two despairing Women enter, and Sing as follows.
First Man. ^ BReak, break distracted heart, there is no cure for love, my
minds too raging calenture.


First Woman. ^ Sighs which in other Passion vent, and give them ease when they
lament, are but the Bellows to my hot desire.


Second Woman. Second Man. ^ And tears in me not quench, but nourish Fire.


First Man. ^ Nothing, nothing can mollify my grief, or give my Passion a
relief. Love is not like our earthly Fire, You soon may smother out that flame,
concealing does increase desire; no opposition Love can tame.


2d Woman. ^ Despair in Love transcends all pain; lost hope will never return
again.


First Woman ^ In Hell there is no such misery as now oppresses me; I this one
pang alone would change for S syphus his stone.


Second Man. ^ I would the torments which I feel, change for Ixion's wheels.


Second Woman. ^ The Vulture should on me for ever feed, rather than thus my
heart for love should bleed. Oh Tantalus! for thy eternal Thirst, I m more on
Earth than thou in Hell accursed.


First Woman. second Woman. 1st. Man. 2d Man. ^ Was ever grief like mine? like
mine? like mine? like mine?


First Man. ^ Was ever grief like mine? was ever ever grief like mine?


2d. Woman. ^ Was ever grief like mine? was ever grief like mine?


2d. Man. 1st. Man. ^ Was ever grief like mine? Was ever grief like mine? Was
ever grief like mine.


2d. Woman. 1st. Woman. 1st. Man. 2. Man. ^ nothing, but death, but death can
cure our misery. I Will die, I Will die, I Will die.


Chorus. 1st. Man. ^ Nothing but death, but death can cure our misery. Nothing
but death can cure our misery.


2d. Woman. ^ Nothing but death, but death can cure our misery. Nothing but
death can cure our misery.


2d. Man. ^ Nothing but death, but death can cure our misery, but death can
cure our misery.


1st Man. ^ Nothing but death can cure our m -- se -- ry, but death can cure
our misery.


ACT. III.
The Scene is the Palace of Cupid, where (after a Dance by Cyclops) Vulcan
enters, and sings the following Song.
^ YE bold sons of Earth that attend upon Fire, make have to the Palace least
Cupid should stay; you must not be lazy when love does require; for Love is
impatient, and brooks no delay, when Cupid you serve you must toil and must
sweat, redouble your blows, and your labor repeat. Retornello.

The vigorous young Cupid's not with laziness served
He makes all his Vassals their diligence show,
and nothing from him but with pains is deserved,
The brisk youth that falls on, and still follows his blow
is his favorite still. The considerate fool
He as useless lay by for a pitiful Tool.

Retornello again, and then go on. 1st. Cycl. 2d Cycl. ^ This Palace is
finished, and the other shall be made fit for his small Deity. But Fire makes
us Retornello. Choleric and apt to repine, unless vou will give us some Wine.


Chorus. ^ With swinging great Bowls let us refresh our dry Souls, and then
we will to work with a Clink clink With swinging great bowls let us refresh our
dry souls, and then we will to work with a Clink, clink, With swinging great
bowls lets refresh our dry souls, and then let us to work with a Clink clink,
With swinging great bowls lets refreh our dry souls, and then we will to work with
a Clink clink, Clink, but first let us drink, but first let us drink. Clink,
but first let us drink, but first let us drink. Vulcan Clink, but first let us
drink, but first let us drink. Let each take his Clink, but first let us drink,
but first let us drink.


2d. Cyclop. ^ Bowl then, and hold to his nose, then let him redouble his
blows; Naystint us not so, but let each take his two, and twice as much then
can we do. Retornello. Chorus and Retorn. as before. With swinging great Bowls,
etc.


Vulcan. Ye slaves will you never from Drunkeness refrain?
Ulysses will catch you again.

4th. Cyclop. Ulysses is a Dog, were he here he should find,
We Would scorn him, and drink our selves blind.

Retor. Cho. and Retor. as before. 1st. Cyclop. 2d. Cyclop 3d. Cyclop. 4th.
Cyclop ^ Here Harpes to you. Here Brontes to you, and so take each Cyclops his
due. To thee Steropes. Pyraman to thee*


Omnes. Retor. soft. ^ And thus in our cups we will agree. And thus in our cups
we will agree. And thus in our cups we will agree. And thus in our cups we will agree.


Chor. and Retorn. as before, and then go on. Vulcan. Be gone, or great Jove
will for Thunderbolts stay,
The World grows so wicked each day.

2d. Cyclop. He has less need of Thunder than we have of Wine,
We Will drink though great Jove should repine.

Cho. and Retorn. again as before, and then go on. The Song at the Treat of
Cupid and Psyche.
^ AL Joy to fair Psyche in this happy place, and to our great Mr: who her
shall embrace; may never his love nor her beauty decay, but be warm as the
spring, and still fresh as the day.


Chorus ^. No Mortals on Earth ever wretched could prove, if still while they
No Mortals on Earth ever wretched could prove, if still while they No Mortals
on Earth ever wretched could prove, if still while they No Mortals on Earth
ever wretched could prove, if still while they Soft. Lived they would be always in
Love, if still while they lived they would be always in love, Lived they would be
always in love, if still while they lived they would be always in love. Lived
they would be always in love, if still while they lived they would be always in love,
Lived they would be always in love, if still while they live they would be always in
love. There Is none without love ever happy can be; without it each brute were
as happy as we. The knowledge men boast of does nothing but vex, and their
wandering reason their minds does perplex.


Chorus again as before, then go on. ^ Loves sighs and his tears are mixed with
delights; But were he still pestered with Loves sighs and his tears are mixed
with delights; But were he still pestered with Cares and with frights: Should a
thousand more troubles a Lover invade, By Carer and with frights: Should a
thousand more troubles a Lover invade, By One happy moment they would fully be
paid. One happy moment they would fully be paid.


The Chorus again as before, then go on. ^ Then lose not a moment but in
pleasure employ it, for a moment once lost will Then lose not a moment but in
pleasure employ it, for a moment once lost will Then lose not a moment but in
pleasure employ it, for a moment once lost will always be so; Your Youth
requires Love, let it fully enjoy it, and push on your always be so; Your Youth
requires Love, let it fully enjoy it, and push on yorr always be so; Your Youth
requires Love, let it fully enjoy it, and push on your Chorus. Nature as far as
'twill go. No mortals on earth ever wretched could prove, if still while they
Nature as far as 'twil go. No mortals on earth ever wretched con'd prove, if
still while they Nature as far as 'twil go. No mortals on earth ever wretched
could prove, if still while they No mortals on earth ever wretched could prove,
if still while they ^ lived they would be always in love, If still while they lived
they would be always in love. lived they would be always in love, if still while they
lived they would be always in love. lived they would be always in love. If still while
they livd' they would be always in love. lived they would be always in love. If still
while they lived they would bealways in love.


Song and Dance of the Salij sung in the principal Street of the City, near a
Triumphal Arch, and accompanied in the Chorus with Kettle-Drums, Wind
Instruments, Violins, etc.
1 st. S'nger ^ LEt us lowdly rejoice, with glad heart and with Voice, for the
Monster is dead, and here is his head, for the Monster is dead, and here is his
head,


Chorus. ^ Let us lowdly rejoice with glad heart and with voice, for the
Monster is dead, he is dead, and here is his head. Let us lowdly rejoice with
glad heart and with voice, for the Monster is Let us lowdly rejoice with glad
heart and with voice, for the Monster is Let us lowdly rejoice with glad heart
and with voice, for the Monster is is dead, and here is his head, for the
Monster is dead, and here is his head, he is dead, he is dead, and here is his
head is dead, and here is his head, for the monster is dead, and here is his
head, he is dead, he is dead, and here is his head is dead and here is his head,
for the monster is dead, and here is his head, he is dead, he is dead, and here
is his head is dead and here is his head, for the monster is dead and here is
his head, he is dead, he is dead, and here is his head


2d. Sing'r. ^ No more shall our Wives be afraid of their lives, nor our
Daughters by Serpents miscarry.


1 st. Singer. ^ The Oracle then shall bestow them on Men, and they not with
Monsters shall marry.


Chorus again as before, then go on. Praesul sings. ^ Great God of Wars to thee
we offer up our Thanks and Prayer: For by thy mighty Deity Triumphant
Conquerors we are.


Chorus. ^ Thour't Great a -- mong the Heavenly Race. Thour't Great a -- mong
the Heavenly Race. Thourt Great among the Heavenly race. Thour't Great a --
mong Instruments. Instruments. the Heavenly Race. Thour't great among the
Heavenly Race. Thour't great among the Heavenly race. And Thour't great among
the Heavenly Race. Thour't great among the Heavenly race. And And And ^ only to
the Thunderer, the Thunderer giv'st place. And only to the Thunderer, the only
to the Thunderer, the Thunderer giv'st place. And only to the Thunderer, the
only to the Thunderer, the Thunderer giv'st place. The Thunderer, the
Thunderer, the only to the Thunderer, the Thunderer giv'st place. The
Thunnerer, the Thunderer, the Thunderer giv'st place. And only to the
Thunderer, the Thunderer giv'st place. Thunderer giv'st place. And only to the
Thunderer, the Thunderer giv'st place. Thunderer giv'st place. And only to the
Thunderer, the Thunderer giv'st place. Thunderer giv'st place. And only to the
Thunderer, the Thunderer giv'st place.


Praesul. ^ Jove is thy Father, but does not exceed thy Deity on any sore.
Thou, when thou will can make the whole world bleed; And then can heal
their breaches by thy power. Verse.


Chorus. ^ It Is thou that must to Armies give success, Thou that must Kingdoms
It Is thou thou that must to Armies to Armies give success, Thou that must
Kingdoms It Is thou that must to Armies* to Armies give success, Thou that must
Kingdoms too It Is thou that must to Armies give success, Thou thot must
Kingdoms too too with safety bless, Thou, thou that must bring, and then must
guard their Peace. too with safety bless; Thou that must bring, and then must
guard their Peace. with safety bless; Thou thou that must bring, and then must
guard their Peace. wiith safety bless; Thou, thou that must bring, and then
must guard their Peace. Thou, thou that must bring, and then must guard their
Peace. Thou that must bring, and then must guard their Peace. Thou, Thou that
must bring, and then must guard their Peace. Thou, Thou that must bring, and
then must guard their Peace.


After a Warlike Dance, the Praesul goes on. ^ While we to Mars his Praises
sing, A Horse the appointed Victim bring.


While Mars and Venus are meeting in the Air, etc. the following Symphony is
Played. ^ Symphony.

Song of VENUS and MARS.
Venus. ^ GReat God of War if thou do not despise the power of my victorious
eyes, reject this Sacrifice: My Deity they dis -- respect, my Altars they
neglect, and Psyhce on -- ly they Adore, whom they shall see no more. Have I
yet left such Influence on your heart, as to enjoin them, you would take my
part? by some known token punish their offense: and let them know their
Insolence.


Mars. ^ SO much your Influence on me remains, that still I glory in my Chains:
whatever you com -- mand shall be a Sovereign law to me; whatever you command
shall be a Sovereign law to me. These saucy Mortals soon shall see, what it is
to disrespect your Deity? To show how much for you I them despise; Since they
with Venus dare contend. Ye powers of Hell your Furies send, and interrupt
their Sacrifice, and interrupt their


Venus. ^ Ye Powers of Hell your Furies send, and interrupt, interrupt their
Sacrifice. Sacrifice. Ye Powrs of Hell your Furies send, and interrupt their
Sacrifice. and interrupt their Sacrifice. and interrupt their Sacrifice.


ACT. IV.
The Scene is a stately Garden, etc.
1st. Voice ^ LEt old age in its Envy and Malice take pleasure,
^ in business that is sour, and in hoarding up Treasure,

2d. Voice. ^ by dullness seem wise, be still peevish and nice,
^ and what they cannot follow, let them rail at as Vice.

3d Voice. ^ Wise youth will in Wine and in Beauty delight,
^ will revel all day and will sport all the night.

4th. Voice. ^ For never to love would be never to live;
^ and love must from Wine its new vigor receive.

Chorus. ^ For never to love would be never to live, and love must from Wine
its new vigor receive, and For never to love would be never to live, and love
must from Wine its new vigor receive, and For never to love would be never to
live, and love must from Wine its new vigor receive, and For never to love
would be never to live, and love must from Wine its new vigor receive, and
Soft. Love must from Wine its new vigor receive, and love must from Wine its
new vigor receive Love must from Wine its new vigor receive, and love must
from Wine its new vigor receive. Love must from Wine its new vigor receive,
and love must from Wine its new vigor receive. Love must from Wine its new
vigor receive, and love must from Wine its new vigor receive.


1st. Voice. How insipid were life without those delights,
In which lusty hot youth spend their days and their nights,

2d Voice. Of our nauseous dull being we too soon should be cloyed,
Without those blessed Joys which Fools only avoid.

3d. Voice. Unhappy Grave Wretches, who live by false measure,
And for empty vain shadows refuse real pleasure;

4th. Voice. To such fools while vast Joys on the witty are waiting,
Life's a tedious long journey without ever baiting.

Chorus. To such Fools, etc.

The same Song composed another way for Two Voices.
1st. ^ LEt old age in its envy and malice take pleasure;
^ in business that is sow'r and in hoarding up Treasure,

2d. ^ by dullness seem wise, be still peevish and nice,
^ and what they cannot follow let them rail at as vice;

1st. ^ Wise Youth will in Wine and in Beauty delight,
^ will Revel all day, and will sport all the night:

2d. ^ For never to love would be never to live,
^ and Love must from Wine its new vigor receive.

Chorus. ^ For never to love would be never to live,
and love must from Wine its new vigor receive.
For never to love would be never to live,
and love must from Wine its new vigor receive.
For never to love would be never to live,
and love must from Wine its new vigor receive.
For never to love would be never to live,
and love must from Wine its new vigor receive.

1st. ^ How insipid were life without those delights
^ in which lusty hot youths spend their days and their nights;
^ Of our nauceous dull being we too soon shall be cloyed,
^ without those blessed Joys which fools only avoid,

2d. ^ Unhappy grave wretches who live by false measure,
^ and for empty vain shadows refuse real pleasure,
^ to such fools while vast Joys on the witty are waiting,
^ Life's a tedious long journey without ever baiting.

Chorus. ^ To such Fools, while vast Joys on the witty are waiting,
^ Life's a tedious long journey without ever baiting
^ To such fools, while vast joys on the witty are waiting,
^ Life's a tedious long journey without ever baiting
^ To such fools, while vast joys on the witty are waiting,
^ Life's a tedious long journey without ever baiting.
^ To such fools, while vast joys on the witty are waiting,
^ Life's a tedious long journey without ever baiting.

Song of the God of the River, and two Nymphs, to PSYCHE, when she is going to
cast her self into the River.
^ STay, stay, this act will much defile my streams;
^ with a short patience suffer these exteems:
^ Heaven has for thee a milder Fate in store,
^ the time shall be when thou shall weep no more:

1st. Nymph. 2d. Nymph. ^ And yet fair Psyche never shall die. She never shall
die. She never shall die. Retornello. Cho. with Voices and Instruments.


1st. Nymph. ^ And yet fair Psyche never shall die, but shall be crowned with
immortality.


2d Nymph. ^ And yet fair Psyche never shall die, but shall be crowned with
immortality. And yet fair Psyche never shall die, but shall be crowned with
immortality. ^ Soft. but shall be crowned, but shall be crowned with
immortality, but shall be crowned but shall be crowned with Im -- mor -- ta --
li -- ty. But shall But shall be crowned with Im -- mor -- ta -- li -- ty. but
shall Retornello. but shall be crowned with Im -- mor -- ta -- li -- ty. be
crowned with Im -- mor -- ta -- li -- ty. be Crowned with Im -- mor -- ta -- li
-- ty. Venus approaches, from her anger* fly, more troubles yet your constancy
must try: ^ But the happy minute will e're long arrive, that will to you
eternal freedom give,


1st. Nymph. 2d. Nymph. ^ and yet fair Psyche never shall die, She never shall
die, She never shall die. Retornello. Chorus as before. And yet fair Psyche,
etc. And yet fair Psyche, etc. And yet fair Psyche, etc. And yet fair Psyche,
etc. Omit the Retornello at the end of the Chorus the last time.


ACT. V.
Devils and Furies.
1st. Devil, 1st. Fury. ^ To what great distresses proud Psyhce is brought.
^ Oh the brave mischiefs our malice has wrought.

2d. Dev. ^ Such actions become the black Subjects of Hell.
^ Our Great Prince of Darkness who e're will serve well,

3d Devil, 3d Fury, ^ must to all Mortals, nay Gods show their spite,
^ and in horror and torments of

4th Devil, 4th. Fury, ^ must to all Mortals, nay Gods show their spite,
^ and in horror and torments of

5th. Devil. ^ others delight,
^ must to all Mortals, nay Gods show their Spite.

6th. Devil. ^ others delight,
^ must to all Mortals, nay Gods show their Spite.

1st. Devil. ^ must to all Mortals, nay Gods show their Spite.

Chorus. ^ And in horror and torments of others delight,
^ and in horror and torments of others delight.
^ And in horror and torments of others delight,
^ and in horror and torments of others delight.
^ And in horrors and torments of others delight,
^ and in horrors and torments of others delight
^ And in horrors and torments of others delight,
^ and in horrors and torments of others delight
^ And in horrors and torments of others delight,
^ and in horrors and torments of others delight
^ And in horrors and torments of others delight,
^ and in horrors and torments of others delight

2d. Stanza in Furies and Devils. 1st. Devil. 1st Fury. ^ HOw cool are our
Flames, and how light are our Chains,
^ if our craft or our cruelty Souls enough gains:

2d. Devil, 2d. Fury, ^ In perpetual Howlings and Groans we take pleasure;
^ Our joys by the Torments of others we measure.

3d. Devil. 3d. Fury. ^ To rob Heaven of the fair is our greatest delight,
^ To darkness seducing the Subjects of light.

4. Fury. ^ To rob Heaven of the fair is our greatest delight:
^ To rob Heaven of the fair is our greatest delight.
^ To darkness seducing the Subjects of light.

1st Devil, ^ To rob Heaven of the fair is our greatest delight.
^ To rob Heaven of the fair is our greatest delight.

The Six part Chorus again with these words, (viz.) ^ To Darkness seducing the
Subjects of Light.

1st. Devil. 1st. Fury. ^ How little did Heaven of its Empire take care,
^ to let Pluto take the rich, witty, and fair;

2d Devil. 2d. Fury. ^ whilst it does for it self Fools and Monsters preserve,
^ the blind, ugly, and poor, and the Cripple reserve.

3d. Devil, 3d. Fury. ^ Heaven all the worst subjects for it self does prepare,
^ and leaves all the best for the Prince of the Air.

4th. Dev. ^ Heaven all the worst Subjects for it self does prepare,
and leaves all the best for the Prince of the Air.

5th. Dev. ^ Heaven all the worst Subjects for it self does prepare.

6th. Devil, ^ Heaven all the worst Subjects for it self does prepare.

1st Devil, ^ Heaven all the worst Subjects for it self does prepare.

Six part Chorus again as before with these words, (viz.) ^ And leaves all the
best for the Prince of the Air.

Pluto and Proserpine. PLUTO. ^ REfrain your Tears, you shall no Prisoner be,
Beauty and Innocence in Hell are free. The're Treasons, Murders, Rapes, and
Thefts, that bring Subjects to the Infernal King. You are no Subjects of this
place. A God must you embrace; from Hell to Heaven you must translated be,
where you shall live and love, where you shall live and love, and love, ^ and
love to all eternity. Psyche draw near, with thee this present take, which
given to Venus soon thy peace will make; of Beauty it is a treasury Divine, and
you're the messenger she did design. Lost beauty this will soon restore, and
all defects repair: Mortals will now afresh her beams adore, and ease her mind
of Jealousy and care; of jealousy and care; No beauty that has this can e're
despair, no beauty that has this can e're despair. ^ Here are your Sisters who
your life once sought, Their malice to this place has Psyche brought, And
against her all these dire mischiefs wrought; for ever, ever, ever, here they
shall remain, and shall in hell suffer eternal pain; But Psyche shall a Deity
embrace; but Psyche shall a Deity embrace.


Proserpine, ^ Be gone fair Psyche. Be gone fair Psyche from this place, from
this place,


PLUTO, ^ Be gone fair Psyche, Be gone fair Psyche from this place, from this ^
place, for Psyche must the God of love embrace, for Psyche must the God of love
embrace. for Psyche must the God of love embrace, for Psyche must the God of
love embrace.


Chorus. ^ Be gone fair Psyche from this place, for Psyche must the God of Love
embrace. Be gone fair Psyche from this place, For Psyche must the God of Love
embrace. Be gone fair Psyche from this place, for Psyche must the God of Love
embrace. Be gone fair Psyche from this place, for Psyche must the God of Love
embrace. For Psyche must, Psyche must the God of Love embrace. fo Psyche must
the God of Love embrace. for Psyche must the God of Love embrace. for Psyche
must the God of Love embrace.


Symphony at the Descending of Apollo and the Gods.
APOLLO, ^ Assemble all ye Heavenly Quire,
^ and let the God of love inspire
^ your heart with his caelestial Fire;
^ the God of Love's a happy lover made,
^ his ravishing delights shall never fade.

Cho. ^ with his immortal Psyche,
^ he now tastes those Joys which ought to be
^ as lasting as eternity.
^ with his immortal Psyche,
^ he now tastes those joys which ought to be
^ as lasting as eternity.
^ with his immortal Psyche,
^ he now tastes those joys which ought to be
^ as lasting as eternity.
^ with his immortal Psyche,
^ he now tastes those joys which ought to be
^ as lasting as eternity.

APOLLO ^ Come Lovers from the Elizian Groves
^ and ce -- le -- brate these Heavenly Loves.

^ Simphonie. Apollo. Begin this on the close note. ^ Bacchus with all your
jolly Crew,
^ come re -- vel at these Nuptials to.

^ Play the Symphony again, and then go on. Apollo. ^ Come all ye winged
Spirits of the Skies,
^ and all your mighty Deities,

Simphonie as before, making the close Note a Minum. Apollo. ^ You all his
humble Vassals are,
^ and in his Joys should have a share.

^ Chorus again as before, and then go on. 1st. Eliz. Lover. ^ On Earth by
unkindness are often destroyed,
^ the delight in the Nymphs who are so much adored,
^ or else the poor Lovers by kindness are cloyed;
^ so faint are the pleasures their love does afford.

2d. Eliz. Lover. ^ With sighs and with tears,
^ with jealousies, rie's and with fears,
^ the wretched poor lover, poor lover is lost,
^ for a few moments pleasure his liberty's lost.

3d. Eliz Lov, ^ How short are those moments yet how few they employ!
^ Ah! how short, ah how short is the Joy?

2l. 3d. ^ Ah how short, Ah how short is the Joy?
^ Ah how short? Ah hw short is the Joy?

The Three Elizian Lovers. Chorus. ^ Thus wretched Mankind does suffer below,
^ and in Heaven each Godhead to Cupid does bow:
^ Thus wretched Mankind does suffer below,
^ and in Heaven each Godhead to Cupid does bow:
^ Thus wretched Mankind does suffer below,
^ and in Heaven each Godhead to Cupid does bow:
^ But Love, Love was never perfect till now.
^ But Love, Love was never perfect till now.
^ But Love, Love was never perfect till now.
^ But Love, love was never perfect till now.
^ But Loee, Love was never perfect till now.
^ But Love, love was never perfect till now.

Symphony at the descending of Jupiter, Cupid and Psyche.
^ After a Dance of the Elizian Princes, MARS sings as follows. ^ Behold the
God of mighty power,
^ we all have felt, and all adore.
^ To him I all my Triumphs owe,
^ To him my Trophies I must Yields;
^ He makes Victorious Monarchs bow,
^ and from the Conqueror gains the field.

Chorus. ^ He turns all the horrors of war to delight,
^ and were there no Love, no Hero's would fight,
^ and He turns all the horrors of war to delight,
^ and were there no love, no Hero's would fight,
^ and He turns all the horrors of war to delight,
^ and were there no love no Hero's would fight,
^ and He turns all the horrors of wars to delight,
^ and were there no love, no Hero's would fight,
^ Play the. Chorus for a Retorn. then go on upon the Close Note. ^ were there
no Love no Hero's would fight.

MARS. Honor to Battle spurs them on,
Honor brings Power when War is done.
But who would venture Life for Power?
Only to govern dull Mankind?
It Is Women, Women they adore!
For Beauty they those dangers find.

CHORUS. No Princes the toils of ambition would prove,
or dominion would prize if it were not for love
Or Dominion, etc.

^ Play the Chorus again for a Retornel. then go on, on the close Note.
Bacch's. ^ THe delights of the Bottle, and the charms of good Wine
^ to the power and the pleasures of Love must resign,
^ though the night in the joys of good drinking be past,
^ the debauches but till the next morning will last;
^ But Loves great debauch is more lasting and
^ for that often lasts a man all his life long.

Cho. ^ But loves great debauch is more lasting and strong,
^ for that often lasts a man all his life long.
^ But loves great debauth is more lasting and strong
^ for that often lasts a man all his life long.
^ But loves great debauch is more lasting and strong,
^ for that often lasts a man all his life long.
^ But loves great debauch is more lasting and strong,
^ for that often lasts a man all his life long.

Play the Chorus again for a Retornello, then go on to the Tune of the former
Stanza. Bacchus. Love and Wine are the Bonds that fasten us all,
The World but for these to confusion would fall.
Were it not for the pleasure of Love and good Wine,
Mankind for each trifle their lives would resign.
They Would not value dull life, nor would live without thinking,
Nor would Kings rule the world, but for Love and good drinking.

Chorus. They Would not, etc. Nor would not, etc.

^ Retornello. Apollo. ^ But to love, to love the great union they owe:
^ All in earth and in Heaven to his scepter must bow.

Grand Chorus and Dance, with all the Instruments. ^ All joy to this Caelestial
pair who thus in Heaven united are. It Is a great thing worth All Joy to this
Caelestial pair who thus in Heaven united are. It Is a great thing worth All Joy
to this Caelestial pair, who thus in Heaven united are. It Is a great thing
worth All Joys to this Caelestial pair, who thus in Heaven united are. It Is a
great thing worth All Joy to this Caelestial pair, who thus in Heaven united
are. It Is a great thing worth All Joy to this Caelestial pair, who thus in
Heaven united are. It Is a great thing worth Heavens design, to make Love's
Power with Beauties join. Heavens design, to make Loves's Power with Beauties
join. Heavens design, to make Love's Power with Beauties join. Heavens design, to
make Love's Power with Beautie's join. Heaven's design, to make Love's Power with
Beauty join. Heaven's design, to make Love's Power with Beautie's join.


FINIS.
The Instrumental Music used in the TEMPEST.
The First Music.
^ soft. loud. ^ INtroduction.

^ Galliard,

^ Gavot,

The end of the First Music.
The Second Music,
^ SArabrand.

^

^ LILK.

The end of the second Music.
Curtain Tune in the TEMPEST,
^ soft. louder by degrees, Violent,

^ soft. loud. soft and slow by degrees,

^

The First Act Tune.
^ Rustic Air.

The Second Act Tune,
^ MI noit.

The Third Act Tune.
^ COrant,

^

The Fourth Act Tune,
^ A Martial Jigge.

^

The Conclusion,
^ A Canon 4 in 2.

^

FINIS.

