BAULME FOR BLEEDING ENGLAND AND IRELAND.

OR, SEASONABLE Instructions, for persecuted Christians: Delivered in several
Sermons, By NICHOLAS LOCKYER Master of Arts.

ISA. 8.17. J will wait upon the Lord, which hides his face from the house of
Jacob, and I will look for him.

LONDON, Printed by E.G. For John Rothwell, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the sign of the Sun in Paul Churchyard, 1643.

IT is ordered this fifteenth day of April, Anno Dom. 1643. By the Committee of
the house of Commons in Parliament concerning Printing, that this Book
entitled (Useful instructions for these evil times) be printed by John
Rothwell.

John White.

portrait of Nicholas Lockyer

The true Effigies of the truly Religious Learned and Iuditious Divine de
Nichola Lockyer Mr of Arts

Note well the Substance of this shade so bright
Lo it is a Burning and a shining Light
Neat Elegant Sententious High and Rare
Lo all his Sermons and Expressions are
R D To the Persecuted Christians In England and Ireland.
BLeeding hearts, you are honored to be Baptized, with Christ's Baptism, to
pledge your dear Savior, in his own Cup. Count not, call not honor misery.
The Wine in your Cup, is red indeed, but without dregs to you; Christ's drinking
first has sweetened it well to Saints. Wrath makes sufferings, misery: let the
World Houle in their wounds but do not you complain: let them curse as
bearing Caines mark, but do you bless God and glory, as bearing the marks
of the Lord Jesus. Love in the bottom of a bloody Cup, and the deeper a man
drinks, the sweeter. Christ powers out love upon the Soul, when the body
powers out blood upon the truth. A Spirit of glory, is a bleeding Christians
glory. There is inward advancement, when outward debasement. The soul is in
Heaven, when the body is in Hell for Christ. Was that a Dungeon or a Heaven, in
which they sang so sweetly at midnight? Gods dealings are righteous, when Man's
dealings are wicked: a man might bear suffering upon this ground, that he
has sinned; but how sweetly may they be borne, when sugared with love, and all
sin forgiven? Ye prisoners of hope: what is your hope? What say you of
Englands night? Will it ever have day? Would my Soul could enter into your
secrets: Would I could participate with you, in some of your
Prison-enlargements. If you find a Heaven in Hell, what will your Heaven be?
Now in the I Will of Patmos, A patrimoniis jam ejecti.
What says GOD to your souls concerning these bleeding Jlands? Many
Christians for whom you have bled, are now a flying from you, to save their
Blood; write after them ye bleeding hearts; preach your Prison-experiments,
the faith and hope of your Bonds, and conclude like Paul, Remember our Bonds,
and Wounds for Christ and you; Surely if there be any Bowels, this will bring
them back to die with truth and you. I believe the Resurrection of thy dead, O
bleeding England. Your Graves shall open, ye Prisoners of hope, and your
buried glory and honor shall return to you. Truth shall outlive tyranny.
Righteousness shall wash her Feet, in the Blood of the wicked. Pride shall be
dethroned; and shame shall be her pavilion. Your integrity, ye
Parliament-worthies, Christ will vindicate; your great pains and labor of
love, Christ will return to you and yours. Steel good resolution, and Christ
will carry you through all opposition. You are great sufferers, I would this
little Book might give some refreshment to you, together with the rest of Gods
suffering ones. Bleeding Ireland, God also is with thee, and will be. Thy Land
is full of murderers, but not too many for God to overcome. God is as just, as
Man is cruel: cruelty will cut its own Throat, when thou can do nothing to
evade it. Venomous Creatures die in thy land, by a providence from Heaven,
which reason cannot reach. God and the whole Creation, (...).
fight against barbarous bloodshed. Thy naked Women and Children, which
mourned, starved and died in winters past, will fight against the monsters
which stripped them, in ^ummers to come, when thou want men, money, and means
to do it. The Vipers which have gnawed out thy guts are got into our Bowels
too, that we might afford thee no relief; Moriendo Christia^o, vivit Christus.
but God will relieve, both thee and us. 'Twas a cursed crew which brought Gall
and Vinegar, when Christ cried Eloi, Eloi. England had helped thee Ireland, had
^^t not been for this cursed Generation; but the blood of both Kingdoms will
be upon them. Christ was not overcome, when killed. Many may die but Christ's
cause in these poor envi^d islands, will live. Manage your bloody business
bravely, ye Soldiers of Christ in England and Ireland, the Lord of Hosts ^s
with you. Your sufferings are many, your pay will be great. Two Heavens are
before you one for you and posterity here, another peculiarly adorned for
sufferers unto blood, C^^ant an p^nn slagellum.
above. flinch from Christ and his cause, and lose both. Vale.

Yours in continual Prayers, Nicho. Lockyer.

To the Reader.
REader, there are some Errata's here and there, throughout this Book,
notwithstanding all our diligence to prevent them; but yet such, as with thine
own observation, of what preceds, (...).
and follows, and with a spirit of love, may easily be set right to thy
understa^ding. Be not a mouth murderer, and kill two at once, my Name and thy
Soul. What is heartily presented to thee, heartily receive, and bless Christ
and the next Author, who is at Prayer for a blessing, upon this Work and thee.

Nicho. Lockyer.

The Table.
THE Power of God relieves weak man. Page. 2. Isa. 8.17.
The property of Divine power. p. 3. 4. etc. Strengthening power, peculiar to
Christians. p. 6. Divine power works in man to an eternal end. p. 3. Power
working relievingly, walk humbly, p. 9. Cheerfully. p. 11, 12 Faith should
kill fears. p. 13. What loses divine strengthening. p. 16. The evil which
follows upon it. p. 18. Power relieving is lost sometimes, only according to
our apprehension. p. 20 The wicked will never beat the righteous out of heart.
p. 25. What al might in a Christian is. p. 28. 29. etc. How differing from that
power which Christ had and used here. p. 32. 33. The Devil allmighty in some.
p. 36. How all might comes into the heart. p. 38. 39 The happiness of an
Almighty Christian. p. 41. 42. etc. Divine power Works gradually in a
Christian. p. 45. When power works lowest in a Christian, it works above the
ruining power of sin. p. 49. Power working according to higher or lower
degrees, we should observe how it works in us. p. 51. All pains spring from
one, that we have so little of God. p. 52. How to know whether divine power
works strong enough to save. p. 54. 55. Divine power should be acknowledged as
it works, with thankfulness. p. 57. 58. Apprehension should make due
impression, upon affection. p. 61. Apprehension is placed sentinel. p. 62. The
danger of soule-powers mis-working. p. 63 How apprehension comes to work
Divinely upon affection. p. 67. 68. etc. We are to call divine power as it
works. p. 73 Sinners will not do so, when power, works against them. p. 76.
How divine power has wrought in the hearts and hands of Christians in England,
to be admired. p. 80. 81. Divine things so mentioned, as to make best
impression upon the soul. p 84. God speaks as one in Heaven, to make us hear
so. p. 90. Souls not stirred by the word, dead. p. 91. The funeral of the
dead, rung. p. 93. 94. Accents, Aspirations of truth must have their place in
the heart. p. 97. The goodness of the heart is, as the word makes full
impression p. 98. Christ has a glorious dominion in dying man. p. 103. Things
which give being, give beauty, and being. ibid. Power works in order to
majesty. p. 106. In order to its own absolute nature. p. 108. Much
communicable, and many have nothing; this pitiful. p. 109. Glorious power, how
miserable twill make a sinner, when set against him. p. 113. 114. What hinders
power, from working gloriously in the soul. p. 117. Love admired that makes
two Heavens. p. 122. 123. Patience defined. p. 126. What patience does
presuppose. p. 132. 133. How much, patience is now needed in England. p. 136,
137. Principles of Patience suited to Englands state. p. 139, 140. etc. What
all Patience, is. p. 150. 151 etc. Persons exhorted to examine their patience,
to know how eminent in it. p. 158. Many grow very wicked for want of much
Patience. p. 161. The evils of impatience. p. 162. 163. etc. How all
impatience is overcome. p. 168. 169. Gospel-sufferings sometimes of great
duration. p. 171. What men should expect in the way to heaven. p. 178. Three
sorts of hearts which cannot suffer long p. 179. 180. etc. Several things
showing Englands sufferferings, likely to be long. p. 183. 184. etc. Suffering
though long, should be managed with a spirit of joy. p. 196. Such spoken to,
who can make no joy out of suffering in a good cause; the causes of it laid
open. p. 203. 204. etc. God would have a Christian, never without joy. p. 209.
Encouragements to suffer long, in the cause of Christ now in England. p. 211.
212. etc. A Christian covets all Christ. p. 21 It Is a lost man which observes
not which way the strength of his soul works. p. 220. 221. A soul in
extremity cannot last long. p. 223. Joy makes an ascending frame of heart p.
225. Christmas joy jostl'd against by Christ p. 231. 232. etc. The property of
bad joy. p. 234. 235. etc. Thankesgiving defined. p. 2^8. What thankesgiving
does presuppose. p. 245. Whose work it is properly, whose naturally. p. 247.
248. Three things broadly speak Englands ingratitude. p. 250. 251. etc. The
remedy of ingratitude. p. 257. 258. etc. Grace, a Creation. p. 263. Sinners
utter undoing-time come, p. 273. Principles demonstrative of soul ruined p.
274. And ruinous. p. 277. The hindrances of creating and making power. p. 281.
Love singles out her objects. p. 285. Man cannot argue Gods love to him from
outward things. p. 294. The properties of an electing love. p. 295. 296 What
persons Christ chooses to work upon, he makes through work in. p. 304. The
properties of a man fitted for wrath. p. 314. 415. Fitting grace for Heaven,
has its means, season, p. 320. A double fitness for Heaven. p. 325. The
highest mercies are Communicable. p. 329. How man's highest felicity is
communicable. p. 339. 340. Multitudes demonstrated to have no heart to go to
Heaven. p. 347. 348. etc. Jnterest in Heaven, should comfort against all
losses. p. 351. The greatest favors come most immediate. p. 356. Hope should
not fall respecting great things, when external means fall. p. 364. Heaven
the inheritance of Saints. p. 375. Demonstrations of profane holiness. p. 379.
380. etc. The birth of Sanctity. p. 386. 387. Heaven resembled by light. p.
392. 393. God does lively shadow out to man here, what will be his condition
hereafter. p. 414.
FINIS.
USEFUL INSTRVCTIONS FOR THESE Evil Times.
COLOSS. 1.11. Strengthened with all might according to his glorious power,
unto all patience and long suffering with joyfulnesse.


PRayer in this Verse is still continued, and still suited to present and
imminent distress. The state of these Christians, was a suffering state, and
like to be more (as our state now is) and therefore Prayer is made for
answerable relief; for divine strengthening; forbearing and suffering grace;
for shoulders suitable to every burden. Strenthened with all might according to
his glorious power, unto all patience and long suffering with joyfulnesse.

The terms of this Text are very weighty, I shall therefore deal with them
one after another: their difficulty lies Et in materia and in voce, both in
matter and word; yet one hand, on which we lean, will carry us thorough both,
to Gods glory and man's edification. I begin with the first word, --
Strengthened, (...) Kobur animi innuit.
etc. It points principally at the spirit of man, which is the bearer up of
all: a man is what he is, from the fortitude of his inward man; according to
this scope and sense the Apostle explains himself, using the same word to the
Ephesians (...), etc. And applying it to the inner man. That he would grant you
according to the riches of his glory, to be [strengthened with might by] his
spirit in the inner man.

God exercises a relieving power in a Christian; As he does exercise a
creating power, whereby he does make a Christian; so he does a strengthening
and relieving power, whereby he does maintain a Christian; -- who are kept by
(...) the power of God, 1 Pet. 1.5. It Is the same word, with this in my Text,
(...) strengthened with all might, etc. Divine power makes, and then it upholds;
it makes Esse, and then it makes porro esse; it brings forth, and breed's up;
it travells in birth, once, and again; My little children of whom I travel in
birth [againe. This travaling in birth again, Gal. 4.19.
is strengthening and relieving power, to maintain and finish the first birth;
the same that is here spoken of in my Text. Strengthened, etc.

Divine power as it works toward a Christian, has its peculiar properties;
Proprietates potentiae Divinae.
as it works toward a Christian, it works tenderly; such a power working
about the soul, works, and works again; it makes lambs, and then it makes
arms to carry lambs, to preserve them to be sheep for the fold of Christ, --
He shall gather the Lambs with his Arms, and carry them in his Bosom, and
gently leading those that are with young. Isa. 40.11. As there is a carring and
a leading power exercised about a Christian; all these sweet expressions, aptly
point out this in my Text, to wit, that strengthening and relieving power which
carries along and finishes the first work strengthened with all might, etc.

The word of God which effectually works also in you that believe. 1 Thessalonians.
2.13. An effectual power subjected to work for man, works and works again,
and never leaves working till it has effected its work, which is,
preservation unto salvation; grace unto life. This power works, and creando and
corroborando creating and strengthening; it maks the soul pass from strength
to strength, till it be above all opposing strength, and expired safe and
complete into that breast from whence it was first breathed. This expression --
effectual power, is an expression of dreadful importance; it notes that
divine power works sometimes by halves; not effectually; Something toward
birth, and toward a man-child, some pangs and throws, but makes but an
abortive at last; some things toward relief, but sinkes and dies, and lets
that which seemed to be come to nothing; but when it works effectually, it
makes grace and carries on that grace to glory: it makes a Christian, and then
it strengthens him to abide so to death, against deadly opposition
Strengthened] with all might according to his glorious power, unto all patience
and long suffering with joyfulnesse.

Finally Divine power as it works about (...)
to the utmost, as you have it expressed, which is very lively: Heb. 7.25.
it lays out it self to the furthest; all vires Divinoe potentiae are
stretched, and made to bear and carry to eternity, to carry unto death,
thorough death, beyond death, above death, as that mighty expression is, Ps.
48.14. (...) Supra mortem.
To resolve it self into everlasting Arms; that is, a power subjected to use;
a Divine power subjected to humane use everlastingly; so as to leave no place,
no possibility of miscarrying to a Christian, let what will be or can be, on
this side death, in death, or beyond death, so long as the soul is. Divine
power is so subjected to work about a Christian as not to lose its work; no
whit of its work; what ever loss he made otherwise upon the man, as a man:
troubles may make loss upon a man as a farmer, as a Gentleman, as a Nobleman,
but not upon man, as a Christian; power is subjected so to work, as to carry
up, carry on, carry out all its own works about the soul, in perpetuum. To all
eternity.

Paul was confident of the Phillippians perseverance in the truth, being
confident of this very thing, that he which has begun a good work in you,
will perform or finish it, unto the day of Jesus Christ. Phil. 1.6.

Media explicandi.
is peculiar to Christians; its the same power which began a good work,
continued working to finish it. Where Divine power works not creatingly, it
works not relievingly; hence it is that one which is not a Christian indeed,
holds not out always to be a Christian in show: hence it is likewise that
Christ says I have lost none, but a lost Creature; one that was never found; a
child of perdition, lost from the beginning, a child of wrath, unto wrath, had
he ever had grace in truth, I would have strengthened it, and kept it -- those
which thou gave me I have [ kept, etc. Ioh. 17.12. Keeping power waits about
those that the Father has given to the Son, and none else; all others are
lost, and to go for lost.

Strengthening power works toward Holy Father keep through thine own Name
those whom thou have given unto me, that they may be one as we are, etc.
Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me
through their word. Ioh 11. and 20. The state of a Christian is botom'd in
blood; founded in Christ's death, made out by life, by Prayer and intercession;
all is merited by Christ's blood; particulars are drawn out and conferred, upon
solemn intercession. Christ's intercession ceased not, when he was on Earth;
the requests above mentioned (I conceive) to be a continuation of solemn
intercession, which must last, till all the Saints be above all wants. Heb. 7.25
He ever lives to make intercession for them; he that lived on Earth was an
intercessor; he that dyed, lives again and goes on with that work, which he
began, from the womb of the morning, from the beginning of love breathing upon
fallen Adam: he that lives, prays; he has done so from the first Saints, and
will do so to the last on Earth; he makes all Prayers of Christians, Gods
rest, and man's relief; pleasing to God, and strengthening to man: Strenegthned
with all might, etc.

which work in sinners, are to finish sin, and bring sinners to their place.
To a condition miserable as near the Devil as may be.
So all the powers which work in Christians subduing power, strengthening
power, leading, keeping, carrying, bosoming power, are to perfect grace, and
bring them to glory. Holy Father keep through thine own Name those whom thou
have given me that they may be one as we are: the end of keeping power, Ioh.
17.11.
(you see) is a complete state; that they may be one as we are. Divine powers
work shapingly, to the highest and happiest similitude, as their end, and
never leave working and shaping this way, till they have made the felicity of
the elect together, the nearest and the liveliest emblem of the felicity of the
Trinity which each person has in and with each other.

declines so will ye faint and do ill. 2 Cor. 4.1.
As we have received mercy we faint not, says our Apostle. Our strength and
supply of spirits, is from relieving mercy; if this be suspended, we faint. As
we are humble, so are our relieving receptions, as those are, so we faint not:
as we have received, so we faint not: our strenth is by daily bread, by daily
divine concurrence, this suspended, your life and livelihood are gone,

best state is vanishing; your gold rustes; your grace, needs grace; your state
as a Christian, needs strengthening power to carry it along: this House upon
the Rock will else fall too, when storms and winds beat. Esse et porro esse
sunt ex gratia.
Mercy and compassion began your blessed state, this must finish it; walk as
those that have all your fortune, at the feet of mercy. A Christian is
strongest indeed, when he is weakest in his own sense: When I am weak then am I
strong. Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in mine infirmity, that the
power of Christ may rest upon me. 2 Cor. 12.
It Is great matter of gladness and lightsomenesse To a good heart.
to be divested of proud cumbersome self: as a Christian can look over all,
that is in him, and be nothing so is he in capacity of the strenthening power
of God, to rest upon him.

Walk cheerfully. Troubles be out of weakness were made strong, etc.
Relieving power how ever it find a Christian below his work, Heb. 11.34
yet it leaves him above it; -- out of weakness were made strong. What can you
say weak souls, more then this, that you are weak, very weak? why it is
meet that you should say of your selves as you are, and it is as meet that you
should say of divine power as it is. You are far below your work, your work
is farther below that divine power which waits upon you. Come what can, can
come worse then what did to these worthies, or find men worse? They were
weak, yea, weakness, and yet out of weakness made strong, Debiles in
abstracto.
and carried through all bravely, scorning base deliverance.

Our Seas rage, likely to rage more; let them rage never so much, so much that
ye be cast into them, out of your vessels, as Jonas was; yet a relieving power
shall bosom and belly you, and cast ye up Ionas'es, Christians, yea, better
Christians then ye were. There be two things in relieving power, which if
considered, methinks, should comfort any discouraged when you need it, and as
you need it, When] thou passest thorough fire; and when] thou passest thorough
water, the^ divine power will be with thee; when] thou art weak then thou shall
be strong; when thou art in the Furnace, then will Christ be there; relieving
power shall work opportunely, that is double relief: thou shall have an arm
stretched out to rescue, as soon as set upon; a breast work raised, as soon as
shot at. Likewise, divine power shall work as you need it; it shall yield as
much strength as your burden requires stands by; let Lions gape never so wide,
you shall stop their mouths; let fire be made never so violent; you shall
quench the violence of it. The seasonable and all-sufficient working of Divine
power, me thinks, should take off all fear and objections in Christians.

Christians chide your fears, kill them with Faith in this point, they will
kill you else, and do you more hurt then the things you fear can possibly
do. There is a relieving power subjected to wait upon you, and you are
subjected to wait upon it, and your enouragement is certain relief. -- they
that wait on the Lord, shall renew their strength, etc. You have a spring of
power running toward you, nothing can dam it up but unbelief, this will cut
the throat of a Samson, and make him as weak as other men: Sampsons hair off,
and he is deadly weak; faith in Gods power out, and Gods people are as fainting
and fearing as other men which have no such advantage attending them.

God exercises strengthening power, and he does it but upon condition of
faith, which is as reasonable and as cheap a condition as can be; but the more
reasonable, the worse, if not observed; a man's soul shall sink with a
witness, that leans not upon his allowed relief. It Is David's expression
often, my soul had fainted, had I not put forth Faith. The soul never sinkes,
let troubles be never so weighty, but when it lets go God Manage faith in that
power which is subjected to serve you, and you can never be made miserable.

file-leaders, to help guide them that are behind you. Christ bears lambs in
his bosom, so must you. Those that cannot relieve themselves, you should. The
strong should support the weak. We should comfort others, with our comforts;
Christians should share in one another sweetest mercies: sweet meats should
be given about. What you have from Heaven, some may have from you. Divine power
works strengtheningly, sometimes more immediately, sometimes more mediatly, the
wind blows where it lists, and as it lists, it is always welcome to a
distressed soul. Sometimes a lame Christian has a staff of support and
comfort more immediately out of Gods own Hand -- thy] rod, and thy] staff
comfort; at another time more mediatly; he has a staff, legs and eyes, lent
him by a friend as Job speaks. Soule-strength the better used, the longer
kept, take heed you lose not the great blessing of assisting and strengthening
power.

1. Want of compassion will endanger the loss of it. 2. Sinning against it,
will certainly lose it. I am afraid of this above all, I see Christians fall
into consumptions apace, by fellowship with sin; as weak as water, as if there
were no power of God at all in them, which is a most doleful condition. How
weak is thine heart (says the Lord to the Jews) seeing thou do all these
things, Ezekiel. 16.30.
the work of an imperious whorish Woman? So may I say of many Christians; how
weak are your hearts, seeing you do all these things, play the worldlings as
do others, play the time-servers as do others? you can turn and wind your
lives and consciences as you list, ah Lord, what strength of God is in such
souls. You have lost assisting power, by your looseness, and baseness, you
had been better have lost your lives, yea, ten thousand lives; you had been
better have died any death, and never have seen that day nor hour in which you
began to decline, to sin, to greive and lose that power and strength of God
which wrought in you.

Unwarranted courses strip the heart of Divine strength. Light will have no
fellowship with darkness: God does not strengthen to sin. Man stripped of
God, is deadly weak; he runs to any course. When God leaves a man, man
becomes a beast. Why you are so easily drawn to sin you may see by this
point; the power of God is gone from your souls; your Delilah has cut off your
strength; your exorbitancy to this and that, has checked, grieved, and killed
the working of a lively power.

This heavy stroke, is not a first but a last stroke for thine unrulinesse;
Sampson had many brunts, about his Delilah before that deadly brunt, that gave
him up. Thou have had other punishments for thy Delilah without, ere it came to
this heavy stroke within; had thou made a right use of them, this last and
deadliest stroke might have been saved. Ah! forsaken souls, it is a thousand
pities that things had not been timely looked to, ere they came to such an
inward extremity, to such a soule-blow, to such a spirit-wou^d. Things thus far
run, a man recovers not in have; it may be not all a man's life, to be as he
was, and to enjoy divine power working so lively and sweetly as it did.
Repenting and doing a man's first works is a likely way to do well, but
whether it shall rise to be as well with the soul as 'twas, that rests wholly
upon divine pleasure; what divine engagement the soul can plead for this,
would be worth his best search. We find David praying hard for wonted favor,
but whether granted, that's doubtful.

Strengthening power lost, the soul has lost its soul: the spirit of man,
has lost the spirit of God; God does not breath in the heart, the man cannot
live, not live a jot better then he does, though reproved by his dearest
friends every hour. That which did this great mischiefe] that which made this
soule-death, was no small sin; it must be sought out and cried out of above all
evils. -- blood guilt, that one sin that killed two, Vriahs body and David's
soul, O how he cries out of this sin, at the throne of grace! This bloody sin
that has killed thy soul, separated between God and thy soul, this must
thou with all fervency cry out upon, and with all care renew faith in an
ever-bleeding Savior, all will be little enough to keep thee from bleeding to
death by despair. One thing is all, if thou can receive it O forsaken soul,
thou art made. Thou must obey divine injunction; believe, and expect good even
in thy bad state. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is
mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption: and he shall redeem Israel from
all his iniquities. A more deserted state then Isreal's was and is, cannot be;
yet faith and hope are both by Divine command to be exercised in this forlorn
condition, with promise of full mercy -- and he shall redeem Israel from all
his iniquity. Psalm. 130.7.8.
Whatsoever thy sin has been, whatsoever the punishment of thy sin is, hope in
the Lord, as the expression here is, that is, trust in Christ, and expect good
in this way, and he shall redeem thee from all thine iniquity, even from that
iniquity which has killed the working of Gods strengthening and relieving
power in thy soul? I judge the expressions of the Psalmist, to have such wide
scope given them of purpose, that any deserted Christians whatsoever, might
suck relief and support from them.

Power relieving and strengthening is sometimes lost not really but seemingly,
Cautio est.
that is, according to a tempted souls apprehension, this must be looked to,
that so none judge worse of their condition then it is, and lay load needlessly
upon themselves. Power relieving is consistent with power invading and
tempting, and yet when this is violent, a poor soul overlookes him that
stands by him, and mournes and prays as if nothing were his that is Gods. God
was feign in a temptation to tell the Apostle Paul, what he enjoyed, which was
all the answer he could have -- And he said unto me my grace [is] sufficient
for thee, and my strength [is] made perfect in weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9
Soule-anguish with strength of temptation, and strength of desire to have it
removed, made him over-looke that mighty aid of God, by which he was enabled to
stand under all; which is many a tempted soul's case, he cannot see the relief
and strength he has, because he has not total freedom from the evil he
groans under. This temptation must be observed, God will otherwise be a loser
and man too: God will lose the glory of his grace, and man the comfort. Is it
not relief and strength, that thou art upheld to encounter in any measure,
with strong temptation? That thou art taken from them into the armies of
Christ, though they not from thee? from the evil of temptation, though not
simply from temptation it self? This was that power which Christ did
principally pray for, not to take out of a wretched World and wretched
condition but to uphold in it. I pray not that thou should take them out of
the World, but that thou should keep them from [the evil, etc.



Paul did eye this in the like conflict; what he was in will when nothing in
deed. He found God in affection, though sin in action; the heart may be sound,
when more external and inferior parts are not. What J do I allow not; what I
would that do I not, but what I hate that do I, and upon this ground comforts
himself in a sad condition, and disclaimes sin as none of his, though acted by
him. Tempted souls must remember this, The heart kept, all is kept; what is
done against this by mere strength of corrupt nature, it is sins, it is not the
souls act: the holy Ghost makes this distinction, a weak soul must not call
it too nice to comfort him: It is one thing to be taken by an enemy, and
another thing to yield and lay down weapons to an enemy: this was the Apostles
case, which though sad, yet he made it to yield its own relief, so must we in
like cases. I am says he a forced man, a prisoner, a captive; I do what I did
never intend, what I can never allow, this may make me a wretched man, but it
cannot make me a damnable man; it may put me into a strait, but my poor soul
may find a way out through Christ -- I thank God through Jesus Christ, etc.

Again remember this, to wit, how the point in hand is proposed, and so take
it. God exercises a relieving power in a Christian, I do not say, a power
presently conquering; by degrees it rises to this. Relief is renewed, and more
and more time after time brought in still, till the soul be made victorious
over all enemies. That place is very observable to this purpose. Mat. 12.20
A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench,
[till] he bring forth judgment into victory. That Christ Keeps alive thy will
and affection toward him in the midst of so much corruption, and so many
foiles, is it not mighty power and love? yet this he does, and this he will
do, till he has made thee in action, what thou art in affection; indeed, what
thou art in will: he will not leave what he has begun till he has made thee
victorious.

Paul found it so. Upon seeking of God again and again, God made known what he
was, and what he would be to him -- and he answered me my grace, etc. That is,
to his prayer, God thus answered. So the Spouse she fervently prays for
relief, and then in the next Verse breaks forth as one feeling it. Stay me
with flaggons, comfort me with Aples for I am sick of love. Then in the next
Verse you have her sensibly expressing her enjoyment, Cant. 2.5.6.
His left hand is under my head, and his right hand does embrace me. God in
manifestation of the first power, is found unsought; but in manifestation of
the second power he is found as sought; he speaks to our heart, as we speak
to his; he reveals his compassion, as we reveal our state. You may want
strengthening power if you seek it not. You may live without the lively sense
of it long, if you pray not fervently. You must not disclaim a good state
wholly, because it is badly managed. Christians ill managing a good state, makes
them often conclude it is stark naught; this is ill and lies heavy upon the
heart, and yet does no good, but much hurt; it discourages to prayer and other
duties, in and by which comes in, the experience of Gods strengtheing power,
which they want.

I have now but one or two things more to speak to the wicked from this point,
and so I shall conclude it. You will never beat the godly out of heart; they
have a relieving and strengthening power comes in still, fresh force from
Heaven, they will never be conquered. They are upon a Rock: winds may blow and
storms beat, they will never fall; the Rock is foundation, and side-props
too. Christians are still kept in that hand, that made them Christians; and
none can pluck them out of that Hand. The wicked have a great deal of work,
more then they will consider they must quench two everlasting burnings ere they
will be conquerours; will they do either? There is an everlasting fire burning
in the hearts of Saints; can all the Waters you power upon it quench it? There
is an everlasting fire burning in Hell; both these fires kindled, and
maintained by the breath of God; can you stop the breath of the Almighty? then
may you be conquerors, not before.

I would wicked men would be wise and acknowledge the principles and
privileges of Saints, and strike sail to them. What they are they will be;
what they are they shall be, to execute the righteous judgment of the Lord
upon you this honor has all the Saints. What honor? why? to be borne along
resolutely and victoriously by everlasting arms, to bind Kings with chains
and Nobles with fetters of Iron, Psalm. 149.8.9.
to execute the judgment written. To be resolute to death is natural and
necessary to them because of that relieving and strengthening power which
works in them: to be resolute to their own temporal death, to accomplish your
eternal death; to be resolute to all hardship, to help you to your place. The
spirit of a Lion is in Christians; I would Dogs did know this: it is still,
'twill be still maintained so, will wicked spirits ever believe this? Ah wicked
wretches, the Saints will be Devils to you here; they will rend you and tear
you, and never let go their hold, God strengthens them to it: you might avoid
this Hell if you were wise, though you cannot, that to come. Who would contend
with everlasting burning? with such fiery spirits as can never be quenched? with
such men, as are more then men, who have the strength of God, the spirit of the
Almighy working within them? The unhappiness of wicked men is double, treble,
I know not how manifold; They are liable to the wrath of God and of his people;
and have no strengthening, power to succor them. When tortured without, they
are more tortured within; it is a fattening, hardening, condemning torturing
power that works in wicked souls; every drop From providence
scalds, not one cooles their souls. The powers which work mightily in them,
are powers of darkness, and lead to utter darkness; there I leave these,
and go on with my Text.

The end of the first Sermon.
USEFUL INSTRVCTIONS FOR THESE Evil Times.
COLOSS. 1.11. -- With All might, etc. Or in all power.


THis is the next word to speak of. All might, is him that is Almighty given
into man, as full as man can hold; it is so much divine strength extended, as to
bear up to all duty, Almighty, is all that man can need, all that man can use
bestowed on him: it is ten Talents; it is strength to hold forth all Gods Will,
in all conditions, against all disadvantages: it is humane capacity made vast,
and filled with as much of God, as any design on earth can require, for the
well managing of it. Almightinesse here, is not spoken in way of comparison
with God, but in way of full obedience to God; it is an expression spoken in
referrence to Gods Will, not in reference to Gods Person, and notes an ability
to all that God commands, and not any equallity to any thing that God is: it
notes such a power in some similitude, to be to what is enjoined, as God is to
any thing, able to it, and above it, though never so great.

Almightinesse in God, cannot be fully expressed by man. Almightinesse in a
Christian, has so much of the Almighttinesse of God in it, that this neither
cannot be fully expressed. It Is the same power which made Christ Almighty,
exceeding richly made known in a Christian; no otherwise did the Apostle know
how to express it. -- that ye may know what is the exceeding greatness of
his power to us ward who believe, according to the working of his mighty power
which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, Ephesians. 1.19, 20.
and set him at his own right Hand in heavenly places, Almightinesse in a
Christian, it is the exceeding great power of Christ made known exceedingly,
whereby a great similitude to Christ is made, in obeying him, as he did obey
his Father. Thus only the Apostle expresses this power, because he knew not
how more fully to reach it; therefore you may not expect a deeper fathoming of
it from me: -- and what is the exceeding greatness of his power to us ward,
etc. It Is an indefinite expression, of an unmeasurable thing: we must word it
as well as we can, when things are too big for words.

3. Quedammodo omnipotens ad extraordinary.
Almightinesse in a Christian, it is one in strength above ordinary work; it is
one all able to extraordnary duties; as able to hard, as to light work: it is
one able not only to impart the Gospel, but his own soul too, for the
Gospel. -- So being affectionatly desireous we were willing to have imparted
unto you, not the Gospel of God only, but also our own souls. 1 Thessalonians. 2.8.
It Is one able to give his heart to God, and his life too; his affection to
Christ, and his blood too, with much willingness. -- So being affectionately
desirous we were willing, etc. Covetously or lustfully desirous, as the
original words signify, which notes the most taking and swaying heart-passion.

utmost, as you have such a Scripture phrase; to the utmost of what God is
communicable, and man capable; to the utmost of what an infinite God can give,
and a finite nature can receive; (...)
to the utmost of what is promised, and a Christians calling can call for. It Is
a Steven, one full of the Holy Ghost and of power; able to stand it out in a
storm of stones; to see Heaven in Hell. It Is a Shadrach a triumpher in the
Almighty, in the face of fiery cruelty; a triumpher in an Almighty God, before
the frowning face of an Almighty man: it is a man able to obey God Agendo and
patiendo in perpetuum, to the utmost; to the last breath. Modus communicandi.


Almightinesse in a Christian it is the same in nature with that which was in
Christ, whereby he did all those Almighty things for our salvation. Modus
communicandi.
The Apostle wishing this power to the Ephesians, says it is that which wrought
in Christ when he raised him from the dead. -- According to the working of his
mighty power which wrought in Christ, when he raised him, etc. Ephesians. 1.19.
Christ had his power by which he did great things for us, by unction; so have
we: he by unction from his Father, we by unction from him. God anointed Jesus
of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power. Acts 10.38. Christ has his
unction immediately from the Father; we immediately from the Son: it is he that
most immeditatly gives the Holy Ghost to us. -- He shall glorify me (says
Christ of the spirit) for he shall receive of [mine] and shall show it unto
you. The power the Holy Ghost gives, it is the power of Christ, the truth he
reveals, it is the truth of Christ; Whatsoever excellency he inspires, it is the
excellency of Christ, and to make similitude to him.

1. Impertiendi discrimen.
Christ had his unction according to his capacity; of infinite capacity, and
therefore his power, the power of a God. All power of God in man, comes to but
finite power, the Subject is capable of no more. Almightinesse in a christian
is but finite power: infinite power working finitly, according to the capacity
of the Subject.

Christ had a more full unction then we, being a vaster continent; and he had a
more free unction, that is, power more absolutely conferred, and made over very
personal to him. He had his power as the first Adam, wholly at his own
dispose, so he spoke of it, and so he wrought by it, I have power to lay
down my life, and J have power to take it up. He could do this as of, and
from himself. The most Almighty Christian cannot say thus, without blasphemy.
Infinite power works in us, but not infinitely nor personally, as a thing
wholly and altogether at our dispose.

shame, obedience to blood and death is coming into use again. Is my strength
the strength of stones? Says Job. The strength of stones and rocks, a kind
of Almightinesse is like to be needed, all the strength of God, to carry us out
well; what power of God works in you?

Divine Justice is thoroughly awake, but ah Lord! we are not. Full executions
working, full preparations asleep; all will be ours with a wet finger; no
Christians, 'twill not; 'twill be with a wet heart too, wet with blood, and
it is well if not with the blood of some of you. It Is a remarkable expression
that of the Prophet Ezekiel. When he had foretold sad things, he concludes thus.
Then said I ah Lord God, Ezekiel. 20. v. ult.
they say of me does he not speak parables? We are to many, as those that
preach our own melancholy fancies, when we please not their fancies. I have
often sadly said it, and with as much humility as I could, that England's
mercy would be bloody mercies; but I doubt what use was made of it. The Sword
you now all see is drawn, when 'twill be put up again, what bleeding yet is
behind, the Lord only knows, 'twill be our wisdom to get strength for the
worst; All might, all the power of God working in us, to bear up under all
that can come.

To have served Christ with our hearts would have serv'd-turne very well, these
fourscore or these hundred years past, but now twill not, it must be with our
heart-bloud; what strength and power have ye in your hearts to this? can you
bleed out your souls in your Fields, in your Streets, at your Doo^es, in your
Houses, for Christ? Tell me all of you (I beseech you) what strength have you
to this? I have but little, I have none: this is the general vote. Such
language in humility is good; but where it is so indeed, there it is sad. Why how
have you used your precious time? you have had many years to fit for this one;
many days of peace to fit for this day of War; many unbloudy days, to fit for
this bloody day. You have had a growing time; a time of full growth, for full
service, for any service; this will be pleaded against you by Christ and
conscience better then I can do; how will ye be able to bear it?

The time is come that many will rue their loss of time; that sloth will fall
to slaying the very womb that has long traveled with her: hard work, deadly
hard work will every day now, fall to him that never dreamed on it, and many I
fear will eternally die in manging a good cause. Ah Lord! this is sad indeed,
when a man shall lose his life and his soul too, in a good cause; when a man
shall make the greatest loss, in the greatest and bravest work of gain, that
can come into a man's hand. I like courage well, but dislike a desperate man as
much; such is every one that goes about deadly work, and yet altogether unfit
to die; under the command of the Devil, when he puts himself under the
command of man, for God.

The Devil is Almghty in some men, I would speak a word to this. That which
does rule all in you, is your Almighty; by this you may know what power works
in you. What power is supreme in you, the power of light and truth, or the
power of darkness and sin? There is a strong man, and there is a stronger
man; the stronger man is the Almighty. Three things will clear what power
it is, that is Almighty in you. What are you in, 1. choice? What in, 2 pursuit?
What in, 3. rest? What a man chooses, what a man prosecutes, what a man rests
in, that has all, is all; that is Almighty. You that choose sin, prosecute sin,
rest in sin; sin, Satan is your almighty; your God: you are strengthened with
all might from Hell. The God of this World rules mightily in the children of
disobedience says the Apostle. When sinners are to sin as children to a
Father, doing what they do very naturally, freely, constantly, contentedly,
ah! lay this to heart, sin is almighty.

Enlarge these things as you will in your selves, I can say only this, you are
lost men, if any thing be Almighty in you, but Christ. As you love your souls,
consider what power works in you, and by what strength you are ruled. You that
have nothing but the strength of sin and Satan in you, what will ye do when
deliberately put to it for Christ? you will deny him and blaspheme him to his
face; a man is, and necessarily must be, as the power that works and rules in
him: you may think this, and promise that, (the weakest Creatures are aptest
this way) but what ov^r-beares you now, will quite undo you in the day of
trial.

These things, Christians, I have spoken our of fear of some, but I hope well
of the most of you; that an Almighty arm of God is under you, and an almighty
spirit and power of God working in you: I would it were so with all. All of you
may be, what any of you are. Covet things that excel, and CHRIST will give
you excellent things; an excelling strength, All might. The most of Christ is
best: the most of his power, the most of his truth, the most of his love, and
the like; few hearts strongly hang after this, therefore are miserable in their
little, of him that is all; al-might, and all joy, and joys so to be, to that
soul that pants after it.

All might comes in as all sin goes out; the Holy Ghost is our power, and he
dwells and works as he can get room. Let Christ have all your affection, and
you shall have all his power, to make you able to do all that he shall call
you to. A man is made to duty, as he strongly loves; strong desires take and
make Christ, and then Christ takes and makes the man strong; as strong as his
work to which he has such a desire.

God dispenses himself according to his own will, and yet according to ours
too. It Is the plague of most men, that they desire but little of God: they are
heart-enemies to all power that opposes their corrupt affections. The strength
of God to mortify what man loves, and God hates, will man seek? or will God
give without it? All might to overcome all, that overcomes the soul, what men
desire or thirst after (this is talked of)? therefore they very deservedly die,
under the power of their sin, and in the weakness of their souls.

Grace in its measure (though not according to its being) is dispensed
according to desire in its measure; for it is but a prevenient capacity made by
God, to hold so much, or so much of himself: Christians enlarge your desires
as Heaven, as the wicked are said to enlarge their desires as Hell. If you
would have great things you must have great desires. According to your
affections will be your fruitions; if you desire flagons of power and love to
stay you, you shall be so supported; if you pant after power, all power to
bear you up, you shall be so borne up. Almightinesse to action, springs out of
almightinesse in affection.

According to affection, and according to faith does the power of God work in
man: Therefore is Steven said to be a man full of faith and of the Holy Ghost;
and elsewhere, full of faith and power, Acts 6.8. According to our faith, is
our incorporation with that strength, and power, which is indeed almighty; and
according to a Christians incorporation with this, is his derived
almightinesse. By faith the walls of Jerico fell: it was faith that made those
worthies, such almighty ones. As the soul rests upon the almighty, so is it
almighty. I would ye would study nothing else but faith; all you have is in
it. Every age calls to peculiar service, this age calls for almighty
Christians; ye see the way to it, blessed are ye, if ye find it: This
blessedness I will speak of in a word or two and close up this point.

An Almighty Christian, it is a Mordecai; Haman holding his bridle. It Is a man
over all, in God. It Is one clothed with the Sun, having the Moon under his
feet. It Is a Christian with one foot on the Earth, and another on the Sea;
trampling under foot corrupt doctrines, corrupt advantages, all that is
unworthy of Christ, and will not go along with the soul, to his everlasting
home.

An Almighty Christian, it is one that Sphere, in caelo chrystallino, in the
crystal Heavens, as near the Heaven of Heavens as may be. It Is one that
waits for Christ from Heaven, more then for Heaven from Christ. It Is an Eagle,
the King of Birds for sight and strength; he can look to the end of what God
says and does, and stand it out expecting that end: he can look to a Canaan
under a frown; behold life in death.

An Almighty Christian can venture all upon an invisible God; bind up all in
one visible word: he can give an Isaac to the dead; expect an Isaac from the
dead; believe that truth shall never die, who ever die or live. An Almighty
Christian can live and die with an Almighty Savior: Christ alone is enough;
Christ alone is all. Christ in poverty, is riches; Christ in death, is life;
he is in spirit still according to him that he loves, and not according to
what befalls him, that he loves. He is in affection according to the person of
Christ, the employment of Christ, and not according to accidentalia that attend
him. My beloved [is] thus and thus, and therefore beloved. What Christ is in
himself takes; what may fall out, nothing. This Christian is Christ's liveli'st
Emblem. Look on me (says Gideon) and do likewise. So does he, look on
Christ, and what Christ says, he says; what Christ does, he does, let all
the World say and do what they will. He can be baptized with the baptism
wherewith Christ was baptized, though a bloody baptism.

And Almighty soul on Earth, what will this soul be in Heaven. One
strengthened with All might, is one prepared for all glory. Who can number the
dust of Jacob, or tell the fourth part of Israel? Who can number the Jewels of
this Christians Crown? Or tell the fourth part of them; Thine is the Kingdom,
[Power and Glory, etc. Power and Glory go in a chain with mutual respect; as
the one is, so the other. Look how much of Christ here, so much of glory with
him hereafter. As CHRIST is in any soul, so he will be glorious in that
soul: So far as he reveals himself in any soul, so far he abides and
will for ever abide, and challenge honor fit for such a vast being, when he
comes home. He now lives obscurely, but he will live in state, according to
his revenue, and Seat: Here is All power, here must be all Glory, here are
wide spacious rooms, they must have hangings suitable: I am all, in this all,
I must have state answerable. CHRIST glorifyes himself in us, as he reveals
himself in us. It Is often hinted, when much is enjoyed, what it will end in at
the appearing of Christ; 'twill best speak it self then. I can speak no more
of it now.

FINIS.
USEFUL INSTRVCTIONS FOR THESE Evil Times.
COLOSS. 1.11. Strengthened [with all might] according to his glorious power,
unto all patience and long suffering with joyfulnesse.


ALL Might. Divine power works gradually in a Christian. Some have little,
some much, some All might. There was (it may be) but little strength in these
Christians, it may be much; but Surely not All might. What ever there was, the
Apostle saw room enough within, for more; occasion enough without, in the
World, for more; for much more; for all that might be had; and therefore so
prayed -- Strengthened with [All might, etc.

There be heavenly places in Christ; some lower, some higher, some highest of
all, and yet all heavenly and holy. And has raised us together and has made
us sit together in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 2.6.



an abiding mansion; to a glory that shall admit of no ebbing nor flowing, of
no intension or remission, of no graduality respecting the same subject.

Divine power works according to Sun of righteousness the little World, to
wit, man; he is not at a Meridian height in any man's heart presently, but
gradually; by greater and greater Revelations of power and strength, he rises
to the Revelation of all power that the soul is capable of. He dwells, and
then walks -- I will dwell in you and walk in you says the Lord. He takes
up a dwelling and then makes long and stately walks. He makes known power,
and then great power, and raises it revelando till it rises to exceeding great
power -- that ye might know what is the exceeding greatness of his power to
us ward who believe. Ephesians. 1.19.

The Earth brings forth fruits of her self (says Christ) first the blade,
then the ear, after that the full Corn in the ear, and then immediately the
Sickle is put in, because the Harvest is ripe. Mar. 4.28. So does Divine power
work in grace (for this is the scope of the similitude) by degrees, not all at
once; and answerably a Christian rises to bud, to blade, to ear and to full
Corn. When all might is revealed, the Corn is full; the state of a Christian
is come to his maturity; he will not be long now ere he be gathered and housed
in Heaven.

God, man in the hand of power, and held up by it, lower or higher, as his
work is -- Whereunto I also labor (says the Apostle) speaking of his
ministerial work) striving according to his working which works in me
mightily. Coloss. 1.29. God had a mighty deal of work to do for the Apostle,
and his power wrought in him mightily: He wrought without, as God wrought
within; he stirred as stirred -- striving [according to his working, etc. Power
is necesitated to work gradually, office and condition does so change and vary
in this World. With an eye to this the Apostle prayed; he apprehended these
Christians set out for great hardship and service, and so he sets upon God to
raise power and force answerably for their aid. -- Strengthened with all might,
etc.

Greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the World, says Christ;
greater when least, and where least, then that power which opposes him in a
Christian heart. Christ according to ordinary and daily residence, carries the
soul above the ruining power of sin: greater [is] he that is in you, etc.
They might suppose their condition the lowest of any, as it is common and
comely for Christians to do, and Christ condescends in speaking, and takes it
so, and speaks of it under such a consideration and yet says he, fear not;
the power that is in you, is greater then the power that is against you. The
lowest degree of power that works in a Christian, will hold the soul that it
shall not eternally miscarry, what strength soever be raised to this end, so
that the devil shall lose his grand design, to wit, the destruction of the
soul. The lowest degree of Divine strength, is supreme strength to all power
resisting; as the lowest good Angel (...) -- Fortes robore. Angels of his,
which are mighty (i) transcending in strength. It Is an Hebraisme, and notes a
superlative. Ps. 103.20.
Excels in strength, all bad.

2. A second note is this, The state of Christians in general under the
Gospel, is a very capable state of the highest revelations of power. Verily,
verily I say unto you, he that believes on me, the works that I do shall he
do also and greater works then these shall he do because. J go unto my
Father, Ioh. 14.12. Accession is now very free, intercession very potent,
blessings are answerably necessary. The expression of Christ forementioned
notes, that there is a peculiar intercession suited, to this bright Gospell-age
where in we live; our grace-capacity now is answerably necessary. What
intercession works in Heaven, such power and love works forth upon Earth. We
live under the richest climate, under the richest Heavenly influence: all might
and all excellence may with all ease be obtained now, in comparison of former
times.

power works without in the World; but our greatest work is to eye and
observe how it works within, in our hearts; I wonder at some men's temper,
which least of all mind this. The soul of man is the noblest thing in the
World, it is above the world and do thou think that he which made it so above
all for himself to work in, is least to be heeded what he works here?

All pains spring from one, that we have so little of God: all pains and
cares therefore should be turned into one, what have I of God? how might I have
more? more of his love, more of his power working in my soul? God gives all
might to many, and yet remains all might for any. Man has his Heaven as he
will. He that will have it in the full and all -- enjoyment of the Creature,
he has it in this; God filles men's bellies with this treasure. Those that
will have their heart in nothing but in the full and all enjoyment of God, have
it so; he satisfyes men's thirst let it be what it will, or how great it will.
He satisfyes the hungry belly, and the hungry soul.

Affection is a graduall working thing, and a various working thing as the
power of God is; Cautio est.
men had need look how it rises in thirst after any thing but God, they may
have their longing else in wrath, and have enough of every thing in their hands
to fill their bellies, but not enough of the power of God in their hearts to
save their souls, and this will be sad indeed. The power of God works
gradually (say I) in the hearts of men; in some, much; so much that one may say
they have all might: in others, little; so little that one may truly say there
is not power of God enough unto salvation. I am not ashamed of the Gospel
says the Apostle, for it is the [ Power of God unto salvation. Is there power
of God enough working in you, to rise to so much as this, to salvation, to
soule-salvation? eternal salvation? Power enough to make you the sons of God?
It Is a great unhappiness to fall short of any power of God communicable; that
any blessing power of God, which works in any man should not work in me: but
to fall short of so much as will make the soul fall short of its eternal
rest, ah Lord! what misery shall I call this?

Scrutinu^.
What faith, what love, what joy, what passion does that power make which works
in you? by this you may know whether twill prove a power Divine enough and
strong enough to save your souls. Ye believe in Christ (we must believe
this) well: yet this is but one thing; that power which works this, works
more and further if it work effectually unto life. Ye believe in Christ; it is
well: do ye love Christ too? his word his people, his ways? How strong is
this love? as strong as death? to the death of sin and self? I mean the
denial of both. Remember this one thing for all, power where it works unto
salvation, strong enough to save a sinner, it makes strong passion, lasting
passion, and all toward Christ and truth. Christ is fair, fairest, the
fairest of ten thousand, that is the fairest of all; so to day, so to morrow,
so every day to the last day, to the end, as that love which set power at work
in the heart, is.

Divine power, when and where it works unto life, takes the heart first; there
it begins. A man loves as soon as he lives, Christ, truth, whatsoever is holy.
There is a desire of milk, yea sincere milk, in newborn babes; in babes
as soon as berne there is love; love to truth, love to pure and sincere truth,
to the pure and Holy word and ways of God: there is even in babes desire;
Divine affection; panting after that light which came down from Heaven: O what
is truth? what is Christ? would I know him; would I could enjoy him: First
faith is most indiscernable; first love, which works from it, is most
discernable, it is so strong and pure, and therefore I most mention this passion
in this case, to discover the power that works in you.

Divine power makes a divine nature where it works to salvation; a man is
another Creature in desire then what he was; he sensibly differs from himself
in affection. Things momentanie are fallen two, yea, ten in the hundred with
him; they have lost their price. The heart has sold all for nothing, that was
all once unto it. Gold, Dung; learning dung; all loss and dung; stinking
earth, that way taking. The heart thirsts for nothing, but him that is all; all
power, all love, all holiness, all happiness. Divine power where it works
strong enough to save, makes passion divine, all passions, love, joy, fear,
hatred. I doubt much what power works in some men's hearts, I see their
affections so strong and so hearty to the World and the vanities of it: I see
passion so impure and so strongly working downward. Christ and truth but as a
straw when it lies in the way of the man's lust; he leapes over it with ease to
satisfy his desire, I like not the state of that man's heart.

Power is leading where it is saving; it leads by truth; by the heart. I am
thine save me. Says the Psalmist. Thine, that is, thine according to truth;
thine in heart, thine in life: thine in trust; thine in blood, in Christ's
blood, I lean on none else to save me; I lean to none else to guide me.

Power is killing, that is saving; sin-killing that is soule-saving. The body
of death, dead: the body of death, no body; no body with a soul, with life.
Self-will slain; the will that lives, Christ's. Not I live, Christ lives in
me. (i) not my will, but Christ's will carries and swayes the soul. These
things have been said to try you, what power and grace of God is in you, I
shall say a little more in the next place to stir you, to acknowledge grace as
you find it, and so leave this point and you for this time.

Divine power works gradually; why as you find God working in you so
acknowledge him; Let God have his own to a grain. Thine is the Kingdom and
power, etc. We are taught this to acknowledge grace in its latitude, to the
God of all grace. The Apostle gives God his own by weight, to a grain, which
works in me mightily says he. If God works in you mightily let him hear of
it mightily. As ye feel God, praise God. Make expression from operation and
express it fully if you can. Thus does Daniel, Then Daniel blessed the God of
Heaven and said. Blessed be the Name of God for ever and ever, for wisdom and
might are his, I thank thee and praise thee O God of my Fathers, who have
given me wisdom and might, Dan. 2. An excellent spirit and power wrought in
Daniel and he acknowledges all to the giver -- wisdom and might are his. How
Gods Power and Glory went in the Sanctuary, is turned into a Psalm of praise;
made to echo to the author. The very degree thereof, is noted, -- so as I have
seen them That I may see thy Power and thy Glory -- So as I have seen them in
the Sanctuary. What he did enjoy was thankefully acknowledged, what he would
enjoy again was heartily panted after. How you see and feel power and glory
go in the ordinances, how in your hearts, I beseech you acknowledge to Christ;
let him have the glory of every powerful working here. We are men as your
selves; that our Weapons are mighty, it is through God; he does all, admire him,
adore him. Heart-smitings, heart-embracings, kisses secretly, or kickings
secretly, they are the kisses of his lips and the spurnings of his power, give
him the glory of all. How prevailingly Christ has revealed power in thee! what
a lust he has discovered, subdued! what an eternal state, ^uined, has he
repaired! What wounds he has healed! What inward issues he has stayed! What
bones, what broken bones, and how many he has set and made to rejoice, let
him have the glory of all. As Christ kisses us, we should kiss him.

-- We should meet our Father with joy Every Revelation of power in the
heart, it is your Fathers coming toward you, to take you nearer home to
himself. We call power little, some Revelations thereof in comparison of
others, because the Scripture does so speak of it for our weakness sake, but
this know, it is no little power that will stir your hearts, it is an arm of the
Lord, which is no small limb -- to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? it is
more then a finger, shall God reveal an arm in you, and lose it in you? He
made the Sun, Moon, and Stars, praise him says the Psalmist. But that power
which has made Sun, and Stars in your hearts, which has bespangl'd your
spirits with various glories, should not this much more make matter of praise?
As power heightens it self operando so should we heighten it verbis elevando.
As any Revelation has less or more of God, in it, so it should busy and take
up the heart to return it -- in thy hand is power and might, and in thy hand
is to make great, etc. 1 Chronicles. 29.1. As Gods hand did work for David, so did
David's heart and tongue work for God: he turned power into praise and so sent
it home again in state to Heaven. But more of his expressions in that place,
are very observable to this purpose and point I am pressing. But who am I
(says he) and what is my people that we should be able to offer so
willingly? 1 Chronicles. 29.14. That we should be able, and able so willingly, here
is the very degree of enabling power praisingly noted. As high as power sets a
lesson of love, so high to a crochet it should be sung.

Do but consider some poor souls that sit by you, which have no power of God
stirring in them, but lie dead, damnably dead, and then be you dead if you
can, to give thanks for that power which has quickened and raised you from the
dead; God will turn grace into our glory hereafter, we should turn grace into
his glory here.

FINIS.
USEFUL INSTRUCTIONS FOR THESE Evil Times.
COLOSS. 1.11. Strengthened with all might according to his glorious power,
unto all patience and long suffering wiih joyfulnesse.


It Is as it ought to be, when apprehension makes full and due impression upon
affection: When the soul works out for God in desire and Prayer, according as
it apprehends the need of him; the necessity of his power, love, or the like,
for himself or others. Suitable to what the Apostle apprehended, he prayed:
suitable to what he judged these would need of GOD, of his Power and might,
so he heartily wished to them.

Apprehension is placed sentinel in the soul by God, the actions of it should
stir all. It Is a power in man to see at a distance, and to give warning to
all other powers, that the heart may more look out, and work out according to
what is or will be needed.

God is come within sight of man, when apprehensio^ reaches him. According to
what of God is in sight, so should the soul stir. I have heard of thee by the
hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee, I abhor my self in dust
and ashes and repent, Job. 42.5, 6. Whilst Job had not such an apprehension of
Divine power as it was, the less sinful that his soul did not stir in
reference to it as he ought, but as soon as he rightly understood it, all
other powers stirred thoroughly, and Job answerably repented and went about his
business to stoop to that power which he saw above him.

Every faculty must have the honor of its place; Divine Ordination must have
the honor of its end or the man dies for it. When you see these things say
that winter is near, etc. Says the Scripture. That is, make use of what you
apprehend, and answerably stir and prepare or you will perish with the world. So
you shall have expressions frequent, when you hear this or that then do thus
and thus. That is, when one faculty does its Office let all the rest do so
too, or else you are lost men. If any sentinel shoot off and be not regarded,
the whole army dies for it.

Any soule-power misworking overthrowes all; so any soule-power disobeyed in
working by other powers, overthrowes all. If apprehension be blind and sleepy
the soul is undon; If apprehen sin see and speak in and by conscience, and
yet the heart lie still, all will miscarry by surprise. Apprehension is a power
placed to prevent surprise; Sad things concerning man, by Divine Ordination,
work at a distance for a time; that man has his eyes in his head that sees
this says Solomon: that is, apprehension discharges its office, if this
Office, and power be slighted by other powers in the heart, all is taken by
surprise.

I think apprehension now, does its Office in most of you, how is it obeyed in
heart, in other maine powers of the soul? Surely now no man but must needs
apprehend, that he may want much of God speedily, as much as the Apostle
apprehended these might do, much might, all might: now what stirring of heart
under all that you apprehend? ye are convinced; are ye converted? Do ye
stir now for your selves as the Apostle did for these? Do ye wrestle hard
with God for all that ye apprehend, ye may need? Can ye apprehend the
necessity of much and be stirred little? Can ye see blood and death in the
Land and lay nothing to heart? Can thou see better blood then thine own
shed, and yet make no preparation for the loss of thine. Though many be slain
yet shall not I: ah Lord! that soul is slain already; 'twill be woeful when
that body comes to be slain too.

Do thou see a Sword in the land separating between soul and body, and do
thou not yet set to separate between sin and thy soul? Art thou resolved to
die in thy sin? will thou bleed to death in thy sin? this will make every
drop of blood that comes from thee as ghastly as Hell. What a deadly bleeding is
that, when soul and body bleed to death together? when the soul bleeds as
fast with wounds from conscience, as the body with wounds from man. When soul
and body bleed mortally together, ah Lord! let me not be near that man: how
will he sigh? how will he look, speak, gasp and groan? and yet many such
sad sights may be for ought I can discern, in many men's preparations to this
hour.

Sinners, God deals with you now as with Balaam, he stands before you with a
drawn sword, he threatens your blood, your death if ye make a step further;
ye cannot but apprehend this now as well as I; Balaam and his Ass too must
needs see it now. What now will ye do? will ye make no use of such palpable
apprehension? How exceeding sinful will that sin become which rids it out now
against blood and death, and will live when the man must no longer live. I
beseech you all consider the dealings of God, and consider your eternal state.
Christians what do ye see? what do ye do? ye see blood, good blood, a
great deal of good blood fall, does good blood stir in you? You see death most
deadly coming toward you, upon the point of a merciless sword, as merciless
I dare say you Londoners shall find it if it prevail, as ever was drawn, do
ye fit and prepare for it? to be hewed to pieces, dragged to death, trod to
death under Horse-feet? ye cannot but apprehend that things may go very bad,
and that ye may need very much speedily; does apprehension make due
impression? Do ye work out Heavenward, as the Apostle does here answerable
to what ye apprehend you and yours may want?

Sin is in great power where the soul will not give up, when he sees God
coming against him. Thy love to sin will be an everlasting love, that dies not
to sin now; thou and it will go to Hell together. Affection to evil becomes
Almighty, unconquerable, and there is no way but one with the man. Man must die
or his sin, that justice is at work which will kill one or the other. I bleed
and mourn to see how some men sin in the face of Justice, at swords point;
swear, curse, and drink drunk and yet going about deadly works. I see
plainly now, that a man may see misery and yet not seek out to be blessed; he
may see himself and others very open to and very near upon deadly danger, and
yet neither seek out for himself nor others; why else do we see so many
continue still yet as they were? Paul's spirit surely is few men's happiness to
stir effectually toward God as they apprehend just cause.

Apprehension works divinely upon hear us speak. Keep faith alive, you will
else see Hell often and feel it too and yet do nothing to shun it. Ye will
see misery and yet not prepare for it, yea, ye will see judgment at the door
and yet scoff at it; so did they of the old World; and another old World is
this.

I will not hear him says Ahab, he never prophesis good to me. A stubborn
heart does prejudge, kill things before they can come near him. Apprehensions
work as we manage them; the strongest are quickly killed if we fight against
them, the truest quickly made delusive if an unsound heart be in us.

duty. That truth which is jassel'd against must discover such apprehension to
be temptation and set the soul in again. A man must fight against
apprehension as it fights against Gods Will, and takes us off from our duty. A
man must not make apprehension from fiction as some tempted souls are taken up
this way, but from real words or works of God, these are only of sanctifying
power upon the spirit. And yet these which rise well, must be kept up well, or
else these will be powerless too. A man much in apprehension must be much in
Prayer, things will die else in the brain as they ly, and derive no influence
down upon the heart. God must hear much of what we see, or else our vision
will not be glorious; taking, fiilling, and leading the heart. Divine
apprehensions are Gods joggings of man, and man must jogge God again often to
understand them well, and to use them well, to know fully what God would to us
in them, and what we should be to him by them. Apprehensions come in confused,
and are shaped and made plain by Prayer; as they come from God they are
ofttimes above us; as carried back again to God by Prayer, they are made
plain and easy to us, and very effectual upon us. I judge these things very
sweet to some of you, but I doubt they are very useless to many, they do so
little lay their Eye or Ear to Gods Word or Work, so little busy
apprehension about any thing that is Divine. Apprehension works much (I
believe) this year, but (I doubt) not very Divinely if it did surely we should
see better hearts and lives then we do.

FINIS.
USEFUL INSTRVCTIONS FOR THESE Evil Times.
COLOSS. 1.11. -- Glorious power, etc, or, power of his Glory.


IT may be I may prosecute this expressio^ both ways, as you have it rendered
and as it is in the Original. As you read it it is rather interpretation then
translation. Word for word as, it is in the Original, is according to the
strength or, force of his glory; which is a propriety of speaking in the
primitive language, where they would express a glorious thing, to express
that by a substantive which we do by an adjective -- the power of his glory,
for glorious power. Like to this is that expression, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. Who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord and from
the [glory of his power, that is, from his glorious power as we speak. In my
Text power is put first, according to the [ power of his glory: but in that
Text forecited, glory is put first -- from the glory of his power: both note
one thing to wit, a glorious power.

Power is called glorious when it does glorious things within or without?
therefore are these expressions here made Relata strengthened with all might, --
according to his glorious power. When a Christian is made almighty, then is
power made all glorious, glorious power; known so, and called so. Thus does
Moses and other servants of the Lord call power glorious, when it was extended
to do glorious things. The right Hand of the Lord is become glorious in power
(says he in his Song when God had drowned the Aegiptians, Ex. 15.6. Thy right
hand has dashed in pieces the Enemy.

That we are to admire and call Divine power as it works: When it does great
things, almighty things, glorious works in the World, in our hearts, then are
we to call it answerably as the Holy Ghost does here, glorious power.
Strengthened with all might according to his glorious power.

All outgoings of God should be called and named as we find God in them.
Christ the great channel of all in which God goes forth into the World (power,
wisdom, mercy of God and the like) is named according to what of God was in
him and to be declared by him. -- And his name shall be called wonderful, the
mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. As Divine power,
mercy, or the like, works in any person or by any person so should it be
called, mighty, wonderful, glorious, everlasting, etc. Thus does the Psalmist,
his work is honorable and glorious. The works of the Lord are great (says he
in the verse. foregoing) and then in this verse he calls it honorable and
glorious, Psalm. 111.2.3. As power works so it is to be called: as wisdom
works so is it to be called -- his understanding is infinite says the
Psalmist speaking of the wisdom of God. Ps. 147.5.

As Christ goes in this World so we are to talk of his going; as he rides in
this World so we are also to talk of that. If Christ ride in triumph we are
triumphantly to speak of him; we are to call him Hosanna in the highest, when
he shows himself highest. When he rides upon Asses and rules asses; when he
shows an overruling power over the unruliest things we are answerably to call
him and his power which so Work.
If he take and show the state and power of a King, a glorious King, we are to
give him royal and glorious titles; we are to name him still in word, as he
names himself indeed: we are to Christen Christ as we find him; to name power
as we find it, love as we find it, etc. We are to extol him that rides upon
the Clouds: that is, we are to lift up him, that lifts up himself; we are
to set him in the Clouds which has set himself there; we are to set up God in
words, as he sets up himself in deeds; to set up him above all, which sets
himself above all; to call him almighty which does almightily; to call power
glorious, which does gloriously. -- according to his glorious power, etc.

1 Love leads to this; Justice 2. binds to this, to give to God that which is
due to his Name; to give to power, that which is due to power; to put titles
suitable to state. Give unto the Lord the glory due to his name says the
Psalmist, that is, to admire and call power as it is, and as it does, in
Christians and for Christians: to call power glorious is but due, when it does
glorious things; the Apostle so apprehended, that when he spoke of power as
working at such an height, at an almighty height for the carrying the soul
thorough the worst that might come, that he was bound to call it glorious
power. Vain man would be wise though he be as the wild Ass, Colt, said he to
Job, that is, he would be accounted wise, and called wise though a fool,
though of no more wisdom then an Ass, then an Ass Colt, the silliest of
Asses: vain man would be accounted that which he is not, and have more then
his due to him, but it is not so with GOD; he would have no man call him what he
is not, or any thing he does, what it is not; but as he is, and as he does.
Tell Pharaoh I am that I am; as he sees me do and work, so let him call me
and no otherwise; as men see me and feel me, my power, my glory and the like,
so let them call it and me. -- Srengthened with al-might according to his
[glorious power, etc.

Jannes and Jambres, the power which wrought by Moses.

This generation is alive again; alive and lusty in this Land at this day.
Divine power works gloriously in the hearts and hands of Christians, yet will
not many wretches acknowledge it, but deride it, blaspheme it, make head
against it, as a power of the devil: Never did divine power work more
gloriously in the hearts and hands of English Christians then at this day and
yet never less acknowledged, nor more opposed; what speaking, what plotting
now by cursed spirits, against glorious power, wisdom, and love that stirs in
the people of GOD? Men care not what they say of our GOD, nor what they do
against those in and by whom he works. Men will not see Christ in Christians,
nor Christ for Christians, but Christ will make them see and feel both.

When the heart is naught it is full of shifts, such men will attribute all that
is done, to any thing rather then to that they should, then to divine power,
and call that glorious. The Syrians attribute that to Hills which they should
have attributed to GOD, for which Divine power wrought bloudily again, more
bloudily then before that they might acknowledge God, and call his power as it
was, glorious. Thus says the Lord because the Syrians have said, The Lord is
God of the Hills, but not of the Valleys, therefore will J deliver all this
great multitude into thine hand, and ye shall know that I am the Lord. 1 Kings
20.28. wretched men will call Hills strong, houses strong any thing strong and
mighty but God. The working of Divine power in the hearts and hands of
Christians so lately and so gloriously at Kenton I much doubt whether the
wicked will acknowledge to be the power of GOD against them, and call it as it
wrought, a glorious power. Divine power therefore shall work again and
again, more bloudily then at Kenton til they be made to call it a glorious
power which works in the hearts and hands of GODS people. Their blindness and
madness is our affliction and their damnation, let us put one against the other
to easen our burdens as we may.

O when will English Papists and Athests, call the power of GOD which works in
the hearts and hands of English Christians, a glorious power? [his] glorious
power? When will they confess, that they are strengthened with all might
according to [is] glorious power? men of almighty hearts and hands, by the
power of an almighty GOD? When will Balaam alight and turn his horse, and
confess a glittering glorious Power of GOD against him? When will he
ingeniously say, I cannot curse but bless altogether English Christians, such
a glorious power of GOD works in their hearts and bands? Naughty hearts have
their shifts, and they have their sins: pride cannot call that power
glorious, which is against it. A proud person cannot acknowledge that power
glorious, which shames him. A proud heart is a deadly plague, such a man will
rather die, then lay down his Weapons to GOD; than acknowledge himself too
vveake for glorious power. O what a nothing is man! What a worse then nothing
is a wicked man! And yet what a something! What a all! What a some thing above
all, does he think himself!

No Land surely, has more guilty wretches of disobedience, to this doctrine I
have in hand, then England. What land has such desperate unacknowledgers of
divine power, of such glorious divine power as we have? Had the glorious and
mighty power which works in the hearts and hands of Christians in England,
wrought so in the sight of Turks and Americans, how would they have adored it,
and glorified it! what hardened Wretches are sinners against the glorious
power, which works in the light of the Gospel above all others! Let all
men know this and fear, that as power is abused so 'twill right it self
within and without. Glorious power abused, will right it self gloriously. That
glorious power which works in the hearts and hands of Christians in England
abused, blasphemed, as many do, will harden and cut off with a witness;
'tvvill turn men into Devils, and Devils into Hell apace. Divine power
stumbled against will throvv men, but Christ and his power scofft at and
blasphemed, will fall upon men and grind them to dust; and yet this is the
practice of our Enemies. Let us be patient they fight against themselves with
their tongues, more then we can do with our hands, by blaspheming that
which they shall be for'ct to stoop unto.

That which the wicked will not do lies the more upon us, a necessary work
will else fall quite to the ground. You have seen how divine power has
wrought, in the hearts and hands of our brethren abroad, in Gods Cause, call it
as it is; a glorious power. The almighty has strengthened them within and
without, according to his glorious power; call it so. He raised and
strengthened the spirit of Scotland to resist to blood, against bloody wretches
that would have destroyed both them and us: his power is a glorious power. He
has raised and strengthened the spirit of England to resist to blood, against
their bloody enemeis and ours too; against all the base bloody body of many
Kingdoms combined: his power is a glorious power. He has strengthened the
hearts and hands of Christians at Hull, at Portsmouth, at Coventry, at Warwick,
in the City, in the Field, and made them victorious; His power is a glorious
power. Blood, much good blood is fallen, and yet much risen up again: men have
hearts, to set their feet in the place of the dead, to die again, that Christ
may never die: His power a is glorious power. He has made the spirits of
Nobles, Noble; the spirits of Gentlemen, noble; the spirits of Tradesmen, yea,
the spirit of Plow-men, noble; City and Country, noble: all England (for so I
account the Parliament) resolved to live and die with truth: his power which
works in them and us, is a glorious power.

This is spoken in the general. I would have every one of you in particular,
to take notice what power works in and by you and call it as it works. Are ye
selfe-condemned? call that a convincing power. Are your hearts pricked and
wounded? call that a terrible power. Are your hearts inflamed with love to
Christ? call that a glorious power. Divine power condemning, executing, to wit,
torturing, must be looked to betimes. It Is time to shake off sin, when hell is
come home; come into a man's soul, ere the soul be gone out of the body. A
power working merely convictive, is a sad and black, not a glorious power. Such
a man should know that life and death are near him: he may live or he may die,
as he stoopes to that power which has seized upon his soul. Where power works
merely convictive, that man is endited for his life; if he can believe he will
do well; if not his wounds will bleed to death. No power works so black and
sad in the soul, but faith alters it and makes it a glorious power. The goings
of God in the soul are suited to faith still. Believe O self condemned soul
and thou shall see the glory of God; a glorious power working in thee. Out of
faith, springs love; out of love, Heaven; Heaven felt, and then, and not till
then, a Christian calls the power that works in him a glorious power: all is
glorious, in Heaven. The soul quickly calls power as it feels it work, and
very hardly otherwise. We call the Sun glorious, when we see it and feel it,
smiling, warming, and ^omforting of us. Other celestial powers which blow;
blast, nip and pinch, we call not glorious powers. Power is glorious, and
confessed glorious, as it does it is most glorious works in the heart.
Christians ye are too far from Heaven, to call the Sun glorious: too few
glorious works in you, to call power glorious. Were ye strengthened with all
might, ye could not but (as the Apostle here does) call power glorious.

FINIS.
USEFUL INSTRUCTIONS FOR THESE Evil Times.
COLOSS. 1.11. -- According to his glorious power, or according to the force of
his glory.


DIvine things are so mentioned, as to make best impression upon the solue of
man. The Holy Ghost speaks as one in Heaven, to make his auditors so: he
speaks gloriously, to take, to raise, to ravish dead and dull man; to work
and force way for Christ into every heart. -- according to the power or force
of his glory.

It Is an expression of energy and divine force, molded and shaped with such
glittering letters and words, with such varnish and beauty from Heaven as to
take and carry every heart thither. Words of glory, and works of glory, all
things of glory, are of great power and force with fallen man; in a glorious
style therefore does the Holy Ghost here speak. -- according to the power of
his glory.

The Holy Ghost does speak as like himself, and to man as like himself. He
speaks as one in Heaven, as one wrapped up in God and in glory, to whom the
language of the holy Land is natural: and he speaks to man as on earth, in
earth, wrapped up soul and body in earth; cold, dull, heavy, and hard to be
lifted up to Heaven, unless Heaven and glory be brought to his door, to his
eye and ear, if anything be of power and force upon a dead creature this will
-- according to the force or power of his glory.

God speaks to man, as man yet moves according to the ruins and remainders of
his first state. Man's first state was glory, and he is a creature leaning and
struggling that way still, to get and make a state of glory; he gropes after it
in every thing, and as any thing carries glory and luster to any sense, eye or
ear, so he looks after it and hearkens to it. Things of natural glory, of
glory to the sense, they are very swaying with a broken glorious creature. This
the Devil knows right well, and therefore he bespangles his expression with
Heaven, and glory, and the state of a God, when he has to do with man. So he
did to the first Adam, so he did to the second Adam, he showed him all the
Kingdoms of the World and the glory of them says the Text; he knows words
and works inlaied with glory, are very working and winning upon humane nature,
who ever wear it. Therefore does he at this day gild all his deadly pills, and
makes them golden and glorious things to look upon; and daily works in his
best apparel as an Angel of light; he puts fair white sleeves upon his arms
when he is going to butcher the soul; he makes every tool and instrument of
death look as glittering and as glorious as may be, he has had long
experience that golden glorious things are of great force, upon a broken
glorious Creature. As Satan does speak and work toward man, as man moves
according to the remainders of his first state; so does God. He knows that
fallen man is much leaning and gropeing after glory, and therefore shall ye
find the Holy Ghost so leaning to this way of speaking in the word, and
working in the World, namely, to cloth expression with words of glory, and
actions, with works of varnish and glory. As when Christ was to come in the
flesh, and sent his Herauld's to the Shepards, The glory of the Lord shined
round about them says the Text. Man is taken with a surrounding glory; once he
had such a glory; in Christ he was to have it again: therefore came the
message so visibly, and so strongly instructing this way. Glory to any sense
works mightily, and be but glory to the ear, glorious words; but glory round,
to ear to eye, to many senses at once, this makes Heaven, and carries all
before it, swallows up the soul. So when Christ shall appear again, you
have the Holy Ghost telling man, that he shall appear in glory. The Holy Ghost
knows that man is a creature much taken with glory, therefore does he cloth
his actions and words with glory. -- according to his glorious power.

God speaks to man as to a creature of state. Persons of state and majesty
mind glory as their nearest kins-man, and take in things only as they come in
glory, and cannot stoop to own and embrace any else; as Kings and persons of
state can embrace nothing but what comes in state, and presented with glory,
suitable to their majesty. Man is a creature of state; of a big spirit; of a
very big spirit in a very bad sense: words must be big when the spirit is big,
or else they will not bear down all before them. One spirit speaks high and
loftily to another: man will not open the everlasting-doores unless the King
speak, and speak as a King, in state, in glory, and therefore does he so
speak -- according to [ his glorious power.

The Holy Ghost speaks so to man, as to make man know his distance; he so, as
to make him know him that speaks to be God, and him that is spoken to, but
man: God speaks so as to make man admire, tremble, stoop. Man is a creature
conceited, and yet of no reach: his conceptions and expressions lessen the
dimensions of God, his wisdom, his power and the like, and in this way man
grows upon God by sinful boldness; and therefore God is feign to put titles
and epithites upon his things himself; to name things according to their
nature himself, which fallen man could have done once, but now cannot; to call
love, -- Love passing knowledge: and wisdom, infinite: his wisdom is infinite
says the Psalmist: and power, glorious To call an Angel, an Angel: and gold,
gold.
: he is feign to cloth every attribute himself with royal apparel, with
titles suitable, that so man may know and keep his distance; hear and fear:
hear and admire: hear and stoop to him that is so glorious and so far above
him in every Limb; that has such a glorious Arm -- glorious power.

Finally God shapes expression so to man, as to hint him of, and move him to,
his highest state, He fetches expression from Heaven and from glory, to mind
man what should take him up, and whither he should drive in all he says and
does: he goes before man in glory, to draw man after him, he speaks gloriously
to man, that man may echo to him, and call divine power as he does, and be
taken with divine power as he is; that man may look about, and turn away his
eye from things that are vainglorious, to that which is indeed glorious, and
will indeed make man so, being strengthened with it. Strengthened with all
might according to his -- glorious power.

glorious Scepter and so holds it forth to your senses, to your eyes to your
ears, what impression does it make upon your hearts? Can ye hear God speak
gloriously and yet not be stird'd? Can ye hear God speak from Mount Sina and
yet not shake? Can ye hear him speak from Mount Zion, as one in Heaven, and
yet not admire him, adore him, and be taken with him?

To unstir'd souls I must first speak from this point, certainly you are
dead. This is the first principle that springs from this point. Unstir'd souls
are dead souls; he that speaks, speaks so gloriously so movingly, that all
men unless they be dead must needs be stirred. Were your souls alive the
words of Christ are so sweet, so full of glory and divine force, that they
must needs stir and take you: were you but asleep the words of Christ are so
glorious and so shining in your eyes that they would awake you. It Is a
remarkable place to this purpose Cant. 7.9. -- and the roof of thy mouth like
the best Wine that goes down sweetly, causing those that are asleep to
speak. Christ's glorious words are very taking, they go down sweetly; if
there be any principle of life in the soul twill stir it: If the heart be
asleep in the lap of any lower sweet, in the lap of any low delights, if
only asleep, and not dead in the nest, this higher sweet and glory, will
awaken it, and make it speak to the praise of him that so exceeds all, in
sweetness and love. Solomon was asleep for a while in the lap of low
delights; but when once Christ began to speak in a glorious style to his
sleepy soul, he awoke presently, and made songs of that glory, that
transcendent glory which he saw. Surely therefore I conclude that they are dead
men whom words of glory, words full of Heaven cannot stir.

How glorious the expression of Christ is here, ye hear: how gloriously
Christ has spoken upon it, out of the mouth of a babe, out of the mouth of a
Worm and no man, ye have likewise heard: of what force and power all has
been upon your hearts ye know: how much more in love with Heaven and with the
Word of Christ, and how much less in love with the World and with your lusts
then you were, you know; ye that yet are as ye were, not a jot better, surely
ye are dead: ye that are yet dead, ah Lord! when when will ye be alive? Let
every heart attend, I will ring the Funeral of the dead.

Hearts dead and unstir'd when Christ Lord have mercy, upon this man's door,
upon his forehead, for he will die in his sin, all the World cannot save him.
Whom truth cannot stir, nothing can; whom glorious words of truth cannot stir,
nothing shall; the man is stretched out for dead, I am now ringing his knell,
does any dead soul hear me?

A Scepter of gold, a glorious power Were there any soul at home when the King
of glory, and the King in glory knocks, certainly 'twould open. What answer can
be made? who can open when no body is at home? Dinah is gone abroad and ravished
by the Shechemites; the heart is gadded abroad, taken and lost in a lie, in a
fading vexing glory, that will be the death of it. An unstird soul is a dead
soul; a dead soul is a lost soul; a lost soul in sin will be found in
judgment, seldom any where else.

I have not yet done ringing the Funeral of the dead, one peale more and I
have done. Ye dead souls, Christ is making your grave do ye not see it? he
is coming to take the length of your corpse with a sword, he will bleed you
first and then bury you afterward. Ye have bled your souls dead, and Christ
will bleed your bodies dead, and then will ye be twice dead and plucked up by
the roots. When ye are gasping for life, will ye be taken and stird with
that mortal power which wounds you? when ye are descended to your long home,
will ye be taken and affected with that power that sends you to Hell? Surely
glorious power gloriously expressed will take your souls, or destroy them. In
what style God speaks, according to it will he make operation in every man,
upward or downward. GODS Words shall have their force, and make issue according
to their majesty and glory in the hearts of you all: words of majesty and
glory; resplendent words, which are so shaped above, as to make strong
reflections of the Sun, upon souls here below, will make very saving or very
killing influence.

God speaks gloriously to take, affect, and save the most obdurate heart, let
him have his design; this is the last thing that I would press upon you, and
this concerns us all. God makes his words glorious, his works glorious, that
the heart may be melted and molded to a glorious form by them, do not
frustrate divine art. Words which go forth with much of God from Heaven, let
them leave much of God in your hearts. When vision is glorious the soul should
be in a transe: when the speaker is in Heaven, the hearer should be there too.
The Lord spoke in glory, in shining light, to Saul; he cast the beauty which he
uses above, upon his words; and these wrought indeed, and made Saul cry out
Lord what will thou have me to do? Methinks this expression in the Text, is as
if there were such another Heaven opening, and such another shining word to
some Saul here, to some bloody malicious sinner. Sinner, sinner, why do thou
shut thine eyes and thine ears, against glorious words of Christ? Some
glorious Meteors they render the Heavens to us, as if they did gloriously open;
Heaven methinks opens in this expression, glorious power; how can any heart
keep out of Heaven, when Heaven opens to it? How can any heart but be taken
with that which is full of nothing but taking luster? what man can pass over
such an expression, without laying his hand on his heart, with such a quaere,
what is that power which the Holy Ghost admires? Surely there is glory indeed,
in that which he calls glorious; O that my soul could see this glory. Where
Christ sets a hand in the margent, pointing to the observation of any thing of
his, that surely is, very remarkable, there the soul should stand still, sit
down and dwell:

The very accents and aspirations of truth must have their place in the heart
of man; the heart is to hold all: not a tittle of truth must fall to the
ground, our hearts must catch it and keep it from falling and dying. Power,
and Love, and Wisdom, they are accented and aspirated; glorious power,
infinite wisdom, love, passing knowledge, etc. These titles and aspirations,
this dust of gold must not be thrown away, but add to the impression of
truth; for it is God setting all his strength, to thrust things into the heart;
it is God using his best soule-saving art, to get into Sanctum sanctorum. As the
heart behaves it self, so Divine truth lives or dies in it; as Divine words,
die or live in the heart, so God dies or lives in the World. Much of God dies,
when glorious expressions make not glorious impressions: much God-dying makes
much man dying: that God is so much dead in England, makes so many men dead.
Man is less then a tittle of truth; yea, the World is less then a tittle of
truth: Spretis punct^s expira^ Anglia.
tittles of truth killed by the Christian World, kille the Christian World so
generally at this day. As truth has apparel'd it self so let it go in the
World, and live in our hearts; let us not take the least spangle from Her
attire; Truth, and Wisdom, and Love, will otherwise lose their dimensions; and
God will lose the glory of his heights and depths of divine dispensations.

The goodness of the heart is, as the words of God make total impression upon
it. It Is the best heart in which God can best read all that he has said to a
tittle; and find glorious impressions, suitable to the glorious words, in
which he delivered himself. How you judge of your hearts I know not, God
judges of them, as your breath turns into his; as your spirits admire, adore,
rise and ascend into Heaven with his. That heart which can read and hear
glorious words of Christ and not be answerably affected, will never be a
glorious Christian. Christ makes the place of his feet glorious; as he treades
in the heart, so he makes it glorious; as his Word makes impression, so is
sanctification and no otherwise: they that hear and let go divine words of
the the movingst form and force, will certainly die loose Souls.

Men go to reading and hearing the word with a careless spirit, it is most
men's sin; all that such get is judgment: they eat and drink judgment
says the Apostle respecting another Ordinance. So these hear and read
judgment to their souls, that is, heart hardening and not heart raising. The
handling of such a glorious expression as this (though by a weak servant of
Christ) must needs have set your hearts something more Heavenward, had ye
heard with such preparation as becomes you. A man finds God in his Word, as he
seeks him in Prayer and no otherwise. Wax receives impression as it is
prepared? Esther must fast and pray, and come with her life in her hand to the
King, to have a glorious Scepter stretched out unto her. So must we come into
the presence of the King of Kings, with much seeking of God and selfe-judging:
with our lives temporal and eternal in our hands, to find glorious words
work gloriously; to have a glorious Scepter stretched out from Heaven to us; a
glorious power working in us, in the hearring of glorious things. He that
minds little about what he is going, finds little but the fruit of his sin;
he goes away from divine ordinances worse then he came to them; he goes away
with a sop; with a heart more poisoned in malice; more hard, dead and cold;
condemned and executed, to wit, tortured.

I conclude this point with a note of admiration. That God will put gloss upon
necessary commodities, such as we cannot be without and do well, to make them
off, is wonderful. Ye do not use to put varnish upon Bread; that is such a
general necessary dish, that its double and maine use to the state of man,
sets it off well enough, without any by-things about the dish; Such is the Word
of God; it is as bread to our souls; of supreme use; this, one would think,
should be enough to set it off with us; and yet because this is not; God paints
bread; guilds Loves and sets them upon the Table to us. Puts gloss upon the
words of eternal life.
That GOD will put himself into a passion, to put us, put Heaven into his
words, to put Heaven into our hearts; lets wonder. That Christ will let fall
his mantle when he ascends, that we may ascend too; make his raised spirit,
break forth into glorious raised words, to raise our spirits too! let his love
and humility be ever before you.

It Is our great work, Christians, it is our great work, to admire God in his
words and works, in his speaking and doing, how he does shape all to a
gaining and saving end of lost man. -- Glorious power; how big-bellied with
Heaven are these words? what a transcendent shape have they, to save! In what a
little can God wrap up much! in what a little, all! in a word, Heaven! in a
word, the Heaven of Heavens! in a word he wraps up glory, infinite glory. --
According to his glorious power. How smilingly does Heaven look upon us in this
expression! God breaks out glory in your very faces here; can ye see so much
of the World to come, and in this World, and not admire?

FINIS.
USEFUL INSTRVCTIONS FOR THESE Evil Times.
COLOSS. 1.11. -- According to his Glorious power, etc.


ALL Stars are glorious, but some are very near the Sun, and double in
magnitude and glory, and as a sun in comparison of other stars. All
dispensations of grace are glorious, but some exceed in glory; so full of
Christ and glory, that they give a great resemblance in the heart, of his
triumphant state in glory, and set the soul as in the borders of Heaven, when
the body is in the belly of Hell: this is here called glorious power, as
appears by the expressions following -- unto all patience and long-suffering
with joyfulnesse. He speaks of such an assisting power, as is superior to all
opposing power, and makes up of it self to the soul, whatsoever the Creature
could, and much more.

-- According to his glorious power. Christ has a glorious Dominion in dying
man, Strengthened with all might according to his loving glorious power, etc.

Things which give being, give beauty and being, glory and being; Esse, and
tale esse: esse, et radiatum esse, Splendidum esse, Nature has a power to put
forth, and a power to shape unto beauty and glory: the earth gives virtue and
glory; life and beauty which makes the earth such a glorious foote-stoole under
us; So do the Heavens give influence and glory: the Sun derives not only
influence, but its very glory to the Sars, which makes the Heavens such a
fruitful and such a glorious Canope over us. So does the Sun of righteousness
give glory and virtue. -- We are called to glory and virtue. According as his
Divine power has given us all things that pertain unto life and godliness,
through the knowledge of him that has called us to -- glory and virtue. 2 Pet.
1.3. Divine power makes virtue, glory and virtue; that is grate unto a glorious
and very Heavenly height; grace unto tranquillity and triumph, let
disadvantages in the World be what they will. He spoke this to sufferers; they
might think their calling to be to nothing but misery, or at least to nothing
but naked godliness and Gospell-profession which exposes to much hardship; no,
says he, ye are called to more then naked virtue, then mere conscience
according to such Gospell-prnciples, ye are called to glory and virtue, to the
participation of such virtue, as will work gloriously, and never leave working
so, let what opposition soever be made, till it rise above all opposition unto
all glory.

Divine power works in order to truth. The promise to us Gentiles is (which
stand not in the first and prime relation, not in the highest sphere of love)
rest, yea glorious rest; dispensations so rich as to rise unto glory, joy and
triumph as their rest above is. And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse
stand for an ensign of the people, to it shall the Gentiles seek, and his
rest shall be glorious: glory, says the Original (i) a rest so glorious, as
shall be very near that glory which is above. He shall quiet guilty
conscience, and crown it; sprinckle it, and adorn it; he shall give a spirit
of Peace, and a spirit of triumph; a glorious rest, a rest next to that above,
where there is no restlessenesse, nor any thing wanting that may make the soul
fully happy. The promise is, a Lord, and a glorious Lord; streams, yea,
Rivers, broad Rivers. But there the glorious Lord will be unto us, a place of
broad Rivers and streams, etc. The expressions note Divine Power working
gloriously, Isa. 33.21.
in the Kingdom of grace; raising grace here under the Gospel to a glorious
height; a power setting the soul in Heaven, the body being in Earth, the soul
in glory, though the body in shame. These are the words of promise: now the
work of power is to make words of promise words of truth; to accomplish truth;
to give full being to all that God has said, that not a tittle fall to the
ground. Power works gloriously necessarily, as engaged by promise.

simpliciter, but power ornate, not only a power which is absolutely necessary
to uphold the being of such a thing, but power also to adorn, dignify, and
felicitate such a being upheld. Kings and Kingdoms have a power unto glory, as
well as a power unto life and livelihood. I will fasten him as a nail in a
sure place, and he shall be for a glorious throne unto his Fathers house. Isa.
22.23. Power works in order to state, as well as in order to truth -- he shall
be for a glorious throne. We are Kings and therefore must necessarily have
power ornate, power gloriously working in us; grace, and grace unto glory;
being, and triumphing: There is being in Christ and triumping in Christ;
triumphing, is glorious power, and this necessarily belongs to a crown a
Kingdom.

Power works in Order to express That you may know what is the hope of his
calling, and what the riches of the glory, of his inheritance in the Saints.
Ephesians. 1. They had aid and glorious aid under the old Covenant, power and
glorious power, so have we; and much more: our Ministration does exceed in
glory says the Apostle, by how much nearer all glory then they. Power works
and will work still more and more glorious within and without as the Christian
world draws nearer and nearer full glory, as all things work strong
stnearest their spring and rise. Power works gloriously now, but it will work
far more gloriously every day then other; the Moon will become a Sun, and the
Sun seven fold more glorious then now it is.

Steven found it so; 'twill work gloriously in Heaven, 'twill work gloriously
in earth, in dust; 'twill work gloriously in man, in beast, in any creature;
'twill make man allmighty women, children, any as it lists: Its absolute, and
works so; it can do any thing and does so; it can work gloriously in a
dunghill, and works as it can; puts forth according to its supreme, and
glorious nature. It Is said of Christ that he manifested forth his glory when he
did that first miracle of turning the water into Wine: there he wrought, John
2.11.
and put forth as he was; glorious power then began to work; according to its
own absolute and glorious nature. As every thing does, and will necessarily
work, according to its own nature; what glory any flow has closed up in its
nature, and within its one bud, it will put forth. The result of all is this,
power works gloriously, necessarily, naturally; in a way of grace, and engaged
providence, and not gloriously in way of miracle now under the Gospel.

So much to be had, and so little enjoyed makes me wonder and grieve: grace
communicable, and grace unto glory, and yet men have no grace, Heaven
communicable, and yet men in hell, glory communicable, and yet many in sin,
in shame; how comes this? England is rich and yet many beggars and tattered
Creatures, neither food nor clothing: is all well ordered? does every one
work hard? were every one diligent might they not live well in England? is
there not plenty of bread, plenty of clothing; fine bread, glorious apparel;
Heaven drops and it drops fatness, why are your souls so lean? in your
fathers house is bread enough; feasting, banqueting, junketing, glorious dishes
in wisdoms house, how is it that you have nothing? not enough to hold life and
soul together? power works gloriously, you feel none; under the power of
sin, as if there were no power of God at all working in the World.

Sinners, the first thing that I have to tell you from this point is that, you
are wholly without excuse. There is power enough working to subdue the
strongest lust, what then can you plead? will not glorious power lead
captivity, captive? kill killing sins? men sin and lay it upon their
weakness, and so rest and rub on? ah Lord! what a life is this GOD will judge
you, and lay it upon your wickedness; is not glorious power able to relieve in
any state? weakness becomes wickedness as it is rested in, and pleaded for:
a soul given to shifting has no mind to leave his sin, there is no damning
temper but this. This is one principle that springs from this point there must
be no pleading for sin; no not for any sin, though never so great and strong,
the remedy is so ready, so gloriously all sufficient.

A second principle that springs from this point, is this. That sin has its
notorious aggravation: how great is that sin which is committed under the
neglect of glorious power! within the reach of a glorious arm! GOD does number
sin, and measure sin, he gives it a name, and a proper name: sin, and
such a sin, he calls it by its kind, and by its color, skarlet and crimson.
As there is a glorious power, so there be glorious sins, Splendida peccata,
skarlet, crimson sins, and these are such as are committed against glorious
means, glorious light, grace, and aid. Sin is aggravated but from one
stander by, but he is more then all, more then a thousand witnesses.

Who did hear? who did see? who did accuse? who did grieve? who would have
relieved? what power had his to relieve? so will GOD plead with poor sinners;
so will he circumstance, and take the dimension of your sins, these little
dashes and strokes by the first line will draw it forth to a great breadth, and
make it look very broad, black, and bloody; the groundwork, and first
draught thus filld up, will make the face of sin look very ugly. Sinners you
sin under observation: yea, that is not all, you sin under aggravation, this
will bring condemnation, the condemnation, This is the condemnation that light
is come into the World, etc. Power, glorious power, works in the World and yet
men lie in their sins.

self, and keep up its glory at a pinch though sinners cannot.

Lets here a little admire the misery of men, that lie in their sins, from
the point in hand. What work will glorious power make when set against a man,
against a worm, and no man; against a sinner a Creature worse then a Worm,
one that has not so much, as the simplicity of its being, to shelter it, as a
Worm has; glorious power, it will work wonders to make you miserable, 'twill
turn it self into a hand, a deadly hand, writing sin in the wall still
wheresoever ye become; 'twill make sin ever before you: My sin is ever
before me says David. If it can do so in reference to a child of God, much
more will it in reference to a wicked man: power 'twill give sin a shape, a
stareing ghastly shape, that shall stare you in the face, where ever ye are or
go, as some pictures very artificially drawn will look upon one which way
soever one goes. Power, 'twill make sin never to look off you, nor you never
be able to look off it: glorious power, 'twill turn sin into a Ghost and
make it haunt you up and down the World, from Eden to the Land of Nod, from
East to West, and weary you of your lives.

Glorious power will bring judgment to your doors; Hell, home; 'twill set
your Coffin, your black bearers ready, at your heels, and make your conscience
tell you as he did Ananias, they are at the door which are ready to carry
you, to your long home, 'twill make your sin find you out; 'twill turn your
sin into a Bloud-hound, and make it find you out wheresoever you be, and
pull you by the Throat. -- Your sins shall find you out, says he to the
Reubenites, glorious power will pull you down if your nest were in the
stars; 'twill fetch you up, if you were in the bottom of the deep. Glorious
power can make a Pursivant to find you, and fetch you, from the ends of the
Earth, to judgment, and to your place. Glorious power can put you into
darkness, into utter darkness, into blackness and darkness as Jude
speaks, into exquisite darkness, and yet where you shall see exquisitely, to
wit, spirits which here you cannot do; damned spirits; spirits burnt black with
everlasting burning; spirits, flaming spirits; spirits all a fire, burned and
burning, sucking in, and breathing forth in one another face nothing but fire,
unquenchable fire.

Glorious power can put you into darkness (yea) under darkness, they are
reserved under darkness says Jude. Glorious power, can bundle up you, and
bundle up darkness, and put one bundle upon another, and put you under-most
under all the weight of Hell: Christ can put all the weight of hell upon one
cursed spirit. Glorious power can cast you into the bottom of the bottomless
pit; and chain you there with everlasting chains -- reserved in everlasting
chains, under darkness, unto the judgment of of the great day says Jude.
These things, sinners, have I spoken that you may dread glorious power, seeing
you will not love it, and seek out to be saved by it.

A fourth principle which springs out of That our condition is very
advanceable. Power works gloriously, you may live, very near Heaven, as well
as very far of, if you will, you may see the holy Land, you may eat clusters of
the fruit of the Country above. As you order things you may live in Heaven or
Hell here. Christians I have a high question to ask you, how near Heaven do
you live? do you see it? do you feel it? did you ever? have you any bunches
of the fruit of the holy Land? The spirit of God is in you, but is the spirit
of glory, and of God in you? you have grace; but have you grace and peace? you
may have grace and peace, but are these multiplied, as the Apostle speaks, to a
glorious height? does a glorious spirit and power dwell and work in you? my
Dove which art in the cleft of the Rocks (says Christ) let me see thy
countenance, and hear thy voice, etc. So say I to you Christians which are in
desolate conditions mourning amongst Rocks, and hard-ships like doves, let me
see your countenance, let me hear your voice, what is your peace, your joy,
your love, your hope? all these are the rays and beams of a glorious power.

I have none says one, I never had says another I doubt whether ever I shall
says an other, this last I like worst, for surely he is furthest off from the
blessing of glorious power. There be but two things that I know which hinder
power from working gloriously, glorifyingly in the soul, and they are sin
loved and unbelief; I will insist upon these a little, because I would have
those that mourn, comforted; all that belong to Heaven, in Heaven. From sin
no man can cease, but cease love to sin, if ye would have a Heaven upon
earth, a glorious power and presence of GOD in you. Render your spirits free to
God, let them not be ensnared with any lust, such intanglement spoils your
glory, kills a glorious working spirit and power in you. Set wide open your
hearts, those everlasting-doores to the King of Glory, and only, to the King
of Glory, and the King of Glory in much glory will come in; a glorious Throne
will he erect in your souls. Pure hearts see the Face of God; impure, only
the black back-parts of GOD. Blessed are the pure in heart, they see GOD. The
heart is pure as love is pure, love is pure as it goes all to Christ, to him
that is all pure. As love goes all to Christ, so it turns all into Heaven, in
the heart; into glorious presence. All our work should be, to be disingaging
out hearts still from all here; Heaven comes into the heart as earth goes out,
the heart sees God as it purifyes it self. Blessed are the pure in heart for
they shall see God. Purity makes capacity of Heaven; a clean heart is Christ's
most intimate companion, he spreades open his Glory in this Bosom.

The holy'st men have always had the most glorious visions, as Daniel, and
Job. God chooses his place to make Heaven; he makes Heaven above; in Jerusalem
that is above: in souls that are above, above the vanities of this World, in
love and desire, he makes a Heaven. Moses is led up to a mount to see Canaan;
Christ upon a mount had his glorious transfiguration; he had his Heaven upon a
mount. Love must mount above all these low things, ere the soul can see
Heaven; enjoy glorious presence. You cannot lie-along upon earth, and see the
Heaven of Heavens; you may lie along upon earth, and see earthly Heavens, that
must pass away. Sin loved and the soul chooses his Heaven here, no man shall
have two Heavens, two Heavens that differ specie. Power will not work
gloriously in that heart that works filthily. A man may see hell in his sin
but shall never see Heaven. It falls out unhapily still with man, when he
goes about to make a heaven here, when he sets love at work to take her
fortune, to make her glory and felicity here below as she can; this checkes
the working of a glorious power in any heart, and sets it a working another
way, to whip the man with vexation of spirit, for seeking Heaven in Earth, in
glorious vanities.

So far as the heart is unmortifyed, it is not simple with God; simplicity is an
absolute requisite, to make capacity of a glorious working power in the soul.
God descended like a Dove, upon a Dove; sweetly and gloriously, upon him in
whose mouth was no guile. A heart and a heart, has none of Gods heart. God
never proclaims himself well-pleased in that heart, which makes not him his
pleasure. Divine Power works not gloriously, where the heart works basely: An
hypocrite has least of Heaven of any man, and most of hell.

As men draw near to God, so they see him; near to him in quality, and near
to him in duty. We see heaven best upon our knees. As we glorify God, so he
glorifyes us. When we open our mouths wide, he gives us great things, filling
things; when we beg for flaggons we are stayed with them. At the throne of
grace, we find grace, grace in glory; heaven at Gods feet; when most in his
presence, most in Heaven. A man must go to heaven to find heaven: a man must
live in heaven, to have heaven live in him. Much going to heaven, brings heaven
at last, down along with one. Things do work best in their own element;
power works most gloriously in heaven; the nearer the heart comes to heaven in
simplicity, in purity, in pure qualities and habits, in pure acts and exercise,
the more glorious does power wo^ke in the soul still.

Unbelief is another hinderance of a glorious working power: Said I not if ye
would believe, ye should see the glory of God? says Christ. By faith Enoch
was translated. Soul translations, soul liftings up, soul raptures are in
faith, in the strong exercise of faith. As we kiss, we are kissed. As we
embrace, we are embraced. I am my wel-beloveds; and my well-beloved is mine.
An act of faith, and then an act of recompense, an act of joy. An act of trust,
and then an act of return. I am my welbeloveds, and my welbeloved is mine.
This is power working, and then glorifying its own work in the heart. It Is the
souls going out to Christ like Zacheus, and then bringing Christ home with
him, and after this follow feasting and joy, and giving away any thing, whilst
he is enjoyed, that is all. Things work as they are in sight; it is so in the
body, it is so in the soul. Faith sets glorified Christ in sight; glorified
Christ in sight makes glorious work in the heart: In whom though now ye see
him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakeable and full of glory. --
In whom though now ye see him not; that is, bodily: but believing, that is,
seeing him soulely. As our soul vision is so in our soul state, for joy, or
grief, shame or glory. If the soul can see light in the countenance of
Christ, t'ath joy, glory, heaven as full as it can hold; if nothing but
darkness, t'ath nothing but grief. As ye believe, so is your Heaven or hell.

With a note of admiration, I will conclude this point. Christians admire love
that makes two heavens for such as are worthy of none. Is it not enough that
power works gloriously above, but must it work so here too? I am not worthy,
that thou should come under my roof said he, and yet Christ was not then in
state; that Christ in state, in glory, shoud come under such a roof, such a
rotten roof, as ours here is! That light should arise in darkness, took the
Psalmist much: that glorious light should arise in a poor dark soul,
glorious power in a poor over-borne sinful soul, should wonderfully affect
us, and set us into holy admiration! If a man die shall he live again? said
Job. Thus much took him. How much more then should this. If a man live, shall
he live again? If a man have a heaven here, shall he have another hereafter.
If a man have glory here, shall he have glory again? shall he have glory upon
glory? be clothed upon? Out of Heaven into Heaven? shall he pass from glory
to glory by the spirit and power of God?

Christians what a King of glory do we wait upon! Beb-chamber, dining-roome
glorious: yea, hall and out-roomes, which border upon hell, glorious: power
works gloriously in a house not made with hands; yea, and in a house made with
hands, with earthen hands, and earthen feet. Power works gloriously in Earth,
forms an earthen Vessel unto glory, forms glory unto it, in it; puts glory
in the earthen Vessel, and then puts the earthen Vessel into glory. The
Queens Daughter is all glorious, indeed: glorious within, without; glorious
hereafter, yea, glorious here. It lies upon you Christians admiringly to speak
and talk of these things. They] shall speak of the glory of thy Kingdom, and
talk of thy power, etc. Psalm. 145.11. Yea, not only admire it, but draw
comfort from it, according to all your fears and distresses. What can ye
want, which glorious power cannot help you to? What is it, that Heaven cannot
make up? Suck this Honey-combe your selves, I only can put it into your hand.
Time calls me away.

FINIS.
USEFUL INSTRUCTIONS FOR THESE Evil Times.
COLOSS. 1.11. -- Unto all patience.


YOu have a hint here, what is the state of a Christian in this World, a state
that needs a bearing, a very bearing frame of heart: patience all patience, if
there be any thing more then this, and beyond this in long-suffering, it needs
this too. Strengthened with all might according to his glorious power [unto all
patience] and long-suffering with joyfulnesse.

I take these two latter expressions to be Synonimicall, or very near it; the
one explaining the other. All patience is long-suffering with joy:
long-suffering with joy, is all patience. What difference they have [I thinke]
is Secundum intra and extra, and so I shall prosecute them. All patience notes
the habit; long-suffering with joy, notes the exercise. The one notes the
grace of patience in its formality; the other, in its use; in its highest use,
as the other notes it, in its full'st esse and strong'st habit; for long
suffering with joy, is patience in its highest and furthest use. Varying and
redoubling of expression is to reach things thoroughly, and to hold them out
most effectually; 'twill be our best way therefore (I judge) to go after the
Holy Ghost step by step, word for word; in this way we shall tread surest, and
be likely to find most, touching the nature of this needful grace of patience.

First therefore of patience; then of all patience some thing shall be said, as
God shall give assistance. Definitio.
Patience is a holy behavior in affliction; It Is virtus versata circa adversa.
A grace that keeps man gracious, in all conditions; good in a bad condition;
holy, against all disadvantages of holinesses, within or without. Man is a
creature since his fall full of wants, and as full of disquiet, and this turns
all wants into sins and miseries: he is a creature beside the rule, and his
punishment for this, keeps him beside the rule through disquiet, and so renders
man totally miserable; miserable without any felicity, or hope of felicity:
this is the gall of bitterness, which patience takes away.

Patience takes away the sin of misery; the misery of misery; the afflicting
strength of misery; the sting and teeth of every affliction; the malignity of
every cup of trembling; the unhappiness of every sad condition, and makes a
felicity in misery. It Is rectitudo animi sub statu infelici. A rectitude of
mind, under a cross and crooked condition: A heart moving by the word of God,
when whipped by the hand of God. It Is Jonah praying in the Whales belly: it is
heaven made by divine art, in the belly of hell; this is patience.

Patience is a soul enjoying it self in every condition, when nothing else.
Anima in omni semetipsa fruens.
There is more truth in the understanding, then power of truth in the heart;
therefore is man though very knowing, yet very unruly when all suits not to his
will; hence it is that the soul can hardly enjoy it self, when it cannot enjoy
all it would. Dispossession of the creature, makes dispossession of the soul;
man in want, distracted; not compos facultatis, because not compos facultatum:
not master of wit, because not master of wealth: the man is no man, because not
such a man: the man has nothing, because not such a thing: because no
children, no life; as one dead; would be dead: let me have this or that, or let
me die: let me not have my soul, if I may not have this or that which my soul
desires. This is vanity grown up to maturity, and turned into vexation of
spirit, which patience cures. Patience is a soul still enjoying it self, when
nothing else. -- in your patience possess your souls. Patience helps a man to
his soul again, that is, to the enjoyment of his soul and of himself when
all is gone. It Is a christian semper idem, one that is the same in sanctity in
the greatest poverty, as in the greatest prosperity: the same in all holy and
sweet frame of spirit in the greatest affliction, as in the greatest
advancement: it is one blessing, God giving, and doing the like when taking
away: It Is one that has all, having God, when Esau is coming to take away all.
-- J have all says Jacob in a very sad condition.

Est aequanimitas sacra.
Patience, it is an even Sea in all winds; a serene soul in all weathers. A
thread even spun, with every wheel of providence: it is a soul above extremes;
neither in excess, nor in defect; neither over sensible, nor under sensible of
any affliction: neither without tears, nor without hope; neither murmuring,
nor presuming: neither despising chastisment, nor fainting when corrected.
Affected with all; cast down with nothing. Quiet, when tossed; very quiet,
while extremely tossed, expecting his salvation, salvation from God when none
can be had from man. Patience is not stupidity; an insensibility of soul under
Gods hand, that is a block, a stone, a Nabal, not a patient man. Patience is not
a mute drooping, a sullen silent soule-sinking and consuming under adversity;
this is despair; this is soul vitality spent; the marrow of the bones dried
up. Patience is virtus in medio a virtue between these two extremes; a soul
sensible of one hand upon him, and of another under him; a soul sensible of a
rod and a staff; and so very quiet and very comfortable in a very low
condition: as having nothing, and yet possessing all things: this is patience.

Patience it is a divine power, Est vis sacra subjugans.
a holy subjugating power working in the soul, rendering all afflictions
still-borne. God may say what he will, do what he will, and a patient soul
charges God with nothing. If a reasonable creature be called dog, used like a
dog, yet patience will not let this dog bark, nor flee out, but call him Lord,
which calls her dog. -- and she said, truth Lord the dogs eat of the
crumb's, etc. Mat. 15.27. Patience gives sweet language for sour, to God and
man: being reviled, reviles not again: being defamed, intreates. God has the
day in a patient soul: he may use his tongue or his hand how he will, a
patient heart is dumb and answers not again. Passion says, I do well to to
be angry, but patience says, I do well to lay my hand on my mouth: I have
spoken once, but I will speak no more; it is thy doing. Patience takes all well
at Gods hands, she loves him so dearly. Patience can give no ill language,
how ill soever it goes with her friend, in whose house she dwells. Patience is
a silent laying down all at Gods feet: it is a christian proclaiming freedom
to Christ, to do his own will with him and his, in love. Patience was never
known to put any other limitation upon the almighty. Make me childlesse, make
me husbandlesse, wivelesse, penilesse, any thing, so thou do it in love to my
soul, says patience. It Is the Lord let him do what he will, said that
patient man. God has freedom proclaimed him, to do what he will, with a
patient man; nothing shall be retorted upon him. Patience can be in honor, in
disgrace, high or low at Gods dispose and be contented. A patient man can live;
can die, and see advantage in either: to live, Christ: to die, more Christ the,
greatest gain of all: he can see gain in all that God does; gain in
sickness, gain in disgrace, gain in loss; the greatest gain in the
great'st loss; soule-gaine, in bodily loss; and therefore can patience speak
of evils as good, of bitters as very sweet. Patience can kiss a rod; kiss
one that looks frowningly, which every one cannot do.

Patience, it is a soul at rest. It Is sacra requies.
A soul daily at rest in God. Wives gone, substance gone, house plundered,
Ziklag burnt, all mourning, many murmuring, ready to stoning and killing of
David, and yet he makes up all in God and is at rest: this is patience.
Patience, it is Jacob sleeping heartily upon a stone; a heart at rest in
hardships: it is a poor Widow cheerfully giving and obeying a Prophet, though
but a little meal in the barrel, nor but a little Oil in the Cruse: it is one
cheerfully going to eat her last provision and die: it is one quietly going up
to take a view of Canaan and die at the door making death, life; Christ,
Canaan. It Is one going to sacrifice an only son, with a -- God will provide:
Patience can speak no worse divinity, in the greatest strait: It Is one
breathing out a soul at rest, in the face of the cruel'st misery; not my will
but thy will be done. If this Cup may not pass, let my blood pass; if this
cause cannot live without I die, let me die: let money go, let limbs go, let
heart-bloud go, that Christ may stay, the Will of Christ may be done. Let the
will of the Lord be done, this is a patient man's, Amen. All runs into this,
That patience, is a holy behavior in affliction.

In short, patience has three things in it, R^sumptio.
1 Passion subdued, 2. The soul quieted, 3. Expectation and waiting for good.
A heart plained and made even with its condition, neither higher nor lower; a
heart still and taking all well; a heart expecting of, and waiting for what is
needed, and Christ has promised; this is a patient soul.

of many virtues, the result of many graces combining: it is virtutum virtus, a
good child, of good parents. It Is virtus a virtutibus derivata, Therefore
called virtus imperfecta by the Moralist.
a pleasant branch from many roots under ground. Patience presupposes an
understanding full of the best light; the soul is argued, not beaten quiet as
you beat a dog. Thou speak like a foolish woman, says he, shall I receive
this and not that at Gods hand? he argues his soul quiet. Folly wrangles --
thou speak like a foolish woman. A fool was never a patient person; he
cannot argue with his heart, nor hold forth convincing, satisfying principles.
Clear divine light swayes, and keeps down all insurrection in a depraved
state:

Patience presupposes a divine understanding, Divine will; that is, a will
subdued: where there is a stubborn will, there is not, nor cannot be a patient
heart: every high thought is brought into subjection, ere the heart becomes
patient. A proud heart resists, and is resisted; this is duro durum, flint to
flint, fire to fire, man hot and God hot; no patience nor quiet in this soul,
nor can be. High things made low; rough, plain; a proud heart, humble; then
follows patience. Patience has a humble meek mother, as any holy child in the
soul; therefore is meeknes (in a promiscuous, way of speaking) put for
patience, whereas it is indeed the mother of patience, according to that
expression -- patient abiding of the meek, etc. A meek heart, makes patient
abiding the will of God. The will subdued, the heart humble, and the man will
stay Gods leisure for any thing.

knowing that the trial of your faith works patience says the Apostle.
Patience it is a Dove fleeing to and again in a deluge, and then resting the
sole of her foot in the Arc: it is a spirit tossed and tumbled within it self,
and then rests in Christ by faith, waiting what he will say and do; therefore
it is said that tribulation works patience; because tribulation when strong
works the soul off from all things here, and puts a man upon the exercise of
faith in Christ for relief, and so sets the soul to expect and wait for good
from God, when it can find none any where else. Before tribulation comes, a
man usually does not exercise faith, because he has where withal within his
own reach to bear up himself, and so thinks he is patient when indeed he is
not, but one calm, in a calm; whereas patience properly is one calm in a
storm; a heart quiet, waiting and expecting good, when it can feel nothing
but evil, nor see nothing but a naked Word of God.

Patience presupposes faith, and hope patience of hope: it is the result in the
heart, of the exercise of both these; it is the blessing of faith and hope, it is
the rest, quiet, expectation, which the acting of these graces raise, whereby
the soul is as if it had all it wants. As the soul in extremity stays it
self upon truth, so it is believing; as it expects accomplishment of truth, so
it rises to hope: as it waits for what it expects, so it rises higher, and this
act of the soul is properly called patience. The soul at this height, is
miserable, as if not miserable, as he uses the phrase about marriage, married
as if not married, possessing as if not possessing; This soul does not
possess, and yet is as if he did possess, he has little, and yet is as if he
had all.

charity suffers long says the Apostle, it indures all things, love
represents every thing to view, lovely; all that God does and all that man
does: things thus represented, the heart cannot swell nor sour it self with
its own thoughts: love renders every person and every thing fragrant, the
veriest dunghill fragrant; when every thing smells sweet to the soul, the
soul keeps it self sweet: love thinks no evil; thinking evil ^akes
evil passion; as the soul is possessed of things, so it works within it
self, as the heart works within it self, so it makes passion still, good or
bad.

husband from wife, soul from body; he is setting every relation a bleeding,
one in the bosom of another: this calls loud for patience.

God seems to be dealing with England as with Job: yea, with every good man in
England as with Job; he seems to be as one resolved to try us all to the
quick, in Country and City; to bring us to a morsel of Bread; to strip us of
all (which God knows England has abused) and to set us upon a dunghill
licking our wounds; to take away all, and then to set us in the want of all, to
complain for pity to them that will show none, but power Vinegar into our
wounds, when we cry for mercy. Ah Christians! will not such a condition call
for patience? All in action now calls for nothing but patience; all in view
now, calls for nothing but patience: what a double miserable man is that,
which lives in England now without patience! and yet Lord how much do I see it
wanting every where!

I see an evil springing up in these Evil Times, which will spoil us all, if
GOD prevent it not, and that is impatience: activity degenerates into
impatience; forward men can bear no check from providence, the most forward
men, are become the most froward men: we set our mercies a day (which is more
then we can answer) and because God does not observe our limitation, we flee
out in heart and tongue fearfully. 1. I am weary of this City to hear the
murmuring and impatience that is in it. The Country looks upon the City, the
City looks upon the Parliament, the Parliament looks one upon another; Commons
upon Lords, Lords upon Commons, all upon the King, and all look short of the
King of Kings; this God saw right well, the fruit of it is upon us; we have
lost much mercy this way, and now are at murmuring hard that we may lose all,
relieving presence in the wilderness, and Canaan too. Will murmuring and
impatience ever bring us into that Canaan we hope for? Christians you fear the
King, you fear the Cavaliers, you fear Commanders, you fear the Parliament,
I tell you my heart; I am more afraid of you, of your unbelief, of your
impatience, that this will prove a City spoiling, a Kingdom spoiling evil
above all.

I will give you some principles of patience, God takes time to administer to
public bodies. England has been a long time polluting her self, and this
not with a Low but with a very high hand, God is going gently to repeat over
all, and will you not give him time? it is but Justice to allow much time to one
that is to repeat much. What has been the course of the public, for this
twenty years together, you have forgotten: what has been your course for
twenty, forty, fifty years, for these hundred years, since we and our fathers
have enjoyed the Gospel, you have forgotten: how cold, how formalizing; how
careless in your Families, how Excessive and abusive of the creature, how
bowel-lesse and mercy-lesse; who can reckon up how you have ordered your time
and talents? God can, but he must have time: will you thrust much work upon
God, and not give him time to go through with it? God takes time to administer
Justice: he was forty years telling Israel, how they grieved him by their
murmuring: you would think much, if he should be so long a telling England, of
her present murmuring. So afterward he took eight years, and then eighteen
years, and then twenty years, to tell Israel what they did under their
Judges; and then seventy years to tell Israel what they did under their Kings:
not any public body that I know of in the Scripture, but when God has come
to administer Justice to it, he has taken some years to do it. Great houses
that have many rooms in them, and these very foul, cannot be swept presently.

Secondly, as God takes time to administer Justice to public bodies, so he
takes time to administer mercy to public bodies. The Tabernacle was long a
raising; the first Temple which was to exceed that, longer; the second Temple
which was to exceed that, much longer; and the third which is to exceed all,
longest of all. The tent or Tabernacle which was but small (I judge) was a
year a making: the first Temple, seven years: the second Temple, forty and
six years: if this had any typical signification (as I believe it had) it
might well point at this, that a public house for Christ, under the Gospel,
would be long a raising; I mean, a worship suiteable to Gods Will, borne up by
public authority. According to what way God will dispense himself, it is
Justice and duty to wait for him: I find not one hint in Scripture, of
sudden raising this last house. You show your selves ignorant men, you err,
not knowing the Scriptures, which are impatient because travailing England is
not delivered in an hour, in a year. We have scarce travailed so long yet, as
the Tabernacle was a building; sure I am, not so long as the first Temple was a
building, there is no ground therefore of impatience, who have more noble
things in hand. The son rises more and more, and so must up to the perfect day;
this is the order that Christ will proceed in, to bring full mercy into the
World will you be impatient, that the sun rises no faster? that he is not at
the meridian, as soon as the day dawnes?

God does fit for favors and then gives them: he does hew stones, for this
last Temple. We are a generation low in spirit, and yet impatient that we have
not high things. Do you give children and fools what they desire? do you not
instruct and discipline, and then give? yea and then too, what in your wisdom
you know good. We are utterly below high things, afraid of full mercies: is it
not the fear of some, that the Puritan faction (as they call them) will be too
strong? the discipline of the Gospel too strict? our spirits are base to God,
and yet we wonder that noble things are not given unto us. Do not men play
with their light? prefer policy to truth? Judge that Christ may wear a party
colored coat; man's wisdom, mixed with Gods; our own inventions and truth weaved
together. Tell me the best of you all, which are so impatient for reformation,
which amongst you all does deal so fairly with your light, and so simply with
your conscience, as to render your selves capable of so great a good, as you
seem to wrangle for? Let things go how they will, you can still shuffle
along; is not a shuffling condition fit for a shuffling spirit? God walks to
you as you walk to him, and yet you are impatient: he cuts you out a condition
with his Sword, suitable to your hearts; he sees what consciences you have,
that you stick at nothing, why should he remove what you can swallow? why
should you think much to live upon Husks, if you can eat Husks? when I
look upon that cold, neutrall, indifferent spirit, that is, in English
Christians generally. I wonder to hear any complain, that their best mercies
are so long a coming. You impatiently talk of the Parliament, of the Army, of
this and that, one is this and another is that, and therefore your misery
lives, your mercies linger, and you die: I tell you, it is Englands neutrality,
that has brought her to this state, that keeps her in this state, that will
spend her and end her with bleeding, if any thing do.

A third principle is this, inferior agents are all overruled; Judas and his
bloody crew, move by a supreme council, they could not else have done to
Christ what they did, and so Christ told them. Providence orders all agent and
actions, to her own end; not to such an end, proposed by such a man: if love be
in the breast of the first agent it is no matter how all other agents act you
are to conclude they act well still, though you cannot see it: no heart could
be impatient, or wrangle, if this principle were but well swallowed. Actions
and agents may move very strangely in our view, and yet very orderly to the
greatest good, as their supernatural end. I would ask any impatient soul but
this, what is in the breast of God respecting our cause? love, or not love? if
you Judge love to be in God to our cause, believe that all agents and actions
are ordered by it, and will bring forth in Gods time, a blessed end.

A fourth principle is this, The employment of War is a new thing to England: a
council of War and a council of State, are two things: experience, makes
Expertnesse it is weakness to fall out which young beginners, because not
expert: every one does not know how to stick a Hog to the heart at one thrust,
such must have the liberty to thrust again, and it is well if they kill him at
last. Would you have men old Soldiers, which never saw the field before? let
any Chronicle produce braver courage and carriage by young beginners, then ours
have hitherto shown both at Kenton and Branford? Passion makes u^ look over,
what God does by us and for us.

A fifth principle is this, Gods providence God we see is by so much the more
watchful, that we are unskilful, have we cause then to be impatient? did not
Gods providence make up our improvidence at Branford? could so many else have
been kept, from coming to the gates of your City, by so few? and so unarmed?
our men wanted powder and shot, and our God shot off for them, and for us, or
else certainly we had had their Cannon, thundering about our Ears, for a
Sabbath peale. Many advantages we have given them, but they are cursed to the
adversary, they do not thrive with them; they labor in the very fire, and
blast themselves upon the top of their best advantages. When God is
all-sufficient, in such a redundant sense as this, to supply over sight, by his
watchful Eye, what soul dares to murmr?

Impatience against called instruments to any work, is impatience against GOD,
and he will take it so: who is Moses? and who is Aron? that you murmr
against them? who is the Parliamente that you are impatient against it? are
they not a called body by God? are they not wise men, holy men; true hearted,
tender hearted; and wish you as well as themselves, as well as you can wish
your selves! Do they not use the best ability they have to do us service?
shall we requite them for all, cost and pains, with murmuring against them?
God will take this to heart, and charge you with murmuring against him.

that we can see man no more: that we can see man no more in our great works, a
Finger of GOD is in it, that he may be seen and admired, as the Author of
all. The Prophet speaking (and certainly of this time) how this Generation
should come down, says, Hab. 2.13.
Behold is it not of the Lord of Hosts that the People labor in the very
Fire, etc. For the Earth (says he) shall be filled with the Knowledge of the
Glory of the Lord, etc. Not with the Knowledge of the Glory of any man. Men can
do no more then they can; men shall do no more then they do, that you make
not Gods of them: That you have no advantage to make a man a GOD, are you
impatient? that God will not use whom you will, and how you will, therefore are
you impatient: that God is not so wise as you, that he loves not himself, so
well as you love him, therefore are you impatient.

To conclude all, let me ask you all one question more; wherein has GOD
given you cause to be impatient from the first of our troubles till now? for
which of his good deeds do you stone him? (for truly impatience is no other
but a stoning of Christ) for his good deeds at Hull? For his good deeds at
Ports-mouth? for his good deeds at Kenton? What has Christ done from the
beginning of this Parliament to this day, to cast discouragement upon any
soul? To cast any heart into a passion. Let his dealings bespeake you patient.
I say no more.

FINIS.
USEFUL INSTRVCTIONS FOR THESE Evil Times.
COLOSS. 1.11. -- Unto [all patience, etc.


COncerning Patience according to its formality, you have heard: concerning
patience now according to its graduality I am to speak, according as the term
here in my Text leads me, -- all] Patience, etc. Patience is a quality, and
qualities admit of intention and remission; a man may have less or more, much
or all Patience, as the expression here is. As there is little faith and great
faith, so there is little Patience and great patience; could ye not watch with
me one hour? that was little patience. What if J will that he tarry till I
come? this is great patience, all patience, as the term here is.

totum subjecti, the man all patient: that is, patient in tongue and in heart.
It Is very usual and very natural to broken men to make false Coin, to put
silver and gold without, when the piece is brass within, and not a quarter so
much worth as it goes for. Many a piece is pure metal to look upon, and yet
take away the guild, and but base metal within: So many a man has a painted
patience, an outside patience, a Lip patience, as there is a Lip-love; very
patient to talk with and to look upon; very cool in the lips, but burning
within. There is a white powder, a wildfire so ordered, as to make no great
report; so there is a pale impatience, that looks white in the face, but red
and bloody within; it makes little report in the tongue, but yet is deadly
wildfire. Man is a creature of art, he can carry fire in his bosom, and keep
it from flameing forth; he can hide coals under embers, and seem as if there
were no fire; he can make words as smooth as Oil, when War and Hell are in the
heart: he can forgive and not forget; Scorch and burn himself inwardly, and
say nothing; hurt no body, but kill himself: this is fretting it is not
patience, it is impatience within door, or behind door: it is discontented
thouhgts pent up: heart passion stiffled, which is deadly impatience; which all
patience, and no less then this, thoroughly takes away.

All Patience, is man all in good temper; Vital spirits and pulse beating well,
as well as Lips and Countenance looking well. All Patience, it is all powers and
parts within and without moving divinely and sweetly, when all in a distressed
state: it is every faculty and organ in tune to move toward God, when scarce
any at ease to move toward man: it is a man begging forgiveness in a storm of
stones, for the^ that unjustly throw them.

As this expression notes totum subjecti, so it notes totum ipsius qualitatis,
a totallity of the very quality, of the very grace of patience. All patience,
that is, patiience, that is al patience: patience without mixture of passion:
pure patience; patience that is throughout, what it is called; as far from all
mixture, as it is possible for flesh and blood to be: patience so far from all
impatience, that man sees none, God takes notice of none, patience so far
from impatience, as to grieve no humane spirit nor Divine.

Man's virtues are mixed, yea, his very graces are mixed; in some more mixed then
in others; in some so much mixed that grace is in a manner buried, and of no
gloss to denominate the man, nor of no strength to make the man useful.
Mixture makes corruption, the more mixture the more corruption; it is hard to
call some men gracious, or to say what they are fit for, passion is so strong
and patience so weak and low: such a man is a torment to himself, and all
near him. A Christian has his gloss and his use, as eminent in patience;
this the Apostle eyed in this expression, therefore (I think) this may be his
meaning, All patience, is patience all pure: the spirit of an Angel, free from
all perturbation, above all scandal, very amiable and very useful, fit for
all service that God and his Gospel can call to.

All patience notes a totallity, as in reference to quality, so in reference to
to condition, totum periculi, a heart so principled, so compos sui master of
himself, that no evil can make evil; not the greatest evil, the least
impression of evil. Evil is nomen magnitudinis and nomen midtitudinis, it
speaks one, and it speaks many: it speaks a great one, and it speaks a great
many: now all patience is such a height as holds its own fully, under all
trials, under all the waves of God, without sinking, or shrinking: under evils
mustered by God, weapon'd, marshaled, brought on by God; set on, kept on, by
God; made do execution by God, further then man, any man, can do; made to
pierce the sides, and to pierce the heart -- the Arrows of the Allmighty are
within me says Job, their poison drinks up my spirit, the terrors of God do
set themselves in array against me, Job 6. A body so shot, a soul so shot, to
come off so bravely as Job does there -- Let him not spare for I have not
concealed the words of the holy one. Let man wound, God wound, God and man do
what they will to soul and body, and not spare, yet God that wounds will I
obey to the death; this is all patience: that is, patience that holds its own
in all conditions.

All Parience, it is patience breathing her self forth, in the Teeth of a dog,
and setters on: Shimei may bark. Standers by hiss: to make barking again,
and yet all patience divinely turns off all, beholding GOD in a dead Dog, a
righteous God, in an unrighteous man. All patience, it is a heart able to
suppress all insurrection, from the naked consideration of God and sin: a
heart that can quiet it self from the very rod; gather patience from the very
twigs that whip and smart. All patience, it is a heart which from the shaper and
shaping of affliction, can shape it self shoulders to bear it well: it is a
heart so principled, as able to fetch out of every eater, meat: out of a
tearing Lion, Honey: out of every bitter, sweet: something in, or about every
evil, to keep it self good, and make it self better. All patience, it is a
spirit grown to an angelical height, able to carry himself sweetly to a dog,
to a Devil, to the worst creature offending, with no worse passion then this,
The Lord rebuke thee.

All Patience notes a totality in reference totum temporis. All Patience, is
patience in grain; such as will hold its color, yea, it is very gloss, as
long as the cloth last: it notes such a patience as dies not, till the man die;
such a patience as keeps the soul in all storms, and till all storms be
over; that keeps the soul quiet, till the very weather be quiet, or till the
soul has quietly expired it self, into the bosom of eternal rest, above all
disquiet. All patience, it is holding fast till Christ come, it is a waiting all
our days for better days in another World -- till our change come: for
liveing again, where barely to live; is Heaven; where being, and wel-being are
not distinguished. All patience, it is a house upon a Rock; a house so built, a
spirit so principled, so sinewed, so nerved and joynted, that nothing can pull
down but death: it notes a soul so much out of it self, and so much in
Christ, in his arms and under his dominion, that it lies under a kind of
impossibility to be stirred: as mount Zion, that not only is not, but cannot
be moved, the house may moulder and that may down, otherwise all patience is
such an inmate, such an inward soule-lasting thing, that it will never out: all
patience was never known to leave any house, till it fell down: all patience
and the last breath go away together, Father into thy hands J commit my
spirit, these are the last words of all patience.

Luke 23.46.
The result of all is this; All Patience, it is all advantages taken away, al
provocations incompassing, and yet the soul abiding holy in behavior and
carriage, in thought word and deed unto death: it is God against man, the devil
against man, wife, friends, fire, winds; all creatures below man, armed and set
against man, and yet man patient: it is man buffeted, scratch't with thorns;
nailed, spear'd, spit on, hell inflicted on Earth, and yet holy and without
sin, and so continuing till hell be turned into Heaven, the soul out of the
body, both into eternal rest. All patience the Apostle expresses in few
words; it is patience having made her full fortifications, her perfect work as
he calls it; it is every faculty in combination to bear what is or can be; it is
the Militia settled in the soul, by act; by consent of the three states,
understanding, will, and affection: it is all soule-powers united, to bear and
endure all that can befall man. All patience, it is a strong spirit as the
expression is used of John Baptist, and of Christ, and of none else: a spirit
fortified with cleerenesse of light, strength of faith, fullness of resolution,
and made Musket proof, Cannon proof, impregnable, against which the gates of
hell cannot prevail.

All Patience, it is patience all in armor: it is a stubborn heart subdued and
risen again to divine resolution, and now as divine hardy, as before fool
hardy: it is a spirit that will know no evil after the flesh; no evil as it is
fleshly miserable, but as it is soul sinful. All patience, it is enduring
hardship as a Soldier, as a good Soldier, as a good Soldier of Christ as the
Apostle says: not opely suffering for truth, but sleighting suffering, as you
know Soldiers do; they make nothing of hunger, nor cold; of blows, of
wounds, no, nothing of death: it is a notable expression this of all patience,
to wit, enduring of hardship as a good Soldier. All patience, it is a spirit
that can endure all hardship, with ease: perils at Sea, perils at Land, perils
amongst false brethren, perils amongst professed enemies; any misery, any
death; burning, tearing, cutting, sawing a sunder, and scorn base deliverance:
this is al patience: patience, al over patience: patience, throughout patience,
so liveing, so dying.

black over you, the Earth al bloody, under you; al miseries are marching
toward you, Famine, Plague, Sword, white Horse, black Horse, pale Horse,
neither true white nor black; al sorts of Men amongst us on Horseback, and
going about deadly work: have you al patience, to entertain them al? who ever
come? and what misery soever they bring? Do ye not expect a very miserable
time? yes. And I expect a very sinful time, there is so little patience.

A little suffering I see will make you sin much, ah Lord! what will great
suffering then do? seven years bleeding, ten years bleeding, twenty years
bleeding, as Germany has had? you murmr now a little is gone, surely you will
blaspheme when al is gone; curse King, Parliament, and GOD too. Lord what shall
we do? we shall have a Kingdom advanced to Heaven, thrown down to Hell: a
Kingdom full of devils, full of evil spirits quickly, if these Evil Times
continue. Men can bear nothing, and God now calls to bearing much: men cannot
tell how to abate a little of wanted contents, and God is going to strip of al:
men cannot exercise patience a little, and God is calling for the exercise of
al: I dread to think what this presages. We shall see poverty, and hear
cursing; see bleeding, and hear blaspheming, and both in one house, yea, both
in one person. We shall see bodies wounded, and souls breathing themselves
through these wounds, in the face of God and man, because in a helpelesse state.

This grieves me, no man lays to heart what God already suffers in these evil
days, from impatient spirits. I have heard some as I have gone along the
streets break forth most bitterly, against the most religious of the Kingdom,
as the cause of al our misery; laying blood at innocent men's doors: great ones
do thus against conscience, poor ones do thus out of ignorance, as rich men's
echo, being their creatures, made through fear, or hope, or both: all sides I
am sure breath not forth al, but little, very little patience. Ah! ye of
little patience, what do ye mean? to make a miserable condition remediless?
a state miserable, damnable? will you sin in poverty that wealth may never
return? will you sin in War, that you may never have peace? will you sin in
blood and death, that Hell may follow? Because men have killed your Trades,
your States, your Bodies, shall the devil have your Souls? Is there any evil
in the City, or Country, which God has not done? God takes away much to save
the maine, and you make the loss of much, the loss of all; the loss of your
souls through impatience.

A rod should humble you, and your skin swells with stripes. Gods Hand on your
back, should make your hand on your mouth, and you curse; you curse, and God
curses, surely you will be cursed: you swear and stare because you have lost
your peace, your temporal respect, and God swears you shall neither have
temporal nor eternal rest. Ah Lord? what has this soul done? murmured and
sworn himself, out of al for ever? Ye men of no patience, have you no light?
no conscience? no soul? do ye sin against no light? no soul? no God? are
ye heathens? are ye worse?

I will tell you the evils of impatience, that you may dread it and every
degree of it, and make them as I name them, motives to endeavor after all
Patience (i) a heart freed from all impatience.

The first evil is this, so far as the soul is impatient, so far it is set
at a distance from God. Impatience, grieves: God grieved, withdrawes. So far
as Saul rages, so far is the Spirit of God gone. So far as the soul is shut
out from God, it is shut out from al. A bedlam is put alone, and there chained,
and whipped; he is fit for no company but forlorn spirits like himself, a
Legion of these possess every impatient soul. No soul has less fellowship
with God, then passionate. God cannot dwell in fire, nor work in fire, any
otherwise then to torment the tormented. Froward children are frowned upon, and
kept at a great distance, 'till their hearts come down. A soul that has
little of God, has much of the devil: if you would see the devil face to face,
look a passionate man in the face; you shall see the devils eyes, his brows,
his tongue, his mouth, al as black, as horrid, as firey as Hell.

A second evil of impatience is this; The counsels of the froward are carried
head long says the holy Ghost: if their counsels, how much more then those
things they do without counsel? and thus most an end do passionate men do,
all they do. Passion puts out a man's eyes, cuts-off a man's arms; it thrusts
a man in have still, to the wrong door, to the wrong end of his business.
Passion cannot observe modus nor media agendi, 'twil up to the top of the house
presently, before there be any stairs made: 'twil run and leave tools behind,
yea, 'twill run and leave God behind, and so buries her honor still, in an
untimely birth. A passionate man has Reubens judgment written in his
forehead, -- never to excel.

Thirdly, impatience is the mother of spirit set on fire of Hell, prepared and
ready to every hellish work; to swear, to curse, to kill; to speak evil, to
do evil: it is a short possession; a man mad for so many hours, that will not
stick at any thing that the devil and depraved nature bid him do: he will flee
in the face of servants, children, wife, magistrate, God, any one: it is a
Snake, whose tongue is his sting, his teeth poison; he takes in and casts up
venom by mouthfuls: his heart brings forth sins by troops; he speaks as
many sins, as words: he burns al black with too much heat: he over-heats
words, works, the wheels light a fire still in carriage, especially when
loaded with any heft, and burn cart and carriage both. Passion, it is the
devils glasse-house, black fire workmen are at it in this soul day and night:
it is the devils sinne-moul'd, to make many sins quickly; many great sins on a
sudden.

praesentia, Appetitui apta.
carnal present things: a measse of potage at present, better then birthright
although Christ and Heaven be wrapped up in it. Tell an impatient man of things
to come, Heaven and Glory, Praesentibus futura majora.
and the like, he cannot stay so long; Heaven a great way off, is no Heaven to
him; he must have a Bird in the hand, a Heaven here, or else Heaven and earth,
shall ring of him; he must have what he will, and when he will, or he will make
the house too hot for all that are in it. This renders an impatient person
utterly incapable of the great'st blessings, because these are longest a
coming, and he cannot wait. Lets have a golden Calfe, as for this Moses we
know not what is become of him, nor when he will come: a golden glittering Calfe
at present, better then to stay for Moses, though he brought the beams of
God, the glory of Heaven shining in his face. Lets eat and drink for to morrow
we die. Magna ^^^antia nulla.
Impatience must have a Heaven at present, a belly-heaven, as for a soul
heaven, a heaven in promise, it is a dead thing. This renders an impatient man
utterly below motive; our greatest Gospel motives are fetched from great things
to come, in another World, and the greatest things are nothing at such a
distance to this man; he cannot wait so long for a Heaven, though he lose
his soul.

There is no divine contemplation in an impatient heart, which is that that
makes Heaven here; So that an impatient man, loses his Heaven here-after and
here too. Impatience, it is a soul still in a hurry; never at home, never at
leisure to go to Heaven, from years end to years end: it is a Salamander,
still in fire, still in Hell, ever in contention and disquiet, which is the
unfittest frame to divine things that can be. Passion degenerates into malice,
and then the man becomes Meditabundus, full of thoughts, but more diabolical
then before, and further from Heaven: his thoughts now travel when he is on
his bed, compassing the Earth too and fro like the devil, but ascend not to
Heaven, no, not one of them. All thoughts are kept in a hudle in a passionate
soul, one crowding, and clambering on the back of another; one, still jostling
against another; no leisure, for the soul to withdraw to God: divine guidance
is gone, and the soul has no command of it self Heavenward: the string of
the watch is broke, and the wheels run down til they break too; no winding up
can be made. Passion cannot pray, cannot hear, cannot read, least of all can
it meditate, which is the life of al. What can a passionate man do, which is
appointed by God as a Medium, to carry the soul to Heaven?

Finally, a Passionate man is fit for no Esau, a rough man, his hand is against
every man, and every man's hand is against him: it is a Bile that rages when one
goes, and when one sits, lying down and rising up, at bed and at board, not fit
for Heaven, most fit for Hell, and yet there is no need of him, for there be
devils enough already, and firebrarnds enough to employ them. Let God do what
he will, an impatient man is never contented. Let Jonah have no blows and he is
impatient, let him be scorcht without and he burns within. An impatient man
ever wantes something, and yet never can tell well what will please him: he
stands much upon his will, it is dearer then his soul, it is dearer then GOD,
and yet it varies as often as temptation presents, and the man knows not well
what he would have; Ah Lord! what a plague? What a changeling? What a soul
bewitched is this? All patience will cure al these evils througly, and less,
will not thoroughly do it: judge ye therefore now, what need ye have to
labor for patience in height -- All patience.

Simeon that he was devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel: devoute,
that is, full of Prayers; the more praying the more waiting; the more in
Prayer, the more in patience. Prayer is fetching breath when the soul begins
to be out of breath, and to faint: it is a fetching out heat, with heat, fire
with fire, bad fire with good. Strong cries will keep the heart patient under
strong trialls: whilst a praying Jonas, a patient Jonas, he first fetched
patience out of the belly of Prayer, and then Prayer fetched him out of the
belly of the Whale.

Prayer must be ordered for strength,

Passion is wild fire, such tempers must observe their weakness, and take
heed how they come near fire. You set powder above, in high rooms out of the
way, it is so apt to take, and fire. Set your selves amongst the most heavenly
souls, in high, up-rooms, with those which have the highest, and sweetest
Communion with God. With the froward, a man learns frowardness; with the
meek, meekness: if you venture to come where striking of fire is, you will be
the first that take fire. A man excells as he takes advantages. All things that
may most subdue will, and advance love, will heighten patience -- charity
suffers long. Long suffering is our next work.

FINIS.
USEFUL INSTRUCTIONS FOR THESE Evil Times.
COLOSS. 1.11. -- Long suffering] with joyfulnesse.


long-suffering, etc. Gospel sufferings are sometimes of great duration:
Christians are called to suffer, and to suffer long -- long-suffering.

The Apostle spoke of Patience according to its dimensions -- all patience,
etc. In reference to suffering, as considering it according to its dimensions
-- long: he spoke of grace in proportion to use; all patience is but little
enough to make long-suffering, all patience is but little enough to manage such
a profession, which all along is liable to persecution, to suffering as long as
being in this World.

Things here below have more then their naked being; they have their being and
their dimensions; so big, so broad, so long: so have afflictions, more then
their naked esse in a Christian, more then barely to denominate him an
afflicted man; they have their dimensions, their bigness and length, to
denominate suffering so great, so long -- long-suffering, sufferings for truth
are sometimes long lived. If any man will be my Disciple (says Christ) Let him
take up his cross [daily Luke 9.23. A daily cross, daily bleeding makes
long-suffering. Like to this is that expression of David, My soul has long
dwelt with him that hates peace, speaking of Doeg, A Christian is incident to
suffering by Doegs and devils long.

A Christians condition is envied: Jnai^a est vitium vitio permamanens.
envy David long; through Ziffe, Engedy, many wildernesses, though never so
long. twill find a dart to throw at a David, till it has killed him, or stabbed
it self. Envy sights desperately, and unweariedly, it will never give over as
long as there is breath; twill eat no bread till it has done its work,
killed a Paul or starved it self. Envy is al spirit: al evil spirits in one,
it is a spirit of the right breed for the devil; twill fight, and fight till
death: twill work to the utmost vires, as long as nerves and sinews bind
bones together: it is everlasting burning, which nothing will quench but its
own blood: Saints have had the trial on it long. -- long suffering.

A Christians condition is qualifyed: -- Tristitia laetis.
he has sweet things and bitter in every dish, down along to the lower end of
his Table: al-long his life he shall know that he is not at home. He has
enough sometimes to say it is good being here, but never enough to say it is best
being here. His rapture has a rupture, a sad breaking off: his glory, a
shadow: his statue a curtain drawn before it: his heavenly vision, is let down
and drawn up, his sunshines and clap's in, suitable to this clowdy and impure
region, thus it does through out the day. Few and evil, many and evil, all
evil does good Jacob call his days, so were all his sweets embittered and
qualifyed by God. If one mercy be come, another must be gone: if corn be come
Benajmin must be gone; some thing for life is come, and he that had the fathers
soul must be gone. If some children come home well, some evil is befallen the
rest -- Joseph is without doubt rent in pieces. Genesis 37.33.
So 'twas with the blessed seed afterward, which inherited the promise: Milk
and Honey, and pricks in the sides whilst eating on it; and so it must be all a
long, as long as in Canaan; the best people, long sufferers in the best place,
that earth will afford.

Vineyard God sends laborers to work hard, and to work so, long; to the
sixth, ninth and last hour, to make much fruit. Afflictons are Gods
day-labourers; they work and work thoroughout man's day, to plow and break up
his fallow heart; to grub up roots, bitter roots, and to prepare the way of
the Lord, for good fruit. As God has day-labourers to belabour the ear, the
heart, the inward man, and these kept at work till the ninth and last hour of
man's life; so he has day-labourers to be labor the back, the belly, the
outward man, and these kept at work as long as the other, as long as man
lives, the one to prepare the way for the other; one to plow and break up, and
the other to sow. The heart of man, has an unexpressible hardness, the
hardness of an Adamant; many blows will not break this stone: it must be
soakt in tears, and in blood long.

Afflictions are bitters to weane, To moderate in lawful things.
from sweets that are not necessary. There is but one necessary, the soul
makes many, it is whipped and whipped long ere 'twill leave this. Some children are
not easiy to weane; bitters must be laid upon the breast, and lie long there,
ere the dug be cast off: 'twas long ere David could say, Lord my heart is not
haughty, surely I have behaved and quieted my self, as a child that is weaned
of his mother.

To take away unlawful things.
Afflictions are to take away sin: By this therefore shall the iniquity of
Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit, to take away his sin, etc. Isa.
27.9. Afflictions and sufferings were only to torture sin, this might quickly
be done, but they are to take away sin, this is long work. The furnace is to
purify; it must be heat and heat long, to melt and segregate, to discover,
disperse, and take away dross. Afflictions are to work truth in the inward
parts, it is long ere man be good at heart: they are to heighten integrity, it is
longer ere the heart become so upright, as to be a heart after Gods own heart:
it is long ere a foul stomach will be made vomit up all, it is long ere man will
be brought to observe all Gods will, this makes great plagues and of long
continuance. If thou will not observe to do all the words of this Law, that
are written in this book, that thou may fear this glorious and fearful
name, THE LORD THY GOD. Then the Lord will make thy plagues wonderful, and the
plagues of thy seed, even great plagues and of long continuance, [ and sore
sickenesses and of long continuance. Deutrenomy 28.58, 59.

God puts weight, To serve in truth.
great weight upon truth, to make it enter, and make thorough impression: truth
is managed with great art, to put back every spring, and to make the bolt go
forth as far as it should, and as fast and facile as it should. Let these
sayings sink down into your ears; for the Sun of man shall be delivered into
the hands of men. Luke 9.44. Christ made a weight of himself, and ties this to
his words, to make them sink down into men's hearts: he makes a weight now of
us, speaks and then strikes, strikes and strikes often and long, and then
says secretly to the soul, let these and these words now sink down into
their ears. Christ is feign to bore way for truth, to bore a long hole, from
the ear to the heart, and this many times is a long while a doing, six years
ten years, twenty years.

A Christians condition is conformed: it is made to speak Christ within and
without; in spirit, in flesh; the book is written within and without; in our
souls, in our bodies we are made to bear the marks of the Lord Jesus; marks
broad and long, just like his in every circumstance. The plowers made -- long
furrows on his back, as long as his life: he was acquainted with grief:
grief and he were long acquaintance, his whole voyage about this lower world
was in storms. A man of sorrows: his life made up of sighs, groans, tears,
words, blood; thus breathed, thus expired; a mourning life, a bleeding death.
The servant is as his Lord; sufferers both, as long as livers in this World:
the Apostle apprehended these Christians would find it so, therefore so prayed.
Strengthened with all might according to his glorious power, unto all patience
[and long-suffering with joyfulnesse.

another, that it is hard to make one step skin-whole. Can ye bear these
sayings? Can ye bear such doings? Can ye bear till your backs ache? Can ye
bear till your backs break? Can ye bear till you sink and die under your
burden; Can ye suffer long? as long as ye live? Can ye leave all and follow
Christ? all your state, all your limbs, all your comforts, al your days? Can
ye spend and end your days in misery, to be blessed in another world? you may
think ye can do so and be deceived; Peter did so, I will speak to this point
a little.

There be three sorts of hearts which Judas will kiss Christ and depart, and
hang himself rather then be hanged for Christ. Gold endures fire long, as long
as you will: cast a Joseph, an upright man, into prison, and he will lie there
long, as long as the devil will, till the Iron, enter into his soul. Truth
will live and die with truth. I will not wager a straw upon any man for his
parts, let them be what they will, in point of long suffering: what is the man
at heart? that will he be for continuance in hardship for truth. Natural
courage may do much in a desperate way, but deliberate trial, long suffering
tyres this quite. Nature can go no further, then she can. The old man cannot
travel; long pains and toil, will make him petition for a Quietus est, for
an accommodation, for any peace so he may sit down quiet, and sleep in a whole
skin:

Sampson will give up at last, and betray his own life, that is engaged in
heart to please a wife, a friend, his own unmortifyed heart, any one before
GOD. A heart that will be drawn was never, will never be a long sufferer:
this is the worst temper of all, for long work: this man has his disadvantage
within, Satan will often visit him, to spare himself, and this heart will
find so much discretion at last, as to hearken to him, and choose sin rather
then suffering, then suffering long. I never knew a man that could be made, but
Satan could do it first or last. Either the glory of this World, or the
terror of this World, the casting down from a pinnacle, will fetch about that
man, in whose heart Satan when he comes finds something, some
selfe-engagement. The heart so far as engaged, is selfish; so far as man is
selfish, so far will he admit of parley with the evil one, the devil was never
admitted to parley with man, but he carried it; his Parliament will sway every
selfish man, to look to his skin and his life above his soul.

A careless spirit will never suffer good Kings strait, -- We know not what to
do, so long as troubles keep at any distance, if it be but at skin distance,
till troubles come to touch the skin, and touch to the quick, and then they
know not what to do indeed. It Is worse then long suffering to some men, to be
told of it, or to think of it; they drink down all; and feast dead their
fears, and (I fear) their souls. Do ye not see this? Is not London wanton
and voluptuous still? What table can ye come at, that speaks this, London is
like to suffer long? Will feasting fit for hungring and starving? will the
killing of your souls fit you for the killing of your bodies? Ah Lord! will
wicked wantons, beastly belly-gods, drunken careless Nabals, prove long
sufferers for truth? will persons that cannot now live without excess, without
too much and too fine, do well when they shall want necessaries, and want them
long, longer then many others for much more abuse? Surely these wretches will
be doubly miserable when misery comes: they will wish themselves any where, to
be delivered from the fruit of their ways. All the Armor of God should be
looked after with all diligence to make fit for long suffering, and careless
souls look after none, and yet they dream they shall suffer as long, and as
well as the best, but they do but dream. They will lose their souls in a
dream; their carelessness will make their long suffering as long as eternity.

I have spoken to take off security I will also speak something to take off
scandal and so pass this point. Sufferings for truth fall out sometimes to be
many and long, this is the point, and this is likely to be our condition:
Englands troubles look as if they would be long, they have a long visage in my
eye two or three things make me think our suffering will be long.

The first is this, a spirit of confusion is power'd out upon us: it is very
general and Jews came first out of Babylon; when they came to Herusalem to
set about the building of Gods house, then fell in a spirit of strong confusion
amongst them; some were for the old house, some for the new; some Cried to
think of the external glory of the old house, others joy'd to see the
beginnings of a more spiritual house; but this is very observable, the worst
note was the lowdest: a man could not discern the noise of the shout of joy,
for the beginnings of the new house, the noise of the weeping and crying of the
people for the old, was so great: out of this spirit of confusion sprung up
Vipers and Serpents, such as took this advantage, and hindered that great
work of the Lord many years, and made their suffering long, as you may see
exactly in that story. This is our case at this day: there are many joy to see
some beginnings of a more pure worship; some hopes of raiseing and finishing
this, raises their hearts: but there be many more which cry and take on, for
the old house, for the pomp and glory of Bishops, garments, pipes, carnal
ordinances, which please carnal senses, and the cry of these is so loud, that
the joy of Gods people cannot be heard; it is now as quite buried. Out of this
confusion has sprung up Sanballats and Tobias, strong adversaries; so strong,
and so many, that they are likely to hinder Gods building much, and make our
suffering long.

A second thing that gives, our troubles A jostling spirit of pride and
frowardness against authority; against those which God has wonderfully raised
to deliver us, as wonderfully as ever he raised Moses to deliver Israel out of
Egypt. Ye take too much upon you said Corah and his company, seeing all the
Congregation is holy (i) holy enough already. This is the very spirit and
language of many great ones and small ones, at this very day, respecting the
Parliament. They take too much upon them, things were well enough, as under the
government of Bishops, and as in Queen Elizabeth's time, King Iame's time.
Reformation in Church and state according as our present condition, and the
increase of light calls for, because this attempted, renders the Parliament as
odious in the eyes of many, great, and small, as ever was Moses in the eye of
Corah and his company, for discharging his conscience. This spirit became very
spreading then, and so strong, that God was feign to make Isreal's misery long,
till he had cut off all that were unworthy of that which Moses and Aaron
labored to bring them to: so may this spirit make our sufferings long, so
long, till God has cut off al these proud jostling spirits, which are
altogether unworthy of those great mercies, which our honest-hearted
Parliament, painefully labors to bring us to.

That the one thing necessary to public welfare, is not preferred and
prosecuted, as such a thing: that is, according to its dignity, and our duty.
The maine thing (I conceive) to our public welfare, is to perfect our
reformation of Religion, to raise up and finish that building, the foundation
whereof our Fathers bravely laid, in their own blood. Israel suffered much,
and suffered long, a consumption followed them, till it had brought them almost
to nothing, because they grew slack about the maine, and preferred their own
houses, the seiling and finishing of them, before Gods House. At first when
they came togegether to Jerusalem, they were hot upon Gods House, but being
diverted by troubles they grew cold, and involved their spirits in their own
affairs, which cost them dear and brought them into a deep consumption: I am
afraid this is our case. Our Parliament at first coming together, seemed very
hot about Church affairs (though not so hot then as, I could have wished:) God
had his Committee amongst many other of our own, I mean a Committee about
scandalous Ministers, and matters wherein God is most immediately concerned;
this Committee was of life and heat a time, and the dread and Majesty of that
great Court hereby, great; many troubles came in, and this Committee laid
down, and other things relateing to this stayed off; by means of which the
Majesty of that honorable House is much weakened, because God much neglected:
I am affraide this will bring us into a deep consumption, and make Englands
sufferings long, because we make God suffer so long, all the Kingdom over, by
blind worship, and blind Ministers, who are now the activest Engines against
us.

God has suffered our troubles to grow beyond our Tiller, as the Archers term
is, our bow is made too strong for us to bend, this makes long work to be
ready. If an unruly child creep up under the lenity of Parents, to become an
unruly boy, one in bodily strength, suiteable to his spirit, before taken
down, this speaks long suffering to such parents: this is Englands case. Our
wicked children are grown up, under the wing and lenity of the Parliament, to
virility, to man's estate, to external strength suiteable to their internal
temper, this I am afraid speaks long suffering to thee, O poor England.
Justice does not look as if she would lay down her rod presently, when she
is gathering more and more twigs. A few malignants are become many; many
without Arms, many, in Arms: our locusts go forth by troops. Justice does
not use to make a rod of so many, and so great twigs, for a little work:
strong twigs and rods are gathered to last, for long work.

A fifth thing that makes Englands A heavy spirit seems to be fallen upon us,
-- Make their ears heavy (says God) their Ears? that is, their hearts: I am
afraid that plague is heavily fallen upon us. Heavy jades are shaped to much
beating; a little will not make them go. Men come up to their light, like a
bear to the stake: how heavy has our motion been, to blast the Common Prayer
Book by public vote? how heavily brought on to judge it an agreement? how
heavily brought on, to clip the power of Bishops? how heavily brought on to
vote them quite down, although such as had voted and almost acted down God
and all good in the Land? how much farther has many Parliament men gone, in
matters of Gods worship, then droven? I keep honor in my breast toward them,
who have done throughout truly honorably. For the execution of thorough
Justice, are they not now by the sword droven? and will they go now? My heart
bleeds to consider this, what a heavy spirit is upon us, in the prosecution of
that work which God has thrust us upon. Our eyes are half open, as
heavy-headed men's eyes are, to see our advantages, and our hands in our bosom,
like heavy sluggards when we should take and prosecute advantages, which God
wonderfully gives us. A heavy spirit speaks heavy misery, suffering much, and
suffering long: a heavy spirit makes heavy misery necessary; such a temper
otherwise will never go so far in good, as it should.

suffering does not soften: our fire does not melt, but harden and make brawny
the heart of the most. The weekly news of our bleeding, is become as the
weekly bill of the plague, read over and thrown a side. Many bodies killed,
how many souls more alive then were? What heart goes in secret, and bleeds in
his brethrens wounds? Many killed, many more worse then killed; maimed, spoiled,
turned out of all, and likely to starve to death; go weeping, wailing, and
wringing their hands up and down the Country, yea up and down here, and do
fully look some of you in the face, and yet I see no sign of all this in your
faces. Their tone is doleful, do we echo to them? The spoiled mourn to the
saved, do we weep with them that weep? do we bear their burden as our own?
Let every man's conscience speak, and acquit him if it can. Does not this
saddly speak more suffering, because no man will suffer, till Justice bring
suffering to his own door? No man will be afflicted, till it come to his own
turn; no man will afflict himself, all is put upon God, he must do it man by
man; many will not be afflicted in few, this will be long work. I can sadly
tell you of hearts, more brawny then these: hearts that would not have spoiling
cease, because it inricheth them: no, not killing cease, because it is their
gainful trade; that see blood and desolation daily, and yet have no bowels,
but fear this will end too soon; that cut out their work, to last: this is not
the spirit of a Soldier, but the spirit of a Butcher, that lives by killing as
his Trades, and pockets up the prize of blood and misery, with joy. This a
Soldier? a Judas, a Wolf, that grows fat upon the carcasses of the slain.
Men that strive after places, to kill bodies for gain, Ah Lord! who has
killed such souls? This is the spirit of a Soldier, to go about a bleeding
work with a bleeding heart, and yet this is consistent with the spirit of a
Lion, to a man's place: Must I kill bodies to save souls? O that wickedness
should thrust such deadly work upon me, how many such Soldiers have we? if
deliverance from suffering, come no faster then true sensibility under it,
surely Englands sufferings will be long. That sensibility that is, more selfish
then divine. When will our troubles have an end? when this? and when that? who
is that man, that looks upon the plaster, as suited to a sore? When will the
sore be well? whose heart beats thus? but every man's tone is, when will the War
end? Why? when all bad blood is out of thy veins, will not that be long first?
and yet will not that be soon enough?

These things and such like, make me fear, Christians, that your sufferings
will be long: but be not offended, we cannot be too long in the Hand of God. If
long lying among the pots, bring us forth with silver wings at last, our long
suffering will recompense it self: who will then complain that Englands
sufferings have been too long? Gold seven times purified, will glister
gloriously: thorough refining, will make England the the glory of al Lands. If
Joseph lie prisoner long, and be raised to be Prince at last, has he cause to
complain of hardship? that his suffering was too long? A heart apt to take
offense at Gods dealing is willing to depart; let such go, God will have enough
to do his work. Revolt under your long suffering, and your suffering will be
long indeed, as long as England lasts, as long as Hell lasts.

FINIS.
USEFUL INSTRUCTIONS FOR THESE Evil Times.
COLOSS. 1.11. -- Long suffering [with joyfulnesse.


TO make a rod bud and become pleasant, to turn a Hell into Heaven: misery,
long misery into joy; this is hard and high, yet thus high does a Christians
duty rise in this Text [ Long-suffering with joyfulnesse.

This last term does explain, what sufferings for kind the Apostle means, to
wit, suffering for truth, the reproach of Christ, and this how great so ever,
should be treasure; how lasting so ever, should be undergone with joy --
long-suffering with joyfulnesse.

Sufferings are various, and differ in their nature according to their
immediate cause. Sin is the immediate cause of some sufferings,
righteousness the immediate cause of others. When man suffers for his sin,
he should bear it, accept the punishment of his iniquity and not kick against
his Maker, how long soever such suffering be; but joy is not proper under this
suffering, because such suffering speaks wrath, I will bear the wrath of God
because J have sinned. Bearing is proper under divine displeasure, but not joy;
to smile when God frowns is to despise the chastening of the Lord: no
affliction is joyous as it referrs to sin and wrath.

Righteousness is the immediate cause of other miseries; patience is proper
under these, and more: suffering, and joy: beareing long, and bearing long with
joy, because these afflictions speak only the displeasure of man; not the
displeasure, but the pleasure of God. A man should smile when God smiles: joy,
when God joys, though in a dungeon.

Suffering for Christ, how great, how long so ever, should be managed with a
spirit of joy. A man should suffer the spoiling of his person, the spoiling of
his goods, the spoiling of all for Christ, and suffer it with joy -- ye had
compassion on me, and took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, etc. Heb.
10.34.

Rejoice in the Lord [alwayes,] and again I say rejoice: he spoke this to
suffering Christians, he lifts, and lifts again, to lift the heart as high as
its duty, which is to make christianity throughout, a course of joy; to make
fair way, and foul way, always, all wisdoms ways, all Christ's ways,
pleasant; Some duties have their termination, joy has none: it is an always
work, an everlasting duty: it is not to cease when goods cease, when honors
cease, no, it is not to cease when all contents cease; it is to last Summer,
Winter, Spring, Fall, Day, Night: joy is the Nightinggall-grace in the soul,
it is to sing all night long, let the night be never so long, never so dark,
ever more -- Rejoice ever more: truth and joy are never to part; they are to
keep company together and bear up one another; truth, joy; and joy, truth;
till they lie down both together in the bosom of eternal felicity.

Duties are consistent, one duty is not Rachel suffer much and suffer long,
till al her children are not, joy is not: if children be killed, she thinks
she may kill her joy; if al be killed, she thinks she may kill al her joy, and
never let it live more -- Refuse to be comforted. One beam of the Sun does not
devour another, they all shine together, that makes that celestial body so
glorious: so al graces are to shine in a Christian together, this gives a
Christian his glory -- long-suffering and joy. Long suffering is a beam of
God, this does not put out, or darken other beams: he is long suffering
indeed, he suffers more and longer then any of us, and yet he is joyous to; he
does not barely bear, but joy and bear; he does not overthrow, no, nor
diminish in the least kind, the felicity of his condition by suffering:
Christians are to be like him. Duties are made consistent, we must not make
them inconsistent. Long suffering and joy seem inconsistent to flesh and
blood, yet joined together by God, in my Text: we may not part what God joines
-- long-suffering with joy:

Peter's Angel, if Peter be in Prison, and have been there long, this Angel is
at the door. More then this, as soon is a Christian is in prison for Christ,
Christ is at the door which joy: let such a man but ask and his joy will be
full presently, Christ is so near him -- ask and [your] joy shall be full
Ioh. 16.24. You know he speaks it to such, who apprehended how much they
should undergo, when Christ was gone from them. Ah! says Christ, though I go
away I will set joy at your door, a comforter to be very near you, when any
discomfort surprises; and then nearest, when you need him most; so that you
shall get more of a sudden by Prayer, then you could in all your life before.
A suffering Christian has his peculiar advantge, let him but open his mouth
heavenward and it is filled presently: let his heart be at his mouth, and the
holy Ghost will be at his heart; all upon wing and wrapped up in the third Heaven,
when the body in Hell. Long suffering and joy are very near: as near, as
night and morning; if misery makes the night joy makes the morning: and if the
night cannot ask for the morning, yet the morning will come of it self -- joy
[comes] in the morning. If a long sufferer be ^o worn, so depressed with his
burden, that he be not able to pray, not able to ask, for joy and for comfort,
yet his joy will be full, 'twill come of it self as things that are joined
together, will call in one another -- long suffering with joyfulnesse.

Cardinal virtues, glorious graces, it makes the very emblem of Heaven in the
heart. The holy line must not be broken: as things have their order in their
own nature, so they must have their course in the soul, long suffering for
truth, must bring forth joy, and not grief: a Jacob must hold an Esau by the
heel, joy must embrace rough usage; out of the sowerest stock, ar't should
make sweet fruit come -- out of long-suffering, for Christ joy.

regurgitate bitterly in the afternone, when things have lai'n long in the
stomach, but it is to give advantage to a Christian, fully to speak forth his
own integrity, and Gods glory. Long suffering with joy, is a full expression
of man's simplicity and Gods Glory. Long suffering in any cause, has its
integrity as the heart is free from repining under it; which it is, when it is
meat and drink to suffer for Christ; joy to bear, and to bear long. Grace
should move in grace; that is long suffering with joy: grace should move to a
Christians grace, and to GODS glory, that is long suffering with joyfulnesse.

that has hung long by? Can you play well, when the strings be broke? When the
back, when the belly of the instrument is broke? Can you sing the songs of Zion
in a strange Land? Can ye make melody in your spirits, when never a whole
piece in your flesh? some of you it may be have never a penny in your purse,
scarce any rag to wear, no house to put your head in, but live upon the mere
mercy of friends, for giving testimony to Christ's cause: can ye joy now?
Christ has mingled your drink with weeping, can ye drink off this Cup with
joy?

Suffering is suffering indeed, when it goes quite through the man, body and
spirit; body without all joy, and soul too. A man is plundered indeed, when he
is plundered in his estate, within and without; plundered of money and goods, and
plunderd of peace and joy too: no comfort without, nor none within neither, Ah
Lord? here is a man quite undone indeed, here is a man, all over miserable, soul
and body bleeding; can there be any gathering to relieve this man? I have heard
many complain, that they are quite undone, the expression has cut me to the
heart, to hear it; their faces all over blackness, not one line drawn
similingly. You have lost all joys without, why but there are joys within,
which the World cannot give nor take, have you lost these too? did the
Cavaleers take away all together? money and plate and Christ too? Ah! poor man,
thou art quite undone indeed, certainly the devil was in those Cavaleers.

I would speak to such from this point, which are quite undone, which Our
light afflictions which endure but for a moment, work about a far more
exceeding and an eternal weight of glory. Long suffering is but a moment, when
compared with eternity of glory. The great Heaven at a distance, makes a little
Heaven at present, a Heaven in hell to that soul which has it in its eye: as
these lower Heavens, give a great luster and vigor at a distance to beholders,
and raise much; so does the Heaven of Heavens. It Is a Heaven to behold Heaven a
far off, where ever the body be; 'twas Canaan to Moses, Ab extremis miseriae
quies.
to see Canaan a far off. The sight of the end shortens the way, suffering is
deadly long when a man can see no end; when a man is in darkness and can see
no light, it is hard to bring the soul to joy in such darkness. A man must
look upon affliction from one end to to'ther, that would fetch in joy to his
soul from suffering. At one end of long suffering for truth, is a father: at
the other end, a reward; which if seen well, will make the longest suffering
very short, and very sweet.

you. Surely you have lost your state, and found sin: death has a sting;
death of a man's body, yea, and death of a man's estate, has a sting. A little
guilt, is heavier then a great deal of misery, then all the afflictions of
this World. When bare misery goes over a man's head, though never so much, he
may well stand under this; but when misery clothes it self with guilt and goes
over a man's head as Iniquity, this makes the burden too heavy to be borne:
when the apprehension of sin startes out of misery, and stares upon the
soul, this killes all joy dead, and the man is not able to bear up, if he
had all the World to comfort him. The cause may be good and the man bad; it is
hard to keep up a bad heart, though the suffering be good, there be so many
by-things besides the cause, break in; guilt does so speak, stare, and tear,
in such a soul, when any bodily misery grows great and long. Long suffering
turns a guilty soul into hell, a hell in the flesh may be borne with joy, but
not a hell in the spirit. Plundered persons complain they art quite undone,
sin has done this, fall out with that, not with Cavaleers: they could not
have stripped you of all, not of your joy, by taking away your goods, no, not by
taking away your limbs, no, not by taking away your life: had not you wounded
your souls with sin, neither men nor devils could have stripped you of your
joy: the wounds which you have made in your spirits, not those which they have
made in your flesh, have quite undone you; these are the wounds that have bled
to death your joy. Thou have been the cruellest Cavaleer to thy self, O
sinner.

We glory in tribulation knowing that it works this and that grace, says the
Apostle, that is, takes off the soul from the Creature, sets it upon God and
eternal things. Thy sufferings are mere sufferings, they work no grace; if
they did, thou must needs joy in this to see how a fiery Charet, carries thy
soul to Heaven. No affliction is joyous or can be, but as it brings home the
soul to God, the Prodigal home to his Father. When afflictions do barely
afflict, and only afflict, this must needs leave the soul in a very ill
frame to joy. There is no joy in eating of husks.
Barren clouds do not make the Earth smell and smile; barren afflictions,
afflictions which make no grace, can make no glory; joy is an afflicted souls
Glory. As the vessel comes into form by beating, so comes in delight: as gold
appears by fire, as Christ is seen in the furnace, so is joy there. Suffering
long, and the heart hold it is own in sin! Ah Lord! here is a soul in hell
indeed: is it possible for such a soul, to make joy in such suffering?
suffering long and the heart hold it is own in sin? this sets the soul at a
greater distance from joy then ever, as one that is wicked and will be so;
there is no peace nor joy to the wicked: when will there? when can there? to
him that is wicked and ever will be so? that short suffering, long suffering,
no furnace, can melt nor purify. This souls suffering, is and will be, of the
same nature with theirs below; there is long suffering and no Joy without
possibility of Joy, so will it be with every wicked man.

Sinners tell me what do ye see? what do ye feel? sorrow, but no joy, why
that is right: write, Lord have mercy upon me, my hell is begun: my body is
desolate, my soul is desolate, so 't'as been long, so 'twill be for ever,
because my misery has not bettered me. What no enquiry? no panting for Christ
yet? will ye rub along through one hell, till you come to another? O God! when
shall Christ be in request? bodies bleed, souls bleed, and yet is not a
bleeding Savior sought after, that a bleeding condition may be made blessed
and Joyous. Sinners, you are ensnared in an evil time. Did you dream of long
suffering? what days are come upon you? what racked souls are within you?
when will this end? So it is, so it must be, till one deep swallow up another,
till the lowest Hell swallow up this nether-most Hell.

Read my Text once more, God is to be admired, so is this point, and (I
think) this Text to be concluded. How tender is God of the felicity of man:
he does much to destroy his sin, but nothing to destroy his joy, when he
makes him suffer long, he would have sin die, all sin, but no joy, no, not
a dram, but rise to an exceeding height -- Rejoice and be exceeding glad says
Christ. All that God does, the worst that God does to a Christian, is to make
him a Heaven and to increase it: it should make ones heart leap to think of
it. If he cast down, it is to raise up; if he humble, it is to exalt: if he
empty, it is to fill; if he kill, it is to make alive: if he make misery long
without, it is to make joy strong within: still he has a tender care of man's
joy. This is the Benjamin, about which Gods bowels beat, let my child suffer
any thing, but nothing in his joy. O dear father who can conceive thy bowels
to thy children? Lord what is man that thou art so mindful of him, and so
tender of his joy?

He that is in Heaven can speak nothing but Heaven: he that is never without
joy, would never have us without joy, although we be never without sin, no, not
then when we do and suffer most and longest for him: when he speaks of long
suffering, he ends it with joy, nay, he means it all a long with joy.
Christians, admire love, God does nothing to make you miserable; all that is
done this way, you do it your selves. He has been a Father of children, of
many children, this many thousand years, yet never was known to do any
thing, to take away the joy of any. God is very tender of your joy, be you so:
he does nothing to kill your joy, do not you make any thing he does, do it.
When he makes you suffer much, and suffer long, do not you make it kill your
joy: this is to turn long suffering, into long sinning, yet flesh and blood is
apt to this, I Will therefore speak a word to this point.

Our sufferings look as if they would be long, they have a long visage in my
eye (as I told you last day:) how long soever they stretch out themselves, yet
I would have you manage them (as the holy Ghost here speaks) with a spirit of
joy. I will give you three or four things to help, raise your hearts to
suffer, and to suffer long, and all along with joy.

wickedness. Should be the joy of a child of God to suffer long, to kill the
least sin, it is so killing to his father: how much more to kill a Goliath,
that is up in defiance against him. You shall kill wickedness in Armor,
wickedness with a brazen face; wickedness with a head-peece, back-peece,
belly-peece; wickedness wrapped up in Iron, in armor from head to foot;
wickedness grown so wicked, that thinks she has made her self
musket-proofe, Cannon-poofe, against the Almighty. Should it not joy a man to
suffer long, to kill such wickedness, to kill wickedness, that thinks to
outlive all goodness? wickedness that dares GOD, tears God; swears,
curses, blaspheames, at every word; wickedness set all on fire of Hell: should
it not joy a man, to quench such fire with his blood? should it not be a joy to
a man, to put forth an Arm to cast out Devils, though he never pluck it in
again? should not a Christian make it his honor, his joy, to make devils
subject to him? to make insolent wickedness ashamed and return? or swell and
break and hang it self? should it not joy a man to suffer any thing, to kill
a devil? legions of devils? principalities, and powers? Scarlet wickedness?
wickedness grown so high, as scarce ever was in England? 'twas the joy of
Sampson to suffer any thing, that he might make wicked Nobles suffer, scarlet
wickedness a never dying Monument of shame, me thinks it should make, the
most fleshly fearful spirit in the World Joy, to suffer any thing, to help
forward such noble acts as these. To die in the prosecution of a just cause to
the life, such a death, is it not life? such heart blood dropping forth, does
not every drop give back a cordial to the heart, from whence it comes? Such
misery, does it not create it is own joy. Can you not joy in such sufferings,
as bring cordialls with them? Such sufferings as are rather joys then
sufferings, they have so much honor and glory in them?

England, throughout the Christian world. Some think the Throne of the Beast
is in England; I believe, the life of the Beast, the life of al beastly
wickedness through out the Christian world, depends much upon these wicked
wretches, which live in England: is it not time then they were dead? should it
not joy any one to suffer any thing, to send such to their place? to damn up
Springs of wickedness? to cut off the devils right hand? to pull down strong
holds of hell? should it not joy a man, to die dead the divelish world, to die
like Sampson, and pull down all the Philistims strength at once. A blessing is
pronounced twice in one Psalm, to them that take Babylons little ones, and
dash them against the stones: what blessedness then, to them which take
Babylons great ones, and dash them against the stones? should it not joy one to
go about a bloody work, to be so blessed, so particularly, so doubly, blessed?

You shall be the life of Christ's Kingdom: God shed his blood says the
Scripture, to save the blood of man, and he did this bloody service with joy,
with delight, says the Psalmist, which notes an intention of joy: should not a
man gloryingly breath forth his glory and die, that Gods panting glory in
England, may recover breath and live? who would not be ambitious, to be his
Saviors Savior? to bear up the pillars of the Christian World? as the
Psalmist speaks.



FINIS.
USEFUL INSTRVCTIONS FOR THESE Evil Times.
COLOSS. 1.11. Strengthened with all might, according to His glorious power,
unto all patience and longsuffering with joyfulnesse.


EVery word in this Verse, has it not been a sweet flower to smell to? the
whole is a bundle of myrrh. It Is a Verse filled with the pantings of a
precious spirit, which are, to be filled with God: to have all, of that which
is indeed all: all soul strength, all soul wealth, all might -- all patience,
all joy; all Christ in fellowship and fruition, to do him all, cheerful
service, as long as life lasts.

There is holy ambition in Christianity: (i) to be greatest in the Kingdom of
God: In the Kingdom of grace.
to sit on Christ's right hand, as he sits on his Fathers right hand; to have
all power given unto us, to do all works well, which are assigned to us, as
he did; the whole soul to lie in the bosom of Christ, and so to be all in all,
and answerably all, unto all; all in point of power, patience, joy ability and
cheerfulness unto all duty.

O how good, a good heart would be! all good; all good in the worst condition:
grace would be absolute, grace would have all grace, that all the world may see
nothing in her but like her self, in the lowest condition: a man in Christ,
would be all in Christ; all unto Christ; outside, inside, whole man, whole man
Christ's with joy.

they can, to get into their own Heaven if it may be. Eagles fly high, and come
as near the Sun as they can. Grace has its instinct; it ascends, and ascends
as high as ever it can; would come as near the Sun as it is possible; 'twould
be like him; 'twould shine in a dark World, in a dark night, in a desolate
condition gloriously, as he did. A Christian would be all of that nature, of
which he is so little: he would be in all conditions himself, above
himself; a Christian in state, when a man in no estate.

Things have their sense. Senses are give, give; the eye is not satisfied with
seeing, nor the ear with hearing, nor the mouth with tasting: so grace, 't'as
i'ts instinct; yea 'tas more: 't'as sense: grace can see grace, grace can taste
grace, grace is sweet to grace; the new man can savor the things of God. A
Christ can desire as he tastes; pantes, and Prays, as he feels; he pants
for flagons, he feels drops so sweet; for water brooks, he sees little
streams so pleasant. Gods children are very craving; the more receiving, the
more craving; receptions are so sweet, sense is still eged on: divine sense,
divinely exorbitant, never satisfied; it cries give, give all: all strength,
all patience, all joy. The crying of a babe, is after all that the breast will
yield, yea, after all that both breasts will yield; after all that a Savior
has purchased, and made giveable:

ex judicio, he discourses worth, and so makes out: pearls are no lumber;
silver and gold, no lumber, but treasure, pure treasure; I would I had my
housefull of these says he. Reason has found out, and pitched upon worth, and
this makes desire mighty vast; the man would have all, it is so good, it is so
precious, such mere treasure. The new man, is of the clearest reason, of all
men; he discourses worth at a greater height, then any man besides, and so
makes out. He looks with a very piercing eye upon every thing; through
Pearls, and through gold, though the hardest things to be pierced, and finds
out exactly what they are, and calls them exactly as they are, corruptible
things: grace only goes for Jewels with the new man; in these only no loss,
no lumber; in these only no vanity, no vexation; in these, God; so much of
these, so much of God (...) ^hese J^wels in my bosom, and a^^ (...) ^ll Heaven
there. Thus the new (...) ^^scourseth worth at a mighty height, and makes a
very exact judgment go before, and then a very vast desire and endeavor,
answerably to follow after: give all, of that which is above all; of that which
will make me above all, in the lowest state: give me all might, all patience,
all joy.

Things have their rule, and so must all might, all patience, etc. All pains,
all prayers, must al run out at this height, for all grace, or they will run
all too low, below their rule here in my Text.

all within your selves, or to be an all in and unto Christ?

Fallen man is a greedy creature as Banckrupts usually are; he has lost all
and he is grasping for an all again. Know your state: it is wrong, it is
wretched: observe the greediness of your hearts, and which way it lies, or
your souls will be lost in an evil covetousness. Two things make up an evil
covetousness, when a man desires illicita simpliciter, or licita illicite;
Things forbidden in themselves, or things forbidden so; to make nothing all;
vanity, chief. Earth, Heaven, Earth, all.
You seek great things to your selves, do you seek great things for your
souls? every man is grasping after much, after a little all: tell me, what is
that all.

It Is a lost man, that observes not which way the strength of his soul works,
and spends it self. It Is horrible wickedness, to let a man's strength pass
unnaturally from him; to let his precious soul, spend its reins in a bed of
vanities. A man's soul wastes it self unnaturally, when it works greedily
toward any thing but Christ, and grace. There is more done to this man, then
he will believe: it is a man let loose to the Creature, for not taking pleasure
in GOD. When a man cannot find enough in God to make him his all, God gives up
that man to some lust, to make nothing all: affection flies out strongly,
fearfully, now: behold a man sick of love to a lie! a man that will kill
himself with love to an Harlot!

It Is one that bears his judgment already, conscience wounds, kills this man
daily, for burying love in a dunghill; for prostituting his glory to base Earth.
God vexes this heart, as the expression is Ezechiel the 32.9. I will vex the
heart of many people, etc. God is a vexing God to the heart of an earthly man;
he wakes sleeps* eats, talks, laughs, with a sad restless soul: he sleeps
but his conscience wakes: he rises, but his heart is down: 'twould be loaded
with thick Clay, and it is loaded with a witness: Ah Lord! has not he Earth
enough, that cannot bear up his earthy heart, it is so heavy?

This soul is in a deep Consumption, far gone from GOD; if any thing will
fetch him back, 'twill be to consider his folly, and how favor still waits to
be gracious to him. All earthen Cisternes are cracked: what folly is it to
seek for all, in that which will drop out all? Things cannot hold much, things
shall not hold much, which you too much bend after. All is lost, when the World
is made all: Death is in the Pot, when you are taken with the Broth, the
Birthright is as good as actually gone, when affection is so strong to
Pottage. Ah Wretch! thou have lost thy soul, to gain the World.

If this will not fetch back the Prodigal, this added, will; or nothing. Favor
yet waits. A Soul that has been a great Traveller in the World, that has
gone through the vanity of the Creature, through strength of desire and
curiosity, may return to Christ and be welcome: 'twas the Prodigalls case; he
had spent all, wasted prime love, prime strength, and then returned, and God
accepted. 'Twas likewise Salomons case. Love turned at a low ebb, it met with
Love. Inclinations of heart are dear to Christ. Smoking flax is not
troublesome to his eyes; he will stoop and blow it, to make it flame. Christ
is taken with a sinner, whenever he begins to pant after him. Bestow love
upon Christ when you will, he will meet you; or what Love you will, he will
out-Love you. Promise to your selves what you will in Christ, you shall find it
and more: make a God of Christ, you shall find him so; make him al, and you
shall find him al; more then all the World beside.

But take this Item along with you, A Soul in extremities cannot last long.
Passion strong to the Creature, will provoke much, and consume speedily; what
is done therefore in point of remedy, must be done speedily, or the Soul is
lost: a Soul a Fire to the Creature, must be snacht as a Brand out of the
Fire; 'twill suddenly be consumed else. A Soul posting to Hell, will quickly
be there. Greediness surfets; surfets make quick dispatch; Death is at the
door, when the Soul is exorbitant; the Creature is now made a God, GOD will
not now endure nor forbear longer. Let exorbitant Souls think of this, and
think what they have to do, and do it.

The End of the first Verse.
USEFUL INSTRUCTIONS FOR THESE Evil Times.
COLOSS. 1.11, 12. -- Long suffering with joyfulnesse. --
Giving thanks to the Father, etc.

It makes a very ascending frame of heart: it tunes and winds up every string
to praise God -- with joyfulnesse, -- Giving thanks to the Father, etc.

As the Soul has its Divine advantages, so it mounts: as the body has its
advantages, so (you know) with facility it vaults and leapes. Joy is a soul
lifted up by God, it is the soul upon Eagles wings; the soul easily mounts
Heavenward, when God lifts it. As sorrow is Gods casting down the soul --
Why art thou cast down O my soul? etc. And then the soul is fit for no duty,
disadvantage is so strong upon it; so joy, it is Gods lifting up the soul; upon
this advantage it can do any thing, go up hill with ease, mount to heaven
facilly. Joy, it is Gods giving wings to the soul, to fly after him. A soul
winged by God, will mount as high as God, as high as the highest Heaven, where
God is: 'twill after God from favor to favor; from bush to bush, as young
Birds do after the old one, when they are by the warmth of the old one fledged
and can flee; as soon as the old one has featherd and winged them by warmth,
they after him from twig to twig, from Tree to Tree and hang about him: So does
the soul as soon as warmed and winged with joy from God, make after him to
Heaven with praise, let disadvantages be what they will. You cannot keep
young ones in the nest, when once feathered and winged; no more can you keep
the soul from ascending to Heaven, when warmed by God with Joy.



as you read of the Devils coming down, that expression notes his
extraordinary working, in and by the children of disobedience; so notoriously,
as if he were in person present here, and had no other residence but in their
hearts, no dwelling but here, as if he had removed his shop above in the Air,
and brought all his tools and black family down upon Earth: so joy it is Gods
coming down, I cannot borrow a fuller expression; it is God extraordinarily
present, and working in the hearts of his people, as if he did make Heaven it
self descend, and bring down all the glory that is above, and set it in the
midst of man. God thus working in man, such works work out, work up very
high; Ordinary works may be veiled and hid, extraordinary, cannot; they will
break out, ascend and publish themselves in the Ears of the Author: these are
works so wrought, as made alive, and with Legs to go home again, and
acknowledge their Father; so are all graces when divine joy takes them, made
alive and ascending home, to acknowledge their Father -- with joyfulnesse --
giving thanks to the Father, etc.

That joy makes a very ascending frame of heart. As graces grow to maturity, so
they make home. Joy, it is grace grown up, grace grown tall, to man's estate,
to maturity of knowledge, to maturity of expression: Joy knows her father,
which no child else in the soul does; can own her father: Joy is strong, she
can, she does necessarily extol and lift up her Father -- With joy -- giving
thanks to the Father, etc.

with joyfulnesse -- giving thanks to the Father, etc.

Hell, it is this certainly; the devil liftes up that heart that thus joys,
that in joying lifts up it self against God. Cursed is that joy, that makes
God sad: Cursed is that joy, that leads to weeping and wailing and gnashing of
teeth: in a time of joy (as you make it) I am come to speak of joy; it is a
good hand of providence so to order our way: I wish I could so handle this
point of joy, in this time of joy, as to make you all to look well to your joy.

Time will not suffer me to say much: It fell-out to be an eclipse, that day
this Sermon was preached: Christmasse eclipsed Sunday; 'twas very sad to
behold, to tender hearts.
I can only say this, watch your hearts, a loose time is come, 'twil suite well
with loose souls: you will see many damnably merry. Carnal creatures will leap
out of their skin, out of their souls into Hell, when their bellies be full.
Belly-gods, set a knife to your throats, have a care of your souls, as you
love your souls look to your joy; eat and drink and rise up to play, and
not rise up to pray and praise God, and your Table will be your snare, your
death. Your brethren have too little, will you eat too much? your brethren
fast, will ye feast? your brethren bleed, will ye wantonly sport? they are
killed with grief, will ye kill your selves with joy? What a strange Kingdom
shall we render our selves to be, in the sight of God? some bleeding and
groaning, and some surfeiting and chambering; some reeling and falling, with
deady bullets in their sides, and others reeling and falling, with too much
drink in their bellies; some wallowing in the field in blood, and others
wallowing in the streets in vomit: Ah Lord! will not this make vengeance smoke
against England?

Christians and sinners, I am afraid of these profane days: Jobs fear
respecting his children, when they were going a feasting, is strongly seized
upon me, lest you pull your houses about your ears, by carnal and
unseasonable joy. I charge you al, by the dreadful coming of the Lord Jesus,
whose bloody sword is drawn in the Land, and set at your breasts, that you
look to your joy, in this sensual season, and make it divine. Let your
laughter be turned into weeping, as the Apostle speaks, if ever that were
seasonable, it is now. Some can smile and weep, it is a comely countenance now:
if you can so joy now, do. Remember God when your hearts are cheered; remember
the afflictions of Joseph in your bowls: what a wonder is it that this cup of
beer, is not a cup of blood! thus lay your hand on your breast. In your chief
joy forget not your selves, forget not your brethren, Forget not God, lest God
write up your wickedness on the walls, in your consciences, as he did
belluine Beltshazzars, and make your souls ring of your unseasonable joy, to
the day of your death. Germani'es wicked feasting, it is deadly cured; their
great drinking, is turned into great bleeding; their great feasting, into
famine. Be instructed England, be instructed: so else will be the deadly cure of
thy excess.

You observe days and good times (as you call them.) I am afraid of you,
observe your souls: observe your joy, how holy it keeps these holy days.
These holy days are betraying days, they are the devils snare to thousands;
how many thousands have more wronged their souls, in these few days then in all the days of the year besides? and yet this soule-undoing time, must be
called a blessed time. Our wickedness upon this blessed time, has brought
many a curse; our evil joy, much grief: if we shall yet continue it, when shall
our grief end? The devil has many snares for the poor soul of man, but they
are worst, which are wrapped up in joy; least discerned, but catch most and kill
deadliest. Slips in mirth and in joy are pleaded for, the devil has enough
now; the man does the devils work, the devil may keep Christmas, holy day too
now, if he will, his work is done for him. I am led to brand a bad joy: I am
commanded by this point in hand, to stigmatize al joy that is not divine, that
makes not an ascending frame of heart: I will do this in three or four things
briefly.

It strips God of all. No evil carries the heart so totally from God, as evil
joy: it carries away the heart, and every heart string; The soul and all that
is within, as that full expression of David's is; the soul and all within, the
body and al without, every sinew and nerve, are set intensely awry, when joy is
awry. A man is very heartily wicked, very totally wicked, every faculty, every
sinew stretch themselves to sin, when sinful in joy. There be many
sacrificers to the devil, but none sacrifices so bountifully to the devil as
joy does, when corrupt: she sacrifices totum universale, totum particulare, al
in general, al in particular, all the man, all the joints nerves and sinews of
the man, to the utmost; All the blood, all the spirits in the blood, all the
spirits generaly throughout the whole state, does bad joy set a dancing after
the devil, so that God has nothing left him in this man. A merry devil
jostles Christ out of all.

Bad joy has this ground evil in it, it is stiffnecked; hardest of any to
return, to be reclaimed. A man's joy commands all, and is all, and will be all,
to the heart. A man is most hardely brought to part with his joy. What is so
dear to a man as his joy, let it be what it will? it is his Heaven; the soul
and Heaven are inseparable, they are so identified, so one in another above al
other things. Joy and the soul are more identified, more one in another; then
the soul and any other passion or thing whatsoever. It Is almost impossible to
separate things which are so near, only the power of a God, which can do any
thing, can do it. Hence it is, that it is so hard to bring a man to leave sin,
when his soul has found out joy in it, when the sinner can make music to
himself in his sins, when the sinner by art has made an instrument of his
sin, a Lute to play upon, and delight his senses withal; Joy, it is a
fragrancy made from many flowers, with much picking, choosing, and composing of
flowers; it is honey gathered with much art, from much variety: the soul is not
easily brought to put that by, which it has so spent it self for, and so laid
out its utmost art and skill after. Bad joy, it is the soul in the arms of the
devil, he holds fast: it is the soul in the bosom of the devil, two evil
spirits dear each to other, making their felicity in and of each other; evil
spirits endeared are harder to part then evil bodies.

It Is the completion of evil: it is wickedness, full: sin grown old, out
lived al virtue, yea, out lived all conscience; for till conscience was quite
dead, bad joy could not live. Bad joy is an evil that has conquered virtue,
truth, conscience, God; and triumphs in this victory: all the tone now is, hang
sorrow, and yet hell now gapes for the man, and never so wide as now. Sin may
be grown old when the man is young, it is many a young man's case, the Lord
knows; nothing mature in them, but sin, as you may see by their joy and
triumph in it; fit for hell, ere they come to age, to be fit for their patrimony.

Bad joy, has this grand evil in it: It at the gates of hell, knocking to go
in. Evil joy it is a Malefactor upon the gallows, there is but a step between
him and turning off: The triumphing of the wicked is short, Job. 20.5.
when once a sinner begins to triumph, he has but a little time to live.
See thou a sinner laughing? stay a little, the next change of countenance,
will be weeping and wailing and gnashing of Teeth. You say of some notorious
persons, that the gallows groans for them: when you see a man notoriously
wicked, joying and triumphing in sin, Ah Lord! hell groans for this man, hell
opens for this man, in a moment he will go down to the pit. We leave him
there, and conclude.

FINIS.
USEFUL INSTRVCTIONS FOR THESE Evil Times.
COLOSS. 1.12. Giving thanks to the Father, etc.


Defin.
THanksgiving (according to the sense of this and other Texts) is a divine
return of divine love: It Is a Sea going forth into all the veins of the Earth,
and returned again to its self, by Rivers and Streams. God is infinitely out
here below, and yet all upon finite man, man is to make a return of al, and in
Gods own coin; love, for love; to make Gods own doings and dealings,
acknowledge him and own him; al love to the Creature, respecting body and
soul, in prosperity and adversity, to call him Father: giving thanks to the
Father.

Man is the mouth of the Creation, to make all the works of God speak, and
acknowledge their proper Author; all the power, all the wisdom, all the love
that is in them, to God as their Father. Every Creature has a rude speech to
this purpose, of its own: that is, as Gods own glory, gloriously revealed in
them, sensibly speaks forth himself. But man is formed intentionally, and
very transcendently to this work; to speak not rudely, but divinely,
accurately; to make power speak, and to speak to the life; wisdom speak,
and speak to the life; every mute Creature and action, and all the love that
lies mute and silent in them, to speak out and prostrate it self, to God as
it is Father. Giving thanks to the Eather; who has made us, etc.

All things in the World, in the Heavens, in the Earth, in the Sea, have Gods
mark upon them, as his goods; as great Merchants set their mark upon all the
goods which are theirs. God has not left himself without witness, throughout
the Creation; Now thankfulness, it is a going from Creature to Creature, from
work to work, to find out God, his mark, his image and superscription: to
whom does this belong? To whom that? if the Echo be to God: why? give unto God
the things that are Gods: if this creature or action, be so fat, so mute that
it cannot speak, nor call God Father, I will for it, says a thankful soul:
let God have all his own, let him wear his one glory himself, and none else;
Father al love, to al things here below, temporal love eternal love, upon him.
Give thanks to the Father, who has made us meet, etc.

Thankfulness is a making every thing that is good, to cry Abba Father to
God: every thing that is good, and all the good that is in every thing; what is
simply and totally good; what is subordinately and finally good, good in its
end, as troubles which prepare and fit for Heaven: what good is in the staff,
what good is in GOD? what good is in good, and what good is in evil?
thankfulness goes a fishing and gathering for love, every where, and to every
ones door; to hell door, to Heaven door, to present it to its own Father,
giving thanks to the Father who has made us meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of Saints in light.

Thankfulness, it is Gods faithful register. It Is Recorder to the great City
above; 't'hath an admirable memory, nothing dies that love does; it is a grace
which lays up doings, sayings, yea, whisperings of love in the heart, many
years and ponders them every day, every hour, and keeps them alive, and as
fresh and fragrant in the soul, as if but now done. She writes love, as he
writes beloved, upon the Palm of her hand; she is never forgotten, nor never
forgets; she remembers days of Old; days of love, though never so old, are
new. Thankfulness makes mercies live as God lives, for ever. His name is had
in everlasting remembrance, etc. By whom? by a thankful soul by none else.
There is no grace makes Chronology so exact for years for days, for hours
for all circumstances, as thankfulness does. How long God has been a Father:
in what condition a Father, in what manner and measure a Father: to what end a
Father, to bestow an inheritance; what inheritance for kind, for situation;
whether in darkness or in light, she exactly records all. Giving Thanks to
the Father who has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the
Saints in light.

Thankfulness, it is Gods bountiful paymaster: it is a return of Gods own
with advantage; his favors, and man's heart in over and above, for Gods
favors. A thankful man cannot nakedly return fatherly love; he binds up his
heart in his acknowledgements; he bundles up blessings, and bundles up his
soul in them, and so carries them al together to Heaven. All his benefits, and
all my soul, and all that is within it, let them al go together to Heaven, to
make an offering of thanksgiving. Let the Arc go home again, but by no means
let it go home empty; send costly Pictures of Gods dealings home with it,
golden Emrods, golden Mice: let Christ and love revealed in my soul, be
returned by my soul home again, but let them not be returned empty, says a
thankful man; let me picture out and engrave Gods kind dealings in my heart,
and so send Divine favors and heart together, home to Heaven: yea if I had ten
thousand souls, ten thousand Jewels more precious, then that inmost Jewel of
all in my breast let that love which has made it self my father, and made me
out an inheritance, as a child, and me fit for that inheritance, have all.
Giving thanks to the Father, etc. Understand this to be a heart speech, a
soul breathing, an intense total soul breathing, heavenward.

Thanksgiving it is a presenting God with his own; with all his own: -- with
thine own have we offered unto thee says David in his thansgiving: wisdom,
might are thine, all that is good comes of thee. A thankful man has no good
thing of his own, it is all Gods that he has; his wisdom, Gods; his strength,
Gods; every good thought of God; to do, to will good, of God; whatsoever he
has, whatsoever he is, is grace -- by his grace I am that I am: this is the
natural language of a thankful soul. All good in me, al good that comes from
me, is of him and through him, and therefore all shall be for him: inheritance,
fitness for this inheritance; all felicity, all that belongs to felicity, have
no natural, but a divine father. Giving thanks to [the] Father, etc. It Is an
expression (...), it is a breathing out of all, for all, to him that is al. Gods
fathering of man, has al favors in it, all favors have two parts, an
inheritance, and fitting for it, and both in this Text, and both taken up with
one hand, to wit with thanksgiving, and lifted up as high as Heaven.

Thanksgiving, it is a spirit still upon the wing, rising and ascending to
Heaven from every thing; never at home but at Heaven, it is a very low thing,
that he cannot rise from as high as Heaven: he eats and looks up; drinks
and looks up; looks down and looks up; whatsoever he looks upon, he cannot
look off God: whatsoever he sees, hears, tastes smells, he takes wing from,
and goes bound in spirit for Heaven -- whether ye eat, or drink, or
whatsoever he does, he does all to the glory of God. Thankfulness is an
Eagle-grace, whose game lies all in soaring and mounting, toward the Sun: it is
a soul still traveling from Earth to Heaven, from the creature to the
Creator: it is he that brings tidings to Heaven still of the lost groat, of the
lost sheep, of the lost Son; of what of Gods was lost, and is found here and
there, in this person and that, in this thing and that, which makes that
transcendent joy above: it is a man whose mind runs upon God (as you have such
a phrase) nothing but God is in all his thoughts; he is lost in love, and can
find no way out, but by breaking out to Heaven. O the depth of the riches both
of the wisdom and knowledge of God, etc.

Thankfulness does presuppose admiration: a mind over-matcht with matter. The
soul is big with admiration as it can go, ere it kindly and nuturally brings
forth thanksgiving. A little makes a thankful man, admire much; the least of
Gods mercies, O how great it is, to a thankful soul? A thankful soul sees
nothing but wonders; bread a wonder, a crum of bread in his mouth, a wonder:
clothes a wonder, any rag on his back, a wonder: any whole piece in his flesh,
in his spirit, in his estate, in his name, a wonder; O how big are all a
thankful man's mercies, and how little he? how tall and proper every mercy,
and what a dwarf he! How good is every piece, but the middle piece! what a
worm is man, and yet how used by God above a man, set little lower then
Angels! What a nothing, what a worse then nothing is man, and yet what an all
is God to him! these two wonders make a third, to wit a dead heart alive, and
leap as high as Heaven. Giving thanks to the Father, who has made us meet,
etc. You see thankfulness has here a great many wonders in her eye, and this
stirs her -- who has made, and made us: and made us, what? why partakers of an
inheritance: what inheritance? why an inheritance of Saints: where does (...)
lie, why? wonderful strangely, as high as Heaven, in light: admiration (you
see) is the natural mother of thanksgiving, giving thanks to the Father who
has done all these, and these favors for us.

Finally (for I will name no more things about the opening of this doctrine,
though it were worthy long dwelling upon; thanksgiving, it is the proper work
of a Christian, and the natural work of an Angel. A Christian is organized
above all men, sweetly to tell God, his own: he can dive deeper, ascend higher,
run faster and further after God, then all the lower World beside. It Is proper
only to a Christian to see love, to taste love, which are the strings only
which thanksgiving makes music upon; she can play nothing but love lessons.
No man is divine but a Christian, all others are but sensual, and to be ranked
with bruites in point of thanksgiving, for they give as good praise to God for
any thing they have, as any carnal man, and better. Bruites cannot speak, but
their bodies really answer their end, which is real thanksgiving, for what
they have and are: It Is a real return of all, for all. A carnal man can
speak God I thank thee, etc. But neither tongue nor hand, neither soul nor
body answer their end, and so man makes himself an Hypocrite, which a beast
cannot do.

The Waves clap their hands (says the Psalmist) many carnal men do not so
much in point of thanksgiving, the best of them can do no more. All inanimata
and mere animata, they are only Creatures ad extra respecting thanksgiving,
they can only clap their hands, and clap their wings, and all carnal men can
do no more; their Creatures only ad extra respecting divine works, what they
can do at these is only with their hands and with their tongues, clap their
hands, clap their breasts and lift up their eyes which some Bruites will be
taught to do in time.

As thanksgiving is the proper work of a Christian so it is the natural work
of an Angel, their breathing is divine praising: they are spirits of honor
waiting upon the King of glory, their place and their shape is for transcendent
melody: the advancing of infinite love is all their work, they speak nothing
else, do nothing else, nor can do; as the works you do naturally you do
necessarily; you breath and you can do no otherwise. They are just under the
line, love shines mighty hot upon them; with full face, with perpendicular
rays that they are in a continual rapture which necessitates heart lifting
and leaping and nothing else, and makes Hallelujah's all their language. They
are taken up with returning what they hear, see, feel, taste, and live in,
and live upon. The result of all is this thanksgiving, is a divine returning of
divine love: a rendering to God as we have received as that expression
concerning Hezekiah is; it is said he rendered not, or as it is in the Original
repayed not according to what he received, which is a full and a lively
definition of thanksgiving.

over; Christians are broke and make no return, God is breaking of all. He
cannot have what he would have, what he should have, he will take what he can
get; for money he will take goods, limbs, arms, legs; he will have his own
out of your skin, out of your blood, out of your bodies and souls: he is
setting the Christian World as light and as low, as they have set his love. Ah
Lord! what a time do we live in? Long suffering is at an end: mercy will be
righted by Justice, Justice will have all behind, 'twill be paid to the utmost
farthing; 'twill set abroach your blood, but 'twill have all behind. England
look to thy self: how much have thou received? what have thou returned? there
is but one thing will undo thee O England, to wit, ingratitude, not returning
as thou have received.

Englands ingratitude. Great favors overlookt, So great things scarce in any
age as in ours, has God wrought, yet what impression is there to be found, in
any man's heart? wroks are great, and yet make but little impression; as fast as
wrought, dead; it is deadly ominous. Tell me, are your hearts in a flame of
love? does Heaven ring with your praises? have not, do not the dealings of God
challenge this of every one? The dealings of God with England, carry a sweet
Face of love, and their inside seems very killing and judiciary, they leave
all hearts so flat and so low, at such a desperate loss still, as if nothing
were done: the greatest Victories, the greatest deliverances, keep up the
heart but a day, but an hour: Our favors are great, but work not answerably,
There is no one thing more sad in my observation: they are great only to look
upon, not great in their efficacy and power upon the soul, which may make you
all look about you.

The buddings of great desolation appear, The Lord pity thee England, The Lord
pity thee England. We grow cold, under the rays of fervent love: dead, and
nothing will keep us alive. The Revelation of great love, made us a little
warm for a time, and lifted up our hearts a while, high; and now they fall
deadly fast; it is deadly presaging. If nothing will keep up the heart, all will
down, all must necessarily down. If Ely cannot keep up his spirit, he will
not keep up his person: if the heart be broke and down, the neck will be
broke too ere long, and all down: a sinking spirit, presages a sinking state.
Every man's heart ere while, was at his mouth leaping, now it is at their heels
running; love unto miracle will not keep us alive, nor keep up our hearts and
hands, to magnify God: what desolating ingratitude is this? Every one looks
heavy, speaks heavy, sighs heavy, scarce one magnifying God. What shall I do
says one? What shall I do says another? Why, what does God do? eye him, do
your duty, follow after him with praise, or you will murder your selves and
many more.

Englands ingratitude, is, Concuring and assisting providence checked: A willing
God to do great things for his people, slighted. Love works richly, we
work poorly: we let love die in travel at our door; we are likely then, to
make a goodly return of love, are we not? we are lazily making our selves
ready, when love calls and puts in her finger at Key holes, and crannies,
gloriously to us, which is gross ingratitude, and for which the Church was
heavily judged, with a departure. We take not Christ by the hand, when he
stretches it out to us; we do not welcome Christ, as he comes smiling and
with a countenance like Lebanon, toward us; we do not bless, kiss, and
embrace him, when he shows his Face as an Angel: greater unkindnesse and
ingratitude, can there be? We let mercies, great mercies, melt away in their
own grease, and make nothing of them for Gods glory, or our own good; as if
great favors cost GOD nothing, Gods people nothing, or were worth nothing.
Heaven opens and our Eyes are shut: Heaven opens again, and our Eyes are still
shut. God makes his glory pass by us, and we let it pass. Green mercies, raw
mercies, half mercies, bastard blessings will content us, when full favors,
mature favors, admirably proffered. We check a bountiful God, a willing
Father, Is not this base ingratitude? we slight full love, when fully
proffered; a plant of renown, when proffered in a way of renown: Is this to
return full love, fully? to kill it in travail? to strangle it in the womb?
Because the Man-child makes Panges and Throws, therefore weary of travail,
and any peace, so but an end of this War; Any reformation, so this corporal
desolation, were but ended: O base England.

Englands ingratitude, is this, gentle corrections unobserved. Who observes how
tenderly the bloody swords, is managed in England? How in the midst of
Justice, God remembers mercy? who is taken with this? how many hearts does this
raise to follow God with praises? What an Earthquake Justice makes, in the
joints of the wicked! What a breast work in Bataile mercy makes? to save the
innocent! Few to resist many: few to kill many! how sparing of good blood, is
our good God! how careless of bad! How he does drop in relief like
Aquavitae, when we are ready to swoune, things go so ill! How many hearts are
taken, raised up, kept up, blessing God for this? Mercy Exalts her self
against Justice, she leads and guides our bloody Armies; Justice is but as a
common man, wounds and killes here and there, where mercy bids it. At most,
justice brings up but the rear in our War, she comes behind and Treades a
little upon our heel, and bruises that, whiles she breaks the heads and
necks of the wicked. O what Heavenly pillage, every battle in England, has
hitherto afforded! how much of God, how much Divine power, how much Divine
wisdom, Divine love, to be gathered up! but who has inricht himself, with
this Noble treasure? thy greatest mercies O England, are but short lived: thy
tenderest mercies quickly dye, I like it not, shall thou live O England? God
admirably saves us, we wickedly kill his kindness: 'twill kill us all, if not
well looked to. God is full of bowels, we are brawny, 'twill not last so
always. God killes malice, we kill love what dealings are gentle, we groan
under as tedious; too long, and too broad, too spoiling, too killing: who
blesses God that Englands miseries are mild? that England is dealt with, far
better then she does deserve.

I have spoken more generally to the Land, I will speak more particularly to
you Christians. You have a great stock of love in your hand, what return do
you make? I am commanded by this point in hand, to look after my masters
income, his great revenue of this lower world; rent day is come, and I am come
to demand it. You were Lepers, are ye cleansed? How many return and give
thanks; you were cast out to loathing, are ye taken into embracing? what
acknowledgment do you make? Infinite love is out upon you Christians, how does
it return into the bosom from whence, it came out?

Ingratitude makes great guilt, and great breach; that heart will grow too
heavy for the man, that cannot be taught to praise God, to sing new songs as
God renewes his favor. Three incomparable things, are spoiled by ingratitude;
Gods glory, man's peace, and increase of grace; he grows backward (as you have
such a phrase) that is ungrateful: it turns all man's welfare into a
consumption: it is the thief that robs God and man, it is base baseness; Gods
love and man's knit up in a Sack, and the mouth cannot be opened; all divine
stirrings chok't, cripl'd, killed and deaded, which makes merrily, and sweetly,
heavenward. 'Twere endless to tell you, the evils of ingratitude.

I will give you a word of remedy, and art of hers, to make him glorious. All
the complaint of integrity is, that favors are lost upon her, that love dies
in her bosom, and many made-prisoners by her, so chained and fettered with an
evil heart, that they cannot return to God that gave them. Integrity is still
sighing and panting to get up hill, with all Gods blessings on her back; Oh
that I could carry all sweetly home again, that God lends me.

strong winged soul, that is good at thanksgiving, the duty is so merely and
so highly heavenly. A cold heart can do but little at prayer, but just nothing
at thanksgiving; you were as good go to string a stone and play upon it, as to
make divine melody upon a stony cold heart. Defect in natural heat, maks
benu^mednes to action, if you be benumbed to duty, certainly there is a defect
in spiritual heat; you are not warm enough at heart: a man is in
thankfulness, as he is in strength of love: strong love will fall a limming
out of Christ from head to foot acutely; his eyes are like, his hair like
that, etc.

Thirdly, as the soul is in Prayer, so sudden and lifts up the soul, when the
man is upon his knees. A man does beyond expectation, when he humbly casts
himself upon the means; when a Christian cannot do a divine duty, let him
come as near it as he can, and God steps in and makes it out. When a Christian
cannot give thanks, let him pray, and God will turn a spirit of Prayer, into
a spirit of praise. Some are discouraged from Prayer, they can give thanks no
better; I come still as a Raven, merely craving; why? do so still, it is not
impossible to God to teach a Raven to sing.

Finally a man is at thanksgiving according to an inward secret assistance and
concurrence, which no man can express: as the spirit helps in Prayer, with
sighs and groans which cannot be expressed, so in thanksgivings, with
heart-liftings, and heart-raysing and ravishing which cannot be expressed.
Sailors to Heaven find some times a current, as Sailors here below do in some
voyages; when the soul lights of this, it sails a pace, whether it will or
no, with no pain: there are secret whispers from above; bunches of the holy
Land, tastes of the powers of the World to come; these are above all to raise
the soul, and to set all a praising God: as the soul is brought nearer
Heaven, this duty becomes natural. I see some very thankful, and yet very
poor, scarce any thing without to make Music on; surely, they have a mighty
advantage within; there is one winds up, blows and breaks within, the
instrument could never go, without any thing else, so, as it seems to do.

FINIS.
USEFUL INSTRVCTIONS FOR THESE Evil Times.
COLOSS. 1.12. Giving thanks to the Father, [who has made us meete] to be
partakers of that inheritance of the Saints in light.


OUr way is mountainous, every word is wonderful high; we need wonderful aid
to do well: I again beg your Prayers; I prize them above all parts, to
facilitate and felicitate my way, make me and your selves happy in them: make
wings for me to ascend to Heaven, my Text and work lies all there. Giving
thanks to the Father who has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance
of the Saints in light.

-- Who has made us meet, (...) who has made us fit or sufficient. Idoneum
facere. Who has [ made, etc. Vox creationis, terminus creandi Creating and
making idem sonant see Genesis 5.1. Doct.
est. It Is a term of Creation; Grace is another Creation: it is much out of
nothing, much made from nothing, by nothing, but by him that is all. Giving
thanks to the [Father] who has [ made us meet, etc.

The Image of God in Adam was a piece of the Creation, a peculiar, prime piece,
it is noted so -- In the Image of God made he him, etc. Gen 5.1. The image of
God was the result, the ultimate, the gloss, the glory of the whole piece; the
furthest reach, the design proposed, the top of creating art lay in this
Creating and making idem sonant see Genesis 5.1. Doct.
in the likeness of God made he man etc. This prime piece was lost, deeply
lost, generation will not reach it, regeneration only can: the result of
generation is but man's image nakedly and no more; Gods image is a piece, that
bears still upon Creation. Who has [made] us meet.

We are created in Christ Jesus unto good works, etc. Says the Apostle. Men
whose art and trading lies only this way, to make gracious, yet these cannot;
we are but instruments by whom men believe, but pipes thorough which grace is
conveyed: the fountain open is Christ. He is the fountain of life; life, and
the fountain thereof; spirits bubble and spring out of his bosom and blood.
Fountain, it is a term that notes no reception, because none known, is used
by the holy Ghost, as Melchisedeck, to set forth a transcendent thing, a work
immediately and only from God, as Creation was: so would the Apostle have this
word sound in our ear, which is used in my Text, who has made us meet, who
alone (i) has done this, as he did things at first, Cunctis patientibus, every
thing laying merely passive, as the Chaos before him.

The natural spirit is still created; Semen sanguinis and semen carnis, but
not Semen spiritus the seed of flesh and blood, but not the seed of your
souls, you bring nothing to this glorious work; not a stone, not a dust to
our inmost room; God breathes the soul still; if the natural spirit, much
more the divine, the holy spirit. Gives the holy spirit to them that ask it.
Grace is another inbreathing, another in spiration, upon expiration, solemn
request as dead; an immediate Act from Gods own Mouth, as the first breathing
of the soul was; not leaning to or admitting of, any subordination or
co-ordination. No Father has grace but God, Giving thanks to the [Father] who
has [made] me, etc.

The way of grace is via creationis, the Chaos: It works not in reference to
any preceding work, or sign of enducement, much less engagement: All are
under sin, dead; a Chaos, and he quickens whom he will: all inducement, is
only from GOD and will. An out room here below he would have, and he said
let there be this, and let there be that, and it was so; and this was the
manner of raising it: so now, a room he will have here below, more inward from
the noise of the World, and he said Ephata, let this window be opened, and let
there be light, and it is so. Vessels, he will have for this low room, and he
makes them al himself, according to absolute will; he makes one to honor,
etc. Terminus creandi est, it is a term of Creation, Synonimicall with this in
my Text, who has made us meet (i) by his word, and of his one free will.

Media gratiae, ordinem creationis subeunt.
The means of grace have the order of Creation, stamped upon them: Christ the
great wheel, that turns all other wheels of our salvation, is made unto us
what he is, and made of God. -- Who of God is made unto us, wisdom,
righteousness, etc. 1 Cor. 1.30. Christ is a full Sea indeed, but not a drop
to us, but as made of God. So we are made able Ministers of the new Testament,
not of the letter but of the spirit. Could such a poor man as I, by speaking a
while to the ear, turn the heart from sin to Christ, did not a creating
blessing sit on my lips? Divine institutions have the formality of a Creation
in them, because they have what they have, and do what they do, from supreme
power only, above all cause and reason: Other means have their reason in
them, as a cause.
Therefore are institutions and means of grace here, not so much as mentioned,
only the Father, means are so beside likelihood and reason, to so noble an
end, as to make and fit souls for Heaven. Giving thanks to the [Father] who
has [made, etc. None else worthy to be so much as mentioned, in this noble
work.

Grace is a Creation, Creatio, and talis creatio'
and it is such a Creation, there is Creatio transiens, and continuans. Grace is
a continued Creation. The Father works [hitherto] and I work; he speaks of
Gods working grace, under the motion of Creation, and in that very phrase, that
we should call the working of grace, a Creation. The Creation of the World
ceased in so many days, Transiens
and God rested from that labor, and does still, but the the Creation of grace
lasts, hithertoo; it is the work of the Trinity to this day without resting,
and how long yet further 'twill be, whether to the end of the external
Creation, I cannot say. The Word of God is a lively word, it has a spirit in
it: this is the work of the Trinity still, to put spirit into the Word, to
make living words, and so living souls. So the works of God are lively
works; what God does, 'has a voice; the staff, a voice; all that God says,
and does, all his words and works, they are made lively, that is, breathing and
forming eternal life in man, by a transcendent concurrence of Father, Son and
holy Ghost; the first is here mentioned, to wit, the Father, the rest are to be
understood, to wit, the Sun and the holy ghost; the works of the Trinity ad
extra are not to be divided. Giving thanks to the [Father] (i) to Father Son
and Holy Ghost. Who has [made] us meet, etc. Under this term made, the Word
of God and works of God are meant as means, for he speaks in the foregoing
Verse of sufferings which attend truth, which are al conducing to this noble
end to fit man for God.

Grace, it is a new Creation; Nova.
a Creation that makes old things pass away, things as old as the old
Creation, and then things to become new. 'Tas destruction in it, and then
erection and edification; it takes away and then sets up; it destroys sins,
which are old things, as old as the Devil, and then sets up grace; takes away
the stone, and then builds with flesh, this is the fashion and manner of
building within: kills the old man, and then makes a new; new light, new love,
this makes a new heart, a new Creature, a new man. Who has [made] us, etc. (i)
who has made us again, who has made us anew.

Grace is a hid Creation: Abscondita.
it is formatio secreta -- our life is hid. Know thou the way of the spirit
in man? it is as the way of a Bird in the Air, it is as the way of the wind in
the Earth, very unknown; Invisibles stellae. A new name which none knows but
he that has it.
it is meat to eat which the World knows not of, no, which Christians know not
of. One Christian does not know what meat another Christian has at his Table,
nor how sweet; not what guests, nor how merry together: J have meat to eat
which [yee] know not of. A Christian is bound in the spirit, and cannot see the
girdle; raised high, and cannot see the hand; taught wisdom secretly, and like
Samuel cannot tell the voice; warmed, and cannot describe the fire; the soul
as in Heaven, and yet in the body, and then whether in the body or out of the
body, cannot tell. As there is killing without hand, so there is making alive
without hand, without any seen, or to be discerned. Trees have their sap and
seed in them; their sap and life is hid, it creepes up under the bark, and
puts out gloriously, but very secretly, and unexspressibly, beyond all
demonstration: so is the way of grace, and the working of the spirit of God in
man.

Interna.
Grace is an internal Creation, it makes a new heart, and a new spirit: it is
glory within, it is bones broken, not flesh and set again and made glad: it is a
heart pricked, wounded, and healed, not a head. Grace it is the foreskin of the
heart taken away; a Jew inwardly: it is great hammering, and yet no noise heard,
it is so inwardly; a cry, but none heard in the streets, it is in such inroomes:
it is not only the hand without put forward, but the watch-wheeles within, set
right to the sun. Grace it is Anima indivisibilis the soul broken all to pieces
by supreme power, and curiously by the same power, set together again. Grace
is glory within, a room of royal repose private: it is Christ in the heart of
the Earth: the Kingdom of God is within us. The words which Christ speaks
they are spirit and life, so are all his works, which now he works, they are
spirit and life (i) of life upon the spirit: he has done all his works
without door, all his work now is within, spirit upon spirit; not a work
more should be wrought now, were it not to make influence upon the spirit. The
ball and flesh of the eye is made, all the work now is about the pupilla, the
nerves and Crystal faculties within, to make it see well, and far off, as
far as Heaven.

Finally, Tota.
grace is an universal Creation. In the first Creation all was good, so in the
second, all is good, all things become new. In the first, all was wonderful
good, good, good, very good; so all things in the new Creation are wonderful
good [behold] all things are become new, Tob, tob. Tob Meod.
a new heart, a new tongue, a new joy, new hand, new foot, all new -- A new
Creature, not a new limb only; all new, all good, wonderful good [behold]
All things are become new. The first Creation made the great World, all of it
fit for Gods delight; the second, makes the little World so, all fit for Gods
delight; it makes, one Christian, all Christians all over, fit to to be
partakers of an inheritance, the highest, the purest, the wonderful'st, -- In
light who has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints
in light.

self, in this without. Ah Lord! What total ruin! What double what damnable
desolation, shall we see! Name, State, Body, all made like unto the foul, all
marred, and ruined.

Sinners your utter undoing time is come, you will have nothing set up within,
you shall have all pulled down without and within; you will not have your
souls made better, you shall have soul and body, all made worse. A blind,
lame, ruined soul will content you, will a blind, lame ruind, body content you
too? you shall have this too; as much ruining, marring, desolating as you will;
none of us will see our inward estate, till God write it out at large in our
outward; Englands plague, every man's plague is in this. God has driven a high
calling of soul making, in this Land many a year: but no man has regarded
it; this has thrust him upon body-marring, and spoiling of al, sinners you
look not to the cause of your misery. Every man complains, he is undone, in
this and that, why O Plaintiff, is not thy soul undone? did not thou play
the Cavalier first, and spoyld'st God, conscience, thy soul? Does not all lie
ruinate within? have they not done so long? Is it much to thee that a few
sheep, cattle and goods lie ruined, and wasted without, and is it not thought
of by thee yet, what ruins are within? Why? thou shall be more desolate, most
desolate, marred quite, till thou better look after soule-making. You kill the
spirit, kill your consciences, kill every good thought, and what looking after
making alive? Shall bad only live and do well, no, God will kill that too; you
have killed all good, God will kill all bad; If you be set upon ruining,
resolved upon ruinning, God will resolve so too.

Not observing estate: The dead heed nothing. Confusion, is every where, and no
where: much and nothing; bad at any thing that is good; worst of all, at
observing it self: can abide no where, study no where, least at home.
Confusion has eyes but none in her head, they are in her heels, at the ends
of the Earth: -- Eyes, but see not; great parts, but of no through use; good
parts, but had still in their use. Let things go as they will, as they can,
this is confusions order: lets drive things as far as they will go, have our
will as long as we can, all go as 'twill at last: that is a ruind soul.
Prosperous things observe themselves, lick themselves, moult themselves, cast
their feathers, pick and set their feathers; things that decay and die, heed
nothing, neither themselves, nor any else. A ruined Soul lets all things run
to ruin, looks to no thing till all be lost.

Not observing estate, 2 Not caring to A ruined soul is careless. A man broke
and undone, cares, not to cast up acounts. A ruined soul has no eyes, no
heart to good: nothing will stir the dead, no eye pitied thee, says God, no
eye? What not the man's own? no, there are no bowels in a ruined soul, to it
self. What shall I do to be saved? There is not such a heart panting to be
heard, in a ruind soul. The heart is a stone, the man a dead dog, a Nabal,
dead alive; others must move for his good, he has no heart; if David kill
Nabals body, and God kill Nabals soul, so if God plague Pharaoh, Moses must
pray, Pharaoh cannot; if Elimas be in the gall of bitterness, Paul must pray,
Elimas has no art, no heart to it. A ruined state is man without a heart, a
heart without God; no love to it self as eternal.

Troubled with truth conscience, friends which call to self observation. A
ruined soul has no good principle, but many bad, if these would mak't up:
it is not good, 'twill not be good, 'twill not be tempted with the means:
Christians are Hypocrites; preaching, prating, folishnesse; Christianity,
preciseness; means of grace kick't at, if not suitable to humor. Self-will
rules every ruined soul, and yet this is very froward: froward will, filthy
affection, baffled light, flesh leading the spirit; does so, shall do so, till
both fall into the ditch, into Hell: Ah Lord! Now all is ruined indeed! Can it
ever be repaired? will Hell ever give up her dead, to Heaven? A ruined state,
has two infallible Charters, pride and malice; these are the two black spots
of a deadly plague in the heart; these are the lungs, by which the old man
breathes out it self: these, the poison of the Toade, which speak him
infallibly.

These are principles demonstrative All is well yet, I have many slips as
others have; but I got up again; fall often, but neck not broke yet; this is
all the relief, that things are not past relief: this is a ruinous soul.
Evidence is blur'd, but the man can make a shift to read a little, and that
little is enough: halter about's, neck, but not yet turned of; conscience
charges home within, but judgments yet do not second home without, therefore
all is well: this is a ruinous condition: house almost quite down, and the
Landlord thinks it is well, as long as any piece of the foundation, can be
found. A ruinous state, is not affected with it self* but with utter ruin; if
it can keep off there, it is well. A ruined, soul can bear ruins, all that is
dreaded is desolation, Hell: surely there is much or Hell in this heart
already, he does so only fear Hell, and as long as he keeps on thus, 'twil
increase. Scratching is nothing, wounding nothing, bleeding nothing, if it can
be stayed, ere all be out. All bad to day, worse to morrow, all the relief
that keeps up is I hope not stark naught: I hope so too, but surely this is
onward a pace to it.

All will be better, though little or nothing done to better what is amiss:
this is a second principle demonstrative, of a state ruinous. A ruinous soul
is idle: his industry lies in shifts to evade, not in care to amend. Times will
turn and be better, though the heart keep on as it was, and the man in his
old pace. Something is in the view of sense, and this strongly cleaved to; what
tender hearts fear, is but fear; he believes still what is near hand, and
shapd by the lasie fancy: a ruined soul is sensual, as long as he can see or
feel, he is never without hope though lust every hour, baffle his light, and
make a knowing man an evil doer, a man of light a walker in darkness. What a
state is this? can any condition come worse then this, which this man is in? He
can think of no bleeding, and yet his soul has scarce a drop of good blood
left; of no misery, and yet scarce any can be more miserable, then he is
already; good still in his own eye, and yet still bad, and does nothing to
amend. The punishment of neglect, is upon this man; when troubles were far of,
he did nothing to prepare for them, now they are near, he is left to
apprehend none; Justice is in this, that the man may eat the fruit of his way.
A ruinous soul, grows still more ruinous: Justice hides opportunites, or
denies stirrings to take them, for abuse of so many, that she may take folly
naked, with a stinging rod.

Things are better with me yet then with A ruinous soul compares himself,
with more ruinous; bad with worse, which is the way to be stark naught. One
would think it sad relief to a Leper, to hear him say, I am not so al over
Leprous yet, as such a one, when it is natural to the disease, to rise to this
upon every one. One would think it sad relief, for a man to say to himself,
such a one is going to Hell a little faster then I.A ruinous soul is base, he
maks base, and not noble spirits his pattern, that he may keep on his way, to
serve his lust. He goes as near a down right worlding, a down right time
server, as he can; there is so much income to accomodate an engaged heart this
way, over there is in nobility of spirit. A ruinous soul is a dunghill, kept
from stinking in every ones nostrils, and that's all. When he begins to smell
strong, the shift is, smell to such a one, he does this and that. A ruinous
soul lives within the confines of Hell, to gain Earth: it is a piece much
below his allowance; he will be judged with the World in this life, he will
have a Hell here, -- scarce be saved, seem to come short of eternal rest; he
will be saved by fire; A fiery salvation, an hellish heaven, will be to this man:
he will be dragged by the heels, out of his baseness.

Having given these principles of discovery, attend to your charge. I charge
you ruined and ruinous souls, with all the ruins of England. Ye desolate
souls, ye have desolated a glorious Land; the cry of blood and desolation is
against you, what do you do to discharge your selves? ye ruined, do you sti^l
lie weltering in your blood, to procure more blood? ye ruinous, do ye mean
to continue cold, lukewarm, and base still, till God spues us out all? the
blood of all be upon you: I wash my hands, from the blood of every base soul.
Know that you have a seasonable word, your misery sleeps not, which have made
so many miserable, by your baseness. If you plead, you would be better, if you
could; why? God can make you better. Your will is your worst piece, and you
think it is the best. You have no mind to be better; because to be better will
not so well serve your turn: Had you had a will to be better, could you have
rubbed, along so base, til now? that judgment states you in the Face?

Creating and making power has but three hindrances, 1. Unbelief. 2.
Frowardness, 3. Besottednesse, it never fails else, to make any man meet to
be partaker of the inheritance of the Saints in light.



let him do with it what he will; that would be made happy by him. Pride is
resisted; a pitiful condition must be pitifully laid open, and then bowels
beat. Son of David have mercy upon me and then says Christ what will thou?
Any thing now.

Finally creating power works in order men and brethren what shall I do? Now
Christ bestirres himself, and does something indeed, to make a miserable
Creature happy, partaker of an inheritance.

The riches of the Saints is in this point, I will touch this and conclude.
Your mercies do not generate, Generation kills, it caries away so much of the
strength of the reins; they are created, created power is omnipotent,
everlasting; so it makes Christians mercies. Generatio est limitatio; fertur ad
quoddam tale, ad individuum tale. Generation speaks limitation, it speaks
restraint to such a species, to such kind of things, and no other. Creatio est
illimitatio fertur ad omnia. Creation speaks, illimitation, boundless
process; you may have what you will, that stand under the blessing of this
power. You stand in a capacity of al; what would you be, that creating power
cannot raise you to? I am [made] all things to all men, says the Apostle;
making power makes a general Christian. [make] me to hear joy and gladness
says the Psalmist. No blessing too big for making power, it will make joy and
gladness in the most bleeding soul, Heaven in Hell.

FINIS.
USEFUL INSTRUCTIONS FOR THESE Evil Times.
COLOSS. 1.12. Giving thanks to the Father, who has made [us] meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints, in light.


us. -- Who has made [us] meet, etc. Love singles out her objects; she
chooses her breast and bosom to lie down in; she does not wantonly and
promiscously kiss as she meets, but picks and chooses and so embraces. -- who
has made [us] meet, etc.

Love works freely; Christ makes many, nothing makes him. The holy Ghost
cannot be bought with money, he is in the gall of bitterness, that thinks so.
Nobility, no more then peasantry; wisdom, no more then folly to take Christ;
he embraces as many of one as the other more; more poor then rich, more foolish
then wise. His will is his pleasure; therefore is will called often in Scripture
the pleasure of God. Whom he will pleases: if it be a theife, an harlot, a
Publican. Christ is a good fortune, but never caught; full of beauty but eyes
none; full of wealth, but looks at none; of great inheritance, but looks not
at dowry: he marries where he will; whom he will; whom he does, he makes; --
who has made [us] meet.

Love works righteously; mercy leaves room for Justice; she can hold al in
her Arms, but she chooses but few, and leaves the rest to be embraced, with
more rough hands. The sun shines as it can get room; in a little place it
cannot bring in all its rays, only, one or two, some few, but in the open
World, all. Christ has his course now in an open World; All are under sin,
he may put forth all his beams and glories, and be righteous; here a beam of
Justice, and there a beam of mercy; he may shine upon one part as upon Sodom,
bloudily; upon another part as upon Goshen, blessedly. Christ is not
necessitated to go about, and kiss all in this lower room as he does above;
he may kiss or he may kick; kick many and kiss a few, and come off
righteously; he may go killing and saveing, making and marring through this
congregation, so as to leave the Apostles liberty for me, in speaking of you
-- who has made [us] meet, etc.

Love works very purely; purity is choice, My beloved is one, this is the
Language of the Church, and this is the Language of Christ, both electing in
their love, and a few serves turn on both sides. The Churches love gathers
into one breast; so does Christ's. Him and no other says the Church; these and
no other says Christ. The property of love is to be entire; to use many, but
to choose but few -- who has made [us] meet, etc.

Love works strongly; she contracts her beams, that is her strength. The more
contracted the sun beams are, the stronger in heat. Love is love indeed, that
loves but few, one of a Tribe, two of a City, us of all Colosse; three or four
poor persons, of such a great famous City, and all the rest left and lying
under wrath. Running in many channels, breaks the strength and greatness of a
stream; That love which runs common is no thing; Love, and upon the matter,
no love; it is consistent with all misery, both here and hereafter. Special
love works strongly; she travailes to bring forth a Heaven; a Heaven fit for
man, and men fit for it; those wombes which bring forth great ones, bring forth
but few. Multitude is made up in magnitude; a few kings are considerable, to
many thousands of inferior men; one Kindome is considerable, to many manors;
a few Saints, considerable to many wicked. Love travailes and works stongly;
she brings forth Kings, Kingdoms, great things, and therefore but few -- Who
has made [us] meet etc.

Love works nobly; the channels are al speak love, and work love, as to
make all echo to his own honor. Much amonst few, will hold its muchnesse, and
they will confess the donor noble, and their inheritance great; thus do these
here in the Text, they admire love. -- Giving thanks to the Father, who has
made [us] meet to be partakers of the inheritance of Saints in light.

Love works hintingly. Christ does so kiss and embrace, in this lower room
where he comes, that it may be plainly discerned, that he is not a like pleased
with all. The very going forth of mercy, speaks Justice to the wicked; she
kisses one over another shoulder; is not that deadly hinting, and damnably
nodding to him that stands between? Love comes very near a man, and yet steps
over him and kisses the next: Two grinding at a Mill, one taken and another
left, two lying in one bed, one taken and the other left; does not this manner
of loves working, speak wrath to standers by? has not mercy in its
dispensation a tongue? a voice? does she not give a deadly cast and glote with
her eye, that she is not pleased with all? that some shall die under a
slight? that she never means Heaven to this man nor that man, what ever they
promise to themselves? love smiles and goes close by one soul, and kisses
another, why this very transcient smile, is a deadly frown; it is a smile, and
yet it is a deadly frown too, the soul past by should account so, and spell
his death out of it. Abels offering accepted and Cains nor, this was to hint to
Cain how things went in Gods breast, and it did so, but wrought desperately.
Christ in the same breath, in the same expression, can speak consolation and
condemnation, life and death; life plainly, death noddingly; so he does here
in this form of expressing himself -- Who has made [us] meet, etc.

What man's state so bad, but he thinks ^will end in Heaven? Ignorant souls
make Heaven, and the Bosom of God, ^he center of souls, that to which all
souls necessarily go, and can go no whither else. I am pained at the heart,
to hear profane men's opinions and their principles, respecting the love of
Christ and their eternal estate. I will give you two or three of their
principles, and speak to them.

They thrive in the World, therefore love has given them her favor, and
chosen out them to be the only happy men, who ever be miserable.

Did not the sun shine upon Sodom? was not Dives, a wealthy man? and yet
where is he? Where is he? was not ^ophet prepared for the King? The things of
this life, are consistent with death, with wrath. A man may lie in the bosom
of the Creature, and in the bosom of the devil too, nothing more common. A
full Table speaks snares and death, as well as love. That man will certainly
choke his soul, that will not rise from his Table, to fetch an argument of
Gods favor toward him.

I am beloved of all men: in this some bless themselves, as beloved of God.

David loved Saul, a (...) yet Saul was not beloved of God. There is a love of
relation. David loved Absalom, yet Absalom not beloved of God. Gods people may
fasten love, where God will not. Gods people are weak, it is usual with them
to fasten love, where God cannot. And as for the Worl^, they love their own,
they hug one another to death: what then can thou argue from hence, touching
Gods favor to thee? I am not more jealous of any man then of him, that
aleadges a general approbation for his goodness. The World gives no
certificate to Saints, nor Saints give no certificate to the World; he that
gets a certificate from both: Lord! what is he? a Saint? or a worldling? good
or bad? or made up between both? Common vote for goodness, speaks common
goodness, commonly: seldom is this height, a height to argue special love
from.

My conscience is as clear and as good as any Man's, my heart is at rest J
thank GOD.

The soul is corrupt, 'twill lie down with a lie. There is settling upon
lees; this speaks not love, but deadly hatred. When the strong man keeps the
house, all is at peace. Some are quiet, because there is no grace to oppose
corruption. The old man is quiet enough, if he may have what he will: The
devil is as quiet as another Creature, if he be let alone, to rule all as he
list's. There is peace, peace, and yet no peace: have you never heard of that?
They shall cry peace, peace, and yet no peace, no favor with God, but wrath
burning, and judgment at the door. Peace may be in a sinners mouth, and wrath
in Gods; peace may be in a sinners heart, and wrath in Gods heart, yea, when
wrath is in Gods Hand, and ready to cut him off. There is a peace of man's
speaking, and a peace of Gods speaking: -- When [they] shall cry peace, peace,
merely they, and not God; this peace peace, this double peace, speaks double
wrath.

Delusions are many, sinners look to your souls. This is certain, love
elects: she goes forth with choice, not promiscuously: she makes some, not all,
blessed. -- Who has made [us], etc. Are ye amongst this number? Can ye say
thus? who has made [mee] meet, and [mee] meet for Heaven. Every one thinks
special love embraces him: I Will therefore give you the proprieties of an
electing love.

It Is in living: Sun rays generate; Vita.
sun rays regenerate. Love is warming: heat makes life. The Love of God
revealed, begets love in man: We love him, because he loved us first. God
gives all great favors so, as to return to him naturally. Divine love shed
abroad in the heart, carries the heart to God. The spirit returns to God that
gave it; the natural spirit does so at death, the holy spirit does so before
death, all along even unto death. Gods Countenance where it is similing, it is
winning, where it is winning; it is drawing; where divine love is drawing, the
soul is running to Heaven. A favorite is much at Court, ever at the Kings
elbow; Gods favorites are much with him, still bending Heavenward. Love is
always in her journey, toward her beloved; No bosom so sweet, as that from
whence she came forth. Divine love, makes divine; it comes from Heaven, it
carries to Heaven. Chosen, are called: electing love has a still, sweet,
calling voice. This is the way says love: and there is no way to this, says
the beloved. Grace echo's to God the giver. Wisdoms ways have the name for
pleasantness, with a chosen soul.

Love inflames: the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence and the violent take
it by force. V^atal's
Infinite love, makes a kind of infinite: it generates simile. Love is as
strong as death, it is spoken of the love of the Spouse. The Husbands love is
unexpressible strong, so is the Wives: Love, sets the soul for Heaven, with
full sail: All the heart, and all the might. Electing love, carries al captive
to Christ: it is not to be expressed how strong love is, when made divine. That
love that is set upon God, is the strongest of all, 't'as such a transcendent
object, and such secret transcendent influence. No sinner loves sin, as a
Christian loves Christ. Love is made from the object: no object so lovely, so
soule-drawing out, as Christ is. No such rapture did Salomons soul ever make
in the Creature, as in Christ: nothing is so drawing out of love, as Christ:
the very vastness of the soul, is suited in him: how vastely does the soul
love, when fully suited? When every power of the soul, has enough to take
full hold on! Thou have put joy in my heart, [more] then they, when corn and
wine and oil increased. Gods Countenance draws more out, more love, more joy,
then Corn and Wine, then any thing can do, it is so fully soul answering.
Electing love is a transcendent love, stronger then that which is borne to all
the Creation besides; so it makes a transcendent love, a love stronger to
Christ then to any thing. My love is white and ruddy: fair, yea [fairest] of
ten thousand. A man whom Christ loves, cannot see such another as Christ is: as
the Apple Tree among the Trees of the Wood, so is my beloved among the Sons.

Electing love is separating. I have chosen you [out] of the World. The body in
the World but the soul out of it, off of it, (i) in esteem, all earthly
things dung; stinking Earth: that which is taking to a carnal man, is stinking
to a Christian. Earth is base, to a heavenly soul: thick clay, a load; yea
the very flesh upon the back, a load to a divine spirit; life, this life, but a
death. The best house here, but a groaning house -- in this house we groan,
panting after another better built, A house from Heaven. Christ finds men lost
in the Creature, but leaves them lost in himself. I esteem all loss but
Christ. A choice person has a choice affection, he can put no prize upon any
thing, but Christ. A Christian is the worst bidder for the World, in the World.
A Judas bidds basely for Christ; A Paul bids basely for all, besides Christ; he
bids nothing; he esteems all dung, he prizes it at no rate, only worthy of
strong contempt. The glory of this World, takes not a glorious soul. I am
crucified to the World, and the World to me. Paul had nothing of the World, nor
cared for nothing: there was as little of the World in his heart, as in his
hand; as little in his spirit, as in his purse. Divine love, is very estranging
from worldly things; knows nothing, no, no person after the flesh. A brother
is nothing; a sister, a mother, nothing; divine things, All; 'twas so with
Christ, it is so with a Christian. All Christ's children, take after him.

Whether chosen of God, whether singl'd out by love, now speak. Whom love has
not singled out, wrath now will. Justice has no other Butt to shoot at, but a
rejected soul. Mercy sets her children under her wing, Justice killes her
children with death; ye rejected souls what will ye do? The great Shepherd
is separating, between sheep and swine: tares shall no longer stand amongst
the Wheat, plucking up by the roots is come. Bleed under your condition,
sinners: the quarrel at this day in the Land, is between Christ and rejected
persons: there should not a stroke be struck more in the Land, were it not to
cut off, that which is cast off. Every Soldier is Gods bloud-hound; you will
see wrath single out the stoutest Goat in the heard, and pull him by the
throat; Justice drink the blood of every Judas, and make Filii perditionis,
filii perditi, the greatest men, in misery as deep as their merit; persons,
cast off by GOD, cut off by Man.

Justice is going once again, to give every Cain his mark. Not a rejected
person through the Land, but shall feel the power of Gods Wrath. Ye forlorn
Souls, what will ye do? Shall your sin find you out? Will you go on in
your sin, till God make your rejection visible, and write your doom in your
blood, for posterity to read and tremble? Is it a small thing that you have
lost your name and honor with men? Will you desperately lose your honor
eternally with God? Ye Malignants, ye seed of the Serpent, you say you have
but a life to lose, I say you have Souls to lose. You say you will honor the
King; so do, but honor God too, or else the King of Kings will crush you all.

I conclude this point, Duty.
with a word to Gods chosen ones; your Duty; your safety lies in this point.
Love singles out her beloved -- Who has made [us] meet, etc. You are of this
little Number, admire love: this is the use made in the Text. Give thanks to
the Father, who has made us meet, etc. What knotty pieces has God hewed, and
made fit for himself! That Gods Love should center any where but in himself,
a^l the Creation should admire: that God will foul his hands, to mould and
make up Earth for Heaven, for ever admire; man's love is all from motive, Gods
love from none. God lays out cost on a dunghill, and makes it a stately
Throne. Things which so move that we can see no spring, their very form set's
us into admiration: Divine Love moves thus altogether; singles out, kisses,
embraces, and no spring nor principle, but it self; loves, because it loves:
can you reach this reason? No, why? then admire and adore that love, that has
your Souls in her Arms, to carry them to Heaven.

Safety.
Your safety is in this point. Whom Love has singled out, wrath shall never
wrong. The favor of God is a sufficient defense, against the frowns of the
greatest man. Love is as tender to keep, as choice to take into protection:
she commandes men, she commands Angels, she commands the whole Creation, to
serve her Beloved. A man has the Munition of Rocks, that is in the Arms of
Christ. A Christian cannot object his sin, to turn of this consolation from
him. Divine love began freely, it goes, on so; it chose out the man freely,
it chooses out mercies for the man, freely. A man is Universally made, that is
chosen out by God to be happy: hereafter, happy; here, happy: in every
condition here, happy. Christ leaves none to the hazard of sins, or times:
he secures his choice, as his own eternal felicity; He binds them up as
His Jewels, sets the Righteous apart, As for Himself.

All.
Your safety, your All, is in this point. It Is your Spring of supplies; it is a
Fountain open. Free-Love is a Canaan of blessings, Milk and Honey Flowing.
Free-Love, it is infinite mercy set to make you her Heir, to bestow all she
has upon you and yours. Would ye have your selves blessed, the Kingdom
blessed, Free-Love has in it, to do all: Free-Love has a long Arm, and a
full Hand; mercy for thousands, and from Generation to Generation.

FINIS.
USEFUL INSTRVCTIONS FOR THESE Evil Times.
COLOSS. 1.12. Giving thanks to the Father, who has made us [meete] to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.


Who has made [us, etc. Love works fully; What persons Christ chooses to work
upon, he makes thorough work in: he renders them meet, fit, sufficient (the
Original word will bear all these) to be partakers of the inheritance of the
Saints, in light.

Sin has it is fitting, and finishing, and then it brings forth its end.
Sin finished brings forth death, etc. The Devil is a thorough worke-man;
where he lays a foundation he raises up the building till all be fit for
himself, and the man made meet and fit to be partaker of an inheritance, with
the wicked in darkness. Grace has its finishing too; Christ is a thorough
workman; he does thoroughly purge his floor, and so takes Wheat into his
barn. He does not take Wheat of his floor any way, carelessely, but
curiously, purgedly, purgedly thoroughly, till it be fit to make fine bread for
his own Table above. There is washing, and washing thoroughly wash me thoroughly
from mine iniquity says David. Through washing only, makes white and fit for
Heaven. So there is making, and making fit; age, and full age, fit age for the
inheritance, and then the inheritance Who has made us [fit] for the
inheritance, etc.

fit for us: grace goes out her time, to make us fit for God. Our Heaven here,
bears upon the fitness of every thing (...) us; our (...) ^en (...) ^ter,
(...) upon the ^^tnesse of e^^^y person (...).
Apples grow, and they grow so long, till so big, so yellow, so rud, and then
we gather them. Grace grows, and grows so long, to such a height, depth,
breadth, and then is a Christian gathered as ripe fruit, fit for the Lord. A
Christian lives so many days, and waits the working of so many things, and
then his change comes from the working of all things here, to the bosom of God
and there rests.

Like things bosom one in another, the more like, the nearer still they draw
to one another; Homogenea which are quite like, as Gold and Gold, upon
advantage of heat run quite one into another, incorporate and become one body.
The way and work of Christ is, to make full similitude between man and God,
and when this is done, sets them in one another bosom for ever. Truth rises;
when the Image of God is full drawn, then is the piece removed, and set in
Gods dyning room. Christ sets ^o raw draughts, in his up-roome: he (...)
every piece its complement, that every piece may give its place 'its full
ornament, wherein lies a great part of Heaven. We are transformed, and by
transformation we pass from glory to glory; from the glory of one measure, to
the glory of a greater, from the glory of a greater, to the glory of the
greatest measure, which is all glory, the inheritance here spoken of, which
lies in light, in all glory. Our fitness to Heaven, is our similitude to
Christ; our similitude to Christ, is the success of sureame powers Long and
strong working, so much is sounded here in these terms of the Text. -- who
has [made] us etc. (i) Who by much pains, and long labor, has made us like
Christ, and so fit to live for ever with him.

Christ works here below, as a very Idiome in that language; the habit they
wear above, and the fashion exactly. He was made for us the good spy, of that
Canaan to come, he knows all. He has a true light, and he is true to it; he
knows the Law of the Land above, and works, and fits according to it; he
suites inhabitants to that holy Land. Christ's motion in man, is according to
the Will of God; he works by rule; the Law of the Country is his rule, which
is this, Without holiness no man shall see God, because without this, none fit
for God. Christ is true to this Law, and true to his light, he will damn any
man, rather then he shall transgress this rule, and break into Heaven, as
unfit. Without his qualification no man shall see God, that is without such
holiness, as renders fit, for such a holy place, and such a holy God.

above, is first made grow against nature here, by supreme power; and then
transplanted. Christ is a very curious Artist, he will draw out any thing, in
any thing; he will draw to the life things above, in things here below, the
noblest things above, in the basest things here below: in man which is the
worst piece here below, to draw out any Heavenly thing in, he can reach the
exactest pattern, and render them the one fit to the other, though his
materials to work upon, be very bad to make work with. None worse then
Gentiles, and yet these here mentioned, as made fit for Heaven.

Christ moves as a very sufficient agent; who has made us fit or sufficient.
The exactest condition, that the exactest place or person can require, Christ
can perform it. Himself is our sufficiency for Heaven; and what place so
high, so noble, that he is not sufficient for? He moves Modo devolvendi seipsum
nobis, by way of devolution of himself upon us, which makes absolute
sufficiency, and full capacity of all above, if there were more blessedness
there, then there is. [Hee] is the Lord our Righteousness. What he is as
Christ, what he is as Jesus, what he is as Prophet, Priest, King, he is ours.
he makes, it ours actu transferendi, and it goes above as ours. Who has made
us [sufficient] (i) in Himself, in his own sufficiency, which is absolute
sufficiency. Who has made us [fit] there is a double fitn^sse to be understood
in this term, A fitness to Christ, and a fitness in Christ, these may be
distinguished, but not separated. Christ first pleases his own eye in us, and
then pleases his Fathers eye concerning us, in himself: he fulfills his own
will in our sanctification, and then fulfils his Fathers will, in our
justification; this makes absolute fitness, and sufficiency for Heaven. Our
fitness to Christ, is but disposing Heavenward; our fitness in him, is
completing and absoluteing for it. One act does both these; faith fits to
Christ, and leaves the soul fit in Christ, for his inheritance; and this the
work of God, a piece of the Creation here mentioned. Who ^ath [made] us
sufficient (i) absolutely sufficient.

Christ moves as an unwearied agent: let the piece be never so knotty, he never
leaves working till it be fit, sufficiently fit for the stateliest building.
Christ works quoad principium externum, and quoad principium internum;
according to an external principle, and according to an internal principle
which never tires; he works according to office, and according, to love.
According to designed office, and this binds to fit and finish for Heaven, --
He is the Author and finisher of our Faith, and this by office. Christ also
works according to a proper principle in himself, to wit, love; which cannot
be quiet, nor leave off working, till every person foreknowne, be fully fitted
to love, and for love. Love is an untired principle in Christ, though not so in
us; this makes him an everlasting Father, a worker as a Father without
cessation, till children be fit to be taken home, to enjoy their inheritance,
fit for him who took such a knowledge of them. Christ moves as an everlasting
father; he lays out, and lays out; he is at cost and pains this year, next
Year, to give breeding, high breeding suitable to fortune, and never leaves
off, till the child be fit for his inheritance; Christ is an everlasting
Father, as well as a Prince of Peace; he has love, proper love in him, as well
as proper duty and office devolu'd upon him. Office binds to finish for
Heaven, love, more. I think it is proper to say, Christ moves more naturally
then obligedly, to fit lost man for his eternal home. Bonds were voluntarily
taken up, and taken up from love; love is the natural motion of Christ, this
works and never leaves working, till the soul upon which it seiseth, be fit
for Heaven.

Hell have in these bleeding times! What preparation for Heaven do you see men
make, more then they did! He that was filthy, is so still: he that was an
Earth-Worme, is so, although God be treading Worms to death, and crumbling
Earth to dust. Though person and state lie open to death, yet no man mends his
pace for life. What shall I think of such a Generation? My bowels rend, to
look some of you in the face, to behold how like your selves you still look,
and what a deadly visage your life still carries. What you were; you are; what
men are now for sin, surely they shall be; Justice is at work to perpetuate
misery to thousands: to harden Pharaohs, and then cut them off; to fit Vessels
for wrath, and then fill them up with it, as full as they will hold; to fit men
for their place, and then send them thither a pace.

Sinners you hear all this, can you bear all this? do not your souls yet
stir? Are they not then white to harvest? fit to be cut off, by that sword of
wrath, which is going about? An unstirred soul is fit for nothing but Justice;
it is death in strength upon the soul; it is the soul in grave, and a stone
roul'd upon the door. What you are fit for, that you shall now have; Justice
is commanded to go over the Land, and single out every wretch, and give him his
own. I think there is scarce a sinner amongst us, but Justice ere it has done
with us, will make him eat of the fruit of his way. Does not wrath make misery
begirt us? Does it not cut down dry Trees every where? fuel fit for the fire,
does she not set a fire, and cast into everlasting burning? And yet are not
your souls a fire, to be fit for Heaven: such whose souls stir not now, there
is just cause to fear, that they are left as fit fuel for wrath.

Obduratio.
I will give you the properties of a man fitted for wrath. The first is
obduration. A stone is fitted to descend; 't'as its property to bear
down-ward. Hardness maks fitness to judgment. The way to Hell is, from
burning to burning; from a seared conscience to a damned soul. Justice blasts
the soul in the body, ere it burns it out. A fitted soul for wrath, it is one
with his Eyes out, it is one that can see no evil making toward him, although
himself very evil: one that cannot see Justice though very visible, nor sin
though very palpable. Justice works within, and then without; she spends her
self most fiercely within, her last and least breathings and blastings, are
without; she first puts out a man's eyes, with the sin he loves, and then comes
as a snare against the sinner. I sit as a Queen and shall see no evil, and
yet this Qu^ene a Queen, and very evil: that is a Swans song before death; now
is the soul fit for Justice and wrath, and never so fit as now. When a sinner
sings a requiem, soul take thine ease, he is fit for, yea, very near to,
wrath. -- this night says Christ in such a case, they shall take away thy
soul. A man has sinned himself to Hell-doore, which has sinned his soul
blind and secure. A man is fitted for wrath indeed, when he stands at
Hell-door, readdy to go in.
Settling upon the lees, and judiciary visitation, they are joined both
together, as near Neighbors, and as belonging to one thing, and this by
resolute will [I will] visit those that are setl^d upon their lees, Wrath is
coming toward you, ye blind souls: do ye see it? no: There is none. Why
therefore 'twill certainly come; you are the only persons fit to be visited [I
will] visit those which are settled upon their lees, whom ever I pass by. A
Horses Eyes out, and the next work he is fit for, is grinding. Justice sets
sinners to grinding, their own souls, when they cannot see their own sins.
Wrath certainly, will not suffer that man to live long, which has killed his
soul with sin.

Alienatio
A second property of a man fitted for wrath, is this, alienation. No blessed
fellowship, speaks separation to wrath. A King calls home his Ambassadors, when
he means War, and Judges a Kingdom fit for nothing, but the Sword. Casting
off, fits to cutting off. The spirit of God departs, when the man is rejected.
Alienation is great still, before desolation. Saul shall have no answer no
where, no whispering from any but from Hell, when given up as only fit for that
place. Light has no fellowship with darkness; but when 'twill have nothing
to do with darkness, to make it light, the state is desperate, it is a sign
that the soul is fitted for utter darkness. There are but two steps to death,
the first is this. The sinner says he will have no fellowship with God: the
second is, God says he shall have none. Now is the sinner judged; how fit for
Hell then, now judge ye; execution only is wanting, and the Devil is not
usually back-ward, to discharge his office; the man is upon the gallows, he
wants but turning off; how things may turn, whether Christ will put in and beg
the man's life, here lies the case, and depends wholly upon Christ's Will. What
fellowship your souls have with God, I know not: whether God say any thing, or
nothing; whether instruction with strong hand, be come to instruction with
weak hand, by reason of your strong lusts: whether your instruction with weak
hand, be not come to instruction with no hand, but bare blows for your
baseness: whether all whisperings be not laid aside, and whispering turned
into whipping, this would be looked well into; for it speaks very ominously for
eternity. Love or hatred cannot be guessed at, by things without, but by Gods
dealings within, they may shrewedly be guessed at.

Profanatio. 3.
Profaneness is a third property, of a man fitted to wrath. Profaneness is the
badge, of an Esau: wickedness speaks out a cursed soul. To what Country a man
belongs, you may understand by his language, whether to Spain, France or the
like Hell has its openings, as Heaven has; when Hell opens in a man's mouth,
what needs any further enquity, what Country man Sir? To what place do you
belong? A man molded and shaped for wrath, may be read in his face. Death
though it cease within, yet it show it self in the very superficies without.
You have such a common speech, One may see Death in that man's face. A man's life
is, in reference to his eternal estate, as his face is in reference to his
temporal, it is Index ^nimi, index futuri, index aeterni. A man's life foretells
his end. What course any man leads, broadly speaks what such a man is, what he
will be for felicity or misery. An a man be in the broad-way, he may prophecy
where 'twill end, and to what inheritance he shall come, whether to light, or
darkness. I know not what lives you lead; Christ does, and you should. Let
them be led how they will, you may spell Heaven or Hell out of them. Life is
but an expression of the frame of the spirit; it is but motion according to such
wheels, and such a spring within. If you will know of what frame, or what make
your souls are, and to what fitted; view your lives. Your souls breath out
themselves, in your lives; and they breath out themselves in the bosom of God,
or the devil; into whose bosom you breath your souls in life, into that
bosom, you will certainly breath them in death.

As you find your state now move. To fit for Heaven is no trifle, your eternal
estate depends upon it. To fit for Heaven is not arbitrary; you cannot come
there without it. To fit for Heaven is not easy, the making power of God must
go to it. Sinners why do you put of this work as a trifle? And why do you put
it of till death? That man would never be holy if he could shift it, that will
not be holy till he die. He would never have to do with Christ if he could shun
him, that will not seek aquaintance with him till he must leave leave this
Word. When death is fitting the soul for Hell, then the soul sets about to
fit it self, for Heaven. Ah Lord, that ever this man had a soul, that damnes
it himself! Wrath does usually cross and curse this folly; men are surprised
in body, or surprised in soul; no strength, or no heart, and so die in their
sin.

Fitting grace for Heaven has its means, has its season, has its course, and
then has its blessed end; I will touch these a little. 'T'ath its means. Will
you be fitted for Heaven ye wicked souls, and use no means? It Is common to
the worst man, to cast their souls upon a miracle for salvation, and not upon
means. God fits by his word, they will hear none: God fits by Prayer, they will use
none: God fits by his People, and they care for none: holy Ordinances
slighted, and yet the Holy Land promised. Ah Lord! Are not these souls mad?
to conclude the end, and exclude the means? These men will die in presumption,
or else I dare die for them.

'T'as its season: Earthen Vessels have their season, for molding and shapeing
to such a form and to such an use. All times of the year, are not seasonable
for such a purpose. Salvation has its day: the Sun stands not still, it is
coming toward a man for so many hours, and then goes away from him as fast.
Fitting seasons for Heaven, are transient: slighted, and eternally hid from a
man's eyes. O that thou had known in this thy day, etc. But now they are hid.
Love passions are strong, but no fire cooles so fast as this when abused, nor
so hard to be kindled again when out. God knocks, and if no opening, away to
others that will. He comes to a man's house, and proclaims peace, if peace be
not regarded, he departs with a witness, leaves the dust of his feet behind
him, to testify what a base Earthy heart 'twas, that rejected him.

Fitting grace for Heaven, has its course. line upon line. All is not done of
an hour, to make the soul fit for blessedness, for ever. Grace conflicts
with corruption long, ere it can get ^he victory, and render the soul fit for
Heaven. Some sinners will never be fit for Heaven; because they cannot bear a
fitting course. Sorrow for sin, spending; the pain of conscience, killing;
bleeding til binding up from Christ comes, utterly consuming, not to be thought
of: if these men can fit themselves for Heaven, it is well; they will never be
made fit by Christ, they are so idle headed, and wilful hearted.

fruition of its end; a fit soul expires into Heaven: the soul fit for
Heaven, stays not long thence. The spirit says come, when fit: the Bride
says come, when fit: a fitted soul for Heaven, is a panting soul for Heaven,
and Christ a panting husband for this Spouse Grace has its distinct property,
at every height; when at full height, and fit to be dissolved, it desires
dissolution, and dissolution is granted, as a medium to its ultimate form,
which makes the perfection of a thing. A Chr^stian is perfect, when fit for
Heaven; his Grace is perfect, when in Heaven.

Christians, I have something to say to you from this Point, and then I give it
up, and get gone. It Is many a good souls panting often. O that J were fit For
Heaven. Why? Christ makes so: He works at such a height, as at which thy heart
bends. The bending of thy heart to such a height in Grace, is a prevenient
disposition to it, it is the work thou would, begun; and well on-ward to
finishing. Such a panting soul will be fit for Heaven, and caught up into
Heaven, ere he is aware. When the Soul is pitched upon such a Noble height,
Christ has taken it into his Hand to make it so high. Strong desires are
glimmerings of Sunne-rising.

I would have no Soul sad, that pants after much grace. Certainly the Sun is
risen very high in this Soul already, 'twill be at the Meridian apace; Heaven
is not far off that soul, which longs to be fit for it. When Christ once
began to pray, Father glorify me with thine one Self, with the glory which I
had with thee, before the World was; glory though so great was not far off.
When the poor man would believe, the spirit of Faith was near, and the next
words are Faith, and no more words of unbelief, If thou can do this, if thou
can do that, heard. There is no design to become fit for Heaven, like
bringing a man's soul into a passion this way. Divine passion makes strong
compassion. Christ does not quench smoking Flax: does he quench flaming flax?
Panting to be fit to live in Heaven, where so much holiness is, to live in the
presence of God who is all holiness, this is flaming Flax. The fire goes as
high as Heaven: Heaven will open wide, to such a Heavenly heart. The Soul
would have a suit to wear in the Country, which will serve at Court; a suit on
Earth, which will become it in Heaven: this is flaming Fax: Grace is never
checked in its grows by God, but embraced most, when it ascends highest. God
meets a Prodigal, and kisses him: does he not meet a dear child, which is
almost come quite home to his Fathers House, and kiss and feast him: A Soul
that pants to be fit for Heaven, is crope up to Heaven door, certainly CHRIST
will welcome this Soul, and let him into his desire.

Thou pantest to be made fit for Heaven, why? thou art fit. Who [hath] made us
[fit], etc. These are said to be fit for Heaven by the Apostle, and yet prayed
for by him, as yet wanting much grace. There Is a Fundamental fitness, and a
complementall fitness for Heaven. The lowest dram of true grace, gives a
fundamental fitness for Heaven. A weak hand of Faith on Christ, will save a
man from drowning: a spark of fire will ascend to Heaven, as truly as a
flame, though not so strongly. That there is any spark in the soul to byasse
it Heavenward, we should bless God, and blow the spark by Prayer, this is
the way to have more.

A complementall fitness is, when there is a double Testimony that all is
ours; from Gods spirit, and our own: when the soul is sealed with this double
seal, to the day of Redemption. When Faith is strong, love strong, experience
much, joy much, unspeakeable and full of glory, then is the soul
complementally fit (i) fully fit for glory. This should be striven unto,
because it makes large entrance: but the soul should not torture it self,
that it cannot with any pains, yet attain so high. Some have Heaven here;
such are fit for Heaven in deed, as carry Heaven still about with them: it is
but out of one Heaven into another with these. Others are made fit for Heaven
in hell, and come as out of hell to heaven, and yet this is great mercy too,
and every poor low graced soul, should say so.

Let these things settle weak souls, banish bad objections, and make your
fitness for Heaven, in that measure which it is; your consolation in these
miserable times; Swords, Guns, Weapons of War, may Wound, Lame, and unfit you
for Earth, but let this comfort you, you are still fit for Heaven. Lame Legs,
cut Arms, bleeding bodies, and holy souls, will go to Heaven well enough:
poor, blind, lame, halt, are most the guests that come there. Christ had
bloody usage from base Wretches, as we have now, spears thrust in his sides,
deep wounds, so deep as to let out all his blood, and yet not any of his
fitness for Heaven. Should be enough to us all, in these bad times, that a
mansion is prepared for us, and we for it, where all loss will be turned into
gain; where lost Legs, and lost Arms, and lost estates, will meet their
right owners again, and glory in over and above.

FINIS.
USEFUL INSTRUCTIONS FOR THESE Evil Times.
COLOSS. 1.12. Giving thanks to the Father, who has made us meet to be
[partakers] of the inheritance of Saints, in light.


TO be partakers] of the inheritance, etc. Thus read, it is interpretation, not
strict translation; yet possibly I may make issue both ways for your sakes,
both as you read it, and as it is to be read in the original. The Text
verbatim runs thus -- fit to a part, or portion of a lot of Saints in light.
It Is phrased in allusion to Canaan, where the people of GOD had their part and
portion, and this by lot, by an immediate providence, and by no humane art, by
the special blessing and disposing hand of God, and by no merit or means of
their own. The phrase notes top favors, gallant mercies, dispensations full of
love, all love, all love to all eternity. The highest mercies are communicable:
Heaven, all that is in Heaven, distributive; distributive to men like our
selves -- Partakers of the inheritance.

Love is bountiful, she gives all, Participatio sacra, est communicatio
totius.
mercy empties her self upon her children: she empties her pockets, she
empties closets Cabinets; Jewels of price, Jewels of glory, of eternal
glory, are given away to her favorites. Having given us Christ, will he not
with him give us [all things? Love gives all: Christ, and all that Christ has.
The Apostle argues a maiori ad minus. Christ is a greater gift then Heaven, and
yet he is made communicable, and communicable to man, to us; therefore no
marvel that Heaven is. Having given us Christ, etc. Love will make her heart
blood communicable, which is more then making heart Jewels communicable:
Christ's giving of himself, is more then giving any thing without himself,
more then the giving of Heaven and Earth to man. Heaven is not noted in
Scripture, as the height of Christ's love, but himself; what himself is, and
what he puts himself unto. His own selfe] bare our sins, on his body, etc.
1 Peter 2.24. And to be with [Christ] is best of all. It Is not said, to be in
heaven is best of all. Abraham's bosom is but alluding, to the felicity that
is, where Christ unbosomes himself to Saints.
The accent of love is fastened upon Christ himself, and not upon any thing
else. Christ himself is still noted as a greater communication of love, then
Heaven or Earth, or any thing besides him. Love opens her purse to her beloved,
yea, she opens her bosom, and sets her beloved there; Heaven is in Christ's
bosom, Communicatio sacra est ad demo^strandum-Communicantem.
Partakers of the inheritance, etc.

Sacred Communication, is to make suitable demonstration, of infinite love.
Great love is not suitabley expressed, by small things. Magna parvis minima
exprimuntur.
Springs make Chanells, Streams, Rivers, suitable to their strength; they make
their rent without, suitable to their bubling within, under ground. Heaven is
but a suitable expression, of the love of a God: it is but a stream suitable,
to such a fountain: but beams suitable, to such a Sun. Heaven is but legible
writing out, of infinite love. Were not heaven made communicable, infinite love
would be but half expressed, 'twould have no suitable demonstration, 'twould be
far more in it self, then known to us. It Is with Christ here in this World,
as it is with a Christian, a Christians fortune here, does not suite his titles;
called a King, and has nothing. Now are we the Suns of God, but does not
appear what we shall be. Why we shall be but the Sons of God his meaning is,
that now title and revenew do not agree, nothing in possession that speaks out
the Son of a God, the Son of a King; state and title, do not fitly and fully
express one another: so it is with Christ now his love and his expression of
it, are short one of another: many expressions of love are made here, but they
all express it but brokenly. heaven will speak out an infinite love; 'twill
demonstrate it to the life, to all the senses at once, which is such a
demonstration of a thing, as here man cannot make of any thing. There a man
shall have the advantage of all senses together, to fathom infinite love: he
shall hear it, see it, taste it, etc. He shall see the fountain where and how
it rises; the Ocean how vast it spreads, and how broad it bears. Christ
demonstrates infinite love fully, fitly; therefore is heaven made communicable
to poor Earthen creatures -- partakers of the inheritance, etc.

Sacred participation is to make soul satisfaction. Communicatio est ad
implendum subjectum, cui communicatur.
Every thing less then heaven, is too title to satisfy the soul -- All is
vanity, etc. Put all things on this side heaven together, and all is empty (i)
in reference to the vast partaking spirit of man; it swallows and swallows the
whole Creation, and makes nothing of all: participation of Earth, of all the
Earth, will not satisfy; heaven must come in too, or else the soul like the
Dove, remains utterly restles, and cries like the grave, g^ve, g^ve* There is
excess in the Creature, but not proper filling. Be not drunken with Wine
wherein is [excesse] but be [filled] with the spirit: it is one spirit, that
fills another. Abundance of Earthly things may make excess, and turn the
soul into sin, but participation of fullness in God, is that which gives the
soul its felicity in it self, and this is in Heaven. Absolute fullness is in
heaven, and this makes absolute content, therefore is our participation here,
still reaching after more, then can be had here. All that is dispensed in way
of inferior ordinance, makes but tasting and longing, does but put on appetite
to a full meal. Heaven, is Gods supreme ordinance, to give the soul
satisfaction. Participando.
Other ordinances bring in the soul but drops, and therefore it still thirsts;
this supreme ordinance brings in the Ocean: the soul in this ordinance is
swallowed up, It Is Gods letting forth of al, to things without him.
it can breath nothing but blessing, as seeing, feeling, hearing, tasting
nothing else.

Sacred participation is made according to Christ*s will. Communicatio, est ad
placitum communicantis.
The pleasure of the King is, that we should sit at his Table, that we should
dip our morsels, in the same dish with him; eat as he does, drink as he does,
wear and fare to all eternity as he does: Father I will, that those whom thou
have given me, be with me where J am, that they may behold the glory, which
thou have given me John. 17.24. Christ would not be in heaven alone, to eat
his morsels alone; his pleasure is in choice company, though not in any. [J
will] that [those] which thou have given, be with me. The pleasure of Christ,
is the spring of favors, as high as this rises, a Christian rises, necessarily.
The natural Son, may have what he will, for the adopted Sons; the Will of
Christ, is the rule of Communication: all is his to make gifts to his
favorites, as great as he will. These have continued with me in my temptation,
these [shall] sit on Thrones, the pleasure of Christ, Thrones us, heaven's us.
Heaven rises out of Christ's breast. It comes out of the belly of divine will.
Participation is to suite will, will is infinite vast, therefore is Heaven
communicable. Great persons do great things, to satisfy their will.

Participation is proportioned to promise: no less then the Land flowing with
milk and honey, is promised. Communication is according to obligation.
Heaven is but little enough, to fulfill truth, to pay debts. Christ has been
so free of his promise, that all he has will but make it good, and render him
just. He has engaged his own honor, his own inheritance, all below, yea all
that he has above, upon poor terms, but upon our service, which is more
disservice, more sin then service at best. If any man serve me, let him
follow me, and where I am there shall my servant be, John 12.26. We are by
promise to have as much wages as Christ, to receive as great pay, though not in
so great command, and though but common Soldiers and he a Captain, yet all
that serve under him, are to have as he has, a house full of silver and gold,
yea a house not made with hands, a very vast house; a house full, a heaven full
of Jewels. Communication is according unto obligation, debts must be paid,
although never so great. Mercy never dies in debt to justice; every man shall
partake of as much, as fit for and promised to him, although Christ himself
has no more.

Communication is according to instigation, sometimes.
Participation is proportioned sometimes according to merit. Gods giving, is
according to Christ's deserving, not according to ours: the best of us should
partake of hell, and not of heaven, if we had our deserts. Heaven is great, and
yet less then Christ's merit, and therefore God himself is proposed as a
Saints portion, and Christ's purchase. The Lord is my portion, he does not say
heaven. The Lord which made heaven, and can make more heavens, yea, is more
then all heavens, upon a glote of whose eye, upon a cast of whose countenance,
stands heaven and hell; he is my portion. He is so: in whom? why? in Christ, by
his merit. Participation is proportioned, to merit; merit is vast, it
challenges heaven; more: God himself. Christ's merit makes God ours, the holy
Ghost ours, what God is in himself, ours; which is the heaven of heavens, that
which makes heaven, heaven. Christ's blood is of more worth then heaven: it
bought heaven and earth too of exact Justice, not for years, or for lives, but
the fee simple for all eternity. We receive as God gives, God gives as Christ
merits, and mediates: heaven comes out of Christ's wounds to Us: Heaven comes
out of hell to fallen man. Christ's descension to hell, makes our ascension to
heaven; we are partakers of glory by his shame and misery -- By his stripes we
are healed, etc. By his hell, we are heaven'd. We inherit not hereditarily, but
made heirs and so partake. Our participation of glory, is a made
participation, made out of merit; merit is vast, therefore is our participation
so vast as heaven -- partakers of the inheritance.

equivalent. God is more giving then taking away: is not heaven more then you
have lost upon earth? heaven is communicable, and yet you complain, what shall
you do for house? what shall you do for land? for enough for you and yours? all
is gone. What? is heaven gone? then all is gone indeed. God shuts one hand, that
we may look to the other, which is open with greater and better things. Men's
eyes are not opened, by the dealings of God; men learn not instruction though
God whips to teach; that is your undoing, not what you have lost, though never
so much; for heaven would make up that well enough. God takes away in earthly
things, that we may consider and see, wherein he is a greater giver, do ye
make this use of your loss? a man loses much, when he loses a state on Earth,
and loses with it a heart to look after a state in Heaven: when losses and
crosses kill affection Heavenward, all is gone indeed: gone without hope of
recovery.

Do not the strokes of God make you look to him? Why? then you will be smitten
again. Jobs messengers shall come one after another, and tell you of the loss
of all, to see if that will save all. Divine rods are ordered to second one
another, till the soul be as high as it should be, or as low as it must be: as
high as Heaven, or as low as hell. I would sinners did consider the scope of
Gods dealings now, and what is before them. Heaven and hell is before you now,
you may be partakers of which you will. Heaven is communicable, hell is
communicable, one in one hand of God, 'tother is in 'tother. Which way any
great man's vein lies, you observe him. Gods vein lies in giving of great
things, great mercy or great misery; he gives no less then heaven or hell to
every man: he makes every man partake of one or 'tother. Sinners, as you love
your souls consider this.

Wrath works, as love is abused: Communicatio plena.
justice rises high, when high favors are slighted. All is communicable:
'twill break the neck of all, which make not use of this; man's spirit must
work, as Gods does: when one is open to give, 'tother must be to receive.
Bounty presupposes a ready receiver: who is back-ward to take great things? and
yet who is not back-ward to go to Heaven? Heaven is wholly communicable, and
yet sinners are wholly careless of it. Not a penny in Heaven, but 'tmay be
yours, and yet what heaps of treasure are there? Ah Lord, what wealthy persons
might sinners be, and will not! Only their will keeps them poor, Paul yours,
Apollo yours, all yours, all is communicable, Heaven and Earth: the Earth and
the fullness of it; so Heaven and the fullness of it, not a room, not a walk
in Heaven but it is in common for all the inhabitants! Not a dish, but every
ones hand is in it together: many hands in a dish, is all the feeding above.
Not a delightful tune above, but every ones heart is set to it: not a beam in
the Sun above, but every ones eye is fixed upon it: not a flower in Christ's
bosom, but all smell to it: not a secret, but revealed to all. All that has
lain hid for this many thousand years, almost from all here below, there it is
known to all; they above know, as they are known; such great mercy, such full
mercy, rejected, what great misery, what full misery, will it make? Justice
swells, as sinners kick mercy: such a heaven slighted, makes such a hell.
Hell, it is but Justice working suitable, to the abuse of so much mercy, as may
be had in heaven, and the soul would not

Communicatio libera.
Heaven is freely communicable, and yet sinners have no heart to it. Heaven may
be had for nothing, neither for money, nor money worth, only for making fit
for it, and this too wholly at another pains and cost, and yet sinners have
no heart to it. Christ gives much, but takes nothing: mercy, is all mercy;
mercy, is all free; as it is laid out all in an inheritance, and lies all round
together above, it is all free. Love in its utmost dimensions, in its heights
and depths, as it passes knowledge, as it makes a heaven, yet it keeps its
own essential property; it is love, and but love: heaven is nothing else, but
a bed of love: all delights free. There is nothing in heaven bought, nor paid
for by us, of all the costly things that are there. There are Jewels about the
inhabitants necks, such as the World never saw, and yet not one bought by the
wearer and owner: all given freely. You have not seen such an inheritance for
nothing, as Heaven is. There be things which cost infinite dear, and yet done
away for nothing. A man may see that which eye never saw, and hear that which
Ear never heard, for nothing. God lays out much, but looks for no return: his
greatest favors go for acceptance. Participation of purchase, is pay for
purchase: an m^n will but go to Heaven, the place shall cost them nothing,
though fit for a Prince. All Gods motion is free: his blessed motion for a
time, free; his blessed motion for eternity, free. As God makes Heaven, he
works for nothing: as he makes fit for Heaven, he works for nothing: for his
greatest layings out, he sets down nothing: at Heaven door he sets no bill,
what rent and fine, though there be not such a house of state again, in the
World. God keeps open house below, and above too: the best dainties, and yet
no reckoning brought in; nothing to be paid, no, nothing expected. There is no
thought of heart, what this dish might have yielded, and what that precious
odor might have been sold for. Heaven goes freely free, gratissime gratum.
Heaven given, and not a thought against it: all the riches of a God laid down
at man's foot, and all the heart of God too, with it; and all the panting above,
is, O that all may not be trod upon. Ah sinners, what a damnation will this
make, to set one foot upon heaven, and 'tother foot upon Gods heart! To
trample all his, yea and all him too, in the dirt: heaven, and his heart too,
to hold your sin?

Communicatio universalis.
Heaven is universally communicable: from East, West, North, South, many come
and sit down, in the Kingdom of Heaven. Strangers may dwell in the holy Land;
Gentiles, as well as Jews. Of all Nations, kindreds, tongues, may live together
above, and be spoken unto, in their own language, yea, understand one another
plainly. Variety of language, excludes not heaven, confounds not heaven. All
above, are intuitively understanding: men are as the Angels of God, in the
Resurrection. Oh every one that thrists, come in; that is the bill, that is set
upon Heaven door: did ye never stand still and read it, sinners? Heaven gate
is open to all that knock, but fools, foolish Virgins, foolish souls, which
have nothing in them, nor will have nothing in them, to render them fit for
heaven. There is Rahab the Harlot; There is Manasseh that murderer; there is
the Thief; there is Mary, that had so many Devils: A man that has many
Devils, may come where there is not one; The most devilish, hellish creature,
may be made partaker of Heaven. Lame, and Blind, and Halt, may come in there,
and yet still there is room. It Is don as thou have commanded, said the
servant, that was sent out to invite all sorts, and yet there is room. Luke
14.22. There is great variety of guests above, and yet one Table large enough
for all; no crowding, and yet thousands and thousands of thousands, sitting
together. Heaven is a vast continent; much of the holy Land, not yet planted:
many mansions above, without any Inhabitant. Heaven is universally
communicable, and universally fit and complete so to be: All may sit round and
look the Sun full in the face, and he them. That which is so proposed to all,
and so fit for all, how will it doubly damn all, that come short of it! You
will be jugded as lovers of hell, more then lovers of Heaven, which come short
of it; As lovers of darkness, more then light; As lovers of sin, more then
the eternal felicity of your souls: upon this very ground, that grace and
Heaven are so generally communicable. Light is come into the World, says
Christ, And the world regards it not. This is the condemnotion of the World;
A World of men might be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light,
and will not, this will make hell, hell indeed; condemnation, the condemnation:
because men will not go thither, though no exception. It Is desperate, to make
exceptions where God makes none: to exclude a man's self, when God does not.

Finally, communicantio durabils.
Heaven is durably communicable. I cannot say, it is perpetually communicable.
The everlasting doors, stand not open everlastingly; But yet a great while.
The Thief found them open, at the last hour of his life. A sinner may come
in, at the ninth and last hour, and have his pay. A sinner of a hundred years
old, may get into Heaven, I doubt there be but few gray headed sinners turn in
there, yet it is not long of the place. Heaven doors are open, till old Age;
only old folks are wilful, which is excluding. God is long suffering; all
that while, Heaven doors are open. The long suffering of God waited in the
days of Noah, says the Apostle Peter. A hundred and twenty years, Heaven
stood open, to that people. God makes the greatest mercies, wait upon the
greatest sinners, a great while, which is one of the greatest wonders, in the
World. If you have a mind give great things, you have no mind to wait to do
it, yet so does God: He waits to be gracious. The Sun is made to stand still
many hours, many days, many years. Salvation brought to men's houses,
Parishes, yea, to men's ears, and there sounding and knocking, seven years,
ten years, twenty years: And all the entreaty is, Will ye go to Heaven
sinners? Will ye go to Heaven? Will you be made partakers, of the inheritance
of Saints? God is not a bare giver of Heaven, but a woer for Heaven: he does
reconcile, and beseech to reconciliation: he does knock, and stand at the door
and knock, till his locks be wet with the dew of the night: He stretches out
his hand with Heaven in it, and does so all the day long. -- To Israel he
says: All the day long, have I stretched out mine hand, to a disobedient and
gainesaying People. Romans 10.21. Heaven made to wait upon earth. base earth,
wicked earth; what will this come to, if not looked to? If heaven not
participated of at last? What a hell will he have, which has had heaven at his
door many years together, and had no heart to enter into it! But you will
say, no body is so careless: Every one surely, is willing to go to Heaven.
One would think so: But yet it is not so.

It Is easy to demonstrate, that multitudes have no heart to go to Heaven. They
will part with nothing for it. Sin is worse then nothing, and yet Sinners
will not part with this, for Heaven: Have they any heart to Heaven then? Christ
makes an underprizing of a thing, a demonstration of no love, nor heart to that
thing, so prized. If you think good give me my price, if not, forbear: So
they weighed for my price, thirty pieces. Cast it to the Potter, says God: A
goodly price. Underprizing and undervaluing a thing, speaks out properly and
plainly, no will to that thing. Will swayes, that way which it is willing. Love
bids according to worth: She comes to Christ's price, for Christ; and glad she
can have him so too. If you think good, give me [my price,] etc. A man's own
price, is no price: base bidding for Heaven, argues no heart to it; such a
wretch is cast to the Potter, cast to hell to be torn to pieces, as a vessel
in which there is no pleasure. If underprice argues no heart, what does no
price? It Is many a sinners damnable case, he will part with no sin for Christ,
nor Heaven, could Christ and heaven be much more worth then they are. Part with
no sin, do no duty, wait no time. 'Twill be a hell to this man, to go to
Heaven. A man that will not part with his sins, to be partaker of Heaven, is
more willing to go to hell then to Heaven: sin has got his heart, he should
lose his Heaven, to go to Heaven. A sinners own heaven is dearer to him, then
Christ; he will venture the loss of

They will perform no duty for Heaven. Action speaks out affection. To what a
man has a heart, he has a hand, a head, a foot; heart commands all. The will
is Major General, orders all to move as she will. Where there is no foot
toward Heaven, no hand toward Heaven, nor bending that way, Is the heart
toward Heaven? From your lives, you will be condemned: ye speak out your
hearts, and yet you plead for them; you have set your way you will go, and yet
upon pretend, you are bound in spirit for Heaven. Perverseness is in your
paths, and yet you plead for your will. Sinners observe that speech of Christ.
If any man [will] be my Disciple let him deny himself, and follow me. Christ
makes deed to demonstrate will: if a man be willing to be Christ's companion,
and scholar, he will follow Christ; yea he will take up his Cross, (i) go
through any difficulty, to enjoy his fellowship. What will is indeed to the
end, it is to the means. It Is idle talk, fancy, and dreams, not will to a
thing, that will use no means. Ye tell me, ye are willing to be made
partakers, of the inheritance above: what do you do to be made partakers? Do
you walk in the way, which leads to Heaven? Are you not in life, according to
your lusts? In your course, according to your company? Unto divine duty,
according to your humor? Does not will rule truth, and not truth, your will?

Let persons convinced, be instructed. Ye cannot be partakers of the Cup of the
Lord, and of Devils, says the Apostle: so say I, ye cannot be made partakers
of Heaven, and keep on in the way to hell, you must first be made partakers,
of the Heavenly calling, as the Apostle calls it, ere ye can be made partakers
of Heaven it self. Wherefore holy brethren, partakers of the [Heavenly
calling,] etc. Heb. 3.1. (That is) a calling to Heavenlinesse. Heaven must
begin here; Christ must rule all, and be made all here, as he is above. A
Heavenly calling, speaks three things. A heavenly rule, a heavenly subject,
and then a heavenly end. I am the way. That Is a heavenly rule. Not I live, But
Christ lives in me. That Is a Heavenly Subject. I have fought a good fight,
henceforth is laid up for me, a Crown of Righteousness, that is a heavenly
end. The two former, are subordinate to this latter. Christ must be without a
man, and within a man, or that man will never come to Heaven. He must be all
without, and all within; he only must be the way -- I am the way. And he only
must live in the heart, to guide this way -- yet not I, but Christ lives in me.
The Word of God and the Spirit of God, must meet in the life of man, or that
life will end in death, in hell, not in Heaven. A heavenly rule, and a heavenly
heart, lead to Heaven. Few Christians lives, are clearly Christian. Christ is
our sanctification, as he is our justification: he is our life here, as well as
our life hereafter: he must be made so by every soul, and then all will go
well at last. Heaven is a Crown of Righteousness; not of our Righteousness,
but of Christ's. His spirit must rule all, his merit must be leaned upon for
all, this soul will certainly, be made partaker of all.

Christians should be comforted from this point. All the wealth of Christ is
communicable: Heaven communicable, communicable to you, to Saints. The
complaints of Gods people are many, this point answers all. My losses are great
says one, so says an other. Will not Heaven make them up? Thou have neither
money nor goods, Thieves and Plunderers have stole all. Have thou not treasure
laid up in Heaven, where no spoil can be made? In cases of persecution, Christ
teaches us to comfort our selves with Heaven, how all is doubly made up there
When men persecute and revile you rejoice and be exceeding glad, etc. Upon what
ground? Why? Upon this: great is your reward in Heaven. Loss has its
quantity, It Is great, that makes it so heavy; reward has its quantity too,
[Great] is your reward in Heaven. If a man had lost a Kingdom on earth, Is not
the Kingdom of Heaven responsible? If a man had lost all this World, Is not
the World to come, as good as this? Is not Heaven as big as Earth? As good as
Earth? As Much good? As lastingly good? Will not your Heaven above, be as sweet
as your hell here is bitter? ^uppose there be nothing above but Christ, to make
up al thy loss here below, is not he enough? Can thou not comfort thy self
in Christ alone? What a soul have thou? 'Twas high time, thou did lose thy
treasure here; 'twas thy God. Thou would otherwise have lost thy soul.

my heart sinkes within, and I do not know how to keep it up.

God; things will end well, if Heaven will make it so.



thy misery may prove blessed misery, to thee and thine. This will be thy
comfort at giving up, that thou have discharged thy duty, to make a miserable
condition blessed. But if success suite thy industry, thy miserable children
are made indeed. This may cheer thee under sad thoughts; I can leave my
children no earth, but I can leave my children Heaven; I cannot leave my
children, this hilly Country, nor that; neither the blessing of hills, nor
valleys here; but I can leave them the blessing, of the everlasting Hills, as
the expression is of Joseph's blessing: Heaven was eyed, in that expression. I
conclude all thus: we are under age here, hardship is fit, for us, and ours.
Such heirs must comfort themselves with what they shall have. You which are
partakers of the divine nature, shall be partakers of more felicity, then the
tongue of men and Angels can express; and yours, for your sakes will be
blessed below, when you are so blessed above.

FINIS.
USEFUL INSTRUCTIONS FOR THESE Evil Times.
COLOSS. 1.12. (...).
Giving thanks unto the Father, which has made us fit, to the part of the
[Lot] of Saints, in light.


THE greatest favors, come most immediate to us. Eternal mercies fall as a
Lot in our lap; no art, no medium, no merit. Gods own finger points them to
persons; to such, and not to such. -- Who has made us fit to the [Lot] of
Saints.

Providence has a mediate, and an immediate course, to give out favors to man
This, that expression of the wise man gives us. House and riches are the
inheritance of fathers, but a prudent wife (says he) is of a higher descent,
is from the Lord. The mercy is higher, and therefore disposed by a more
immediate and special providence. As things rise in the Nobility of their own
nature, so they rise in the manner of their birth and bringing forth to us.
Grace and glory are simply and absolutely, the noblest natured things, and these
in the noblest way descend upon us, by a very immediate disposing hand of God,
like a Lot.

Things are of a double descent. There is man's offspring, and Gods offspring.
[wee] are his offspring says the Apostle. The noblest things are only Gods
offspring: the great things of eternity, come only out of the womb of a God;
Heaven comes forth, from between his (...) Some things come down along in such
a line to us, through so many wombes, through so many hands, into our hands:
Heaven comes out but of one womb, but that womb as blessed as God, from Gods
immediate hand, by providence not to be explained, just as a Lot. -- the Lot of
Saints, etc.

Some things have succession, others have none. Melchisedeck, neither father
nor mother. The great'st favors come all so into the World, neither father nor
mother but God. Out of nothing came al: from nothing comes al still, to the
Saints; heaven which is a Saints al, from nothing but from Heaven. From what
house does that great house descend upon us, to be ours? From what progenitors,
but Christ? Is it not disposed to such and such secretly, wonderfully, by a
hand and power unknown to all the World? Upon Christ's vesture they did cast
Lots, and as that fell, so the vesture went, by a supreme hand only. Heaven is
Christ's vesture, the Sons best garment, his robe of state and glory, and this
goes by Lot too; it is put, upon the back of none, by any art of their own, but
by a power supreme, by that hand which disposes Lots which none sees; so all
the Saints, get their greatness. -- The lot of the Saints, etc.

As power did create so providence does dispose. A very unknown creation, had
the Heaven of Heavens, Above speculation, therefore not subjected to it:
wisdom would nor dazell, weak eyes.
The Angels, and all the state and glory, of that brave World to come. Do you
find any piece of that stately building above, so much as once expressly
mentioned, in the days of Creation? It Is disposed as 'twas created, in a very
close way, as a Lot, by such a power and providence as no Ceature can explain,
or peep into. This World was made by an immediate hand, but that above after a
more close, more entire, and more supreme, way (i) utterly without all hint to
be guessed at. So this World is disposed of by a providence of God, but by a
providence working very externally, and very humanely (i) al-along in such and
such humane and secular ways as usually known unto us. But that glorious
World above, is disposed by such a providence, as works very internally, very
hiddenly, in utter unlikely means, and in these moves, utterly out of our
sight and reach, just as that hand, and those fingers do, which dispose into
your bosom such a Lot of great treasure.

Some motion is peculiar for state. Kings give low things by Offices, and take
no notice of them themselves, what they are, nor to whom they go. But other
things, of a more noble nature, they give with their own mouth, and with their
own hand, such and such noble things, to such and such noble persons. Heaven is
nobility conferred with Gods own hand; It Is the best robe, put upon the
Prodidall, by the hand of his Father, and none else. It Is lame Mephibosheth,
advanced by word of mouth, from David himself, as a piece of the state of his
greatness, to which God had raised him, and as a high point of love. The more
immeditate things come, out of one friends hand into another, the more they
speak out love, and render parties honorable. I did it for him with my own
hand, you have such a common expression, when you would work your respect,
with such and such, to a great height. The King gives a Jewel, and he gives it
with his own hand; his love and honor doublely sparkle in such a Jewel, every
time it is look 't upon. Heaven is a Jewel hanged about our neck, by Gods own
hand. God makes a rich portion, and as it were rolls it up in a Lot, and with
his own hand, without any art of man, casts it into our lap -- the lot of
Saints.

Some motion is peculiar for complement. It Is a filling up of Love, to give and
to give with a man's own hand: to give an only son, and the father to do it
with his hand only; this is Love to admiration, love filled up to the brim.
God so loved the World, that [he gave] his only begotten Son. Some persons
give, as if they would give themselves too, if they knew how; that makes the
gift mighty big: ye shall have gift, and hand and al; words, and arms and
all. A gift fully circumstanced with love, is a double gift. Heaven given, and
cast into our lap with Gods own hand, is a double Heaven. A Lot in a good
ground, and to [fall] there; Heaven, and to fall as out of Heaven, that is two
Heavens. Gods love motions, are fully circumstanced with love; the Sun wants
not a beam, to give forth its glory. Heaven comes from God to the soul, as
the soul it self came from God; the soul and the felicity of the soul, both
breathed from Gods own mouth.

Some motion is pecular for Echo. A trumpet is sou^ded so, and at such a place,
for echo.
Some things are done so and so, to suite and joint to others. The holy Land
was divided by Lot, immediate providence carried it there. Friendship made no
revenue in Canaan; Gods own hand cast every man his fortune, so big and so
good; in such a place, in the Mountains, or in the valleys, with springs, or
without. Divine dispensations, are harmonious; Heaven comes in no new way to
us: God gives, as he did give: He did give Canaan with his own hand, so he
gives Heaven. Power wrought very immediate, to plant our fathers in the holy
Land; Ioshuah did cast lots, and so divided the Land; power did work very
immediate, to plant persons there; so it does to plant Persons above: [I goe]
before to provide a place, Josh. 18.10
etc. Our Ioshuah, assigns our mansion, situation, building, conveyance, all
done with Christ's own hand [I go etc.] Though power work without hand, yet
not without rule; not a word spoke, nor a work done by Christ, but with scope,
and look to some rule, though sometimes that rule be a great way off, as far as
Heaven. Truth fulfils Types; dispensations under each covenant, one echo to
another. Canaan went by Lot, so does Heaven -- the lot of Saints.

Dispensations of grace and glory suite, Gory is suited to grace in
dispensation, as grace is suited to glory in fruition.
as really the same. Heaven and Christ, come both one way to a Christian, by
immedate providence: grace and glory, are wrought both with Gods own hand; It Is
the finger of God that turns the heart toward Heaven, and that turns the
heart into Heaven. Grace is an inspiration, glory is so too; there is no
remoter agent of either then Gods own spirit. A soul and such a soul, so
happy, and so glorious, was breathed altogether into Adams nostrils. The breath
of Gods own mouth makes alive still, and the breath of his own mouth, cast
varnish and glory, upon that being, to maturation. It Is Christ al in all here,
it is no otherwise above. Christ al in all; no less makes grace; and no more is
glory. Grace is such an immediation, according to such a location: glory is
such an immediatio^, according to such a translocation: Christ is next to, and
only with the soul in both.

Zerubbabell, great hindrances, in the way of our great mercies, so that we see
no likelihood in an ordinary way, how or when, our great Heaven desired, should
arrive with us. Let the point in hand support; the greatest favors come, in
the most immediate way of providence: heavenly favors come to us, as if they
did drop out of Heaven. The more heavenly and divine, the mercies are which we
expect, in the more divine and immediate way, they will descend. The stone shall
be cut out without hands, that shall smite the image, of various mixtures, and
break it to pieces: new Jerusalem, comes down out of Heaven. Power will work
in a very immediate way, to bring in that new Heaven into the Christian World,
which now the Christian World is laboring for. Yet once more [I] shake, not
the earth only, Heb. 12.26.
but also Heaven. God himself will after a special manner, set his own
shoulders, to shake that rotten heaven of men's inventions, and those which set
their shoulders to keep it up, and make battery with such Cannon, as we are
not aware of. Not by might nor by power but by [my spirit] says the Lord,
respecting the building of that house, which typifyed this. Not by might nor
power (i) not by humane strength, so much as by his own power, shall the old
Heaven be destroyed, and the new erected. We expect our Heaven too low; from
men: but 'twill come from God when it comes. As it is a great favor, so '^will
come in state, in the way of sublime favors, very sublimely. Magicians, great
heads, and divellish wits, shall be non-plust by God own finger and art, not
by men's wisdom and art. Egiptians shall be drownned on a sudden, by a
stratageme made in Heaven, and managed from heaven. Jericho shall fall by
Faith, by making no more or the power of men, of Swords and Guns, then of
Rammes-hornes, but magnifying the power of Christ, and trusting in that. Surely
we are yet too many and too strong, to be delivered.

Christians, I would ye were skilled in the way of GOD. GOD keeps his Old way
in bestowing great things, and yet ye wonder and murmur: your folly is your
own affliction, and many's more. Things of great worth, Christ will trust no
Messenger with them, but bring them himself: Christ will trust none to bring
your Heaven to you; neither your Heaven here, nor hereafter. Men are false,
they would mar your heaven, and bring you an old one, in stead of a new one,
or an old one new patcht up. Blessed be he that will bring a new heaven to us,
all new, divine favors in their maturity, though every man be trampled under
foot, and none seen in the work but God: though he trample all men in the
dirt, and he only be left alive, with the cause in his hand. If men would
allow God his way, they would never be at a loss of Faith, so fearfully as
they are. Ye open one door and there comes in nothing but your shame; ye set
open another door of your own, for Christ to come in at, and there also comes
in nothing but your folly and shame. Ah Lord! When will ye look up, and
expect Christ from Heaven? Do not great things come in a very immediate way to
man? Has God tied himself to do every great work, with such and such great
means, as your eye is fixed upon, to cast out a Legion of bad spirits, with a
Legion of good? Is not one enough to do it? Christ brings an eternal weight of
glory, upon his own Shoulders to your doors, can he not bring a temporal
weight of of glory, which is far easier, alone? Thou art great and do great
things, thou art God alone says the Psalmist. We think God is not God, nor
able to do like a God, Psalm. 86.10.
unless such and such men stand, by him. What? Is not God, God alone? Cannot
he, nay, does not he use to do great things, alone? Nemine adjuvante, multis
obstantibus? Is not Heaven brought to us, against all the strength of Hell, by
Christ alone?

I will make a more strict soule-application of this point. Great things come
in a very immediate way: my inference is, our eyes in matters of the soul,
which are the greatest things, should be much fixed upon God. Sinners undo
their souls, in that little which they do, to save them. It Is enough to some,
that they put themselves upon Ordinances, as if that were all to bring the
soul to Heaven. Grace and salvation, come in a more immediate way; It Is not
what men say to the ear, but what God himself speaks to the heart, which
makes Heaven there, and a capacity of Heaven for ever. It Is the voice behind
you that turns you, and saves you. Grace drops from Christ's on we lips, [I
create] the fruit of the lips, peace. These waters are nothing, to him that
makes them enough: It Is the Angels stirring, does the work for Heaven. Sinners
when you come to Ordinances, use them as Ordinances, Media ut media, secus
slagella,
and not as Gods, charge your souls to hearken what God will say, and what God
will do. I am going to divine Ordinances, it may be a man may say many good
words to me, and God never a one, man may lift and lift, and be very lively,
and God give never a lift, and then is my soul lost: Ah Lord! How ominous is
that, when God will not speak a word to the soul?

I am fallen upon a point of life and death: sinners attend, or you will
utterly lose your souls. You have mediate favors cast upon you, but what
immediate? You have men-preaching, but what God-preaching do you find? you
keep on in a rode-way, what foot-way has Christ within from heaven to your
hearts? The Law was written with Gods own hand, and so dispensed in a very
immediate way, which was Israells greatest favor. Is the Law written on your
hearts, by the finger of God? What friends have you from Heaven visiting you,
which no eye sees? What immediate dispensations from Christ to your souls?
What workings of the spirit of God upon your spirits, do you find in
Ordinances? many a man, has no bigger favors from God, then a Horse or a Cow;
naked corporal things, for the support of such a corporal being; bread and
flesh, as a brute has hay and grass: This was Caines curse; banished from
Heaven to earth, cursed from the presence of the Lord, to bruites mercies,
only to what felicity the earth could afford; no fellowship between God and
his soul. The World is full of banished souls, from the presence of the Lord.
Justice for this makes no difference O England, between thy men and horse, no
more of one then of the other, because so like in qualification, one looking no
higher then the other. The noblest blessings, the greatest favors, Heaven and
Heavenly things, which God gives with his own hands to the soul, these thy
wantons and worldlings O sensual England, have not esteemed. A base sunk
spirit, has sunk thee England. If thou could have but the mercies of a
brute, fat pasture and peace to grase in it, 'twould much as thy heart wishes;
As for those greatest favors, which God in state dispences, with his own hand
to the heart, thou have many children, which will dispense with these, and many
which will scoff at them. Multitudes amongst you care not for the smile of a
God, so you may have but the smiling countenance, of some great man; so you may
but sleep in a whole skin, and enjoy fleshly delights, whether God or your
soul ever change a good word, you heed not.

Ye base spirited wretches, which care not for Heaven, so that ye may have
but earth; know, that ye are the plague of poor England: The blood of the
Land, will be laid at your door. Had not you grown so earthly and base in a
fat Land, as to slight Heaven, and slight the greatest favors, we had not
bled at this day. It Is the badge of an Esau to prize earth, and slight Heaven;
to serve sense, and to care for no nobler, nor nearer fellowship with God, then
providence bring to the belly. God may bring a Heaven to your bodies, if this
will serve turn, and a hell to your souls. Let every man know the plague of
his heart, and repent: carnality will kill you all.

Spirituality only covets the noblest things. A spiritual man cannot feed so
low, nor so course, as others do; he must have a Dish from GODS own Table,
or all dainties at his own table relish not. The Creature is sweet, but
there is a Heaven beyond this, (says he.) He cannot sit down without God,
nor rise up without him. All is wanting, when God cannot be found: no body at
Table, when Christ is not there: what dropping from Heaven upon my soul, from
every thing? that is still the Quaere, with a spiritual man. Immediate favors,
noblest; God alone, all, to this man. Whom have I in Heaven but thee, whom have
I in Earth, in comparison of thee? Words of men, weighed; words of Gods within,
laid up more choice then Jewels. The opportunity is still lost, when Christ
and the soul, has had no talk. Vanites ensnare, I am too fleshly for Christ
to take me by the hand, says a spiritual man. One spirit is still panting,
after another; two spirits would be one in the bosom of another; no less then
the jewels, which hang about Christ's own neck, will content a noble spirit.
The Quaere is not, how much the body has of the Creature, but how much the
soul does enjoy of God. What immediate mercies, do I enjoy? What has God
laid in, for spending, in these hard times, with his own hands? What faith?
What experiments? What divine resolutions? Spirituality carries the soul
sublime; every thing is in price, as it comes from Heaven, and brings Heaven
along with it. That Is preaching, that brings Heaven and the heart together;
that is a christian, whose breath smells like a garden, which the Lord has
blessed; In whose mouth Heaven opens. As things are wrapped up in Christ, so they
have their price still, to a spiritualll man. Carnality makes you mind, no high
things; earth is heavy; earthy souls cannot flee high, no higher, then the top
of a golden dunghill. Let these things hint a bad state, and better it. The
noblest things, make the noblest condition, both here and here after. Live low
now, and live low for ever; as low as hell.

FINIS.
USEFUL INSTRVCTIONS FOR THESE Evil Times.
COLOSS. 1.12. Giving thanks to the Father, who has made us meet to be
partakers, of the Inheritance of the [Saints] in light.


It Is considerable, how Christ makes his will: how he disposes of all, where
he gives most: where he casts his best blessings, to wit, in the bosom of the
best persons. Heaven is the inheritance of Saints.

Saints -- Inheritance of Saints, etc.

Corruption cannot inherit incorruption: Heterogeneals will not incorporate.
Choice flowers will not grow by stinking weeds. Capacity is absolutely
necessary, respecting the inheritance above. If Sinners would into Heaven, they
cannot. Light and darkness are inconsistent: Fire and water oppose: God and
ungodly men cannot live near, Justice will fight it out with sin to the
death. Without holiness man cannot see God; without this, God cannot endure to
see the man. There be thousands and ten thousands in Heaven but not one sinner
amongst them all; the Land will not bear Snakes, Toades, Serpents, no
poisonous creatures, only Saints. -- Inheritance of Saints.

Justice makes exact distinction. Sheep and Goats though many, yet all parted;
Not a Goat upon Christ's right hand. Every attribute is exact at it is Office:
mercy brings her children from the four winds of the Earth, to Heaven, and
leaves not one short, nor brings not one over. Justice gathers her brats too
from the four Winds, and leaves not one for any higher preferment then hell
will afford -- The Lord knows who are his, that is the Seal of Heaven; A Seal
is for exact distinction. What a seal is unto us for exact distinction, that
is Christ's knowledge to him; he does as firmly, as lastingly, as exactly
distinguish by virtue of this, all persons in the World as we do by our
seals and Marks distinguish amongst multitudes of things. Though the devil
have many thousands here below, and Christ but a few, and these tumbled up and
down amongst the wicked; yet Christ knows which is which, and who are his:
And only his shall have all he has, Saints inherit.

God moves in relation. Children only inherit, bond servants have a little and
turned off when their time is out. -- If children, then heirs: joint heirs
with Christ. This Hypothesis is a Thesis only in a Saint: He is a child of
God out of question; the nature of God is only manifest in a Saint. A holy man
plainly and without controversy speaks out himself to be a Son of God. Jus
legale carries the inheritance to him. The wicked are of their father the
Devil, they may not lay claim to Heaven upon pain of hell. If they touch the
tree of Life, they die; when they promise Heaven, wrath then smokes, and hell
never so near as now. Bondslaves do not inherit, nor bastards do not
inherit, the case is the same of either respecting Heaven. No Bastard
Christians, no Bastard Saints, but Saints indeed, inherit.

If children, then heirs. A man may look into his bosom, and tell what he
shall be for eternity. Know your hearts, and know them thoroughly, you cannot
do well else. It Is death to me, to smell the breath of some of you, your
inwards are so rotten, and yet I fear, I fear, you take notice of nothing. My
Quaere to you all is, what have you to take to for eternity? Heaven? How do
you make that good? Can you make demonstration of a holy state? Yes, I live
justly; I pray to God; I hear his Word. This is not infallible demonstration
of sanctity. Civil conscience calls and thrusts to all these, as it is so
principled and under such a government. A man may be just to men, and not just
to GOD. Heathens have been as just, as any of you all: That young man which
came to Christ, when the Law was read he should not kill, nor steal, but love
his Neighbor, etc. All this have J done from my youth.. He was exact for
Justice, and yet but in a sorry state for Heaven, if one may bel^eve his own
words. Drawing near to God in duties, is a better demonstration of sanctity,
and yet this may be done with the lips, when the heart is far from God. They
draw near, and sit before me as my people (says God) But their hearts go
after their covetousness. A man's devotion may be hot for the Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of the Lord; And yet himself the Temple of the devil; strict
for new moons and solemn feasts, and Gods soul loath all, both men and their
devotion.

There is blind devotion, profane holiness: I will give you two or three
principles demonstrative of it, for I fear there are some deluded souls
amongst you.

Outside holiness, how splendid so ever it The heart denominates action. The
Pharisee was for Temple praying, for lifting up of eyes, and hands, but no
heart; A mere image drawn out in such a posture, with his eyes and hands
inclining upwards, and Christ made baseness of this best piece. God is
worshipped in spirit; If holiness reach not this, it is gross profaneness.
Holiness, is spirit yielding to spirit; bad, to good: It Is a pure heart, a
heart captivated with Christ, and spending it self upon him. Holiness, it is
everlasting doors within, doors of the soul, that everlasting thing, opened
to a King of glory. It Is affection catched with truth; one spirit bound by an
other, a bad spirit by a good, and carried whither that list. It is a flame,
and an Angel ascending in it; A spirit a fire, and ascending upward; A man
upon his knees, and his heart upon his lips, taking rise for Heaven, from this
advantage.

but faction, that cannot be clasp't up, within the covers of a Common Prayer
Book. Wednesdayes and Frydayes, the only days for Prayer; The printed
liturgy, an only form for Prayer Ah Lord! What? is Bishops holiness, only
blessed holiness? Did not their bloody zeal lie here? What a curse is blind
devotion! The things that dame them, are dear! True holiness is regulated by
truth, and not by persons nor time. Sanctify them with thy truth, thy word is
truth, says Christ? Sanctity is made by truth, Gods truth; Gods truth is his
word: his words are truth; Thy word is truth; not Bishops words, nor any man's
word, to square holiness by. Holiness is motion from Christ, to Christ. A
soul taking rise from truth, and so going to God, making Gods Word, Gods way
to himself.

Profane holiness, is faithless; mere God [I] thank thee, I am not as other
men. Why? I do this and that. His own menstruous rags, his robes in which
he glories. When the talk is about Heaven, the eye is upon works: have I not
done this and that, etc? Doing must make saving, or else no doing. -- What
shall I do to be saved? And because 'twould not do that way, he gets gone.
Justice of action, makes not Justice of person; did so, but does not now: few
men are practically clear in this point, which makes great measures of
holiness, sinking and damning wickedness. Motion by rule, does not reach
rule; men come short in Justice of action, and yet this must be their
holiness. Much holiness in man's eye, is none in Gods. You call saints, which
God calls devils. A man in his own righteousness, is as black as hell in
Gods Eye. Christ is our sanctification. Sanctity is Christ advanced to rule and
save; soul and all given up to him, to be ordered and blessed: life ordered to
his approbation here, person and life left wholly to him, for commendation
above. Holiness, it is love become divine, and making with all her might to
please Christ, that in him she may be well pleasing to the father. Holiness
goes through two hands, but the last gives it, its formality and denomination:
In us it is duty, in Christ it is sanctity properly: we give every good thought,
word, and work, a rough shape, Christ, a full form. We mar things, Christ
makes both them and us.

If these things have made any discovery, let every one call himself as he is.
There are but two sorts of men with God, holy and profane, Saints and wicked.
It Is hard to bring men, to rank themselves right. The worst will not own their
condition, nor their place; no Officer of Christ, can make them keep ranks
with evil doers, and expect their inheritance; wherefore these are the two
things that I would a little press upon sinners. Sinners, honor truth and
confess your state. Lay hands on a bad heart, and bring it forth to the great
searcher of secrets, and charge it with its own. My heart is wicked, my person
abominable, my state damnable. Sinners can ye thus judge your selves? No. Why?
Then you will be judged of the Lord. What a man will not lay hands on and bring
forth to God, God will judge it where it lies; the sin you keep close, shall
burn in your bones; David found it so; shall not a wicked man, much more? He
that hides his sin, hardens his soul, and hardens GOD to cut it off; he
can never prosper. Hypocrisy discovered by truth, and the man not own it? Ah
Lord! Grace is frustrated, Justice only must go to work upon this soul. It Is
dreadful to me to think, what shuffling some make, to bear up before the
light that condemns them: you make a halter for your own necks in this, to
be dispatched quickly. You fight with light, because ye love darkness; what
do ye think will be the end of this? You make fuel for consuming fire, to
flame forth against you.

Own your state; call evil, evil. Expect your inheritance. As a man is, so
he has. Dignity goes according to quality still with God The wicked inherit
wrath. An hypocrites fortune lies all in a lake, and that Lake has no fish in
it, but Serpents: no water in it, but fire: no fire for use, but fire to choke
fire and brimstone. In the lap of Delilah, fancy works goldenly: men devoted
to please themselves, fancy befooles them, they expect nothing but brave
things: but believe the holy ghost, an hypocrites hope will perish. Ye unholy
souls. What do ye look for now? Do ye not frame your expectation, sui
table to your fortune? Do ye look for any thing now, but a sword for your
bodies, and a hell for your souls? This is very considerable, There is not any
relief, allowed an ungodly man. Expectation is to be torture to the wicked, as
well as present dealing. He may not comfort himself in hope, when in present
distress. Tell him his hope (says the holy Ghost) shall be as the giving up
of the Ghost: as his state is, so let his thoughts work; let not one thought
bring in relief to him, no, not those which go furthest off, and take in
longest time to do it; let not any thoughts, no, let not one thought, go
forth in hope to relieve this man. Expectation is the proper relief of Saints,
therefore are they called so often to hope in God. Other men's hearts must
break, when their Estate breaks; their thoughts for the future must be more
burdensome, then their state for the present is miserable, to think what is
behind yet: it is bad, 'twill be worse; I am in hell, I shall be in another,
bigger. Conscience burns already, 'twill burn worse; I shall go from burning
to burning. Can ye thus make expectation suitable to fortune?

Sinners, can ye expect hell? Can ye please your selves, with the expectation
of such an inheritance? None else may ye lawfully look for. If ye like not
this, mend your manners. Look after a sanctified condition.

Sanctity is a supreme birth. Now are ye clean through the Word which [J]
have spoken unto you. John 15.3. Cleansing words, fall only from CHRIST'S
Mouth. His breath is emollient, opening, and loosening of filth about the
breast and heart. Only supreme Majesty, can over-master a loose soul. Man
cannot make you holy, Ordinances cannot: Christ only cleanses Lepers. [I
will] be thou clean. The Plague of the heart has but one Physician; he
unused, and it is irrecoverably mortal. Of what price is Christ with you, ye
profane souls? Do ye hang about him as an only Physician? As he alone,
that has soul cleansing niter^? Or do ye lie in your filth, and study one
sin to drive out the sense of another, and say you are clean, when more
filthy? Ah Lord! Will dirt fetch out dirt? Will addition, make no number? Will
adding to sin, make no sin? This filthy wretch is sentenced: he has his
secret doom, Let him be filthy still.

Sanctity, it is a free birth. The Sun filles the world with riches,
smilingly. It Is meat and drink to Christ, to make bad souls good; the worst,
best: to forgive much, that they may love much. Grace falls from Heaven, as
freely as dew -- thou have the dew of thy youth. The laver of Regeneration cost
Christ dear, and yet he washes sinful souls with it, for nothing. He
bathes souls in his blood for nothing. Virtue goes from him for nothing, to
cure issues. Virtue is [gone] from me, etc. Healing virtue makes to it self
legs, and goes of it self to relieve distressed: it boiles, runs over, and
runs out it self, and quenches strong fire which would burn the soul.

It Is a facile birth. The wind blows where it lists. Christ can do what he
list within, as you can set your mouth, and blow, and breath, this way or that
way, as you list. It Is nothing to Christ to wash a black-Moore white; to make
scarlet sin white; to fetch out filth in grain. Christ quickens whom he
will; he can will you clean. When the strong man comes he takes him and
binds him, etc. Says the Scripture. It Is nothing to Christ to take the
strong'st man, and bind him; to throw down, and throw out the strongest lust.
The strong man is no man to Christ. Christ can with his finger cast out
Devils. If I by the finger of God cast out Devils.

It Is a full birth. One grace cannot be had without another; no grace, without
all Christ. All Christ is our sancti^y. Ye cannot have the stream, unless
ye have the fountain. Ye cannot have a beam of the Sun, unless the Sun be
yours. It Is in vain to talk of holiness, till Christ be owned by faith.
Christ made ours, makes us. Faith fetches him, that brings down, and brings in
all to the soul. Christ is a troop of virtues. Behold a troop comes, when he
comes. Behold he comes, if ye believe. Sinners, can ye believe in the Son of
God? Can ye resign up all to him, which is all holy; if so, he will make you
all holy; without this, he will not. Christ is holiness all-over, so is the
soul that i^ filled with him. Sinners make it your design to get Christ, to
be holy: get the Sun to be glorious. Saints make it your design to get more of
Christ to be more holy, Of his fullness [yee] receive, and grace for grace.
Christ in fullness in the soul, makes grace for grace. It Was Simeons ambition
to have Christ in his arms; to have his bosom full of him: then had he his
spirit at the fullest height, for Heaven. Our souls rise in holiness and
heavenlinesse, as Christ comes in: all Christ come in to the soul, and all
presently makes away post, to perfect glory: if the King of glory were come in
ad suam plenitudinem, the soul would arrive instantly apud suam beatitudinem
at his full blessedness.

FINIS.
USEFUL INSTRVCTIONS FOR THESE Evil Times.
COLOSS. 1.12. Giving thanks unto the Father, which has made us meet to be
partakers, of the Inheritance of the Saints [in light.


LIght is used in Scripture, ^o resemble the noblest things, as darkness is
used to resemble the dreadfull'st: civil felicity is set forth by light. Thou
shall not go forth with us any more to Battle, that thou quench not the
[light] of Israel. They spoke this in a civil sense, as David was the prime
member of such a body; a Sun, by whose rays all Israel had their flourishing
livelihood.

Divine felicity likewise is set forth by light, every step of it, to the last
step, which is Heaven. Christ is called light. I come a light into the World,
etc. He is called a Sun, that great Seminary of light, which makes glory and
felicity to a World at once. The rays of this Sun, to wit, graces and their
exercise, are set forth by light. If we walk in the light, as he is in the
light, etc. Our blessedness here, and our blessedness above, grace and glory;
All that ever the Saints shall have for eternity, are shadowed out by light. --
The inheritance of the Saints in light.

The holy ghost always makes apt similitudes; apt similitudes always
illustrate; what illustration of our highest felicity light gives, I am to give
you by charge from this Scripture, which I will discharge as well as I can.

Light is a very immediate thing; it is a medium to bring all other things to
view, but 'tas no medium but it self, to discover it self: light only
discovers light. The first thing the eye takes in, is light, ere it can do its
office for the body, as such a prime Organ. Our felicity above, is of a very
immediate nature; it self best discovers it self, no discovery here can be
made to any purpose, it is felicity so immediate from Christ. It Is Christ and the
soul face to face, the Bride and Bridegroom hand in hand. It Is the soul where
Christ now personally is, and with these eyes (i) not through ordinances, but
as it shines in it self beholding Christ's personal glory. It Is the soul
brought into the presence Chamber above, and beholding the great King of all
the Earth at dinner, yea, sitting down next to him, and feasting with him. Our
felicity above, it is the solace of the marriage bed, so you know the Scripture
compares it, where there is the most near and most immediate enjoyement, that
any Ordinance affords to man. It Is a feast, and the King in person present; it is
a feast and every bit given with the Kings own hand, and blessed with his own
mouth. Heaven, it is glory falling immediately from Gods face upon ours, by
standing near him and beholding of him; you may take its glimpse and
resemblance, from that glory which fell upon Moses face, immedatly from Gods,
by discourse with him. Our felicity above, is full union; members joined to
their head, according to their full and mature conjunction, and so receiving
all fully and only from the head; hearing no other words, but what Christ
himself speaks; feeding upon no other sweet meats, but what Christ with his
own hand, gives about. Our felicity above, it is communicatio sine mediis, and
est receptio sine mediis, drinking at welhead: more immediate, it is springs
bubling up in the soul, to an eternal life (i) felicity, so you know does
Christ similize it.

It Is immense. Can you make a girdle for the Sun? Can you span the light? Or
tell the house where it dwel's? As God speaks to Job. His expressions are very
high and noble. Where is the way where light dwells? Job. 38.19.20.
etc. That thou should take it to the bound thereof, etc. Our felicity above
is immense, that Holy Land has no bounds; there is more milk and honey, then
ever will be eaten. It Is not flagons of love above, but Sea's which cannot be
fathomed; all the work there is admiration, because none can find botom; not
Angels, those tallest spirits, can feel the botom of that love, in which they
have so long stood, and so deeply weighed. Our felicity above is as vast as
GOD; it is only God: A Father with all his Children in his arms. Christ
manifesting forth his own glory, to make some as blessed as himself. It Is
mortality swallowed up of life; not only filled with felicity, but swallowed
up. Here the soul swallows up every good, and looks for more, but is
swallowed up of none; the soul is vaster then the things you put into it, so
that nothing filles it, much less swallows it up. But our felicity above
swallows up the vastest soul; there is every Vessel filled, and swallowed
up; every sense satisfied, and swallowed up. This is not consistent here, but
it is above. There is much within reach, as much within reach, as capacity to
reach; and there is much beyond reach, for the soul to admire to all eternity,
and this not as a lessening, but as a filling up of its own and others
felicity. Infinite, swallows up finite; God is beyond the souls capacity when
vastest; therefore all are in an extasis above. Not a soul in Heaven, but in a
rapture.

Light is pure. The Sun is without spot, so are all his beams, so is all the
light of those beams, light is the purest thing that man beholds; 'tas no
defilement, nor takes none, though nothing more general in its course; it is
over all an unclean World, and yet without all uncleanness. Can ye dirt the
light? Ye may defile your selves in the light, but ye cannot defile the
light. It Is simple; corrupts not within it self, nor can any thing without it,
corrupt it. Our felicity above is pure. Heaven is a House without Spider or
Spiders-web; there is no dirt, nor dust, within door, nor without; the very
gates and streets are Gold and Pearls, In allusion to our City above may
those expressions be R^vel. 21.21. As the Kingdom of grace, in the highest
glory thereof, is expressed by terms and things of the noblest nature, and
highest glory.
pure Gold, etc. If the City of Christ here below will be so; what will that
City above be? Holy, holy, holy, is our felicity above; purity absolute: this
is the Sun that shines upon all there, and all there shine like this Sun,
with absolute purity. There is no sin above; not the least appearance of
sin. Every spirit there, moves steadily without the least jogging or shaking:
Christ and the soul go exactly in one path. The nature of the place, and the
nature of every one in it, fully suite, all Divine; Christ and the soul all
one. Here Christ and the soul are one in purity, my undefiled is [one, etc.
(i) In simplicity and purity. But above, they are all one. Here is simplicity
in the Spouse; it is not a heart and a heart, in the Kingdom of grace; but one
heart -- my undefiled is [one, etc. But in the Kingdom of glory there is
absolute simplicity; truth and the soul, all one: Not a soule-stirring, no,
not a Soul inclination impure, nor under the least possibility to be made so.

Light is pleasant. Truly light is sweet, the wise man. Eccles. 11.7. Light
is glorious and casts glory upon every thing. It suites a most noble and
general Organ, which makes a very noble and general content. Light sets out
all the Creation in glory, to man's view, and so makes a very royal and full
employment, for such a royal and vast Creature. Light is medium universale, it
brings in for all senses, parts, faculties, to solace themselves withal. Our
felicity above is pleasant. Heaven is a stately House to behold; it is
glorious, and makes all so which come in to it. Glory filles that House, and
all in it. The very doore-keeper of that House, is a King of Glory. All great
Princes, and peers, persons of great glory to look upon, above; and the glory
of GOD, as the glorious Canope, over all. -- The Glory of GOD is the light of
our City above. There is a great heap of Pearls above, and there is a
glorious Sun that shines upon them, which makes so many Quot conchi tot
Phoebi.
Jewels, so many Suns, such abounding of sparkling rays and glory, that I
am amazed with the thought of it. There is another expression, which by way of
allusion, to the glory of the City above is used. -- The Lamb is the light
thereof, etc. It Is a made glory which light discovers to you here, yea, and
it is a made light which brings in this glory to you. But what God is himself,
and what discovery he makes of himself by himself, without any medium, is
the glory of our felicity above. God according to his Works, is the glory
here; God according to Himself, is the glory there; his own Face is the daily
Sun, the glorious Sun that shines in Heaven -- The Lamb is the light of
it. The Sun that made the Sun, shines above; the sweet that made all sweet,
is tasted on, Feasted on altogether in Heaven. This Sun which you behold, is
but as a spot, or broad blemish, in the Face of the Creation, in comparison of
the Sun which shines, in the brave World to come. This Sun though very
glorious in it self, yet very inglorious, a piece of stained paint, for feeble
senses to gaze at, in comparison of that above. Something to declare his
pleasure, rather then to make pleasure, are all the Works of Gods Hands here;
what he is in Himself, is properly to make pleasure for the soul of man. All
that the Lamb is in himself; all that glory and luster, he has of Himself,
is opened by himself in Heaven. Surely the glory of this World, is but a
Dunghill to that to come: Sun beams, but a pyramid bundle of strawes.

Light is homogeneall. Every twinkling of light, is light, as every drop of
Honey is Honey, and has the nature and definition of the whole: it is
throughout, like to it self. Our felicity above is homogeneall; Heaven is all
Heaven. Every corner of Heaven, is a Heaven: every thing that is tasted, a
Heaven; every thing that is smelt, a Heaven; ever thing that is looked upon, or
meddled with, a Heaven; a full felicity to the soul. Our felicity here is not
homogeneall; we have some things delightful, more things grievous; some
things pleasant, more things displeasant. Above, all is pleasant: GOD,
pleasant; Angels, pleasant; Saints, pleasant; all that all these say and do,
pleasant. On earth God is afflicting, as well as felicitating, but in Heaven,
never seemingly displeased. Christ's face is continually, as Lebanon; bright and
glorious, as the looking forth of the morning.
No deformity above. Every thing in Heaven, a Heaven. GOD is light, and in him
is [no darkness: it is a mighty expression. As it is spoken of sin here, so
it may be spoken of affliction respecting our Country above. God is felicity
above, and in him, nor from him, is no infelicity, not so much as the least
affliction: God is not an afflicting God, not a chastening Father, in Heaven.
So it may be said of Saints and Angels; there is felicity in them; and in them,
nor from them no affliction, but all happiness. Every glote of the Eye, of
every one above, pleasant and glorious; the stirring of every Finger, of every
Toe, of every Hair, of every one in Heaven, a Heaven to behold. There is no
distinction of habit and act, time and place, means and end, in point of
felicity, as here is; as you know there is misery all along in the means (with
us) and felicity only in the end, and that uncertain too: and so a little
good habitually scarce any at all actually, and the like. In Heaven there is
none of these miserable distinctions, but Heaven in all: in every quality,
Heaven; in every action, Heaven; in every time, Heaven; in every place, Heaven;
in every mean to such an end, equally as in the end it self, Heaven.

Simili dissimile.
In things which are but like, there is some dislike. Light is not universally
permanent. Our Sun sets and rises, rises and sets, so it is with most parts of
the World; very few parts have all day and no night; all light, and no
darkness. It Is not so above, our felicity there, is universally permanent:
there is all day, and no night to all that upper World: the Sun goes round
that glorious Globe, without any interposition to any. There is no drooping
Soul in Heaven; no wounded spirit in all the Land above, nor never will. Our
life above is everlasting -- Shall of the spirit reap life everlasting, etc.
Says our Apostle. There is such inspiration, as shall never admit the least
expiration in any; comforts never faint, nor flat; no soul grows weary of
place, company, habit, diet, employment: every ones Heaven, is an eternal
Heaven; every ones rest an eternal rest. Some have been in Heaven many
thousands of years, and yet not a thought of dislike of any thing there, nor
the least desire stirring to be any where else, but the strong desire of all,
that all Gods dear ones were there. The spirit and the Bride say, come. Christ
and all those members he has above, pant for the rest, that all were as they
are; one, as they are one. Joy is made as vast as the soul, as lasting as the
soul, and the soul as lasting as Christ. There are no broken Cisternes above;
not one Vessel drops out one drop of its felicity, in the space of
eternity, though he stand brim full. No consumption, no Disease above; every
thing lives, yea, and thrives for ever. There is eternal Revelation, in
Heaven: Infinite excellency, taking suitable time, to lay open it self, to all
others: there is John's rapture to all eternity.

All these particulars gathered up render the meaning of the Metaphor to be
this, That our felicity above, is a full and absolute felicity; a transcendent
blessedness, suiting such a transcendent being as the soul of man is.

Pravity is misleading, but when the Soul is judged for this, there is noe
turning the man; this consideration makes me shake indeed, when I consider
how Earthy some men are, and how wilful in their way. Speak to them of
minding their Souls, and beating off their thoughts from this World, you are
as Vinegar to their Teeth, and smoke to their Eyes. When corruption thrives in
the soul, it is dangerous; but when it has got a head, Ah Lord! The state of
that man is desperate. Who shall save that man from Hell, and bring him to
Heaven, which is earthy, and will be so still?

The Creature is seducing: much is promised, but its still a lie to the soul;
the fullness of the World, makes up no fullness to that noble part within. If
there be any absoluteness in things here below, it is in point of vanity; they
are Vanity of vantie, and vexation of spirit (i) Perfect vanity, just
nothing, as our English phrase is. Consider all the Word in reference to the
spirit, and it is a heap of perplexity, A Bush of Briers and Thorns: shall all
your industry lie, to Crown your souls with Thorns? With our Saviors Cross
and Curse? Are you not scratcht enough with the World yet? Will not your
spirits be vexed enough hereafter, but will you be vexing of them here too? Will
you begin your Hell in Earth, and inure your spirits, to tearing and torment
before the time?

Know your souls, and what is the felicity of them, and what you do, do in
good earnest to attain it: you move as you love, Christ concluded that, when
the Jewish Church slighted him. If you love darkness better then light, you
will never seek out for light nor for that Inheritance which h^s there. If
Heaven were more absolute felicity, or more transcendent blessednesses then
it is, a heart pre-engaged (i) set upon an other Heaven, will slight Heaven
indeed: your life lies upon this point, to look how, and where your love is
picht; where a man's Treasure is, there will his Heart be; if you make money
only your Treasure, you will only bend in good earnest after it. If you make
not Heaven your chief Treasure, you will not seek after it heartily. Heaven
has been shadowed out to you, according to the Metaphor in the Text, is it now
of any price in your Eye? Has it gained your love? It Is a transcendent
blessedness: are your hearts taken with it, as such a blessedness? Till this,
I shall not look to prevail with any soul, to seek out after Heaven, to any
purpose. 'Twas the Art that Christ used, when he spoke of eternal things,
first to set out the excellency of them, to make that sparkle gloriously in the
Eye, to stir love, and then answerablie come on to do good. J am the Bread
which came down from Heaven, etc. -- J am the Bread of Life, etc. -- And he
that shall drink of the Water that I shall give him, shall never thi^st, etc.
Many such expressions to take love, you shall find in the Scripture. What have
we gained upon your love, by all our discourse of Heaven? An love be as it
was, the man will be as he was; if Heaven be at his door, he will step
beside it into Hell. Divine Love is that flame, that carries the soul upward,
where this is not, Heaven though all, is nothing.

There is darkness, And sitting in darkness, look to that as you love your
souls, it is excluding from the Inheritance in light: sit in darkness, love
your lusts, and you will never part with them, for Heaven. The condition of
your Inheritance in light is, that you must cast away the unfruitful works of
darkness, The Soul lives and dies in that it loves.
you will rather cast away your souls then do this, if your affection be
impure. If your love to sin live, you will have your pleasure in it, though
you die for it. If love to sin live, there is but one way with your souls;
they will die in that sin. Love of sin, and Heaven opened to the soul,
it is rejection of Christ, with his greatest blessing in his Hand. Christ casts
off every Soul, that thus desperately casts off him. A Man must set his Knife
to the Throat of an Isaac, Judge his Soul in that which is dearest, if
sinful: GOD will not else look toward a Man, with great things. He
looks upon Men, if any say I have sinned, and perverted that which was right,
and it profited me not, he will deliver his Soul from goeing down into the
Pit, and his Life shall see the light.

Consolation must conclude this point. Christians I am to give you a glad word,
in this sad Time. Your Inheritance here is spoiled, you have one that lies
above spoil, in light. Can Men or Devils pull the Sun out of Heaven? Then
may your highest fortune be spoiled. You have one Sun turned into blood, but
you have another which cannot. Your felicity here is broken, and grows every
Day more broken and bloody: you have a felicity complete, full, absolute, as
full of Blessedness as the Sun of light, a felicity as full of Beams, as
the Eyes of the Soul can receive. Draw up your souls to Heaven quickly,
Earth is posting away: Let good blood stir, every drop will be lost else.
You will be killed in all on Earth, to make you more Heavenly, ere GOD has
done with you. Think how absolute you shall be above, and feede^^ that. Let
not tyranny trample down your souls, though it does your bodies, a perfect
felicity waits for you. Let Englands bloody misery, make you cry Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly: set me as high, and as happy, as mine Inheritance.

-- Jn Light.
Inference.
THat which by way of Inference, may be taken from this Metaphor; I shall but
name and conclude all; Time, and Text. GOD does lively shadow out to Man here,
his condition hereafter; what he shall be, and where he shall be for eternity.
There is death, and the shadow of it, before it come. So there is life, and the
shadow of it: light is here made the shadow and semblance of Heaven, of a
glorious estate to come. As there be Tastes of the World to come; so there be
sights: Light gives glimpses below, of the glory that is above. There is a
beholding the Land that is far off; the Face of Christ, in a Glass; the glory
above, by the glory here; one Heaven, in another; Heaven, in Light. Man has
many Sermons preached to him, to make him Heavenly, as many Heavenly Sermons,
as there be rays in the Sun: by every glimpse of Light, you should set
before you Heaven. As long as the Sun shines, you should not want a Sermon,
to send your souls to Heaven.

God deals, with flesh, as flesh. Man is a Creature taken with shadows.
Things drawn out to the life, take. The Soul now, fetches in all from sense;
God stoops to help in things this way, at such doors as they will go in at.
GOD wraps up the higher Heaven in the lower; glory, in Light, and so brings it
down to carnal sense, and enobles it there, to enoble it within; catches the
senses, to catch the Heart, and save the Soul. If Light be so glorious, what
is Heaven! This is the secret Soule-taking argument, that is wrapped up in this
Metaphor. Though your bodies have yet no Heaven: your souls, if you walk as
you should, need never be without one. As long as your Eyes be open to see
the Sun, you may sweetly send your Souls to Heaven. Some swear by the
Light; this is to send their souls to Hell, not to Heaven, by the Light.

God moves in means powerfully. Pictures are powerful, upon flesh and blood.
Make things glitter, and Man will gaze: make Earth glitter, although so base,
and fallen Man will be taken with it; work it up from its basenesses but so
little, as to look golden and glorious, and man will dote upon it. How taking
is golden Earth, to all the World! Heaven is wrapped up in Sunbeams and made to
glitter, to catch a fool. Christ is expressed by the Sun; Heaven, by Light,
that if sense have any power upon the soul, no soul may go to Hell, whilst
the Sun gives Light.

There were transient Visions; now there are standing. Truth and the Creature,
are Gods standing Vision. Things below are all made at Divine pleasure, to
speak out things above. The Word of God uses the Works of GOD, to shadow out
what cannot be plainly seen here: invisible things, are brought to
understanding, by visible; Heaven, by light; Hell, by darkness: Hell beneath,
by Hell here. The gnawing Worm is used, to shadow out gnawing conscience;
gnawing conscience, to shadow out Hell. Man has his vision, what shall be, in
things round about him. The Word of God, the Works of God; Light, darkness,
Serpents, Dragons, Worms; Lambs, Doves, all Creatures are used to give apt
vision to man, of things to come. All runs into this, CHRIST makes lively
apparition of things to come.

Look about you sinners: your Sun is turned into blood, this is speaking to
you pro futuro. Strange Lights, and sights have been in Heaven, look about
you all; this is God using the Creature, to shadow out to dull sensual man,
something to come, a Heaven or a Hell: (...).
blessed is every English heart, that can discern the signs of the Times.

FINIS.

