To my FRIEND Mr. MATTHEW LOCK, ON HIS INGENIOVS DISCOVERY OF THOSE MUSICAL
INNOVATIONS Held forth by the AUTHOR of An ESSAY to the Advancement of MUSIC,
etc.
AS MARSYAS, though by MINERVA taught,
While with insipid Novelties he thought
Great PHOEBUS of his Luster to deprive,
Was for his bold presumption Flead alive:
So while our LOCK, the APOLLO of our Age,
This MUSICAL PHANATICK does engage;
He both o'recomes and punishes his Pride;
Though he Flea's not his Skin, he Tawes his Hide.
J. Philips.

To my worthy Friends and Fellow Servants The GENTLEMEN of His Majesty's
Public and Private MUSIC, AND ALL OTHER Approved Professors and Understanders
of that SCIENCE.
GENTLEMEN,
THe Abusiveness, not Excellency of the pretended Universal Character, gave me
occasion of presenting you these Remarques; wherein I have endeavored to
manifest the falsity, insignificancy, contradictory, and (in some parts)
impossibility of its Authors Proposals. But e're I proceed, since he has been
liberal to evince the intricate and difficult way of your proceeding by an
Experiment of his own ( Page 25.) the Ground indeed of his whole Discourse, and
(being truly applied) the Square of all men's Understanding; to be out of his
debt (taking it for granted, how ignorant soever he renders you, you understand
the degrees of Comparison) I Will tell you a Tale:

Once upon a time, when I was a Schoolboy, had got a smack'ring of the Syntax,
could Sing my Part, put three or four Parts together in Music, and Play a
Voluntary and Service on the Organ (perhaps well enough for the time) I began
to admire my own excellency, despise others, and ( Lucifer-like) thought on
nothing but setting up for my self; not doubting, but fame and fortune would
attend those so suddenly acquired accomplishments, which they (silly fellows)
had been so long groping after to so little purpose. But here my good Genius
put a stop to my cariere, and (with a See thou a man wise in his own eyes?
there is more hope of a Fool than of him) prevented the publication of my
folly; that by longer study and experience I might become sensible of the
vanity and impudency of it. And truly when I began to write Man, and had
conversed in the world, it proved so; for notwithstanding the fair progress I
had made, I found I was but at the beginning of my journey: which, the more
seriously I reflected on, the closer it obliged me to proceed cautiously, and
not judge of any thing I was not certain I knew.

Gentlemen, you have the privilege to make what application you please: mine
is to keep within compass in the following Discourse.

Be pleased then to know, that about three years since, our Universal Essayer
made his address to me for instruction in Composition; but I, never having
contrived any method that way, referred him to Mr. Simpson's Compendium of
Practical Music for the first Rudiments, and to Mr. Birabensha (his now
Publisher) for his further advance; assuring him I knew no man fitter for that
purpose; it being in a manner his whole business. This advice was civilly and
kindly taken, and after a short time put in execution. But e're the Sun had run
his Annual Circuit the case was altered; such pretty canting Questions came so
innocently nibling after Solutions, that I knew not whether they were proposed
by way of joke or in earnest, till (I know not how) a Brother broke out, It Is
another Circulation of the Blood! and then, O then 'twas I began to suspect
that Midsummer Moon lasted all the year; though the several favors I had
received from the Family (which I shall always acknowledge) kept me within the
bounds of modesty, and fed me with hopes of a farther discovery.

Which there was no appearance of (not so much as by way of hint, for a
Universal Character) till the last Summer, and that by accident too; for
meeting with Mr. John Carr, a Seller of Instruments in the Middle Temple, I had
the favor of a running view both of it and the Publishers Preface, and
withal, a request to write somewhat in commendation of it: which how in
civility to refuse, or in respect of my own reputation to do (being ignorant of
many particulars therein, and not well satisfied in others that I thought I
understood) I knew not. However, importunity prevailing over good Nature, his
desire in innocent Drollery (in hopes to occasion a more serious survey of
those many bold and unmanly aspertions in it) I endeavored thus to comply with.

INgenious Ralpho! Squire Prophetic,
Who whilome did in Speech Poetic
Baffle Nature, Art and Schools
By thy Spirits Ardent Tools,
Appear again! here is new cut work,
Under which strange secrets lurk;
Would thou see the wonder? Come!
It Is exposed to Christendom,
And all else that is habitable
By, or knowing, weak, or Rabble;
I Am ignorant, my Spirits can-
Not suppose the half of Man.
Come, defend me but this once,
And I Will swear thou art no Dunce.
So farewell Broke and Publisher:
Your Friend to use, and good Wisher.
This immediately was communicated, and severely censured; the Publication of
the Work (by adding, changing, wherefore-notting and why-notting) put off for
near two Terms; and I, poor I, delivered up to be buffeted. Which coming in
general to my Ears put me in mind of what I had read, and that (after a little)
wriggling of the merry Maggot) of Ralph's choleric Answer to my Petition:
which was thus: THou self-denying Ordinancer
Why me do invocate? Avaunt, Sir,
Avaunt, I say, Curr of Perdition,
Thou, smell'st of Popish Superstition,
Have not seen Fish in subtle weels?
So Musick's here put neck and heels;
Notes in two places at one time,
Without or Reason, Sense or Rhyme;
And Fiddles English taught to speak
As well as Latin, Welsh, or Greek.
Beside, the Author's no Inventer,
But a kind Broker to his Hinter.
In fine, thou know both all and some,
'Twill exe'lent Fodder make for Bum,
And save the use of Shell or Thumb;
Another Templum Musicum.
Vex me no more, O Brat of Rome!
Thou and the Book have had your doom.


Thus it rested (and truly for the Authors sake I wish it had still) till about
the latter end of the last Term, when it come forth, being ushered in with as
much National Expectation and splendour, as the Authors own recommendatory
Epistles, or (if near home) Elegant Speeches could embellish it with: And what
care and pains have been since taken to beget an answerable reception of it, I
suppose none that know him or his Relation can be ignorant of. Hitherto by way
of History: Now, Behold and have regard!

Where, in the first place, you are entertained with the device of a
Frontispiece; the mind whereof (as I humbly conceive) may be this: A melodious
Hackney Lady under a pleasant shade, near the Entering into a delicate Garden,
playing the elaborate and incomparable Arro^s Jigg; at the hearing whereof, the
Author, having seated himself among the Gods, descends; and (for the
encouragement of poor deluded Mortals) with his own right hand furnishes the
World with his own Invention of the Harmonical and Immutable B. M. T. on the
one side, and the old discordant confused Cliffs on the other. If this be not
the genuine sense of the Imagery, I must blame its obscurity, and advance to
the Preface.

Where, to make way for the Essay, the Publisher at one blow knocks all or most
in the head, that either have written of, or practiced Music from the first
Invention of the Scale or Gamut to our days. His words are these: There is not
any Art which at this day is more rude, unpolished, and imperfect in the
Writings of most of the Ancient and Modern Authors than Music; for the
Elementary part thereof is little better than an indigested Mass, and confused
Chaos of impertinent Characters, and insignificant Signs. It is intricate and
difficult to be understood, it afflicts the memory, and consumes much time
before the knowledge thereof can be attained, because the Cliffs are diverse,
their transposition frequent, and the order and places of Notes very mutable,
and their denomination alterable and unfix'd. These things being considered,
etc.

Behold the Platform of insignificant Innovation! first complain, then propose,
next reform if you can: it is no matter which way. But who can help it? What Is
bred in the bone will never out of the flesh: and you know it is hard crossing
Proverbs; however I shall willingly pass him by, as a Gentleman (I fear)
struggling under an obligation beneath either his Birth, Education, or
Knowledge, and proceed.

Be pleased then to observe, that the first Chapter is nothing to the purpose
of his Universal Character, but for the most part a bare Discourse of Musicks
Advantages over other Recreations, without so much as taking notice of the
Divine Use thereof, notwithstanding the many Commands and Examples recounted in
holy Writ to that purpose. I will not be so severe as to judge it a wilful
omission: but I Will assure you it looks very odd. The rest of it (after Teazing
the Nobility and Gentry for some miscarriages in other Recreations) is made up
with a serious invitation, and solemn assurance, that as Music never beggered
any, so it never made any rich; that is to say in plain English: When you have
done all, and gape for gains,
You reap your labor for your pains.


Encouragement enough doubtless for such as shall make it their business to
follow his Tract; and perchance agreeable to some who have been conversant
within the narrow circuit of his progress. But as to the generality of that
Profession abroad, there is no knowing Traveller, that dares speak truth, but
will assure him, they live as splendidly, with as much respect, as large
rewards, and as many advantages to enrich themselves (if they please) as any
Professors of any Art or Science whatsoever. And at home, were he not very
short sighted, he might with ease meet with those who have made fair purchases;
and, were they so inclined, could still adventure the buying of a good
Benefice, without the least assistance of their frugal Parents. But ex Pede
Hercules; from this praise and contempt, you may guess at your future usage.

In his second and third Chapter, to carry on a thorough Reformation, the Axe
is laid to the Root, and in a moment, you and all Musical Mankind living are
made Conjurers and Stults. But who has not heard of Friar Bacon's Oracle!
However, be not daunted for a hasty word, nor doubt of setting the Saddle on
the right Horse; for the proof of the Pudding is in the Eating, as the learned
Sanca Panca has it; and though comparisons are odious, as the saying is, yet to
compare Notes is not: And therefore, etc.

THE GAMUT OR SCALE OF MUSIC.


This Scale contains or implies the compass of all Voices and Instruments by
Alphabetical and Gradual Motion; so that wherever either of the three Cliffs
are placed, that Character or Cliff takes with it so much of the Scale as is
pertinent to the Voice or Instrument it is applied to for any single Part.

His new Scale of G. A. B. C. D. E. F. G. confusedly divides it self at every
Octave Note or Tone, and consequently Tinker-like instead of mending one hole
makes two or three, imposing a necessity of more mutability and perplexity,
where each part enjoys its own latitude, than was or could be in the old, and
(by not planting the beginning of his second Octave inclusive to the first)
making that same Note or Tone to be in several places or distances at the same
time; and from this I make my exceptions against his whole Book.

For Example: Unison ^

Behold the Inventor's grand Invention, on which all his other Inventions
depend! And if it be not worthy the Author let the world judge.

From this fixedness (for so he will have it) arises and destruction of his whole
design, and indeed, makes it appear that he either understands not, or wilfully
mistakes the proper use of the old Scale as to Vocal Music; for in the first
Septinary thereof there is implied the three manners of Naming the Notes in
Singing, by sharp, natural, and flat, each taking its rise from the Syllable
Vt, etc. as in the former Scale is demonstrated, (of which more hereafter.) Now
the Natural contains the compass of the generality of Men's Voices, and is thus
set down by us: ^


But by his new found way thus: ^


Or by the addition of two lines more thus: ^


Or with as many above, if he prick in his B Thing.

So that either it leaves not room to put words under your Notes, or forces you
to skip from one of his Hieroglyphical Characters to another, Like to a Bird
from Tree to Tree,
Or like the Damask Rose you see.


Which how inventingly it shows, and how cunningly it runs into the
perplexities beforementioned, none can be ignorant that have Eyes in their
heads.

The same it is in the superior Part for the Voice, which generally takes up
the same compass, and is regularly set down by us, thus: ^


But by his reformed way, thus: ^


Or by the addition of two lines to his Man T, which is far worse.

And in this he might have convinced himself, had he but taken the pains to
have transcribed the Tune of Aurelia in the Key proper for singing it, which
ought to be thus planted: ^


But his way, thus: ^


And if some Teachers of Vocal Music write their single Airs by the G Cliff,
it is rather to assist those who learn by Ear only, by the Violin, (that being
the proper Cliff for that Instrument, and that Instrument more generally known
and used than any other, and always in Unison with the Voice for that Part, if
truly tuned and applied,) than in the least to contradict our certain Method of
the Scale; which never gives so much as occasion for the chopping and changing
of Cliffs, or writing in Improper Keys; one or both of which he must of
necessity do, if he will stick to his own Principles; the whimsies of his Lieger
Line ( page 23.) and Exotic Notes ( page 73.) not at all mending the matter,
whatever he pretends; but rather (Sir Positive-like) declares that not to be
which really is; for do but observe how facile to the Eye (which page 41 he
seems to be a friend to) a Double Relish appears our way: ^


And how subtly, or rather conjuringly, in a Treble and higher Octave,
according to his new Scheme ( page 23.) thus: ^


And if it have not a powerful operation on your understandings (if he will permit
you to have any) that he writes by a more than ordinary Illumination, I Am much
mistaken.

I shall only add an Example or two of Vocal Music in Parts, and proceed to
the examination of his borrowed ones.

^
CANON. O bone Ie -- su mi - se -
^
O bo-ne Ie -- su mi-se -- re -- re me -- i *
^
rere me -- i mise-re-re mei mise-re-re, O, etc.
^
me-i mi-se -- re -- re, O bo -- ne, etc.
Here Is no Bugbear to fright Children, or perplexity to deter the Lovers of
Science from their and our rational and gradual proceeding; but in his reformed
way, Behold its Physnomy?

^
O bo -- ne Ie -- su, etc.
^
O bo -- ne Ie -- su, etc.
^
^
^
etc.
^
And if in courtesy you will permit him to write the Bass as it is in the former
way, it is nothing to the purpose of his fower-line loving Friends to the Eye
and possessour of a complete Octave (as he calls them,) but a strong
confirmation of our Scale, without the use whereof, he could not shun the
ridiculous fop-doodles above mentioned; and with it has been necessitated to
dash out the (...) of his dear Babes Invention and Reformation. But O the
Father! what will not a Man do to be Chronicl'd on Inventor. If you can make
any shift, without swo^^ (...) and blubbered Cheeks, call to mind I beseech you
the memorable and never to be forgotten Invention of burning Diana's Temple;
and accordingly, etc.

CANON Three in One.
^
Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, Domi
^
Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, Dominus De -- us
^
Sanct. Sanct Sanct Dom. De -- us Sabbath, Pleni su^t
^
nus De -- us Sabbath, Pleni sunt Coe -- li and
^
Sabbath, Pleni sunt Coeli and Terra, Glo-ri -- a
^
Coeli and Terra, Gloria tu -- a, Hosanna in ex cel-
^
Terra, Gloria tua, Hosanna in excel -- sis, in ex-
^
tua Hosanna in excelsis, in ex -- cel -- sis, in ex-
^
sis, in ex -- cel -- sis, in ex -- cel -- sis, Hos. in ex-
^
cel -- sis, in ex-cel-sis, Hosanna in ex cel sis,
^
cel-sis, Hosanna in ex -- cel-sis, Hosanna in excelsis,
^
cel -- sis, Hos. in ex -- cel -- sis, in ex -- cel -- sis,
^
in ex -- cel -- sis.
^
in ex -- cel -- sis.
^
in ex -- cel -- sis.
CANON Six in Three.
^
Domine Ie -- su, Chri-
^
Do-mi-ne Ie -- su Christ, Christ
^
Do-mi ne Ie -- su Chri-
^
Do mi ne Ie --
^
Do-mi-ne Ie -- su-
^
^
ste, Christ, mi-se-re-re me-i
^
mise-re-re me i, mise re-re me- i me-
^
ste, mi-se-re-re me -- i, miserere me --
^
- su Chri -- ste, mi-se re-re me-
^
Chri -- ste, mi-se-re-re me-
^
Do-mi-ne Ie -- su Chri -- se,
^
mise-re re me i, me -- i, mise -- re -- re me -- i,
^
-- i, mi-se-re re me -- i, secundum mag-
^
-- i, mise-re re me i,
^
-- i, miserere mei, mise -- re-re me i,
^
- i, mi -- se -- re -re me -- i, se-cun-dum
^
mi-se-re -re me -- i, se -- cun-dum
^
se -- cun - dum mag -- nam
^
nam miseri-cordiam tu -- am, mi-seri -cor-di-am
^
se -- cun -- dum mag -- nam miseri-
^
se-
^
magnam misericor -- di-am, misericordiam tuam
^
mag -- nam, se -- cun -- dum mag-
^
misericordiam tu -- am, mi-se ri -- cor -- di-am
^
tu -- am, mi se-ri-cor diam
^
cordiam tu -- am, mi se-ricordiam tu -
^
cun -- dum mag -- nam miseri
^
mi -- se -- ri cor -- di - am
^
^^m miseri -- cor-di am, misericordiam tu am,
^
tu -- am, mi-se-ri-cordiam tuam,
^
tuam, Amen, bo -- ne Ie -- su, A --
^
am, A -- men, bo-
^
cordiam tu -am, misericordiam tu -- am,
^
tu -- am, A-
^
A -- men, bo -- ne Jesus, A-
^
Amen, bone Ie -- su, A -- men, A -- men.
^
-- men, Amen, bone Ie -- su, Amen, Amen.
^
men, bone Jesus, Amen, Amen, bone Jesus, Amen.
^
A -- men, Amen, bone Jesus, Amen.
^
men, bone Jesus, Amen, Amen, bone Jesus, Amen.
^
men, Amen, bone Jesus, Amen.
By these Examples (which are not proposed so much to signify the convenience
and necessity of removing the Cliffs according to our Scale and Method, as to
revive, if possible the excellent and almost lost kind of Music called Canon)
it appears that all his abusive Rhetoric tends to nothing more, than to
dethrone what is self-evident, and (to make a new Commonwealth) set up
supposition, imagination, and if so, why then so, etc. to reign in its stead;
as if there were no certainer way in the World to make a Man clear sighted, but
putting out his Eyes.

And his Scheme of our Cliffs ( page 21.) which he would fain render ridiculous
and useless, is sufficient to convince any rational Man, that has studied
Music, of the necessity of retaining them: For by the C Cliff is understood
(and universally so used) not only a Tenor, but a Contra-tenor, and a higher
and lower Mean; whereby the Parts of a regular Composition are fixed in their
proper places; which by his way cannot be done, without the transposition of
his darling Letters BMT. And the B Cliffs, flat and sharp, are so essentially
necessary, that without them it is impossible to complete Harmony; which, he
knowing (if I guess right) made him give quarter and confine them: but how
contradictory to his own Hand and Seal page 32. and the Plate of Aurelia, we will
manifest when we come to the Nomination of Notes. So that after all the gay
assurances of his plain and easy Method, instead of after Saturday night comes
Sunday morning, as he tells us page 73. we are to accept of after Sunday
morning comes Saturday night; and in lieu of a complete Body, be contented with
a lame Foot, half a Head, and one single Gut. But enough of this. The following
Observations, and comparing both Scales, will assure you the Author is no
Changeling, and that his whole piece is of a lump.

His assuring his Reader ( page 14.) that you cannot declare a Note to be in a
different Octave, because their Names are different in every Octave, is false;
for the Cliffs and Scale distinguishes them by Capital, single and double
Italick Letters, as before is set down.

His swallowing the old way of Alphabetical Numeration, without giving any
account why he commences with G and not A, (as the honest Horn-books and
Kalenders do,) was no small oversight; for had he done it, it might in some
measure have answered the hungry Gapers after his pretended Invention and
Reformation; but being omitted, they still remain Seekers: And I with them, had
there not been a happy accident of meeting with an Acquaintance and worthy
Neighbor of his; who assured me, the sole reason of his proceeding that way,
was, because G was the Dominical Letter that Year he writ: which, how admirably
it demonstrates the Excellency of his Invention, the very Rabble, his dear
Cronies as it seems ( page 78.) will confess, and give him thanks for. But in
earnest, had I occasion to quarrel with that account, I should have thought it
rational to have reformed it, by taking the Alphabet end wise; which, in all
probability, would have freed us from those perplexities he says we are
involved in, and those we are sure he would lead us in.

His arguing upon supposition, that the fiction words of the Gam-vt (for so
he is pleased to dip them page 15.) were originally designed to show the place
of Mi, is of the same stamp; for they were Syllables purposely chosen as most
proper for opening the Mouth and putting forth the Voice, every Vowel mastering
his fellow Consonant, and every Syllable properly signifying a more Grave or
Acuter Sound in relation to their plantation: which, had he been conversant in
Vocal Music, he might sufficiently have experienced, or indeed with common
sense; for either would have satisfied him, that the Consonant Letters
concluding any word, do generally in their pronounciation force the Tongue
either against the Teeth, Roof of the Mouth, stop the Mouth, or produce an
unpleasant hesitation: For Example, stop, mouth, from, which, his, tub, etc.
His asserting that the former Syllables are now become useless, because English
Musicians have laid aside Vt and Re, is like the rest; for if some have, some
have not; and in foreign parts they are generally used for the same reasons
above mentioned. But what is this to the purpose of his Universal Character?
it is the Thing not the Name we contest for; the Names being not so much as
necessary Accidents (as is manifest in all Instrumental Music) but only
convenient Assistances for young Beginners: yet this is the great Goliath our
little David has undertaken to defeat! This the Gibberish and Conjuring you are
charged to cheat the World with ( p. 11.) But it is a thousand pities, a Man
should have so much Wit as to lose his Memory; for notwithstanding this
horrible Charge, he commands the Use of them ( page 18.) in these words; And
for the placing of Mi you must take the usual Monosyllables, so you order them
in the most practicable Methods, viz. Mi fa sol la fa sol la Mi.

O Reformation! Reformation! how amiable art thou in the Nostrils of those that
cannot see! Was It ever seen, felt, heard, or understood, that the Toning of the
Voice must take its rise from a Semi-tone? or Composition begin or end with
half a Bass? for so it is, (and must be, if Mi be his fundament Syllable) Sol
or Vt beneath, making it perfect, and completing a proper Octave. But if he will
have it so, let him ride his own Hobby Horse: we will enquire what is become of his
fixed Mrs. Mi in Aurelia? as certain as two Two pences make a Groat she is gone
a rambling and turned Queen; for notwithstanding his special care of the
Baggage ( page 36.) that she should keep within doors, in one or two Apartments
only, she is there whipped into a third; and in his Scheme ( page 32.) into two
others; so that in plain English, we are got out of the frying Pan into the
Fire, or as far off from being fixed his way as our own, though in a far worse
condition upon the account of Composition; yet we must take it for an
Invention, and glad we can escape so. His other Accusation for obliging your
Pupils, to be able to account their distances forwards and backwards by heart (
page 11.) is so horribly out, that it is as impossible for any flesh to Sing,
Play, or Compose without it, as for a Man to make a good Accomptant, that
cannot reckon ten. He abuses Mr. Chr. Simpson (a Person whose memory is
precious among good and knowing Men, for his exemplar life and excellent skill)
by asserting ( page 30.) That he perceiving it impossible for a Composer to
have ready enough in his eye the Concords as they are placed, advised an
ad^ition of Figures between the Parts; for he proposed it not to a Composer but
to a Novice, for prevention of: such lapses as young Beginners are subject to:
And I think the Essayer would not think it ^easonable in his Tutor, to oblige
him to read all days of his life with a Festo^e because he learned his Letters
with one: yet, valens nolens, so he would have it, and in all probability take it
ill if you will not grant it; though you can assure him, there is no Man wears the
Name of Composer, put to those straights.

I am weary of Citing; let the Reader if he please, for want of better
employment, peruse him, and accordingly judge.

His telling us that a Beginner may learn as well his way, as ours, is as much
to the purpose, as if I were to teach one to read, should persuade him A
signified Blockhead; or a Mother, her Child may sooner learn to go on all four
than upright, because a Puppy (commonly his first play-fellow) gave him an
Example.

The referring us to the French Musicians for placing their G in the lower
Line, assures he understands not their Music; for they use it only in such
Tunes as are made for Dancing; where they never descend below that Cliff, but
frequently into that which he would wheedle in, under the appellation of an
higher Octave, for invention sake. All other Parts they write as we, and the
rest of the Musical part of the World. Though to save the labor of going into
France, I do assure both him and you, that I can produce Compositions of Dr.
Taverner (who lived in King Henry the Eighth's time) and other his
Cotemporaries, with that very individual G, in the very same Line where he
would make the World believe he invented it to be.

The Viol, which he seems most Knight Errantly to take for a distressed Lady,
and to fight her relief; instead of accomplishing it (O Misfortune in so great
an Adventure!) he has both pinioned and fettered her; for where the old Tuning
gives her the fair liberty of all sorts of Keys in all kinds of Music for that
Instrument, with a far greater advantage to the hand than any other, he
confines her to one that can hardly do either, saving such lean stuff as
Fortune my Foe, or John come kiss me now; and them well neither, without the
removing a String half a Note higher or lower at every Tune; which how
ridiculous it is, when compared with his plausible pretenses, is enough to make
an healthy Man sick, and a rational mad. But in that, I blame not him so much
as his Publisher, who has been a professed Violist, and consequently could not
be ignorant of the impossibility of it. The Example he sets down, made by Mr.
Chr. Simpson for Children (for it seems the Universal Character can reach no
farther) contradicts his long pleading for four lines only in a Part, the first
Note thereof after his B beginning in a Sixth, and more than confirms my
Example of putting the same Note in two places at one time: For there it is
proposed as in different Parts, and so might be liable to exception, being he
tells us no Part must mind what another does (but keep every Octave within the
System of four lines;) but here, the same Note, to be played on the same String
and Fret, is in the same Lesson at least forty times set down in different
places. Let him not pretend he is misunderstood, the thing is evident: The
first Note after his B is C in the Line, the first Note after his M is the same
C in the Space, and so forward; which, what need there was for, heaven knows! I
do not. For after he found 'twas impossible to carry on his Plot of Four Lines
without perpetual afflicting the Mind and Eye, he humbly submits; and gives
Commission for the speedy raising three, four, or more Lines (as their might be
occasion) for defense of his Universal Character; but the filthy foul Fiend was
in 't: when they came to duty, they were all false disciplined. If you will
satisfy your selves, you may; I suppose the Author has not bought all his
Books and given them away yet.

The Organ and Harpsechord fall next under his lashe which, who understands,
will assert to be Complete Consorts, if rightly managed. But he, for the
advancement of his humble T, has left 'm emptier than Three blew Beans in a
blew Bladder, not so much as allowing them the privilege of a poor Welsh Harp
( viz. the playing of Three Parts) without the hopping and skipping of his
Servants BMT upon all occasions, as in the Example he has inserted from Mr.
Thetcher, and that only for Children too: For had he presented you with what
either of those Instruments are worthy of, Composed by the incomparable Dr.
Bull, Mr. Orlando Gibbons, heretofore; Mr. Albertus Bryne, Mr. B. Rogers, of
London, lately of our own Country; Senior Froscobaldi of St. Peter's in Rome,
Senior Froberger of the Christian Emperial Court, Monsieur Samboneer of the
French, or any other Eminent Author; it would have so evidenced his confused
way, that you might without the least breach of Modesty conclude who has been
dipped in Pump-water has the advantage of a Rubical Complexion, and a security
from blushing, come what will.

His dear Empress the Lute, which his Romantic Brethren (if he speak truth) do
so infinitely admire, brings up the Rere of his Examples; but with the like
success (poor dumb thing) as the rest: For at first dash (as a true friend to
Confusion) he sets her at defiance with her sister Instruments, by buzzing her
in the head, that she is supreme; which is as absolute a Tale of a Tub (how
eloquently soever told) as ever wanted Bottom or Truth; the Harpsechord and
Organ far exceeding her in Compass and Parts, the Viol and Violin in lowdning,
softning, and continuing a Note or Sound, Sagbuts and Cornets the same; every
Instrument having one or other Excellency proper to it self: The convenience of
its being portable and useful at the same time is common to most other
Instruments: That true Excellency which is peculiarly hers, is the making of a
complete Consort with the stop of one hand only; which he (notwithstanding all
his gay commendation) has absolutely robbed her of in his confounded Example of
Arrons Iig, his way of writing being incapable of containing the Parts of a
well-composed Lute-Lesson, without all the absurdities before mentioned. And
truly, had I had a mind to have abused Mr. John Rogers (the eminent'st Lutenist
that this Nation could ever glory in) I should hardly have thought of any thing
fitter for that purpose, than the publishing to the World under his great Name
so pitiful and unmasterly a piece. It Is not to the purpose to urge, he teaches
it his Scholars; for that is only to such as are incapable of better things,
which when they arrive at, he advances: As Children are cherisht with Milk,
till they have Teeth and strength to eat and digest stronger Meat.

By what has hitherto been said, appears the groundless, insignificant, and
indeed saucy attaques of our Scale by the Essayer; whence may be evinced the
truth of that old Saying, It Is the easiest thing in the World to find faults,
but the hardest to mend them. But it is no new thing: Eves Play-fellow begun,
and with as much vigilance carries it on. Yet we must not be ungrateful; as we
have been beholding to the Publisher for his referring those who had no Latin
to the Greek, for understanding the English of his Translated Alstedius; so our
ingenious Author, who supposes we ken GABCDEFG, refers us to it, to assure us
that the Bass is so called, because it is the Foundation of Music. But more
especially the tender Feminine Sex, if it be true what a learned Gentleman of
the Authors Acquaintance and Profession, when he professed Physic, assured me:
For, said he, FCG have but the bare signification of FCG, but BMT have a double
sense, in the first place, Bass, Mean, and Treble; in the second, the most
Essential Balsam of the World, viz. ^^. A Man T -- erected, apply it to the
Basis of the Patient with a gentle motion, and 'twill give present Ease. Which
doubtless will infinitely oblige those amorous Affecters of his way of
Prick-song. But whether it be so or not, I shall not urge; it is sufficient for
me that his standing on another Man's shoulders, signifies no more than the
Gentleman Usher of the Bears his annual Procession on his dear brother Animal,
who at the years end is altogether as wise as at the beginning.

To conclude, the experience of those excellent Young Men, (Children, long
since His Majesty's happy Restoration) who have attained to that Eminency in
Music by our Scale, (the only Universal Character, by which All People, of
All Nations, of what Opinion, Humor, or Religion soever, converse with each
other) will convince him and the World of his calumnious affirming the
necessity of the taking up a Man's whole life, till he has overcome the drudgery
of that Science.

I have omitted several Passages in his Book, on purpose to invite him to blot
more paper. If I have used too much Gall in these lines, it is only to let him
know that I can write with his Ink; and that I intend to vindicate the old
Scale till I meet with a better; while I am capable of subscribing my self,

Your Servant, M. LOCK.
From my Lodgings near the Savoy, April 11, 1672.
Some faults having escaped the Press, the courteous Reader is desired to mend
the most material of them with his Pen, which are two, viz. Page 25. the last
Quaver in the lowest line, standing in the Space, should stand on the Rule,
thus: ^ And Page 29. l. 18. fiction is set instead of fictious.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is newly published a new Edition (Corrected and Enlarged) of The Musical
Companion, in Two Books: the first, contains Catches and Rounds for Three
Voices; the second, Dialogues, Airs, (...) and Songs; some for Two, some for
Three, and some for Four Voices: All the Parts are so Printed as they may be
Sung out of one Book.

Also a new Book for the ^^agiles, Entitled, The Pleasant Companion,
containing Lessons and Instructions for the same: Published by Tho. Greeting
Gent.

Both Sold by John Playford at his Shop near the Temple Church.


