Analogia Honorum: OR, A TREATISE OF Honor and Nobility, According to the LAWS
and CUSTOMS OF ENGLAND. Collected out of the most Authentic Authors, both
Ancient and Modern. In Two Parts. THE FIRST Containing Honor Military, and
relates to War. THE SECOND Honor Civil, and relates to Court and City.

Illustrated with variety of SCULPTURES suitable to the several Subjects.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Roycroft, Anno Dom. MDCLXXVII.

To the Right Noble James Duke of Monmouth and Buccleuth, Earl of Doncaster
and D^ Lord Scott of Askdale, Tendale, and Wichester, Lord high Chamberlain of
Scotland, cheife^y and Justice in Air of all his Matys. Parks, Chaces, and
Forests on the South side of Trent, Ld L^^ of the County and Steward of the
Town of Stafford, Lord Leivtenant of the East Rideing of York shire, Governor
of the Town and Citadel of Kingston upon Hull, Chancellor of ^ University of
Cambridge, Master of ye Horse to his Maty, Captain of his Matys. Guard of H^^
Knight of the Garter, Captain General of his Matys. land Forces and one of ^
Lords of his Matys most Honorable privy Council etca. This Plate with the
Treatise of Honor Military and Civil is in all Humility dedicated to your
Grace, by m^

your Graces most Submissive Servant. Richard Blome.



Royal blazon HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE.



THE FIRST PART; OR Honor Military.
CHAP. I.
ALL Honors may not improperly be said to receive their Birth either from the
City, Court, or Camp, which of all is esteemed the most worthy and honorable,
raising some to Imperial and Princely Dignities, and disthroning others: And in
all Kingdoms (even amongst the barbarous Americans) War has ever been, and yet
is, held in high esteem, and of great Importance; as well for the preservation
of their Laws and Rights, as for the defense of their Dominions; for which War
is permitted by the Laws of God, is taught by the Laws of Nature, and commanded
by the Laws of Nations. And to excite men to valor and noble Atchievments,
Reward, or Honors is conferred upon such that merits the same, according to
their Deserts, for the defense of holy Church, their King, and Country.

War being therefore of such concern, it behooves every prudent Prince, for the
welfare of his People, to be always prepared for Peace or War, either Offensive
or Defensive, both for Foreign Invasion, or the suppressing Domestic
Insurrections; wherefore it has been found expedient to join good Laws (the
Friends of Peace and Rest) unto Arms; War being always accompanied with men of
audacious and furious Spirits.

Iustinianus, for the uniting of Laws and Arms, appointed one Officer, called a
Praetor, to command both Martially and Civilly; which Name the Romans continued
for their General of War, and by his Office had Authority both Martial and
Civil. By which it appears that War cannot endure without the assistance of
Law: and wise men, in former Ages, did hold that Prudence and Power ought not
to be separated; of which Opinion was Horace, saying, Vis expers consilii mole
ruit sua. Likewise for the same reason, learned Writers were induced to commend
valiant Captains and wise Counselors, as it were jointly and in one rank; for
with Simonides they joined Pausanias, with Craesus, Solon; and with Pericles,
Anaxagoras.

Of War, and the Causes thereof.
DIscord is common to all men, and that occasioned either by Revenge for
Injuries done, out of covetousness in gaining that which belongs to others; for
ambition in gainning Fame by noble Victories, or such like Reasons; and this
makes one City to wage war against another, one Province to invade another,
and whole Kingdoms to oppress one another, even to a Conquest if they can.
Aristotle proves that some men by nature are born to Command, and others to
Obey: by which it appears that War is necessary, as well to compel those to
Obedience, as the others to hold their Authority. The Romans did sometimes
judge it convenient to make War only to train up their Youth fit for Service,
and to keep them from idleness, which breeds Intemperance and Dishonesty. And
by Action, Princes that are martially inclined, have not only gained Renown,
but also much enlarged their Dominions. Yet I am of the Opinion, That War ought
not to be made without just cause, and when the Enemy cannot be persuaded to
reason by Ambassadors, prudent Princes and Commanders do not wage War
unadvisedly; and when they do, they should follow the Example of Trajanus, who
observed these Cautions; to be careful to supply the places of his slain
Soldiers; to repress the enemies pride; and according to Military Discipline,
constrain Mutiners to Obedience and Order.

Of Soldiers.
Soldiers, or men professing Arms, according to Vlpianus, were called Milites
a malitia, id est duritia; that is, were so named in respect of the hardness
and danger they endure in defense of other people, or because they keep off the
injuries which enemies do offer. He that desires to enjoy the Honor belonging
to Arms, ought first to prove himself a Soldier: which by the Civil Laws may
be done three ways; the first is by Certificate from the Captain or Officers;
secondly, he ought to make proof of his experience and manhood in Martial
Affairs; and thirdly, to be registered in the List of received Soldiers: and
none other properly ought to be termed Soldiers.

By ancient Custom, Soldiers always took an Oath not to abandon their Captain
or Camp, not to commit Treason, nor consult with one another privately to cause
mutining, and the like. Martianus the great Doctor, did reject Bondmen as
persons unfit and unworthy to be called Soldiers; and no person that has
committed any infamous Crime, of which he is convicted, ought afterward to
bear Arms; so honorable is the Name and Dignity of a Soldier.

The persons excused from bearing Arms, are Priests, and all in Holy Orders,
all Graduates in Schools, all men above the Age of 60 years, and those under
the Age of 17 years.

Those Soldiers that had long served the Romans, either in their Legion, or
elsewhere, and deported themselves obediently to their Officers, and honestly
to all men, were called Veterani, and had great favor showed them; and that
when any Veteran had honestly served them the space of twenty years, he was
then called Emeritus, and might have his dismission to end his days in peace
and quietness, with the enjoyment of diverse Immunities, besides signal marks of
Honor according to their merit; which was a great encouragement to Youth to be
trained up in Military Service, which oft-times they made use of, appointing
Tutors to instruct them therein, and these they called Tyrones.

And as on the one hand the Romans rewarded them for good Service, so on the
other they inflicted punishments according to the heinousness of the Offense;
as for Treason, Disobedience, Abandoning their Colors, and Assisting the
Enemy; also for Theft, Murder, and Cowardice, which they esteemed most vile.
The experience of which was seen when Spractacus defeated the Romans, conducted
by Crassus: For presently upon that dishonor, Crassus commanded a Decimation,
and put to death a tenth man in every Legion, for not having courageously
behaved himself; which being done, he began the fight afresh, and although
their number was lessened, yet were they victorious, and made havoc of the
Enemy. And if it happened that a Soldier was degraded for any Offense, it was
deemed more dishonorable unto him, than a punishment either Corporal or
Pecuniary.

The Donatives or Rewards which the Romans used to bestow on deserving
Soldiers, were either advance of Honor, increase of Wealth, or both; and that
more or less, according to their Deserts: some of which I shall here give
account of. To him that had dismounted an Enemy (if a Footman) was given a pot
of Gold, or a piece of Plate; and if an Horseman, an ornamental Badge to be
set on his Crest. He that first mounted the Wall of an Enemies Town or place of
Fortification, had a Crown of Gold. Octavius Caesar, after the Philippian War,
gave unto the Legionary Soldiers certain Crowns, and unto every Captain a
purple Garment. Julius Caesar, after his Triumph for Victory against Pharnax,
gave unto every Soldier five thousand Groats, to every Leader twice as many,
and to every Horseman double so much. Pompeius having overcome Mithridates,
before he triumphed, bestowed upon every Soldier five hundred Groats, and upon
the Captains a far greater Reward. And Alexander Severus did usually say, That
Soldiers would not live in awe of their General, if they were not well
clothed, well fed, well armed, and some money in their Purses.

Nor was the Romans slack in their Rewards unto their Generals; for besides
rich Presents, they conferred Honor on them, and received them home with
triumphal Arches; and to perpetuate their Fame, they erected Pillars, Statues,
or Obylisks, to set forth their noble Victories.

But what need we fetch all these Examples from the Romans, when our modern
Princes do the same: witness the high advance to Honor and Riches that our
Sovereign, King Charles the Second, bestowed on that truly loyal and much
deserving Subject, George late Duke of Albemarle, whom I shall anon take more
occasion to speak of: Nor has his Majesty's Favor been only showed on him,
but on diverse others, as their Merits deserved; some of which I shall also take
occasion to speak of in place more convenient.

Of Ambassadors or Legates.
THE Office of an Ambassador is of so great Honor and Trust, that none are
employed therein, but such as are sufficiently known unto their Prince for
Persons of Integrity, Prudence, Knowledge in State Affairs, and such as will be
strict Observers of their Masters Commands. The Romans had so high an esteem
for Ambassadors, that whenever any came to Rome, he was first brought unto
the Temple of Saturnus, where his Name was written before the Praefectiarii,
and from thence he was conducted to deliver his Embasie to the Senate.
Ambassadors ought to be in all Countries inviolable; and whosoever offered Violence
unto them, was thought to have done contrary to the Law of Nations: which
caused Publius Mutius to command, That whosoever did assault an Ambassador,
should be delivered up to the Enemy from whom the Ambassador was sent; and
although the Enemy received him not, yet was he to remain an Exile.

Ambassadors are generally employed by their Prince for the Confirming or
Establishing of Peace, a Truce, or Leagues: To demand Restitution for things
unjustly detained, or Satisfaction for Injuries done: To establish or adjust
Commerce, or the like. And they are sent (and so likewise received) in some
State and Grandeur befitting so high a Dignity.

The Ceremonies, in many Countries, for the Confirming and Establishing of
Peace, a Truce, and Leagues have been diversely used.

The Lacedaemonians confirmed their Treaties with great Sacraments, swearing to
observe the same justly, and without fraud. The Tartarians caused some weapon
of War to be brought, and thereupon they took an Oath to observe the same;
which done, they drank of the water wherein the weapon was washed. The Grecians
(after the death of Cyrus the younger) confirming a Peace with Arieno, a
Commander of a barbarous sort of people, caused a Bull, a Boar, a Wolf, and a
Ram to be slain, and laid upon a Shield, and in the blood of those Beasts the
Grecians dipped their Swords, and the Barbarians their Lances, each protesting
to observe Fidelity and Friendship to each other. And the Romans used this
Ceremony, that when Peace was made, the Praetor, the Consul, or Senate
delivered to the Foecial an Herb called Verbena, or Grass pulled up by the
root, and therewith some Boughs of Verbena, together with a Flint taken out of
the Temple of Jupiter Feretrius; which done, the Foecial caused a Sow to be
brought to the Marketplace, and holding a Scepter in his Hand, having his Head
covered with a Cloth, he crowned himself with a Crown of Verbena; then
beseeched he Jupiter, Mars, and the other Gods, that if any of the Parties
failed to perform their Agreements, that then he should be stricken and slain
like the Sow; after which Imprecations her Body was cut with the Flint, upon
which they cast Fire and Water, and so their Sacrifice was solemnized.

Of War, and the natural Inclinations of the English to it.
IRrational Animals and Vegetables are not only subject to, and swayed by the
Powers and Influences of the Climate under which they live, but likewise the
Temperatures and Complexions of Men's Bodies, which also works different
effects in their Minds and Dispositions: For proof whereof, Experience shows
that the Italians and French (as well in former Ages as at present) are more
naturally Courtly, and of brisker Spirits than the Flemmings: The Spaniards and
Lybians more Agile and Crafty, subject to Choler, Malice, and Pride, than the
Suede, Muscovite, or other Septentrional People remoter from the Sun, who are
more inclined to Valor and Animosity, and the Nations proximate to the Sun
have their Blood seccicated, which causes Melancholiness, and are noted for
the searching into the secrets of Nature. The Greeks are inclined to Anger, but
noted to have been exquisite Mechanics. The Egyptians and Jews are addicted to
Superstition and Idolatry. The Turks and Tartars to Cruelty: yea, the careless
Americans to Lust and Idleness, representing the Golden Age in their modern
Lives, who are, according as Ovid fancies, the ancient World.

Contentique cibis nullo cogente creatus,
Arbutes fetus, montanaque fraga legebant.
Cornaque, and in duris herentia mora rubetis
Etque deciderant patula Jovis arbore glandes.
Content with Natures vain forced food
They gather Wildings, Strawberries of the Wood,
Sower Curnels, what upon the Bramble grows,
And Acrons which Joves spreading Oak bestows.
To draw home to Britain, a Microcosme of it self, situate under a temperate
Clime, Fertile to the envy of many of her Neighbors, and blessed with all that
is necessary for Human Life, producing Men endowed with all the Virtues that
other People dispersed over the face of the Universe, can boast of, and
principally with hearts that contemn death it self, which to other Nations is
so dreadful, having an affection to Arms, and are covetous of Fame,
Soveraignity, and Honor above other men.

But it may be objected, How then comes it to pass that we are confined within
the narrow Bounds of our British Seas? Secondly, Wherefore have we quitted our
Claim to France, or suffered it to lie dormant so many Ages?

To the first may be Answered; That it was the piety of our Princes to content
their selves within their own Limits, and were unwilling to be troublesome to
other Princes, until our Henry the Second was supplicated by the Irish to
commiserate their Calamities, and deliver them out of their Intestine Broyls,
into which their irreconcilable Divisions and unchristianlike Fewds had
plunged them. Thus by Composition, rather than Conquest, was our Soveraignity
confirmed in Ireland, and the Charter signed by the Irish Princes and the
Commonalty, which being transmitted to Rome, was confirmed by Pope Adrian about
the Year 1174.

For France it may also be Answered; That we were constrained to vindicated a
just Title to that Crown by force of Arms, when Arguments and fair Means would
not prevail: and for the loss of it, it is apparent in all Histories, that our
Discords at home, not the Courage or Force of France forced us to quit the
same, gaining with few Blows what otherwise they would not so much as have
attempted. Add hereunto the covetousness and envy of some of our Natives, who
being themselves out of Command, will yield any terms to a Foreign Enemy,
rather than maintain an Army in pay for their security; by which facile
Concessions and Peace thus purchased, we discourage our Souldery, suffer them
to lose their Discipline, and to degenerate by Sloth and Idleness; (a
Depravity which cost the Romans very dear at the beginning of their second
Carthagenian War) being almost ruined before they could recover their former
practice of Arms, but for us meliora spero.

War being in diverse Cases just upon the Offensive part, and absolutely
necessary on the Defensive, it is fit we consider the proper Definition thereof.
It is generally said, to be the Exercise of Arms against an Enemy, but more
properly it is a Contention between Princes or States, by force of Men under
Discipline to obtain Victory: And the end of War is either to obtain Victory,
or to live in Peace and Honor.

The Division of War (for so much as concerns England) may be of two sorts or
kinds; viz. Terene and Naval; in open Field, or upon the Seas. The Art and
Exercise of both are absolutely necessary, it being impossible for us to secure
our Shoars, if we are not Masters of the Seas; nor were we ever victorious in
our Transmarine Attempts, before our Enemies Naval Forces were conquered, as
appears by the Histories of Edward the Third, Henry the Fifth, etc. Thus are
our Oaken Castles our securest Bulwarks to defend us from our Enemies; nor can
we offend them abroad without these floating Squadrons; how needful then is the
excellent employ of Navigation to our Nation, and how glorious, or rather
terrible might we be to the Universe, it we did more encourage it, by
maintaining a Royal Navy, and having an Army ready upon any occasion; be it
either by standing Troops, or a reformed and well disciplined Militia, which is
held more grateful to the People in general.

Philip de Comines tells us of his own knowledge, That the English, at their
first Arrival in France, were very raw, and ill disciplined Soldiers; but
within the space of two or three weeks, which they spent in moderate Exercise,
before the French could rally up a Force to engage them, they grew expert in
their Weapons, and became fit for the Field-Service: from whence he concludes,
That the English, of all People in the World, are the most prone to War, and
aptest to make good Soldiers. Our late Actions at home and abroad justify our
ligitimate Succession from such valiant Ancestors; nor is there any thing so
much wanting amongst us, as Encouragement to the truly generous Martial
Spirits. Charles the Fifth advises his Son to preserve his old Soldiers from
sloth by constant Exercise, and to train up the Youth of Spain under Leaders
who had Lands, Goods, and Relations, to secure their Loyalty to the Crown, if
they were naturally addicted to Arms; because sense of Honor, or shame of
Punishment, with the loss of Estate, must necessarily prevail more with such,
that can be expected from others who carry all their Interest in their Persons,
and have nothing to care for but their own safety. Also the privilege of
wearing a Martial Robe; the priority of place in some public Assemblies, or
the like, would much encourage Youth to Martial Discipline. Nor is this only a
Spanish Device, but 'twas the practice of the Romans, who had their several
Triumphs for their Victorious Generals, and also particular Rewards for their
private Soldiers. He who had first boarded an Enemies Ship, entered their Camp
or Garrison, slain one of their Captains in Combat, taken a Standard, etc. was
rewarded with a Silver Crown of form denoting his Exploit, with a Collar of
Gold, or the like; the wearing (...) which in their Theaters was prized (...)
to the possession of a Seignory without ^^ch an Honor. We read of a young man
^^ Scipio's Army, who had done gallant Exp^o^ts in a Battle under him, so that
he deserved such a Reward as aforesaid; Scipio judging of his mind, gave him a
good sum of Money, exhorting him to persevere in his Valor: but he with a sad
countenance laid down the Gold at Scipio's feet, demanding of him the
Honorable Ensign of Victory in lieu of the Gold, preferring Glory before Gain;
for which noble Act he was not only commended, but advanced by the General, as
most fit for Honor and Office, having a Spirit free from the sordid Vice of
Covetousness, which blasts the Fame of many a valiant Captain, and ruins many a
brave Army. It were to be wished that such Roman Spirits were now to be found
amongst us, and then it is probable the War might have proved more succesful:
but nowadays such true Valor gives place to Interest, and to an Officer of
Fortune, the dread of being disbanded makes a Victory more fatal to him than a
Foil; for who will beat his Enemy, that must feel a want when he has none to
appear against? What then more serviceable than a well disciplined Militia to
be employed upon all occasions, at Sea and Land? For the Officers (as men of
Estates) would be glad to win Honor with hazard of their Lives; and if they
should return with the loss of a Limb, would not put the King to the Charge of
a Pension: And for the Soldiers, when dismissed, may immediately fall to their
Trade, or to Husbandry, pleasing themselves to tell their Neighbors the Story
of their Adventures. Thus the large Armies of Horse, which support the Turkish
Empire, are maintained. Thus is Poland preserved from the power of the Turk:
and by this very way were our Kings anciently guarded, their Castles defended,
their Forces for Conquest, as well as Defense, mustered up ( viz. by Knights
Service) as our Histories and Law Books sufficiently demonstrate.

Of Captains General, Marshals, and other chief Commanders.
AN Army may be provided, a Navy rigged, manned, and equipped, but the chief
and most difficult task is to find a Generalissimo worthy of Command, one upon
whose Conduct the hope of the War depends; I mean not in the force of his
Person, but in his Knowledge in Military Affairs, in his Magnanimity, which
comprehends the four Cardinal Virtues, viz. Prudence, Justice, Temperance, and
Fortitude; in his Authority, and in his Disposition to engage the Affections of
his Soldiers, without which they will hardly be brought to do him Honor, nor
their King and Country good Service, as might be demonstrated by several
Examples, were it convenient.

It behooves a General, not only to Conduct his Army, but carefully to provide
for them Provisions as well as Ammunition, and to show himself prudent,
patient, cautious, and liberal unto them, endeavoring to gain by love what he
might command from them by power. And this made Homer to call Agamemnon a
Pastor of People, because he carefully looked after the safety of his Army.
Theodosius the Emperor did not command the meanest of his Soldiers to do any
thing, but that he himself would sometimes do. And Antonius did sometimes march
on foot, and carry in his Hand the general Ensign of the Army, which was very
ponderous, to show that his Soldiers should not refuse to undergo any Labor
that should be required from them.

Amongst the many good properties required in a General, nothing is more
commendable than Liberality; and on the contrary, Covetousness as much
detestable: for hard it is to attend the Affairs of War, and be overmuch in
love with Money. Yet that Commander, who with Honor and good Conscience can
attain to Wealth, is not to be disliked; for thereby he may upon an emergent
occasion supply the wants of a necessitated Army. And that General is most to
be esteemed, who (as a Soldier) knows how to offend his Enemy, to govern his
own Forces, patiently to suffer want, and to endure labor. heat, and cold: For
sometimes it is found, that he who has Authority to command, wants another
to command him, for want of true knowledge of those things that belong unto his
Office; for it is more difficult for a General or Commander to know what
belongs unto him, than to execute the Office of that place, seeing that Skill
must precede Action, and use go before Commandment.

It is expedient for all Princes and Commanders to be well read in Histories,
and principally those that concern the Actions of their Ancestors. And this (as
some believe) caused King Edward the Third (when he made War against Robert the
Second, King of Scots) to order a certain Monk to attend him in that
Expedition, to write down all the Actions of that Enterprise. Mahomet the
Second, Emperor of the Turks; endeavored much to know the Histories of his
Predecessors, and gave liberally unto one John Maria of Vincenza, to write the
Victories he obtained against Vssancassan King of Persia. Much more praise and
honor is due unto those Commanders, that by long Service, and due degrees of
War, have deserved the Titles appertaining unto Arms, and bear about them the
Scars and Marks of true Valor.

A General of Horse (according to Plato) ought to be made by the consent of the
whole Army. The Praefecti or great Commanders were elected by those Soldiers
that bare Targets: The Tribuni militum had their advancement by the voice of
Men at Arms; and other Captains or Commanders of a lower quality were chosen by
the chief General. And that Person that in Service was most painful, in Actions
most industrious, in Perils most resolute, in Counsel most provident, and in
Execution most quick, was by the Chieftains elected for their Emperor.

Leo the Emperor, in his Book entitled, The Preparation for War, speaking of
the Election of a General, says, That to know the generosity of a Horse, or a
Dog, we have regard to his proper Operations, rather than to the Dam or Sire
which begot him; even so the Nobleness of a Man ought to be considered by his
proper Valor and Virtue, and not by the Blood of those that brought him into
the World, neither of the Glory of his Ancestors, which oft-times degenerates.
I confess, to aim more at the Nobleness of the Blood than at the necessary
Virtues of the Person chosen, is a dangerous Error in time of Action, and
proved fatal to Phocas the Emperor, when he sent his Nephew Manicel against the
Sarazens, being a young Man of no Experience, yet stubborn in his Resolves;
who, contrary to the Vote of his Council of War, followed his Enemy till he was
drawn by them into certain Streights, and hemmed in, and the most part of his
Army slain. Fazelli lib. 6. Dec. 2. Hist. Sicili.

A Charge of so grand an Import ought therefore to be bestowed upon a worthy
Person, whose Virtues have been tried in times of trouble, one (if to be found)
whose conduct has been crowned with Success. The Commander, whose Helmet has
been usually canopied with the Plumes of Victory, will not quickly be forsaken
of his Soldiers in the uttermost Extremity; they still expecting the same
Fortune should attend him, as Julius Caesar oftentimes experienced: nor is it
an easy task to engage an Enemy against him upon equal terms.

An experienced, liberal, and tender affectionative General to his Soldiers is
then the Man: and the more Illustrious by Birth the better; Equality causing
Emulation, which some convert to envy, and that oftentimes ends in inveterate
Malice.

Never have we been more fortunate than in our Royal Armies when we have had a
King, or an Heir Apparent to the Crown, the Head thereof; witness our Victories
in Palestine and Cyprus under King Richard; our many victorious Henry's and
Edwards; the Battles of Cressey, Poictiers, and Agincourt; our grand Victory at
Sea in the Dutch War under the Conduct of his Royal Highness James Duke of
York. Nor are we at present destitute of Captains of the Blood Royal, which are
endowed with all Virtues and Princely Qualities requisite for so great Employ:
Let me but mention his Royal Highness the Duke of York, and all Christendom
will second me, to his eternal Fame; that neither Alexander, Caesar, nor any
other old Captains showed greater Courage or Skill, passed through greater
perils by Land or Sea than he has done; nor is there any Person in Europe that
can justly dispute for Glory with him, or whose Life has been so illustrious.
Let us but consider, How that at Twenty years of Age he had traced most part of
Christendom to encounter glorious Actions; that since he has been engaged in
all sorts of Combats, wherein he has been Conqueror: That he has appeared
magnanimous in Campaigns, Leguers, Battles, and Seiges by Land; in the most
furious and dreadful Sea fights, in which he has given life to some Enemies,
and taken it from others: His escaping such Hazards, and passing by Domestic
Broyls with a Princely Scorn, would half persuade a credulous person that he
had evaded the time of dying, and that for the World's general good it were
decreed, he should endure as long as the Sun and Moon to support the Grandeur
of the British Monarchy, in the Person of his Sacred Majesty King Charles the
Second, and his lawful Successors.

Next to his Royal Highness, we may justly commemorize his Highness Prince
Rupert, Duke of Bavaria, Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Cumberland, Earl
of Holderness, etc. who from his Birth was designed for Warlike Achievements:
for the calamities that followed that illustrious Family from Bohemia to the
Palatinate, forced the Queen and this Infant Prince into the Low Countries,
where he passed his tender Age in the practicing the knowledge of Military
Affairs; insomuch that at about the Age of Thirteen years he marched under the
command of the Prince of Orange to the Seige of Rhineberg, and proved so good a
Proficient in that rough Study, that at the Age of Eighteen he was thought fit
to command a Regiment of Horse in Germany. In the Battle of Lemgow, 1638. being
taken by the Imperalists under the Command of Count Hatzfield, he remained a
Prisoner above three years, till by the Mediation of his Uncle, the King of
Great Britain, he was set at Liberty: And in requital of which kindness,
hearing that England was in an uproar, he posted hither, and tendered his
Service to his Uncle, who in Anno 1642 graciously received him; and at a
Chapter held at ^ork, was made Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter.
'Twas then The Effiges of the Right Noble George, late Duke of ALBEMARLE. Earl
of Torrington Baron Moncke of Potheridge^ Beauchamp and Teys, Knight of the
Noble order of the Garter, Lord Leiutenant of Devonshire. Captain General of
all his Majestyes Land Forces. Joint Admiral with his Highness Prince Rupert
in the last Dutch Warr^ one of the Lords Comissioners of his Majestys Treasury^
one of the Gentlemen of his Bedchamber and-one of ye Lds. of his most Honble.
privy Council etca.
Edw. Le Davis sculp

a time of Action, and each party endeavored to gain a Reputation by their
Valor at the opening of the War; in which his Highness had the Fortune to rout
a party of the Rebels Horse near Worcester, commanded by one Colonel Sands. The
Prince being made General of his Majesty's Cavalry, he had Fieldroom enough to
exercise his Courage, and show his Conduct. Diverse Incounters, and some pitched
Fields are sought with various success, viz. at Edghill, the taking of
Cirencester, the raising of the Siege of Newark, Litchfield and Latham-house,
the taking of Bristol, and those bloody Battles at Newberry and Marstou-moor,
in all which he was a principal Actor, and in some the chief Commander. And as
an acknowledgment of his Majesty's Favors for these his many hazards and good
Services done, he was created Duke of Cumberland; and in Anno 1644. was made
Generalissimo of his Majesty's Forces in the room of General Ruthen: He
marches from Oxford with the King Northwards. In May 1645. takes Leicester by
storm; but hearing that Fairfax and Cromwell had beleaguered Oxford, he
returns, diverts their Design, and fights the fatal Battle of Naisby against
them: Is afterward besieged in Bristol by Fairfax, which he surrenders upon
Articles; and thence marches to Oxford, where he continued, till the King
despairing of any relief, quitted the Garrison, and went into Scotland. Oxford
being delivered up, the Prince takes the be^^fit of the Articles of Surrender
to transport himself into France: was afterward Admiral of such Ships as left
the Rebels to pay their Duty to their Sovereign Prince, in which he ran many
hazards, and escaped the perils of the Seas; but his Brother, Prince Maurice,
perished in a Hericane. At last he returns to Paris to the King, and from
thence goes into Germany, where he remained till his Majesty's most happy
Restoration, by whom he was affectionately invited and welcomed into England
in Anno 1662. and made a Privy Councellor. In the year 1666. was joined Admiral
with the Duke of Albemarle against the Dutch Fleet, and rescued him from the
danger that he and his Squadron were in, being assaulted by the Dutch's whole
Fleet, when ours was unhappily divided; but the Prince's seasonable Assistance
secured our Honor, and put the Enemy to a shameful flight. In the year 1673.
he went Admiral to Sea against the Dutch. These his Actions are remunerated by
a Pension of Four thousand pounds per Annum; and the Wardenship of Windsor
Castle. Thus you see the life of a Hero to be like a Voyage at Sea, composed of
Calms and Tempests, which unexpectedly succeed each other.

Thus in a Victor's Garland often we see,
Laurels with Cypress intermixed be.
But I could lose my self in the Admiration of these Objects, were I not again
surprised by the late Generous and Noble Exploits of the Heroic Prince, James
Duke o^ Monmouth, whose brave Spirit disdaining to be confined to the ease of a
Court life, contemning the soft pleasures of Peace, seeks out Dangers abroad,
makes Bellona his Mistress, de^ies death in his ascent to Honor, and thus
immortalizes his Name throughout Christendom by his Valor and Conduct at
Mastricht, in Anno 1673. To affect Glory in Youth is becoming a Royal Birth;
and to begin with Victory is a happy Omen of Future Success. In a long progress
of time a Coward may become a Conqueror: Some others from mean Adventures,
passing through gross Errors, grow to Experience, and in time perform great
Exploits: But as there are few Rivers Navigable from their first Fountain; so
are such Men doubtless very rare and singular, who have not any need either of
growth or years, nor are subject either to the Order of Times, or Rules of
Nature. Proceed brave Prince in the path you have so fairly traced out, and let
the World see your renowned Valor.

Of a lower Orb, we may justly boast of our English Fabius, General Monk, who
so wisely wearied out Lambert by his delays, and cajoled the rebellious Rump
Parliament. He was a Person of great Valor, Experience and Prudence, whose
Loyalty and Conduct has given him a never dying Fame to be celebrated by the
Pens and Tongues of all good Subjects, whilst the Name of Britain lasts. His
Exploits were truly great, his Success in his Conduct renowned with too many
Victories to be here inserted: Let it suffice to say he was bred a Soldier,
and after the many risks of Fortune got the Art to manage that fickle Lady so
well, that he triumphed over his Foes both in War and Peace, acted the part of
a good Politician, the trusty old Cushai, confounding the Counsel of
Achitophel, to preserve his Royal Master, and was the blessed Instrument of his
Majesty's most happy Restoration to his Crown and Dignity, and the Kingdom to
its pristine Laws and Liberties, securing to himself and Posterity that well
purchased Title of the most High, Potent, and Noble Prince George, Duke of
Albemarle, Earl of Torrington, Baron Monk of Potheridge, Beauchamp and Teys;
besides which Hereditary Titles, he was Knight of the Noble Order of the
Garter, one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and Captain General
of all his Majesty's Forces during life; an Honor and Office scarce ever
before entrusted in the hands of a Subject in times of Peace. He lived the
darling of his Country, dearly beloved of his Majesty, and all the Royal Stem,
and dreadful to our Foreign and Homebred Foes, but laden with Love, Honor,
and Years. He yielded up his Life to the Hands of him that gave it, and
departed in peace the Third Day of January, Anno Dom. 16 69/70. lamented by all
good Subjects.

-- Post funera Virtus.
We have many more that by Experience and Conquest are very well known to be
eminent Warriers, whose Noble Acts were enough to fill large Volumes, and whose
worthy Achievements will be recorded in the Histories of that Age for an
Encouragement to Posterity, the Effigies of some of which I have here lively
represented to your View.

The Effigies of ye. Right Honble: Charles Earl of CARLISLE Viscount Morpeth
Baron Dacres of Gillsland, Lord Leiutenant of Cumberland and Westmoreland Vice
Admiral of ye. Countyes of North^mberland Camberland Westmoreland ye
Bishopric of Durham. The Town and County of Newcastle and Maritin parts There
adjacent and one of his Matyes most Honble privy Council etca
Abra. Bl^thing sculp.



The Effiges of the Right Honble. William Earl of Craven, Viscount Craven of
Vffington, Baron Craven of Hampsted-Marshall, Lord Leiutenant of the County of
Middlesex, and Borough of Southwarke, and one of the Lords of his Majestys most
Honble. privy Council etca.


This Portraiture is in memory of Bertram Ashburnham of Ashburnham in Sussex,
who in the time of King Harold was Warden of the Cinqueports, Constable of
Dover and Sheriff of the said County. and being a person in so great power at
the Landing of William the Congueror, King Harold (who was then in the North)
sent him a Letter to raise all the force under his Command to withstand the
Invador. And when the King cam^ up to oppose y^ Conqueror, the said Bertram
(who had an eminent Command in the Battle) received so many wounds that soon
after he dyed thereof And since which time (through the mercy of god) the Said
family (in a direct male line) have ever since continued at Ashburnham
aforesaid, and are the present possessors thereof.
Edw: Le Davis Sculp.



THE SECOND PART; OR Honor Civil: AND Treats of the Nobility and Gentry,
according to the Laws and Customs of England.
CHAP. I.
Of Honor General and Particular.
HONOR is the Reward of Virtue, as Infamy the Recompense of Vice; and he that
desires to mount her footsteps (as naturally all men in some degree or other
are addicted unto) must arrive thereunto by the way of Virtue: which was
strictly observed by the Romans; for Dignities by Birth were not enough to
advance them thereunto, if they were not endowed with Heroic and Virtuous
Qualifications; and Honor should be a Testimony of their Excellency therein.
Some Learned Writers say, That Honor consists in exterior Signs; and
Aristotle calls it Maximum bonorum exteriorum: Others say it is a certain
Reverence in Testimony of Virtue. Honor is of greater esteem than Silver or
Gold, and ought to be prized above all Earthly Treasure. And for the
encouragement of Youth to virtuous Achievements, the Romans were no more slack
in their Rewards and Badges of Honor, than they were in their punishment of
Vice, which was most detestable unto them. And Marcus Tullius studying to
restrain the Vice of Youth, by Law ordained eight several punishments, which he
called Damnum, Vincula, Verbera, Talio, Ignominia, Exilium, Mors, Servitus.

The Ensigns of Honor, which the Romans used to be^tow in token of Dignity,
were Chains of Gold, gilt Spurs and Lances, but principally Crowns of
different forms; which at first were made of Bays in token of Mirth and
Victory, but afterward they were made of Gold.

The chief Crowns were Military, with which their Consuls and chief Commanders
in their Triumphs were crowned.

The next was by them called Corona Muralis, and was given to him that was
first seen upon the Wall of an Enemies Town; and this Crown was wrought with
certain Battlements like a Wall, and made of Gold.

Corona Castrensis, made of Gold with points like Towers; and this was given
for a Reward to him that could break the Wall of an Enemy, and enter the Town
or Castle.

Corona Navalis, made of Gold, garnished with Forecastles, and given to him
that first boarded an Enemies Ship.

Corona Oleaginea, made of Gold, given to them that repulsed an Enemy, or were
Victorious in the Olympian Games.

Corona Ovalis, made of Gold, given to them that entered a Town taken with
little Resistance, or yielded upon Composition.

Corona Obsidionalis, given to a General Leader that had saved his Army in
Distress; and this Crown was made of the Grass growing where the Army was
beseiged.

Corona Civica, made of Oaken Boughs, and was given to him that saved a Citizen
from the Enemy.

Corona Haederalis, which was given to Poets.

Corona Populea, which was given to young men that were industrious, and
inclined to Virtue.

Aristotle makes four kinds of Civil Nobility, viz. Divitiarum, Generis,
Virtutis, and Disciplinae.

Sir John Fern defines Civil Nobility to be an Excellency of Dignity and Fame,
placed in any Kingdom or People, through the Virtues there showed forth to the
profit of that Kingdom. Which made Diogenes to term Nobleness of Blood a Vail
of Lewdness, a Cloak of Sloth, and a Vizard of Cowardice.

Civil Nobility may be refined into a triple Division; first by Blood, secondly
by Merit, and thirdly by Blood and Merit; which last without doubt is the most
honorable, and of greatest esteem: For certainly the Honor gained lives in
his Family, and does perpetuate his Virtues to Posterity; whilst the glory that
those by descents of Blood shine in, is but the reflection of their Ancestors.
For all will judge the raiser of a Family more honorable than him that
succeeded him, not adding to that Honor by any Merit of his own. So that it is
the best honor the Son can do his deceased Father or Relation, to imitate his
Virtues.

If any person be advanced by lawful Commission of his Prince, to any Place,
Dignity, or public Administration, be it either Ecclesiastical, Military, or
Civil, so that the said Office comprehends in it Dignitatem, vel dignitatis
titulum, he ought to be received into the Degree of Gentility. And a Man may be
ennobled by Letters Patents from his Prince, though he have not the Superior
Titles added; and may have a Coat of Arms given him.

Of Gentry, and bearing of Arms.
NOah had three Sons who were saved with him in the Ark from the Deluge, viz.
Sem, Cham, and Iapheth; and between these three he divided the World. Sem, his
eldest Son he made Prince of Asia; Cham, his second, Prince of Africa; and
Iapheth, his third, Prince of Europe..

Of these three issued diverse Emperors and Rulers, whereof at this day we have
ten Degrees; of which Six are called Noble, as a Gentleman, Esquire, Knight,
Baronet, Baron, and Viscount: and four others are called excellent, as an Earl,
Marquis, Duke, and Prince.

There are Nine sundry Callings of Gentlemen.

1. The' first is a Gentleman of Ancestry, which must needs be a Gentleman of
Blood. 2. The second is a Gentleman of Blood, and not of Ancestry, as when he
is the second degree descended from the first. 3. The third is a Gentleman of
Coat Armor, and not of Blood, as when he wears the Kings Devise given him by
a Herald. If he have Issue to the third Descent, that Issue is a Gentleman of
Blood. 4. The fourth also is a Gentleman of Coat Armor, and not of Blood; as
when the King gives a Lordship to him and his heirs for ever; then he may by
virtue thereof bear the Coat of the Lord's making, the Herald approving
thereof: But if any of the Blood of that Lordship be yet remaining, he cannot
bear the same. 5. The fifth is a Christian man, that in the Service of God and
his Prince kills a Heathen Gentleman, he shall bear his Arms of what degree
soever (a Knight Banneret excepted) and use his Achievement without any
difference, saving only the word of the same miscreant Gentleman. If he also
have Issue to the fifth Degree, they are Gentiles of Blood. Note that no
Christian may bear another Christians Coat, nor a Pagan a Pagans Coat, on the
Condition abovesaid: But if an English man in the Field, when the Banner Royal
is displayed, do put to flight any Gentleman which is an Enemy to his Prince,
from his Banner of Arms the English Soldier may honor his own Coat in the
Sinister Quarter with the proper Coat of the Gentleman that he so put to flight.

Also in Challenge of Combat the Victor shall not bear the Coat of the
Vanquished: yet indeed the Vanquished shall lose his own Coat; But if he marry
a Gentlewoman of Coat Armor, by the Courtesy of England he may bear hers.

6. If the King do make a Yeoman a Knight, he is then a Gentleman of Blood. 7.
The Seventh is when a Yeoman's Son is advanced to Spiritual Dignity, he is then
a Gentleman, but not of Blood; but if he be a Doctor of the Civil Law, he is
then a Gentleman of Blood. 8. The Eighth is called a Gentleman untryal, as
brought up in an Abbey, and serving in good calling, and also is of kind to the
Abbots. 9. The Ninth is called a Gentleman Apocrifate, such a one as serving
the Prince as a Page, grows by diligence of Service to be Steward, or Clerk
of the Kitchen, and is without Badge of his own, except when the Prince by the
Herald endoweth him with some Conisance, etc.
Aristotle in his Politics recites four kinds of Nobility; that is, Nobleness
of Riches, Nobleness of Lineage, Nobleness of Virtue, and Nobleness of Science,
amongst which, those of Virtue and Lineage are of chief estimation, being such
from whence the others do proceed.

As some write, Nobility began to be advanced shortly after Noah's Flood: For
when possessions were given by the consent of the people (who had all things in
common, and were of equal degree) they gave them to such whom they admired for
their Virtues, and from whom they received a common benefit.

The Law of Arms, which is chiefly directed by the Civil Law, must needs be
very ancient; for field nor fight cannot be continued without the Law;
therefore it is to be presumed it began when Battles were first fought in the
World; and the bearing of Arms was come to some perfection at the Siege of
Troy; for Hector of Troy bore Sable, two Lions combattant, Or.

It is written by an ancient Author, called Gesta Trojanor^ that a Knight was
made before any Coat Armor; and how. Asterial, who came from the Line of
Iapheth, had a Son named Olibion, who was a strong and mighty man, and when the
people multiplied, being without a Governor, and were warred upon by the
people of Cham, they all cried upon Olibion to be their Governor; which
accepting of, and men being mustered under him, his Father made to his Son a
Garland of Nine diverse precious Stones, in token of Chivalry. Then Olibion
kneeled down, and his Father took Iapheth's Faulchion that Tubal made before
the Flood, and smote him nine times on the right shoulder, in token of the nine
Virtues of Chivalry. Also Asterial gave to his Son Olibion a Target made of an
Olive Tree, with three Corners, two above his Face, and one beneath to the
ground-ward.

Principles of Honor and Virtue that every Gentleman ought to be endowed with.
TO love, honor, and fear God, to walk after his Commandments, and to his
power defend and maintain the Christian Religion; To be loyal and serviceable
to his Prince and Country; To use Military Exercises; To frequent the War, and
to prefer Honor before worldly wealth; to be charitable to the distres^ed, and
to support Widows and Orphans; To reverence Magistrates, and those placed in
Authority; To cherish and encourage Truth, Virtue, and Honesty, and to eschew
Riot, Intemperance, Sloth, and all dishonest Recreations and Company; To be of
a courteous, gentle, and affable deportment to all men, and to detest pride and
haughtiness; To be of an open and liberal heart, delighting in Hospitality^
according to the Talent that God has blessed him with; To be true and just in
his word and dealing, and in all respects give no cause of Offense.

Of Precedence.
THe Degrees of Honor which are in this Kingdom observed, and according to
which they have precedence, may be comprehended under two Heads, viz. Nobiles
Majores, and Nobiles Minores. Those comprehended under Majores are Dukes of the
Royal Blood, Archbishops, Marqui^^es, Earls, Viscounts, Bishops, and Barons:
And those under Minores are Knights of the Garter (^f no otherwise dignified)
Knights Bannerets, Baronets, Knights of the Bath, Knights Batchelors, Esquires,
and Gentlemen. And all or most of these Degrees of Honor are speculatively
distinguished the one from the other in their Ensigns or Shields of Honor, as
shall be showed in the Chapter of each particular Degree.

Touching place of Precedence amonst the Peers, or those under the Name of
Nobiles Majores, it is to be observed, That all Nobles of each Degree take
place according to their Seniority of Creation, and not of years, unless they
are descended of the Blood Royal, and then they take place of all others of the
same Degree.

That after the King, the Princes of the Blood viz. the Sons, Grandsons,
Brothers, and Nephews of the King take place: Then these great Officers of the
Church and Crown are to precede all other of the Nobility, viz. the Archbishop
of Canterbury, the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, the
Archbishop of York, the Lord Treasurer of England, the Lord President of the
Privy Council, and the Lord Privy Seal. Next Dukes, Marquisses, Dukes eldest
Sons, Earls, Marquisses eldest Sons, Dukes younger Sons, Viscounts, Earls
eldest Sons, Marquisses younger Sons, Bishops, Barons, Viscounts eldest Sons,
Earls youngest Sons, Barons eldest Sons, Privy Counselors, Judges, and Masters
of the Chancery, Viscounts younger sons, Barons younger sons, Knights of the
Garter (if no otherwise dignified, which is seldom sound) Knights Bannerets,
Baronets, Knights of the Bath, Knights Batchelors, Colonels, Sergeants at Law,
Doctors, and Esquires, which may be comprehended under ^ive Heads: 1. Esquires
unto the King's Body; 2. The Descendants by the Male Line from a Peer of the
Realm; 3. The eldest sons of Baronets and Knights; 4. The two Esquires
attending upon Knights of the Bath at their making; And 5. Officiary Esquires,
as Justices of the Peace, Barresters at Law, Lieutenant Colonels, Majors, and
Captains; and lastly Gentlemen.

Note, That these great Officers of Court, of what Degree soever they are of,
take place above all others of the said Degree; viz. the Master of the Horse,
Lord Chamberlain of England, Lord High Cons^able of England, Lord Marshal of
England, Lord Admiral of England, Lord Steward, and Lord Chamberlain of his
Majesty's Household.

So the Secretaries of State, if Peers, take place of all of that Degree,
except these great Officers aforesaid.

Note, That the Ladies take place or precedence according to the Degree or
Quality of their Husbands.

Note, That in a Volume lately published by me, entitled Britannia, being a
Description of his Majesty's Dominions, in page 33. the precedence of the
Nobility and Gentry is treated of, wherein the Masters of the Chancery are
placed next after Sergeants at Law, which Error happened through wrong
Information, their right place being next after Judges, as is here set down.

Note, That it was decreed by King James, That the younger sons of Viscounts
and Barons should yield place to all Knights of the Garter, to all Bannerets
made under the Standard Royal, his Majesty being present, to all Privy
Counselors, Master of the Wards, Chancellor, and under Treasurer of the
Exchequer, Chancellor of the Duchy, Chief Justice of the King's Bench, Master
of the Rolls, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Chief Baron of the Exchequer,
and to all other Judges and Barons of the degree of the Coif, by reason of
their Honorable employ in his Majesty's Courts of Justice.

Note, That as there are some great Officers, as a^oresaid, that take place
above the Nobility of a higher Degree; so are there some persons, who for their
Dignities Ecclesiastic, Degrees in the Universities, and Of^icers in an Army,
although neither Knights nor Gentlemen born, take place amongs^ them: Thus all
Deans, Chancellors, Prebends, Doctors of Divinity, Law, and Physic, are
usually placed before most sorts of Esquires.

All Colonels are Honorable, and by the Law of Arms ought to precede simple
Knights; so are all Field Officers, Master of the Artillery, Quartermaster
General, etc.

All Batchelors of Divinity, Law, and Physic, all Masters of Arts, Barrestors
in the Inns of Court, Captains, and other Commissionate Officers in the Army,
or those by Patent-places in his Majesty's Household may equal (and some of them
precede) any Gentleman that has none of these qualifications. But how unjustly
these Privileges are possessed by some of these pretenders, and how contrary
this usage is to the Laws of Honor, see the Chapter of Gentlemen.

I think it here convenient to give you an Account of the Cavalcade of his
M^^^^ties passing through the City of London, ^^^^^e his Coronation, which was
on Monday the 22 th of April, 1661.

First the Duke of York's Horse Guard. Messengers of the Chambers in their
Coats, with the King's Arms before and behind. Esquires to the Knights of the
Bath, in number 140. Knight Harbinger and Sergeant Porter, Sewers of the
Chamber, Gentlemen Ushers, Quarter Waiters, in Cloaks. Clerks of the Chancery,
6. Clerks of the Signet, 4. Clerks of the Privy Seal, in Gowns. Clerks of the
Council, 4. in Cloaks. Clerks of the Parliament, 2. Clerks of the Crown, 2. in
Gowns. Chaplains having Dignities, 10. in Gowns and square Caps. The King's
Advocate, The King's Remembrancer, Masters of the Chancery, The King's Counsel
at Law, 2. in Gowns. The King's puisne Sergeants, 2. The King's Attorney, The
King's Solicitor, The King's eldest Sergeants, 2. in Gowns. Two Secretaries of
the French and Latin Tongue, in Gowns. Gentlemen Ushers, Daily Waiters, in
Cloaks. Sewers in Ordinary, in Cloaks. Carvers in Ordinary, in Cloaks.
Cup-bearers in Ordinary, in Cloaks. Esquires of the Body, 4. The Effigies of
the Right honble: Heneage Lord Finch, Baron of Daventry, Lord High Chancellor
of England, and one of ye Lords of the most honble. Privy Council, to King
Charles ye. second. Anno Dn^i: 1676.
The Effigies of ye Right honble: Anthony Earl of Shaftsbury, Baron Ashley, of
Wimbourne, St Giles, and Ld. Cooper of Pawlet; Ld. High Chancellor of England,
Ld. Leiutenant of the County of Dorset, and ^one of ye Lords of ye. most
honble. Privy Councell^ to King Charles y^. 2d. Anno Domini ^673.
Masters of standing Offices, Tents 1. in Cloaks. Masters of standing Offices,
Revels 1. in Cloaks. Masters of standing Offices, Ceremonies 1. in Cloaks.
Masters of standing Offices, Armory 1. in Cloaks. Masters of standing Offices,
Wardrobe 1. in Cloaks. Masters of standing Offices, Ordnance 1. in Cloaks.
Masters of the Requests, 4. Chamberlains of the Exchequer, 2. in Gowns.
Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber, in Cloaks. Knights of the Bath, 68. in long
Mantles, with Hats and Feathers. The Knight Marshal, in a rich Coat. Treasurer
of the Chamber, Master of the Jewel House, in Cloaks. Barons younger Sons.
Viscounts younger Sons. Barons of the Exchequer, 3. in Robes and Caps. Justices
of the King's Bench and Common Pleas, 6. in Robes, Caps, and Collars. Lord
Chief Baron of the Exchequer, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, in Robes,
Caps, and Collars. Master of the Rolls, in a Gown. Lord Chief Justice of the
King's Bench, in his Robe, Cap, and Collar. Knights of the Privy Council, in
Cloaks. Barons eldest Sons. Earls younger Sons. Viscounts eldest Sons. Kettle
Drums. The King's Trumpeters, in rich Coats. The Sergeant Trumpeter with his
Mace. Two Pursuevants at Arms, in their Coats of Arms. Barons 51. in Cloaks.
Marquisses younger sons. Earls eldest Sons. Two Pursuevants at Arms, in their
Coats of Arms. Viscounts 7. Dukes younger Sons. Marquisses eldest Sons. Two
Heralds in their Coats with Collars of SS. Earls 32. in Cloaks. Lord
Chamberlain of the King's Household, with his white Staff. Dukes eldest Sons.
Two Heralds in Coats with Collars of SS. Two Marquisses in Cloaks. Two Heralds
in Coats with Collars of SS. The Duke of Buckingham. Clarencieux, King at Arms,
in Coats with Collars of SS. Norroy, King at Arms, in Coats with Collars of SS.
The Lord Treasurer with his white Staff. The Lord Chancellor with the Purse.
The Lord High Steward with his white Staff. Two Persons, one representing the
Duke of Aquitain, and the other the Duke of Normandy, in broad Caps and Robes
of Ermyn. The Gentleman Usher with the black Rod on the right hand, bareheaded,
in a rich Cloak, Garter King of Arms, bareheaded, in his Coat and Collar of SS.
The Lord Mayor of London carrying the City Scepter on the left hand,
bareheaded. The Duke of York. Sergeants at Arms with their Maces, 8 on a side
from the Sword forwards, in rich Cloaks. The Lord Great Chamberlain on the
right hand. The Sword born by the Earl of Suffolk, Marshal pro tempore. The
Earl of Northumberland, Lord Constable of England pro tempore, on the left
hand. Gentlemen Pensioners with Pole-Axes. The King. Gentlemen Pensioners with
their Pole-Axes. Esquires. Footmen. The Master of the Horse leading a spare
Horse. The Vice Chamberlain. Captain of the Pensioners. Captain of the Guard.
The Lieutenant of the Pensioners. the King's Horse Guard. The Lord General's
Horse Guard.
As in Man's Body, for the preservation of the whole, diverse Functions and
Offices of Members are required; even so in all well governed Commonwealths, a
distinction of persons is necessary; and the policy of this Realm of England,
for the Government and Maintenance of the Commonwealth, has made a threefold
Division of persons; that is to say,

First the King, our Sovereign Monarch (under which Name also a Sovereign Queen
is comprised, as it is declared by the Statute made in the first of Queen Mary,
cap. 1. Parliam. 2.)

Secondly the Nobles, which comprehend the Prince, Dukes, Marquisses, Earls,
Viscounts, and Lords Spiritual and Temporal.

Thirdly the Commons, by which general word is understood Baronets, Knights,
Esquires, Gentlemen, Yeomen, Artificers, and Laborers.

It is observed, that our Law calls none Noble under the Degree of a Baron,
and not as men of Foreign Countries do use to speak, with whom every man of
Gentle Birth is counted Noble: For we daily see, that both Gentlemen and
Knights do serve in Parliament, as Members of the Commonalty. Neither do these
words the Nobles, the high and great men in the Realm, imply the Person and
Majesty of the King: but with the Civilians the King is reckoned among the
Nobility.

The Nobility are known by the general Name of Peers of the Realm, or Barons of
England; for Dukes, Marquisses, Earls, and Viscounts did anciently sit together
in the King's great Council of Parliament as Barons, and in right only of their
Baronies: And therefore by the general Name of Barons of the Realm, and for the
Baronage thereof, we under^^and the whole Body of the Nobility; the Parliament
Robes of the Dukes differing nothing from the Barons, but that they wear the
Guards upon their Shoulders three or four folds: For though Dukes, Marquisses,
Earls, and Viscounts in their Creations are attired with Ornaments of Silk and
Velvet; yet in Parliament they use the same that Barons do, made of Scarlet,
with diverse differences of white Fur set as Fringes or Edgings on their
Shoulders; and although they sit in right of their Baronies, yet they take
their places according to their degrees of Dignity.

And hence it is that those bloody Civil Wars concerning the Liberties granted
in the Great Charter, both in the time of King John, and Henry the Third, his
Son, prosecuted by all the Nobility (some few excepted) are called in our
Histories the Barons Wars. Neither have the Spiritual Lords any other Title to
that pre-eminence, but by their ancient Baronies: For although originally all
the possessions of Bishops, Abbots, and Priors, were given and holden in Frank
Almoign; most of their Tenures were altered, viz. Baronia, as appears in
Matthew Paris A. 1070. fol. 66. and of that Tenure have continued ever since,
as you may read by the Constitutions of Clarendon in the Reign of Henry the
Second, and in Glanvile and Bracton. But the Tenures of all Abbots and Priors
were extinguished by the uniting and coming of them to the Crown by the Statute
of Dissolution of Monasteries: For though the Nobility of England differ in
Titles and certain Ceremonies, yet a Baron enjoys the same privileges.

And by experience it is found, That Dukes and all other degrees of Nobility in
Cases Criminal are tried by Barons, together with Marquisses, Earls, and
Viscounts, as their Peers, and Peers of the Realm.

Nobilitas generally is of the word [ Nosco] signifying in common phrases of
speech, Men of Generosity of Blood and Degree; and therefore it is said, Vir
nobilis idem est quod notus, and per omnia or a vulgatus: But especially it is
applied and used to express the reward of Virtue in honorable measure,
Ageneris claritate, which being in part of distributive Justice, remains with
the highest Sovereign annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm.

For as Virtue is the gift of none but of God, so the reward thereof with
Honor cannot be the gift of any but the Supreme Governor, being God's
Vicegerent on Earth. But when Honor and Arms be bestowed upon any, if there
shall arise contention between Competitors for the same, the ancient policy of
this Realm has ordained a Special Court; the Judges whereof in all times
having been Right Honorable Personages, viz. the Lord High Constable and the
Earl Marshal; and in latter times the Judge thereof only the Earl Marshal. The
Jurisdiction of the Court consis^eth in the Execution of that part of
distributive Justice, which concerns the advancement and support of Virtue.

Nevertheless some men there are, not duly considering of what principle and
parts the Laws of this Realm do consist, have labored to prove that the
Questions and Controversies of Nobility and Arms should not be determined by
the Laws of the Realm, but by the Civil Law, framing to themselves many
Arguments to prove the same; but being of small value, I pass them over.

The Common Laws, as also the Laws of Charity used in the Marshals Court, do
prohibit any Subject of this Realm to receive Titles of Honor and Dignity by
gift or donation from a Foreign Prince, King, or Emperor; for it is a thing
greatly touching the Majesty of the King and State of his Kingdom, Est vis
Majestatis and inter insignia summae potestatis.

And if a man shall bring an Action, and in the Writ is styled by such a
Foreign Title, the Defendant may plead in Abatement of his Writ, That he is no
Duke, Marquis, Earl or Baron; whereupon if the Plaintiff, as demanded, take
Issue, the Issue shall not be tried by the Jury, but by the Records of
Parliament, wherein he fails.

And if any English man be created Earl of the Empire, or of any other Foreign
Nation, and the King also do create him into any Title of Honor in England, he
shall be named in all Judicial proceedings only by such Name and Title as he
has received from the King of this Realm, whose Subject he is. And if by the
King of England he be not advanced to Title of Honor, then he shall bear the
name only of his Baptism and Surname, unless he be a Knight. For experience
teaches that Kings joined in League together by certain mutual, and as it were
natural, power of Monarchies according to the Laws of Nations, have dismissed
one another Subjects and Ambassadors graced with the Dignity of Knighthood.

A Duke of Spain, or of another Foreign Nation, comes into England by the
King's safe Conduct, in which also the King does style him Duke, according to
his Creation; nevertheless in all proceedings in the King's Courts he shall not
be so styled by his Title of Dignity.

And although the said Noble person be also by the King's Letters Patents, and
by his Foreign Name and Title of Dignity made Denizon (for that is the right
Name so called, because his Legitimation is given to him): Or if he be
naturalized by Authority of Parliament, wherein he seems to be in all things
made as a Subject born, yet shall he not be styled by his Foreign Titles of
Dignity.

And so it is if a Nobleman of France, or elsewhere, come into England as
Ambassador, and by lawful Marriage has a Son, and the Father dies, the Son is
by Birth a Natural Englishman, yet he shall not bear the Title of Honor of his
Father; and the reason thereof is, because that Title of Nobility had its
Original by a French King, and not by any natural Operation: which thing is
well proved both by Authority of Law and Experience in these days.

If a Postna^us of Scotland or Ireland (who in these days is a Natural Subject
to the King of England) or if any of his Posterity be the Heirs of a Nobleman
of Scotland or Ireland, yet he is none of the Nobility of England: But if that
Alien or Stranger born a Scot, be summoned by the King's Writ to Parliament,
and therein is styled by his Foreign or other Title, whereunto he is invested
within England by the King's Grant; then, and from thenceforth he is a Peer of
this Realm; and in all Judicial and Legal Proceedings he ought to be so styled,
and by no other Name. And it was the Case of Gilbert Humfrevile Earl of Angus
in Scotland: of it appertains to the Royal Prerogative of the King, to call
and admit an Alien born to have place and voice in his Parliament at his
pleasure; although it is put in practice very rarely, and that for great and
weighty Considerations of State. And if after such Parliamentary Summons of
such a Stranger born question do arise, and the Issue be, whether he is of that
Title or no? it may well be tried by the Record, which is the only lawful trial
in that Case.

But there is a Diversity worthy of Observation, for the highest and lowest
Degrees are universal; and therefore a Knight (Engglish or Stranger born) is a
Knight in all Nations, in what place soever he received his Title and Dignity,
and so ought of right, and by Law, to be named in the King's Courts as
aforesaid.

Also if the Emperor, the King of Denmark, or other Foreign King, come into
this Realm by safe conduct (as he ought; for a Monarch or absolute Prince,
though he be in League, cannot come without the King's License and safe
Conduct; but any Subject to such a Foreign King in League, may come without
License.) In this Case he shall sue and be sued by the Name of Emperor or King,
or else the Writ shall abate.

There is a notable President cited out of Fleta, where treating of the
Jurisdiction of the King's Court of Marshalsea, it is said, And these things he
might lawfully do by Office; that is to say, The Steward of the King's
Household, notwithstanding the Liberty of any other, although in another
Kingdom, when the Offender may be found in the King's Household: according to
that which happened at Paris in the Fourteenth year of Edward the First, when
Engelram of Nogeut was taken in the Household of the King of England (the King
himself being then at Paris) with silver Dishes lately stolen; at which deed the
King of France did claim Cognizance of the Plea concerning that. Theft by
Jurisdiction of that Court of Paris. The matter being diversely debated in the
Council of the King of France, at length it was Ordered, That the King of
England should use and enjoy that Kingly Prerogative of his Household, who being
Convicted by Robert Fitz-Iohn Knight, Steward of the King's Household, of the
Theft, by consideration of the said Court, was hanged on the Gallows in St.
Germans Field.

And here by the way may be noted from those recited Books alleged, That the
person of the King in another King's Dominions is not absolutely privileged,
but that he may be impleaded for Debt or Trespass, or condemned for Treason
committed with in the said Dominions: For it is the general Law of Nations,
that in what place an Offense is committed, according to the Law of the said
place they may be judged, without regard to any privilege. Neither can a King
in any other Kingdom challenge any such Prerogative of Immunity from Laws: For
a King out of his proper Kingdom has not merum Imperium, but only does retain
Honoris titulos and dignitatis; so that where he has offended in his own
Person against the King in whose Nation he is, per omnia distringitur, etiam
quoad personam. And the same Law is of Ambassadors, ne occasio daretur
delinquendi. That Ambassadors are called Legates, because they are chosen as fit
men out of many; and their Persons be sacred both at home and abroad, so that
no man may injuriously lay violent hands upon them, without breach of the Law
of Nations, and much less upon the person of a King in a strange Land.

Bracton, a Judge of this Realm in the Reign of King Henry the Third, in his
first Book, and eighth Case, says, There is no respect of Persons with God;
but with men there is a difference of Persons; viz. the King, and under him
Dukes, Counts, Barons, Lords, Vavasors, and Knights. Counts, so called, because
they take the Name from the County, or from the word Sociati, who also may be
termed Consules of Counselling; for Kings do associate such men unto them to
govern the People of God, ordaining into great Honors, Power, and Name, where
they do gird them with Swords, that is to say, Ringis gladorium. Upon this
cause were the Stations and Encampings of Arms, called by the Romans Castra, of
the word Castrare, since they ought to be Castrata vel Casta. In this place
ought a good General to foresee that Venus Delights be (as it were) gelded and
cut off from the Army. So Sir John Fern's Book, entitled The Glory of
Generosity; Ring, so called quasi renes girans and circundans, for that they
compass the Reins of such, that they may keep them from Incest of Luxury;
because the Luxurious and Incestuous persons are abominable unto God. The Sword
also does signify the Defense of King and Country.

And thus much in general of the Nobility of England. Now follows a more
particular Discourse of each particular Degree; and first of his Majesty, the
Fountain from whence all these Rivulets and swelling Streams of Honor's Spring.

The most high and mighty Monarch CHARLES the second by the Grace of God King
of Great Britaine^ France, and Ireland^ Defender of the faith etca.
The Effiges of the most high and mighty Monarch CHARLES the second by the
Grace of God King of Great Britain; France, and Ireland; De^ender of the
faith. etc^^


OF THE KING, OR MONARCH OF Great Britain. CHAP. II.
MONARCHY is as ancient as Man, Adam being created Sovereign Lord of the
Universe, whose Office was to govern the whole World and all Creatures therein.
His Posterity (after his Death) dividing into Tribes and Generations,
acknowledged no other Dominion than Paternity and Eldership. The Fathers of
Nations were instead of Kings, and the Eldest Sons in every Family were
reverenced as Princes, from whence came the word Seignior amongst the Italians
and French, and Seignories for Lordship and Dominion; of which Seneca makes two
kinds, viz. Potestas aut Imperium, power to command, and Proprietas aut
Dominium, Property or Dominion.

These Empires in the Golden Age were founded upon natural Reverency and Piety;
their Power was executed with the soft Weapons of paternal persuasions, and the
greatest penalties that they inflicted upon the most Capital Criminals was the
malediction of their Primogenitors, with an Excommunication out of the Tribes:
But as Men and Vice began to increase, Pride and evil Examples overshadowed
Filial Obedience, and Violence entered upon the Stage of the World, the mighty
Men tru^ling in their own strength, oppressed the Feeble, and were at length
forced to truckle under the tyranny of others more Gygantick than themselves,
which necessitated them to submit to Government for self-preservation, many
households conjoyning made a Village, many Villages a City, and these Cities and
Citizens confederating established Laws by consent, which in tract of time were
called Commonwealths; some being governed by Kings, some by Magistrates, and
some so unfortunate as to fall under the yoke of a popular Rule, Nam Plebs est
pessimus Tyrannus.

The first Chiefs or Kings were men of Virtue, elected for their Wisdom and
Courage, being both Reges and Duces, to govern according to their Laws in
Peace, and to lead them forth to Battle against their Enemies in time of
Hostility. And this Rule proving more safe for the people, honorable amongst
men, and ^^rm in it self than the other, most Nations followed it, approving
the Sentence of Tacitus, Pr^stat sub Principo ^alo esse quam nulle. Lamentable
Experience, the Mistress of Fools in some, and of Wisdom in others, in the Ages
sequent necessitated them again to quit the ^orm of Election, and to entail the
Sovereign Power in the Hereditary Loins of their Kings, to prevent the fatal
consequence of Ambition amongst equal pretenders in popular Elections.

Thus the beginning of an Empire is ascribed to reason and necessity; ^ut 'twas
God himself that illuminated the minds of men, and let them see they could not
subsist without a Supreme in their human affairs. Necessitas ^st firmum
judicium and immutabilis providentiae potestas.

This Island of Great Britain, when Barbarism was so happy as to submit to a
Regal Power (as Caesar in his Commentaries witnesses) then divided into many
Kingdoms; under which Government of Kings (with some small alterations,
according to the necessity of times and pleasure of Conquerors) it has
flourished, descending from the British, Saxon, Danish, Norman, and Scotch
Kings, to our gracious Sovereign Charles the Second, into whose Veins all those
several streams of Royal Blood are conjoined to unite those jarring Nations
into one Body, under a Head, unto which each one may justly claim an interest.

God has thus restored our ancient Government, and seated our Sovereign in the
Throne of his Ancestors, giving him a power just and absolute, as well to
preserve as curb his people, being not only Major singulis, but Major
universis; and his power is super totam Rempublicam, which I thus prove, Either
the whole power of the Commonwealth is in one, or not; if not, then he is no
absolute King or Monarch; but if he be (as all must yield) a Monarch, I ask if
there be a power in the Commonwealth which is not in him? Is it subordinate to
his power, or not? If subordinate, than his power is above that power, and so
super totam Rempublicam and Major universis; if it be not, then there are a
simul and semel to Supreme Civil Powers in the same individual Kingdom and
Gubernation, and yet divided against it self, which is most absurd and
impossible. This in Answer to a monstrous Pamphlet, which the lasciviousness of
our late unhappy Wars produced, which asserted Rex minor universis. But the
Divine Providence has (I hope) put a period to all such Traiterous Tenants,
and concluded such Disputes by Acts of Parliament; so that no person for the
future shall dare to question who has the right of making Peace or War, the
power of Militia by Land and Sea, all strong Holds and Forts, etc. being the
inherent right of the English Monarchs by their Prerogative Royal.

The King is God's Vicegerent, and ought to be obeyed accordingly: If good, he
is a blessing; if bad, a judgment: and then against whom we are to use no other
weapons but prayers and tears for his amendment. He is styled Pater Patriae,
and Caput Re^publicae; and because the protection of his Subjects belongs to
his care and office; the Militia is annexed to his Crown, that the Sword as well
as the Scepter, may be in his hand. The Parliament (then all Roman Catholics)
in the behalf of Henry the Eighth writ to the Pope, declaring that his Royal
Majesty is the Head, and the very Soul of us all; his Cause is the Cause of us
all, derived from the Head upon the Members; his Griefs and Injuries are ours,
we all suffer equally with him. Camden in his Britannia, fol. 100. calls the
King the most excellent part of the Commonwealth, next unto God. He is under no
Vassuage; he takes his Investure from no man. Rex non habet Superiorem, nisi
Deum: satis habet ad poenam, quod Deum expectat ultorem.

In England, France, Spain, etc. Kings are styled Dei Gratia, etc. and as the
French King is said to be Rex Francorum Christianissimus, the most Christian
King of France; The King of Spain the most Catholic; The Emperor the Defender
of the Church: So the Kings of England, by a Bull from Pope Leo the Tenth, sent
to King Henry the Eighth (for a Book of Controversy written by him against
Luther) have the Title of Defenders of the Faith; and by Act of Parliament he
is declared Supreme Head of the Church of England.

It is the manner also for Kings to write in the plural Number (which is God's
own style) Mandamus, Volumus, etc. and in the Scripture we find them called
Gods, in which sense they may be styled Divi, or Dii, quia Dei Vicarii, and Dei
voce judicant.

Our Lawyers also say, Rex est persona mixta cum Sacerdote, habet
Ecclesiasticam and Spiritualem Iurisdictionem. This shows the King's power in
Ecclesiastical Causes, being anointed with Oil as the Priests, and afterward
the Kings of Israel were; which signifies his person to be both Sacred and
Spiritual. And therefore at the Coronation has put upon him a Priest's
Garment, called the Dalmatica, or Colobium, and other such Vests. And before
the Reformation, the King, as a Spiritual person, received the Sacrament in
both kinds. He is capable of holding Tithes; all Extra-Parochial Tithes, some
Proxies, and other Spiritual profits belong to the King.

The Ceremonies at the Coronation of the King are many, and with us in England
more than in many other Countries; As the Anointing with Oil, which is proved
by Mr. Seldom to be of above one thousand years standing; the Crown set upon
his Head with many Religious Ceremonies: besides the Ensigns of Regality, which
are a Ring to signi^ie his Fait^fulnes; a Bracelet for Good Works; a Scepter
for Justice; a Sword for Vengeance; Purple Robes to attract Reverence; and a
Diadem triumphant to blazon his Glory.

It was the saying of Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury, Inunguntur Reges
in Capi^e, etiam pect^re and brach^is, quod significat gloriam, sanctitatem and
for^^n^ in^^n. King's are Anointed on the Head to signi^^e their Glory, on the
Breast to Emblematize their Sanctity, and on their Arms to declare their power.

He is crowned with an Imperial Crown, the Crown set on his Head by the
Archbishop of Canterbury; a prerogative belonging to that See, as it is in
Spain to Toledo, in France to Rheims, and in Sueden to Vpsalia.

But this Imperial Crown has not been long in use amongst us (though our Kings
have had Imperial Commands, as over Scotland, Ireland, Man, and other Isles)
being in a manner like that of an Earls now. Neither is it found that any such
thing as a Diadem was at all in use, until the tune of Constantine the Great:
For before the distinction was some kind of Chaplet, or rather a white silk
Fillet about the Head, which was an ordinary way to distinguish them. And we
read that Alexander the Great took off his white Diadem to cure the madness of
Seleucus.

The first King that was crowned with this Imperial Crown floried and arched,
was Henry the Third, but some say Henry the First, and indeed it is left in
dispute. However, it is very probable and plain, That the ancientest Ensign of
Regal Authority was the Scepter, which is every where spoken of, both in
Scripture and Profane History.

There is another Ensign of their Authority, which is a Globe or Mound with a
Cross, which has been in use amongst us ever since Edward the Confessor's
time, which is placed in the left hand, as is seen in most of their Coyns: The
Cross denoting his Faith, the Globe his Empire by Sea and Land; as it is said of
Justinian the Emperor, who was the first that ever used it.

The Office of the King of England, according to Fortescue, Pugnare bella
populi sui and eos rectissime judicare, to fight the Battles of his people, and
to see Right and Justice done unto them: or more particularly (as is promised
at the Coronation) to preserve the Rights and Privileges of Holy Church, the
Royal Prerogatives belonging to the Crown, the Laws and Customs of the Realm,
to do Justice, show Mercy, keep Peace and Unity, etc.

The King is enabled to perform this great and weighty Office by certain
extraordinary powers and privileges which he holds by the Law of Nations, by
the Common Law of England, or by Statutes. The Regalia were anciently called
Sacra Sacrorum (as his Lands are called in Law Patrimoni^^ S^c^^^) now commonly
Royal Preroga^ives.

The King being Principium, Cap^^, and ^inis Parli^menti, may of his mere will
and pleasure Convoke, Adjourn, Remove, and Dissolve Parliaments: He may, to any
Bill that is passed by both Houses of Parliament, refuse to give his Royal
Assent, without rendering a Reason; and without his Assent a Bill is as a ^ody
without a Soul: He may at his pleasure increase the number of the Members of
both Houses, by creating more Peers of the Realm, and bes^owing privileges
upon any other Towns to send Burgelles by Writ to Parliament: and he may refuse
to send his Writ to some others that have sat in former Parliaments. He has
alone the choice and nomination of all Commanders and Officers for Land and
Sea-service; the choice and election of all Magistrates, Counselors, and
Officers of State; of all Bishops, and other Ecclesiastic Dignities; also the
bestowing and conferring of Honors, and the power of determining Rewards and
Punishments.

By Letters Patent his Majesty may erect new Counties, Universities,
Bishoprics, Cities, Boroughs, Colleges, Hospitals, Schools, Fairs, Markets,
Courts of Judicature, Forests, Chases, Free Warrens, etc.

The King by his Prerogative has power to enfranchise an Alien, and make him a
Denison, whereby he is enabled to purchase Lands and Houses, and to bear
Offices. He has the power to grant Letters of Mart or Reprisal; to grant safe
Conducts, etc. He has at all times had the right of Purveyance or Preemption
of all sorts of Victuals within the Verge, viz. Twelve miles round of the
Court; and to take Horses, Carts, Ships, or Boats, for the Carriage of his
Goods, at reasonable rates. Also by Proclamation to set reasonable rates and
prices upon Flesh, Fish, Fowl, Oats, Hay, etc. sold within the limits of the
Verge of the Court in the time of his Progress.

Debts due to the King are in the first place to be satisfied in case of
Executorship and Administratorship; and until the King's Debts be satisfied, he
may protect the Debtor from the Arrest of other Creditors. He may dis^rein for
the whole Rent upon one Tenant that holds not the whole Land: He may require
the Ancestors Debt of the Heir, though not especially bound: He is not obliged
to demand his Rent according to the Custom of Landlords: He may distrein where
he pleases, and sue in any of his Courts.

No Proclamation can be made but by the King. No protection for a Defendant to
obstruct the course of the Law against him, if he be not one of his Majesty's
Menial Servants.

In case of loss by Fire, or otherwise, his Majesty grants Patents to receive
the Charitable Benevolences of the people.

No Forest, Chase, or Park to be made, nor Castle, Fort, or Tower to be built
without his Majesty's especial License.

Where the King has granted a Fair, with Toll to be paid, yet his Goods shall
be there exempted from the said Duties of Toll.

His Servants in Ordinary are privileged from serving in any Offices that
require their Attendance; as Sheriff, Constable, Churchwarden, or the like.

All Receivers of Money for the King, or Accomptants to him for any of his
Revenues, their Persons, Lands, Goods, Heirs, Executors, and Administrators,
are at all times chargeable for the same: for Nullum tempus occurrit Regi.

His Debtor has a kind of Prerogative Remedy by a Quo minus in the Exchequer
against all other Debtors, or against whom they have any cause of personal
Action; supposing that he is thereby disabled to pay the King: and in this Suit
the King's Debtor being Plaintiff, has some privileges above others.

In doubtful Cases semper praesumitur pro Rege, no Statute restrains the
King, except he be especially named therein. The quality of his Person alters
the descent of Gavelkind, the Rules of joint Tenancy: No Estoppel can bind him,
nor Judgment final in a Writ of Right. Judgments entered against the King's
Title, are entered with Salvo Iure Domini Regis. That if at any time the King's
Counsel at Law can make out his Title better, that Jugment shall not prejudice
him, which is not permitted the Subject.

The King by his Prerogative may demand reasonable Ayd-money of his Subjects
for the Knighting his Eldest Son at the Age of Fifteen years, and to marry his
eldest Daughter at the Age of Seven years; which Aid is 20 s. for every Knights
Fee, and as much for every 20 l. per annum in Soccage. Moreover, if the King be
taken prisoner, Ayd-money is to be paid by the Subjects for his Redemption.

The King upon reasonable Causes him thereunto moving, may protect any of his
Subjects from Suits of Law, etc.

In all Cases where the King is party, his Officers with an Arrest by force of
a Process at Law, may enter and (if any entrance be denied) may break open the
House of any man by force.

A Benefice, or Spiritual Living, is not full against the King by Institution
only, without Induction, although it be so against a Subject.

None but the King can hold Plea of false Judgments in the Courts of his
Tenants.

The King by his Prerogative is Summus Regui Custos, and has the Custody of
the Persons and Estates of such, as for want of understanding cannot govern
themselves, or serve the King; that of Idiots to his own use, and that of
Lunaticks to the use of the next Heir: So the Custody or Wardships of all such
Infants, whose Ancestors held their Lands by Tenure in Capite, or Knights
Service, were ever since the Conquest in the King, to the great honor and
benefit of the King and Kingdom: But abuses, which too often happened, made the
people complain thereof, which was the cause of its laying aside.

His Majesty is Vl^imus Haeres Regni, and is (as the great Ocean is of small
Rivers) the Receptacle of all Estates for want of Heirs, or by Forfeiture,
Revert or Escheat to the King. All Spiritual Benefices, for want of
presentation in due time by the Bishop, are elapsed to the King. All Treasure
Trove (that is Money, or Gold and Silver plate, or Bullion found, and the
owners unknown) belongs to the King: So does all Waifs, Strays, Wrecks, not
granted away by him, or any former Kings. All waste Ground or Land recovered
from the Sea: All Lands of Aliens dying before Naturalization or Denization,
and all other things whereof the property is not known: All Gold and Silver
Mines, in whose Ground soever they are found: Royal Fish, as Whales, Sturgeons,
Dolphins, etc. Royal Fowl, as Swans not marked, and swimming at Liberty on the
River, belong to the King.

In the Church the King's prerogative and power is extraordinary great: He only
has the patronage of all Bishoprics; none can be chosen but by his Conge
d'Es^ire, whom he has first nominated; none can be consecrated Bishop, or take
possession of the Revenues of the Bishopric, without the King's special Writ
or Assent. He is Guardian or Nursing Father of the Church, which our Kings of
England did so reckon amongst their principal Cares; as in the Three and
twentieth year of King Edward the First, it was alleged in a pleading, and
allowed; The King has power to call a National or Provincial Synod; and with
the advice and consent thereof to make Canons, Orders, Ordinances and
Cons^itutions to introduce into the Church what Ceremonies he shall think sit;
to re^orm and correct all Heresies, Schisms, and p^nish Contempts, etc,

The King has power not only to unite, consolidate, separate, enlarge, or
contract the limits of any old Bishopric, or other Ecclesiastical Benefice:
But also by his Letters Patents may erect new Bishoprics, as Henry the Eighth
did Six at one time, and the late King Charles the Martyr intended to do at St.
Albans for the Honor of the first Martyr of England, and for the contracting
the too large extent of the Bishopric of Lincoln.

In the 28. of Eliz. when the House of Commons would have passed Bills touching
Bishops, granting Faculties, conferring Holy Orders, Ecclesiastical Censures,
the Oath Ex Officio, Non-Residency, etc. The Queen being much incensed, forbade
them to meddle in any Ecclesiastical Affairs, for that it belonged to her
prerogative.

His Majesty has also power of Coynage of Money, of pardoning all Criminals,
of dispensing with all Statutes made by him, or his Predecessors, which are
Malum prohibitum, and not Malum in se. The diversity between these terms is set
down in the Statute made Term. Mich. Anno 11 H. 7. 11. Thus where the Statute
does prohibit a man to coin Money, if he do, he shall be hanged; this is Malum
prohibitum: for before the said Statute it was lawful, but not after; and for
this Evil the King may dispense: But Malum in se neither the King nor any other
can dispense with. As if the King would give leave to rob on the Highways,
etc. this is void; yet after the Fact done, the King may pardon it. So it is in
Ecclesiastical Laws for conformity to the Liturgy, etc. which are Malum
prohibitum; and the King may by his Prerogative Royal as well dispense with all
those penal Statutes, as with Merchants to transport Silver, Wool, and other
prohibited Commodities by Act of Parliament.

The King cannot divest himself or his Successors of any part of his Royal
Power, Prerogative, and Authority inherent and annexed to the Crown; nor bar his
Heir of the Succession, no not by Act of Parliament; for such an Act is void by
Law.

These Prerogatives do of right belong to the Crown of England, which I have
collected out of the most Authentic Modern Authors. And to complete this
Chapter I shall proceed to his Superiority and Precedence.

The King of England acknowledges no Superior but God alone; not the Emperor,
Omnem potestatem Rex Angliae in Regno suo quam Imperator vendicat in Imperio;
yet he gives Precedence to the Emperor, Eo quod antiquitate Imperium omnia
regna superare creditur.

Touching our King's Supremacy before any other, these Reasons are offered;
First, Lucius, King of this Land, was the first Christian King in the World; as
also Constantine our Countryman the first Emperor that publicly planted
Christianity. Secondly, The King of England is anointed as no other King is,
but France, Sicily, and Jerusalem. Thirdly, He is crowned, which honor the
Kings of Spain, Portugal, Navarr, and diverse other Princes have not.

The honor of Precedence amongst Christian Kings is often disputed by their
Ambassadors and Commissioners representative at General Councils, Diets,
public Treaties, and other Honorable Assemblies at Coronations,
Congratulations in Foreign Countries, etc. which by the best Information I can
get is thus stated; As to England, next to the Imperial Ministers, the French
take place, as being the largest Realm in Christendom, and most Noble, since
Charles le main, their King, obtained the Imperial Diadem; the second place in
the Western Empire was undisputably the right of our English Kings, so enjoyed
for hundreds of years, 'till Spain grown rich and proud by the addition of the
Indies, claimed the priority, yet could not gain it till their Charles the
Fifth was Elected Emperor; but after his Resignation, the Controversy renewed
upon the Treaty of Peace between Queen Elizabeth and Philip the Third, King of
Spain at ^oloign in France, Anno 1600. Our Ambassadors were Sir Henry Nevil,
John Harbert, and Thomas Edmonds, Esquires; and for Spain, Balthazer de Coniga,
Ferdinando Carillo, Io. Ricardett, and Lewis Varreyken. The English challenged
precedence as due to them before the Emperor Charles his time, as does appear
by Volatteram in the time of our Henry the Seventh, when the like difference
being in question, 'twas jointly referred to the Pope, who adjudged to England
the most Honorable place: But the Spaniards refusing to stand to that old
Award, or to admit of an equality, the Treaty of Peace broke up; neither has
any certain Resolution been hitherto taken in the matter, as ever I heard of.

OF THE PRINCE. CHAP. III.
THE King's Eldest Son and Heir apparent, from the Day of his Birth, is
entitled Prince, of the Latin word, quasi Principalis post Regem.

The first that we read of in England was Edward, eldest Son to King Henry the
Third, since which time the eldest Son of the King has been by Patent and
other Ceremonies created Prince of Wales, and Earl of Chester and Flint. By
Patent also Edward the Third, in the Eleventh year of his Reign, added the
Dukedom of Cornwall to the Principality of Wales; and Anno Regni 36. he makes
his eldest Son Edward the Black Prince, Prince of Aquitain, for which he did
Fealty and Homage at Westminster, Sed tamen Principatum Walliae, Ducatum
Cornubiae, Comitatum Cestriae and Cantii non reliquit. Walsing. fol. 172.

Since the Union of England and Scotland, his Title has been Magnae Britanniae
Princeps, but ordinarily Prince of Wales. As eldest Son to the King of
Scotland, he is Duke of Rothsay, and Seneschal of Scotland from his Birth: And
so long as Normandy remained in the possession of the English, he had always
the style of Duke of Normandy.

At his Creation he is presented before the King in Princely Robes, who puts
a Coronet upon his Head, a Ring on his middle Finger, a Verge of Gold in his
Hand, and his Letters Patents after they are rea^.

His Mantle, which he wears in ^arliament, is once more doubled upon the
sho^^^^rs than a Dukes, his Cap of State indente^ and his Coronet, formerly of
Crosses and Flower de lis, mixed. But since the happy Restoration of his
Majesty it was solemnly ordered, that the Son and Heir apparent to the Crown of
England shall bear his Coronet of Crosses and Flower de lis with one Arch, and
in the midst a Ball and Cross, as has the Royal Diadem. That his Royal
Highness the Duke of York, and all the immediate Sons and Brothers of the Kings
of England, shall use and bear their Coronets, composed of Crosses and Flower
de lis only: But all their Sons respectively, having the Title of Dukes, shall
bear and use their Coronets composed of Leaves only, as the Coronets of Dukes
not being of the Royal Blood.

Note, That by Order, not Creation, our present King was admitted Prince of
Wales, had the Principality with the Earldom of Chester, etc. confirmed to him
by Patent, and was allowed to hold his Court apart from the Kings.

The Prince by the Common Law is reputed as the same Person with the King, and
so declared by Statute temp. Hen. 8. The Civilians say, the King's eldest Son,
during his Fathers life, may be styled King by the Law of Nations, because of
his so near Relation to the Crown, that if the Father die he is ipso momento
Rex, though he be not crowned. A usual custom in Spain, and once allowed here
to Henry, Son of King Henry the Second; yet he holds his Seigniories and
Principalities of the King, as Subject to him, and gives the same respect to
him as other Subjects do.

He has certain privileges above other persons: To him it was permitted by
the Statute 24 Hen. 8. cap. 13. to wear Silk of the color of Purple, and cloth
of Gold, of Tissue in his Apparel, or upon his Horse. And by the Statute 24 Ed.
3. ca. 2. Takings shall not be from henceforth made by others than the
Purveyors of the King, of the Queen, and of the Prince their eldest Son: And
that if any man's Purveyor make such takings, it shall be done of them as of
those that do without Warrant, and the Deed adjudged as a thing done against
the Peace and the Law of the Land; and such as do not in manner aforesaid,
shall be duly punished.

To eschew Maintenance, and nourish Peace and Amity in all parts of the Realm,
many Statutes have been made in the Reign of King Henry the Fourth, prohibiting
the giving of Signs or Liveries to any but Menials; nevertheless by the Statute
2 Hen. 4. cap. 21. it is provided that the Prince may give his honorable
Liveries or Sign to the Lords, or to his Menial Gentlemen; and that the same
Lords may wear the same as if they were the King's Liveries; and that the
Menials of the Prince may also wear the same as the King's Menials. But
afterward by occasion of diverse other Statutes made by sundry Kings, for the
suppressing o^ that enormity of Maintenance, and of the general word in them,
that privilege of the Prince was abridged, or rather taken away, therefore the
Statute 12 Ed. 4. cap. 4. was made.

By the Statute 21 H. 8. cap. 13. the Prince may retain as many Chaplains as he
pleases, although all other of the Nobility (except those of the Blood Royal)
are constrained to a certain number; and they, or any of them, may purchase
License and Dispensation, and take and retain two Parsonages or Benefices with
Cure of Souls.

By the Order of the Common Law, the King may Levy a reasonable Aid of all his
Tenants, as well of those that did hold their Lands of him by Knights Service,
as in Soccage, pur fair fitz Chevalier, and pur File marrier, and the sum of
Money was not in certainty.

Note that the Aid is not to be recovered before the Son be of the Age of
Fifteen years, and the Daughter accomplish the Age of Seven years: Fitz. Nature.
B. 28.6. But in the King's pleasure, till by the Statute in the 25 Ed. 3. cap.
11. it was Enacted, That for the Knighting his eldest Son, and marrying his
eldest Daughter as aforesaid, the Aid following shall be demanded and levied,
viz. of every Knight so holden of the King (without mean) 20 s. and no more;
and of every 20. l. of Land holden of the King (without mean) in Soccage, 20 s.
and no more. And so after this rate for the Lands in Soccage; and for Land in
Tenure of Chivalry, according to the quantity of the Fee.

By another Statute made in the said 25 th of Edward the Third, cap. 2. amongst
other things it is declared, That to compass or imagine the death of the King's
eldest Son and Heir, is Crimen laesae Majestatis; or if a man do violate the
Wife of the King's eldest Son and Heir, it is High Treason. And so the Statute
26 Hen. 8. cap. 13. does declate. And so was the ancient Common Law of this
Realm, and not a new Law made by the Statute, Coke 8. part 28. b. but this
Statute is a Manifestation and Application of the ancient Common Law in this
Case.

Because the people were in ambiguity, Whether Children born in parts beyond
the Sea, and out of the King's Dominions, should be able to demand any
Inheritance within his said Dominions, or not; It was declared at a Parliament
holden at Westminster in the Seventeenth of King James, for the removing of
those doubts, That les Enfants du Roy, the Children of the Kings of England, in
whatsoever parts they are born in, are able, and ought to bear the Inheritance
after the death of their Ancestors.

Read the Statute in Coke's Seventh Part, 8. a. where you shall see, that
though generally the Birthplace is observed, yet many times Legiance and
Obedience without any place in the King's Dominions, may make a Subject born:
For we see by Experience almost in every Parliament, that Ambassadors,
Merchants, and the King's Soldiers do sue therein, in such Cases, to have
their Children Naturalized, or made Denisons. And in the Articles confirmed by
Parliament touching the Marriage between Philip King of Spain and Queen Mary,
Anno primo Parliamenti 2. cap. 2. a special Proviso was to bar him from being
Tenant by the Courtesy of the Crown, in case he should have Issue by her, and
survive; which was superfluous, because the Common Law would have denied it.
For this last point see the Lord Chancellor's Speech in the Case Postnati, f.
36.

But note, If an Alien Enemy come into this Realm, and his Wife, English or
Stanger, be here delivered of a Child, this Child notwithstanding his
Birthplace, is an Alien born, for want of Allegiance in the Parents, ibid.

King Henry the Third did create Edward his eldest Son the first Prine of
Wales, and did give unto him the Dominion and Dignity thereof, to be holden of
him and his Heirs, Kings of England: And after that time the eldest Sons of the
Kings of England have been Princes of Wales; and as incident to the State and
Dignity of a Prince, did and might make Laws and Statutes, and use Jurisdiction
and Authority, as amply as any King of that Nation could do; for Wales was a
Kingdom in ancient time: but by a Statute made the Twelfth of Edward the First,
Wales was incorporated and united to England, and became part thereof.

Also by another Statute made 27 Hen. 8. c. 24. a general resumption of many
Liberties and Franchises heretofore granted, or taken from the Crown, as the
Authority to pardon Treasons, Murder, Manslaughter, and Felony; also power to
make Justices in Oyer, Justices of Assize, Justices of the Peace, Goal
deliveries, and such like; so that from thenceforth the King's eldest Son has
only the Name and Style of Prince of Wales, but no other Jurisdiction than at
the King's pleasure is permitted and granted him by his Letters Patents; as by
the tenor thereof here following made by King Henry the Eighth to Edward his
Son and Heir apparent, may appear.

HENRY by the Grace of God, King of England and of France, Lord of Ireland, etc.
To all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Justices,
Viscounts, Governors, Ministers, and to all our Bailiffs and faithful Subjects,
Greeting.
Out of the Excellency of Royal Pre-eminence, like leaves from the Sun, so do
inferior humors proceed; neither does the integrity of Royal Luster and
Brightness, by the natural disposition of the Light affording Light, feel any
loss or detriment by such borrowed Lights; yea, the Royal Scepter is also much
the more extolled, and the Royal Throne exalted, by how much the more
Nobleness, Preheminencies and Honors are under the power and command thereof.
And this worthy Consideration allureth and induces us, with desire to increase
the Name and Honor of our Firstbegotten and best Beloved Son Edward, in whom
we behold and see our self to be honored, and our Royal House also, and our
people subject to us; hoping by the grace of God, by conjecture taken of his
gracious future proceedings to be the more honorably strengthened, that we may
with honor prevent, and with abundant grace prosecute him, who in reputation
of us is deemed the same with us. Wherefore by the counsel and consent of the
Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons of our Kingdom, being in our
present Parliament, We have made and created, and by these Presents do make and
create him the said Edward, Prince of Wales, and Earl of Chester: And unto the
same Edward do give and grant, and by this Charter have confirmed the Name,
Style, Title, State, Dignity, and Honor of the said Principality and Connty,
that he may therein in Governing Rule, and in Ruling direct and defend; we say
by a Garland upon his Head, by a Ring of Gold upon his Finger, and a Verge of
Gold, have according to the manner invested him, to have and to hold, to him
and his Heirs, the Kings of England for ever. Wherefore we will and command for
us and our Heirs, that Edward our Son aforesaid shall have the Name, Style,
Title, State, Dignity, and Honor of the Principality of Wales, and of the
County of Chester aforesaid, unto him and his Heirs, the Kings of England for
ever: These being Witnesses, the Reverend Father John, Cardinal and Archbishop
of Canterbury, Primate of England, our Chancellor, and William Archbishop of
York, Primate of England, Thomas Bishop of London, John Bishop of Lincoln,
William Bishop of Norwich, our most well beloved Cosins Richard Earl of
Warwick, Richard Earl of Salisbury, John Earl of Wiltshire, and our well
beloved and faithful Ralph Cromwell Chamberlain of our House, William
Falconbridge and John Stourton, Knights.

Dated at our Palace at Westminster the 15th day of March, and in the year of
our Reign 32.

And here by the way may be observed, That in ancient time, and in the time of
the English-Saxon Kings, the use was as well in pennings of the Acts of
Parliament, as of the King's Letters Patents, when any Lands, Franchises, or
Hereditaments did pass from the King of any Estate of Inheritance; as also in
the Creations of any man unto Honor and Dignity, the Conclusion was with the
sign of the Cross in form aforesaid, his testibus, etc. But long since that
form has been discontinued; so that at this day, and many years past, the
King's Patents for Lands, Franchises, and Hereditaments do conclude with Test
me ipso. Nevertheless in all Creations of Honor and Dignity of Letters
Patents, the ancient form of concluding His testibus is used at this day.

And it has been resolved by the Judges of all Acts of Parliament and Statutes
which do concern the Prince, who is the Firstbegotten Son of the King, and Heir
apparent to the Crown for the time being, perpetuis futuris temporibus, be such
Acts whereof the Judges and all the Realm must take Cognizance, as of General
Statutes: For every Subject has interest in the King, and none of his Subjects
(who are within his Laws) be divided from him, being he is Head and Sovereign;
so that the business and things of the King do concern all the Realm, and
namely when it does concern the Prince, the Firstbegotten Son of the King, and
Heir apparent to the Crown.

Although the Prince by express words has no privilege by the Great Charter
of the Forest^, 9 Hen. 3. cap. 11. for hunting in the King's Forests or Parks,
passing by them, and sent for by the King's Command; yet the Prince is to take
the benefit and advantage thereby, as well as the Earls, Bishops, or Barons,
who are expressed. Crompton's Courts des Justices de Forest, 167.

In the Parliament 31 Hen. 8. cap. 10. an Act concerning the placing of King's
Children and Lords in the Parliament, and other Assemblies, was amongst other
things made, as follows; That no person or persons, of what degree, estate,
or condition soever his or they be of (except only the King's Children) shall
at any time hereafter attempt to sit, or have place on any side of the Cloth of
Estate in the Parliament Chamber, whether his Majesty be there personally
present, or absent. The Prince shall not find Pledges for the prosecution of
any Action, and therefore shall not be amerced no more than the King or Queen
should be.

The Prince is a distinct person from the King; he is a Subject, and holds
his Principalities and Seigniories of the King, and subject to the Law of the
Land as a Subject.

And in token of the Prince's subjection, he does not upon his Posie in his
Arms disdain the old Saxon words [ Ich Dieu] I serve.

And there is a Case, that Glascoine Chief Justice of England, in the time of
Henry the Fourth, did commit the Prince, who would have taken a Prisoner from
their Bar in the King's Bench: And the Prince did humbly submit himself, and go
at his Command. And this did much rejoice the King, to see that he had a Judge
so bold to administer Justice upon his Son; and that he had a Son so gracious
as to obey his Laws.

The Exercises befitting Princes, whilst they are young, are Chivalry, and
Feats of Arms, and to adjoyn therewith the knowledge of the Law and God: For it
is the Duty and Office of a King to fight the Battles of his people, and
rightly to judge them, 1 Kings 8. And the Prophet David says, Be ye learned,
you that judge the Earth. Whereto if they also would endeavor to have
knowledge in the Principles and Grounds of the Laws of their own Country, which
they in due time inherit, they shall be much the more enabled to govern their
Subjects; and it is a point of Wisdom in such to acknowledge, that Rex datur
propter Regnum, and non Regnum propter Regem: And to move the Princes to these
things, there is an excellent Book, Dialogue-wise, between a Prince (a King's
Son of this Realm) and Sir John Fortescue a Judge, entitled De laudibus Legum
Angliae.

Many that have been Heirs apparent to the Crown of England, ever since the
Norman Conquest, have been taken away either by their natural deaths, or by
violence, during the life of their Ancestors, so that they have not attained to
the Crown.

William, the only Son of Henry the First, was drowned in his passage from
Normandy, his Father reigning.

Eustace, King Stephen's only Son, died mad, to the great grief of the King his
Father.

William, the eldest Son of King Henry the Second, died in the Fourth year of
his Age, and in the Third year of his Fathers Reign.

King Henry the Second's Son, called Curt-Mantel, was in his Father's life time
crowned King, by the Name of King Henry the younger, but died in the life time
of his Father.

Geffrey, the fourth Son of the said King, died during the Reign of Richard
Coeur de Leon, his third Brother, which King Richard had no Son, and so Geffrey
was Heir apparent to the Crown.

King Edward the First had Issue John, Henry, and Alphons, but all three died
in their Childhood in their Father's life.

Edward the Black Prince (of famous memory) eldest Son to King Edward the
Third, died before his Father.

Richard the Third had Issue only one Son. named Edward, who died without Issue.

Arthur, the eldest Son and Heir apparent to King Henry the Seventh, died in
the life time of his Father.

Henry Prince of Wales, eldest Son to King James, also left the World before
his Father.

These Examples may serve as a Mirror for all succeeding Princes and others, to
see how transitory the Glory of this World is; whereof the saying of the
Princely Prophet David may never be out of remembrance, Psalm. 82. I have said
ye are Gods, and ye are all the Children of the most High; but ye shall die
like men, and ye Princes like others.

Also diverse other Heirs apparent, and those that have been in possession of
their Crowns, have been defeated by Usurpers: And namely Robert Duke of
Normandy, eldest Son to William the Conqueror, was defeated of his Birthright
by his two younger Brethren, William Rufus and Henry, successively one after
another; and after Six and twenty years Imprisonment, having both his Eyes put
out, died in the Reign of his Brother Henry.

Maud, the sole Daughter of the said King Henry, was defeated of her
Birthright to the Crown by Stephen, the Son of her Fathers Sister.

Arthur, the only Son and Heir of Geffrey, the fourth Son to Henry the Second,
was next Heir to the Crown after the death of his Uncle Richard, the first King
of that Name, who died without Issue (his Father being dead before) but his
Uncle John, Son to the said Henry the Second, defeated him not only of his
right to the Kingdom, but also of his Life, and that by starving him.

King Edward the Second was deposed by his eldest Son, who in the life time of
his Father took upon him to be the King of England.

Richard, the only Son to Edward the black Prince, and next Heir to the Crown
after the death of his Grandfather King Edward the Third, was defeated both of
his Crown and Life by Henry of Lancaster, Son to John of Gaunt, who was but the
fourth Son of King Edward the Third; yea, although Lionel, the third Son of the
said King Edward, had Issue Philip his only Daughter, who by consequence was
next to the Crown before the Issue of John of Gaunt; which Philip was married
to Edward Mortimer Earl of March, from whom the House of York, by the name of
Edward the Fourth, are lineally descended: For William of Hatfield, second Son
to King Edward the Third, died young without Issue.

King Henry the Sixth, having but one Son, named Edward, he was slain in the
life time of his Father, and the King himself deposed by Edward the Fourth, and
murdered in the Tower: So the Act of Parliament made between them for an
indented Peace, exemplified in our Books of Law.

Edward and Richard, the two only Sons to Edward the Fourth, after the descent
of the Crown, and before the Coronation of Prince Edward, were both of them
murdered in the Tower by their Uncle, Richard Duke of Gloucester, who thereupon
took upon him the Crown, although there were remaining alive diverse Daughters
of the late King Edward the Fourth. During these troublesome and tragical
times, each of the Kings prevailing attainted the other their Adversary of High
Treason by Act of Parliament, intending utterly to disable them, and make them
to be incapable by the Law of the Crown. And it is a matter worthy of
Observation, how the Hand of God did not forget to pursue Revenge in these
Cases; for William Rufus died without Issue; Henry his Brother had a Son and
one Daughter, but his Son died an Infant, and his only Daughter Maud was
defeated of her Birthright by Stephen. King John, who defeated Arthur his
Nephew of his Birthright and Life, lived in continual Wars, never enjoyed
Peace, but was driven to submit himself, and subject his Kingdom to the Pope.
In his time Normandy, which King William the First brought with him, and which
in five Descents continued in actual Obedience of the Kings of England, was in
the sixth year of his Reign lost, until King Henry the Fifth recovered it
again, and left it to King Henry the Sixth, who again lost it in the Eight and
twentieth year of his Reign, as does appear both in our Chronicles, and in our
Books of Law.

Concerning the violence done to King Henry the Second, albeit Edward his Son
enjoyed a long and prosperous Reign; yet his Successor, King Richard, was in
the like violent manner imprisoned, deprived, and put to death.

King Henry the Fourth, by whom King Richard was deposed, did exercise the
chiefest Acts of his Reign in executing those, who conspired with him against
King Richard: His Son had his Virtue well seconded by Felicity, during whose
Reign, by the means of Wars in France, the humor against him was otherwise
employed: But his next Successor, King Henry the Sixth, was in the very like
manner deprived, and together with his young Son Edward, imprisoned and put to
death by King Edward the Fourth. This Eward died not without suspicion of
poison; and after his death, his two Sons were likewise disinherited,
imprisoned, and murdered by their cruel Uncle, the Duke of Gloucester, who
being both a Tyrant and Usurper, was justly encountered by King Henry the
Seventh in the Field: So infallible is the Law of Justice in revenging
Cruelties and Injuries, not always observing the present time wherein they are
done; but often calling them into reckoning, when the Offenders retain least
memory of them.

But as the saying is, Ex malis moribus bonae leges oriuntur; so their Tragical
and Miserable Combustions have occasioned, that the Law has established more
certain Resolutions in all these cases and pretenses against the right Heir to
the Crown than before. For first, though a common Opinion was conceived, that a
Conqueror might freely dispose of the Succession of that Estate, which he had
obtained by the purchase of his Sword (which was the Title pretended for
William Rufus) yet now in our Books this difference is taken for Law, viz.
between the Conquest of a Kingdom from a Christian King, and the Conquest of a
Kingdom from an Infidel: For if a King come to a Christian Kingdom by Conquest,
seeing he has Vitae and necis potestatem, he may at his pleasure alter and
change the Laws of that Kingdom; but until he does make an alteration thereof,
the ancient Laws do stand; and therefore the case of Rufus, the ancient Law of
this Realm being, That the eldest Son should inherit, and that a King in
possession cannot devise the same by his last Will, or by other Act; therefore
the said William Rufus was no other than a Usurper. But if a Christian King
should Conquer a Kingdom from an Infidel, and being then under his subjection,
there ipso facto the Laws of the Infidels are abrogated; for that they be not
only against Christianity, but against the Law of God and Nature, mentioned in
the Decalogue: and in that case, until certain Laws be established amongst
them, the King by himself, and such Judges as he shall appoint, shall judge
them and their causes according to natural Equity, in such sort as Kings in
ancient times did within their Kingdoms, before any certain municipal Laws were
given. And if a King have a Kingdom by Title of Descent there, seeing by the
Laws of that Kingdom he does inherit the Kingdom, he cannot change those Laws
of himself, without consent of Parliament. Also if a King have a Christian
Kingdom by Conquest, as King Henry the Second had Ireland, after that King John
had given unto them (being under his Obedience and Subjection) the Laws of
England for the Government of that Country, no succeeding King could alter the
same without Parliament.

In Succession of Kings a question has been, Whether the King, who has had
Sons both before and after he came to the Crown, which of them should succeed,
he that was born before, as having the prerogative of his Birthright; or he
that was born after? And for each Reasons and Examples have not been wanting.
For Xerxes, the Son of Darius, King of Persia, being the eldest Son after the
enthroning his Father, carried away the Empire from his Brother Arthemones or
Artobazanes, who was born before his Father came to the Royal Possession
thereof. So Arceses, the Son of another Darius, born in the time of his Fathers
Empire, carried away the Garland from his Brother Cyrus, born before his Father
came to the Empire. So Lewis, Duke of Millain, born after his Father was Duke,
was preferred to the Dukedom before his Brother Galiasius, born before the
Dukedom. But notwithstanding these Examples, and the Opinion of sundry Doctors
to the contrary, common use of Succession in these latter days has been to the
contrary, and that not without good reason; for that it is not meet that any
that has right to any Succession by the prerogative of their Birthright (such
as all elder Brothers have) should be put by the same. And this was the
pretense of Henry the First against Robert his eldest Brother.

Also sundry Contentions have risen in Kingdoms between the Issue of the eldest
Son of the King dying before his Father, and the second Brother surviving, who
should Reign after the death of the Father; the Nephew challenging the same
unto him by the Title of his Fathers Birthright, and by way of Representation,
Cok. part 3. cap. 4. the other claiming as eldest Son to his Father at the time
of his death: Upon which Title, in old time, there grew a Controversy between
Arcus the Son of Arrotatus, eldest Son of Cleomenes King of Lacedemonia, and
Cleomenes second Son of Cleomenes, Uncle to the said Arcus: But upon debate of
the matter, the Senate gave their Sentence for Arcus against Cleomenes.
Besides, Enominus King of Lacedemon having two Sons, Polydectes and Licurgius,
Poyldectes dying without Children, Licurgius succeeded in the Kingdom; but
after he had understood that Polydectes Widow had a Child, he yielded the Crown
to him; wherein he dealt far more religiously, than either did King John, or
King Richard the Third: For King John, upon the like pretense, not only put by
Arthur Plantaginet, his eldest Brother's Son, from the Succession of the
Kingdom; but also most unnaturally took away his life And King Richard the
Third, to come to the Crown, did most barbarously, not only slay his two
innocent Nephews, but also defamed his Mother in publishing to the World, that
the late King his Brother was a Bastard.

Our Stories do obscurely note, that Controversy of like matter had like to
have grown between King Richard the Second, and John of Gaunt his Uncle; and
that he had procured the Counsel fo sundry great Learned Men to this purpose:
but that he found the hearts of diverse Noblemen of this Kingdom, and especially
the Citizens of London to be against him; whereupon he desisted from his
intended purpose, and acknowledged his Nephews Right. And the reason of the
Common Law of England is notable in this point, and may be collected out of the
ancient Authors of the same; Glanvile lib. 7. cap. 1. Bracton lib. 7. c. 30.
and by Brittan, fol. 119. For they say, Whosoever is Heir to another, aut est
haeres jure proprietatis, as the eldest Son shall inherit only before his
Brothers; aut jure representationis: as where the eldest Son dies in the life
of his Father, his Issue shall inherit before the youngest Son; for though the
youngest sit magis propinquus, yet jure representationis the Issue of the
eldest Son shall inherit, for that he does represent the person of his Father;
And as Bracton says, jus proprietatis, which his Father had by his Birthright,
does descend unto him: aut jure propinquitatis, ut propinqui jus excludit
remotum, and remotus remotiorem: aut jure sanguinis. And yet Glanvile, Lord
Chief Justice under King Henry the Second, seems to make this questionable
here in England, Who should be preferred, the Uncle or the Nephew. Also it has
been resolved for Law, That the possession of the Crown purges all defects,
Hen. 1. fol. 3. and so does Vlpian the Civilian determine. And this is one of
the three Reasons alleged, wherefore by the policy of our Law the King is a
Body Politic, thereby to avoid the attainder of him that had right to the
Crown, Coke's seventh part, 12. a. lest in the interim there should be an
interregnum, which the Law will not suffer, because of the manifold
Encumbrances thereof: For it has been clearly resolved by all the Judges of
the Land, That presently, by the descent of the Crown, the next Heir is
completely and absolutely King, without any essential Ceremony or Act to be
done, ex postfacto; And that Coronation is but a Royal Ornament and outward
Solemnization of the Descent. And this appears evidently by abundance of
Presidents and Book-Cases. Let us take one or two Examples in a Case so clear
for all: King Henry the Sixth was not crowned till the Eighth year of his
Reign, and yet diverse men before his Coronation were attainted of Treason,
Felony, and the like Crimes; and he was as absolute and complete a King for
matters of Judicature, Grants, etc. before his Coronation, as he was after.

Queen Mary reigned three months before she was crowned, in which space the
Duke of Northumberland and others were condemned and executed for Treason which
they had committed before she was Queen.

And upon this reason there is a Maxim in the Common Law, Rex nunquam moritur,
in respect of his ever living and never dying politic capacity. In France
also the same Custom has been observed; and for more assurance it was
expressly enacted under Charles the Fifth, That after the death of any King, his
eldest Son should immediately succeed; for which cause the Parliament Court of
Paris does accompany the Funeral Obsequies of those that have been their Kings,
not in mourning attire, but in Scarlet, the true Ensign of the never dying
Majesty of the Crown: Nevertheless certain Cities in France, not long since,
alleged for themselves, that because they had not reputed Henry the Fourth for
their King, and professed Allegiance unto him, they were not to be adjudged
Rebels; Whereupon the chief Lawyers of our Age did resolve, That forasmuch as
they were original Subjects, even Subjects by Birth, they were Rebels in
bearing Arms against their King, although they had never professed Allegiance
unto him.

To conclude this Chapter, I shall give you a View of the Ceremonies of the
Creation of Henry Prince of Wales, which began on the Thirtieth of May, 1610.
as follows; The Prince accompanied with diverse young Noblemen, together with
his own Servants, rode from his Court at St. James's to Richmond, where he
reposed that night; on the next day the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, with the several
Companies in their Barges attended his Highness about Barn Elmes, where he was
entertained with a Banquet, and in other places with Speeches by a Neptune upon
a Dolphin, and a Sea Goddess upon a Whale, etc. His Highness landing at
Whitehall, was received by the Officers of his Majesty's Household, according to
order, viz. by the Knight Marshal and the Sergeant Porter; In the Hall by the
Treasurer and Comptroller of the Household; in the great Chamber by the Captain
of the Guard, and in the presence Chamber by the Lord Chamberlain; from whence
he went into the Privy Chamber, where the King and Queen met him; the Saturday
after was taken up with the usual Ceremonies of making Knights of the Bath to
attend his Highness at his Creation, which were Five and twenty in number.

Upon Monday following these Knights of the Bath met in the Queens Closet,
where they put on long Purple Satin Robes, lined with white Taffata, and a
Hood like a Bachelor of Law about their Necks; and in a Barge prepared for
them went before the Prince to Westminster Palace, where his Highness landed,
and proceeded to his Creation thus: First the Heralds. Next the Knights of the
Bath. Then the Lords that were employed in several Services. Garter King at
Arms, bearing the Letters Patents. The Earl of Sussex the Robes of Purple
Velvet. The Earl of Huntington the Train. The Earl of Cumberland the Sword. The
Earl of Rutland the Ring. The Earl of Derby the Rod. The Earl of Shrewsbury the
Cap and Coronet. The Earl of Nottingham and Privy Seal supported his Highness,
being in his Surcoat only, and bareheaded, to the Parliament Chamber.


The King was already set with all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in their
Robes of State, all the Knights and Burgesses of the lower House present; as
also the Foreign Ambassadors, the great Ladies of the Realm, and the Lord Mayor
and Aldermen of London seated upon Scaffolds. The Procession entering in manner
aforesaid, made three several low Reverencies to his Majesty; and when they
came to the Throne, Garter King at Arms kissed the Letters Patents, and gave them
to the Lord Chamberlain, who presented them to the King, who delivered them to
the Earl of Salisbury, Principal Secretary of State, who read them, the Prince
kneeling all the while before the King; and at the words accustomed, the King
put on the Robe, the Sword, the Cap and Coronet, the Rod, and the Ring. The
Patent being read, the King kissed him on the Cheek, and the Earl Marshal, with
the Lord Chamberlain, placed him in his Parliament Seat, viz. on the left hand
of the King; which Ceremony being ended, they returned to the Palace Bridge in
manner as follows.

First the Masters of the Chancery, the King's Council and others; then the
Officers of Arms, the Knights of the Bath; next twenty Trumpets before them;
then the Judges; and after them all the Members of Parliament in order, the
Barons, Viscounts, Earls, and Marquisses having Coronets on their Heads; then
Norroy and Clarenceaux King at Arms going next before the Lord Treasurer and
the Lord Chancellor; then Garter next before the Sword; and then the Prince and
King. They took Barge at the Palace Stairs, and landed at Whitehall Bridge,
where the Officers at Arms, the Members of Parliament, and the Lords being
first landed, attended the King and Prince, and went before into the Hall, and
so into his Majesty's Presence Chamber, whence the Prince descended again into
the Hall to Dinner, himself seated at the upper end of a Table, accompanied
with the Lords that attended him at his Creation, who sat on both sides of the
Table with him. At another Table on the left hand sat the Knights of the Bath
in their Robes along one side, attended by the King's Servants. At the second
Course, Garter with the Heralds came to the Prince's Table, and after due
reverence, proclaimed the King's Style with three Largesses, viz. King of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. And then
proclaimed the Prince's Titles, viz. Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall and
Rothsay, Earl of Rothsay, Earl of Chester, and Knight of the Garter, with two
Largesses: Then with Feasting, Masks, and all sort of Courtly Gallantry, that
joyful Creation of the Prince ended.

Although at present we have no Prince of Wales, yet I shall give you the Badge
or Armorial Ensign of Honor appropriate unto them, which is as it is here
depincted.

The word Ich Dieu signifies I serve. The Coronet is born, by reason that the
valiant black Prince at the Battle of Cressy won the Crown from John King of
Bohemia, whom he there slew, and took the Crown from his Head.

OF DUKES. CHAP. IV.
THE Title and Degree of a Duke has been of ancienter standing in the Empire,
and other Countries, than amongst us; for the first English Duke was Edward the
black Prince, created Duke of Cornwall by his Father King Edward the Third; by
which Creation, according to the Tenure of his Patent, the Firstborn Sons of
the Kings of England are Dukes of Cornwall: Nor is there any Creation required
for the said Honor, although there is for Prince of Wales. A Duke is said to
be so called a Ducendo, from leading; being at the first always a Leader of an
Army Imperial or Regal, and was so chosen in the Field, either by casting of
Lots, or by common Voice; and the Saxons called this Leader an Hertzog: but
now, and for some time past, it is a Dignity given by Kings and Princes to men
of great Blood and excellent Merit. In some Countries, at this day, the
Sovereign Princes are called Dukes; as the Duke of Savoy, Duke of Muscovy, Duke
of Saxony, Duke of Florence, and the like.

All Noblemen at their Creation have two Ensigns, to signify two Duties, viz.
their Heads are adorned ad consulendum Regem and Patriam in tempore pacis, and
they are girt with Swords, ad defendendum Dominum Regem, and Patriam in tempore
belli. The Chapeau or Head-attire (says Chassanaeus) Dukes were accustomed to
wear in token of Excellency, it is of a Scarlet Color, lined or doubled Ermin.
And now Marquisses, Earls, and Viscounts plead Custom for the use thereof, as
also for Coronets; which his Majesty King Charles the Second has also granted
Barons to wear, but with due difference, as is also in their Robes, which may
appear by the Portraiture of the said Degrees here lively set forth. His Sword
is girt about him, and his short Cloak or Mantle over his Shoulders is guarded
with four Guards; his Coronet is Gold, the Cap Crimson, doubled Ermin, but not
indented, as those of the Blood Royal are; and the Verge which he holds in his
hand is also of Gold.

Dukes of the Royal Line or Blood are reputed as Archdukes, and are to have
their Coronets composed of Crosses and Flower delis, as other Dukes.

A Duke tantum shall take place before any Lord, that is both Marquis and Earl;
but a Duke that is both a Marquis and Earl, shall precede him.

The Dukes, Marquisses, and Earls at their Creations have a Sword put over
their Shoulders, or girt about them, which the Viscounts and Barons have not.

A Duke may have in all places ou^ of the King's or Princes presence a Cloth of
Estate, hanging down within half a yard of the Ground; so may his Duchess, who
may have her Train born up by a Baroness: And no Earl, without permission from
him, ought to wash with a Duke.

All Duke's eldest Sons, by the Courtesy of England, are from their Birth
styled Marquisses, The Effigies of the Most Noble, George Duke, Marquess, and
Earl of Buckingham, Earl of Coventry, Viscount Villers, Baron of Whaddon, and
Knight of ye most Noble order of the Garter. anda.
R. While sculp:



His Royal Highness James Duke of York and Albany, Knight of the most noble
order of the Garter, sole Brother, to his sacred Majesty King Charles the
second and coet.
The most Illustrious Prince Rupert, Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of
Bavaria, and Duke of Cumberland, Earl of Holderness, Governor of
Windsor-Castle, Lord Leivtenant of Ber^shire, Knight of the Garter, Nephew to
the late King of blessed memory, and one of his Ma^^es. most Honorable privy
Council etc^.
The Right Noble Henry Duke of Norfolk, Earl of Arundell, Surrey, Norwich and
Earl Marshall of England, Baron Howard, Fitz-Allen, Matravers, Mawbrey
Seagrave, Bruce^ Clu^n, Oswalds tree and Castle Riseing
The Right Noble Francis Seumour, Duke of Somerset, Marquess and Earl of
Hertford Viscount Beauchamp, and Baron Seymour etct.
The Right Noble George Duke, Marquess and Earl of Buckingham. Earl of
Coventrey, Viscount Villiers. ^^ron of Whaddon, and Knight of the most noble
order of the Garter etct.
The Rt. Noble Christopher Duke of Albemarle. Earl of Toringto^ Baron Monck of
Potheridge, Beauchamp and Teys, Knight. of ye. most noble order of ye. Garter, Lord
Leivtenant of Devon-shire and Essex. one of ye Gentlemen of his matys
Bedchamber and one of ye. Lords of his most honble. privy Coun^^
The Right Noble James Duke of No^^^uth and Buccleuth, Earl of Doncaster, and
Dalkeith Baron of Askedale Te^d^l^ and Whitch^^^^^en (...) Chamberlain of
Scotland. Mas^^r of his Man. horse, and Captain of his life Guard, Governor of
Hull Lord Leivtenant of ye. East Rideing of Yo^k-shire, Chancellor of ye.
University of Cambridge, Knight of ye. Garter and one of ye. Lords of his
matys. most honble. privy Council. etct.
The Right Noble William Cavendish. Duke, Marquess and Earl of Newcas^ Earl
of Ogle. Viscount Mansfield, Baron Ogle, Bertram and Bolesmere. Knight of the
Garten Ld. Leiutenant of Nottinghamshire, Gent: of his matys. Bedchamber,
Justice in Ire of all his matys. Parks; fforests and Chases Northwards of
Trent, and one of ye. Lords of his matys. most honble. privy Council and^
The Right Noble Charles Fitz-Roy Duke of Southampton Earl of Chichester,
Baron of Newbury. Knight of the Garter and heir in Succession to the Duchy of
Cleaveland etc^
The Right Noble Charles Lennox, Duke of Richmond and Lennox, Earl of March,
and Darneley, Baron of Settrington and Tarbolton etct.
The Right Noble Henry Fitz-Roy, Duke of Grafton, Earl of Euston Viscount
Ipswich, and Baron Sudbury. and^^
and the younger Sons Lords, and take place of Viscounts; but not so
privileged by the Law of the Land.

A Duke has the Title of Grace; and being written unto is styled, Most High,
Potent, and Noble Prince. And Dukes of the Royal Blood are styled, Most High,
most Mighty, and Illustrious Princes.

The younger Sons of Kings are by courtesy styled Princes by birth, but have
their Titles of Duke, Marquess, etc. from Creation; The Daughters are styled
Princesses: and the Title of Royal Highness is given to all the King's
Children, both Sons and Daughters.

The form of a Patent of the Duke of York, tempore Iacobi.
JACOBUS, etc. To all Archbishops, Bishops, Dukes, Marquisses, Earls,
Viscounts, Barons, Justices, Knights, Governors, Ministers, and to all Bailiffs
and faithful Subjects, Greeting. Whereas oftentimes we call to mind how many
and innumerable Gifts, and what excellent Benefits that Great Maker of all
Goodness (of his own benignity and clemency) has abundantly bestowed upon us,
who not only by his power has consociated diverse and mighty Lions in firm
Peace, without any strife; but also has amplified and exalted the Bounds and
Limits of our Government, by his unspeakable Providence, above our Progenitors,
with an indissolvable Conjunction of the ancient and famous Kingdoms, in the
right of Blood, under our Imperial Diadem. In regard whereof we cannot boast,
but most willingly acknowledge our fruitfulness and Issue plentifully adorned
with the gifts of Nature, which he has vouchsafed unto us, because in truth in
the Succession of Children a mortal man is made as it were immortal; neither
unto any mortal men, at leastwise unto Princes not acknowledging Superiors, can
any thing happen in worldly causes more happy and acceptable, than that their
Children should become notable in all virtuous Goodness, Manners, and Increase
of Dignity, so as they which excel other men in Nobleness and Dignity,
endowments of Nature, might not be thought of others to be exceeded: Hence it
is that we (that great goodness of God, which is showed unto us in our felicity
not to pass in silence; or to be thought not to satisfy the Law of Nature,
whereby we are chiefly provoked to be well affected and liberal to those in
whom we behold our Blood to begin to flourish) coveting with great and fatherly
affection, that the perpetual memory of our Blood, with Honor and increase of
Dignity, and all praise may be affected, our well beloved Son, Charles Duke of
Albony, Marquis of Ormond, Count of Ross, and Lord of Ardmannoth, our second
begotten Son, in whom the Regal form and beauty worthy Honor, and other gifts
of Virtue, do now in the best hopes shine in his tender years, We erect,
create, make and ordain, and to him the Name, Style, State, Title, and Dignity,
and Authority, and Honor of the Duke of York do give, to him that Name, with
the Honor to the same belonging and annexed, by the girding of the Sword, Cap,
and Cirtlet of Gold put upon his Head, and the delivery of a Golden Verge, we
do really invest, To have and to hold the same Name, Style, State, Dignity,
Authority, and Honor of the Duke of York unto the aforesaid Charles our second
begotten Son, and to the Heirs male of his Body lawfully begotten for ever. And
that the aforesaid Charles our second begotten Son, according to the decency
and state of the said Name of Duke of York, may more honorably carry himself;
we have given and granted, and by this our present Charter, we confirm for us
and our Heirs unto the aforesaid Duke and his Heirs for ever, out of Farms,
Issues, Profits, and other Commodities whatsoever coming out of the County of
York, by the hands of the Sheriff of the said County for the time being, at the
times of Easter and Michaelmas by even portions. For that express mention of
other Gifts and Grants by us unto the said Duke before time, made in these
Presents, does not appear notwithstanding these being Witnesses; The most
excellent and most beloved Henry our Firstbegotten Son, Ulrick Duke of Hellet,
Brother of the Queen our beloved Wife, and the Reverend Father in Christ
Richard Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, and
also our beloved and faithful Counselor, Thomas Lord Elsmere our Chancellor of
England, Thomas Earl of Suffolk, Chamberlain of our Household, and our dear
Cousin, Thomas Earl of Arundel, our welbeloved Cosins and Counselors Henry Earl
of Northumberland, Edward Earl of Worcester, Master of our Horse, George Earl
of Cumberland, and also our welbeloved Cosins, Henry Earl of Southampton,
William Earl of Pembroke, and also our welbeloved Cosins and Counselors,
Charles Earl of Devonshire, Master of our Ordinance, Henry Earl of Northampton,
Warden of the Cinque Ports, John Earl of Warwick, Robert Viscount Cranborne our
Principal Secretary, and our wellbeloved and faithful Counselor, Edward Lord
Zouch, President of our Council within the Principality and Marches of Wales,
and also our welbeloved and trusty Robert Lord Willoughby of Eresby, William
Lord Mounteagle, Gray Lord Chandois, William Lord Compton, Francis Lord Norris,
Robert Lord Sidney our welbeloved and faithful Counselor, William Lord Knowles
Treasurer of our Household, and our welbeloved and faithful Counselor George
Dunbar, Lord of Barwick, Chancellor of our Exchequer, Edward Bruce of Kinloss,
Master of the Rolls of our Chancery, and also our welbeloved and faithful
Thomas Eareskine of Birketon, Captain of our Guard, James Lord Barmermoth, and
others.

Given by our Hand at our Palace at Westminster, in the Second year of our
Reign of England, etc.

King Edward the Third, in the third year of his Reign, by his Charter in
Parliament, and by Authority of Parliament did create Edward his eldest Son,
called the black Prince, Duke of Cornwall not only in Title, but cum feodo with
the Duchy of Cornwall, as by the Letters Patents may appear in Coke's Eighth
Part in the Pleadings, Habendum and tenendum eidem Duci, and ipsius, and
haeredum suorum, Regum Angliae, filiis Primogenitis, and dicti loci Ducibus, in
Regno Angliae ei haereditarie successuris: So that he who is hereditable must
be Heir apparent to the King of England, and of such a King who is Heir to the
said Prince Edward, and such a one shall inherit the said Dukedom; which manner
of limitation of Estate was short and excellent, varying from the ordinary
Rules of the Common Law, touching the framing of any Estate of Inheritance in
Fee-simple, or Fee-tayl; and nevertheless, by the Authority of Parliament, a
special Fee-simple is in that case only made, as by Judgment may appear in the
Book aforesaid, fol. 27. and 27 Ed. 3.41. b. And ever since that Creation, the
said Dukedom of Cornwall has been the peculiar Inheritance of the King's
eldest Son, during the life of the King his Father, so that he is ever Dux
natus, non creatus; and the Duke at the very time of his Birth is taken to be
of full and perfect Age, so that he may send that day for his Livery of the
said Dukedom. And the said black Prince was the first Duke of England after the
Conquest: For though Bracton, who made his Book in the Reign of King Henry the
Third, says, and sunt sub rege Duces (as appears) that place is to be
understood of the ancient Kings before the Conquest: For in Magna Charta, which
was made in the Ninth of King Henry the Third, we find not the name Duke
amongst the Peers and Nobles there mentioned; for seeing the Norman Kings
themselves were Dukes of Normandy for a great while, they adorned none with
this Honor. And the eldest Son of every King, after his Creation, was Duke of
Cornwall: as for example; Henry of Monmouth, eldest Son of King Henry the
Fourth, Henry of Windsor, eldest Son of King Henry the Fifth, Edward of
Westminster, eldest Son of King Edward the Fourth, Arthur of Winchester, eldest
son of King Henry the Seventh, and Edward of Hampton, first Son of King Henry
the Eighth. But Richard of Bordeaux, who was the first Son of Edward the black
Prince, was not Duke of Cornwall by force of the said Creation: For albeit,
after the death of his Father he was Heir apparent to the Crown; yet because he
was not the Firstbegotten Son of a King (for his Father died in the life of
King Edward the Third) the said Richard was not within the limitation of the
Grant and Creation by Authority of Parliament made in the Eleventh of King
Edward aforesaid; and therefore to supply that defect, in the Fifth of Edward
the Third, he was created Duke of Cornwall by special Charter.

Elizabeth, eldest Daughter of King Edward the Fourth, was not a Duchess of
Cornwall, although she was the Firstbegotten Daughter of Edward the Fourth; for
the Limitation is to the First-begotten Son. Henry the Eighth was not in the
life of his Father King Henry the Seventh, after the death of his eldest
Brother Arthur, Duke of Cornwall, by force of the said Creation; for although
he was sole Heir apparent, yet he was not his eldest begotten Son.

And the Opinion of Stamford, a Learned Judge, has been, That he shall have
within his Dukedom of Cornwall the King's Prerogative, because it is not
severed from the Crown after the form as it is given; for none shall be
Inheritor thereof but the King's of the Realm: For example; whereas by Common
Law, if a man hold diverse Manors, or other Lands or Tenements of diverse Lords,
all by Knights Service, some part by Priority and ancient Feoffment, and other
Land by Posterity and a later Feoffment, and the Tenant so seized dies, and
his Son and Heir within Age, in this case the custody and wardship of the Body,
and his marriage may not be divided amongst all the Lords, but one of them only
shall have right unto it (because the Body of a man is entire). And therefore
the Law does say, That the Lord, of whom some part of those Lands are holden by
Priority, and by the same Tenure of Chivalry, shall have it, except the King be
any of the Lords; for then though the Tenant did purchase that Land last, yet
after his death the King shall be preferred before any of the other Lords of
whom the Tenant did hold the Priority. And so shall the Duke of Cornwall in the
same Case have the Prerogative, if his Tenant die, holding of him but by
posterity of Feoffment for any Tenure of his Duchy of Cornwall, although the
same Duke is not seized of any particular Estate, whereof the Reversion
remains in the King; for the Prince is seized in Fee of his Dukedom, as
beforesaid.

John of Gaunt, the fourth Son of King Edward the Third, took to Wife Blanch,
Daughter and Heir of Henry Duke of Lancaster, who had Issue Henry King of
England; so that the said Duchy of Lancaster did come unto the said Henry by
descent from the party of his Mother; and being a Subject, he was to observe
the Common Law of the Realm in all things concerning his Duchy. For if he
would depart in Fee with any thereof, he must have made Livery and Seisin; or
if he had made a Lease for life, reserving Rent with a Reentry for default of
payment, and the Rent happen to be behind, the Duke might not enter without
making his Demand; or if he had alienated any part thereof whilst he was within
Age, he might defeat the Purchaser for that Cause; and if he would grant a
Reversion of an Estate for life or years in being, there must also be
Attornment, or else the Grant does not take effect.

But after that he had deposed King Richard the Second, and did assume the
Royal Estate, and so had conjoined his Natural Body in the Body Politic of the
King of this Realm, and so was become King; then the possession of the Duchy
of Lancaster was in him as King, but not as Duke, which degree of Dignity was
swallowed up in that of the King; for the lesser must always give place to the
greater. And likewise the Name of the Duchy, and the Franchises, Liberties,
and Jurisdictions thereof, when in the King's Hands, were by the Common Law
extinct; and after that time the possessions of the Duchy of Lancaster could
not pass from Henry the Fourth by Livery of Seisin; but by his Letters Patents
under the Great Seal, without Livery of Seisin, and with Attornment. And if he
make a Lease for Life, being Duke, reserving a Rent with a Re-entry for default
of payment; and after his Assumption of the Crown, his Rent happen to be
unpaid, he might Re-enter without Demand; for the King is not bound to such
personal Ceremonies as his Subjects are.

Therefore to have the said Duchy to be still a Duchy with the Liberties to
the same, as it was before, and to alter the order and degree of the Lands of
the Duchy from the Crown; the said King Henry the Fourth made a Charter by
Authority of Parliament, which is entitled Charta Regis Hen. 4. de separatione
Lancastriae a corona authoritate Parliamenti Anno Regni sui primo, as by the
Tenor thereof may appear. And so by Authority of that Parliament, the said
Duchy, with all the Franchises and Liberties was merely resigned from the
Crown, and from the Ministers and Officers thereof, and from the Order, to pass
by such Conveyance which the Law did require in the possessions of the Crown.
But now the possessions of the Duchy by force of the said Statute, stood
divided from the Crown, and ought to be demeaned and ordered, and pass as they
did before Henry the Fourth was King; yet there is no Clause in the Charter
which does make the person of the King (who has the Duchy) in any other
Degree than it was before.

But things concerning his pleasure shall be in the same estate as they were
before such separation: insomuch, as if the Law before the Charter, by
Authority of Parliament, adjudged the person of the King always of full Age,
having regard unto his Gifts, as well of the Lands which he does inherit in the
right of his Crown, or Body Politic, it shall be so adjudged for the Duchy
Land after the said Statute; for the Statute does go and reach unto the Estate,
Order, and Condition of the Lands of the Duchy, but does not extend unto the
person of the King, who has the Lands in points touching his person. Neither
does that distinguish, or alter the preheminences which the Law does give to
the person of the King: For if King Henry the Fourth, after the said Act had
made a Lease, or other Grant of parcel of the Duchy, by the Name of Henry Duke
of Lancaster only, it had been void; for it should have been made in the Name
of Henry the Fourth, King of England.

And thus stood the Duchy of Lancaster severed from the Crown, all the Reign
of Henry the Fourth, Henry the Fifth, and Henry the Sixth, being politickly
made for the upholding of the Duchy of Lancaster, their true and ancient
Inheritance; however the right Heir to the Crown might, in future time, obtain
his right thereunto (as it happened in King Edward the Fourth's time:) but
after the said King Edward obtained his right unto the Crown, in Parliament he
attainted Henry the Sixth, and appropriated and annexed the said Duchy again
to the Crown, as by the Statute thereof made in the first of the King's Reign
it does appear. By which Statute three things were ordained: First, The County
Palatine of Lancaster was again established: Secondly, He did invest it in the
Body Politic of the King's of this Realm: And thirdly, He did divide it from
the order of the Crown Land. And in this form it continued until Henry the
Seventh, who forthwith (being descended from the House of Lancaster) did
separate it only in Order and Government from the Crown, and so it continues
at this day.

Ceremonies to be observed in the Creation of a Duke.
AT the Creation of a Duke he must have on him his Surcoat and Hood, and should
be led between two Dukes, if there be any present, if not, a Marquess or two,
and for want of either, an Earl; somewhat before him, on the right hand, shall
go on Earl which shall bear a Cap of Estate with the Coronet in it; and on the
other side shall also go an Earl which shall bear the Golden Rod; and before
the Duke that is to be created should go a Marquess, or one of the greatest
Estate, to bear the Sword; and before him an Earl to bear the Mantle or Robe of
Estate lying on his Arms. And all these Nobles that do Service must be in their
Robes of Estate.

His Title is proclaimed twice, and the Largess thrice.

The Effigies of the most Noble CHARLES PAULET MARQUESS of WINCHESTER EARL of
Wiltsh: And BARON St. JOHN of Basing. etct.
R. White Sculp:



The most Honrbl: Charles Paulet Mar^quess of Minchester Earl of Miltshire
Baron St John of Basing and^
The most honble: Henry Somerset^ Marquess and Earl of Worcest^^^ Ld. Her^ert
Baron of Chipstom, Raglan, and Gomer, Ld. President ^ Ld^ Leivtenant of Wales,
and the Marches, Ld Leivtenant of (...) Countyes of Gloucester, Hereford, and
Monmouth, and of the (...) and County of Bristoll; Knight of the most noble
order of the G^^te^ and one of the Lords of his matys. most honble: privy
Counc^ll^
The most honorble. Henry Rerrepont, Marqu^ss of Dorchester, Earl of Kingston
upon Hull^ Viscount Nemarke, Ld. Rerrepont, Maunvers, and Herris, and one of ye
Lords of his matys. most honorble^ Privy Council etc^.


OF MARQUISSES CHAP. V.
A Marquess, which by the Saxons is called Marken-Reue, and signifies a
Governor or Ruler of the Marches, has the next place of Honor to a Duke. This
Title came to us but of late days; for the first was Robert Vere, who was
created Marquess of Dublin by King Richard the Second, and from that time it
became to be a Title of Honor; for in former time those that Governed the
Marches were commonly called Lord Marchers, and not Marquisses.

After the Normans had conquered this Land, it was by them carefully observed,
as a matter of great moment, to place upon the Confines and Borders of the
Britains (and those not then subdued) men of much Valor; such that were not
only sufficient to encounter the Inrodes and Invasions of the Enemy, but also
ready upon all Occasions to make onset upon them for the enlarging their
Conquest. These men thus placed were of high Blood and Reputation amongst their
Contrymen, the Normans, and in whose Faith the Conqueror reposed special
Trust and Confidence: And therefore in their Territories given unto them to
hold, their Tenures were devised to be very special, and of great importance
and honor, enriched with Name and Privileges of Earl of Chester; and so the
North-border of Wales created to a County Palatine; and the Barons of the
middle part of the South Marches were adorned in a manner with a Palatine
Jurisdiction, having a Court of Chancery, and Writs only amongst themselves
pleadable, to the intent that their Attendance might not thence be drawn for
the prosecuting of Controversies or Quarrels in the Law. And as for the other
part of the South Marches, they seemed to be sufficiently fenced with the River
Severn and the Sea.

A Marquess is created per gladii cincturam, and circuli aurei suo capiti
positionem. He is honored with a Coronet of Gold, which is part flowered, and
part pyramidal, with the points and flowers, or leaves of an equal height. His
Mantle is doubled Ermin, which is of three doublings and an half, whereas the
Mantle of an Earl is but of three; and the doublings of a Viscount's Mantle is
but two and a half, which are only plain white Furr without Ermins, as are the
Barons, which are but of two doublings.

The form of their Patent (which at their Creation is delivered into their
hands) was various; but of late ^tis regulated to the method of those of other
Degrees, and the Ceremonies the same. This Honor is hereditary, and the eldest
Son, by the Courtesy of the Land, is called Earl, or Lord of a place; and the
younger Sons only Lord John, Lord Thomas, or the like.

He has the Title of most Noble, most Honorable, and Potent Prince; and may
have his Cloth of Estate reaching within a yard of the Ground, the King or a
Duke not being present; and his Marchioness may have her Train born up by a
Knight's Lady in her own House, but not in a Dutchesses presence.

A Marquisses eldest Son is born an Earl, and shall go as an Earl, and have his
Essay in an Earl's presence, and wear as many powdrings as an Earl, but shall
give place to an Earl; and his Wife shall go beneath a Countess, and abov^ all
Marquisses Daughters, who are born Ladies, and the eldest a Countess, but shall
go beneath a Countess.

At the Creation of a Marquess, he must have on him his Surcoat and Hood, and
be led by a Duke or Marquess; the Sword and Cap to be born by Earls. He must go
after his Creation, not after his Marquisite, and the Marchioness his Wife
according to the same.

The Effigies of the Right Honrbl. CHARLES BEAUCLAIRE Baron of Heddington and
Earl of BURFORD. And of ye. Rt. Honrbl: JAMES Ld. BEAUCLAIRE Brother and heir
to ye. Right Honrbl: Charles Earl of Burford.


The Rt. honble. Aubrey Vere, Earl of Oxford^ Baron Bulbeck, Sandford, and
Badlefinere, Knight. of ye Garter, L? Leiutenant with. his grace ye Duke of
^^^^marle of Essex, and one of his. Ma^ys^ most Hon. privy Council etca.
The Right Honorable Charles Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury Baron Talbot, Strange
of Blackmere, Gifford of Brimshel^ Purnivull^ Verdon, and Loveto^
The Right Honorable Anthony Gray Earl of Kent, Baron Gray of Ruthin,
Hasting, and Valance
(...) Right honble. William Stanley Earle^ of Der^^ Lord Stanley etc Strange
of Knocking Viscount Kint^^ Baron of We^^on L^. Mob^n Burnet, Basset, and Lacy.
L^. Leivt^nant of Lanc^shire. and^ Cheshire and Admiral of the Seas their^
belonging. C^amberlaine of Ch^ster, and^ L^. of Man as of ye Isles etca.


The Right honble. John Manors Earl of Rutland, Baron Ross of Hamlack,
Trushut, and Belvior, and Lord Leivetenant of Leicestershire.
The Right honble. Theophilus Earl of Huntington, Ld Hastings of Hastings,
Hungerford, Homet, Botreaux, Moules, Moulins, and Pe^erell, and Elizabeth
Countess of Huntington his wife, eldest daughter and Coeheire of Sr. John
Lewis, late of Ledston in Yorkshire, K^, Bart. deceased.
The Right honble. William Russell Earl of Bedford, Baron Russell of
Tavestock, and Thornhaugh and Knight of ye most Noble Order of the Garter etct.
The Right Honble. Philip Herbert Earl of Pembrook^ Montgomery, Baron Herbert
of Shurland, Cardiffe, Ross of Kendale, Parr, Marmion, and St. Quintin, Ld. of
ye Lordships of Vske, Carleon, Nemportand. Treleg, and Lord Leiutenant of
Wiltshire etct.


The Right honble. Edward Fines Earl of Lincoln, and Baron of Clinton etct.
The Right honble. Charles Howard Earl of Nottingham, Baron Howard of
Effington etct.
The Right honble: James Howard Earl of Suffol^ Baron Howard of Walden, Lord
Leiuetenant of ye Countys of Cambridge, and Suffolk, one of ye Gentlemen of his
matys bedchamber, and Deputy Earl Marshall of England^
The Right honble, Charles (...)^ Earl of Dorset and Middsex, Baron (...) and
Cranf^ild, one of ye Gentlem^^ (...) his Maty^, Bedchamber and Lord Leiut^^^nt
of Sussex


The Right Honorable James Coecill, Earl of Salisbury, Viscount Cranborne and
Baron Coecill of Essenden
The Right Honorable John Coecill Earl of Exeter, Baron Coecill of Burleigh
etca.
The (...) John Egerton Earl of Bridge (...) Brackley, Baron of El^mere, Ld.
(...) of ye County of Bucks, and one ye (...) his matys^ most Hon. privy
Council etc.
The Right honble. Robert Sidney, Earl of Leicester, Viscount Lisle, Baron
Sidney of ^en^urst. and one of ye Lords of his Ma.^^s most honble. privy
Council etc.


The Right Honorable James Earl of Northampton, Baron Compton of Compton,
Lord Leivtenant of Warwick shire. and one of the Lords of his matys. most
honble: privy Council ^ Constable of his matys Tower of London, and Leivtenant
of the Hamlets thereto belonging.
The Right Honorable Robert Earl of Warwick, and Holland^ and Baron Rich of
Leeze, and Kensington etca
The Right Honorable William Earl of Devonshire^ Baron Cavendish of Hardwick,
Knight of the Bath, and Lord Leivtenant of Derby shire etca
The Right Honorable William Feildin^ (...) de Hapsburgh, Earl of Denbig^,
Viscount Feilding, Baron Feilding of Newenham: Pad^x and St. Lis. and Earl of
Desmond etca. in Ireland.


The Right Hononrable George Digby, Earl of Bristoll, Baron Digby of Sherborne
andct.
The Right Honorable Gilbert Holles, Earl of Clare, and Baron Holles of
Haughton in Nottinghamshire.
The Right Honorable Oliver St. John, Earl of Bullingbrook, and Baron S.t
John of Bletshoe andct.
The Right Hono^rable Charles Fane, Earl of Westmorland, and Baron de la
Spencer and Burghwash andct.


The Right Honorable Robert Montague, Earl of Manchester, Viscount Mandevill,
Baron Kimbolton, Lord Leivtenant of Huntingtonshire, and one of the Gentlemen
of his matys. Bedchamber andct.
The Right Honorable Charles Howard Earl of Berkshire Viscount Andover and
Baron Howard of Charlton andct.
The Right Honorable John Sheffeild, Earl of Mograue, Baron Sheffeild of
Butterwick, Knight of ye most noble Order of ye Garter, and one of ye Gentlem^^
of his matys. Bedchamber.
The Right Honorable William Ley, Earl of Marlborough, and Baron Ley of Ley
andct.


The Right Honorable Charles Knowles, Earl of Banbury, Viscount Wallingford,
and Baron Knowles of Greys.
The Right Honorable Thomas Savage, Earl of Rivers, Viscount Colchester, and
Rock savage, and Baron Darcy of Chich.
The Right Honorable Robert Bertue, Earl of Lindsey, Baron Villoughby of
Eresby, Lord Great Chamberlain of England, Lord Leivtenant of Lincolnshire one
of the Gentlemen of the B^dchamber, and Lords of ye most honble privy Council
to his Ma^y K Charles ye ^
The Right Honorable John Carry, Earl of Dover, Viscount Rochford, and Baron
Hunsden.


The Right Honorable Henry Mordaunt, Earl of Peterborow, Lord Baron of
Turvey, Lord Leiutenant of the County of Northampton, And^ one of the Lords of
his Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council. and ct
The Right Honorable Thomas Gray Earl of Stamford, Ld. Ferrers of Grooby,
Banevill and Harrin^^ ^escended from ye family of ye Greus who were Marqueses
o^ Dorset: ye last of which was Hen. who before his Attain^ure and Execution in
Anno 1553 was Created Duke of Suffolk.
The Right Honorable Heneage Finch, Earl of Winchelsey, Viscount Maidston,
Baron Fiz Herber^ of Eastwell, Lord of the Royal Manner of Wye, and Lord
Leiutenant of the Countys of Kent ^ Somerset
The Right Honorable Charles Dormer, Earl of Carnarvan. Viscount Ascot^ and
Baron of wing, Master, Marshall, and Surveyour of his Majetyes Hawks.


The Right Honorable Montjoy Blunt Earl of New^port. Baron Montjoy of
Thurveston in Devonsh^^^ and Lord Montjoy of Montjoy Fort in Ireland etca.
The Right Honorable Phillip Stanhope^ Earl of Ches^erfield, and Baron
Stanhope of Shelford, etca.
The Right Honorable Nicholas Tufton^ Earl of Thanet, and Baron Tufton of
Tufton etca.
The Right Honorable Thomas Weston Earl^ of Portland, Baron Weston of Neyland
etc^.


The Right Honorable William Wentworth Earl^ of Strafford, Viscount Wentworth,
and Baron Went^^^^ ^^d house Newmar^h Oversley and Raby Knight of the Garler
and one of the Lords of his Ma^ys. most Hon^le. privy Council etca.
The Right Honorable Robert Spencer, Earl of Sunderland, Baron Spencer of
Wormle^ton, one of the ^^ntlemen of the Bedchamber, and Lords of the privy
Council to his Maty. K Ch y^ 2
The Right Honorable Nicholas Leake, Earl o^ Scarsdale, and Baron Dayncourt
etca.
The Right Honorable John Wilmot Earl of Rochester Baron Wilmot of Alderbury
in England and Discount Wil^mot of Athlone in Ireland and one of the Gentlemen
of his matys. Bedchamber


The Right Honorable Henry Iermine, Earl of St. Albon^ Baron of St.
Edmonds^bury, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, and one of the
Lords of his matys. most honble. privy Council etc.
The Right Honorable Edward Montague, Earl of Sandwich^ Viscount Montague of
Hinchingbrooke, and Baron Montague of St. Neots.
The Rt. Noble James Duke Marquest, and Earl of Ormond, Earl of ossery and
Br^cknock, Viscount Thurles, Baron of Arklow and Lanthony^ Ld. Leiutenan^ (...)
Ireland, Ld. High, ^teward of his matys. House hold, Chancellor of the
^niversity of Oxford, ^t. of ye Garter, ^ o^^ of ye Lds. of his Ma^^s most Hon
privy Council ^c^
The Right Honorable Henry Hide, Earl^ of Clarendon, Viscount Cornbu^^^ Baron
Hide of Hendon.


The Right honble. Arthur Capell, Earl of Essex. Viscount Malden, Baron Capell
of Hadham, one of the Lords of his matys. most Honorable privy Council, Lord
Leivtenant, and Custos Rotollorum of Hartfordshire, la^^ Ld. Leivtenant
General, and General Governor of his Ma^^s. Kingdom of Ireland.
The Right Honorable Robert Brudenell Earl of Cardigan, and Baron Brudenell
of Staughton etct.
The Right Honorable Arthur Annesley, Earl of Anglesey, Baron Annesley of
Newport Pagnell in England Viscount Valentia and Baron Mount Norris of
Mount-Noris in Ireland; Ld. privy Seal and one of ye Lds. of his matys. most
honble. privy Council for England and Ireland andc^^
The Right honble. John Earl of Bath Viscount ^renvile of Lonsdowne, Baron
Greenvile of Kilkhampton and Bidiford, L^ Warden of ye Stanneries, high Steward
of ye Duchy of Cornwall, Ld. Leivetenant of Cornwall Governor of Plymouth,
Groom of the Stool, first Gent. of his matys. Bedchamber, and one of his Ma^^.
privy Council etc^t.


The Right honble. Charles Howard Earl of Carlisle Viscount Morpeth, Baron
Dacres of Gisland, Lord Leivtenant of Cumberland and Westmorland, Vice Admiral
of ye Coast of Northumberland, Cumberland Westmoreland, Bishopric of Durham
Town and County of New castle and Maritin parts adjacent, and one of the Lords
of his Maties. most honble. privy Council andc^t.
The Right honble: William Earl of Craven, Viscount Craven of Vffington, Baron
Craven of Hampsted-Marshall, Lord Leivtenant of ye County of Midd^x. and
Borough of Southwark, and one of ye Lords of his Mtys. most honble. privy
Council andc^t.
The Right honble: Robert Bruce, Earl of Alisbury and Elgin, Viscount Bruce of
Ampthill, Baron Bruce of Whor^^on Skeleton and Kinloss, Hereditary High Steward
of the Honor of Amp^hi^^ Lord Leivtenant of ye County of Bedford, and High
Steward of Leicester etct.
The Right honble. Richard Boil, Earl of Burlington, and Baron Clifford of
Lansborow in England^ Earl of Cork, Viscount Dungarvan, Baron Yaughal^ and
Lord High Tr^asurer of Ireland and^^.


The Right honble: Henry Bennet Earl and Baron of Arlington, Viscount
Thetford, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, Lord Chamberlain of
his matys. Household, and one of the Lords of his most honble. Council etct.
The Right honble: Anthony Earl of Sha^tesbury, Baron Ashley of Wimbourne St.
Giles, and Lord Cooper of Pawle^.
The Right honble: Henry Howard, ^arle of Norwich and Earl Marshall of
England, Baron Howard of Castle Riseing, Now Duke of Norfolk^, see in ye
Catalogue of Du^es
The Right Honorable William Herbert, Earl and Baron of Powis. and^


(...)Right Honorable Edward Henry (...) of Litchfield, Viscount Quarenton ^^d
Baron Spilsbury.
The Rt. Noble John Maitland, Earl of Guilford, and Baron of Petersham in
England, Duke of Latherdale, Viscount Maitland, Baron of Thirleston,
Miescleboroug^ and Bolton in Scotland; Ld. Comissioner for his present Ma^y. of
that Kingdom, Knight. of the Garter, Gentlem^^ of the Bedchamber, and one of his
matys most honble. privy Council for the Kingdoms of England and Ireland^
The Right honble. Cha^les Fitz-Charles Earl of Plymouth, Viscount Totnes, and
Baron Dartmouth.
The Right Honorable Thomas Osborne Earl of Danby, Viscount Latimer, Baron
Osborne of Kiveton, Viscount Osborne of Danblaine in Scotland; Knight. of the most
noble order of the Garter ^ Ld high Treasurer of England^ andct^


The Right Honorable George Fitz Roy, Earl of Northumberland, Viscount
Falmouth, and Baron Ponte^fract etca.
The Right Honorable Thomas Leonard Earl of Sussex, and Lord Dacres of Giles
land etca.
The Rt Honorable Lovis Earl of Feversham, Viscount Sondes Lord Duras, Baron
of Holdenby and Throwley, Captain of his Royal Highness Troop of his matys.
Guards, Leivtenant Gene^rall of his Maties forces, and Collonell of his matys.
own Royal Regiment of Dragoons.
The Right Honorable Charles Beauclair, Baron of Heddington and Earl of
Burford.


The Right honble. William O^Brien Earl and Baron of Insi^uin, and Baron of
Burren in the Kingdom of Ireland Captain General of his matys. Forces in
Africa, Governor of ye Royoll City of Tanger, vice Admiral of the same, and
of the parts adjacent and one of his Matys most Hon^le. privy Council for the
Sd. Kingdom of Ireland.
The Right Honorable Charles Moore Earl and Viscount of Drogheda, and Baron
of Mellefont in ye Kingdom of Ireland. etca.
The Rit: honble. Luke Plunkett Earl of Fingall and Baron of Killeene in the
Kingdom of Ireland etca.
The Rt^ Honerable Sr. Arthur Chichester Knight Baron of Belfast Vist. Chichester
of Carikfergus and Earl of Donegall in ye. Kingdom of Ireland Governor of
Carikfergus and ye. Teritoryes Ther^^^^ Belonging and one of his matys. Most
Ho^^^ (...) Council for ye. S^. Kingdom.


The Rt. honble. James Ogilby, Earl of Airly, Elight, and Glentrahen, in the
Kingdom of Scotland. etca.
The Right Honorable John Fitz Gerard, Earl of Kildeare. primier Earl of the
Kingdom of Ireland. etca.
The Right Honorable William Pope Earl of Down, Baron and Lord Pope of
Bellterbitt in Ireland. etca.
The Rt. honble. Roger Palmer, Earl of Castlemaine, and Baron of Lamberick in
the Kingdom of Ireland etca.


OF EARLS. CHAP. VI.
THE next Degree of Honor is an Earl, which Word and Title came from the
Saxons: For it is observed, That originally within this Realm, in the ancient
English-Saxon Government, Earldomes of Counties were not only Dignities of
Honor, but Offices of Justice, having the charge and custody of the County
whereof they were Earls; and for their Assistance, had their Deputy, called
Vicecomes: which Office is now managed by Sheriffs, each County having his
Sheriff Annually chosen out of the eminent Inhabitants thereof under the Degree
of Nobiles Majores. And the Earls, in recompense of their Travels concerning
the Affairs of the County, then received a Salary, viz. a third penny of the
Profits of the County; which Custom continued a long time after the Conquest,
and was inserted as a Princely Benevolence in their Patents of Creation (as by
diverse ancient Patents may appear) which afterward were turned into Pensions
for the better support of that Honor, as appears by a Book-Case 32 Hen. 6.
28. And therefore in respect of such Pensions, or such other Gratuities given
in lieu thereof, some men have not without probability thereof imagined, quod
Comites nominabantur, quia a multis fisci Regii socii and Comites eidem
participes essent.

The word Earl by the Saxons was called Erlig or Ethling; by the Germans
Graves, as Lantgrave, Palsgrave, Margrave, Rheingrave, and the like; and by the
Dutch was called Eorle: But upon the coming in of the Normans they were called
Comes, or Comites, that is, Counts; and for Gravity in Council, they are called
Comes Illustris, a Comitando Principem. And as Earls for their Virtues and
Heroical Qualities are reputed Princes, or Companions for Princes: so ought
they to deport themselves answerable to the said Dignity, as well in their
Attendance and Noble Housekeeping, as otherwise.

The Dignity of Earl is of diverse kinds, and is either local or personal:
Local, as from the denomination of some place: and Personal, as being in some
great Office, as Earl-Marshal, and the like. Those Local are also Palatine and
Simplices. Those that are Palatine, or Count Palatine, are Chester, Lancaster,
and the Bishoprics of Durham and Ely, and retain some of the ancient
Privileges allowed them by the Saxons. Hugh Lupus, who was the first
Hereditary Earl, had the County Palatine of Chester given him by the Conqueror,
who governed it Forty years, in which time he created eight Barons, and had
Iura Regalia within the County.

Of Earls not Palatine, which is as ancient as the Conquest, there have been
principally two kinds, but either of them subdivided into several Branches; for
they either take name of a place, or hold their Title without any place. Those
that take their Name of a place are of two kinds; for either the place is the
County, as the Earl of Devonshire, Kent, Middlesex, or the like; or else some
Town, Castle, or Honor; as the Earldom of Richmond in Yorkshire, Clarence in
Suffolk, Arundel in Suffex, Bathe and Bridgwater in Somersetshire, and so
forth. And those Earldoms which have their Titles without any place, are
likewise of two kinds, either in respect of Office, or by Birth: By Office, as
the Earl-Marshal of England, called in Latin Comes Marascallus Angliae, and is
an Office not only of great power, being in the Vacancy of the Lord High
Constable of England the King's Lieutenant General in all Marshal Affairs, but
of as great Honor, taking place of all Earls, except the Lord Great
Chamberlain of England, and is likewise endowed with many honorable
privileges. This Title of Earl-Marshal was by K. Richard the Second first
given to Thomas Mowbray Earl of Nottingham (whereas before they were simply
styled Marshals) and after the Banishment of Mowbray, he granted it to Thomas
Holland, Duke of Surrey; and that he should carry a Rod or Verge of Gold
enammeled black at both ends, whereas before they used one of Wood: This Office
is now by his present Majesty restored to the ancient Family of the Howards
Hereditary for ever, and is enjoyed by the Right Honorable Henry Howard, Earl
of Norwich, Baron Howard of Castle-Rising in Norfolk, and Heir apparent to his
Grace the Duke of Norfolk.

The other sort of Earls are by Birth, and so are all the Sons of the Kings of
England, if they have no other Dignity bestowed upon them: And therefore it was
said that John, afterward King of England, in the life time of his Father
Henry the Second, was Comites sans terre.

Earls (as other Degrees of Nobility) are Offices of great Trust, being created
by Patent for two principal purposes; one ad consulendum Regi in tempore pacis;
the other ad defendendum Regem and Patriam in tempore belli. And therefore
Antiquity has given them two Ensigns to resemble both the said Duties: For
first, the Head is adorned with a Cap of Honor, and a Coronet of Gold, which
for distinction is pyramidal, pointed, and pearled, between each pyramid a
Flower much shorter th^n the pyramid: And the Body is adorned with Robes, viz.
a Hood, Surcoat, and Mantle of State, with three guards of Fur upon the
Shoulders; which Robe is an emblem of Counsel: and they are begirt with a Sword
in resemblance of that they must be faithful and true to defend their Prince
and Country.

An Earl had formerly the Title of Prince; but now it is Most Potent and Noble
Lord, as also The Right Honorable and truly Noble. Out of his Superiors
presence he may have a Cloth of Estate fringed without pendants; and his
Countess may have her Train born up by an Esquire's Wife.

But to the King's high Council of Parliament no man ought to presume to come
before he has received the King's Writ of Summons. This Constitution was first
made by King Henry the Third, after the Barons War was appeased, and by King
Edward the Third, and his Successors, it has been carefully observed. The form
of a Writ of Summons to an Earl, is as follows: REX, etc.
Unto his welbeloved Cousin, John Earl of Greeting.
Because by the advice and assent of our Council, for certain weighty and
urgent businesses concerning us, the state and defense of our Kingdom and
Church, we have ordained to be holden a certain Parliament at our City of
Westminster the day of next coming, and there together with you, and with the
Prelates, and Great and Noble Men of our said Kingdom, to have confidence and
treaty, commanding, and firmly injoyning you upon your Faith and Allegiance
whereby you are holden unto us, that the dangers and perils imminent of that
business considered, and all Excuses set apart, you be present at the said day
in the same place with us, and with the Prelates and Noblemen aforesaid, to
treat and give counsel upon the aforesaid business; and hereof fail not, as you
tender our honor and the safeguard, and defense of our Kingdom and Church
aforesaid.

Witness our self at Westminster the day of in the year of our Reign.



In this Writ an Earl is saluted by the King by the Name of Cousin, although no
Kin; and the Writ of Summons to him, or any other Peer, is particularly
directed to himself, and not unto the Sheriff of the Country, as the general
Summons are to Knights and Burgesses of Parliament.

After a man is created an Earl, Viscount, or any other Title of Honor above
his Title, it is become parcel of his Name; and not an addition only, but in
all legal Proceedings he ought to be styled by that his Dignity.

In the first of King Edward the Third, fol. 151. a Writ of Formedon was
brought against Richard Son of Alleyn, late Earl of Arundel, and did demand the
Manor of C. with the Appurtenances, etc. The Tenant by his Learned Counsel,
did plead that he was Earl of Arundel, and was at the day of the Writ
purchased, and demanded Judgment of the Writ, because he was not named in the
Writ according to his Dignity and Title of Honor. To which the Demandant
says, That at that time, when he did purchase the Writ, the Tenant was not
known nor taken to be an Earl, and it is severe Justice if the Writ shall abate
without any default in the Plaintiff: nevertheless, because the truth of the
matter was so, that the Earldom did descend unto him before the Plaintiff had
commenced his Action, and purchased his Writ against him; therefore by Judgment
his Writ was abated, although the Tenant was not at that time known to be an
Earl. But if a Baron be Plaintiff or Defendant, it is not of necessity to name
him Baron, 8 Hen. 6. 10. yet see a distinction of Barons concerning this
matter, here following: And so Reginald Gray was reputed Esquire after the
Earldom descended unto him, till at last it was published and declared by the
Queen, and the Heralds, that he was Earl of Kent in Right, and by Descent,
although he was not reputed or named Earl before that time.

But an addition may be used, or omitted at pleasure, except in special Cases
where Processes of style of Supremum Caput Ecclesiae Anglicanae, which by Act
of Parliament in the 26 th of Hen. 8. cap. 1. and in the 35 th of Hen. 8. cap.
3. was annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. It is no part of the King's
style, so that it may be omitted in the Summons of Parliament at pleasure; and
so it is adjudged and declared by Parliament in the First and Second of Philip
and Mary, cap. 8. fol. 156.

But not between the Majestical Style of the King, and the Title of Honor
appertaining to a Subject; this difference is between Grants or Purchases made
by or to a Nobleman, etc. For in that first case it is necessary that the Name
[ King] be expressed, otherwise they are void. But if a Duke, Earl, or other
Degree of Nobility, do Purchase or Grant, by the Name of Baptism and Surname,
or other Title of Honor, it is not void; for it is a Rule in Law, That every
man's Grant shall be construed most to the benefit of him to whom the said
Grant is made, that it may rather be strengthened than made void; for there is
a great diversity in the Law between Writs and Grants: For if Writs are not
formally made, they shall be abated, which is only the loss of the same; but if
a Grant should be made void, then the party has no remedy to have a new one,
and for that cause the Law does not favor Advantages by occasion of false
Latin, or such like mistake.

And if an Earl be Plaintiff or Demandant, and having the Writ, shall not
abate; but nevertheless he shall proceed, and count by the Name of an Earl,
according to such Title of Honor as he did bear at the time of the
Commencement of his Action.

But if the Plaintiff in a Quare Impedit be made Knight, having the Writ, shall
abate.

There is a Statute made in the First of Henry the Fifth, cap. 5. wherein is
contained as follows: Item, It is ordained and established, That every
original Writ of Actions, personal Appeals, and Indictments, in which the
Exigent shall be awarded in the names of the Defendants; in such Writs,
original Appeals, and Indictments, additions shall be m^de of their Estates,
Degrees, and Mysteries; and the Towns, Hamlets, and Places, and the County
where they were, or be conversant: And if by Process upon the said original
Writs, Appeals, or Indictments, in which the said additions are omitted, any
Outlawries be pronounced, that they be clearly void, and that before these
Outlawries pronounced the said Writs and Indictments shall be abated by the
exceptions of the party wherein the said additions are omitted: Provided, that
though the said Writs of Additions Personal be not according to the Records and
Deeds by the surplusage of the Additions aforesaid, that for this cause they be
not abated: And that the Clerks of Chancery, under whose Names such Writs shall
go forth written, shall not leave out, or make omission of the said Additions,
as aforesaid, upon pain of punishment, and to make fine to the King, by the
discretion of the Lord Chancellor or Keeper. And this Ordinance shall begin to
hold place at the suit of the party, from the Feast of St. Michael then next
ensuing.

Although addition of Estate, Degree, and Mystery to be added unto Names be
written in the Statute first before the additions of the Places and Counties;
yet it has been used always after the making of the said Statute, to place the
Addition of Estate, Degree, and Mystery after the Places and Counties in all
Writs^ Appeals, and Indictments against common persons: But the use is
otherwise in Appeals and Indictments of Treason or Felony against Dukes,
Marquisses, and Earls; for their Names of Degrees are in such case put before
the Additions of Places and Counties; as Charles Earl of Westmoreland, late of
Branspit in the County of Durham.

Names of Dignity, as Dukes, Earls, Barons, Baronets, Knights, etc. are
contained within the word [ Degree] for the Sat of a man is his Mystery.
Brook, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in Abridgment of the Case of 14 Hen.
6. fol. 15. titulo, Nosme de Dignitate.

Injuries done to the Name and Honor of a Nobleman.
IN the Second of Richard the Second, c. 1. that Counterfeits and Spreaders
abroad of false and reproachful words and lies against the Nobility, Prelates,
and Great Men in public Offices; as the Lord Chancellor, or Keeper, the Lord
Treasurer, Lord Steward of the King's Household, the Judges, etc. whereby
Debates and Discord may arise between the said Lords and Commons, to the great
detriment of the Realm if due Remedy be not provided; It is s^raitly Enacted
upon grievous pain, to eschew the said Dangers and Perils, That from
thenceforth none presume to tell, or report any false and scandalous News
against any of the persons aforesaid, whereby discord, or any slander might
arise; and he that does the same shall incur the punishment ordained by the
Statute of Westminster, cap. 33. which wills, that he be taken and imprisoned
till he have found him that first reported the same. And further, by another
Statute Anno 12 Rich. cap. 12. it was enacted moreover, That when the said
Offender is taken and imprisoned, and cannot find him that first spoke them,
then he shall be punished by the advice of the Council.

And to the intent that such evil disposed persons, which by their lewd
speeches and slanderous words or reports, do endeavor to break and disquiet
the peace of the Realm, might the sooner be enquired of, found out, and
punished by a Statute made in the first and second of Philip and Mary, it was
established, That the Justices of the Peace in every Shire, City, and Town
Corporate within the Limits of their several Commissions, shall have full power
to hear and determine the Causes abovesaid in the two Acts of Edw. 1. and 2
Rich. 2. specified; and to put the said Statutes, and every part thereof, in
due execution, that condign punishment be not deferred from such Offenders. And
besides the said Penalties to be so inflicted on Transgres^ors, every Nobleman,
or great Officer of the Realm, against whom any scandalous words, false news or
lies are spoken, may prosecute the Offender in any Action de scandalis
magnatum, and recover damages against him. And in like manner may every
inferior person, for any such like words of infamy spoken against him, recover
damages against the Offender. And in former times, speeches tending to the
reproach of others were so odious, that King Edgar ordained, That his Tongue
should be cut out that spoke any infamous or slanderoas words of another. And
the said Lord Beauchamp did sue an Action upon the Statute of Richard the
Second, cap. 5. de scandalis magnatum, against Sir^ Richard Ch^^fts, because he
did sue a Writ of forging of false Deeds against the said Lord Beauchamp; and
the Defendant does justify the said slander by use of the said Writ, etc. And
upon Demurrer the matter of Justification was good, so that he was not liable
to the punishment of the said Statutes, but was quite discharged from the same.

There is no foul puddle that arises from the same corrupt Quagmire, and
distilled likewise out of a heart infected with Malice and Envy, but it devised
and practiced by another meaner than the former, which is by lybelling, secret
slandering or defaming of others; for this privy Backbiter does not by words
impeach his Adversary in so manifest and turbulent manner as the choleric
Menacer in his fury does; but seeming to sit quietly in his Study, does more
deeply wound his Fame and Credit, than the other boisterous person does; for he
in a moment threatens to do more, than peradventure he is either able, or has
courage to perform in all his life: For his Passion thus discovering the Malice
of his Heart, does give his Adversary warning to defend himself from him: But
this secret Canker the Libeller concealeth his Name, hides himself in a
Corner, and privily s^ingeth his Reputation and Credit, and he knows not how
to right himself; and the greater is this Offense, if done to a public
Magistrate or Minister of State; for then it may bring a disturbance to the
peace of the King and Kingdom. And if it be against a private person, the
staining his Reputation will cause him not to be at quiet in Body and Mind,
until he has found his Enemy, which many times may lie so secretly hid, that
he cannot be discovered; and then probably one innocent (upon some suspicion or
other) may come to suffer for it. Sometimes the malicious Defamer pours forth
his poison in writing, by a Scandalous Book, Ballad, Epigram, or Rhyme, near
the place where the party so abused does most converse. In which cases the Law
has provided that the party delinquent (when he is found out and discovered)
shall be severely punished; for he may either be Indicted by the ordinary
Course of the Common Law; and if it be an exorbitant Offense, then by Pillory,
loss of Ears, Whipping, etc. or the party grieved may have an Action upon the
Case against the Offender, and recover his Damages: And in this it is not
material whether the Libel be true or false, or the party scandalized be alive
or dead, or be of a good or ill Name; yet our Laws are so made as to punnish
him, and such like men, by a due Course of Justice.

And to conclude this matter concerning Wrongs done to the Name and Dignity of
a Nobleman, this may be added, That it is usual for any person to usurp the
Arms of another. Further, if a Nobleman's Coat Armor and Sword of other
Gentleman's bearing Arms at the solemnizing of their Funerals, is set up in the
Church for the Honor of the deceased, and is by the covetousness of the
Incumbent that pretends right thereunto, as Offerings due unto him,
afterward taken down; or if they be defaced by any other, such are to be
severely punished as Malefactors: And in that case the Action shall not be
given to the Widow, though she be Executrix or Administratrix of her Husband's
Goods; for such things which serve for the Honor of the party deceased, are
not to be accounted inter bona Testatoris. And the Heir shall have his Action
as the Defender of his Ancestor's Honor: But the wrong is offered to the House
and Blood, and therein specially to the Heir, qui est totius geniturae
splendour; and therefore to him accrueth the right of Action; for so it is
reported by Sir John Fern in his Glory of Generosity, fol. 83. that the Lady
Withers Case in 9 Edw. 4. 14. has been adjudged.

OF VISCOUNTS. CHAP. VII.
THE next Degree of Honor to an Earl is a Viscount, which was anciently a Name
of Office under an Earl; who being an immediate Officer of the King's in their
County, for that their personal attendance was oft-times required at the Court,
had his Deputy to look after the Affairs of the County, which at this day is an
Office, and called a Sheriff, retaining the Name of his Substitution; in Latin
therefore called Vicecomes. But about the Eighteenth of Henry the Sixth it
became a Degree of Honor, who conferred this Title upon John Lord Beaumont by
Letters Patent.

A Viscount is created by Patent, as an Earl; has a Hood, Surcoat, and Mantle,
which has on it two Guards and a half of white plain Furr, without Ermins; And
his Coronet is only pearled with a row of Pearls close to the Chaplet.

He has the Title of the Right Honorable and truly Noble, or Potent Lord: He
may have a Taveress in his own House; and his Viscountess may have her Train
born up by a Woman out of her Superior's presence, and in their presence by a
Man.

The Effigies of the Right honrbl: Thomas Belasise viscount Falconbergh of
Henknowle Baron Falconbergh of Yarum Ld. Leiuetenant of the North rideing of
York shire And one of ye. Lords of his maties: most Honbl: Privy Council
andct. R. Whi^^ sculp:


The Rt. Honorable George Sauile Viscount Halifax Baron Sauile:
The Rt. Honorable Robert Paston Viscoun^ Yarmouth Baron Paston of Paston:
The Rt. Honorable Francis Viscount Nervport ^f Bradford, Baron Nervport of
High Erc^ll. Ld. Leutenant of ye. County of Salop. Treasurer of his matys.
Household. and one of ye. Lds. of his matys. most honble. Privy Council.


The Rt. Hon^rbl^. Thoma^ Needham Lord Viscount Killmurr^y of the Kingdom of
Ireland.
The Rt. Honorable Wi^liam Viscount Brouncker of Lyon^, and Baron Brouncker of
N^^ Castle in the Kingdom of Ireland. anda.
The Rt Hon^rable Charles Ld. Fairfax Viscount Emula in the Kingdom of Ireland.
The Rt. Honorable Maurice Berkeley^ Baron Beckeley of Rathdowne; and Viscount
Fitz Harding, of ^ear haven in the Kingdom of Ireland.


The Right Honorable Leicester Devoreux Viscount Hereford and Baron Ferrers of
Chartley.
The Right Honorable Francis Brown, Viscount Montague.
The Right Honorable William Finn^^ Viscount and Baron Say and Seal.
The Right honble. Edward Viscount Conway, and Bar^n of Ragley in England, and
Viscount of Kilultagh in Ireland Leivetenant General of ye Horse, and one of
the Lords of his Majestys most honble. privy for the said Kin^dome of Ireland.


The Rt. Honorable Baptist Noel Viscoun^ Baron Noel of Ridlington and
Elmington And Lord Leiutenant of Rutlandshire
The Right Honorable William Howard Viscount and Baron Stafford:
The Rt. Honorable Thomas Bellasis^^ Viscount Folconbergh of Henknowle. (...)
Falconbergh of Yarum, Lord Leivtenant of North rideing of Yorkshire and one of
ye Ld^. of his (...). Most honble. Privy Council.
^he Rt. Honorable, John Mordant (...) Mordant of Aveland and Baron of Rygate


The most Reverend Father in god Gilbert Sheldon by Divine Providence Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury Primate and Metropolitan of all England, and one of
y^ Lords of his matys most honble. privy Council.
The most Reverend Father in God Richard Stern by Divine Providence Lord
Archbishop of York, Primate and Metropolitan of England etca.
The Right Reverend Father in god Humfrey Hinchman by Divine permission Lord
Bishop of London, Grand Almoner to his Maty. and one of ye Lords of his matys.
most honble. privy Council etca.
The Right Reverend Father in God Seth by Divine permission Lord Bishop of
sarum and Chancellor of the most noble order of ye Garter etc^.


The Right Reverend Father in God Henry Compton, by Divine permission Lord
Bishop of London, Deane of his matys. Chapel, and one of ye Lords of his most
honble. privy Council, brother to ye Rt. honble. James Earl of Northampton.
The Right Reverend Father in God Nathaniel Crew, by divine permission Lord
Bishop of Durham, Clerk of the Closet^ to his Maty. and one of the Lords of his
most honble. privy Council; son to ye Rt. honble. John. Ld. Crew Baron of
Steane.
The Right Reverend Father in God John Pearson by Divine permission Lord Bishop
of Chester.
The Right Reverend Father in God Peter Gunning by Divine permission Lord
Bishop of Ely.


OF THE Lords Spiritual. CHAP. VIII.
ACCORDING to the Laws and Customs of this Realm, many are the Ecclesiastical
Dignities and Privileges belonging to the Bishops and Clergymen, who in all
succeeding Ages have been reverenced with the greatest observance imaginable,
as being acknowleded by all good Christians to be those Messengers sent, and
particularly appointed by God to take care of our Souls.

The Subjects of England are either Clergy or Laymen, both which are subdivided
into Nobility and Commons. Thus we find in our Parliament the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal make the Upper House; the Commons Spiritual, viz. the Clergy
elected to sit in Convocation (who once had place and suffrage in the Lower
House of Parliament) and the Commons Temporal, viz. the Knights and Burgesses
make the Commons.

Most evident it is, by the Consent of all the Councils, Fathers, Histories,
and Universal Tradition, That for the first Fifteen hundred years continuance
of Christianity, there is no Example to be found of any Church governed by any
Authority Ecclesiastic but that of Episcopacy; they were ordained by the
Apostles themselves to be their Successors in Christ's Church, to have a
vigilant eye over the Pastors and Teachers under them, as to their Lives and
Doctrine, for the preservation of Truth and Peace, the prevention of Scandal,
suppression of Heresy and Schism, and to have a care of their Flock, to bring
them to Salvation. It Is not therefore without reason that in all times they
have been the first of the two Divisions of the people, the Clergy and Laity;
and as Spiritual Barons take place of Temporal; they take their name from the
Saxon word Biscoep, a Super-intendent or Overseer.

They are three ways Barons of the Realm, viz. by Writ, Patent, and
Consecration. They precede all under the Degree of Viscounts, and are always
placed upon the King's right hand in the Parliament House. They have the Title
of Lords, and Right Reverend Fathers in God: And their Sees, by the piety of
former times, are endowed with fair Revenues for the due administration of what
belongs to their places: And to keep them from corrupt and sinister affections,
the King's most Noble Progenitors, and the Ancestors of the Nobility and
Gentry, have sufficiently endowed the Church with Honor and Possessions.

Many Privileges and Immunities were likewise granted to them, and the Clergy,
by the Saxon and Danish Kings; as coining of Money, conferring the Order of
Knighthood, etc. which has been long since appropriate to the Crown. Thus
Laufranck, Archbishop of Canterbury, made William the Second Knight in the life
time of his Father.

Of Privileges remaining, some belong to to the Archbishops; some to the
Bishops, as they are so; and some to them, and all other of the Clergy.

We read of three Archbishopricks in England before the Saxons came amongst us;
viz. that of London, York, and Carleon upon Vske: But Christianity being thence
expelled, by the Pagans, the succession of those Sees ceased, till it pleased
God to restore the Light of his Gospel to the blind Saxons (which in this
Kingdom had planted themselves) by the Ministration of St. Augustine, who first
preached Salvation to them at Canterbury, and was there buried, for whose sake
they removed the Episcopal See from London unto Canterbury; and in process of
time placed another Archbishop at ^ork; which two Provinces included England
and Wales, and have Five and twenty Bishops under them, Six and twenty Deans of
Cathedrals and Collegiate Churches, Sixty Archdeacons, Five hundred forty four
Prebendaries, many rural Deans, and about Ten thousand Rectors and Vicars of
Parishes.

The Archbishop of Canterbury was anciently the Metropolitan of England,
Scotland, Ireland, and the Isles adjacent; and was therefore sometime styled a
Patriarch, and had several Archbishops under him: His style was, Alterius orbis
Papa, and orbis Britannici Pontifex: The Date of Records in Ecclesiastical
Affairs ran thus, Anno Pontificatus nostri primo, etc. He was Legatus Natus;
which power was annexed to that See near One thousand years ago, whereby no
other Legate or Nuntio from Rome could exercise any Legantive power without the
King's special License. In General Councils he had place before all other
Archbishops at the Pope's right Foot: Nor was he respected less at home than
abroad, being according to the practice of most other Christian States, reputed
the second person in the Kingdom, and named and ranked before the Princes of
the Blood.

By the favor of our present King he still enjoys diverse considerable
preheminences; as Primate and Metropolitan of all England; has power to summon
the Archbishop of York, and the Bishops of his Province to a National Synod;
is primus par Regni, preceding not only Dukes, but all the Great Officers of
the Crown, next to the Royal Family. He is styled by the King, Dei Gratia
Archiopiscopus Cantuarii: Writes himself Divina Providentia, as does the
Archbishop of York; (other Bishops write Divina permissione:) and has the
Title of Grace given him, (as it is to Dukes;) and Most Reverend Father in God.

His Office is to Crown the King; and wheresoever the Court shall happen to be,
it is said the King and Queen are Speciales Domestici Parochiani Domini
Archiepisc. Cant. The Bishop of London is accounted his Provincial Dean; the
Bishop of Winchester his Chancellor; and the Bishop of Rochester his Chaplain.
He has the power of all the probate of Wills, and granting Letters of
Administration where the party has bona notabilia, that is Five pounds worth,
or above, out of the Diocese wherein he dies; or Ten pounds worth within the
Diocese of London. By Statute of Hen. 8. 25. he has power to grant Licenses,
Dispensations, etc. and holds diverse Courts of Judicature; viz. his Courts of
Arches, of Audience, his Prerogative Court, and his Court of Peculiars: And he
may retain, and qualify eight Chaplains, which is more by two than a Duke can
do.

The Archbishop of York was also Legatus Natus, and had that Authority annexed
to his See. He had all the Bishoprics of Scotland under his Province till the
year 1470. He has the place and precedence of all Dukes, not of the Royal
Blood, and of all great Officers, except only the Lord Chancellor, or Lord
Keeper. He has the Title of Grace, and Most Reverend Father in God: He has
the Honor to Crown the Queen, and to be her perpetual Chaplain. He is also
styled Primate of England, and Metropolitan of his Province. He has the Rights
of a County Palatine over Hexamshire in Northumberland. He may qualify
Chaplains; and has diverse other Prerogatives which the Archbishop of
Canterbury has within his own Province; but Durham being one, has in many
things a peculiar Jurisdiction, exempted from the Archbishop.

Privileges belonging to the Bishops are as follows.
IN their own Court they have power to judge and pass Sentence alone, without
any Colleague, which is not done in any other Court: And therefore the Bishops
send sorth their Citations in their own Names, not in the King's, as the Writs
in other Courts run. They may depute their Authority to another (as does the
King) either to their Suffragan-Bishops, their Chancellors, Commissaries, or
other Officers, which none of the King's Judges can do. In whatever Prince's
Dominions they come, their Episcopal Dignity and Degree is owned; they may
confer Orders, etc. whereas no Lay-lord is acknowledged but in the King's
Dominions, who gave him the Title. None of them can be Indicted of any Crime
before a Temporal Judge, without especial License from the King: A severe
penalty to be inflicted on them that raise any Scandal or false Report. In a
Trial where a Bishop is Plaintiff or Defendant, the Bishop may, as well as any
Lay-lord, challenge the Array, if one Knight at least be not returned upon the
Jury. In Criminal Trials for life, all Bishops are to be tried by their Peers,
who are Barons, and none under that Degree to be impanelled: but anciently they
were exempted from any Trial by Temporal Judges. In Parliament they may Vote in
any thing, but in sentence for Life, or loss of Member, they being by Common
Law to absent themselves; and by Common Law to make Proxies to Vote for them.
They are freed from all Arrests, Outlawries, Distresses, etc. They have liberty
to hunt in any of the King's Forests or Parks, to take one or two Deer, coming
or going from the King's Presence; and to have Wine free from Impost, etc.
Their Persons may not be seized for Contempt but their Temporalities only; and
their word only is to be taken, and their Certificate allowed in the Trial of
Bastardy, Heresy, etc. And such respect has been showed their Persons, that an
Offense by a Clergyman to his Bishop is called Episcopicide, and punished as
Paracide, equal to petty Treason.

Every Bishop may qualify as many Chaplains as a Duke: They are all Barons and
Peers of the Realm, and have place in the upper House of Parliament, as before
noted, and take place according to Seniority of their Consecration, except
London, Durham, and Winchester, who precede by Statute made in the Reign of
King Henry the Eighth.

It will not be amiss to speak somewhat of the Immunities common to all
Ecclesiastics, as well Commons as Lords Spiritual, as follows.

All Suffragan Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, Prebends, Rectors, and Vicars have
privilege, some by themselves, others by proxy, to sit and vote in the lower
House of Convocation.

No Subsidy or other Tax can be imposed upon them without their own consent. No
Clergyman may be compelled to undergo any personal Service in the Commonwealth,
nor to serve in the Wars, or to bear any servile Office. They are free from the
King's Purveyors, Carriers, Posts, etc. for which they may demand a protection
from the King, cum clausula nolumus. They are not obliged to appear at the
Sheriffs Turns or Views of Frank pledge, nor are impanelled to serve upon
Inquests at Assizes or elsewhere. If a Clergyman acknowledge a Statute, his
Body shall not be taken thereupon; for the Writ runs, Si Laicus sit, etc. Their
Goods are discharged from Tolls and Customs ( si non exerceant Merchandizas de
eisdem;) but they must have the King's Writ to discharge them.

As the Clergymen are exempted from the Wars, being by reason of their
Function, they are prohibited the wearing a Sword; so every man in the order of
Priesthood is debarred the Order of Knighthood of the Sword, cum eorum militia
sit contra mundum carnem and diabolum, says Sir John Fern; yet laying aside
their Cures, and also lying themselves to a secular life, they have been
admitted. Dei natalin (says Matthew. Paris) Iohannem de Gatesden clericum and
multis dit^atum beneficiis, sed omnibus resignatis, quia sic oportuit, Baltheo
cinxit militari. These, and many other Rights, Liberties, and Privileges
belong to the Clergy of England, all which the King at his Coronation solemnly
swears to preserve to them: And they have been confirmed by above Thirty
Parliaments; and if any Act be made to the contrary, it is said to be Null by
the Statute of the 4 th of Edward the Third.

OF BARONS. CHAP. IX.
AMONGST the Nobles and Honorable Persons, Barons have the next place. And
first, of the Dignity and Degrees of a Baron in general: Secondly, of the
Etymology of the Name: Thirdly, of the Antiquity thereof, and of the diverse
uses in former Ages: Fourthly, of the Division, and the consideration of the
several kinds of Barons: And lastly, a Declaration of the diverse and sundry
Privileges allowed them, and the rest of the Nobles, by the Laws of this Realm.

The Definition or Description of a Baron.
IT is a certain Rule in Law, Definitiones in jure sunt periculosissimae; earum
est enim (...) non subverti possunt; and therefore I do not often find any
Definition or Description of a Baron delivered by Writers: nevertheless in this
our Kingdom, it is my Opinion, that a Baron may be described in a generality,
answerable unto every special kind thereof in this manner.

A Baron is a Dignity of Nobility and Honor next unto the Viscount: And the
Books of Law do make a difference between Dukes, Marquisses, Earls, and
Viscounts, which are allowed Names of Dignity, and the Baron; for they affirm,
That such a Baron need not to be named Lord or Baron by his Writ; but the Duke,
Marquess, Earl, or Viscount, ought to be named by their Names of Dignity.

Cambden, fol. 1692. says, That our Common Laws do not allow a Baron one of
the Degrees of Nobility: But I take it to be understood of Barons by Tenure, or
Barons by Writ only: For the Title of a Baron by Patent is in his Letters
Patents under the Great Seal of England adorned by the name of Status, Gradus,
Dignitas; and therefore is requisite to be named: And such Dignities are a
parcel of the Name of the Pohenor, as well as the Title and Style of a Duke,
Marquess, Earl, or Viscount. And although there may be conceived this
Difference last mentioned between the Baron by Tenure or Writ, and the Baron by
Patent; yet they being all Members of the higher House of Parliament, they are
thereby equally made Noble, Honorable, and Peers of the Realm, as they are
Barons, without any other distinction.

The Etymology of the Name of Baron.
MAny Writers have labored to place the Etymology and signification of this
word, wherein (following too much their own Fantasies) they have bred much
variation of Opinion. As for Etymology of words, I agree with him that says it
is, Levis and fallax Effigies Illustrissimi Dni^ Caecilij Calvert, Baronis
BALTEMORE de Baltemore in Regno Hibernice; Absoluti Dni^ et Proprietarij
Provinciarum Terrae-Mariae et Avaloniae in America etca.
Abra: Blotling sculp



The Right Honorable George Lord Nevill Baron of Aberg^venny in Monmouthshire
^^
The Right Honorable James Lord Tou^hett Baron Audley of H^leigh in England,
and Earl of Castle ha^en in Ireland etca.
The Right Honorable Charles Lord We^^ Baron De la Ware in Hantshire:
The Right Honorable George Lord Berkley of Berkley etca. descended from
Harding a younger sone of one of the Danish Kings Who came in with William ye.
Conqueror etca
The Right Honorable Thomas Lord Parker, Baron Morley, and Monteagl^ in
Lancashire.
The Right honorable Conyers Lord D'Arcy, Baron D'Arcy, and Menil, in
Yorkshire.
The Right Honorable Benjamin Lord Mildmay Baron Fitzwater.
The Right Honorable William Lord Sturton, Baron Sturton of Sturton, in
Wiltshire.
The Right Honorable Henry Lord Sandis, Baron Sandis of the Vine in Hantshire.
The Right Honorable Thomas^ Lord Windsor, Lord Leivetenant of Worcestersh;
and one of ye Lords of his Ma^^s. most honble. Privy Council for ye Kingdom of
Ireland.
The Right Honorable Thomas Lord Cromwell, Baron of Oakham in Rutlandsh: and
Earl of Arglast, and Viscount Lecaile, in the Kingdom of Ireland.
The Right honrbl. Ralph Lord Eure, Baron of Wilton in the County of
Northumberland. andct.
The Right Honorable Phillip L^^^ Wharton Baron of Wharton in The County of
Westmoreland.
The Right Honorable John Lord (...) Baron Willoughby of Parh^m in
Lincolnshire:
The Right Honorable William Lord Pag^^^ (...) of Beaudefert in the County of
Stafford:
The Right Honorable Charles Lo^^ (...) of Cartlidge in ye. County of
Can^^r^^^ and Baron Gray of Roleston:
The Right Honorable William Lord Bruges, Baron Chandois of Sudley Castle in
Gloucester shire.
The Right Honorable James Lord Bertue, Baron Norris of Rycott in Oxford
shire, brother to the Right Honorable Robert Earl of Lindsey andct.
The Right Honorable William Petre, Baron of Writtle in Essex.
The Right Honorable Digby Gerard, Baron of Gerards^ Bromley in Staffordshire.
The Right Hon^^e. Charles Lord Stanhope, Baron of Harrington in the County of
Northampton etca.
The Right honble Henry Lord Arundell, Baron of Wardure in Wiltshire, and Count
of the Empire.
The Right Honorable Christopher Lord Roper, Baron. Tenham of Tenham in Kent.
The Right Honorable Robert Grevill, Baron Brook of Beauchamps: Court in
Warwickshire, Ld. Leivtenant of Staffordshire.
The Right Honorable Edward Lord Montague of Boughton, decended from Simon
Montague of Houghton who was brother to John Earl of Salisbury.
The Rt. honble. Ralph Lord Gray Baron of Warke etc^ of whose family was Sr.
John Gray who for his good service in France was by King Henry the 5th. created
Earl of Tangverville in the said Kingdom.
The Right Honorable John Lord Roberts, Baron of Truro in Cornwall, and one of
ye Lords of his maties. most Honorable Privy Council. etca.
The Right Honorable John Lovelace, Baron of Hurley in Barkshire.
The Right Honorable John Lord Poulet, Baron of Hinton St. George in Somerset
shire.
The Right Honorable William Maynard, Baron of Estaines in Essex, and Baron
Maynard of Wicklow in Ireland, Comptroler of his Mtys. household, and one of
the Lords of his most Honorable privy Council
The Right Honorable George Coventry, Baron of Alesborough in Worcestershire.
The Right Honorable Thomas Howard, Baron of Escricke in Yorkshire.
The Right honble. Charles Lord Mohun, Baron Mohun of Okehampton in Devonshire
the Right honble. Edward Lord Herbert, Baron of Cherbury in Montgomeryshire,
and of Castle Island in Ireland, and one of the Lords of his maty^. most
honble. privy Council for the Kingdom of Ireland^
The Right honble. Thomas Lord Leigh. Baron Leigh of Stoneley in Warwickshire
The Right honble. Richard Lord Biron, Baron of Rachdale in Lancashire
The Right honrbl. Christopher Lord Hatton, Baron of Kirby in Northamptonsh:
Governor of the Isle of Gemsey andct.
The Right honrbl: Richard Lord Vaughan Baron of Emlyn in England, and Earl o^
Carbery in Ireland. and one of the Lds. of his Majestys most honrbl: Privy
Council:
The Right honrbl. Francis Lord Carrington, Baron of Wotton in Warwicksh, and
Viscount B^rreford in the Kingdom of Ireland.
The Right honble. William Lord Widdrington of Widdrington Castle in
Northumberland and Baron of Blackney in ye. County of Lincoln.
The Right Honorable Edward Lord Ward, Baron of Bermingham in the County of
Warwick
The Right honrbl: Thomas Lord Culpeper Baron of Thornsway in Kent.
The Right honrbl. Jacob Lord Astley, Baron of Reding in Berkshire.
The Right Honorable Charles Lord Lucas, Baron of Shenfeild in the County of
Essex.
the Right honble. John Lord Belasis, Baron of Worlabye in Lincolnshire
the Right honble. Edward Watson, Baron Rockingham of Rockingham in
Northamtonshire, son of Lewis Lord Rockingham by ye Lady Elianor sister to John
Earl of Rutland now living. An. 1625
The Right Honorable Charles Lord Gerard, Baron of Brandon in Suffolk
Gentleman of his matys. Bedchamber
The Right honble. Robert Sutton, Baron Lexington of Axam in Nottingham shire
The Right Honorable Charles Henry Lord Kirkhoven Baron. Wotton of Wotton in
Kent.
The Right Honorable Marmaduke Lord Langdale Baron of Holme Langdale in
Westmorland.
The Right honrbl: William Lord Crofts Baron of Saxham in Suffolk O^e of the
Gentlemen of his matys. Bedchamber
The Right honrbl John^ Lord Berhley Baron of Stratton in Somersetshire One o^
the Lords of his Majestys most honrbl Privy Council.
The Right honble. Denzell Lord Holles Baron of Ifield in Sussex, Lord high
Steward of the Honors Manors, and Revenews of the Queens, Custos Rotolorum of
Dorset shire.
The Right Honorable Charles Lord Cornwallis, Baron of Eye in Suffolk etca.
The Rt. honble. George Lord Booth, Baron De la Mer of Dunham: Massey in
Cheshire etca.
The Right Honorable Horatio Lord Townesend Baron of Linn Regis in the County
of Norfolk, and. Lord Leivetenant of the said County etca.
The Right Honorable John Lord Crew, Baron of Stean in Northampton shire.
The Right Honorable John Lord Frescheville Baron of Staveley in Derby shire.
The Right Honorable Richard Lord Arundell, Baron of Trerife in Cornwall.
The Right honble. Thomas Butler, Earl of Oss^ry in Ireland, Baron Butler of
More Park in Hereford shire, Eldest Son to his Grace James Duke of Ormond, Knight
of the Garter, one of the Gentlemen of his matys. Bedchamber and Lords of his
most Honorable privy Council etca.
The Right Honorbl: Hugh Lord Clifford, Baron of Chudleigh in Devon: shire.
The Right Honorable Richard Butler, Second son to his Grace James Duke of
Ormond Earl of Arran, Viscount Tulough, and Baron of Clougrenan in Ireland and
one of the Lords of his matys. most Honorable Privy Council for the said
Kingdom and Baron of Weston in England.
The Right honrbl. Heneage Lord ^inch Baron of Doventry Lord High Chancellor of
England. and^a
The Rt. honrbl: Walter Ld. Aston Baron of Forfare in the Kingdom of Scotland
whose Father Sr. Walter Aston Knight. of ye: Bath and Bart. was in ye: 3d: of K.
Ch: ye: is it: created to ye: sd. Dignity.
The Right Honorable Coecilius Coluert Baron Baltemore, de Baltemore in the
Kingdom of Ireland Absolute Lord and Proprietary of ye Provinces of Maryland
and Avalon in America.
The Right Honorable William Lord Allington, Baron of Killard in the Kingdom
of Ireland.
The Right Honorable John Lord Baron of Kingsto^ Ld President of the Province
of Connaugh. Comissary general of ye. Horse for his matys. Army in Ireland and
one of the Lds. of his matys. most honrbl. Privy Council for ^he said Kingdom.
and plerumque ridicula; for saepe numero ubi proprietas verborum attenditur
sensus veritas amittitur. It may leave some use, and serve turn in Schools, but
it is too light for Judgment in Law, and for the Seats of Justice. Thomas
Aquinas sets down a more certain Rule, In vocibus videndum, non tam a quo
quam ad quid sumatur; and words should be taken sensu currenti; for Use and
Custom is the best Expositor of the Laws and Words, quem penes arbitrium est,
and jus, and norma loquendi, in the Lord Chancellor's Speech, in the Case
Postnati, fol. 61. And forasmuch as the word may aptly be applied to import men
of strength, Bracton (as before appears) not unaptly uses the signification
thereof in these words, Sunt and alii potentes sub Rege qui dicuntur Barons,
hoc est robur belli.

The Antiquity of the Dignity of Barons, and the sundry uses of the Name.
IT seems that the Dignity was more ancient than the Name; for in the ancient
Constitutions there is no mention made of the name of Barons; howbeit, the
Learned Interpreters do understand that Dignity to be comprehended under those
which are there called Valvasores Majores, and afterward called Capitanei. For
of the Valvasors, which are thought to be the Barons Valvasores Minores, and
Valvasini, or Valvasores Minimi. The like Dignity (before the Conquest) had
those which of the English-Saxons were called Thaines. Mills, fol. 28. says,
Barons were in France from the beginning; nevertheless, the name of Baron was
not much used in this Kingdom until the Norman Conquest, after which the word
Baron seems to be frequently used instead of Thaine amongst the
English-Saxons: For as they in general and large signification did sometimes
use the same to the sense and meaning, and import of a Freeman, born of a Free
Parentage, or such like: So did the Normans use the word Baron, and therefore
called their best esteemed Towns and Boroughs by the name of Barons: And so the
Citizens of London were called Barons Londonni; diverse ancient Monuments of
whom also Britan. makes mention, fol. 272. and lib. 5. cap. 14. Also there are
diverse Charters wherein mention is made of such like Barons. And the Barons of
Warwick in the Record of Domesday: and unto our time, the Free Burgesses of the
Five privileged Ports; and for that also diverse of the Nobility of Barons, as
well Spiritual as Temporal, did in ancient time sit in the Exchequer to
determine the matters there arising. The Judges of that Court have been, time
out of mind, called Barons of the Exchequer. And ^^lliam de la Poole was
created a Baron by King Edward the Third, and made Lord Chief Baron of the
Exchequer.

Moreover, as the English Saxons had two kinds of Thaines, the like has been
observed as touching Barons; ^or the King, and the Monarchs of the Realm have
their immediate Barons, being the Peers of the Realm: And in like manner
certain others of the Nobility, especially the Earls which have Jurisdiction
Palatine, and Earls-Marshal, whose Countries have confined upon the Coasts of
the Enemy, and had under them for their better defense, a kind of Barons; as
namely under the County Palatine of Chester were these Barons, viz. the Barons
of Hilton, Mountale, Molebanck, Shipbrooke, Malpas, Massa, Kinderton,
Stockport, etc. The Earldom of Pembroke being first erected by Arnulphus
Montgomery that conquered part of Wales; and therefore the Earl thereof being
an Earl-Marshal, had also under him his Barons, as by the Parliament Rolls 18
Edw. 1. does appear.

It has been therefore a common Opinion received, That every Earldom in times
past had under it Ten Barons, and every Baron Ten Knights Fees holden of him;
and that those which have Four Knights Fees were usually called and promoted to
the Degree of a Baron.

Also Lords and Proprietors of Manors were, in respect of them in ancient
remembrance, called Barons (but absolutely) and the Courts of their Manors
called thereof Courts Barons.

It rests now, for the more explanation of the use of the name of Barons,
that we call to remembrance that which has bin before spoken. That the Custom
of our Country is, that if a Baron be created Earl, the eldest Son of the said
Earl takes upon him, in the life time of his Father, the Name and Title of the
Barony, although he want the privileges belonging to a Baron.

The Tenor and proper signification of the word Baron.
BArons Honorable are of three kinds, viz. by Tenure, by Writ, and by Creation
or Patent. As for Barons by Prescription, which some men have spoken of, they
are intended to be all one with the Barons by Tenure, or those whose Ancestors,
time out of mind, have been called to Parliament by Writ; for otherwise there
are no such to be found as Barons by Prescription only.

CHAP. X. Barons by Tenure.
BArons by Tenure are those, which do hold any Honor, Castle, or Manor, as
the head of their Barony per Baroniam, which is Grand Ser^eanty. And those
Barons by Tenure are of two sorts, Barons Spiritual by Tenure, and Barons
Temporal by Tenure. Of Barons Spiritual by Tenure sufficient is said, whereunto
may be added, That it appears by all the ancient Writers of our Law, as
Brittan, Glanvile, Bracton, and the rest, that the Archbishops and Bishops of
the Realm in the ancient Saxons days, as well during the time that the Realm
was divided into diverse Kingdoms, as also after the uniting of them into one
Monarchy, were called to Parliament or Assemblies of State as Wisemen; not so
much in respect of their Tenure, for in those days all their Tenures were by a
Frank Almoigne; but especially for that the Laws and Counsels of men are then
most current and commendable, and have a more blessed Issue and Success, where
they are grounded upon the Law of God, the Root and Beginning of all true
Wisdom And therefore our wise and religious Ancestors called to their General
Council, or Wittengemote, or Court of Wisemen (as they called it) those chief
and principal persons of the Clergy, which by their places and professions, by
their Gravities, Learning and Wisdom, might best advise them what was the Law
of God's acceptable will and pleasure, that they might frame Laws answerable,
or at least wise not contrary and repugnant thereunto.

And touching the Temporal Barons by Tenure, mention is made of them in the
Books of Law, Records, and ancient Monuments of the Realm; and these Baronies
were anciently uncertain, and rentable at the pleasure of the King. But such
incertainty was brought to certainty by the Statute of Magna Charta, chap. 2.

Bracton does make express mention of Barons Temporal by Tenure; it shall be
needful here again to remember the former assertion of Bracton, That the head
of a Barony descending to Daughters should not be divided by partition, which
argues likewise the Tenure of Barony. But let us descend to other Authority,
viz. the Book-Case in the 48 Edw. 3. fol. 30. Sir Ralph Everdon's Case; by
which Case of Law it is most evidently proved that there are Barons by Tenure,
which in regard of such their Tenure, ought to be summoned to Parliament. And
furthermore, That there were or are Barons by Tenure, read the Statute of
Westminster 2. cap. 41. where the Fees of the Earl-Marshal and the Lord
Chamberlain are expressed, which are to be taken by them upon the Homage done
of every Baron by Tenure, whether the Baron holds by a whole Barony, or by a
less.

But here arises a Question; If a Baron by Tenure alien and grant away the
Honor, Castle, and Manor holden by Barony, whether shall such Alien or
Grauntee take upon him the State, Title, and Dignity of a Baron, or not? Or
what shall become of such Dignity of Baronage after such Alienation and Grant
made? They which do deny that there are any such Baronies by Tenure, do use
these as their principal Motives or Reasons: First, If there be any Baronies by
Tenure, then the Alience or Grantee of such Honor, Castle, and Manor so
holden, must hold by the same Tenure that his Grantor or Feoffer before held;
but that was by Barony, therefore such Grantee must hold by Barony: And if such
Grant or Alienation be made to persons Vulgar or Ignoble, then should such
Tenure be made Noble, which were very absurd, and full of inconveniency; for
Ornanda potius est dignitate domus, quam ex domo dignitas, utcunque quibus
quaerenda est, ab iis honestanda. Milles peroration. 3. Secondly, It is very
evident and manife, stthat many ancient Manors, which in old time were holden
by Baronage, and were the head of Baronies, are now in the Tenures of mean
Gentlemen, and others, who neither may, nor do challenge unto themselves in any
respect hereof any Nobility, without the great favor of the King's most
Excellent Majesty, who is the Fountain of all Honor within his Dominions.
Thirdly, Some ancient Barons there are that have aliened and sold many of those
Castles and Manors which did bear the Name and Dignity of Baronage; and yet
themselves do still retain, and lawfully keep their Estate, Dignity and Degree
of Baron, and have been, and usually are, such Alienations notwithstanding,
summoned nevertheless to the Parliament, and there do take and hold their
ancient place accordingly.

To these Objections it shall be convenient, for the more easy unfolding the
s^ate of this Question, to exhibit certain necessary distinctions, and upon
them to draw true and infallible Conclusions; and then to prove them by
authority of Law, consent of Time, and manifold Presidents: which done, the
Answer will be presently made (as I conceive) to every of the aforesaid
Objections.

First therefore, If a Baron by Tenure, which holds any Castle, Honor, or
Manor by Baronage, do Alien o^ give the same away, he does it either with or
without a License obtained from his Majesty for the same. If he does it without
a License, then the Conclusion is certain. But by the Laws of this Realm the
Barony, Honor, Castle, or Manor so aliened without license or consent, is
for^eited; and the same Honor, Castle, and Manor ^o ^olden by Barony, and so
aliened, is to ^e seized in the King's hands; and the said Forfeiture, and such
Dignity and Estate no longer to be born and continue, but to be resumed and
extinguished in the Crown, from whence it was derived.

The reason therefore is notable, if we call to remembrance that which was
formerly alleged out of Bracton, That Baronies are the strength of the Realm,
and suffer no division, they suffer also no alienation without the consent or
license of the Sovereign Monarch; for so should the Realm be infeebled, and
base persons ennobled without desert of Virtue or Prowess: For where the thing
so aliened is an Honor or Head of a Barony, it differs much from the
ordinary Tenure in Capite, whereof, if the Tenant make Alienation without
License, he is only to pay a Fine by the Statute of 1 Edw. 3. cap. 12. whereof
also before the making of the Statute, there was diversity of Opinions at the
Common Law after the Statute of Magna Charta, cap. 31. And for further proof
see Glanvile.

In Edward the Third, certain Lands being parcel of the Barony of Bremberway
were aliened by William de Browse the Baron thereof, without the King's
License, and in the Argument of the Case concerning the same, Judge Green
delivered this for Law. First, That parcel of a Barony or Earldom of the King
in chief cannot be aliened or dismembered without his License; and if it be, it
shall be seized, into the King's hands as forfeited, and the King shall be
seized thereof in his own right again. In 43 Edw. 3. it was found by an Office,
that William Bishop of Chester had leased unto one John Preston, for his Life,
a Manor which was parcel of the Manor of the said Bishopric without License,
and it was resolved by the Judges, and others of the King's Council, That the
same was forfeited; but by mediation of the said Council the Bishop submitted
himself to the King, and made a Fine, and several Scire Facias's issued out
against them that had received the many pro^its, to answer unto the King
thereof. And thus much concerning Alienations of Baronies without License.

But on the other part, if a Baron by Tenure who holds any Honor, Castle, or
Manor by Barony, do grant or alien the same by License, I must again
distinguish: for either such Alienation is made for the continuance of his
Barony, Honor, Lands, and Tenements in his own Name, Blood, and Issue Male; or
else the same Alienation is made for Money or other Recompense, or otherwise to
a mere Stranger: and hereof ensues this second Conclusion or Assertion, That
if such Alienation be made for the continuance of his Barony in his Name and
Blood, or Issue Male (as many have made the like) then may such Is^ue Male,
together with the Barony (be it Ca^^e, Honor, or Manor so hold^n) hold, and
law^ully enjoy the Name, Style, Title and Dignity of a baron.

Moreover concerning the second Objection, It is very true that many ancient
Manors which were in times past holden by Barony, are now in the hands of
Gentlemen, mean and ignoble by blood, who neither do, or may claim any Nobility
or Honor thereby. But there has been some former Gifts made by the King's
Progenitors to such as they honored in augmentation and support of their
Honor, and for honorable Services, should thus come to the hands of mean
personages, are twosold: First, For that such Manors have been aliened by
License unto such persons before spoken, of whom such Possessions alone cannot
make Noble. Secondly, And that was usually such Manors as were in ancient time
holden by Barony, that have upon diverse occasions come to the Crown, were
extinct; and after the same Lands were given or conveyed to others, reserving
other Services than those which at the first were due ^or the same, so that it
was no marvel that some Manors anciently holden by Barony, or other honorable
Service, should now be holden in Soccage, or by other mean Tenure.

As to that which was thirdly Objected, That some ancient Barons there are
which have aliened and sold away those Castles and Manors of which they have
and do bear the Name and Dignity, and yet still themselves do retain and
lawfully keep the Dignity and Degree of a Baron, and have been, and are called
to Parliament notwithstanding such alienation.

To that I Answer, That it is true; but it proves nothing against the former
Resolution, and therefore for better satisfaction of this point, it is to be
considered, that either such Barons are original Barons by Writ, or Barons by
Tenure. Barons by Writ (in this respect now in hand) are of two kinds; for
either in such Writ whereby they are, or their Ancestors were first summoned,
they were only named by their own Names, or else there was addition given them
of the principal place of their abode, which was done for distinction sake,
either to sever them from some honorable person of the same Name; or else to
give them such honorable Title by addition of the place, which place
notwithstanding was not holden by Barony: And therefore if such a Baron do
alien away that place which was anciently his Seat, he may nevertheless retain
his honorable Title, no respect had of such place.

But if a Baron by Tenure do alien away the Honor, Castle, or Manor holden by
Barony unto a mean person not capable of Honor, and by sufficient License so
to do; and after the Alienor which made such Alienation, be called by Writ to
Parliament under the Title, or as a Baron to such Honor, Castle, or Manor so
aliened that away which he held by Barony. But thenceforth, after such Writ of
Summons he is become a Baron by Writ, such Alienation notwithstanding,
forasmuch as the Writ directs at the pleasure of the Prince, does give unto
him that Addition of Name and Dignity.

And thus much touching the Resolution of the said Question, and satisfaction
of the said Objections, and of Barons by Tenure.

CHAP. XI. Barons by Writ, which is the second kind of Barons mentioned in the
former Division of Barons.
A Baron by Writ, is he unto whom a Writ of Summons, in the Name of the King,
is directed, to come to the Parliament appointed at a certain time and place to
be holden, and there with his Majesty, the Prelates, and Nobility, to treat and
advise about the weighty affairs of the Nation; which Writ is much to the
effect of the aforementioned Writ in the Title of Earl, and which kind of Writ
is as well directed to the Barons of Tenure, as by Creation by Patents: But
those that are not Barons by Tenure, nor by Patent, and have only such Writs,
after the receipt of such Writ, and place taken in Parliament accordingly,
ought to enjoy the Name and Dignity of Barons.

Touching the Antiquity of Barons by Writ only, and the first institution
thereof, I find little or no mention before the Reign of King Henry the Third;
and therefore I conceive that either the first, or at least the first frequent
use of such Barons was had, and devised 49 Hen. 3. in case of necessity, and
upon a commendable occasion: For in the disorder between the King and his
Nobility in those troublesome Wars, where Seditions and Rebellions were stirred
up by them against the said King, there were many great Battles fought, to the
effusion of much Blood, of which said Rebellions the Right Honorable Simon
Earl of Exeter, was Ringleader for the Defense of their Liberties (as
pretended) granted by Magna Charta, and Charter of the Forest (which are even
to this day the principal Grounds of the positive Law, and are the most ancient
Statutes now in use amongst us) And for the defense of other Constitutions and
Ordinances then made at Oxford: And after diverse Fields sought betwixt them at
Northampton, Rochester, Jews, and other places; last of all was the
Catastrophe of that Tragedy finished at Eveshalm or Easam in Worcestershire,
where the said Earl was slain, the King gained the Victory, and the rebellious
Barons received their overthrow: Upon which presently ensued the Parliament
holden at Winchester in Hantshire, and afterward at Westminster, where such of
the Barons as were slain in the Field against the King, and such others of them
as were taken Prisoners, or made their escape by flight, were to be attainted,
and disinherited of their Estates. And the Number of Barons who had continued
faithful unto their Sovereign being small, it was deemed a necessary policy, to
supply the number of the diminished Barons with other persons of known worth,
wisdom, and repute; by reason whereof there were called at those Parliaments
the Abbots and Priors of the Realm, as well those that held not by Barons, as
others; and diverse others of the most worthy Laity not holding by Barony; and
these by means thereof were thenceforth Barons by Writ; but certain of the said
Abbots and Priors, which held not by Barony, and thought it a burden to their
Houses, got themselves (upon Petition) afterward to be exempted, as by diverse
Records thereof remaining in the Chancery may appear.

This moreover is to be noted concerning the Writ of Summons to Parliament,
that those Writs in form of their directions are diverse, some directed by
special Name of Barons, as Rex, etc. Edmundo Baroni de Stafford, Iohanni Baroni
de Graystock, Iohanni Baroni de Dudley, Edwardo Nevill Baroni Abergaveny, as it
was in the Reign of King James.

Some other are summoned by Name of the party, with addition of the place (as
Iohanni Strange de Knocking, Militi, Edwardo Gray de Groby, Militi, Iohanni le
Scroop de Masham, Militi, Willielmo Souch de Harringworth, Militi) the chief
Castle or Manor of such Baron, which always stands afterward for the head
place of the Barony, whereof the said Baron and his Heirs shall be surnamed,
and called, and shall continue that name of place, although he do alien away
the same, as aforesaid.) Some others are named with the Title of Lord, as Sir
Hugh Bramsteed, by Writ of the 27 th of Henry the Sixth, was styled Lord Veysey.

Johan. Beauchamp Domino de Beauchamp Iohanni Domino de Clynton. To some others
the Writ is directed only by their Name, without any addition of place or
dignity, as William de Lovell, Mil. William Devereux, Mil. etc.

But the Nature, Quality, and Addition of those Barons by Writ is aptly
discovered by the debate of a Question moved often amongst men, and spoken of
concerning the continuance and descent of a Barony by Writ; which Question, for
the more orderly disposition thereof, I shall divide into these Heads or Points.

Question.
First, Whether a Barony by Writ may descend from the Ancestor to the Heir, or
not?

Secondly, Admit such a Barony may descend, then, Whether it does descend to
the Heirs, although not so near as the Heir Female?

Thirdly, Admit it does descend to the Heirs Female; then, Whether may the
Husband of such an Heir Female take upon him the Name, Style, and Dignity of
such a Barony in right of his Wife, or no?

Those therefore that maintain the Negative, that such a Barony shall not
descend, do strengthen themselves with these or the like Arguments, viz.

The first Argument, Whether a Barony by Writ may descend?
Nobility and Honor, which are given in respect of Wisdom, Connsel, and
Advise, cannot extend to any other person, or descend from one man to another;
for it is a Rule in Law, That Privilegium personae personam sequitur, and
extinguitur cum persona: But such is the Dignity of a Baron; therefore it is
reason that it should not descend from the Ancestor to the Heir.

The second Argument.
Again, If the calling of the Parliament by Writ be the sufficient instrumental
cause of such Nobility to the Ancestor, the not calling of the Heir is a loss
of that Nobility: For if the Heir have defects of Nature in him, as Idiotsie,
Frenzy, Leprosy, or the like, whereby he is become unfit for Counsels and
Conversations, for what reason should he enjoy that Dignity, whereof he is
either unworthy or incapable? for the effect has no place where the cause
fails: and hereof they conclude that such Dignities of Baronies by Writ
should not descend.

If on the contrary part, the Affirmation is thus proved. Honor, which is
given in respect of Wisdom and Virtue of him on whom it was first bestowed, is
not only a due recompense for himself whilst he lived, but also a memorable
Reward thereof to Posterity. The words of Cicero to this effect are most
excellent, Homines bonos semper nobilitate favimus, and quia utile republicae
est nobiles esse and homines dignos majoribus suis, and quia valere debet apud
nos claros hujusmodi senes fuisse, e republica moveretur memoria and mortucrum
Honor. Therefore this kind of Honor is Patrimonial and Hereditary; for things
which are once granted unto a man by the King for his Honor, are not again to
be returned to his loss and disgrace, or to his Heirs.

The second Argument.
Secondly, If the Infamy of the Father be a blot to the Posterity, as the
Wiseman Solomon affirms, The Children complain for an ungodly Father, they
are reproved for his sake; and for that also the Law of the Realm does corrupt
the blood of the Posterity by and upon the Offense of the Ancestor; Reason
would also be, that the Honor of the Ancestor should be likewise Honor to the
Posterity; for contraries do also carry their contrary Reason. For the
determination whereof it is to be noted, that diversity of Reason has bred
diversity of Opinion. Some there are that do speak, That the Dignity of a Baron
by Writ is not discendable from the Ancestor unto the Heir, unless the Heir be
likewise called by Writ to Parliament, and that then it becomes an
Inheritance, and not before. But this Assertion is repugnant to the nature of
Descent, which for the most part does carry a Patrimony descendable by act of
Law presently upon the death of the Ancestor unto the Heir not at all.
Wherefore the Custom of the Country, and the manifest Presidents do prove, that
this kind of Baronies does descend from the Ancestor to the Heir, and there
needs not any word of Heir in the Writ of Summons; only one President there
is in a special Writ sometime directed to Sir Henry Bromfleet in the 27 th of
Henry the Sixth, wherein he was styled Lord Veysey, and wherein there are these
words inserted, Volumus tamen vos and haeredes vestros de corpore vestro
ligitime enatos Barons de Veysey existentes. Wherefore it is very true, that
when the Heir of any such Baron by Writ is called to the Parliament, that his
Descent of Honor is thereby established and approved of by the gracious
Judgment of our Sacred Sovereign: So it is also true, that if it shall stand
with his Majesty's pleasure, that such an Heir shall not be summoned at all,
then that Nobility is much impaired, and in a manner extinguished in the
censure of all men; for that it has no other original but by a Writ of
Summons, from the which by the Judgment of the Supreme Sovereign he is excluded.

As to the second principal point, Whether the Barony by Writ may descend to
the Heir Female, it shall not be amiss likewise to show the Reasons on either
part, that by conflict of Argument the truth may the better be discovered.

Those that maintain the Affirmative part, do say, That in reason the Sex of
the Heir Female ought no more to bar her Dignity, than the Nonage of the Heir
Male ought to bar him, though during his Nonage he be unable to do the
Service. But as the Service of the one is for time forborne, so the Sex of the
other may at all times be supplied by the maturity of her Husbands Offices of
Honor, which do much import the Commonweal, being passed by Inheritance, do
descend to the Heir Female, as the Office of the High Constableship of England,
which descended unto the Daughter of Hum. de Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex.
Also the Office of the Lord Steward descended to Blanch, Daughter of Henry Earl
of Lancaster. The like may be said of the Office of Earl-Marshal, which
descended by an Heir Female to the House of Norfolk. All which Offices are as
unsit to be exercised by a woman, as for a Woman to be summoned by Writ to the
Parli^ment as a Baroness, etc.

Many Noble Houses also in England do support and lawfully bear the Dignity of
a Baronage unto them descended by a Woman.

The first Argument contra.
They which stand of the Negative part in this Controversy, do encounter their
Adversaries in this manner, viz. The Writ of Summons to the Parliament, whereby
the Baron by Writ has his Original, is to call that Honorable and Worthy
Person so summoned to the number of that Right, High, and Honorable Assembly,
and to be a Judge, to sit, hear, and determine Life and Member, Plea and right
of Land, if there shall come occasion: likewise to give Counsel and Advise in
the most mighty Affairs of the Realm: But these things are convenient for the
quality and condition of men; unfitting, and altogether unbeseeming the Sex of
women.

Ergo, having respect unto the scope and final purpose of such Writs, such
Inheritances should only descend unto the Heir Female.

The Second Argument contra.
Secondly, If it shall be answered, That although the Heir Female, to whom such
Inheritance is descended, be unfit in her own person for the accomplishing of
these things; yet she may marry with one sufficiently able for her, and in her
behalf to execute the same. This Answer will neither satisfy nor salve the
inconveniences: For admit that such an Heir Female were at full Age at the
death of her Ancestor, unmarried; for it does lie in her own choice then whom
shall be her Husband.

The Third Argument contra.
Thirdly, If such Husband shall be called by the right of his Wife, the Writ
shall make some mention thereof; for otherwise it may well be taken that the
Husband was chosen in his own person, and in behalf of himself, and not in
regard of his wife, or such pretended Dignity descended unto him. But there was
never such a Writ of Summons seen wherein the wife was mentioned. And if the
husband of such a wife have been called to the Parliament (which is always by
General Writ) not mentioning his wife, he is thereby made a Baron of himself by
virtue of the said Writ. Having thus heard both sides to dispute place, it does
now require to interpose Opinion to compound the Controversy. This point in
que^tion is somewhat perplexed by means of difficult Presidents: For first it
is observed, That some Presidents do prove that Baronies by Writ have descended
unto Heirs Female, whose husbands have been called to Parliament, whether in
regard of themselves, or in respect of their wives right, it makes no matter:
but since it is, that the marriage of such Ladies gave that occasion to be
summoned, and such husbands and their Po^^erity have and do lawfully bear the
same Title of Dignity, which the Ancestors of such a wife did before rightfully
bear: For by this Controversy the^e is no purpose to call the right of such
Noble Houses into question. Howbeit, Secondly, this is to be observed out of
the Presidents, and to be acknowledged of every dutiful Subject, That the
King's Majesty is nevertheless at liberty to call to his High Council of
Parliament, whom he shall in his Princely Wisdom think fit, which by his
Majesty's Noble Progenitors have in former Ages likewise observed.

And therefore whereas Ralph Lord Cromwell, being a Baron by Writ, died without
Issue, having two Sisters and Coheirs, Elizabeth the eldest, who married Sir
Thomas Nevile Knight, and Joan the younger, who married Sir Humphrey Butcher
Knight, who was called to Parliament as Lord Cromwell, and not the said Sir
Thomas. Thirdly, It is to be observed, That if a Baron by Writ die without Heir
Male, having his Daughter, Sister, or other Collateral Heir Male that can
challenge the Land of the said Baron deceased by any ancient entail, or
otherwise, the Title of such an Heir Female has heretofore been allowed, as by
the honorable Opinions and Relations of the Right Honorable the late
Commissioners in the Office of Earl-Marshal, signified unto the late Queen,
upon Petition of the Sister and Heir of Gregory Lord Dacres deceased, may
appear.

Moreover, in the same Pedigree of the Lord Dacres it was expressed, That
Thomas, sometimes Lord Dacres, had issue Thomas his eldest Son, Ralph his
Second, and Humphrey his third. Thomas, the eldest, died in the life of his
Father, having issue Joan Daughter and Heir, who was married to Sir Richard
Fines Knight, and after Thomas Lord Dacres his Grandfather, and Father to the
said Ralph and Humphrey, died; after whose death Henry the Sixth, by his
Letters Patents bearing date at Westminster the Seventh of November, in the
Seventh year of his Reign, reciting the said Pedigree and Marriage, does by his
said Letters Patents accept, declare, and repute the said Richard Fines to be
Lord Dacres, and one of the Barons of the Realm. But afterward, in the time of
Edward the Fourth, the said Humphrey Dacres, after the attainder of the said
Ralph, and himself by an Act of Parliament, which was the first of Edward the
Fourth; And after the death of the said Ralph, and the Reversal of the said Act
by another Act in the Twelfth of Edward the Fourth, the said Humphrey made
challenge unto the said Barony, and unto diverse Lands of the said Thomas his
Father, whereupon both parties, after their Title had been considered of in
Parliament, submitted themselves to the Arbitrament of King Edward the Fourth,
and entered into Bond each to other for the performance thereof; whereupon the
said King, in his Award under his Privy Seal, bearing date at Westminster the
Eighth of April, Anno Regni sui decimo tertio, did Award that the said Richard
Fines, in the right of Joan his wife, and the Heirs of his body by the said
Joan begotten, should keep, have, and use the same Seat and Place in every
Parliament, as the said Thomas Dacres Knight, Lord Dacres, had used and kept;
and that the Heirs of the body of the said Thomas Dacres Knight, then late Lord
Dacres, begotten, should have and hold to them and to their Heirs the Manor of
Holbeach. And further, That the said King Edward did Award on the other part,
that the said Humphrey Dacres Knight, and the Heirs Males of the said Thomas,
late Lord Dacres, should be reputed, had, named, and called the Lord Dacres of
Gillesland; and that he, and the Heirs Males of the body of the said Thomas,
then late Lord Dacres, should have, use, and keep the place in Parliament next
adjoining beneath the said place, which the said Richard Fines Knight, Lord
Dacres, then had and occupied.

And that the Heirs of the body of the said Joan his wife shall have and enjoy,
and that the Heirs Males of the said Thomas Dacres, late Lord Dacres, should
have to them and the Heirs Males of their bodies begotten, the Manor of
Iothington, etc. And so note, that the name of the ancient Barony, namely
Gillesland, remained unto the Heir Male to whom the Land was entailed.

Moreover this is specially observed, If any Baron by Writ do die, having no
other Issue than Female, and that by some special entail, or other assurance,
there be an Heir Male which does enjoy all or great part of the Lands,
Possessions, and Inheritances of such Baron deceased, the Kings have used to
call to the Parliament by Writ, as Baron, such Heir Male, omitting the Husband
of the Issue of such Heir Female. And this also appears by a notable
Controversy in the time of Henry the Seventh, between Sir Robert Willoughby
Lord Brook, and Richard Lord Lattimer, for the Barony of Lattimer, which in
effect was; The said Lord Brook did challenge the Barony of Lattimer, as Co^in
and Heir of Elizabeth his Great-grandmother, who was Sister and Heir of John
Nevill Lord Lattimer, who died without Issue: And hereupon exhibited a Petition
to Henry the Seventh in Parliament; whereunto Richard Lord Lattimer was called
to answer, because he then enjoyed the said Title and Dignity.

The said Richard Lord Lattimer did by his Answer show, That after the death of
the said John Nevill Lord Lattimer without Issue, the said Elizabeth was his
Sister, and next Heir, and married unto Thomas Willoughby Knight, second Son of
the Lord Willoughby. But Henry the Sixth, for that the said John Nevill Lord
Lattimer was dead without Issue, and that the next Heir was Female, did
therefore call to the Parliament George Nevill Knight, second Son of Henry Earl
of Westmoreland, to be Lord Lattimer, as Cousin and next Heir Male of the said
John Nevill Lord Lattimer; which George was Grandfather of the said Richard
Lord Lattimer, Father of the said Richard. In debate of which cause, the
Question now in hand, namely, Whether a Barony by Writ may descend to the Heirs
Female? was advisedly considered of by the King and his Nobility in Parliament,
and in the end adjudged with the said Richard Lord Lattimer; which President
does afford us two Judgments in this point: And in the time of Henry the Sixth,
when the Writ was directed to the said Sir George Nevill Knight, whereby he was
summoned as Lord Lattimer to the Parliament, and as Heir Male, and not the said
Thomas Willoughby Knight, husband of the said Elizabeth, Heir Female. And the
second Judgment was given in the time of Henry the Seventh, whereby the said
Barony was adjudged to the said Richard Lord Lattimer, coming out of the
special Heir Male, against the Lord Brook, descended of the general Heir Male.

But here in this President before remembered of the Barony of Dacres, may be
objected to encounter this Conclusion; for there was an Heir Female married
unto Sir Richard Fines; who by the Declaration of King Henry the Sixth, was
Baron of Dacres in right of his wife. And there was also Ralph and Humphrey,
the Heirs Males, before whom the Heir Female was preferred by the censure of
Henry the Sixth, and Edward the Fourth. This Objection is easily answered; for
although Henry the Sixth, through the Princely favor which he bore unto Sir
Richard Fines, had declared him to be Lord Dacres in right of his wife; yet
notwithstanding did Ralph Dacres, being Heir Male then unto the Lord Dacres,
and by that name was attainted in Parliament Anno primo Hen. 4.

Wherefore the reason why the Heir Male could not be regarded was the said
Attainder of the said Ra^ph and Humphrey his brother; and therefore when
Humphrey in the 12 th of Edward the Fourth, labored to have the said Attainder
Reversed, he submitted himself to the Arbitrament of the King, who to satisfy
both Competitors, both having deserved of him after he had admitted them to his
favor, he allowed one to be Lord Dacres, and the other to be the Lord Dacres
of Gillesland.

And thus much concerning the second Point, Whether a Barony by Writ may
descend unto the Heir Female.

The third Point.
As concerning the third Point, admitting such Descent to be to the Heir
Female, when there is no Heir Male that may claim the same; for then does this
Question take place, Whether the husband of such an Heir Female shall enjoy the
Dignity in right of his wife, or no? Wherein we are to rest upon a Resolution
had and given to this special Question, which was in this manner.

In the time of Henry the Eighth, when Mr. Winby took upon him the style of
Lord Talbois in right of his wife, having no Issue by her; The said King,
assisted both by Civil and Temporal Lawyers, gave Sentence, That no husband of
a Baroness, in her right, should use that Style and Dignity, until he had by
her a Child, whereby she should become Tenant by Courtesy unto her
Inheritance. The special Reasons that occasioned this Sentence, were two.

First, It should be convenient for her husband this day to be a Baron and a
Peer of the Realm, and to morrow, by the death of his wife, to become none, and
without the default of the party.

Secondly, If he had Issue by wife, and were entitled to be Tenant by the
Courtesy of England of his wives Lands, if he shall not also bear the Style
and Dignity of his Wives Barony, then should the Son, after the death of his
mother, dying in the life time of his father, be a Baron and Lord without Land;
for so the father should have the Land as Tenant by Courtesy, and the Son the
Lordship without Land. And thus much said concerning the Nature, Quality, and
Estate of a Baron by Writ, and for the Resolution of the several points and
Articles of the Question proposed, may suffice.

CHAP. XII. Barons by Patent, which is the third kind of Barons mentioned in
the former Division of Barons.
THere is also a fourth means of Creation, viz. by Act of Parliament: but the
first two mentioned, and this other by Patent, is most usual for the Honor of
the King; for thereby the Donation does proceed from his Majesty only, as from
the Fountain of Honor: But when the Creation is by Parliament, the King ever
is one, and may be said to be Donor.

A Baron therefore by Creation by reason of Letters Patents, is that noble
Person whom the King, or any of his Progenitors, Kings of this Realm, have
created Baron by such their Letters Patents, began in the Reign of King Richard
the Second.

This kind of Dignity of a Baron shall be of such continuance in Descent, or
otherwise, as shall be limited in the Habendum in such Letters Patents
contained: for it may be but for the life of him to whom it is given, or for
term vanter vie, as some hold Opinion in the 32 of Hen. 6. for cujus est dare
est disponere. It may be in special in our general Tail; and this kind of Tail
was usual before the Statute made decimo tertio of Edw. 1. by which Estate Tail
of Lands and Tenements was created, as appears by the Patent whereby Hubert
de Burgo was made Earl of Kent in the time of Henry the Third, by these words;
Habendum sibi and haeredibus suis de corpore Margaretae uxoris sui, sorors
Alexandri Regis Scotiae, procreatis, and pro defectu talis exitus remanere in
directis haeredibus dicti Huberti. And that Estates intayl are at this Day of
Titles of Honor by the said Statute of Westminster the second.

Question.
If a Nobleman and his Progenitors have for a long time been called to
Parliament, and be a Baron either by Tenure or Writ, and have had in regard
thereof a place certain in Parliament; if afterward the said Nobleman should
be created a Baron of that Barony, and by the same name by Letters Patents,
whether shall he and his Heirs retain his old place in Parliament, which he had
according to his former Dignity; or whether shall he lose his old place, and
take a new one, according to the time of his Creation?

Answer.
The Case of the Lord Delaware lately erected a Resolution somewhat answerable
to this Question: Thomas Delaware in the third of Edward the Sixth, being in
some displeasure with William West his Heir and Nephew, who was Father to
Thomas late Lord Delaware, and Grandfather to Henry Lord Delaware that Nevis
procured by Act of Parliament, by which the said William West was; during his
natural life only, clearly disabled to claim, demand, or have any manner of
Right, Title, or Interest by Descent, Remainder, or otherwise, in or to the
Manors, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, Title and Dignity of Thomas Lord
Delaware his Uncle, etc. After the said Thomas Delaware died, and the said
William West was in the time of Queen Mary attainted of Treason by Verdict, but
pardoned by the said Queen; and afterward by Parliament, in the time of Queen
Elixabeth, was restored; and in the fourth year of her Reign was created Lord
Delaware by Patent, and took place in Parliament accordingly, for that by the
said Act of Parliament of Edward the Sixth, he was excluded to challenge the
former ancient Barony; and after he died. Now whether Thomas Delaware should
take his place according to the ancient Barony by Writ, or according to his
Father's Creation by Patent, was the Question. The Opinions of the late Queens
Council, being his Majesty's Attorney General and Solicitor, were, That the
acceptance of the new Creation by the said William West could not extinguish
the ancient Dignity, for that he had not the ancient Dignity in him at that
time of his Creation; but the Dignity was by the Act of Parliament 3 Edw. 6. in
the balance of suspense or consideration of Law, and he thereby utterly
disabled to have the same during his life, only so as other acceptance could
not extinguish that Dignity which he then had not, nor could not conclude his
Heir, who was not disabled by the Parliament 3 Edw. 6. to claim the ancient
Barony; which Opinion of theirs was seen and allowed by the then Chief Justice
of England, and Lord Chief Baron, and so signified to the Lord Keeper. But this
to be noted by the Reasons made for the said Resolution, though if the said Sir
William West had been Baron, and entitled, and in possession of the ancient
Dignity, when he accepted the ancient Creation, the Law perchance might have
been otherwise; but that remains as yet unresolved: Nevertheless the Rule is,
Eodem modo, quo quid constituitur, dissolvitur. But by a Grant which is but a
matter of Fact, a man cannot transfer his Title of Honor. And thus much
concerning the Degrees of Barons within this Realm upon this occasion, for the
better understanding and direction of that which follows to be handled. And
in this place I think it not impertinent to mention one Case, which I met with
in our Books of Common Law, concerning the Descent of a Title of Honor,
whereof the Ancestor had Estate in Feesimple; there is a Maxim in the Law,
Possessio fratris in feodo facit sororemesse haeredem: But if a man by any of
the three means aforesaid be created into a Title of Dignity to him and his
Heirs for ever, and so have Issue by one wife a Son and a Daughter, and has
also a Son by a second wife; afterward the Father dies, and his eldest Son
enters into all his Father's Inheritances, and also enjoys the Titles and
Dignities which his Father had, but dies without Issue: In this Case the
Dignity shall descend upon the younger Son, though he be but of the half blood
to him that last enjoyed that Name and Title of descent, and shall not descend
to his Sister of the whole blood. And yet in this case he shall only be her
Brother's Heir of all his Feesimple Lands; and the reason thereof is, because
possessio fratris is the name and sole cause which may give Title to her, his
Sister, which fails in this case of Dignity; for it cannot be said that her
elder brother was in possession of his Title of Honor, no more than of his
blood; so as neither by his own act, nor any act to be done by any other, did
gain more actual possession (if so it may be termed) then by the Law did
descend to him: and therefore the younger brother may well by the Law make
himself Heir unto his Father of the Honor, that he cannot be heir unto his
brother: So that this word [Possession] which is no other than pedis positio,
extends only unto such things of which a man may, by h^s entry, or other act
be possessed, and does require actual possession. Coke's third part, 92.

Having thus much treated concerning the Creations, and other things incident
to the degrees of Nobility, I cannot omit some things concerning the
sufficiency and ability of Estate, which the Law does require to be in every of
them, according to their several Dignities. The Common Law (which always will
decorum and convenience be observed, considering the Charges and Dignities
appertaining to these Degrees and Dignities, being Offices of principal Service
to the King and Realm, both in War and Peace) has ordered, that each of them
ought to have a convenient Portion and Inheritance in Land to support the said
Dignity, which Supplies are as Sinews conjoined in the same: For in Virtue and
Riches (as Aristotle confesses) all the old Nobility consisted, and which two
Properties makes a good Complement; for utilior est sapientia cum divitiis
conjuncta. Therefore a Knight's Fee which he ought to have is Twenty pounds
Land by the year; a Baron's thirteen Knights Fees and a quarter; and an Earl's
twenty Knights Fees. For always the fourth part of each Revenues, which is by
the Law held requisite for the Dignity, shall be paid to the King for the
Relief. As for Example; the Relief of a Knight is five pounds, which is the one
fourth of his Revenue, according to the Statute of the first of Edward the
Second. The Relief of a Baron is One hundred Marks, which is also the fourth
part of his Revenue. And the Relief of an Earl is One hundred pounds al^o, the
fourth part of his Revenue. And it appears by the Records of the Exchequer,
that the Relief of a Duke amounts unto Three hundred pounds. And this is the
reason in our Books, that every of the Nobility is presumed in the Law to have
sufficient Freehold ad sustinendum nomen and onus. And to what value those
ancient Fees in the time of Henry the Third, and Edward the Fourth, at this day
do amount unto, most men are not unskilful in, Coke's seventh part, 33. And in
Cases of Decay of Ability, and Estate, as Senatores Romani amoti Senatu, so
sometimes they are not admitted to the Upper House of Parliament, though they
still keep their Title and Dignity. Sir Thomas Smith de Republica A^glorum 22.
and by the Statute made 31 Hen. 8. cap. 10. the Lords have their places
prescribed after this manner as follows, viz. These four, the Lord
Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, the Lord President of the Council, and the Lord
Privy Seal, being Persons of the Degree of a Baron or above, are in the same
Act appointed to sit in Parliament, and in all Assemblies and Councils above
all Dukes, not being of the Blood Royal, viz. the King's Uncle, Brother, and
Nephew. And these six, viz. the Lord Great Chamberlain of England, the Lord
High Constable of England, the Lord Marshal of England, the Lord Admiral of
England, the Lord High Steward of his Majesty's Household, and the Lord
Chamberlain also of his M^jesties Household, by that Act are to be placed in all
Assemblies of Council after the Lord Privy Seal, according to their Degrees: So
that if he be a Baron, than he is to sit above all Barons; or if an Earl, above
all Earls. And so likewise the King's Secretaries, being Barons or Earls, have
place above all Barons or Earls.

PRIVILEGES Incident to the NOBILITY According to the Laws of England. CHAP.
XIII.
WHEN a Peer of the Realm, and Lord of the Parliament, is to be Arraigned upon
any Trespass or Felony whereof he is indicted, and whereupon he has pleaded
Not Guilty, the King by his Letters Patens shall assign some great and sage
Lord of the Parliament to be High Steward of England for the day of his
Arraignment, who before the said day shall make a Precept to his Sergeant at
Arms, that is appointed to serve him during the time of his Commission, to warn
to appear before him Eighteen or Twenty Lords of the Parliament (or Twelve at
the least) upon the same day. And then at the time appointed, when the High
Steward shall be set under the Cloth of Estate, upon the Arraignment of the
Prisoner, and having caused the Commission to be read, the same Sergeant shall
return his Precept, and thereupon the Lords shall be called; and when they have
appeared, and are set in their places, the Con^^able of the Tower shall be
called to bring his Prisoner to the Bar, and the High Steward shall declare to
the Prisoner the cause why the King has assembled thither those Lords, and
himself, and persuade him to answer without fear; and then he shall call the
Clerk of the Crown to read his Indictment unto him, and to ask him, if he be
Guilty, or not: whereunto when he has answered Not Guilty, the Clerk of the
Crown shall ask him How he will be tried, and then he will say, By God and his
Peers. Then the King's Sergeant and Attorney will give Evidence against him;
whereunto when the Prisoner has made answer, the Constable shall be commanded
to receive the Prisoner from the Bar to some other place, whilst the Lords do
secretly confer together in the Court; and then the Lords shall rise out of
their places, and consult amongst themselves, and what they affirm shall be
done upon their Honor, without any Oath to be ministered upon them. And when
all, or the greatest part of them, shall be agreed, they shall retire to their
places, and sit down. Then the High Steward shall ask of the youngest Lord by
himself, if he that is Arraigned be Guilty or not of the Offense whereof he is
Arraigned, and then the youngest next him, and so of the residue one by one,
until he has asked them all; and every Lord shall answer by himself. And then
the Steward shall send for the Prisoner again, who shall be led to the Bar, to
whom the High Steward shall rehearse the Verdict of the Peers, and give
Judgment accordingly.

The Antiquity and Original of this kind of Trial, by the opinion of several
Authors, is grounded from the Statute of Magna Charta, so called, not in
respect of the quantity, but of the weight of it. Coke to the Reader before his
eight part, fol. 2. cap. 29. beginning thus, Millus liber homo, etc. nec super
eum ibimus, nec super eum mittemus, nisi per legale judicium parium suorum. But
I take it to be more ancient than the time of Henry the Third, as brought into
the Realm with the Conqueror, being answerable to the Norman and French Laws,
and agreeable with the Custom Feudale, where almost all Controversies arising
between the Sovereign and the Vassal are tried per Iudicium parium suorum.

And if a Peer of the Realm, upon his Arraignment of Treason, do stand mute, or
will not answer directly, Judgment shall be given against him as a Traitor
Convict, and he shall not be pressed to death, and thereby save the forfeiture of
his Lands; for Treason is out of the Statute of Westminster 1. chap. 12. 15.
Ed. 4. 33. Dyer 205. But if he be Arraigned upon Indictment of Felony, he may
be mute. This privilege has some restraint, as well in regard of the person,
as in the manner of proceeding. As touching the person; first the Archbishops
and Bishops of this Realm, although they be Lords of the Parliament, if they be
impeached of such offense, they shall not be tried by the Peers of the Realm,
but by a Jury of Knights, and other substantial Persons upon their Oaths; the
reason thereof alleged is so much as Archbishops and Bishops cannot pass in
the like cases upon Peers, for that they are prohibited by the Common and
Ecclesiastical Laws to be judged of Life and Blood. Reason would that the other
Peers should not try them; for this Trial should be mutual, forasmuch as it is
performed upon their Honors, without any Oath taken. And so by the way you may
see the great respect the Law has to a Peer of the Realm, when he speaks
upon his Honor, even in a case concerning the life of a man, and that of a
Peer; and therefore ought they much more to keep their Words and Promises in
smaller matters, when they engage their Honor for any just cause or
consideration.

Secondly, as touching these persons, no Temporal Lords, but they that are
Lords of the Parliament, shall have this kind of Trial; and therefore out of
this are excluded the eldest Son and Heir apparent of a Duke in the life of his
Father, though he be called an Earl. And it was the case of Henry Howard Earl
of Surrey, Son and Heir apparent to Thomas Duke of Norfolk, in 38 Hen. 8. which
is in Brook's Abridgment Treason, 2. Likewise, the Son and Heir apparent of an
Earl, though he be called a Lord. And all the younger Sons of Kings are Earls
by birth, though they have no other Creation; but shall not be partaker of
these or other Privileges incident to the Lords of the Parliament.

Thirdly, Those that are Barons, and of the Nobility of Scotland or Ireland, if
upon the like Offense committed in England they be apprehended in England, they
shall not have this Trial by Peers, no, though they were born in England; for
they received their Dignity from a King of England of other Nations: But if the
King of England do at this day create one of his Subjects of Scotland or
Ireland an Earl, Viscount, Baron, or other Peer of this Realm; or by his
ordinary Writ of Summons under his Great Seal do call him to the Upper House of
Parliament, and assign him a place, and to have Voice free amongst the Lords
and Peers there assembled, he shall be partaker with them in all privileges.

And thus much concerning the restraint of the Privileges in respect of the
persons 39 Ed. 3.

And touching the manner of proceeding, it appears by the said Statute of
Magna Charta, chap. 29. That a Peer of the Realm shall be tried by his Peers
only, in case where he is indicted at the King's Suit of Treason or Felony; for
the words of the Statute be Nec super eum ibimus, etc.

But if any Appeal of Murder of Felony be sued by any common person against a
Peer of the Realm, he shall be tried by common persons, and not by his Peers.

And so was Fines Lord Dacres tried in Appeal of Murder. The Nobility of this
Realm do enjoy this privilege, That they are not to be impannelled on any Jury
or Inquest to make trial or inquiry upon their Corporal Oaths between party and
party, for they may have a Writ for their Discharge to the Sheriff.

But it is a Rule in Law, Vigilantibus non dormientibus subveniant jura. For if
the Sheriff have not received any such Writ, and the Sheriff have returned any
such Lord on Juries, or in Assize, etc. and they thereupon do appear, they
shall be sworn; if they do not appear, they shall lose their Issues 35 Hen. 6.
and in such case they must purchase a Writ out of the Chancery reciting their
privileges, directed to the Justices before whom such Noble persons are so
impannelled, commanding to dismiss him or them that were so impannelled out of
the said Panel, F.N.B. 165.

This privilege has, in two causes, not been allowed, or taken place: 1. If
the enquiry concern the King and the Commonwealth, in any necessary and
important degree or business of the Realm. And therefore diverse Barons of the
Marshes of Wales were impannelled before the Bishop of Ely, and other
Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, to enquire of a notable outrage committed
by Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, against Humphrey de Bohun, Earl of
Hereford and Essex, and his Tenants in Wales, in the Twelfth year of Edward the
First, where John de Hastings, Edmond de Mortimer, Theobald Beardmoe, and other
Barons of the Marshes, challenged their privileges aforesaid, and much
insisted upon the same. But it was afterward answered by the Court, as by the
words in the Record appears. The Barons aforesaid did persist in the
Challenge, and in the end both the said Earls, between whom the said outrage
had been perpetrated, submitted themselves to the King's Grace, and made their
Fines. Secondly, This privilege has no place in case of necessity, where the
truth of the case cannot otherwise come to light; for the words in the Writ in
the Register are, Nisi sua praesentia ob aliquam causam specialiter exigatur,
etc.

If any Nobleman do bring an Action of Debt upon Account, in case where the
Plaintiff is to be examined (which is always intended to be upon Oath) upon the
truth of his cause, by virtue of the Statute of the fifth of Henry the Fourth,
chap. 8. it shall suffice to examine his Attorney, and not himself upon his
Oath.

And this privilege the Law has given to the Nobility, That they are not
Arrested upon any Warrant of a Justice of Peace for their good behavior, or
breach of Peace; nor by a Supplicavit out of Chancery, or from the King's
Bench: For such an Opinion has the Law conceived of the peaceable disposition
of Noblemen, that it has been thought enough to take their promise upon their
Honor in that behalf. And as in Civil Causes, the like Rule does the Court of
Equity observe in Cases of Conscience; for if the Defendant be a Peer of the
Realm in the Star Chamber, or Court of Chancery, a Subpaena shall not be
awarded, but a Letter from the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper in lieu thereof.
And if he do not appear, no Attachment shall go out against him: For in the
Fourteenth year of Queen Elizabeth this Order and Rule was declared in the
Parliament Chamber, That an Attachment is not awarded by Common Law, Custom,
or President, against any Lord of Parliament. And if he do appear, and make his
Bill of Complaint upon his Honor only, he is not compelled to be sworn. But by
the Statute 5 Eliz. cap. 1. it is enacted, That all Knights and Burgesses of
Parliament shall take the Oath of Supremacy, and so shall Citizens and Barons
of the Cinque Ports, being returned of the Parliament, before they enter into
the Parliament House; which Oath shall be according to the tenor, effect, and
form of the same, as is set forth in the Statutue of 1 Eliz. Provided always,
that forasmuch as the Queens Majesty is otherwise sufficiently assured of the
Faith and Loyalty of the Temporal Lords of her High Court of Parliament,
therefore this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall not extend to compel
any Temporal person of or above the Degree of a Baron of this Realm to take the
said Oath, nor to incur any penalty limited by the said Act for not taking the
same.

If a Peer be sued in the Common Pleas in an Action of Debt or Trespass, and
Process be awarded by Capias or Exigit against him, then he may sue out a
Certiorari in the Chancery, directed to the Justices of the Common Pleas,
testifying that he is a Peer of the Realm. For unless the Court be certified by
the King's Writ out of the Chancery, that the Defendant is a Peer of
Parliament, if a Capias or Exigit issue forth against him, it is no Error,
neither is it punishable in the Sheriff, his Bailiffs or Officers, if they
execute the said Process, and arrest the body of such a Noble person; for it
appertains not to them to argue or dispute the Authority of the Court. But if
the Court be thereof certified as aforesaid, they will award a Supersedeas,
which is in the Books of Entries in the Title of Error, Sect. 20.

And there are two Reasons or Causes, wherefore no Capias or Exigit lies
against any Peer; one because of the dignity of their persons, and the other by
intendment of Law. There is none of the Nobility but have sufficient Freehold,
which the Plaintiffs may extend for their payment or satisfaction. But a Capias
or Exigit lies against a Knight, for the Law has not that Opinion of his
Freehold. And if any of the Nobility happen to be so wilful, and not to appear,
the Court will compel the Sheriff to return great Issues against him, and so at
every default to increase the issues, as lately against the Earl of Lincoln
has been in practice.

By the ancient Laws of this Realm, before the coming of William the Conqueror,
many good Laws were made for keeping the Peace; and amongst others, That all
above the age of twelve years should be sworn to the King; which we in
remembrance thereof do keep at this day in the view of Frank Pledge, or the
Court Leet. But Noblemen of all sorts, are neither bound to attend the Court
Leet, nor to take the Oath, as appears by Britan. c. 29. treating of the
Court called the Sheriffs Tourn, out of which the Leet to be extracted. And
agreeable thereunto is the Statute of Marlbridge, cap. 10. See the Lord
Chancellor's Speech in the case of Postnati, fol. 78. If a Writ of Error be
brought in Parliament upon a Judgment given in the King's Bench, the Lords of
the higher House alone, without the Commons, are to examine the Errors, ibid.
fol. 22.

In the 11 th of Henry the Fourth, fol. 26. in a Case concerning a Distress
taken for Expenses and Fees, the Knights of the Parliament are not contributary
for such Lands as are parcel of their ancient Lordships and Baronies; but for
other Lands they are. But there is a Question made, If one which is no Baron,
but ignoble, do purchase any ancient Barony, whether he shall be discharged of
such Expenses and Fees, or not? Which is not worthy the questioning: For as
Land holden by Villainous Service does not make him a Villain or Bondsman, which
being free does purchase the same, although by his Tenure he shall be bound to
do such Villainous Service: So on the other side, Land that is holden by Barony
does not make the Villain or Ignoble which purchases the same, to be Noble,
although the charge of such Tenure do lie upon him in respect of the Service of
the Realm.

It is said in our Books, That a day of Grace, or by the favor of the Court,
is not to be granted to the Plaintiff in any Suit or Action whereby a Nobleman
is Defendant; because thereby a Nobleman should be longer delayed than the
ordinary course of the Court is; and such a Lord is to have expedition of
Justice, in respect that he is to attend the person of the King, and the
Service of the Commonwealth: But if there be no Noble person to the Suit, the
Judges do and may at their discretion, upon a motion, grant a day more of Grace
otherwise than by the strict course of the Law the Plaintiff may challenge.
Cambden, f. 169. writing upon this Subject, says, Where a Nobleman is
Demandant, the Defendant may not be assoyned for the delay and cause aforesaid.
To which I could also subscribe, but that the Book in the fifth of Hen. 4. 15.
b. is otherwise adjudged: There the King brought a Quare Impedit against a
common person, and the Defendant was essoyned by a Rule of Court.

If any Peer of the Realm be Plaintiff or Defendant in any Action, real or
personal, aagainst any other, whereupon any Issue is to be tried by a Jury, the
Sheriff must return one Knight at the least to be of the Inquest; otherwise
upon challenge made the whole panel shall be quashed. Which by order of the
Law is appointed to be done for honor and reverence due to the person of that
degree: For when a Peer of the Realm is party, it is otherwise than when the
Suit is between private persons; F. N. B. Title Challenge 115. 13. Edward the
Third in a Quare Impedit against a Bishop adjudged. But the Earl of Kent in the
fourteenth year of the late Queen's Reign, and the parties did plead to an
Issue, the Venire Facias is awarded, which the Sheriff did return ^^rved, and a
panel returned accordingly, in which is no Knight named. The truth of which
Case was, that after the return made, the Demand is published, and demanded by
the Queen and the Heralds to be Earl of Kent in right and descent, although he
had not been so reputed or named before; and also after that time (that is to
say) at the then last Parliament, the Tenant is made a Baron by Writ of
Parliament, and then the Jury does appear in the Court of Common Pleas, and the
Earl of Kent did challenge the Array, because no Knight was returned: but it
was not allowed him by the Court, for the admittance of both parties is to the
contrary, and no default can be laid to the Sheriff, for he had no notice of
the honorable Es^ate of either of the parties; the Demandant not being then
known or reputed to be an Earl by descent, or of the Tenant then also being no
Baron. How much the Common Law has always prohibited perpetuity in Lands and
Tenements, you may see in Corbet's Case, in the first part of Coke's Book, fol.
48. and in many other Cases in the rest of his Books. As also Littleton, fol.
145. says it is a principle in the Law, that every Land in Feesimple may be
charged with a Rent. But if the King's Majesty, upon a Creation of any Peer of
the Realm, of what degree soever, do as the manner is by Letters Patent give
unto any such new created Nobleman an Annuity or Rent for the support of his
degree, which they call Creation-money; this is so annexed to the dignity, that
by no Grant, Assurance, or any manner of Alienation it can be given from the
Lord, but is still incident, and a support of the same Creation.

In all Cases wherein is any Suit, a Baron or Peer of the Realm is to be
amerced no less than five pounds; but the amercement of a Duke is One hundred
pounds. Although the Statute of Magna Charta, chap. 14. be in the Negative,
viz. Comites and Barons non amercientur nisi per pares suos, and non nisi
secundum modum delicti; yet use has reduced it into a certainty. As also by
the same Statute it appears, that such Amercements should be assessed per
pares suos: but that it were troublesome to assemble Barons for so small a
matter, such Amercements in times past have been assessed by the Barons of the
Exchequer, who sometime were Barons of the Realm, as is already taken notice
of; and so writes Bracton lib. 3. tract. cap. 1. fol. 116.8.

Whereas by Statute 32 Hen. 8. cap. 16. it is enacted, That the Subjects of
this Realm shall not keep in their Houses or Families above the number of four
Strangers born; nevertheless, by a Proviso in the same Act, every Lord of the
Parliament has this privilege allowed unto him to keep in his Family the
number of six born Strangers.

By the Statute 14 Hen. 8. cap. 13. a privilege was granted to the Nobility
according to their degrees concerning Apparel; but because by a Statute made in
the first of the King that now is, chap. 15. all Laws and Statutes concerning
Apparel are taken away.

Whereas by the Statute 2 Hen. 5. Parl. 2. cap. 1. it is ordained, That the
Justices of the Peace in every County, named of the Quorum, shall be resident
in the Shires wherein they are Justices, there is a Proviso whereby the Lords
and Peers of the Realm, named in such Commissions, are excepted.

By the Statute 1 Edw. 6. cap. 12. amongst other things it is enacted, That in
all and every Case and Cases, where any of the King's Subjects shall and may
upon his prayer have the privilege of the Clergy, as a Clark Convict, that may
make purgation in all the Cases, and every of them, and also in all and every
Cases of Felony wherein the privilege or benefit of Clergy is taken away by
this Statute, wilful Murder, and poisoning only excepted, the Lords and Peers
of the Realm having place and voice in Parliament, shall by virtue of this Act
of Common Grace, upon his or their requests and prayer, alleging that he is a
Lord or Peer of this Realm, claiming the benefit of this Act, though he cannot
read, without burning in the Hand, loss of Inheritance, or corruption of Blood,
be adjudged, taken, and used for the first time only to all constructions,
intents, and purposes as a Clark Convict, which may make purgations without any
other benefit of Clergy to any such Lord or Peer from thenceforth at any time
after for any cause to be allowed, adjudged, or admitted, any Law, Custom,
Statute, or other thing to the contrary notwithstanding. By this Statute a Lord
of the Parliament shall have the benefit of his Clergy, where a common person
shall not, viz. for breaking open an House by day or night, or for robbing any
on the Highway, and in all other Cases excepted, saving in wilful Murder and
Poisoning, but in all other Cases, wherein Clergy is taken away by any Statute
made since the said Statute of 1 Edw. 6. he is in the same degree that a common
and inferior person: but the Court will not give him the benefit of this
Statute, if he does not require it. If a Lord of the Parliament do confess his
Offense upon his Arraignment, or does abjure, or is Outlawed for Felony, it
seems that in these Cases he may have the benefit of this Statute, viz. his
Clergy; for that by the Statute 18 Eliz. cap. 18. he, nor any other, need to
make his purgation, but shall be forthwith delivered out of Prison by the
Justices.

By the Imperial Constitutions, Nobiles non torquentur, and Nobiles non
suspendentur, sed decapitantur: and so it is almost grown into a Custom of
England by the favor of the Prince; for it is rare to have a Nobleman executed
in other form. Yet Thomas Fines Lord Dacres of the South, in the 23 th of Henry
the Sixth, and the Lord Sturton in the fourth of Queen Mary, were hanged.

At the Common Law it was lawful for any man, Noble or Ignoble, to retain as
many Chaplains as they pleased for their instruction in Religion. But by a
Statute made 21 Hen. 8. cap. 13. a restraint was made, and a certain number
only allowed the Nobility: And such Chaplains for their attendance have
Immunities, as by the Statute at large may appear, viz. every Archbishop and
Duke may have six Chaplains, whereof every one may have, and purchase License
of Dispensation, and take, receive, and keep two Parsonages or Benefices with
Cure of Souls; and that every Marquess and Earl may have five Chaplains; every
Viscount or other Bishop four Chaplains; and every Baron and Knight of the
Garter may have three Chaplains, whereof every one of them may purchase License
of Dispensation, and take, receive, and keep two Benefices with Cure of Souls.

And forasmuch as the retaining of Chaplains by Lords and Peers of the Realm is
ordinary; and nevertheless some questions have been concerning the true
understanding of the said Statute Law, I think it not unnecessary to set down
some subsequent Resolutions of the Judges touching some matters.

If a Bishop be translated to an Archbishopric, or a Baron be created an Earl,
yet in this case they can have but only so many Chaplains as an Archbishop, or
an Earl might have; for although he has diverse Dignities, yet he is still but
one person to whom the attendance and service should be done: So if a Baron be
made a Knight of the Garter, or Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, he shall have
in all but three Chaplains, and sic de similibus.

And if such an Officer allowed by the Statute to have one, two, or more
Chaplains, do retain accordingly, and after he is removed from his Office, in
this case he cannot be now Nonresident, nor accept a second Benefice of his
Complement which was not full before his removing; and in that case it behooves
the Chaplain to procure a Non obstante, otherwise he may be punished for his
Nonresidence.

So if any Earl or Baron do retain a Chaplain, and before his advancement his
Lord is Attainted of Treason (as it was in the Case of the Earl of
Westmoreland) after the said Attainder such a Chaplain cannot except a second
Benefice; for though his Lord be still living according to Nature, yet after
the Attainder he is a dead person by the Law, and therefore out of the case to
have privilege for himself, or for his Chaplains.

If a Baron have three Chaplains, and every of them have two Benefices, and
after the Baron dies; they shall enjoy those Benefices with Cure, which were
lawfully settled in them before: But in this case, although the said Chaplains
be resident upon one of his Benefices, yet now he is become punishable for
being resident upon the other; for Cessante causa, cessat effectus.

The same Law is, if the Baron be attainted of Treason or Felony; or if any
Officer be removed from his Office, and sic de similibus.

So if a Lord do one time retain more Chaplains than are allowed by the Law,
the lawful number only shall have privilege; and in this case which of them be
first promoted shall have privilege, and the rest are excluded; for aequali
jure melior est conditio possidentis. If a Nobleman does retain Chaplains above
his number at several times, if any of his Chaplains die, the next that was
retained shall not succeed, for his first retainer was void; and therefore in
this case, it behooves him to have a new retaining after the death of the
predecessor, and before his advancement; for quod ab initio non valet, in
tractu temporis non convalescit.

If a Noble person retain such a number of Chaplains as is by the law allowed
him, but afterward the Lord, upon such dislike or other cause, do discharge
any of them from their attendance or service, the Lord in this case cannot
retain other (thereby to give them privilege) during the life of them so
retained and discharged. And the reason thereof is, because the first Chaplains
were lawfully retained, and by virtue thereof, during their lives, might
purchase Dispensations to have advantage according to the Statute: and
therefore if the discharge of their service and attendance might give liberty
to the Lord to retain others, by such means he might advance Chaplains without
number, by which the Statute might be defrauded. And the said Statute must be
strictly construed, Non-residents, and Pluralities, as a thing prejudicial to
the service of God, and the ordinary instruction of the people of God.

By the Statute 3 Hen. 7. cap. 4. it is enactect as follows; Forasmuch as by
quarrels made to such as have been in great Authority, Office, and of Council
with the King's of this Realm, has ensued the destruction of the Kings, and
therefore the undoing of this Realm, so as it has evidently appeared, when the
compassing of the death of such as were of the King's true Subjects was had,
the destruction of the Prince was imagined thereby, and for the most part it
has grown and been occasioned by malice of the King's own Household Servants;
and for that by the Laws of this Land, if actual deeds were not, there was no
remedy for such false compassing, imaginations, and confederacies had against
any Lord, or any of the King's Council, or great Officers in his Household; and
so great inconveniences did ensue, because such ungodly demeanours were not
strictly punished before that any actual deed was done; for remedy whereof, it
was by the said Statute ordained, That the Steward, Treasurer, or Comptroller
of the King's Household for the time being, or one of them, shall have full
authority to enquire by twelve discreet persons of the Check Roll of the King's
honorable Household, if any person admitted and sworn the King's Servant, and
his name put in the Check Roll, in any quality or degree whatsoever under the
state of a Lord, do make any Confederacies or Conspiracies with any person or
persons, to destroy or murder the King, or any Lord of this Realm, or any
other person sworn to the King's Council, Steward, Treasurer, or Comptroller of
the King's Household, that if it be found before the said Steward for the time
being, by the said twelve men, that any such of the King's Servants as
aforesaid has confederated or conspired as abovesaid, that he so found by the
enquiry be put thereupon to answer, and the Steward, Treasurer, or Comptroller,
or two of them have power to determine the said matter according to Law: And if
he put in trial, that then he be tried by Oath of twelve discreet men of the
same Household, and that such Misdoers have no challenge but for maliace: And if
such Misdoers be found Guilty by confession or otherwise, that the said Offense
is adjudged Felony, and they to have Judgment and Execution, as Felons
attainted ought to have by the Common Law.

By the Statute made in the second of King Henry the First, cap. 8. Authority
is given to the Sheriffs, and other the King's Justices, for the better
suppressing of Riots, to raise posse Comitatus; and the same liberty does in
Common Law guide in many other cases: Nevertheless the Sheriff may not by such
Authority command the person of any Nobleman to attend the Service. But if the
Sheriff upon a Supplicavit against a Nobleman in that case do return, that he
is so puissant that he cannot, nor dare not arrest him, the Sheriff shall be
grievously amerced for such his return: For by the Writ under the Great Seal of
England, the King's Command is to all Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Counts, and
Barons, and to all Leigemen of the County, to be aiding unto him in that which
to his Office appertains; and therefore no person whatsoever can respit the
execution of the said Writ of the King's: Also the Sheriff at his discretion
may levy three hundred men, if need be, to aid him in that behalf.

The words of the great Charter of the Forest, in the eleventh Chapter, are as
follows; To every Archbishop, Bishop, Earl, or Baron coming to us, and
passing by our Forest, it shall be lawful for him to take one Beast or two by
the view of the Forest if he be present; or else he shall cause one to blow a
Horn for him, that he seem not to steal our Deer. Although the Statute does
speak but of Bishops, Earls, and Barons, yet if a Duke, Marquess, or Viscount
(which are Lords of the Parliament) be coming toward the King by his command,
they also shall have the benefit of this Article.

So if the King send to any of the Lords aforesaid to come to his Parliament;
or send for him by Writ of Subpoena to appear in the Chancery; or by Privy Seal
to appear before his Council; or send for him by Letters Missive, or by
Messenger, or Sergeant at Arms; in all these cases he shall have the benefit of
this Statute, because that they come at the King's command. The same Law is, if
a Scire Facias go out of the Chancery or Kings Bench to a Lord of Parliament:
But if such Process go forth against a Lord to appear before the Justices of
the Common Pleas, or the Barons of the Exchequer, and he comes upon the same,
he shall not have the benefit of the Statute; for he does not come unto the
King; and the words of the Statute are, Veniens ad nos; And all the Process
which are made out of the Chancery and King's Bench, are, Quod sit coram nobis;
and so are the Process out of the Star Chamber.

Also Lords which come to visit the new King after the death of his Father
(though not sent for) shall have the same privilege. And so that this Statute
is a Warrant dormant to such Lords; which also is to be understood as well of
their returning homeward, as of their coming to the King. And note, that this
Statute does extend to give License to kill or hunt in the King's Parks, though
the Letter of the Statute be Transiens per Forestam nostram.

The Oath of Supremacy is not imposed on the Peers of the Realm.

A Peer shall for his first Offense of Felony, though he cannot read, have the
benefit of his Clergy, and without burning.

If any person shall divulge false and scandalous Reports of any Lord of
Parliament, the Offender is to be imprisoned until he bring forth the Author.

In personal Actions the Plaintiff may pray a day of Grace; but against a Lord
of Parliament it shall not be allowed him.

It is Actionable for any to deface the Coat Armor, etc. of any Nobleman or
Gentleman, that is placed in a Church or Window.

Certain Cases wherein a Lord of the Parliament has no privilege.
THE Statute of Westminster 2. cap. 39^ says, If the Sheriff return that he
cannot execute the Kings precept propter resistentiam alicujus magnatis; if it
be true, he shall punish the resisters by Imprisonment, from whence they shall
not be delivered without the Kings special commandment.

In 11 Hen. 4. 15. in homine replegiando, against Dame Spencer a Peer of the
Realm, ( viz. a Baroness born) a Capias was granted, because it was an high
injury to the person whom she eloigned, and in some other cases of great
contempt a Capias may be awarded against a Peer.

An Abbot, which was a Lord of the Parliament, was impleaded, and he did pray
privilege to appear by an Attorney: and by the Rule of the Court he could not,
because the Statute is general, and against it; but by a special Writ out of
Chancery he might; and so in case where he does pray to be received. For if a
Lord of the Parliament, holding Lands of another in Feesimple, does forbear and
withhold to do, and pay his Service to his Landlord, and that by the space of
two years; whereupon he brings a Writ of Cessment (which is his Remedy given
by Law) thereby to recover the Inheritance of the Land: But the said Lord, for
the saving of Tenancy, being minded to pay all the Arrearages before Judgment
given against him (as by the Law he ought to do) in this case he must come in
proper person, and not by an Attorney.

If a Nobleman be indicted, and cannot be found, Process of Outlary shall be
awarded against him per legem terrae, and he shall be outlawed per judicium
Coronatorum, but he shall be tried per judicium parium suorum when he appeals
and pleads to issue.

If any Lord did depart this Realm as Ambassador and otherwise, by the Kings
License, or without License, and do not return at the King's command, or upon
the Kings Writ, upon his privy Signet, the King may seize his Goods and
Chattels.

If a Lord, arrested upon a Supplicavit for the peace, do refuse to obey the
Arrest, and make Rescous, and the Sheriff do return the Rescous; upon such
return shall issue an Attachment against the said Lord for his contempt, to
take his Body; and this is a way to obtain the peace against any Lord of the
Parliament; whereas the party could not have an Attachment against him, if the
Subpoena had been duly served, and peaceably accepted of, although the said
Lord had not appeared thereupon.

All Lords are compellable to take the Oath mentioned in the Statute of the 7
th of King James, chap. 4. And see the Statute of the 7 th of King James, chap.
6. who have Authority to minister the said Oath unto them.

If a Baron that holds by Baron Tenure, have his absence excused by Essoyn,
he which casts his Essoyn or Excuse, ought to find Surety that the said
Essoyn is true. But in case of common persons, it shall rest upon the Credit
and Integrity of the Essoyner; wherein a Lord has lesser privilege than a
common person.

And whereas the Amercements should be offered per pares, the use is to refer
them to the Barons of the Exchequer.

When a Peer of the Realm is Arraigned in any Appeal of Felony, he shall not
have that privilege to be tried by his Peers (as in case of Indictment) but
must undergo the ordinary Trial of Twelve men.

Also in case of Indictment, the Defendant (though a Peer) may not challenge
any of his Triers: And the Judgment to be given against any Lord of Parliament
in cases of Felony or Treason shall be no other, than according to the usual
Judgment given against common persons. And their Execution (through the special
Grace and Favor of the King) is beheading.

By Attainder of Felony or Treason is corruption of Blood, so that their
Children may not be Heirs unto them, nor to any other Ancestor. And if he were
a Nobleman before, he is by the Attainder made Ignoble, not only himself, but
all his Children; having regard unto the Nobility which they had by their
Birth. And this corruption is so strong and high, that it cannot be salved by
the King's pardon, or otherwise than by Authority of Parliament.

But here is to be observed, That Nobility is not a thing substantial, but mere
accidental; for it may be present or absent, without corruption of the Subject
whereof it does depend; for experience shows, That the passing of honorable
Titles are restrained by exorbitant Crimes, when as Nature in the mean while
cannot be thrust away. Wherefore, though the Lawyers do call Extinguishment of
Nobility, which happens by such heinous Offenses committed by corruption of
Blood: nevertheless they use not this manner of phrase, as though Nobility were
naturally and essentially in the Honor of Blood, more than any other
hereditary Faculty; but because the right of Inheritance (which is by degrees
of communication of Blood directed) is by that means determined; and also in
regard of the hatred and detestation of the Crime, it is called corruption of
Blood.

And here a Question may arise, Whether by Attainder of the Father the Blood be
so corrupted, that the Son shall also be barred his Mother's Inheritance, who
has not transgressed, or no?

They that maintain the Affirmative, say, That forasmuch as none can be
procreated or engendered according to the course of Nature, but of a Father and
Mother, and must have in him two Bloods, viz. the Fathers and Mothers;
therefore the Law also faith, Those Bloods commixt in the person of a man in
lawful Marriage, do constitute and make him an Heir; and that none can be Heir
unto any, unless he has both Bloods in him to whom he does convey himself to
be Heir. And therefore the Heir of the half Blood shall not inherit, because he
does want one of the Bloods which should make him inheritable. And upon this
reason Britan. chap. 5. says, If a man be attainted of Felony by Judgment, the
Heirs engendered after the Attainder are precluded from all manner of succession
in the Heritage, as well of the part of the Mother as of the Father; for ex
leproso parente, leprosus generatur filius. And when the Father is attainted of
Treason or Felony, the Blood, in respect whereof he is Inheritable, being
corrupted, the same has but half his Blood, that is, the Blood of his Mother
in him without corruption. And with this does agree Bracton, lib. 3. cap. 13.
Non valebit felonis generatio, nec ad haereditatem paternam, nec maternam; si
autem ante feloniam generationem fecerit, talis generatio succedit in
haereditatem patris vel matris, a quo non fuerit felonia perpetrata. Because at
the time of his Birth he had two lawful Bloods commixt in him, which could not
be corrupted by the Attainder subsequent, but only as unto that party who did
offend.

But on the Negative part it is said, That the Law is not so penal against the
innocent Child, as to prejudice him touching his Mothers Inheritance, who also
did not offend; or contrariwise, especially in case where the Mother was seized
of an Estate in Feesimple, either in Lands or Tenements, or Title of Honor.
And this was the case (if I be not mistaken) of Philip late Earl of Arundel,
notwithstanding the Attainder of Thomas Duke of Norfolk his Father; for he had
that Earldom in right of his Mother.

But they do agree, That if the Lands or Tenements, or a Title of Honor, be
given to a man, and to his wife in tail who has Issue: The Father is attainted
of Treason, and executed, though this forfeiture of the Husband shall be no
bar to the Wife concerning her interest by Survivorship; yet their Issue is
barred by the Statute 26 Hen. 8. cap. 13. and his Blood corrupted: For in that
case the Heir must necessarily make himself Heir, as well of the Body of the
one as of the other. And yet the words of the Statute 32 Hen. 8. cap. 28. are,
That no Fine, Feof^ment, or other Act or Acts hereafter to be made, or suffered
by the Husband only of any Manors, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, being
the Inheritance or Freehold of his Wife, during the Coverture between them,
shall in any wise be, or make any discontinuance, or be prejudicial to the said
Wife, or to her Heirs, or to such as shall have right, title, or interest to
the same by the death of such Wife or Wives; but the same Wife or her Heirs,
and such other to whom such right shall appertain after her decease, shall or
may then lawfully enter into all such Manors, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments according to their Rights and Titles therein. For there is
Adversity taken and agreed for Law between a discontinuance which does imply a
wrong, and a lawful Baron which does imply a right: And therefore if Land be
given to the Husband, and the Wife, and to the Heirs of their Bodies begotten,
and the Husband levies a Fine with Proclamation, or do commit High Treason, and
dies, and the Wife before or after Entry dies, the Issue is barred, and the
Comisee for the King has right unto the Lands, because the Issue cannot claim
as Heir unto both. And with this does agree Dyer 351. b. adjudged. vide 5 Hen.
7. 32. Cott's Assize, Coke's eighth part, 27. where it is resolved, That the
Statute 32 Hen. 8. does extend only unto Discontinuances, although the Act has
general words, or be prejudicial to the Wife or her Heirs, etc. but the
conclusion; if she shall lawfully enter, etc. according to their right and
title therein, which they cannot do when they be barred, and have no right,
title, and interest. And this Statute does give advantage unto the Wife, etc.
so long as she has right; but it does not extend to take away a future bar.
Although the Statute does give Entry without limitation of any time;
nevertheless the Entry must attend upon the right: and therefore if the Wife be
seized in Feesimple, and her Husband levy a Fine with Proclamation unto
another, and dies, now the Wife may enter by force of the Statute; for as yet
that Fine is not any bar unto her, but her right does remain, which she may
continue by Entry; but if she do surcease her time, and the five years do pass
without Entry, etc. now by force of the Fine with Proclamation, and five years
past after the death of her Husband, she is barred of her right, and by
consequence she cannot enter. And the Statute does speak of Fine only, and not
of Fine with Proclamation. If there be Father and Son, and the Father be seized
of Lands holden in Capite, or otherwise by Knight's Service, the King does
create the Son Duke, Earl, or other Degree of Nobility, and afterward the
Father dies, his Son being within the Age of One and twenty years, he shall be
no Ward; but if the King had made him Knight in the life of his Father, he
should not have been in Ward after the death of his Father, neither for the
Lands descended, nor for his Marriage, though he be within Age.

NOBILITY AND LORDS IN REPUTATION ONLY. CHAP. XIV.
THERE are also other Lords in Reputation and Appellation, who nevertheless are
not de jure; neither can they enjoy the privileges of those of the Nobility
that are Lords of the Parliament.

The Son and Heir of a Duke, during his Father's life, is only in courtesy of
Speech and Honor called an Earl; and the eldest Son of a Marquess or an Earl,
a Lord: but not so in legal proceedings, or in the King's Courts of Judicature.
But the King may at his pleasure create them in the life of their Ancestors
into any Degree of Lords of the Parliament. And according to the German Custom,
all the younger Sons of Dukes and Marquisses are called Lords, but by courtesy
only, which Title descends not to their Heirs.

A Duke, or other of the Nobility of a Foreign Nation, does come into this Land
by the King's safe Conduct, in which said Letters of safe Conduct he is named a
Duke according to his Creation, yet that Appellation makes him not a Duke,
etc. to sue, or be sued by that name within this Realm, but is only so by
Reputation.

But if the King of Denmark, or other Sovereign King come into England under
safe Conduct, he, during his abode here, ought to be styled by the name of
King, and to retain his Honor, although not his Regal Command and Power. And
in this case may be observed by the way, That no Sovereign King may enter into
this Realm without license, though he be in League.

All the younger Sons of the Kings of England are of the Nobility of England,
and Earls by their Birth without any other Creation.

And if an Englishman be created Earl of the Empire, or some other Title of
Honor by the Emperor or other Monarch, he shall not bear that Dignity in
England, but is only an Earl in Reputation.

A Lord or Peer of Scotland or Ireland is not of the Nobility or Peerage of
England in all Courts of Justice, although he is commonly reputed a Lord, and
has privilege as a Peer.

OF THE QUEEN CONSORT, AND OF NOBLE WOMEN. CHAP. XV.
A QUEEN, so called from the S^xon word Cuningine, as the King from Cuning (by
variation of Gender only, as was their manner) signifies Power and Knowledge,
and thereby denotes the Sovereignty due unto them which they enjoyed in those
days, and do now in most Nations, being capable of the Royal Diadem, by the
common right of Inheritance, for want of Heirs Male. But in France, by the
Salique Law, the Sex is excluded from their Inheritance, by which they debarred
the English Title to their Crown.

There are three kinds of persons capable of the Title and Dignity of Queen
amongst us, and each of them different in Power and Privilege. The first is a
Queen Sovereign, to whom the Crown descends by Birthright, and is equal in
power to a King, as before noted. She is her Husband's Sovereign, and he her
Subject in England, although he were an Emperor: So was King Philip of Spain to
Queen Mary; and her Authority is included in the foregoing Chapter of Monarchy,
and therefore need not to be here repeated. The second in Honor is the Queen
Consort; and the third the Queen Dowager or Queen Mother.

As from the benign influence of the glorious Planet the Sun, all Creatures (by
God's decree in the order of Nature) receive life and motion; so from the King
(God's Vicegerent on earth) all degrees of Nobility take their advance and
dignity: It Is therefore requisite the King should as far excel his Subjects in
Majesty and Splendour, as does the Sun the other Planets. And as the Moon is the
mirror of the Sun, representing his Glory by Night; so the Queen Consort, the
Counterpart of the Royal Majesty, shines amongst us, for whom, and for whose
Posterity the Nation is bound to send up their Prayers to God.

The Queen of England, during the life of the King, has as high prerogatives
and privileges, and lives in as great state as any Queen in Europe. She is
reputed the second person in the Kingdom; and the Law sets so high a value
upon her, as to make it High Treason to conspire her death, or to violate her
Chastity.

She is allowed Regal Robes, Ornaments and a Crown of the same form, as an
absolute Queen wears, and may be (as formerly they were) crowned with Royal
Solemnity; the performance of which Office properly belongs to the Archbishop
of York. And although their Coronations of late have been disused, yet they
have as much honor, and enjoy the same privileges, as if that Ceremony had
been done. And the manner and solemnity at the Coronation of a Queen is at
large set down in most of our Chronicles, and in particular in Holinshead and
Stow, upon the splendid Coronation of Anna Bulloign in the Reign of King Henry
the Eighth, to which I refer the Reader.

The Queen is permitted to sit in state by the King, and to keep a distinct
Court from the King's, although she be the Daughter of a Nobless; and has her
Courtiers in every Office, as has the King (though not altogether so many;)
and has her Yeomen of her Guard to attend her on foot, and within doors, and
her Lifeguard of Horse for her state and security when she goes abroad: She
has her Attorney, Solicitor, and Counsel for the management of her Law
concerns, who have great respect showed them, being placed within the Bar with
the King's Counsel in all Courts of Judicature.

Although she be an Alien, and a Feme covert during the King's Life, yet
without any Act of Parliament for Naturalization, or Letters Patents for her
Denization, she may purchase Lands in Feesimple; make Leases in her own Name
without the King; has power to give, to sue, and to contract Debts, which by
the Law is denied any other Feme Covert; she may not be impleaded till first
petitioned; nor is the formality of fifteen days Summons to the Defendant
needful, if she be Plaintiff; nor can she be amerced, if she be Nonsuited in
any Action; she may present by her self to a Spiritual Benefice.

Anciently the Queens had a Revenue called Aurum Reginae, that is the Queen's
Gold, which was the tenth part of what came to the King by the name of Oblata
upon Pardons, Gifts, etc. but of late they keep to their Dowry, viz. Forty
thousand pounds per Annum, besides fines upon the renewing of Leases; which
said Dowry is as large as any Queens in Christendom.

The like honor and respect that is due to the King is exhibited to the Queen,
as well by Foreigners as by the King's Subjects; as is also to the Queen
Dowager, who loses not her Dignity or Reverence, although she should marry a
private Gentleman, as did Queen Kath^rine, Widow to King Henry the Fifth, who
after she was married to Owen Teudor Esquire, maintained her Action at Law as
Queen of England.

The present Queen Consort is the thrice Illustrious Donna Katherina Infanta
Portuguesa, whose virtue and true piety ought to be taken notice of in all
Histories, ^or succeeding Queens to trace her Noble footsteps, whom God
preserve.

The Queen Dowager takes place next to the Queen Consort, and in the absence of
the King her Son, or in his minority, is sometimes made Queen Regent, or
Protectress; but this trust is usually by the King's own command, or at the
request of the three States assembled in Parliament, to prevent the danger of
an usurpation of the Crown: the like trust is sometimes imposed upon the Queen
Consort in her Husband's absence, as by King Henry the Eighth twice during his
Wars in France.

Note, That during the minority of the King of England, whatsoever Laws are
enacted in Parliament under a Queen Regent, or a Protectress, are no longer
binding than till the King attains to full age, after which he may revoke and
make void by his Letters Patents under the Great Seal.

The Daughters of the Kings of England are all styled Prince^^es. The eldest is
called the Princess Royal, and has an aid or certain rate of money paid by
every Tenant in Capite, Knights Service, and Soccage, toward her marriage
Portion, as was levied by K. James when he married the Princess Elizabeth; and
to violate her Cha^^ity is by the Law adjudged High Treason.

Of Noble Women.
WOmen in England, according to their Husbands Qualities, are either Honorable
and Noble, or Ignoble. Their Honorable Dignities are Princesses, Dutchesses,
Marchionesses, Countesses, Viscountesses, and Baronesses.

The Nobless (as the French call them) are all Knights Ladies, who in all
writings are styled Dames; all Esquires and Gentlemen's wives only Gentlewomen.

The third sort comprehends the Plebeans, and are commonly called Goodwives.

Noble women are so by Creation, Descent, or Marriage.

Of women honorable by Creation are diverse Examples, of which the first (as I
remember) that we read of, was Margaret Countess of Norfolk, created by Richard
the Second Duchess of Norfolk. And many of them had their Honors granted by
Patents to themselves, and the Heirs Males of their Bodies to be begotten, with
special Clauses that their Heirs Male shall have voices in Parliament, Creation
money, their Mothers Titles; as if a Duchess, he a Duke; and if a Countess, he
an Earl, with the Ceremony of Mantle, Surcoat, Coronet, etc. The like Grant was
to Anna Bulloign when she was created Marchioness of Pembroke by Henry the
Eighth. Of a later date was the Lady Finch made Countess of Winchelsey, who had
all the said privileges granted to her, and her Heirs Male. The Duchess of
Buckingham also, in the time of King James. And in our Age we have diverse Noble
Ladies advanced to degrees of Honor, viz. the Countess of Guilford, Groom of
the Stool to the Queen Mother, and a faithful Servant to her in her banishment,
being then Countess of Killimeak in Ireland: The Lady Dudley Duchess of (...)
The celebrated Beauties, Barbara Villiers Duchess of Cleaveland, and Countess
of Southampton; and Louyse Rene Angelique de Carwell Duchess of Portsmouth,
Countess of Petersfield, etc.

Of Titles by Descent and Marriage, there are Examples enough, so that I need
not trouble the Reader with any repetition; I shall only set down some few
general Observations not sufficiently discoursed of.

If a King's Daughter marry a Duke or an Earl, illa ^emper dicitur Regalis, by
Law and Courtesy.

Noble women by descent, Birthright, or Creation, remain Noble although they
marry Husbands under that degree. Also any Daughter of an Earl or Viscount that
continues a Virgin, or marries an Esquire, yet she retains the Honor that
sprung from her Parents, and shall take place accordingly, and be saluted by
the Title of Lady.

If a Gentleman, Knight, or Peer marry a wife of ignoble Parents, she shall
enjoy the Title, Name, and Dignity of her Husband, not only during his life,
but when she is a widow, or afterward married to an Ignoble person; but this
is by the Courtesy (and not by the Law) of the Realm. Whereas on the contrary,
let a woman of Blood and Coat Armor marry a Yeoman or Churl that is Ignoble,
and has no Coat Armor, his Condition in point of Honor is in no respect
advanced, and she shall retain the Honor, State, and Dignity she was born
unto. Yet if she have i^^ue by that Yeoman or Ignoble person, she being an
Heiress, that Issue shall have liberty to bear her Coat; but Sir John Fern
says only for life, and that on a Lozenge Shield, with a difference of a
Cinquefoil.

If a French, Spanish, or other woman Alien, be married to a Peer of the Realm,
or to a Gentleman, and be not denizened, she is debarred all Privileges and
Titles due to her Husband; nor can she claim any Dower or Jointure from him by
the Laws of England.

Yet in some things our Laws are wonderful kind to the Female Sex, especially
procreandi causa: As thus; if a man and his wife separate for some fraud, or
private loathing of the Marriage Bed, or the like, and so continue for some
years; after which time the woman brings forth a Child, which though got by
another man, and her Husband in all that time not having enjoyed her, yet if he
live in the Kingdom he must Father the Child; and if before that time he had no
Child, that shall inherit his Lands, if entailed, or left without Will. Also if
a Wife be with Child when her Husband dies, and she marry another man before
her delivery, the latter Husband must own the Child, which must be his Heir at
Law if he were childless.

The Wives Dignities and Lands descend to her Heirs, not to her Husband; yet to
encourage him to play the man, the Courtesy of England is such, that as the
Wife has the third part of his Estate in Lands for her Jointure, during her
life if a Widow; so the Husband, if he get his Wife with Child, and that Child
be heard to cry, he shall enjoy all her Lands during his life.

The Wife can make no contract whatsoever, that shall stand good in Law, to the
detriment of her Husband, without his consent; nor can she make a Will, or
dispose of what she has, whilst she is a Feme Covert; ^he cannot be produced
as a witness for or against her Husband; nor shall she be accessory to his
felonious acts, although she receive the Goods, or conceive the Fact, if she be
not personally an Actor therein.

Female Children are also by Law capable to give their consent to marriage at
Seven years old; and the Lord's eldest Daughter is to have aid of his Tenants
to marry her at that age, though she may dissent from this Contract when she
comes to Twelve; but if at that Age she does not dissent, she is bound for
life: she may then make a Will, and dispose of Goods and Chattels by it. At
Nine years of Age she is Dowable: at Fourteen she might receive her Lands into
her Hands, and was then out of Wardship, if she were Fourteen at the death of
her Ancestor; otherwise she was in Wardship till she accomplished Sixteen
years, and then she was free. At One and twenty she is enabled to contract or
alienate her Lands by Will or otherwise.

If there be no Son, the Lands as well as Goods are equally divided amongst the
Daughters, who are Coheirs.

In ancient times Women amongst the Romans were thought worthy of enjoying
peculiar favors and respect. And out of their great love and honor to the
Mother of Marcus Coriolanus, for diverting his fury which he threatened the
Citizens to their ruin, for their ingratitude toward him, the Citizens granted
the Roman Dames the privilege of wearing the Segmenta Aurea, or Bordures of
Gold and purple on their Garments: They were also permitted to wear gold
Earrings; to have place on the way; and in memorial of the said preservation,
there was erected a Temple dedicated to the Female Fortune.

Anne of Britain, wife to Charles the Eighth of France, as an ornamental Honor
to several deserving Ladies, instead of the Military Belt and Collar, bestowed
on them a Cordon or Lace, and admonishing them to live chastely and devoutly:
and to put the greater esteem thereon, the surrounded her Escocheon of Arms
with the like Cordon; from which Example it is now become the Custom for
unmarried women to bear their Arms in form of a Lozenge, which are commonly
adorned with such a Cordon.

Joseph Micheli Marquez, for the further Honor of the Female Sex, gives an
Example of the Noble women of Tortosa in Aragon, whom he calls Cavalleros, or
Knights: For (says he) Don Raymond, last Earl of Barcellona ( who by right of
his wife Petronilla, sole Daughter and Heir to King Ramiro the Monk, joined his
Principality to the Kingdom of Aragon) having in the year 1149. taken from the
Moors the City of Tortosa, who in a few months after laid siege to the said
City, and reduced the Inhabitants to so great a strait, that their intentions
were of surrendering it up to the Moors; but the women hearing thereof, for the
diverting their ruin, put on men's Apparel, and by a resolute Sally forced the
Moors to raise the Seige. And the Earl, in acknowledgment of his thanks for
this their Noble Act, as a reward of Honor, instituted an Order (not much
unlike a Military Order) into which were admitted only those brave women, and
their Descendants. The Badge which he assigned them was something like a
Fryer's Capouch, but of a crimson color, which they wore upon their
Head-clothes. Amongst the privileges which this Earl granted them, they were
to be freed from all Taxes; to have precedence of men in public Meetings; and
that all the Jewels and Apparel of their deceased Husbands should be their own,
although of never so great value. And these women having thus purchased this
Honor, deported themselves after the manner of Military Knights of those days.

To look further back, ancient Histories do take notice of the Amazons of old,
whose Fame in Arms is sufficiently known.

Although Noble women may not sit in Parliament, in respect of their Sex; yet
they are in Law Peers of the Realm; and all or most of the prerogatives before
mentioned, which to the Noblemen are belonging, do appertain unto them.

But the Opinion of some men have been, That a Countess, Baronness, and other
women of great Estate, cannot maintain an Action upon the Statute de Scandalis
magnatum, because the Statute 2 Rich. 2. speaks but of Prelates, Dukes,
Earls, Barons, and of the Chancellor, Treasurer, Privy Seal, Steward of the
King's Household, and other Nobles, great Officers of the Realm; by which words
they conceive that the meanings of the Makers of that Statute was only to
provide in that case for Noblemen, and not for Noble women.

Also if any of the King's Servants within the Check-Roll do conspire the death
of any Noble woman, it is not Felony within the compass of the Statute 3 Hen.
7. 18.

Honorable women, as before noted, are of three sorts, by Creation, by
Descent, and by Marriage. And the King may create any woman into any Title of
Honor at his pleasure: and the King by his Letters Patents openly read in
Parliament, without any other Investure, did create Mary Fane Widow, the sole
Daughter of Baron of Aburgaveny, Baronness de le Spencer.

Noble women by Descent are, either those to whom the Lands holden by such
Dignity do descend as Heir, and they are said to be Honorable, by Tenure; or
by whose worthy Ancestors, to whom they were Heirs, was seized of an Estate
descendable to them in their Titles of Dukedoms, Earldoms, or Baronies; or
those whose Ancestors were summoned to Parliament, for hereby also Inheritance
does accrue to their Posterities.

Noble women are also those, who do take to their Husbands any Lord or Peer of
the Realm, although they themselves were not of any degree of Nobility.

Question and doubt has been made, Whether if a man be summoned to Parliament,
and afterward die without Issue Male, the Dignity and Title of Honor may
descend to the Heir Female. And many Arguments have been pro and contra in that
case, which at this time I purposely omit, because I have before discoursed
thereof in the Chapter of Barons.

Concerning the Title of Honor descendable to the Heir Female by reason of a
Tenure of her Ancestors, there needs no more doubt to be made than of Offices
of Honor, the which do much support the public wealth, and being of Estate of
Inheritance, do descend to the Heir Female, if there be no nearer Heir Male: As
the Office of High Constableship of England challenged in the time of Henry the
Eighth by the Duke of Buckingham, and adjudged by the Advice and Resolution of
the Judges, as by a note of that Case extant, whereof Dyer in his Reports has
a memorial 205. b. Kelway, the Sixth of Henry the Eighth 170. b. which
descended to the Daughter of Humphrey de Bohune, Earl of Hereford and Essex, as
before is declared. The Office of the Lord Steward descended to Blaunch,
Daughter of Henry Earl of Lancaster, in whose right John of Gaunt her Husband
enjoyed the same. The like may be said of the Office of Earl-Marshal, which
descended by an Heir Female unto the House of Norfolk: All which Offices are as
unfit to be exercised by a Woman, as for a Woman of Honor to be summoned to
the Parliament. And when a Title of Honor does descend to a Woman, if question
in Law do arise between the said Noble woman and any other person, whether she
be of that Degree of Nobleness or no, the Issue shall be tried by the Record
thereof, and by the King's Writ it shall be certified, and not by a Jury of
twelve Men, even as it should have been in case her Ancestor had been party.

Although the Laws of the Realm regularly do make all the Daughters (where
there are no Sons) equally to inherit Lands and Tenements, and to be but one
Heir to their Ancestor; yet it is not so in the descent of Dignity and Titles
of Honor: for Inheritances concerning matter of Honor, being things in their
nature participating of Superiority and Eminency, are not partable amongst
many, and therefore must of necessity descend unto one, and that is to the
eldest Daughter, Sister, Aunt, or Cousin Female, and inheritable where there is
no Heirs Males that may lawfully challenge the same. And so in this point is
the Civil Law.

Nevertheless, there was a Judgment in the time of Henry the Third, touching
the descent of the Earldom of Chester, after the death of the Earl, who died
without Issue, his Sisters being his Heirs; which Judgment was, That the said
Earldom should be divided amongst the said Copartners as the other Lands; and
that the eldest should not have it alone. But this Judgment was holden
Erroneous, even in those times wherein it was given: For Bracton, a Learned
Judge, who lived in that Age, writes thereof, treating of partition between
Copartners, lib. 2. Case 24. by which it is evident, That Baronies and
Dignities of Honor do by the Laws of this Realm descend unto the eldest
Copartner; and the Judgment given once to the contrary thereof, Bracton does
rightly account to be unjust: His Reason is notable; Forasmuch as the Honor of
the Chivalry of this Realm does chiefly consist in the Nobility, Reason would
not that such Dignity should be divided amongst Copartners, whereby through
multitude of partitions the reputation of Honor in such Succession, and so
divided, might be impaired, or the strenght of the Realm, being drawn into many
hands, with decrease of livelihood by such partition, should be infeebled. In
which Resolution Britton, the Learned Bishop of Hereford (who compiled his Book
of the Laws of this Realm, by the Commandment, and in the Name of Edward the
First) accords, Britton 187. And therefore, howsoever the Judgment was given,
or whenever, it is nevertheless very evident that it was soon redressed: For
if it were given upon the death of Ralph, the last of that Name Earl of
Chester, who died about the Seventh of Henry the Third without Issue, the
Writers of that time do testify, that the Earldom of Chester came wholly unto
John Scott, the Son of David Earl of Huntington, and Auguish and Maud, the
eldest Sisters of the said Ralph, if it were given upon the death of the said
John Scott, who died about the Four and twentieth of Henry the Third without
Issue; yet notwithstanding the said Judgment stood in force, for that the said
King assumed the Earldom into his own Hands upon other satisfaction made to the
said Sisters, Copartners of the said John Scott^ Ne tanta haereditas inter
colos deduceretur Matthew. Paris Monaster. Sancti Allane in Crompton, fol. 366. b.

Nevertheless you may read in this Treatise of Heraldry, written by John
Guillim about fol. 18. That Sisters are allowed no differences of Badges in
their Coat Armor, by reason that by them the name of the House cannot be
preserved, but are admitted to the Inheritance equally, and are adjudged but
one Heir to all intents and purposes whatsoever. And the knowledge of this
point in these days is worthy to be enquired into; for this is to be observed
out of Presidents, and to be acknowledged of every dutiful Subject, that the
King can advance to Honor whom he pleases: And therefore whereas Radulph
Cromwell, being a Baron by Writ, died without Issue, having two Sisters and
Coheirs; Elizabeth the eldest married unto Sir Thomas Nevill Knight, and Joan
the younger married to Sir Humphrey Bowcher, who was called to Parliament as
Lord Cromwell, and not the said Sir Thomas Nevill who married the eldest
Sister. And Hugh Lupus, the first and greatest Earl of Chester, Habendum sibi
and haeredibus adeo libere per gladium sicut iple Rex tenuit Angliam per
tenorem. Hugh died without Issue, and the Inheritance of his Earldom was
divided amongst his four Sisters, and the eldest had not the Seigniory entire
unto herself.

If a Woman be Noble by Birth or Descent, with whomsoever she does marry,
although her Husband be under her Degree, yet she does remain Noble; for
Birthright est Character indelebilis.

Other Women are enobled by Marriage; and the Text says thus, viz. Women
ennobled with the Honor of their Husbands, and with the Kindred of their
Husbands, we worship them in the Court, we decree matters to pass in the Names
of their Husbands, and into the House and Surname of their Husbands do we
translate them: But if afterward a Woman do marry with a Man of a baser
Degree, then she loses her former Dignity, and follows the condition of her
latter Husband. And concerning the second disparaged Marriage as aforesaid,
many other Books of the Law do agree; for these be Rules conceived in those
Cases: Si mulier nobilis nupserit ignobili desinit esse nobilis, and eodem modo
quo quid constituitur dissolvitur. It was the Case of Ralph Howard Esquire who took
to Wife Anne, the widow of the Lord Powes: they brought an Action against the
Duke of Suffolk, by the Name of Ralph Howard Esquire and the Lady Anne Powes his
Wife, and exception was taken for mis-naming of her; because she ought to have
been named of her Husband's Name, and not otherwise: and the Exception was by
the Court allowed; For, said they, by the Law of God she is Sub potestate viri;
and by our Law her Name of Dignity shall be changed according to the Degrees of
her Husband, notwithstanding the Courtesy of the Ladies of Honor and Court:
Dyer 79. And the like is also in Queen Mary's Reign, when the Duchess of
Suffolk took to her Husband Adrian Brook, Title Brief, 54. 6. And many other
Presidents have been of later times. And herewith agrees the Civil Law,
Digest. lib. 1. title q. lege 1. In this Case of acquired Nobility by marriage,
if question in Law be, whereupon an Issue is taken between the Parties, that is
to say, Dutchesses are not Dutchesses, Countesses are not Countesses, and
Baronesses are not Baronesses; the Trial whereof shall not be by Record (as in
the former Case) but by a Jury of Twelve men; and the reason of the diversity
is because in this Case the Dignity is accrued unto her by her Marriage, which
the Lawyers term Matter in Fact, and not by any Record.

But a Noble Woman by marriage, though she take to her second Husband a man of
mean Degree, yet she may keep two Chaplains, according to the Proviso in the
Statute of 11. Hen. 8. Case 13. for and in respect of the Honor which once she
had, viz. at the time of the Retainer: And every such Chaplain may purchase
License and Dispensation, etc. And Chaplains may not be Non-residents
afterward.

And forasmuch as the retaining of Chaplains by Ladies of great Estate is
ordinary, and nevertheless some questions in Law have been concerning the true
understanding of the said Statute Law; I think it not impertinent to set down
subsequent Resolutions of the Judges touching such matters.

So long as the Wife of a Duke is called Duchess, or of an Earl a Countess,
and have the fruition of the Honor appertaining to their Estate, with
kneeling, tasting, serving; so long shall a Baron's Widow be saluted Lady, as
is also a Knight's Wife by the courtesy of England, quamdi^ matrimonium aut
viduitas uxoris durant; except she happen to clope with an Adulterer: for as
the Laws of this Kingdom do adjudge that a Woman shall lose her Dowry in that
(as unto Lands, Tenements, and Justice;) so does the Laws of Gentry and
Nobleness give Sentence against such a Woman, advanced to Titles of Dignity by
the Husband, to be unworthy to enjoy the same, when she putting her Husband out
of her mind, subjects her self unto another.

If a Lady which is married come through the Forest, she shall not take any
thing; but a Duchess, Marchioness, or Countess shall have advantage of the
Statute de Charta Forest. 12 Artic. during the time that she is unmarried.

This is a Rule in the Civil Law, Si filia Regis nubat alicui Duci vel Comiti,
ducetur tamen semper regalis. As amongst Noble Women there is a difference of
Degrees, so according to their distinct Excellencies the Law does give special
privileges, as follows: By the Statute 25 Edw. 3. cap. 1. it is High Treason
to compass or imagine the death of the Queen, or to violate the King's
Companion. The King's Response is a sole person, except by the Common Law; and
she may purchase in Feesimple, or make Leases or Grants with the King; she may
plead and be impleaded, which no other married Woman can do without her Husband.

All Acts of Parliament for any cause, which any way may concern the Queen, are
such Statutes whereof the Judges ought to take Recognizances as of general
Statutes: though the matter does only concern the capacity of the Queen, yet it
does also concern all the Subjects of the Realm; for every Subject has
interest in the King, and none of his Subjects within his Laws are divided from
the King, who is Head and Sovereign, so that his business concerns all the
Realm: and as the Realm has interest in the King, so and for the same Reason
is the Queen, being his Wife.

A man seized of diverse Lands in Fee holden by Knight's Service, some by
Priority (that is by ancient Feoffment holden of others) and some other part
holden of the King in posteriority; the King grants his Seigniory to the
Queen during her life; and afterward the Tenant dies, his Son within Age: in
this case he shall have the Wardship of the Body, and have the Prerogative even
as the King himself should have had.

The Queen Consort or Dowager shall not be amerced, if she be Nonsuited in any
Action or otherwise; in which case any other Subject, of what degree soever,
shall be amerced: for in that case the Queen shall participate of the King's
Prerogative.

But the Queen shall not in all cases have the same prerogative as the King; as
for Example, Petition is all the remedy the Subject has when the King seizes
his Lands, or takes away his Goods from him, having no Title by order of Law
so to do, contrary to the Opinion of some ancient Books, as you may see
Stamford's Prerogative, Case 19. But no such Suit shall be made to the Queen,
but Actions as against other Lieges of the King, according as the Case shall
require: For by the same Reason that the Queen may be Plaintiff or Demandant in
Actions without the King, by the same Reason she shall be Defendant without the
part taking of such Prerogatives as do appertain to the King.

Against the King by his Prerogative nullum tempus occurrit; but it is not so
with the Queen, 18 Edw. 3. 2. a. And plenarily by six months is a good Plea in
a Quare Impedit brought by Philip Regina Anglia, ibidem fol. 1. 13. b.
Stamford's Prerogative, Case 18. prope finem. In the 22 Edw. 3. 6. it is thus
to be read; Note that a Protection was sued forth against the Queen in a Writ
which she brought, and it was allowed, though she be a person exempt.
Nevertheless by this short Case following may be observed, That the Justices do
not easily suffer any proceedings in Law against the Queen (Wife or Widow;) but
will hold with their Immunities so much as by Law they may.

A Writ of Dower was brought against Isabel Queen of England, and Mother to the
then King; and the Court said to the Plaintiff, The Queen is a person of
Dignity and Excellency, and we are of Opinion that she shall not answer to the
Writ, but that she should be sued unto by Petition. And thereupon the Demandant
dixit gratis, and she prayed the Court to grant a Continuance of Action until
another day, so that in the mean time she might speak with the Queen: But the
Court would not agree to make a Continuance; but said, That upon her request
they might give day prae re pertin. and so it was done; for the Queen's Counsel
would not agree to a Continuance, for thereby the Queen shall be accepted as
answerable.

Neither do I suppose that I have digressed from any former purpose for making
mention in those Cases concerning the Queen Consort: For notwithstanding the
intermarriage with the Sovereign King, yet she is no other than a King's
Subject, whether she be of a Foreign Nation, or a Native born; and though she
be by the favor of the King solemnly crowned Queen, yet that is but a Royal
Ceremony, and no essential Exception, whereby she may not from henceforth be
accounted in the rank of Noble Women. And this has been proved by the effect
in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, when some of the Wives, crowned Queens,
have been Arraigned of High Treason, and therefore put to Trial by the Nobles
of the Realm as her Peers.

The Wife of the King's eldest Son has also some Prerogatives in regard of the
Excellency of her Husband, which the Wives of other Noblemen have not: For by
the Statute of the Thrteenth of Edward the Third, it is High Treason to violate
the Wife of the King's eldest Son and Heir.

Dutchesses and Countesses have special Honors appertaining to their Estates;
as Kneeling, Tasting, etc. which things are more appertaining properly to the
Heralds, than to be here treated of.

Ladies in Reputation.
THE Wife or Widow of the Son and Heir of a Duke or Earl in the life time of
his Father, is a Lady by Courtesy of Speech and Honor, and takes place
according as in ancient time has been permitted by the Sovereign Prince, and
allowance of the Heralds; but in legal proceedings they are not Privileged,
nor to be named according to such Names of Dignity. But the King may at his
pleasure create such Men, in the life of their Ancestors, unto degrees of
Lord's of his Parliament, and then the Law is otherwise.

If a Noble Woman of Spain come into this Realm by safe Conduct, or otherwise,
though in the Letters of safe Conduct by the King she be styled by such her
Sovereign Title; yet in the King's Courts of Justice she shall not be named by
such Title, though in common Speech she is styled a Lady.

An English Woman born does taken to her Husband a French or Spanish Duke,
though he be made a Denizen, yet she shall not bear his Title of Dignity in
Legal Proceedings.

A German Woman is married to a Peer of the Realm, and unless she be made a
Denizen, she cannot lawfully claim the Privileges or Titles of her Husband, no
more than she can to have Dower or Jointure from him.

An English Woman does take to her Husband an Irish Earl; or if a Lord of
Scotland (though he be a Postnatus) take an English Woman to his Wife, their
Wives shall not participate of their Husbands Titles of Dignity.

But if the King do create one of his Subjects of Scotland or Ireland a Peer of
this Realm, then shall he and his Wife enjoy all the Privileges of a Nobleman.
But if an English man by the Emperor be made an Earl of the Empire, his Wife
shall not bear that Title of Honor.

All the Daughters of Dukes, Marquisses, and Earls are by the ancient Custom
of the Realm styled Ladies, and have precedence according to the Degrees of
their Parents; And of this Custom the Laws do take notice, and give allowance
for Honor and Decency: But nevertheless in the King's Courts of Justice they
bear not those Titles of Honor, no more than the Sons of such Noble persons
may do: So in this point the Law is one way, and the Honor and Courtesy of
Ladies another. And as a Civilian in like Case says, Aliud est jus, and aliud
privilegium; nevertheless the Books of our Law do make mention thereof, and
allow of it as a Courtesy, though not as a Law.

Thus much of Women: If I have been too large upon this Subject, I crave their
pardons; and if too short, I wish I had been more large for their Honor: Yet
let them compare their Conditions with that of their Neighboring Nations, and
it is believed they have reason to judge themselves the happiest Women in the
World; but Nemo sua sort contentus.

None truly value what they do possess:
Birth, Beauty, Titles, Riches in excess,
Are all a Plague, if ought else we desire;
The loss of that makes all our joys on fire.
The Right Noble Frances Stewart duchess dowager of Richmond and Lenox and^a.
The Rt. honble. Ann Stuart Baroness of Castle Stuart in ye. Kingdom of
Ireland Relict of ye Rt. honble. Josias Baron of Castle Stuart and Daughter of
John Madde^ of Rousky Castle in ye. County of Fermenaugh^^ y^ sd. Kingdom Esqr
Katherine Gam's daughter and Coheire of Hoo Gam's of Newton in Brecknock shire
Esqr, Grand daughter to Sr. John Gam's descended by the elder house from the
mighty Sr. David Gam'^ of Newton afores^ who did wonders at ye battle of
Agencourt, who was descended from Tudor ye great King of South Wales. The
occation of wearing ye Leek was from yt family. vide see^ chapt. 4.
Katherine Sedley sole daughter and heir of Sr. Charles Sedley of South fleet
in Kent Baronet.


OF KNIGHTHOOD IN GENERAL^ CHAP. XVI.
ALthough I am not of the Opinion of some that vainly derive the Order of
Knighthood from St. Michael the Archangel, whom they term the primier
Chevalier; yet I may say that it is near as ancient as Valor and Heroic
Virtue, and may derive its Original from Troy, which bred many Noble and
Renowned Knights; amongst which were Hector, Troilus, AEneas, and Antenor. So
among the Greeks were Agamemnon, Menelaus, Peleus, Hercules, Diomedes, Telamon,
Ulysses, and several others, whose Military and Heroic Acts purchased unto
them a never dying Fame. And the Romans took so great care for the cherishing
and advancement of Heroic and Military Virtue and Honor, that they erected
and dedicated Temples to Virtue and Honor; and from the infancy of their
Military Glory they instituted a Society of Knights, which consisted of a
select number. And some there are that plead to have Knighthood take its rise
from Romulus: For, say they, that Romulus having settled his Government in
Rome, partly for Security, and partly for magnificence, erected or enrolled
three Bands or Centuries of Knighthood or Horsemen; the first he called Romene
from his own Name; the second Titience from Titus Tacitus; and the third
Luceria, whereof mention is made by Livy. And this Inrollment consisted of
Three hundred stout and personable men, chosen out of the chiefest Families,
and were to attend him as his Lifeguard, both in Peace and War, and were
called Celeres, or Equites, from their personal Valor and dexterity in Martial
Affairs.

And to add to the Honor of Knighthood, the Romans oft-times made the Knights
Judges for the management of their Civil Affairs, yet continued they of the
Equestrian Order.

The Romans called their Knights Milites, or Miles, and Equites, or Equites
Aurati; the Italians and Spaniards, Cavalieri; the French, Chevaliers; and the
English, Knights.

The Addition of Sir is attributed to the Names of all Knights, as Sir John,
Sir Thomas, and the like. And to Baronets the said Addition of Sir is granted
unto them by a peculiar Clause in their Patents of Creation, although they are
not dubbed Knights.

No man is born a Knight of any Title or Degree whatsoever, but made so; either
before a Battle, to encourage him to adventure his Life; or after the ^ight, as
an advancement to Honor for their valiant Acts. And although Knighthood,
according to its first Institution, was only a Military Honor; yet of later
days, it has been^ frequently seen, that meritorious persons in Civil Affairs
have this degree of Honor conferred upon them. Nor ar^ Kings, Princes, or
Potentates at any time limited or confined their bestowing this Dignity, being
at all times free to bestow it on whomsoever they shall in their Princely
favor think worthy to be advanced to the said Honor, either for their Merit,
Birth, of Estate.

The Ensigns or Ornaments belonging to Knighthood are many, each Country or
Kingdom having those peculiar to it self: I shall name some of the chief.

To the Knights of the Equestrian Order amongst the ancient Romans was given a
Horse, or a Gold Ring. The Germans gave the Badge of the Shield and Lance. The
French anciently gave also the Shield and Lance (as Favin notes) but since
they used the Equestrian Target.

Another Knightly Ornament is the Military Belt, first made of Leather, which
afterward came to be richly adorned with Gold and precious Stones; and to this
Belt was added a Sword. Other Ornaments were gilt or golden Spurs, and golden
Collars of SS. But these have been for a long time laid aside; and instead
thereof is only used Dubbing with a naked Sword to Knights Batchelors, which I
shall speak of when I treat of Knights Batchelors.

Many have been, and yet are, the Degrees and Order of Knighthood in
Christendom, each Kingdom having some appropriated to themselves: which though
many of them are now extinct; yet I shall touch upon them, as I find them
Recorded by Sir William Segar in his Volume of Honor Military and Civil, and
by Elias Ashmole, Esquire in his incomparable Volume of the Order of the Garter, to
which I refer the Curious Reader for his further satisfaction. And of these
Degrees or Orders I shall first treat of those used amongst us, beginning with
that of the most Noble Order of the Garter; next with the Knights Bannerets;
then with Baronets, this being their proper place according to precedence,
although something improper, as not being of any degree of Knighthood; next
with Knights of the Bath; then with Knights Batchelors; and so conclude with
those Degrees of Knighthood in Foreign Kingdoms and Countries.

His Royal Highness James Duke of York and Albany Knight. of the most noble order
of the Garter, and sole brother to his sacred maty. King Charles the 2d. etca.


The Effigies of the most honble. Henry Somerset, Marquis and Earl of
Worcester. Ld. Herbert, Baron of Chipston Raglon and Gowen Lord President and
Ld. Leivtenant of Wales, and the Marches, Lord Leivtenant of the Countyes of
Gloucester, Hereford, and Monmouth, and of the Cilty and County of Bristol,
Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, and one of the Lords of his
matys. most honble. Privy Council.


The Effigies of the Right honble. Henry Bennet Earl and Baron of Arlington
Viscount Thetsord Knight of the most noble order of the Garter Lord
Chamberlain of his Ma^^s. Household and one of the Lords of his most
Honorable privy Council etca.


KNIGHTS Of the most Noble Order of the Garter, OR St GEORGE. CHAP. XVII.
IT was the custom and policy of puissant Princes in all Ages to invite and
secure to themselves persons of Renown, and such Heroic Spirits were
encouraged with Remarks of Honor, ( viz. eminent privileges of Place,
different Habits, and additional Titles) to distinguish them from the Vulgar,
besides other opulent Rewards: And amongst those persons, the more eminent or
excellent of merit were placed in a Superior Orb, that their Glory might be the
more splendid to the World. Such were King David's mighty men, the Satrapae of
Persia, the Orders Military amongst the Romans, and the many Institutions of
Knighthood in Christendom: But of all Orders purely Military now extant, I
must prefer this of St. George, which we call the Garter; not only because it
is our own Nation, or that none are commonly admitted but Peers, but for the
excellency of it self.

First, for its Antiquity; Secondly, for its glorious Institution by that
Renowned King Edward; And thirdly, for the many Emperors, Kings, and Princes
that have been admitted into the said Fraternity.

First, I find it agreeable to all Histories, that 'twas instituted by King
Edward the Third, Anno 1350. which was fifty years before the Instituting the
French Order of St. Michael by Lewis the Eleventh; Two hundred twenty nine
years before Henry the Third devised the new Order of the Holy Ghost, full
Eighty years before the Order of the Golden Fleece was instituted by Philip the
Good of Burgundy; One hundred and ninety years before King James the Fifth
refined the Order of St. Andrew in Scotland; and about Two hundred and nine
years before the Kings of Denmark begun the Order of the Elephant; which gives
it clearly the pre-eminency before other Orders in point of Antiquity.

For the occasion of the pristine Institution you must know, King Edward the
Third having engaged himself in a War with France (for the obtaining of that
Crown which descended on him in right of his Mother) thought fit to allure to
his party all such Gallant Spirits as were Friends to Bellona; and to that end
erected a Round Table in the Castle of Windsor in imitation of King Arthur's at
Winchester, where they were exercised at Tilts and Tournaments, and Royally
entertained with magnificent Feasts and other Princely Favors to engage them
unto him. But Philip of Vallois, who was in actual possession of the Crown of
France, countermined him by erecting a like Table in his own Court, whereby he
drew away many from King Edward, so that being disappointed in that Project,
and yet proving victorious in his Arms against France and Scotland, at his
Return he rewarded the most eminent of those Heroic Knights that had born the
brunt of the Day, and persevered in their Loyalty, with this Noble Order, which
consisted of Six and twenty, of which himself was one; being all persons of
choice Endowments, of great renown in Chivalry, and such as should be bound by
Oath and Honor to adhere unto him. And upon the death of any one of them, the
place was to be supplied by another, elected by the King and his Successors,
who are Sovereigns of the said Order, with the consent of the Fraternity; but
now the Election is at the entire pleasure of the King.

Ther^ are many Articles confirmed unto them, to which all that are enstalled
Subscribe, besides the forementioned Oath, viz. that whilst they shall be
Fellows of the Order they will defend the Honor, Quarrels, Rights and
Lordships of the Sovereign; that they will endeavor to preserve the Honor of
the said Order, and all the Statutes made for the same, without fraud or covin,
Quinam perjurati.

It is also esteemed most Honorable, there having been more Emperors, Kings,
and Foreign Princes of this one Order, than of all others in a manner in the
World; which Honor is obtained by keeping precisely to the primitive Number,
never exceeding Six and twenty; whereas all others of this kind have been so
frankly communicated unto all pretenders, that at last they lost their luster
and esteem in the World. Of this Order there has been no less than eight
Emperors, seven Kings of Portugal, two Kings of Scots before the Union, five
Kings of Denmark, three of Naples, one of Poland, and two of Sueden, besides
many Foreign Sovereign Princes of Italy, Germany, etc. The Order and
Institution being Honorable, and by many Learned Pens sufficiently cleared
from the envy of Froysart, and other French men; as also from the folly of
Polydore Virgil, who favors the Romantic Story of the fair Countess of
Salisbury, who being a dancing with the said King Edward, let fall her Garter,
which the King took up and tied about his Leg; at which the Queen being
jealous, he gave this Motto, Honi sort qui mal y pense, that is, Evil be to him
that evil thinks.

The Patron of this Order is St. George, a Man of great Renown for Chivalry; he
suffered Martyrdom at Lydda under Dioclesian, says Mr. Seldom; supposed by Dr.
Helyn to have been martyrred at Nicomedia, the principal Seat then of the
Eastern Empire; and by others at Diosprilia or Lyddea in Palestine, where he is
said to be interred; whose Fame was so great in the World, that many Temples
and Monasteries were dedicated to him in the Eastern Countries, from whence his
esteem came into England, who celebrated to his memory the Three and twentieth
of April with the rest of the Universal Church: But how long he has been
honored as Patron and Protector of England is disputable; Mr. Seldom concludes
before the Conquest; And it is no marvel (says he) that so warlike a people
should make choice of such a Souldier-Saint, known by the particular name of
Tropheophorus, of greater eminency in both the Eastern and Western Churches
than any other Souldier-Saint. To this Tutelary Saint or Patron of Martial men
King Edward commends himself and his Companions, called The Knights of St.
George: And having both beautified and enlarged his Castle at Windsor to be the
Royal Seat of this Order, he caused a solemn Proclamation to be made in France,
Spain, etc. to invite all Military Spirits to attend those Tilts and
Tournaments which were intended to be kept, not only on St. George's day then
next ensuing, which was designed for the day of Institution, but for fifteen
days before, and as many after; and that the memory of St. George might be
still continued, he gave them for a part of their daily Habit the Image of St.
George encountering with the Dragon or Devil, inchased with Pearls and precious
Stones, appendant to a blue Ribon, continually to be worn about their necks.

As for the Habit of this Order, besides the George and Ribon before mentioned,
and a Garter enamelled with Gold, Pearl, and precious Stones, with the Motto,
Honi soit qui mal y pense embroydered upon it, which is fastened about the left
Leg with a buckle of Gold, from whence they were called Knights of the Garter,
and without these two Ornaments none of these Knights are to appear in
public; There also properly belongs to this Order a Cassock of crimson
Velvet, and a Mantle and Hood of purple Velvet, lined with white Sarsnet, on
the left shoulder, whereof is an Escocheon of St. George embroidered with a
Garter, within the Motto: The Escocheon is Argent, a Cross, Gules. But these to
be worn only upon St. George's day, and when it shall please the Sovereign to
celebrate the Ceremonies of the Installations. To each Knight belongs a Collar
of the Order made of pure Gold, weighing thirty Ounces of Troy weight, composed
of Garters and Roses, enamelled with Roses red and white; and since the coming
of King James, there has been an intermixture of Thistles; the Image of St.
George enriched with precious Stones appendant to it, to be worn over all the
Robes at St. George's Feast, and over their ordinary Cloaks, upon all such days
on which the Sovereign is bound by Statute to make Offerings. Also besides
these Robes and Ornaments appointed by the Founder, it was ordered by K.
Charles the first, That all Knights should ordinarily wear upon their Cloaks or
Coats, on the left side, a Star of Silver imbroidery, with the Escocheon of St.
George within the Garter, etc. in the Center of it. But the Habit does more
lively appear by the Pourtraiture representing the Habit of the said Order.

In some of these Habiliments these Knights are attired in public, as the
diversity of the occasion requires; but always in their stateliest Robes and
richest Collars when the Solemnities of the Order are to be performed, that is,
the celebrating of St. George's Feast, and in the Act of their Installations,
in the Free Chapel of St. George, built within the verge and limits of the
Castle, at the Foundation whereof was appointed a Dean, Prebends, and poor
Gentlemen established, to be maintained with Stipends, by the Name of Knights
(or poor Knights) of Windsor, who have provided for them Robes of Cloth
according to them of their Order, who are to pray for the Order. Concerning the
Ceremony of the Installation you are to know, that every Knight is bound to
fasten an Escocheon of their Arms on a plate of Metal on their several Stalls,
with an Inscription of their Names, Titles, and Honor, which they remove as
they are advanced in order higher. And in this order they also advance their
Banners, Swords, and Helmets, which are continually over their Stalls during
their being of that Order, that plate of their Arms being left unto the Stall
in which they last sat; the Hatchment taken down to make room for such as
succeed unto the deceased or higher removed Knights, touching which they are
placed according to the Seniority of their Creations, and not according to
their Dignities and Titles of Honor; so that sometimes a Knight Bachelor has
place before an Earl or Duke; as not long since Sir Henry Lea Knight, Keeper of
the Armory, had precedence of the Duke of Lenox, besides Earls and Barons: only
in honor to Strangers who are Sovereign Princes, or Sons or Brothers to such,
it is permitted by the Rule of Order that they take place according to the
quality of these persons; but this by a late Indulgence. Anciently if a King
crowned came in place of a Knight Bachelor, he sat there without any
difference; but this alteration was made, as it is supposed, by King Henry the
Seventh, in reference to Foreign Princes; the rest continue in their Stalls
where first seated; so that the Sovereign reserved to themselves the power once
in their Lives (so says the Statute) to make a general translation of all the
Stalls, except of Emperors and Foreign Princes, which order continues to this
day.

Much may be said in honor of this Noble Order: but it being so well and
accurately treated of by that great Antiquary Elias Ashmole Esquire in a large
Volume in Folio lately published by him, entitled The Institution, Laws, and
Ceremonies of the most Noble Order of the Garter, that nothing more can be said
thereof, which he has illustrated with great variety of useful and ornamental
Sculptures; I shall therefore conclude by setting down the Heads of the several
Chapters and Sections by him so learnedly treated of, recommending to the
Reader the said Volume as a Work fit to adorn and enrich the Libraries of the
most Curious.

The first Chapter treats of Knighthoood in general, which is divided into ten
Sections.

Chap. II. Of the Religious Orders of Knighthood in Christendom, divided into
five Sections.

Chap. III. Of Military Orders of Knighthood, in three Sections.

Chap. IV. Treats of the Castle, Chapel, and College of Windsor, in eight
Sections: 1. Of the Castle; 2. Of the Chapel; 3. The Foundation of the
College; 4. Of the Dean, Canons, Clerks and Choristers; 5. Of the Poor
Knights; 6. Of other Officers of the College; 7. Of the Endowment of the
College; And 8. of the Privileges of the Chapel and College.

Chap. 5. Treats of the Institution of the Order, in five Sections: 1. The
Opinions concerning the occasion of its Institution; 2. The true Cause
inserted; 3. The Time of its Institution; 4. Of the Patrons of the Order; And
5. the Honor and Reputation thereof.

Chap. VI. Treats of the Statutes and Annals of the Order, in four Sections: 1.
Of the Statutes and Institutions; 2. Of those other bodies of Statutes since
established; 3. The endeavors for the reforming the Statutes since King Henry
the Eighth; And 4. of the Annals of the Order.

Chap. VII. Treats of the Habit and Ensigns of the Order, in ten Sections: 1.
Of the Garter; 2. Of the Mantle; 3. Of the Surcoat; 4. Of the Cap and Hood; 5.
The Robes anciently assigned to the Queen and great Ladies; 6. The Collar in
general; 7. The Collar of the Order; 8. The Collar of SS; 9. The lesser George;
And 10. when the Habits, in whole or in part, ought to be worn.

Chap. VIII. Treats of the Officers appointed for the Service of the Order, in
seven Sections: 1. The Prelat's Institution, his Oath, Robe and Privileges; 2.
The Institution of the Chancellor's Office, with his Oath, Badge, and Pension;
3. The Register's Institution, with his Oath, Mantle, Badge, etc. 4. Garter's
Institution, with his Oath, Mantle, etc. 5. The Institution of the Black Rod's
Office, with his Oath, Habit, etc. 6. The payment of the Officers Pensions upon
the new Establishment; And 7. the Execution of these Offices by Deputies.

Chap. IX. Treats of the Election of a Knight into this Order, in eighteen
Sections: 1. Of Summons to the Election; 2. The place of the Assembly; 3. The
number of the Knights; 4. The Dispensation for want of a full number; 5. Of
opening the Chapter; 6. That Knights only present in Chapter ought to nominate;
7. Of the number, qualifications, and degrees of those persons to be nominated;
8. Of the Scrutiny, and by whom it ought to be taken; 9. The time when; 10. The
Order and Manner of it; 11. The presentation of it to the Sovereign; 12. His
considerations referring to the qualifications of the person to be elected; 13.
Of other inducements for Election; 14. The Sovereign only Electeth; 15. The
Scrutiny ought not to be entered amongst the Annals; 16. The Scrutiny ought not
to be viewed until it be entered; 17. Of Scrutinies taken, yet no Election made;
And 18. the penalties inflicted on Knights Companions who appear not at the
Election.

Chap. X. Treats of the Investure of a Knight-Subject with the Garter and
George, in six Sections: 1. The notice given to a Knight-Subject of his
Election; 2. His reception into the Chapter House; 3. The Ceremonies of
Investiture with the Garter and George; 4. Of sending the Garter and George to
an elect Knight-Subject; 5. The manner of a Knight's Investiture; And 6. the
Allowances and Rewards given to Garter King at Arms for his Service in this
Employment.

Chap. XI. Of the preparations for the personal Installation of a Knight, in
seven Sections: 1. That Installation gives the Title of Founder; 2. Of the time
and place appointed for Installation; 3. Of Commissions for Installation; 4. Of
Letters of Summons; 5. Of Warrants for the Livery of the Order; 6. The removal
of Achievements and Plates; And 7. preparations made by Knights Elect.

Chap. XII. Treats of the personal Installation of a Knight-Subject, in eleven
Sections: 1. Of the Cavalcade to Windsor; 2. The Offerings in the Chapel on
the Eve of the Installation; 3. The Supper on the Eve; 4. The order in
proceeding to the Chapter House; 5. The Ceremonies performed in the
Chapter House; 6. The proceeding into the Choire. 7. The Ceremonies of
Installation; 8. The order observed when two or more Knights are installed in
one day; 9. The Offerings of Gold and Silver; 10. The grand Dinner at the
Installation; And 11. of setting up the Knight's Achievements.

Chap. XIII. Treats of the Installation of a Knight-Subject by proxy, in nine
Sections: 1. The original cause of making Proxies; 2. Letters of Procuration;
3. Qualifications of a Proxy; 4. Preparations for Installations; 5. Proceeding
to the Chapter House; 6. Transactions in it; 7. Proceeding to the Choire; 8.
Ceremonies performed there; And 9. the grand Dinner.

Chap. XIV. Treats of the signification of Election to Strangers, in five
Sections; 1. In what time and manner Certificate is made for their Election; 2.
Of notice given of an Election before sending the Habit; 3. Notice of Election
sent with the Habit; 4. Certificate of acceptance; And 5. of an Election not
accepted of.

Chap. XV. Treats of the Investiture of Strangers with the Habit and Ensigns of
the Order, in four Sections: 1. The time for sending the Habit and Ensigns
unlimited; 2. Preparations made for the Legation; 3. The Ceremonies of
Investiture; And 4. Certificates of having received the Habit and Ensigns of
the Order.

Chap. XVI. Treats of the Installation of a Stranger by Proxy, in thirteen
Sections: 1. Touching the choice and nomination of a Proxy; 2. The Proctor's
qualifications; 3. His Letters of Procuration; 4. Of the Proctor's Reception;
5. The preparations for Installation; 6. The Proctor's Cavalcade to Windsor; 7.
Supper after his arrival there; 8. Of the proceeding to the Chapter House; 9.
The Ceremonies performed therein; 10. Of the proceeding to the Choire; 11. The
Ceremonies of Installation; 12. The Proctor's Offerings; And 13. the Dinner.

Chap. XVII, Treats of the Duties and Fees payable by the Knights-Companions at
their Installations, in four Sections: 1. Concerning the Fees due to the
College of Windsor; 2. Fees due to the Register, Garter, Black Rod, and
Officers of Arms; 3. Fees belonging to others of the Sovereign's Servants; And
4. Fees payable for Strangers.

Chap. XVIII. Treats of the Grand Feast of the Order, in ten Sections: 1. The
Grand Feast appointed to be annually kept on St. George's day; 2. The
Anniversary of St. George fixed by the Church unto the Three and twentieth of
April; 3. St. George's day made Festum duplex; 4. The place for celebrating the
Grand Feast assigned to Windsor Castle; 5. St. George's day kept apart from the
Grand Feast, and how then observed; 6. The Grand Feast neglected by King Edward
the Sixth; 7. Removed from Windsor by Queen Elizabeth; 8. Of prorogation of the
Grand Feast; 9. Of Commissions for prorogation; And 10. that the Grand Feast
ought to be celebrated once every year.

Chap. XIX. Of preparations for the Grand Feast of the Order, in eight
Sections: 1. Of Letters giving notice of the time and place; 2. Of
Dispensations for not attending at the Grand Feast; 3. Of Commissions of
Lieutenancy and Assistance; 4. Warrants for the Removal of Achievements; 5.
Scutcheons of Arms and Styles; 6. Of adorning the Chapel; 7. The furnishing of
St. George's Hall; And 8. Officers and Servants appointed to attend at the
Grand Feast.

Chap. XX. Treats of the order of the Ceremonies on the Eve of the Grand Feast,
in seven Sections: 1. Of the beginning of the Grand Feast; 2. Of setting the
proceeding in order; 3. Of proceeding to the Chapter House; 4. Of the opening
of the Chapter; 5. Transactions in the Chapter held before the first Vespers;
6. The Ceremonies relating to the first Vespers; And 7. the Supper on the Eve.

Chap. XXI. Treats of the Order of the Ceremonies on the Feast day, in nine
Sections: 1. The proceeding to the Chapel in the morning; 2. The proceeding to
the second Service; 3. Of the Grand Procession; 4. The order of the said
Service; 5. The Offering of Gold and Silver; 6. The return to the presence; 7.
Of the Dinner on the Feast Day; 8. The Ceremonies belonging to the second
Vespers; And 9. of the Supper on the Evening of the Feast Day.

Chap. XXII. Treats of the Ceremonies observed on the last day of the Feast, in
four Sections: 1. Of proceeding to the Chapter House in the morning; 2. Of the
elect Knights proceeding into the Choire; 3. Of the Ceremonies performed at
Divine Service; And 4. the Diets at some of the Grand Feasts.

Chap. XXIII. Treats of the Observations of the Grand Feast by absent Knights,
in five Sections: 1. Absent Knights enjoined to observe the Grand Feast; 2.
More particular directions for their observation thereof; 3. How to be observed
in case of Sickness; 4. In what manner the Feast has been observed by absent
Knights; And 5. Dispensation for absence granted during life.

Chap. XXIV. Treats of Degradation of a Knight-Companion, in three Sections: 1.
Of the Degradation of a Knight Bachelor; 2. The manner of Degrading a
Knight-Companion of the Garter; And 3. of Restoration into the Order after
Degrading.

Chap. XXV. Treats of Honors paid to deceased Knights-Companions, in four
Sections: 1. Of the celebration formerly of Masses for defunct
Knights-Companions; 2. Of fixing on the Stalls Plates of their Arms and Styles;
3. The Offering of Achievements; And 4. of depositing the deceased Knights
Mantles in the Chapter House.

Chap. XXVI. Treats of the Founder, the first Knights-Companions, and their
Successors, in four Sections: 1. Of what number they consisted; 2. A short view
of the Founder's Wars; 3. Some account of the first Five and twenty
Knights-Companions; And 4. a Catalogue of their Successors.

OF Knights Bannerets. CHAP. XVIII.
THIS Degree of Knighthood, called by some Equites Vexillarii, or Chevaliers a
Banier, is a most ancient Order, having been used in England ever since King
Edward the First; and has been always conferred on most deserving persons for
their signal Valor, as I shall anon take occasion to speak of.

It Is the Judgment of some Antiquaries, that these Bannerets were once used as
a part of the three States of the Realm; and that it was the Custom of Kings
hertofore to summon by Writ the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, with such other
worthy persons of this Order as they thought fit to call to consult about the
Public Affairs of the Kingdom; which persons thus assembled were then called a
Parliament. And that those Bannerets often serving their King and Country, in
process of time obtained the name of Barons, and were admitted into the
Peerage, and had their Titles affixed to them and their Heirs. And this was the
usuage and custom of the Saxon Kings to consult their Affairs without the
election of the Commons, as both Ethelred and Edwin did. But whether this be a
truth, or only opinion, I leave to others to dispute.

Certain it is, they always retained some Ensigns of Honor equal to the
Nobility, being allowed to bear their Arms with Supporters, which is denied to
all others under the Degree of a Baron: Also they take place before all
Viscounts and Barons younger Sons; as also before all Baronets, and were of
such esteem, that diverse Knights Batchelors and Esquires have served under them.

This Order in France was Hereditary, but with us only for life to the
meritorious person; yet esteemed a Glory and Honor to their Family. The
Ceremony of their Creation is most Noble: The King (or his General, which is
very rare) at the head of his Army (drawn up into Battalia after a Victory)
under the Royal Standard displayed, attended with all the Field Officers and
Nobles af the Court, receives the Knight led between two renowned Knights or
valiant Men at Arms, having his Pennon or Guydon of Arms in his Hand; and
before them the Heralds, who proclaim his valiant Achievements, for which he
deserves to be made a Knight Banneret, and to display his Banner in the Field;
then the King (or General) says unto him, Advances toy Banneret, and causes
the point of his Pennon to be rent of; and the new Knight having the Trumpets
before him sounding, the Nobles and Officers accompanying him, is remitted to
his Tent, where they are nobly entertained.

To this degree of Knighthood does belong peculiar Robes and other Ornaments at
their Creation.

A Banneret thus made may bear his Banner displayed in an Army Royal, and set
his Arms thereon with Supporters, as may the Nobles.

Of this Order there is at present none extant; and the last I read of was Sir
John Smith, made so after Edghill fight (for rescuing the King's Standard from
the Rebels in that Battle) who was afterward flain in his said Majesty's
Service at Alresford in Hantshire.

To this degree of Honor Sir William de la More (Ancestor to the present
Edward More of More-hall and Bank-hall in Lancashire, Esquire) was advanced by
Edward the black Prince for his eminent Service done at the Battle of Poictiers
in France.

The Portrature and Coat Armor of Sr. William de la More Ancestor of ye.
present Sr. Edw. More of More^hall and Banke^hall in Lancashire Baronet which:
sd. Sr. Will: was made Knight. Banneret by Edw ye. Black Prince at ye. Battle of
Poictiers in France.


The Rt. Honoura^le Sr. George Ca^teret of Nawnes in Bedford shire Knight. Baronet.
Vice Chamberlain of his Majestys Household and one of his Majestys most
Honorable privy Council etca. the 45^ Bart. by Creation.
The Hon^. Sr H^rbotle Grimston of Gore ham bury in (...) (...) Baronet,
Speaker of ye honble. house of Common (...) first Parliament under his Majesty
King Ch^^^e^ ^he 2d and at present Master of the Roll^ the 87 Bart. by Creation
Sr. Edmund Bacon of Redgrave in Suffolk Primier Bart. of England: the first
Bart. by Creation:
Sr Francis Radcliffe of Dilston in Northumberland Bart of which Family^ there
have been six Earle^ of S^^r^x and five of them were Kt^. of ye Garter besides
S^ John Radclyffe Knight. of ye. Garter t^m^ps K. Hon 6th. and ^^ (...) Rodclyffe
al^oe Knight. of ye. Garter tem^ps K. Rich. 3d. q. 18 Bart. by Creation:


Sr. Richard Atkins of Much Haddam in the County of Hertford Knight and
Baronet. The 4 S^. Bart. by creation.
Sr. Francis Gerard of Harrow Hill in Middlesex and of Aston Clinton in the
County of Buckingham Knight and Baronet. The 126. Bar^. by creation
Sr. Tho. Mauleverer of Allerton-Mauleverer in the West rideing of York shire
Barnt. now married to Katherine sole daughter and heir of Sr. Miles Stapleton
of Wihill in ye. Sd. rideing of Yorkshire Knight. deceased. The Barnt. by creation.
Sr. John Wittewronge of Rothamsted in ye parish of Harpenden in the County of
Hertford K^. and Bart. descended from the Wittewronges in Flanders, whose
Grandfather Jacques Wittewronge of Gaunt in the sd. province did thence
transplant himself and family into this Kingdom Anno. 1564. The Bart. by
creation.


Sr. Tho: P^yton of Knowlton in the County of Kent Bart. descen^d from the
Peyton's of Peyton Hall^ Suffolk, who had by his first wife Margaret daughter
and heir of Sr. John Bernard of J^esham in Cambridg shire, much land and many
children, from whom are descended the Peyton's of Suffolk, Cambride shire,
Kent, and the Isle of Eley, his second wife was Margaret daughter and Coheyre
of Sr. Hugh Francies, by whom he had also much land and many Children and from
whom are descended the Peyton's of Sr. Edmondsbury, Warwick shire, Worcester
shire, and Gloucester sh. ye 61. Bar. by creation.
Sr. Anthony Craven of Sparsholt in Berkshire Knight and Baronet. of the name
and family of the Right Honorable William Earl of Craven andct The 648. Bart.
by creation.
Sr. Henry Puckering alias Newton of the priory near the Borough of Warwick in
Warwickshire Bart. now married to Elizabeth daughter of Tho. Murrey Esquire.^
secretary to King Charles the first wh^^ ^rince of Wal^^. The ^24. Bart. by
creat^^n.
Sr. Phillip Mathei^s of Edmonton in Middx. Bart. Now Married to Ann eldest
daughter of Sr. Tho: Wolstonholme of Minsingden in ye. Sd. Parish of Edmonton
Bart. ye 6^4 Bart. by Creation


Sr. Thomas Tempest of Stelle in the Bishopric of Durham. Bart. the ^99 Bart
by Creation.
Sr. John Molinevx of Teversa^^ in ye. County of Nottingham Bart. the 3^ Bart.
by Creation
^r. William Walter of Sarsden in Oxfordshire Bart. ^^^ended from ye.
antien^family of ye. Walters of Warwi^^ ^^^re whose late wife was ye. Lady Mary
Tuston dau^ (...) ye. Rt^ honble. Nicholas Earl of Thanet decea^e^ ye. 352
Bart. by Creation:
S^ John Osborn of Chick^ands in ye. County of Bedford Baronet: the 468 Bart.
by Creation:


Sr. Robert Vyner of ye. City of London K^ Baron. And Lord Major thereof Anno.
Domini. 1675 ye. 658 Bart. by Creation.
Sr. Thomas Wolstenholme of Minsingden in ye. Paris^ of Edmunton in the County
of Middlesex Baronet the 747 Bart. by Creation.
Sr. Peter Gleane of Hardwick in ye. County of Norfolk Baronet ye. 770. Bart.
by Creation.
Sr. Robert Jason of Broadsomerford in Wiltshire Baronet now married to Ann
daughter of George Dacres of Cheston in the County of Hertford Esquire. y^ 672
Bart. by Creation.


Sr. Thomas Wilbraham of Woodhey in ye. County of Chester. Baronett: now married
to Eliz^ sole Daug^ter: and heyr of Edward Mitton of Weston vnd^^ Lozzardin^
ye. County of Stafford ^ Esquire: ye. ^4^8 Bart. by Creation:
Sr. Thomas Myddelton of Chirk^ Castle in Denbighshir Bart. first Married to
Elizabeth daughter of Sr. Tho Wilbra^ham of Woodh^^ in Cheshire Bart. and now
to Charlott Daughter of ye. Rt Honb^^. Orlando Bridgman Knight and Bart. deceased,
Late Ld. Keeper of the great Seal of En^land: the 514 Bart. by Creation:
(...) ^^hn Bridg^man of Castle Bromwic^ in Warwickshire Bart, Eldest son of
ye. Rt. honble. Sr. Orlando Bridg^^an: of great Lea^er in Lancashir Knight. and
Bart. dece^^^^ La^e ^^. Keeper. of ye. great seal of England: with. (...) S^.
^ohn is now married to Mary Daughter and Coheyr^ of ^^^^g^ ^radock of Carswall
Castle in Stafordshire Esquire deceased: The 496 Bart. by Creation:
^r. Samuel Barnadiston of Brightwell Hall in Suffol^ Bart. Third son to Sr.
Nath: Barnadiston of Ketto^^^^ (...) ye Sd. County: who was ye. 23d. Knight.
Lineally descended of ye. family with: still Enjoyes ye. Paternall Estate they
had before ye. Conquest ye. Bart. by Creation:


Sr. Thomas Dar^ey of St. Clerehall in St. oseth in ye. County of Essex Bart.:
The 486 Bart. by Creation:
Sr. Humfrey Forster of Aldermaston in Barkshire: Bart., descended of a family
of great antiquity Whose Ancestors have been there seated for Above 300 years:
the 129 Bart. by Creation:
Sr. John Robinson of ye. City of London Alderman: Knight. and Bart. and
Leiutenant of his matys. Tower of London: The 494 Bart. by Creation:
Sr. Ralph Verney of Middle Claydon in ye. County of Bucks Knight. and Bart. son to
Sr. Edmund Verney Knight. Marshall to K. Charles ye. first and Standard bearer at
ye. Battle of Edghill: The 619 Bart. by Creation:


S^. John Hobart of Blicklin^ in Norfolk Barot. heir male to Sr. Henry Hobart
K^. and Barot. Chief Justice of ye. Common please who descended from the 2d
son of Sr. James Hobart of Hal^s in ^ ^d. County Attorney General to King
H^nry ye. (...) John is now married to Mary daughter of John Hampden of Hampden
in Buckingham shire Esquire. (...). ye ^t^. Bart. by Creation.
Sr. John Corbett of Stoke upon Tean and Adderley in Shropshire Bart. first
married to Theophila daughter and Coheire of James Cambell in Essex Esquire and now
to ^rances daughter of Randolph Egerton of Betley in Staffordshire. Esq^ y^.
217 Bart. by Creation.
Sr. Vincent Corbett of Moarton Corbett in Shropshire Bart. now married to
Elizabeth daughter of Francis Thorns of Shelvock in ye. sd. County ye. 37^
Bart. by Creation.
Sr. Thomas Williams of Elham Court in Co^^ Kent Knight. and Baronet first and
principal Chemical Ph^sitian to his maty King Ch^ ye 2d. ye Bart. by Creation.


Sr. Phillip Perci^^le of Burton in the County of Cork in Ireland Baronet
descend^d from the Perciuals of North Weston near Bristoll in Somersetshire:
the family ca^^ in with William the Conqueror and were ^hefore of Vile near
Caene^ in Normandy.
Sr. John Lowther of Lowther hall in the County of Westmoreland Bart.
Sr^ Charl^s Whe^er of Burbury in the County of Warwick Baronet^ anciently of
Martin Hus^ingtre in the County of Worcester. the 544 by Creacion.
^r^ Me^calfe Robinson of Newby in the North rideing of Yorkshire Bart. married
Margaret daughter of Sr. William Darc^^ of Witton Castle in ye Bishopric of
Durham Knight. ye 536 Bart. by Creation


Sr. Kingmill Lucy of N^tley in Huntshire Bar^^ Second Branch of ye Ancient
Family of ye Lucy^ of Charle^o^ in Warwickshire, now Married to Theophila. 2d.
daughter to ye R^. honbl. G^^^ge Ld. Barkley of (...) Castle. ye 99th. Bart. by
Creati^^
(...) Thomas Hanmer of Hanmer and Bettes fi^l^ in the County of Flint Bart.
descended by many Knights from Sr. John de Hanmer who lived in the time of King
Edw ye first the 139 Bart. by Creation.
(...) Henry Hunlock of Wingerworth in Derbyshire Bar^. in ye Escocheon of
pretense is ye Arms of Katherine his Lady who was sole daughter and he^r^ of
^rancis Turwhit of Kettleby of Lincolnshire Esquire ^ last ^f y^ Eldest branch of
that great and ancient family the 424 Bart. by Creation.
Sr^ William Glynne of Biss^^^er alias Byrcester in Oxfordshire and of Hawarden
in flintshire. Baronet ^^iter married with. Penelope^ daughter of Stephen
Anderson of Evworth in Bedfordshire Esquire ye 64^ Bart. by Creation.


^r^ Richard Graham of Nether by in Cumberland Bart. (...) in ye second son of
ye Earl of Monteith in ye Kingdom of ^cotland, who about ye time of K^ Hen^
y^ 4th. of England married y^ Lady Anne Vere Daughter to ye Earl of Oxford which.
Sd. Sr. Ric^^^^ now married to ye Lady Anne 2d. daught^r to Charles ^arle of
(...) the 284 Bart. by Creation.
Sr. JOHN ^ANKS of ye Friars in Aylesford ^^ ye County of Kent Bart. now married
Elizabeth^ eldest daughter of Sr. John Dethick of the City of London Knight. and
Alderman deceas^d. ye. 671 Bart. by Creation.
(...) John Shaw of Eltham in ye County of Kent^ (...) and Bart. now married to
Bridget Viscount (...) Kilmurrey daughter to Sr. William Dru^y of Bestroorp in
Norfolk Bart. ye 755 Bart. by Creation^
Sr. RICHARD HEAD of the City of Rochester in the County of Kent Baronet ye by
Creation


(...) Edw^ More of Morehall and Bank hall in Lancashi^^ ^a^t. Whose late wife
was Dorothy one of the Daugh^^^ and Coeheir^s to Sr. ^itt^ Fenwick of Meldon in
Northumberland Knight. and Bart^ by ^eabell Daugh^^^^ and sole heir of Sr. Arthur
Gray Knight. Unc^^ to ^^esent Will Ld. Gray of Warke^ the 689 Bart. by Creation.
S^^ John Holland of Quidenham in ye. County of Nor^^^^ ^art d^scend^d from ye
Hollands of ye. Ancient (...) (...) in Lancashir: Married to Alathea daughter
and C^heyce of John Panton of Bru^^shop in Denbighshi^^ ^^que Re^ict of ye. Rt.
Honerbl^. Witt^ Ld. (...) of the Vine in Hantshire: the 188 Bart. by Creation.
^r^ Anthony Aucher of Byshopsbourn in (...) ^t. and Bart. married to one of ye.
daughter o^ Robert Hatton Knight. deceased: one of the Chamberlyns of his matys.
Exchequ^r^ the Bart. by Creation^
Sr. John Reresby of Thriberge in the West Rideing of Yorkshire Bart. Governor
of Burlington in ye said County the 387 Bart. by creation


OF BARONETS. CHAP. XIX.
THE lowest degree of Honor that is Hereditary is this of Baronets, which was
instituted by King James in the ninth year of his Reign, Anno 1611. They are
created by Patent under the Great Seal, a form of which I shall here set down,
which are generally all of one form; viz. to a Man and the Heirs Males of his
Body lawfully begotten; yet sometimes the Honor is otherwise entailed for want
of Issue Male. And the Proeme or Argument of the said Patent being for the
propagating a Plantation in the Province of Vlster in Ireland, to which the aid
of these Knights was ordained, or for the maintenance of Thirty Soldiers each
of them in Ireland for three years, after the rate of eight pence sterling per
diem, which at first was paid into the Exchequer at a lump, upon the passing
their Patents; which with the Fees of Honor due to Officers, amounted to above
One thousand pounds a Man.

Their Titles are to descend as aforesaid; and they have precedence before all
Knights, except those of the Garter, Bannerets, and Privy Counselors: they are
styled Baronets in all Writs, Commissions, etc. and the addition of Sir is
attributed unto them, as the title of Lady is to their Wives.

They are to take place according to the priority of the date of their Patents,
and no Honor is to be created between Baronets and Barons.

At the first instituting of this Order King James engaged that they (...) two
hundred in number, and after the said number should be completed, if any for
want of an He^r Male should be extinct, there should never any more be created
in their room, but that the title should diminish to the honor of them
remaining. But afterward a Commission was ordained to fill up the vacant
places, who had instructions also enacted, by which the Commissioners were
empowered to treat with others that desired to be admitted into the said
Dignity, which is now allowed without limitation; yet with this Proviso, that
they be of good Reputation, and descended of a Grandfather at the least by the
Father's side that bare Arms, and have also a certain yearly Revenue of One
thousand pounds per Annum de claro.

It is also ordained that they and their Descendants, viz. their eldest Sons,
attaining the full Age of One and twenty years, may receive Knighthood; and
that they shall in a Canton, or in an Escocheon (which they please) bear the
Arms of Vlster, viz. in a Field Argent, a sinister hand couped at the wrist,
Gules. In the King's Army Royal they have place in the gross near the King's
Standard, and are allowed some peculiar Solemnities for their Funerals.

Since the first Creation of Baronets in England, there has been several made
after the like manner in Ireland; as also the Knights of Nova Scotia in the
West Indies by King James upon the like design, that is, for planting that
Country by the Scotch Colonies, and the Deg^^es likewise made Hereditary.

By the King. THE INSTRUCTIONS Within mentioned to be observed by Our
COMMISSIONERS WITHIN NAMED.
FOrasmuch as We have been pleased to authorize you to treat and conclude with
a certain number of Knights and Esquires, as they shall present themselves unto
you with such offers of assistance for the service of Ireland, and under such
Conditions as are contained in these Presents, wherein We do repose great trust
and confidence in your discretions and integrities, knowing well, that in such
cases there are so many circumstances incident, as require a choice care and
consideration: We do hereby require you to take such course as may make known
abroad both Our purpose, and the authority given unto you, That by the more
public notice thereof, those persons who are disposed to advance so good a
Work, may in time understand where and to whom to address themselves for the
same; For which purpose We require you to appoint some certain place and times
for their Access: which We think fittest to be at the Council Chamber at
Whitehall, upon Wednesdays and Fridays in the Afternoon, where you shall make
known to them (as they come) that those who desire to be admitted into the
Dignity of Baronets, must maintain the number of thirty foot Soldiers in
Ireland, for three years, after the rate of eight pence sterling money of
England by the day; And the wages of one whole year to be paid into Our
Receipt, upon the passing of the Patent.

Provided always, that you proceed with none, except it shall appear unto you
upon good proof, that they are men for quality, state of living, and good
reputation, worthy of the same; And that they are at the least descended of a
Grandfather by the Father's side that bare Arms; and have also of certain
yearly revenue in Lands of inheritance in possession, One thousand pounds per
Annum de claro; or Lands of the old Rent, as good (in account) as One thousand
pounds per Annum of improved Rents, or at the least two parts in three parts to
be divided of Lands, to the said values in possession, and the other third part
in reversion, expectant upon one life only, holding by Dower or in Ioynture.

And for the Order to be observed in ranking those that shall receive the
Dignity of a Baronet, although it is to be wished, that those Knights which
have now place before other Knights (in respect of the time of their Creation)
may be ranked before others ( Caeteris paribus) yet because this is a Dignity
which shall be Hereditary, wherein diverse circumstances are more considerable,
than such a Mark as is but Temporary (that is to say of being now a Knight, in
time before another) Our pleasure is, you shall not be so precise, in placing
those that shall receive this Dignity, but that an Esquire of great Antiquity
and extraordinary Living, may be ranked in this choice before some Knights. And
so (of Knights) a man of greater living, more remarkable for his house, years,
or calling in the Commonwealth, may be now preferred in this Degree, before one
that was made a Knight before him.

Next, because there is nothing of Honor, or of Value, which is known to be
sought or desired (be the Motives never so good) but may receive scandal from
some, who (wanting the same good affection to the Public) or being in other
considerations incapable, can be contented out of envy to those that are so
preferred, to cast aspersions and imputations upon them; As if they came by
this Dignity for any other consideration, but that which concerns this so
public and memorable a work, you shall take order, That the party who shall
receive this Dignity, may take his Oath, that neither he (nor any for him) has
directly or indirectly given any more for attaining the Degree, or any
Precedence in it, than that which is necessary for the maintenance of the
number of Soldiers, in such sort as aforesaid, saving the charges of passing
his Patent.

And because We are not Ignorant, that in the distribution of all Honors, most
men will be desirous to attain to so high a place as they may, in the Judgment
whereof (being matter of dignity) there cannot be too great caution used to
avoid the interruption that private partialities may breed in so worthy a
Competition.

Forasmnch as it is well known, that it can concern no other person so much to
prevent all such Inconveniences, as it must do our self, from whom all Honor
and Dignity (either Temporary or Hereditary) has his only root and beginning,
You shall publish and declare to all whom it may concern, That for the better
warrant of your own Actions, in this matter of Precedence (wherein We find you
so desirous to avoid all just Exceptions) We are determined upon view of all
those Patents, which shall be subscribed by you, before the same pass Our Great
Seal, to take the especial care upon Us, to order and rank every man in his due
place; And therein always to use the particular counsel and advice that you our
Commissioners shall give Us, of whose integrity and circumspection We have so
good experience, and are so well persuaded, as We assure Our self, you will use
all the best means you may to inform your own Judgments in cases doubtful,
before you deliver Us any such opinion as may lead Us in a case of this Nature,
wherein our intention is (by due consideration of all necessary circumstances)
to give every man that satisfaction which stands with Honor and Reason.

Lastly, having now directed you, how and with what caution you are to
entertain the Offers of such as shall present themselves for this Dignity, We
do also require you to observe these two things. The one, That every such
person as shall be admitted, do enter into sufficient Bond or Recognizance to
Our use, for the payment of that portion which shall be remaining after the
first payment is made, which you are to see paid upon delivery of the Letters
Patents: The other, That seeing this Contribution for so public an Action is
the motive of this Dignity, and that the greatest good which may be expected
upon this Plantation, will depend upon the certain payment of those Forces
which shall be fit to be maintained in that Kingdom, until the same be well
established, the charge whereof will be born with the greater difficulty, if We
be not eased by some such extraordinary means; we require you Our Treasurer of
England, so to order this Receipt, as no part thereof be mixed with Our other
Treasure, but kept apart by it self, to be wholly converted to that use to
which it is given and intended; And in regard thereof, that you assign it to be
received, and the Bonds to be kept by some such particular person as you shall
think good to appoint, who upon the payment of every several portion, shall
both deliver out the Bonds, and give his Acquittance for the same. For which
this shall be yours and his the said Receiver's sufficient Warrant in that
behalf.

THE PRECEDENT OF THE PATENT OF Creation of Baronets.
REX omnibus ad quos. etc. Salutem. Cum inter alias Imperii nostri gerendi
curas, quibus animus noster assidue exercetur, illa non minima sit, nec minimi
momenti, de Plantatione Regni nostri Hiberniae, ac potissimum Vltoniae, amplae
and percelebris ejusdem Regni Provinciae, quam nostris jam auspiciis atque
armis, foeliciter sub obsequii jugum redactam, ita constabilire elaboramus, ut
tanta Provincia, non solum sincero Religionis cultu, humanitate civili,
morumque probitate, verum etiam opum affluentia, atque omnium rerum copia, quae
statum Reipublicae ornare vel bear possit, magis magisque efflorescat. Opus
sane, quod nulli progenitorum nostrorum praestare and perficere licuit, quamvis
id ipsum multa sanguinis and opum profusione saepius tentaverint; In quo opere,
sollicitudo nostra Regia, non solum ad hoc excubare debet, ut Plantatio ipsa
strenue promoveatur, oppida condantur, aedes and castra extruantur, agri
colantur, and id genus alia; Sed etiam prospiciendum imprimis, ut iniversus
hujusmodi rerum civilium apparatus, manu armata, praesidiis videlicet and
cohortibus, protegatur and communiatur, ne qua aut vis hostilis, aut defectio
intestina, rem disturbet aut impediat: Cumque nobis intimatum sit, ex part
quorundam ex fidelibus nostris subditis, quod ipsi paratissimi sint, ad hoc
Regnum nostrum inceptum, tam corporibus, quam fortunis suis promovendum: Nos
commoti operis tam sancti ac salutaris intuitu, atque gratos habentes hujusmodi
generosos affectus, aque propensas in obsequium nostrum and bonum publicum
voluntates, Statuimus apud nos ipsos nulli rei deesse, quae subditorum
nostrorum studia praefata remunerare, aut aliorum animos atque alacritatem, ad
operas suas praestandas, aut impensas in hac part faciendas, excitare possit;
Itaque nobiscum perpendentes atque reputantes, virtutem and industriam, nulla
alia re magis quam honor ali atque acui, omnemque honoris and dignitatis
splendorem, and amplitudinem, a Rege tanquam a font, originem and incrementum
ducere, ad cujus culmen and fastigium proprie spectat, novos honorum and
dignitatum titulos erigere atque instituere, utpote a quo antiqui illi
fluxerint; consentaneum duximus (postulante usu Reipublicae atque temporum
ratione) nova merita, novis dignitatum insignibus rependere: Ac propterea, ex
certa scientia and mero motu nostris, Ordinavimus, ereximus, constituimus, and
creavimus, quendam statum, gradum, dignitatem, nomen and titulum Baronetti
(Anglice of a Baronet) infra hoc Regnum nostrum Angliae perpetuis temporibus
duraturum. Sciatis modo, quod nos de gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa
scientia and mero motu nostris, ereximus, praefecimus and creavimus, ac per
praesentes pro nobis, Haeredibus, and Successoribus nostris, erigimus,
prae^icimus, and creamus dilectum nostrum de in comitatu virum, familia,
patrimonio, censu, and morum probitate spectatum (qui nobis auxilium and
subsidium satis amplum, generoso and liberali animo dedit and praestit, ad
manutenendum and supportandum triginta viros in cohortibus nostris pedestribus
in dicto Regno nostro Hiberniae, per tres annos integros pro defensione dicti
Regni nostri, and praecipue pro securitate plantationis dictae Provinciae
Vltoniae) ad, and in dignitatem, statum, and gradum Baronetti (Anglice of a
Baronet) Ipsumque Baronettum pro nobis, haeredibus, and successoribus nostris,
prae^icimus, constituimus and creamus per praesentes, habendum sibi, and
haeredibus masculis de corpore suo legitime procreatis imperpetuum. Volumus
etiam and per praesentes de gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia and
mero motu nostris, pro nobis, haeredibus, and successoribus nostris concedimus
praefato and haeredibus masculis de corpore suo legitime procreatis, Quod ipse
idem and haeredes sui masculi praedicti habeant, gaudeant, teneant, and capiant
locum atque Praecedentiam, virtute dignitatis Baronetti praedicti, and vigore
praesentium, tam in omnibus Commissionibus, brevibus, literis patentibus,
scriptis, appellationibus, nominationibus, and directionibus, quam in omnibus
Sessionibus, Conventibus, Caetibus and locis quibuscunque prae omnibus
militibus, tam de Balneo (Anglice of the Bathe) quam militibus Baccalaureis
(Anglice Batchelors) ac etiam prae omnibus militibus Bannerettis (Anglice
Bannerets) jam creatis, vel imposterum creandis (Illis militibus Bannerettis
tantummodo exceptis, quos sub vexillis regiis, in exercitu regali, in aperto
bello, and ipso Rege personaliter praesente, explicatis, and non aliter creari
contigerit. Quodque uxores dicti and Haeredum masculorum suorum praedictorum,
virtute dictae dignitatis maritorum suorum praedictorum, habeant, teneant,
gaudeant, and capiant locum and praecedentiam, prae uxoribus omnium aliorum
quorumcunque prae quibus mariti hujusmodi uxorum, vigore praesentium habere
debent locum and praecedentiam; Atque quod primogenitus filius, ac caeteri
omnes filii and eorum uxores, and filiae ejusdem and haeredum suorum
praedictorum respective, habeant, and capiant locum and praecedentiam, ante
primogenitos filios, ac alios filios and eorum uxores, and filias omnium
quorumcunque respective, prae quibus patres hujusmodi filiorum progenitorum,
and aliorum filiorum, and eorum uxores, and filiarum, vigore praesentium habere
debent locum and praecedentiam. Volumus etiam, and per praesentes pro nobis,
haeredibus, and successoribus nostris, de gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa
scientia, and mero motu nostris concedimus, quod dictus nominetur, appelletur,
nuncupetur, placitet and implacitetur, per nomen Baronetti; Et quod stylus and
additio Baronetti apponatur in fine nominis ejusdem and haeredum masculorum
suorum praedictorum, in omnibus Literis Patentibus, Commissionibus, and
brevibus nostris, atque omnibus aliis Chartis, factis, atque literis, virtute
praesentium, ut vera, legitima, and necessaria additio dignitatis. Volumus
etiam, and per praesentes pro nobis, haeredibus, and successoribus nostris
ordinamus, quod nomini dicti and haeredum masculorum suorum praedictorum, in
sermon Anglicano, and omnibus scriptis Anglicanis, praeponatur haec additio,
videlicet Anglice ( Sir:) Et similiter quod uxores ejusdem and haeredum
masculorum suorum praedictorum, habeant, utantur, and gaudeant hac
appellatione, videlicet Anglice ( Lady, Madam, and Dame) respective, secundum
usum loquendi. Habendum, tenendum, utendum, and gaudendum, eadem, statum,
gradum, dignitatem, stylum, titulum, nomen, locum, and praecedentiam, cum
omnibus and singulis Privilegiis, and caeteris praemissis, praefat. and
haeredibus masculis de corpore suo exeuntibus imperpetuum. Volentes and per
Praesentes concedentes, pro nobis, haeredibus and successoribus nostris, quod
praedictus and haeredes sui masculi praedicti, nomen, stat^m, gradum, stylum,
dignitatem, titulum, locum, and praecedentiam praedictam, cum omnibus and
singulis Privilegiis, and caeteris praemissis successive, gerant and habeant,
and eorum quilibet gerat and habeat, quodque idem haeredes sui masculi
praedicti successive Baronetti in omnibus teneantur, Et ut Baronetti tractentur
and reputentur, Et eorum quilibet teneatur, tractetur et reputetur. Et ulterius
de uberiori gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia et mero motu nostris
Concessimus, ac per praesentes pro nobis haeredibus et successoribus nostris
concedimus praefato and haeredibus suis masculis praedictis, quod numerus
Baronettorum hujus Regni Angliae ^unquam posthac excedet in toto, in aliquo uno
tempore, numerum ducentorum Baronettorum: et quod dicti Baronetti, et eorum
haeredes masculi praedicti respective, de tempore in tempus in perpetuum,
habebunt, tenebunt, et gaudebunt locos et praecedentias suas inter se,
videlicet, quilibet eorum secundum prioritatem and senioritatem Creationis suae
Baronetti praedicti; quotquot autem creati sunt, vel creabuntur Baronetti per
literas nostras Patentes, gerentes Datas uno and eodem die, and haeredes sui
praedicti, gaudebunt locis and praecedentiis suis inter se secundum
prioritatem, quae cuilibet eorum dabitur, per alias literas nostras patentes in
ea part primo conficiendas, sine impedimento, and non aliter, nec alio modo.
Et insuper de abundantiori gratia nostra speciali, and ex certa scientia and
mero motu nostris concessimus, ac per praesentes, pro nobis haeredibus and
successoribus nostris concedimus praefato and haeredibus suis masculis
praedictis, quod nec nos, nec haeredes vel successores nostri, de caetero in
posterum erigemus, ordinabimus, constituemus, aut creabimus infra hoc Regnum
nostrum Angliae aliquem alium gradum, ordinem, nomen, titulum, dignitatem, sive
statum sub vel infra gradum, dignitatem, sive statum Baronum, hujus Regni
nostri Angliae, qui erit vel esse possit superior, vel aequalis gradui and
dignitati Baronettorum praedictorum, sed quod tam dictus and haeredes sui
masculi praedicti, quam uxores, filii, uxores filiorum and filiae ejusdem and
haeredum masculorum suorum praedictorum, de caetero in perpetuum libere and
quiet habeant, teneant, and gaudeant, dignitates, locos and praecedentias suas
praedictas prae omnibus, qui erunt de talibus gradibus, statibus, dignitatibus
vel ordinibus in posterum, ut praefertur creandi respective secundum veram
intentionem praesentium absque impedimento nostro, haeredum, vel successorum
nostrorum, vel aliorum quorumcunque. Et ulterius per praesentes declaramus, and
significamus beneplacitum and voluntatem nostram in hac part fore and esse, Et
sic nobiscum statuimus and decrevimus, quod si postquam nos praedict. numerum
ducentorum Baronettorum hujus Regni Angliae compleverimus and perfecerimus,
Contigerit aliquem, vel aliquos eorundem Baronettorum ab hac vita discedere,
absque haerede masculo de corpore vel corporibus hujusmodi Baronetti vel
Baronettorum procreato, quod tunc nos non creabimus, vel praeficiemus aliquam
aliam personam, vel personas in Baronettum, vel Baronettos Regni nostri
Angliae, sed quod numerus dictorum Ducentorum Baronettorum ea ratione de
tempore in tempus diminuetur, and in minorem numerum cedet and redigetur;
Denique volumus, ac per praesentes pro nobis, haeredibus and successoribus
nostris de gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia and mero motu nostris
concedimus praefato and haeredibus suis masculis praedictis, quod hae Literae
nostrae Patentes erunt in omnibus, and per omnia firmae, validae, bonae,
sufficientes and effectuales in lege, tam contra nos, haeredes, and successores
nostros, quam contra omnes alios quoscunque secundum veram intentionem
earundem, tam in omnibus curiis nostris, quam alibi ubicunque Non obstante
aliqua lege, consuetudine, praescriptione, usu, ordinatione, sive constitutione
quacunque ante hac edita, habita, usitata, ordinata, sive provisa, vel in
posterum edenda, habenda, usitanda, ordinanda, vel providenda: Et non obstante
aliqua alia re, causa vel materia quacunque Volumus etiam, etc. Absque ^ine in
Hanaperio, etc. Eo quod expressa mentio, etc. In cujus rei, etc. Test, etc.

A CATALOGUE OF THE Baronets of England ACCORDING To their Creations from the
first Institution to the last; with their Seats and Titles expressed in their
Patents, Anno 9. Iacobi Regis, 1611.
May 22. 1611.
1 SIR Nicholas Bacon of Redgrave in Suffolk, Knight. 2 Sir Richard Molineux of
Sefton in Lancashire, Knight. now Irish Viscount. 3 Sir Thomas Mauncell of Mergan
in Glamorganshire, Knight. 4 George Shirley of Staunton in Leicestershire Esquire 5 Sir
John Stradling of St. Donates in Glamorganshire, Knight. 6 Sir Francis Leeke of
Sutton in Derbyshire, Knight. now English Earl. 7 Thomas Pelham of Laughton in
Sussex, Esquire 8 Sir Richard Houghton of Houghton-Tower in Lancashire, Knight. 9 Sir
Henry Hobart of Intwood in Norfolk, Knight. Attorney General to the King. 10 Sir
George Booth of Dunham-Massey in Cheshire, Knight. now English Baron. 11 Sir John
Peyton of Isleham in Cambridgeshire, Knight. Extinct. 12 Lionel Talmache of
Helmingham in Suffolk, Esquire 13 Sir Gervase Clifton of Clifton in
Nottinghamshire, Knight of the Bath. 14 Sir Thomas Gerard of Bryn in
Lancashire, Knight. 15 Sir Walter Aston of Tixhall in Staffordshire Knight. of the
Bath, since a Baron of Scotland. 16 Philip Nevet of Buckenham in Norfolk, Esquire
Extinct. 17 Sir John St. John of Lidiard-Tregoz in Wiltshire, Knight. 18 John
Shelley of Michelgrove in Sussex, Esquire
June 29. 1611. 9 Iacobi.
19 Sir John Savage of Rock-Savage in Cheshire, now English Earl. 20 Sir
Francis Barington of Barington-hall in Essex, Knight. 21 Henry Berkley of Wimundham
in Leicestershire, Esquire Extinct. 22 William Wentworth of Wentworth-woodhouse in
Yorkshire, English Earl. 23 Sir Richard Musgrave of Hartley-Castle in
Westmoreland, Knight. 24 Edward Seymour of Bury-Pomeray in Devonshire, Esquire 25 Sir
Moyle Finch of Eastwell in Kent, Knight. now English Earl. 26 Sir Anthony Cope of
Hanwell in Oxfordshire, Knight. 27 Sir Thomas Mounson of Carleton in Lincolnshire,
Knight. 28 George Gresly of Drakedow in Derbyshire, Esquire 29 Paul Tracy of Stanway in
Glocestershire, Esquire 30 Sir John Wentworth of Coffield in Essex, Knight. 31 Sir
Henry Bellasis of Newborough in Yorkshire, Knight. now Viscount Faulconberg in
England. 32 William Constable of Flamborough in Yorkshire, Esquire 33 Sir Thomas
Leigh of Stoneley in Warwickshire, Knight. since English Baron. 34 Sir Edward Noel
of Brook in Rutlandshire, Knight. now Viscount Cambden in England. 35 Sir Robert
Cotton of Conington in Huntingtonshire, Knight. 36 Robert Cholmondleigh of
Cholmondleigh in Cheshire, Esquire since Earl of Lempster, Extinct. 37 John
Molineux of Taversal in Nottinghamshire, Esquire 38 Sir Francis Wortley of Wortley
in Yorkshire, Knight. 39 Sir George Savile Senior, Thornhill in Yorkshire, Knight. now
Viscount Halifax in England. 40 William Kniveton of Mircaston in Derbyshire,
Esquire 41 Sir Philip Woodhouse of Wilberly-hall in Norfolk, Knight. 42 Sir William
Pope of Wilcot in Oxfordshire, Knight. now Earl of Down in Ireland. 43 Sir James
Harington of Ridlington in Rutlandshire, Knight. 44 Sir Henry Savile of Metheley in
Yorkshire Knight. Extinct. 45 Henry Willoughby of Risley in Derbyshire, Esquire
Extinct. 46 Jews Tresham of Rushton in Northamptonshire, Esquire Extinct. 47
Thomas Brudenell of Dean in Northamptonshire, Esquire now Earl of Cardigan in
England. 48 Sir George St. Paul of Snarsford in Lincolnshire, Knight. Extinct. 49
Sir Philip Tirwhit of Stainfield in Lincolnshire, Knight. 50 Sir Roger Dalison of
Loughton in Lincolnshire, Knight. Extinct. 51 Sir Edward Carre of Sleford in
Lincolnshire, Knight. 52 Sir Edward Hussy of Henington in Lincolnshire, Knight. 53
L'Estrange Mordant of Massinghamparva in Norfolk, Esquire 54 Thomas Bendish of
Steeple-Bemsted in Essex, Esquire 55 Sir John Win of Gwidder in Carnarvanshire,
Knight. 56 Sir William Throckmorton of Tortworth in Glocestershire, Knight. 57 Sir
Richard Worsley of Apledercombe in Hantshire, Knight. 58 Sir Richard Fleetwood of
Calwiche in Stafforshire, Knight. 59 Thomas Spencer of Yarnton in Oxfordshire, Esquire
60 Sir John Tufton of Hothfield in Kent, Knight. 61 Sir Samuel Peyton of Knowlton
in Kent, Knight. 62 Sir Charles Morrison of Caishobury in Hartfordshire, Knight.
Extinct. 63 Sir Henry Baker of Sissinghurst in Kent, Knight. 64 Roger Apleton of
South-Bemsted in Essex, Esquire 65 Sir William Sidley of Ailesford and Southfleet
in Kent, Knight. 66 Sir William Twisden of Royden-hall in East-Peckham in Kent, Knight.
67 Sir Edward Hales of Woodchurch, and now of Tunstall in Kent, Knight. 68 William
Monins of Waldersher in Kent, Esquire 69 Thomas Mildway of Mulsham in Essex, Esquire 70
Sir William Maynard of Eastanes, or Easton parva in Essex, Knight. now English
Baron. 71 Henry Lee of Quarendon in Buckinghamshire, Esquire now Earl of Litchfield
in England.
Anno 1612. Nov. 25.
72 Sir John Portman of Orchard in Somersetshire, Knight. 73 Sir Nicholas
Saunderson of Saxby in Lincolnshire, Knight. now Viscount Castleton in Ireland. 74
Sir Miles Sandys of Wimbleton in the Isle of Ely, Knight. 75 William Gostwick of
Willington in Bedfordshire, Esquire 76 Thomas Puckering of Weston in Hartfordshire,
Esquire Extinct. 77 Sir William Wray of Glentworth in Lincolnshire, Knight. 78 Sir
William Aylofte of Braxsted magna in Essex, Knight.
Nov. 25. 1612.
79 Sir Marmaduke Wivell of Constable-Burton in Yorkshire, Knight. 80 John Penshall
of Horsley in Staffordshire, Esquire 81 Francis Englesfield of Wotton-Basset in
Wiltshire, Esquire 82 Sir Thomas Ridgeway of Torre in Devonshire, Knight. now Earl of
Londonderry in Ireland. 83 William Essex of Bewcott in Berkshire, Esquire 84 Sir
Edward Gorges of Langford in Wiltshire, Knight. since a Baron of Ireland. 85 Edward
Devereux of Castle-Bromwich in Warwickshire, Esquire now Viscount Hereford in
England. 86 Reginal Mohun of Buckonnock in Cornwall, Esquire since an English Baron.
87 Sir Harbottle Grimston of Bradfield in Essex, Knight. 88 Sir. Thomas Holt of
Aston juxta Burmingham in Warwickshire, Knight.
Sept. 24. 1612.
89 Sir Robert Naper alias Sandy of Lewton-How in Bedfordshire, Knight. 90 Paul
Banning of Bentley parva in Essex, since Viscount in England, Extinct. 91 Sir
Richard Temple of Stow in Buckinghamshire, Knight. 92 Thomas Penystone of Leigh in
Sussex, Esquire 93 May 27. 1615. Thomas Blackstone of Blackstone in the Bishopric
of Durham, Esquire 94 June 10. Sir Robert Dormer of Wing in Bucks, Knight. since Earl
of Carnarvan. 95 April 5. 1617. Sir Rowland Egerton of Egerton in Cheshire, Knight.
96 April 16. Roger Townsend of Rainham in Norfolk, Esquire now an English Baron. 97
May 1. Simon Clark of Salford in Warwickshire, Esquire 98 Oct. 2. Edward Fitton of
Houseworth in Cheshire, Esquire Extinct. 99 March 11. Sir Richard Lucy of Broxburne
in Hertfordshire, Knight. now enjoyed by Sir Kingsmill Lucy of Facombe in
Hantshire. 100 May 25. 1618. Sir Matthew Boynton of Bramston in Yorkshire, Knight.
101 July 25. Thomas Littleton of Frankley in Worcestershire, Esquire 102 Dec. 24.
Sir Francis Leigh of Newnham in Warwickshire, Knight. an English Earl, Extinct. 103
Feb. 25. Thomas Burdet of Bramcote in Warwickshire, Esquire 104 March 1. George
Morton of St. Andrews Milborn in Dorsetshire, Esquire 105 May 31. 1619. Sir William
Hervey of Kidbrook in Essex, Knight. since a Baron of England and Ireland, now
Extinct. 106 June 4. Thomas Mackworth of Normanton in Rutlandshire, Esquire 107 15.
William Gray of Chillingham in Northumberland, Esquire now Baron Warke in England.
108 July 19. William Villiers of Brooksby in Leicestershire, Esquire 109 July 20.
Sir James Ley of Westbury in Wiltshire, Knight. since Earl of Marlborough in
England. 110 21. William Hicks of Beverston in Glocestershire, Esquire 111 Sept.
17. Sir Thomas Beaumont of Coleorton in Leicestershire, Knight. since a Viscout of
Ireland. 112 Nov. 10. Henry Salisbury of Leweney in Denbeighshire, Esquire 113 16.
Erasmus Driden of Canons-Ashby in Northamptonshire, Esquire 114 28. William Armine
of Osgodby in Lincolnshire, Esquire 115 Dec. 1. Sir William Bambury of Howton in
Yorkshire, Knight. Extinct. 116 3. Edward Hartop of Freathby in Leicestershire,
Esquire. 117 31. John Mill of Canons-Court in Sussex, Esquire 118 Ian. 31. Francis
Ratcliff of Darent-water in Cumberland, Esquire 119 Feb. 6. Sir David Foulis of
Ingleby-mannour in Yorkshire, Knight. 120 16. Thomas Phillips of Barington in
Somersetshire, Esquire 121 Mar. 7. Sir Claudius Forster of Bramburgh-Castle in
Northumberland, Knight. 122 23. Anthony Chester of Chickley in Buckinghamshire, Esquire
123 28. 1620. Sir Samuel Tryon of Laire-Marney in Essex, Knight. 124 April 2. Adam
Newton of Charlton in Kent, Esquire 125 12. Sir John Boteler of Hatfield-Woodhall
in Hartfordshire, Knight. since a Baron of England. 126 13. Gilbert Gerrard of
Harrow-hill in Middlesex, Esquire 127 May 3. Humphrey Lee of Langley in Shropshire,
Esquire 128 5. Richard Berney of Park-hall in Redham in Norfolk, Esquire 129 20.
Humphrey Forster of Aldermaston in Berkshire, Esquire 130 29. Thomas Bigs of
Lenchwick in Worcestershire, Esquire Extinct. 131 30. Henry Bellingham of
Helsington in Westmoreland, Esquire Extinct. 132 31. William Yelverton of Rougham
in Norfolk, Esquire 133 June 1. June Scudamore of Holm-Lacy in Herefordshire, Esquire
now an Irish Viscount. 134 2. Sir Thomas Gore of Stitnam in Yorkshire, Knight. 135
22. John Packington of Alisbury in Buckinghamshire, Esquire 136 28. Ralph Ashton of
Lever in Lancashire, Esquire 137 July 1. Sir Baptist Hicks of Camden in
Glocestershire, Knight. now Viscount Camden in England. 138 July 3. Sir Thomas
Roberts of Glassenbury in Kent, Knight. 139 8. John Hanmer of Hanmer in Flintshire,
Esquire 140 8. Edward Friar of Water-Eaton in Oxfordshire, Esquire Extinct. 141 13.
Edward Osborn of Keeton in Yorkshire, now Earl of Danby in England. 142 20.
Henry Felton of Playford in Suffolk, Esquire 143 20. William Challoner of Gisborow
in Yorkshire, Esquire 144 24. Sir Thomas Bishop of Parham in Sussex, Knight. 145 26.
Sir Francis Vincent of Stoke d' Abernon in Surrey, Knight. 146 Feb. 27. Henry Clear
of Ormsby in Norfolk, Esquire 147 March 8. Sir Benjamin Titchborne of Titchborne in
Hantshire, Knight. 148 May 5. 1621. Sir Richard Wilbraham of VVoodhey in Cheshire,
Knight. 149 8. Sir Thomas Delves of Duddington in Cheshire, Knight. 150 June 23. Sir
Jews Watson of Rockingham-Castle in Northamptonshire Knight. since an English
Baron. 151 29. Sir Thomas Palmer of VVingham in Kent, Knight. 152 July 3. Sir
Richard Roberts of Truro in Cornwall, Knight. now Baron Truro. 153 19. John Rivers
of Chafford in Kent, Esquire 154 Sept. 6. Thomas Darnell of Heyling in
Lincolnshire, Esquire 155 14. Sir Isaac Sidley of Great Chart in Kent, Knight. 156 21.
Robert Brown of VValcot in Northamptonshire, Esquire 157 Oct. 11. John Hewit of
Headley-hall in Yorkshire, Esquire 158 16. Henry Iernegan of Cossey in Norfolk, Esquire
159 Nov. 8. Sir Nicholas Hide of Albury in Hertfordshire, Knight. Extinct. 160 9.
John Phillips of Picton in Pembrokeshire, Esquire 161 24. Sir John Stepney of
Prendergast in Pembrokeshire, Knight. 162 Dec. 5. Baldwin Wake of Clevedon in
Somersetshire, Esquire 163 20. William Masham of High-Laver in Essex, Esquire 164 21.
John Colebrond of Bocham in Sussex, Esquire 165 Ian. 4. Sir John Hotham of
Scarborough in Yorkshire, Knight. 166 14. Francis Mansell of Mudlescomb in
Carmarthenshire, Esquire 167 18. Edward Powel of Penkelley in Herefordshire, Esquire
Extinct. 168 Feb. 16. Sir John Gerrard or Garrard of Lamer in Hartfordshire,
Knight. 169 23. Sir Richard Grosvenour of Eaton in Cheshire, Knight. 170 Mar. 11. Sir
Henry Moody of Garesdon in Wilsthire, Knight. Extinct. 171 17. John Barker of
Grimston-hall in Trimley in Suffolk, Esquire 172 18. Sir William Button of Alton
in Wiltshire, Knight. 173 26. 1622. John Gage of Ferle in Sussex, Esquire 174 May 14.
William Gore^^g of Burton in Sussex, Esquire 175 18. Peter Courteen of Aldington
in Worcestershire, Esquire Extinct. 176 23. Sir Richard Norton of Rotherfield in
Hantshire, Knight. 177 30. Sir John Laventhorp of Shinglehall in Hertfordshire, Knight.
178 June 3. Capell Bedell of Hamerton in Huntingtonshire, Esquire Extinct. 179 13.
John Darell of VVestwoodhey in Berkshire, Esquire 180 15. William Williams of
Veynol in Carnarvanshire, Esquire 181 18. Sir Francis Ashby of Hatfield in
Middlesex, Knight. 182 July 3. Sir Anthony Ashley of St. Giles-VVinborne in
Dorsetshire, Knight. Extinct. 183 4. John Cooper of Rochbourn in Hantshire, Esquire now
Earl of Shaftsbury in England. 184 17. Edmund Prideaux of Netherton in
Devonshire, Esquire 185 21. Sir Thomas Haselrigg of Nousley in Leicestershire, Knight.
186 22. Sir Thomas Burton of Stockerston in Leicestershire, Knight. 187 24. Francis
Foliamb of Walton in Derbyshire, Esquire Extinct. 188 30. Edward Yate of Buckland
in Berkshire, Esquire 189 Aug. 1. George Chudleigh of Ashton in Devonshire, Esquire 190
2. Francis Drake of Buckland in Devonshire, Esquire 191 13. William Meredith of
Stansly in Deubighshire, Esquire 192 Oct. 22. Hugh Middleton of Ruthin in
Deubighshire, Esquire 193 Nov. 12. Gifford Thornhurst of Agne-Court in Kent, Esquire
194 16. Percy Herbert of^ Redcastle in Montgomeryshire, Esquire 195 Dec. 7. Sir
Robert Fisher of Packington in Warwickshire, Knight. 196 18. Hardolph VVastneys of
Headon in Nottinghamshire, Esquire 197 20. Sir Henry Skipwith of Prestwould in
Lincolnshire, Knight. 198 22. Thomas Harris or Herris of Boreatton in Shropshire,
Esquire 199 23. Nicholas Tempest of Stella in the Bishopric of Durham, Esquire 200
Feb. 16. Francis Cottington of Hanworth in Middlesex, Esquire since an English
Baron, and now Extinct. 201 April 12. 1623. Thomas Harris of Tong-Castle in
Shropshire, Esquire Extinct. 202 June 28. Edward Barkham of South-acre in Norfolk,
Esquire 203 July 4. John Corbet of Sprouston in Norfolk, Esquire 204 Aug. 13. Sir
Thomas Playters of Sotterley in Suffolk, Knight.
Baronets according to their Creations by King Charles the First.
205 July 27. 1626. Sir John Ashfield of Netherhall in Suffolk, Knight. 206 Sept.
8. Henry Harpur of Calke in Derbyshire, Esquire 207 Dec. 20. Edward Seabright of
Besford in Worcestershire, Esquire 208 Ian. 29. John Beaumont of Grace-dieu in
Leicestershire, Esquire Extinct. 209 Feb. 1. Sir Edward Dering of Surrenden-Dering
in Kent, Knight. 210 5. George Kempe of Pentlone in Essex, Esquire 211 Mar. 10. William
Brereton of Hanford in Cheshire, Esquire 212 12. Patricius Curwen of Workinton in
Cumberland, Esquire Extinct. 213 William Russel of Witley in Worcestershire, Esquire
214 14. John Spencer of Offley in Hartfordshire, Esquire 215 17. Sir Giles Estcourt
of Newton in Wiltshire, Knight. 216 Apr. 19. 1627. Thomas Aylesbury Esquire one of the
Masters of Requests, Extinct. 217 21. Thomas Style of Waterinbury in Kent, Esquire
218 May 4. Frederick Cornwallis of in Suffolk, Esquire 219 7. Drue Drury of (...)
in Norfolk, Esquire 220 8. William Skeffington of Fisherwick in Staffordshire, Esquire
221 11. Sir Robert Crane of Chilton in Suffolk, Knight. Extinct. 222 17. Anthony
Wingfield of Goodwins in Suffolk, Esquire 223 17. William Culpeper of Preston-hall
in Kent, Esquire 224 Giles Bridges of Wilton in Herefordshire, Esquire 225 John Kirle
of Much-marcle in Herefordshire, Esquire 226 20. Sir Humphrey Styles of Beckham in
Kent, Knight. Extinct. 227 21. Henry Moor of Falley in Berkshire, Esquire 228 28.
Thomas Heal of Fleet in Devonshire, Esquire 229 John Carleton of Holcombe in
Oxfordshire, Esquire Extinct. 230 30. Thomas Maples of Stow in Huntingtonshire, Esquire
Extinct. 231 May 30. 1627. Sir John Isham of Lamport in Northamptonshire, Knight.
232 Henry Bagot of Blithfield in Staffordshire, Esquire 233 31. Jews Pollard of
Kings-Nimph in Devonshire, Esquire 234 June 1. Francis Mannock of Giffords-hall in
Stoke in Suffolk, Esquire 235 7. Henry Griffith of Agnes-Burton in Yorkshire, Esquire
Extinct. 236 8. Lodowick Dyer of Staughton in Huntingtonshire, Esquire 237 9. Sir
Hugh Stukeley of Hinton in Hantshire, Knight. 238 26. Edward Stanley of Bickerstaff
in Lancashire, Esquire 239 28. Edward Littleton of Pillatonhall in Staffordshire,
Esquire 240 July 7. Ambrose Brown of Betsworth-Castle in Surrey, Esquire 241 8.
Sackvile Crow of Llanherne in Caermarthenshire, Esquire 242 11. Michael Livesey of
East-church in the Isle of Sheppy in Kent, Esquire Extinct. 243 17. Simon Bennet of
Benhampton in Bucks, Esquire 244 19. Sir Thomas Fisher of St. Giles's in the Fields
in Middlesex, Knight. 245 23. Thomas Bowyer of Legthorn in Sussex, Esquire 246 29. Buts
Bacon of Milden-hall in Suffolk, Esquire 247 Sept. 19. John Corbet of Stoke in
Shropshire, Esquire 248 Oct. 31. Sir Edward Tirrill of Thornton in Bucks, Knight. 249
Feb. 18. Basil Dixwell of Tirlingham in Kent, Esquire 250 March 10. Sir Richard
Tongue, Knight. Extinct. 251 May 6. 1628. William Pennyman Junior of Mask in
Yorkshire, Esquire Extinct. 252 7. William Stonehouse of Radley in Berkshire, Esquire
253 21. Sir Thomas Fowler of Islington in Middlesex, Knight. 254 June 9. Sir John
Fenwick of Fenwick in Northumberland, Knight. 255 30. Sir William Wray of Trebitch
in Cornwall, Knight. 256 July 1. John Trelawney of Trelawney in Cornwall, Esquire 257
14. John Conyers of Horden in the Bishopric of Durham, Gent. 258 July 24. John
Bolles of Scampton in Lincolnshire, Esquire 259 25. Thomas Aston of Aston in
Cheshire, Esquire 260 30. Kenelme Ienoure of Much-Dunmore in Essex, Esquire 261 Aug.
15. Sir John Price of Newtown in Montgomeryshire, Knight. 262 19. Sir Richard
Beaumont of Whitley in Yorkshire, Knight. 263 29. William Wiseman of Canfield-hall
in Essex, Esquire 264 Sept. 1. Thomas Nightingale of Newport-pond in Essex, Esquire 265
2. John Jacques of Esquire Extinct. 266 6. Robert Dillington of in the Isle of
Wight, Esquire 267 12. Francis Pile of Compton in Berkshire, Esquire 268 John Pole of
Shur in Devonshire, Esquire 269 14. William Jews of Langors in Brecknockshire, Esquire
270 20. William Culpeper of Wakehurst in Sussex, Esquire 271 Oct. 3. Peter Vanloor
of Tylehurst in Berkshire, Esquire Extinct. 272 9. Sir John Laurence of Iver in
Bucks, Knight. 273 23. Anthony Slingesby of Screvin in Yorkshire, Esquire 274 24.
Thomas Vavasour of Haselwood in Yorkshire, Esquire 275 Nov. 24. Robert Wolseley of
Wolseley in Staffordshire, Esquire 276 Dec. 8. Rice Rudd of Aberghaney in
Caermarthenshire, Esquire 277 18. Richard Wiseman of Thundersley in Essex, Esquire 278
19. Henry Ferrers of Skellingthorp in Lincolnshire, Esquire 279 Ian. 3. John
Anderson of St. Ives in Huntingtonshire, Esquire 280 19. Sir William Russel of
Chippenham in Cambridgeshire, Knight. 281 29. Richard Everard of Much-waltham in
Essex, Esquire 282 Thomas Powell of Berkinhead in Cheshire, Esquire 283 March 3.
William Luckin of Waltham in Essex, Esquire 284 29. 1629. Richard Graham of Eske in
Cumberland, Esquire 285 April 2. George Twisleton of Barley in Yorkshire, Esquire 286
May 30. William Acton of the City of London, Esquire 287 June 1. Nicholas
L'Estrange of Hunstanton in Norfolk, Esquire 288 15. John Holland of Quiddenham in
Norfolk, Esquire 289 24. Edward Alleyn of Hatfield in Essex, Esquire 290 July 2.
Richard Earl of Craglethorpe in Lincolnshire, Esquire 291 Nov. 28. Robert Ducy of
the City of London, Alderman. 292 April 9. 1630. Sir Richard Greenvile of
Kilkhampton in Cornwall, Knight. 293 June 22. 1631. Charles Vavasour of
Killingthorp in Lincolnshire, Esquire 294. Feb. 19. 1638. Sir Edward Tirril of
Thornley in Bucks, Knight. 295 July 20. 1640. Edward Mosely of Rowlstone in
Staffordshire, Esquire 296 Ian. 8. Martin Lumley of Bardfield in Essex, Esquire 297
Feb. 15. William Dalston of Dalston in Cumberland, Esquire 298 19. Henry Fletcher
of Hutton in the Forest in Cumberland, Esquire 299 March 4. Nicholas Cole of
Brancepeth in the Bishopric of Durham, Esquire 300 April 23. 1641. Edmund Pie of
Leekhamsted in Bucks, Esquire 301 May 26. Simon Every of Egginton in Derbyshire,
Esquire 302 29. William Langley of Higham-Gobion in Bedfordshire, Esquire 303 June 8.
William Paston of Oxnead in Norfolk, Esquire now Viscount Yarmouth in England. 304
11. James Stonehouse of Amerden-hall in Essex, Esquire 305 24. John Palgrave of
Norwood-Barningham in Norfolk, Esquire 306 25. Gerard Nappier of Middle-Merthall in
Dorsetshire, Esquire 307 28. Thomas Whitmore of Apley in Shropshire, Esquire 308 29.
John ^^ney of Linton in Kent, Esquire 309 30. Sir Thomas Cave Junior of Stanford in
Northamptonshire, Knight. 310 Sir Christopher Yelverton of Easton Mauduit in
Northamptonshire, Knight. 311 July 3. William Boteler of Teston in Kent, Esquire 312 5.
Sir Thomas Hatton of Long-Stanton in Cambridgshire, Knight. 313 7. Thomas Abdy of
Flex-hall in Essex, Esquire 314 14. Thomas Bampfield of Poltmore in Devonshire, Esquire
315 Sir John Cotton of Landwade in Cambridgshire, Knight. 316 15. Sir Simon D'Ewes
of Stow-hall in Suffolk, Knight. 317 Henry Frederick Thinn of Cause-Castle in
Shropshire, Esquire 318 John Burgoyne of Sutton in Bedfordshire, Esquire 319 16. John
Northcote of Haine in Devonshire, Esquire 320 17. Sir William Drake of Sherdelow in
Bucks, Knight. 321 23. Thomas Rous of Rouse-Lench in Worcestershire, Esquire. 322 Ralph
Hare of Stow-Bardolph in Norfolk, Esquire. 323 July 24. 1641. Sir John Norwich of
Brampton in Northamptonshire, Knight. 324 26. John Brownlow of Belton near Grantham
in Lincolnshire, Esquire. 325 27. William Brownlow of Humby in Lincolnshire, Esquire.
326 28. John Sidenham of Brimpton in Somersetshire, Esquire. 327 Henry Prat of
Coleshall in Berkshire, Esquire 328 Francis Nichols of Hardwick in
Northamptonshire, Esquire. 329 30. Sir William Strickland of Boynton in Yorkshire,
Knight. 330. Aug. 4. Sir Thomas Wolriche of Dadmaston in Shropshire, Knight. 331 Thomas
Mauleverer of Allerton-Mauleverer in Yorkshire, Esquire. 332 William Boughton of
Lawford in Warwickshire, Esquire. 333 John Chichester of Raleigh in Devonshire,
Esquire. 334 Norton Knatchbull of Mersham-Hatch in Kent, Esquire. 335 Hugh Windham of
Pilsden-Court in Dorsetshire, Esquire. Extinct. 336 9. Richard Carew of Antony in
Cornwall, Esquire. 337 William Castleton of St. Edmondsbury in Suffolk, Esquire. 338
Richard Price of Gogarthan in Cardiganshire, Esquire. 339 10. Hugh Cholmondley of
Whitby in Yorkshire, Esquire. 340 11. William Spring of Pakenham in Suffolk, Esquire.
341 Thomas Trevor of Enfield in Middlesex, Esquire. 342 Sir John Curson of
Kedleston in Derbyshire, a Baronet of Scotland. 343 Hugh Owen of Orrelton in
Pembrokeshire, Esquire. 344 12. Morton Briggs of Haughton in Shropshire, Esquire. 345
Henry Heyman of Somerfield in Kent, Esquire. 346 Thomas Sandford of Howgill-Castle
in Westmoreland, Esquire. 347 14. Sir Francis Rhodes of Barlbrough in Derbyshire,
Knight. 348 Richard Sprignell of Coppenthorpe in Yorkshire, Esquire. 349 Sir John Potts
of Mannington in Norfolk, Knight. 350 Aug. 14. 1641. Sir John Goodrick of Ribstan
in Yorkshire, Knight. 351 16. Robert Bindlosse of Borwick in Lancashire, Esquire. 352
William Walter of Saresden in Oxfordshire, Esquire. 353 Thomas Lawley of Spoonhill
in Shropshire, Esquire. 354 Sept. 6. William Farmer of Eston-Neston in
Northamptonshire, Esquire. 355 9. John Davye of Creedy in Devonshire, Esquire. 356 23.
Thomas Pettus of Rackheath in Norfolk, Esquire. 357 Dec. 11. William Andrews of
Denton in Northamptonshire, Esquire. 358 John Meaux of (...) in the Isle of Wight,
Esq^ 359 14. Sir Richard Gurney Knight. Lord Mayor of the City of London. 360 15.
Thomas Willis of Fen-Ditton in Cambridgshire, Esquire. 361 Francis Armitage of
Kirklees in Yorkshire, Esquire. 362 18. Richard Halford of Wistow in
Leicestershire, Esquire. 363 24. Sir Humphrey Tufton of the Mote near Maidstone in
Kent, Knight. 364 30. Edward Coke of Langford in Derb^shire, Esquire. 365 Ian. 21.
Isaac Astley of Melton-Constable in Norfolk, Esquire. 366 Sir David Cunningham of
London, a Baronet of Scotland. 367 22. Sir John Rayney of Wrotham in Kent, a
Baronet of Scotland. 368 29. Revet Eldred of Saxham Magna in Suffolk, Esquire. 369
John Gell of Hopton in Derbyshire, Esquire. 370 Sir Vincent Corbet of Morton-Corbet
in Shropshire, Knight. 371 Feb. 4. Sir John Kay of Woodsome in Yorkshire, Knight. 372
5. Thomas Trollop of Casewick in Lincolnshire, Esquire. 373 Mar. 3. Edward Thomas
of Michells-Town in Glamorganshire, Esquire. 374 4. Sir William Cowper of
Ratling-Court in Kent, a Baronet of Scotland 375 5. Denner Strut of
Little-Worley-Hall in Essex, Esquire. 376 8. William St. Quintin of Harpham in
Yorkshire, Esquire. 377 14. Sir Robert Kempe of Gissing in Norfolk, Esquire. 378 16.
John Read of Brocket-hall in Hartfordshire, Esquire. 379 Apr. 9. 1642. James Enyan
of Flower in Northamptonshire, Esquire. 380 19. Sir Edmond Williams of Marnehull in
Dorsetshire, Knight. 381 22. John Williams of Minster in the Isle of Thanet in
Kent, Esquire. 382 29. George Wintour of Huddington in Worcestershire, Esquire. 383 May
4. John Borlase of Bockmer in Bucks, Esquire. 384 6. Henry Knollys of Grove-place
in Hantshire, Esquire. Extinct. 385 11. John Hamilton of the City of London, Esquire
386 12. Edward Morgan of Llanternam in Monmouthshire, Esquire. 387 13. Sir Nicholas
Kemeys of Keven-Mabley in Glamorganshire, Knight. 388 14. Trevor Williams of
Llangibbye in Monmoutshire, Esquire 389 16. John Reresby of Thribergh in Yorkshire,
Esquire 390 17. William Ingilby of Ripley in Yorkshire, Esquire 391 18. Poynings Moore
of Loseley in Surrey, Esquire 392 19. Christopher Dawney of Cowick in Yorkshire,
Esquire 393 June 3. Thomas Hampson of Taplow in Bucks, Esquire 394 Thomas Williamson of
East-Markham in Kent, Esquire 395 William Denney of Gillingham in Norfolk, Esquire 396
11. Christopher Lowther of Whitehaven in Cumberland, Esquire 397 13. Sir Thomas
Alston of Odell in Bedfordshire, Knight. 398 20. Edward Corbet of Leighton in
Montgomeryshire, Esquire 399 21. George Middleton of Leighton in Lancashire, Esquire
400 28. Edward Payler of Thoralby in Yorkshire, Esquire. 401 July 9. Sir William
Widdrington of Widdrington in Northumberland, Knight. 402 20. Matthew Valckenburgh
of Middle-Ing in Yorkshire, Esquire. 403 Philip Constable of Everingham in
Yorkshire, Esquire. 404 30. 1642. Ralph Blackston of Gibside in the Bishopric of
Durham, Esquire. 405 Aug. 8. Sir Edw. Widdrington of Cartington in Northumberland,
a Scotch Baronet. 406 15. Robert Markham of Sedgbrook in Lincolnshire, Esquire. 407
Philip Hutgate of Saxton in Yorkshire, Esquire. 408 Stephen Lennard of West-wickham
in Kent, Esquire. 409 24. Sir William Thorold of Marston in Lincolnshire, Knight. 410
29. Walter Rudston of Hayton in Yorkshire, Esquire. 411 30. Walter Wrotesley of
Wrotesley in Staffordshire, Esquire. 412 Thomas Bland of Kippax-Park in Yorkshire,
Esquire. 413 Sept. 1. Robert Throckmorto^ of Coughton in Warwickshire, Esquire. 414 10.
William Halton of Samford in Essex, Esquire. 415 26. Brocket Spencer of Offley in
Hertfordshire, Esquire. 416 27. Edward Golding of Colston-Basset in
Nottinghamshire, Esquire. 417 William Smith of Crantock in Cornwall, Esquire. 418
October. 1. Henry Henn of Wingfield in Berkshire, Esquire. 419 5. Walter Blount of
Sodington in Worcestershire, Esquire. 420 14. Adam Littleton of Stoke-Milburge in
Shropshire, Esquire. 421 Nov. 2. Thomas Lidell of Ravensholme-Castle in the
Bishopric of Durham, Esquire. 422 9. Richard Lawday of Exeter in Devonshire, Esquire.
Extinct. 423 Feb. 4. Thomas Chamberlain of Wickham in Oxfordshire, Esquire. 424
28. Henry Hunloke of Wingarworth in Derbyshire, Esquire. 425 Thomas Badd of
Cames-Oysells in Hantshire, Esquire. 426 Mar. 20. Richard Crane of Wood-Rising in
Norfolk, Esquire. Extinct. 427 21. Samuel Danvers of Culworth in Northamptonshire,
Esquire. 428 July 3. 1643. Henry Anderson of Penley in Hartfordshire, Esquire. 429 17.
William Vavasour of in Yorkshire, Esquire. Extinct. 430 25. Sir Henry Jones of
Abermarles in Caernarvanshire, Knight. 431 Aug. 1. 1643. Sir Edward Walgrave of
Hever-Castle in Kent, Knight. 432 October. 28. John Pate of Sysonby in
Leicestershire, Esquire. 433 Nov. 9. John Bale of Carleton-Curley in
Leicestershire, Esquire. 434 13. Brian Oneal in the Kingdom of Ireland, Esquire. 435
16. Willoughby Hickman of Gaynesborough in Lincolnshire, Esquire. 436 Dec. 7. John
Butler of Bramfield in Hertfordshire, Esquire. 437 Ian. 17. Edward Acton of
Aldenham in Shropshire, Esquire. 438 Mar. 14. Sir Fran. Hawley of Buckland in
Somersetshire, Knight. now Irish Baron. 439 Apr. 1. 1644. John Preston of the
Manor in Furness in Lancashire, Esquire. 440 2. John Webb of Odstoke in
Wiltshire, Esquire. 441 25. Thomas Prestwick of Holme in Lancashire, Esquire. 442 May
4. Henry Williams of Guernevet in Brecknockshire, Esquire. 443 20. Gervase Lucas of
Fenton in Lincolnshire, E^q. 444 June 14. Robert Thorold of Hawley in
Lincolnshire, Esquire. 445 July 23. John Scud^more of Balingham in Herefordshire,
Esquire. 446 October. 8. Sir Henry Bard of St^nes in Middlesex, Knight. 447 Feb. 12. Sir
Richard Vivian of Trelowren in Cornwall, Knight. 448 28. William Van-Colster of
Amsterdam in Holland, Esquire 449 Mar. 21. William de Boreel of Amsterdam
aforesaid, Esquire 450 May 4. 1645. Edward Greaves of St. Leonards-Forest in
Sussex, Esquire 451 9. George Carteret of Metesches in the Isle of Iersey, Esquire 452
Nov. 25. Thomas Windebanke of Haynes in Wiltshire, Esquire 453 Feb. 7. Benjamin
Wright of Dennington in Suffolk, Esquire whose Patent was Superseded. 454 March 6.
Edward Charleton of Hesleyside in Northumberland. 455 July 11. Richard Willis,
Esquire Brother to Sir Thomas Willis of Fen-Ditton in Cambridgshire.
Baronets created by King Charles the Second.
456. Sept. 1. 1649. Richard Brown of Deptford in Kent, Esquire created by Letters
Patents dated at St. Germans^ in France. 457 3. Henry de Vic of the Isle of
Garnsey, Esquire created by Letters Patents at St. Germans aforesaid. 458 Sept. 18.
Richard Forster of Stokesley in Yorkshire, Esquire by Letters Patents dated at St.
Germans. 459 Sept. 2. 1650. Richard Fanshaw Esquire afterward Master of Requests
to his Majesty. 460 April 2. 1652. William Curtius, Esquire 461 Oct. 19. 1657. Sir
Arthur Slingsby of (...) in Kent. 462 (...) 1658. Thomas Orby of (...) in
Lincolnshire, Esquire 463 Thomas Bond of (...) in (...) Esquire 464 Aug. Arthur Marigny
Carpentier, Esquire 465 1660. Sir Anthony de Merces, Extinct. 466 May 29. Sir John
Evelyn of (...) in (...) Knight. 467 30. Sir Gualter de Read. 468 Feb. 11. John
Osborn of Chicksands in Bedfordshire, Esquire 469 June 7. Sir Orlando Bridgman of
Great Leaver in Lancashire, Knight. late Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England.
470 Sir Ieffrey Palmer of Carleton in Northamptonshire, Knight. his Majesty's
Attorney General. 471 Sir Heneage Finch of Raunston in Bucks, Knight. now Lord
Daventry, and Lord Chancellor of the Great Seal of England. 472 Sir John
Langham of Catsbrook in Northamptonshire, Knight. 473 9. Humphrey Winch of Hanmes
in Bedfordshire, Esquire 474 Sir Robert Abdy of Albins in Essex, Knight. 475 Thomas
Draper of Sunninghill-Park in Berkshire, Esquire 476 11. Henry Wright of Dagenham
in Essex, Esquire 477 June 12. Jonathan Keate of the Hoo in Hartfordshire, Esquire 478
Sir Hugh Speak of Hasilbury in Wilsthire, Esquire 479 13. Nicholas Gould of the
City of London, Esquire 480 Sir Thomas Adams, Knight. Alderman of London. 481 Richard
Atkins of Clapham in Surrey, Esquire 482 14. Thomas Allen of the City of London,
Esquire 483 Henry North of Milden-hall in Suffolk, Esquire 484 15. Sir William Wiseman
of Rivenham in Essex, Knight. 485 18. Thomas Cullum of Hastede in Suffolk, Esquire 486
20. Thomas Darcy of St. Cleres-hall in St. Oliths in Essex, Esquire 487 George
Grubham How of Cold-Barwick in Wiltshire, Esquire 488 21. John Cutts of Childerley
in Cambridgshire, Esquire Extinct. 489 Solomon Swale of Swale-hall in Yorkshire,
Esquire 490 William Humble of the City of London, Esquire 491 22. Henry Stapleton of
Miton in Yorkshire, Esquire 492 Gervase Elwes of Stoke near Clare in Suffolk, Esquire
493 Robert Cordell of Melford in Suffolk, Esquire 494 Sir John Robinson Knight.
Lieutenant of the Tower of London. 495 Sir John Abdy of Moors in Essex, Knight.
496 25. Sir Robert Hilliard of Patrington in Yorkshire, Knight. 497 Jacob Astley of
Hill-Morton in Warwickshire, Esquire 498 Sir William Bowyer of Denham in Bucks,
Knight. 499 Thomas Stanley of Alderley in Cheshire, Esquire 500 26. John Shuckborough
of Shuckborough in Warwickshire, Esquire 501 27. William Wray of Ashby in
Lincolnshire, Esquire 502 Nicholas Steward of Hartley Manduit in Hantshire, Esquire 503
June 27. 1660. George Warburton of Areley in Cheshire, Esquire 504 Sir Francis
Holles of Winterburne St. Martin in Dorsetshire, Knight. Son and Heir to Denzill
Lord Holles. 505 28. Oliver St. John of Woodford in Northamptonshire, Esquire 506
29. Ralph De la Vall of Seyton De la Vall in Northumberland, Esquire 507 30.
Andreas Henley of Henley in Somersetshire, Esquire 508 Thomas Ellis of Wyham in
Lincolnshire, Esquire 509 July 2. John Covert of Slaugham in Sussex, Esquire 510 Peter
Lear of London, Gent. 511 Maurice Berkley of Bruton, Esquire 512 3. Henry Hudson of
Melton-Mowbray in Leicestershire, Esquire 513 Thomas Herbert of Tinterne in
Monmouthshire, Esquire 514 4. Thomas Middleton of Chirk in Denbighshire, Esquire 515 6.
Verney Noell of Kirkby in Leicestershire, Esquire 516 7. George Buswell of Clipston
in Northamptonshire, Esquire 517 10. Robert Au^ten of Bexley in Kent, Esquire 518 12.
Robert Hales of Bekesburne in Kent, Esquire 519 13. Sir William Boothby of
Bradley-Ash in Derbyshire, Knight. 520 14. Wolstan Dixey of Market-Bosworth in
Leicestershire, Esquire 521 16. John Bright of Badsworth in Yorkshire, Esquire 522 John
Warner of Parham in Esquire 523 17. Sir Job Harby of Aldenham in Hartfordshire, Knight.
524 18. Samuel Morland of Southamstede-Banester in Berkshire, Esquire 525 19. Sir
Thomas Hewit of Pishobury in Hartfordshire, Knight. 526 Edward Honywood of Evington
in Kent, Esquire 527 Basil Dixwell of Bromehouse in Kent, Esquire 528 22. Richard Brown
of London Ald. 529 23. Henry Vernon of Hodnet in Shropshire, Esquire 530 Sir John
Awbrey of Llantrilhed in Glamorganshere, Knight. 531 William Thomas of Fowington in
Essex, Esquire 532 25. Thomas Sc^ater of Cambridge in Cambridgshire, Esquire 533 Henry
Conway of Botritham in Flintshire, Esquire 534 26. Edward Green of Sonpford in
Essex, Esquire 535 28. John Stapeley of Patcham in Sussex, Esquire 536 30. Metcalf
Robinson of Newby in Yorkshire, Esquire 537 31. Marmaduke Gresham of Limpsfield in
Sussex, Esquire 538 Aug. 1. William Dudley of Clopton in Northamptonshire, Esquire 539
2. Hugh Smithson of Stanwick in Yorkshire, Esquire 540 3. Sir Roger Mostin of
Mosti^ in Flintshire, Knight. 541 4. William Willoughby of Willoughby in
Nottinghamshire, Esquire 542 6. Anthony Oldfield of Spalding in Lincolnshire, Esquire
543 10. Peter Leicester of Tabley in Cheshire, Esquire 544 11. Sir William Wheeler
of the City of Westminster, Knight. 545 16. John Newton of Barscote in
Glocestershire, Esquire 546 Thomas Lee of Hartwell in Bucks, Esquire 547 Thomas Smith
of Hatherton in Cheshire, Esquire 548 17. Sir Ralph Ashton of Middleton in
Lancashire, Esquire 549 John Rous of Henham in Suffolk, Esquire 550 22. Henry
Massingbeard of Bratostshall in Lincolnshire, Esquire 551 28. John Hales of
Coventry in Warwickshire, Esquire 552 30. Ralph Bovey of Hill-fields in
Warwickshire, Esquire 553 John Knightley of Offchurch in Warwickshire, Esquire 554 31.
Sir John Drake of Ash in Devonshire, Knight. 555 Sept. 5. Oliver St. George of
Carickermrick in the County of Trim in Ireland, Esquire 556 11. Sir John Bowyer of
Knipersley in Staffordshire, Knight. 557 13. Sir William Wild, Knight. Recorder of the
City of London. 558 19. Joseph Ash of Twittenham in Middlesex, Esquire 559 22. John
How of Compton in Glocestershire, Esquire 560 26. John Swimburne of Chap-Heton in
Northumberland, Esquire 561 Oct. 12. John Trott of Laverstoke in Hantshire, Esquire 562
13. Humphrey Miller of Oxenheath in Kent, Esquire 563 15. Sir John Jews of Ledston
in Yorkshire, Knight. 564 16. John Beale of M^idston in Kent, Esquire 565 Sir Richard
Franklin of Moore-Park in Hartfordshire, Knight. 566 Nov. 8. William Russel of
Langhorne in Caermarthenshire, Esquire 567 9. Thomas Boothby of Friday-hill in the
Parish of Chingford in Essex, Esquire 568 William Backhouse of London, Esquire Extinct.
569 12. Sir John Cutler of London, Knight. 570 16. Giles Mottet of Leigh in Esquire 571
21. Henry Gifford of Burstall in Leicestershire, Esquire 572 Sir Thomas Foot of
London, Knight. and Alderman. 573 22. Thomas Manwaring of Overpever in Cheshire,
Esquire 574 Thomas Benet of Baberham in Cambridgshire, Esquire 575 29. John Wroth of
Blenden-hall in Kent, Esquire 576 Dec. 3. George Win of Nostell in Yorkshire, Esquire
577 4. Heneage Featherstou of Blakesware in Hartfordshire, Esquire 578 Humphrey
Monnox of Wotton in Bedfordshire, Esquire 579 10. John Peyton of Dodington in the
Isle of Ely in Cambridgshire, Esquire 580 11. Edmond Anderson of Broughton in
Lincolnshire, Esquire 581 John Fagg of Wiston in Sussex, Esquire 582 18. Matthew
Herbert of Bromfield in Shropshire, Esquire 583 19. Edward Ward of Bexley in
Norfolk, Esquire 584 22. John Keyt of Ebrington in Glocestershire, Esquire 585 William
Killegrew of Arwynick in Cornwall, Esquire 586 John Buck of Lamby-Grange in
Lincolnshire, Esquire 587 24. William Frankland of Thirkelby in Yorkshire, Esquire 588
Richard Stiddolph of Norbury in Surrey, Esquire 589 William Gardner of the City of
London. 590 28. William Iuxon of Albourn in Sussex, Esquire 591 29. John Legard of
Ganton in Yorkshire, Esquire 592 31. George Marwood of Little-Buskby in Yorkshire,
Esquire 593 John Iackson of Hickleton in Yorkshire, Esquire 594 Ian. 2. Sir Henry
Pickering of Whaddon in Cambridgshire, Knight. 595 Henry Bedingfield of Oxbrough in
Norfolk, Esquire 596 4. Walter Plomer of the Inner Temple, London, Esquire 597 8.
Herbert Springet of Broyle in Sussex, Esquire 598 23. William Powell alias Hinson
of Pengethley in Herefordshire, Esquire 599 25. Robert Newton of the City of
London, s 600 29. Nicholas Staughton of Staughton in Surrey, Esquire 601 William
Rokeby of Skyers in Yorkshire, Esquire 602 Feb. 2. Walter Ernley of New-Sarum in
Wiltshire, Esquire 603 John Hubaud of Ipsley in Warwickshire, Esquire 604 7. Thomas
Morgan of Llangahock in Monmouthshire, Esquire 605 9. Richard Lane of Tulske in the
County of Roscommon in the Kingdom of Ireland, Esquire 606 15. George Wakefron of
Beckford in Glocestershire, Esquire 607 Benjamin Wright of Cranham-hall in Essex,
Esquire 608 18. John Colleton of the City of London, Esquire 609 18. Sir James Modyford
of London, Knight. 610 21. Thomas Beaumont of Stoughtongra^ge in Leicestershire,
Esquire 611 23. Edward Smith of Eshe in the Bishopric of Durham, Esquire March 4. John
Napier alias Sandy of in Bedfordshire, Esquire to take place next after Sir Thomas
Holt, Number-88. 612 Thomas Gifford of Castle-Iordan in the County of Mead in the
Kingdom of Ireland, Esquire 613 Thomas Clifton of Clifton in Lancashire, Esquire 614
William Wilson of Eastborne in Sussex, Esquire 615 Compton Read of Burton in
Berkshire, Esquire 616 10. Sir Brian Broughton of Broughton in Staffordshire, Knight.
617 16. Robert Slingsby of Newcells in Hartfordshire, Esquire 618 John Crofts of
Stow in Suffolk, Esquire 619 Ralph Verney of Middle-Claydon in Bucks, Esquire 620 18.
Robert Dicer of Vphall in Hartfordshire, Esquire 621 20. John Bromfield of
Southwark in Surrey, Esquire 622 Thomas Rich of Sunning in Berkshire, Esquire 623
Edward Smith of Edmundthorp in Leicestershire, Esquire 624 26. 1661. Walter Long of
Whaddon in Wiltshire, Esquire 625 30. John Fetiplace of Chilrey in Berkshire, Esquire
626 April 8. Walter Hendley of Louchfield in Sussex, Esquire 627 9. William Parsons
of Langley in Bucks, Esquire 628 John Cambell of Woodford in Essex, Esquire 629 20.
William Morice of Werrington in Devonshire, Esquire one of his Majesty's Principal
Secretaries of State. 630 Sir Charles Gawdey of Crowshall in Suffolk, Knight. 631
29. William Godolphin of Godolphin in Cornwall, Esquire 632 William Caley of
Brumpton in Yorkshire, Esquire 633 30. 1661. Thomas Curson of Water-Perry in
Oxfordshire, Esquire 634 May 1. Edmund Fowel of Fowel in Devonshire, Esquire 635 7.
John Cropl^y of Clerkenwell in Middlesex, Esquire 636 10. William Smith of Redcliff
in Bucks, Esquire 637 George Cook of Wheatley in Yorkshire, Esquire 638 Charles Lloyd
of Garth in Montgomeryshire, Esquire 639 Nathaniel Powel of Ewhurst in Essex, Esquire
640 15. Denney Ashburnham of Bromhall in Sussex, Esquire 641 16. Hugh Smith of
Long-Ashton in Somersetshire, Esquire 742 18. Robert Ienkinson of Walcott in
Oxfordshire, Esquire 643 20. William Glynn of Bissister in Oxfordshire, Esquire 644 21.
John Charnock of Holcot in Bedfordshire, Esquire 645 Robert Brook of Newton in
Suffolk, Esquire 646 25. Thomas Nevill of Holt in Leicestershire, Esquire 647 27. Henry
Andrews of Lathbury in Bucks, Esquire 648 July 4. Anthony Craven of Spersholt in
Berkshire, Esquire 649 5. John Clavering of Axwell in Durham, Esquire 650 8. Thomas
Derham of West-Derham in Norfolk, Esquire 651 17. William Stanley of Howton in
Cheshire, Esquire 652 Abraham Cullen of Eastshene in Surrey, Esquire 653 James Roushout
of Milnstgreen in Essex, Esquire 654 Godfrey Copley of Sprotborough in Yorkshire,
Esquire 655 Griffith Williams of Penrhin in Caernarvonshire, Esquire 656 18. Henry
Winchcumbe of Buckdebury in Berkshire, Esquire 657 Clement Clarke of Lande-Abby in
Leicestershire, Esquire 658 Thomas Vyner of the City of London, Esquire 659 John
Sylyard of Delaware in Kent, Esquire 660 10. Christopher Guise of Elsmore in
Glocestershire, Esquire 661 11. Reginald Forster of East-Greenwich in Kent, Esquire 662
11. Philip Parker of Erwarton in Esquire. 663 Sir Edward Duke of Denhall in
Suffolk, Esquire 664 21. Charles Hussy of Caythorpe in Lincolnshire, Esquire 665
Edward Barkham of Waynfleet in Lincolnshire, Esquire 666 23. Thomas Norton of
Coventry in Warwickshire, Esquire 667 John Dormer of the Grange in Bucks, Esquire 668
Aug. 2. Thomas Carew of Haccombe in Devonshire, Esquire 669 7. Mark Milbank of
Halnaby in Yorkshire, Esquire 670 16. Richard Rothwell of Ewerby and Stapleford in
Lincolnshire, Esquire 671 22. John Banks of London, Esquire 672 30. John Ingoldsby of
Letherborow in Bucks, Esquire 673 Sept. 3. Francis Bickley of Attilborough in
Norfolk, Esquire 674 5. Robert Jason of Broad-Somerford in Wiltshire, Esquire 675 26.
Sir John Young of Culliton in Devonshire, Knight. 676 Oct. 4. John Frederick van
Freisendorf of Herdick, Lord of Kymp, Ambassador to his Majesty. 677 Nov. 8.
William Roberts of Willesdon in Middlesex, Esquire 678 15. William Luckin of
Waltham in Essex, Esquire 679 28. Thomas Smith of Hill-hall in Essex, Esquire 680 Dec.
3. Edwyn Sadler of Temple-Donesley of Hartfordshire, Esquire 681 9. Sir William
Windham of Orchard-Windham in Somersetshire, Knight. 682 Ian. 24. George Southcote
of Bliborough in Lincolnshire, Esquire 683 George Trevillian of Nettlecombe in
Somersetshire, Esquire 684 Feb. 4. Francis Duncombe of Tangley in Surrey, Esquire 685
7. Nicholas Bacon of Gillingham in Norfolk, Esquire 686 Richard Cocks of Dumbleton
in Glocestershire, Esquire 687 27. John Coriton of Newton in Cornwall, Esquire 688 28.
John Lloyd of Woking in Surrey, Esquire 689 Mar. 1. Edward More of More-hall and
Bankhall in Lancashire, Esquire 690 7. Thomas Proby of Elton-hall in
Huntingtonshire, Esquire 691 Mar. 20. Miles Stapleton of Carleton in Yorkshire,
Esquire. 692 April 16. 1662. Sir Richard Braham of New-Windsor in Berkshire, Knight.
693 May 2. Sir John Witerong of Stantonbury in Bucks, Knight. 694 June 13. Philip
Matthews of Great Gobions near Rumford in Essex, Esquire. 695 July 1. Robert
Bernard of Huntington in Huntingtonshire, Sergeant at Law. 696 15. Roger Lort
of Stock-poole in Pembrokeshire, E^q. 697 15. Edward Gage of Hargrave in
Suffolk, Esquire. 698 22. Thomas Hook of Franchford in Surrey, Esquire. 699 24. John
Savile of Copley in Yorkshire, Esquire. 700 Aug. 5. Christopher Wandesford of
Kirklington in Yorkshire, Esquire. 701 13. Richard Astley of Parshall in
Staffordshire, Esquire. 702 16. Sir Jacob Gerard of Langford in Norfolk, Knight. 703
21. Edward Fust of Hill in Glocestershire, Esquire. 704 Sept. 1. Robert Long of
Westminster in Middlesex, Esquire. 705 13. Sir Robert Can of Compton-Greenfield in
Glocestershire, Esquire. 706 October. 24. William Middleton of Belsey-Castle in
Northumberland, Esquire. 707 Nov. 17. Richard Graham of Norton-Coniers in
Yorkshire, Esquire. 708 Thomas Tankard of Burrow-Brigg in Yorkshire, Esquire. 709 20.
Cuthbert Heron of Chipchase in Northumberland, Esquire. 710 29. Sir Francis Wenman
of Caswell in Oxfordshire, Knight. 711 Dec. 4. Henry Purefoy of Wadley in
Berkshire, Esquire. 712 9. Thomas Cobb of Adderbury in Oxfordshire, Esquire. 713 12.
Henry Brooks of Norton in Cheshire, Esquire. 714 Dec. 22. 1662. Peter Pindar of
Edinsnaw in Cheshire, Esquire. 715 Ian. 19. Sir Nicholas Slaning of Mariston in
Devonshire, Knight of the Bath. 716 22. Sir George R^eve of Thwayte in Suffolk,
Knight. 717 Mar. 18. Thomas Brograve of Hammels in Hertfordshire, Esquire. 718 Arpil 7.
1663. Sir Thomas Barnardiston of Kedington in Suffolk, Knight. 719 May 11. Sir
Samuel Barnardiston of Brightwell-hall in Suffolk, Knight. 720 June 1. Sir John
Daws of Putney in Middlesex, Knight. 721 Sir John Holman of Banbury in Oxfordshire,
Knight. 722 29. William Cook of Bromehall in Norfolk, Esquire. 723 30. John Bellot of
Moreton in Cheshire, Esquire. 724 July 1. Sir George Downing of East-Hatley in
Cambridgshire, Knight. 725 13. William Gawdey of West-Herting in Norfolk, Esquire. 726
14. Sir Charles Pym of Brymmore in Somersetshire, Knight. 727 29. Sir William
D'oyley of Shottesham in Norfolk, Knight. 728 Aug. 12. Sir John Marsham of Curton
in Kent, Knight. 729 15. Robert Burnham of Boughton-Mancalsey in Kent, Esquire. 730
Dec. 15. Francis Leek of Newark in No^tinghamshire, Esquire. 731 30. John St. Barbe
of Broadlands in Hantshire, Esquire. 732 Feb. 22. James Pennyman of Ormesby in
Cleaveland in Yorkshire, Esquire. 733 Mar. 1. Thomas Moddiford of Lincoln's Inn in
Middlesex, Esquire. 734 3. George Selby of Whitehouse in Durham, Esquire. 735 31. 1664.
Sir Edmund Forresc^e of Fallowpit in Devonshire, Knight. 736 Samuel Tuke of
Cressing-Temple in Essex, Esquire. 737 May 25. John Tempest of Touge in Yorkshire,
Esquire. 738 June 25. Littleton Osgoldeston of Chadlington in Oxfordshire, Esquire. 739
July 1. Giles Tooker of Maddington in Wiltshire, Esquire. 740 13. Stephen Anderson
of Eyworth in Bedfordshire, Esquire. 741 Aug. 31. 1664. Thomas Bateman of How-hall
in Norfolk, Esquire. 742 Sept. 26. Thomas Lorrayne of Kirke-Hall in Northumberland,
Esquire. 743 27. Thomas Wentworth of Bretton in Yorkshire, Esquire. 744 Nov. 2. Sir
Theophilus Biddulph of Westcombe in Kent, Knight. 745 William Green of Micham in
Surrey, Esquire. 746 Dec. 24. William Cooks of Norgrave in Worcestershire, Esquire.
747 Ian. 10. Sir John Wolstonholme of London, Knight. 748 11. Sir John Jacob of
Bromley in Middlesex, Knight. 749 12. John Yeomans of the City of Bristoll, Esquire.
750 13. John Pie of Hone in Derbyshire, Esquire. 751 18. Thomas Tailor of the
Parkhouse in Maid-stone in Kent, Esquire. 752 Mar. 3. William Leman of Northaw or
Northall in Hertfordshire, Esquire. 753 30. 1665. Sir Robert Smith of Vpton in
Essex, Knight. 754 Apr. 14. Sir Nicholas Crispe of Hammersmith in Middlesex, Knight.
755 15. Sir John Shaw of Eltham in Kent, Knight. 756 May 10. John Brown of Casome
in Oxfordshire, Esquire. 757 20. George Rawden of Moira in the County of Down in
Ireland, Esquire. 758 June 8. Robert Iocelyn of Hyde-hall in Hertfordshire, Esquire.
759 16. Robert Dackenf^eld Junior, of Duckenfield-hall in Cheshire, Esquire. 760
July 6. John Lawson of Broughton in Yorkshire, Esquire. 761 20. Philip Tyrrell of
Hanslap and Castlethorpe in Bucks, Esquire. 762 25. Francis Burdet of Burchet in
Yorkshire, Esquire. 793 26. George Moore of Maids-Morton in Bucks, Esquire. 764 Sept.
9. Abel Barker of Hambleton in Rutlandshire, Esquire. 765 Dec. 12. Sir William
Oglander of Nunwell in the Isle of Wight, Knight. 766 Ian. 31. William Temple of
Sheene in Surrey, Esquire. 767 Mar. 1. William Swan o^ South-fleet in Kent, Esquire.
768 Mar. 6. 1665. Anthony Shirley of Preston in Sussex, Esquire. 769 Maurice Diggs
of Chilham-Castle in Kent, Esquire. 770 Peter Gleane of Hardwick in Norfolk, Esquire.
771 May 10. 1666. John Nelthorpe of Gray's Inn in Middlesex, Esquire. 772 10. Sir
Robert Vyner of London, Knight. 773 June 13. Sir Thomas Twisden of Bradburn in
Kent, Knight. 774 July 4. Sir Anthony Aucher of Bishops-bourn in Kent, Knight. 775 7.
John Doyle of Chiselhamton in Oxfordshire, Esquire. 776 12. Edward Hoby of Bisham
in Berkshire, Esquire. 777 21. Thomas Put of Comb in Devonshire, Esquire. 778 October.
22. John Tyrrell of Siringfield in Essex, Esquire. 779 Nov. 17. Gilbert Gerard of
Friskerton in Lincolnshire Esquire. 780 Dec. 31. Sir Robert Y^omans of Redlands in
Glocestershire, Knight. 781 Ian. 16. Carr Scroop of Cockerington in Lincolnshire,
Esquire. 782 29. Peter Fortescue of Wood in Devonshire, Esquire. 783 Feb. 7. Sir
Richard Bettenson of Wimbleton in Surrey, Knight. 784 Mar. 21. Algernon Peyton of
Doddington in the Isle of Ely, Esquire. 785 28. 1667. Roger Martin of Long-Melford
in Suffolk, Esquire. 786 May 7. Richard Hastings of Redlench in Somersetshire, Esquire.
787 William Hanham of Wimborn in Dorcetshire, Esquire. 788 24. Francis Top of
Yarmarton in Glocestershire, Esquire. 789 Aug. 28. 1668. William Langhorne of the
Inner Temple London, Esquire. 790 April 28. 1670. Edward Moston of Talacre in
Flintshire, Esquire. 791 May 5. Sir George Stonehouse for life, having surrendered
his former Patent, Dated May 7. 1628. 792 October. 25. Fulwar Skipwith of
Newbold-hall in Warwickshire, Esquire. 793 May 19. 1671, John Sabin of Eyne in
Bedfordshire, 794 June Philip Carteret of St. Owen in the Isle of Iersey, Esquire.
795 28. William Chaitor of Croft-hall in Yorkshire, Esquire. 796 Sept. Herbert
Croft, Son to the Bishop of Hereford. 797 Mar. 11. John Seintowbin of Clowence
in Cornwall, Esquire. 798 Edward Nevill of Grove in Nottinghamshire, Esquire. 799 Sept.
1672. Robert Eden of West-Stukeland in Durham, Esquire. 800 Nov. 28. John Werden of
Chester, Esquire. Secretary to his Royal Highness. 801 June 2. 1673. Francis War
of Hestercombe in Somersetshire, Esquire. 802 Nov. 12. Orlando Bridgman of Ridley
in Cheshire, Esquire. 803 18. Francis Windham of Trent in Somersetshire, Esquire. 804
Dec. 1. Arthur Harris of Stowford in Devonshire, Esquire. 805 12. William Blacket
of Newcastle in Northumberland, Esquire. 806 John Thomson of Haversham in
Buckinghamshire, Esquire. 807 Feb. 7. Thomas Allen of Blundeston in Suffolk, Esquire.
808 June 7. 1674. Halswell Tynte of Halswell in Somersetshire, Esquire. 809 May 22.
Robert Parker of Ratton in Sussex, Esquire. 810 20. John Sherard of Lopthorpe in
Lincolnshire, Esquire. 811 Feb. 11. John Osborn of Chicksands in Buckinghamshire,
Esquire. 812 October. 30. Walter Clargis of St. Martins in the Fields in Middlesex,
Esquire. 813 Nov. 12. Thomas Williams of Elham in Kent, Esquire. 814 Dec. 24. Robert
Filmer of East-Sutton in Kent, Esquire. 815 Feb. 24. Sir Edward Nevill of Grove in
Nottinghamshire, Knight. 816 Mar. 25. 1675. Cornelius Martin Tromp of Amst^rdam,
Esquire. 817 April 23. Richard Tulpe of Amsterdam, Esquire. 818 Dec. 7. Thomas Samwell
of Vpton in Northamptonshire, Esquire. 819 Ian. 24. Charles Rich of the City of
London, Esquire. 820 Mar. 11. Benjamin Maddox of Wormley in Hertfordshire, Esquire. 821
Apr. 1. 1676. William Barker of Bokinghall in Essex, Esquire. 822 Aug. 19. Richard
Head o^ Rochester in Kent, Esquire. 823 Dec. 18. Bennet Hoskins of Harwood in
Herefordshire, Esquire. 824 Feb. 8. Richard Standish of (...) in Lancashire, Esquire.
825 3. Alexander Robertson alias Collyear of Holland, Esquire. 826 Mar. 3. Thomas
Dyke of Horeham in Sussex, Esquire. 827 29. 1677. Sir Robert Cotton of Cumbermere
in Cestr. Knight. 828 April 7. Francis Willoughby of Wollaton in Nottinghamshire,
Esquire. 829 July 28. Richard Newdigate Sergeant at Law. 830 Sept. 29. Richard Cust
of Stamford in Lincolnshire, Esquire. 831 October. 8. Francis Anderton of Lostock in
Lancashire, Esquire. 832 18: James Symeon of Chilworth in Oxfordshire, Esquire. 833 25.
James Poole of Poole in Worrell in Cheshire, Esquire. 834 Dec. 31. George Wharton
of Kirkby-Kendal in Westmoreland, Esquire. 835 Ian. 31. Hugh Ackland of Cullum-Iohn
in Devonshire, Esquire. 836 Apr. 22. Francis Edwards of Shrewsbury in Shropshire,
Esquire. 837 May 8. Sir Henry Oxinden of Deane in Kent, Knight. 838 18. James Bowyer of
Leighthorne in Sussex, Esquire. for life, and after to Henry Goring of Higden in
the said County, Esquire. 839 June 29. Ignatius Vitus alias White of Limberick in
Ireland, Esquire.
KNIGHTS OF THE BATH. CHAP. XX.
KNights of the Bath (so called from part of the Ceremony at their Creation)
are commonly made at the Coronation of a King or Queen, at the Creation of a
Prince, or of a Duke of the Blood Royal. Thus at the Creation of Henry Prince
of Wales, and Charles Duke of York, the second Son of King James, Knights of
the Bath were made; and at the Coronation of our dread Sovereign King Charles
the Second, 68 were made, whose Names you will find in the ensuing Catalogue.

This Order was first erected, says Froysard, in Anno 1399. by King Henry the
Fourth, who to add to the luster of his Coronation, created 46 Knights of the
Bath; and Mr. Seldom thinks them more ancient: But that great Antiquary Elias
Ashmole Esquire is of the Opinion that the said King did not constitute, but rather
restore the ancient manner of making Knights; for formerly Knights Batchelors
were created by Ecclesiastics with the like Ceremonies, and being thus brought
again into use, and made peculiar to the Degree of Knights of the Bath, they
have ever ^ince continued: and the better to maintain this his Opinion, says,
That they have neither Laws nor Statutes assigned them; neither are they to
wear their Robes, but upon the time or solemnity for which they were created
(except the red Ribbon which they are allowed always to wear cross their left
Shoulder;) and upon any vacancy their number (which is uncertain) is not
supplied.

They are created with much noble Ceremonies, and have had Princes and the
prime of the Nobility of their Fellowship. The particular manner of their
Creation is mentioned by many Authors, but most exactly described, and
illustrated with Figures of all the Ceremonies, by the learned Hand of William
Dugdale Esquire Norroy King at Arms, in his Description of Warwickshire, to which
laborious Piece I refer the curious Reader, borrowing from him, and some
others, this small abstract of their Ceremonies.

When one is to be made a Knight of this Order, at his coming to Court he is
honorably received by the Chief Officers and Nobles of the Court, and has two
Esquires appointed to wait upon him, who convey him to the Chamber without more
seeing him that day, where he is to be entertained with Music; then a Bath is
to be prepared by the Barber, who is to trim him; and the King being informed
that he is ready for the Bath, he is by the most grave Knights there present
instructed in the Orders and Fees of Chivalry, the Music playing to his
Chamber door; then they hearing the Music shall undress him, and put him naked
into the Bath, and the Music ceasing, some one of the Knights shall say, Be
this an honorable Bath unto you: then shall he be conveyed to his Bed, which
shall be plain and without Curtains; and so soon as he is dry, they shall help
to dress him, putting over his inward Garment a Rus^et Robe with long sleeves,
and a Hood like unto that of an Hermit; and the Barber shall take all that is
within and without the Bath, with his Collar about his Neck, for his Fees: then
shall he be conducted to the Chapel with Music, where being entered, the
Knights and Esquires shall be entertained with Wine and Spices for their
favors done unto him; then they take their leaves of him, and he and his two
Esquires and a Priest performs a Vigil till almost day, with Prayers and
Offerings, beseeching God, and his blessed Mother to make him worthy of that
Dignity; and being confessed, he shall, with one of the Governors, hold a
Taper till the reading of the Gospel; and then he shall give it to one of the
Esquires to hold till the Gospel is ended; and at the elevation of the Host,
one of the Governors shall take the Hood from the Essquire, and after deliver
it again till the Gospel in principio, and at the beginning take the Hood
again, and give him the Taper again in his hand, having a penny ready near the
Candlestick, at the words Verbum caro factum est, the Esquire kneeling, shall
offer the Taper to the Honor of God, and a penny to the Honor of the person
that makes him a Knight: This Ceremony being ended, he shall be conducted to
his Chamber for some repose until the King's pleasure is known; and then he is
dressed and attended into the Hall, which is ready for his Reception, being
girded with a Girdle of white Leather without Buckles, having a Coif on his
Head, Mantles of Silk over a Kirtle of red Tartarin, tied with a lace of white
silk, with a pair of white Gloves hanging at the ends of the Lace; and this
Attire is the Chandlers Fees: Then he is conducted by the Knights on Horsback
to the King's Hall, with his Sword and his Spurs hanging at the Pomel of the
Sword, being carried before him; and the Marshal and Ushers meeting him, do
desire him to alight; the Marshal shall take his Horse for his Fee: and being
brought to the high and second Table, with his Sword being held upright before
him, the King coming into the Hall does ask for the Sword and Spurs, which the
Chamberlain shall take and show the King, who takes the right Spur and delivers
it to the most Noble Person there, wishing him to put it on the Esquire, which
being done, a Knight puts on the left Spur; then the King taking the Sword,
which he girts about him, and putting his Arms about his Neck, says, Be thou a
good Knight, and after kisseth him; then he is conducted to the Chapel, and
kneeling with his right hand lying on the high Altar, he promises to maintain
the Rites of Holy Church until his death; and ungirting his Sword with great
Devotion he offers it there to God; then at his going out the King's Master
Cook, who is there ready to take off his Spurs, shall say, I the King's Master
Cook am come to receive thy Spurs for my fee, and if you do any thing contrary
to the order of Knighthood (which God forbid) I shall back your Spurs from your
heels. Then he is conducted again into the Hall, where he shall sit at Table
with the Knights; and being risen and retired into his Chamber, his Attire is
taken off, and again clothed with a blew Robe, having on his left Shoulder a
Lace of white Silk hanging, to be worn upon all his Garments from that day
forwards, till he have gained some Honor and Renown for some Feats of Arms, or
some Prince or Lady of Quality cut that Lace from his Shoulder. After Dinner
the Knights must come to the Knight, and conduct him into the King's presence,
to return him thanks for these Honors, and so takes his leave of the King; and
the Governors craving his pardon for any miscarriage, and claiming their Fees
according to the Custom of the Court, also take their leaves of the Knight. I
shall conclude this Chapter with giving an Account of the Knights made at the
Coronation of his Majesty.

Knights of the Bath made at the Coronation of his Majesty King CHARLES the
Second.
EDward Lord Clinton, now Earl of Lincoln. John Egerton Viscount Brackley,
eldest Son to the Earl of Bridgwater. Sir Philip Herbert, then second Son to
the Earl of Pembroke. Sir William Egerton, second Son to the Earl of
Bridgwater. Sir Vere Fane, second Son to the Earl of Westmoreland. Sir Charles
Berkley, eldest Son to George Lord Berkley. Sir Henry Bellasis, eldest Son to
the Lord Bellasis. Sir Henry Hyde, now Earl of Clarendon. Sir Rowland Bellasis,
Brother to Viscount Faulconberg. Sir Henry Capell. Sir John Vaughan, now eldest
Son to the Earl of Carbery. Sir Charles Stanley, Grandchild to the late Earl of
Derby. Sir Francis Fane Sir Henry Fane Grandchildren to the Earl of
Westmoreland. Sir William Portman Baronet. Sir Richard Temple Baronet. Sir
William Ducy Baronet. Sir Thomas Trevor Baronet. Sir John Scudamore Baronet.
Sir William Gardener Baronet. Sir Charles Cornwallis, afterward Lord
Cornwallis. Sir John Nicholas. Sir John Monson. Sir Bourcher Wray. Sir John
Coventry. Sir Edward Hungerford. Sir John Knevett. Sir Philip Boteler. Sir
Adrian Scroop. Sir Richard Knightley. Sir Henry Heron. Sir John Lewkenor. Sir
George Brown. Sir William Tyrringhum. Sir Francis Godolphin. Sir Edward
Baynton. Sir Greville Verney. Sir Edward Harley. Sir Edward VValpool. Sir
Francis Popham. Sir Edward Wise. Sir Christopher Calthrop. Sir Richard
Edgcombe. Sir William Bromley. Sir Thomas Bridges. Sir Thomas Fanshaw. Sir John
Denham. Sir Nicholas Bacon. Sir James Altham. Sir Thomas VVendy. Sir John
Bramston. Sir George Freeman. Sir Nicholas Slaning. Sir Richard Ingoldsby. Sir
John Roll. Sir Edward Heath. Sir William Morley. Sir John Bennet. Sir Hugh
Smith. Sir Simon Leech. Sir Henry Chester. Sir Robert Atkyns, now one of the
Justices of the Common Pleas. Sir Robert Gayre. Sir Richard Powle. Sir Hugh
Ducy. Sir Stephen Hales. Sir Ralph Bash. Sir Thomas VVhitmore.
OF Knights Batchelors, With what is incident to that Degree of KNIGHTHOOD
According to the Laws of England. CHAP. XXI.
THE particular kinds of Services by which Lands of Inheritance are
distinguished, are two; viz. Knights of Service, and Knights of Soccage.

And in ancient time Tenure by Knights Service was called Regale serviti^m,
because it was done to and for the King and Realm, and forinsecum servitium, as
appears in the 19 Edw. 2. Avowry 224. 26. Ass. p. 66. 7. Hen. 4. 19. Coke's
seventh Part, 8. a. Calvin's case: because they who hold by Escuage ought to do
and perform their Services out of the Realm, Litt. 35. and ideo forinsecum dici
potest sit quia, and capitur foris, and hujusmodi, servitia persolvuntur
ratione Tenementorum, and non Personarum.

And as Knights-Service-Land requires the service of the Tenant in Warfare and
Battle abroad, so Soccage-Tenure commands the attendance at the Plough; the
one by Manhood defending the King, or his Lord's life and person; the other by
industry maintaining with Rents, Corn, and Victuals his Estate and Family.

For Kings did thus order their own Lands and Tenements: one part they kept and
detained in their own hands, and in them stately Houses and Castles were
erected, and made for their habitations, and defense of their Persons, and of
the Realm; also Forests and Parks were there made for their Majesty's
Recreation: One other part thereof was given to the Nobles, and others of their
Chivalry, reserving Tenure by Knights Service: The third part was bestowed upon
men of meaner condition and quality, with reservation of Soccage-Tenure. And in
this manner the Dukes and Nobles amongst their Menials and Followers dissipated
a great part of their Lands; viz. to their Gentlemen of quality, to hold by
Knights Service, and to other of meaner condition by Soccage-Tenure.

Gervatius Tilbuciensis, a learned man that flourished in the days of King
Henry the Second, in his Dialogue of the Observations of The Right Honorable
S. Joseph. Williams on of Milbeck hall in Cumberland Knight one of his Majestys
principal Secretarys of State etca.
The Honorable Sr. Robert Atkins of Totteridge in Hertford shire, and of
Sapperton in Gloucester shire Knight of the Bath, and one of his matys. Justices
of the Com^on pleas etca.
Sr. John Bennet of Dawly in Middsx. Knight. of the honble. order of the Bath,
Leivtenant to his maties Band of Gentlemen Pentioners, and eldest brother to
the Rt. honble. Henry Earl of Arlington; who was first married to Elizabeth
Countess of Mulgrave daughter to ye Earl of Middsx. and now to Bridget How of
the Family of Sr. Grubham How
Sr. Robert Southwell Knight, one of the Clerks attending his Majesty King
Charles the Second in his most Honorable privy Council etc^t.
Sr. Hugh Wyndham of Silton in Dorsetshire Knight. one of the Justices of his
matys. Court of Common pleas at Westminster, eighth son of S. John Wyndham of
Orchard-Wyndham in Somersetshire Knight, who was lineally descended from the
ancient Family of ye Wyndhams of Felbrigg in Norfolk ^own^r ther^of
Sr. Thomas Daniell of Beswick in the East Rideing of Yorkshire Knight. Major to
his matys. Regiment of Foot Guards, and Captain of his matys. Archchiffe Fort
in Dover.
Sr. Thomas Mompesson^ anciently Montpintson^ of Bathampton in Wiltshire
Knight, a person of eminent Loyalty and suffering in the late trouble, whose
Family have been of great antiquity in the said County.
Sr. Thomas Lynch of Great Sonkey in Lancashire Knight., one of the Gentlemen of
his maty^. privy Chamber in ordinary, and late Governor of his Ma^^^ Island of
Jamaica, decended of ye Linc^^s of Groves in Kent; and is now married to Vere
Herbert, 2^. daughter of Sr. Edw: Herbert sometime Lord Keeper of the gro^t
sea^e.
Sr. William Pelham of Brocklesby in Lincolnshire Knight., whose Grandfat^er Sr.
William Pelham of the said place Knight., (who was descended of ye ancient family,
of ye Pelhams of Langhtoni^^ sussex) was employed under Queen Eliz: in ye
offices of Ld chief Justice of Ireland, Marshall of ye English forces sentinto
ye Low Countries, Mast^^ of her ordnance^ and one of her privy Council.
Sr Thomas Davi^s of the City of London Knight Ld. Mayor thereof Anno 1677.
Sr. William Prichard of the City of London Knight. and Alderman; now married to
Sarah daughter of Francis Cook of Kingsthorp in Northampton shire Gent^.
Sr. Thomas Player of Hackney in Middlesex Knight, Chamberlain of the City of
London.
Sr. John Berkenhead Knight Master of Requests to his Majesty, and Master of
the Faculties, and one of the members of the Honorable house of Commons.
Sr William Drake of Amersham in the County of Bucks Knight. now married to
Elizabeth daughter of ye honble. ^^. Mount^gu Lord chief Baron of his matys
Court of Exchequer
Sr William Pargiter of Greetworth in Northampton shire Knight a samily of good
Antiquity whose Ancestors have been their Seated for many Generations.
Sr. William Waller of Winchester in Hantshire K, descended from Richard Waller
of Groombridg in Kent Esqr. who at ye battle of Agencourt took Io^ Duke of
Orleanse Prisoner, and brought him to Groombridg, wh^re he remained a Prisoner
24 years; and in memory of the Action it has bin ever since allowed to the
family to bear hanging on their Ancient Crest the Arms of the said Duke.
Sr William Hustler of Acklam in Cleaveland in The County of York Knight
Sr. Joseph Sheldon of the City o^ London Knight. Aldermanand, Lord M^j. thereof
Anno (...)
Sr. Robt. Hanson of the City of London Knight and Alderman. Lord Major
thereof Anno 1673
Sr. John Maynard of Gunnersbury in the Parish of Ealing in the County of
Midlesex Knight, sergeant at Law to his Majesty King Charles the second.
S^. John Short^r of the City of London Knight. and Alderman; now married to Ezabe^
daughter of John Birkhead of Ristwhait (...) y^ parish of Crostwhait in
Cumberland Gen^
Robert Peyton of East Barnet in ye. County of (...) Knight. descended of ye.
Ancient Family of ye. Peyton^ Cambridgshire. no^ Married to Jane Daughter and
(...) heyrs of Lionell Robison of Couton in York shire Esquire.
Sr. Edward Low of new Sarum in Wiltshire Knight. one of the Masters of the High
and Honorable Court of Chancery.
Sr. John James of Wi^^borow in K^nt Knight. d^scended of ye. ^nti^^^ And S^r^ading
Family of ye. Iam^^is Who Transpl^nted Themselu^s out of Cle^^ in Germa^y into
England About ye^ (...) of y^ ^^igne of K. (...) Family S^^ (...) in T^^ Body
of y^. Book S^ction Chap: 1 The S^S. Io^n is ^^w Married to M^^y d^ught^r of Sr.
Robert Ki^^e^r^w of Ha^worth in Middle^^^ Knight. des^^ed (...) C^^m^er^^n to y^
Late Queen Mother.
(...) Hon Sr. Robert B^oth of Salford in L^^c^shire K^. ^ chife Justice of
(...) Mat^s Court. of Com^n pleas in Ireland and one of his Ma^^^ most Hon
pri^^ ^^^ncell for y^ Sd Kingdom, Grandchild and heir of Humfry ^ooth of
Salford (...) G^n. whose Ch^ritable works (...) his name of w^. see more in ^
^^dy of y^ Bocke s^e 3 chapt. 1^ The Sd. S^r. Robert was first married to mary
^^^ghter and heir of Spencer Po^ts of Chalgraye in Bedfordshire Esquire, and (...)
to Susanna Daughter of Sr. (...) of Dean in East Kent Knight. A^^so^ D^ceased:
Sr. Charles Pitfeild of H^xton in the Parish of St. Leonard ^horditch in
Middlesex Knight. Descended of the Ancient family of the Pitfeilds of ^um^n^s^ry in
D^rs^tshire^ is now married to Winefrid one of the Daughters and coeheyrs of
John Adderley of Cotton in Stafordshire Es^
Sr. Thomas Middleton of Stansted Mount Fichit in ye. County of Essex Knight. now
married to Mary ye. Relict of Thomas Style Esquire Eldest Son of Sr. Thomas Style of
Wa^ering bury in ye^ County of Kent Bar^: and only Daughter of Sr. Stephen
Langham of ye City of London: Knight.
Sr. Francis Theobald of Barking hall in Suffolk Knight. a great Lover of Lerning
and fautor of Learned men in Soemuch yt Dr. Castle in his Polyg^o^ Lexicon makes
This mention of him yt. he is harum Linguarum Callentissimus
Sr. Robt. Hardinge late of Kings-Newton in ye Parish of Melborne in
Darby-shire, N^w of Grais Inn in Middle^. Knight. his matys. Attorney of all his
Forests etc. from Trent Northward's a great sufferer for there matys. King
Charles ye first and second. He Married Anna eldest daughr. of Sr. Richard
Sprignell of H^gate in Middlesex Bar^. Deceased.
Sr. Io. Kirk of East Ham in Esex Knight. one of ye Band of Gentleman Pentioners
to his maty^. King Charles the 2d. which sd. Sr. Io. and his family has been
very active for the Servic^ of there King and Country. and in particular at
Canade in America.
Sr. Thomas Marshe of Darkes in the Parish of South Mimms in Com Middlesex
Knight
Sr. William Beversham of Holbrookhall in Suffolk Knight. one of the Masters o^
the High and Honorable Court of Chancery
the Exchequer, has in effect as follows: Until the time of Henry the First
(says he) the Kings used not to receive Money of their Lands, but Victuals for
the provision of their House; and toward the payment of their Soldiers wages,
and for such like Charges, money was raised out of the Cities and Castles in
which Husbandry was not exercised: But at the length, when the Kings being in
parts beyond the Seas, needed ready money for and toward the furniture of
their Wars, and the Subjects and Farmers complained they were grievously
troubled by carriage of Victuals into sundry parts of the Realm far distant
from their Habitations, the Kings directed Commissions to certain discreet
persons, who having regard to those Victuals, should reduce them into
reasonable sums of money, the levying of which they appointed to the Sheriff,
taking order withal that he should pay them at the Scale or Beam, that is to
say, that he should pay six pence over and above every pound weight of money,
because he thought that the money would wax so much the worse for the wearing.

And it was anciently ordained, That all Knights Fees should come unto the
eldest Son by succession of Heritage, whereby he succeeding his Ancestor in the
whole Inheritance, might be the better able to maintain War against the King's
Enemies, or his Lords; and that the Soccage of Freehold be partable between the
Male Children, to enable them to increase into many Families for the better
increase of Husbandry.

But as nothing is more unconstant than the Estates we have in Lands and
Livings, even so long since these Tenures have been so indifferently mixed and
confounded in the hands of each sort, that there is not now any note of
difference to be gathered by them. Lambert Peramb. of Kent, 10. Et quia tale
servitium forinsecum non semper manet sub eadem quantitate, sed quandoque
praestatur ad plus, quandoque ad minus; ideo eo quantitate Regalis servitii,
and qualitate fiat mentio in charta, ut tenens certum tenere possit, quid and
quantum persolvere teneatur.

And therefore the certainty of the Law in this case is, That he that holds
by a whole and entire Knight's Fee must serve the King, or his other Lord,
forty days in the Wars well and sufficiently arrayed and furnished at all
points: and by twenty days if he hold by a moiety of a Knights Fee; and so
proportionable.

And in the Seventh of Edw. 3. 246. it was demurred in Judgment, Whether Forty
days shall be accounted from the first day that the King did first enter into
Scotland; but it seems that the days shall be accounted from the first day
that the King does enter into Scotland, because the Service is to be done out
of the Realm.

And they that hold per Regale servitium, are not to perform that Service,
unless the King do also go himself into the Wars in proper Person, by the
Opinion of Sir William Earl Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Irium Sept.
Edw. 3. 246. but vide 3 Hen. 6. tit. Protection 2. in which Case it was
observed, That seeing the Protector (who was Prorex) went, the same was
adjudged a Voyage Royal.

Also before the Statute de quia emptores terrarum, which was made decimo
octavo Edw. 1. the King or other Lord had given Lands to a Knight to hold of
him by Service and Chivalry ( scil.) to go with the King, or with his Lord,
when the King does make a Voyage Royal to subdue his Enemies, by Forty days
well and conveniently arrayed for the War. In this Case the Law has such
regard to the Dignity of Knighthood, that he may find an able person to go for
him, and the Knight is not compelled by his Tenure to go in person as ordinary
Soldiers, who are hired or retained by Prest-money or Wages.

There has been many and varying Opinions of the contraries of a Knight's Fee,
as you may read in Coke's ninth Part 122. and there it is proved, that
Antiquity has thought that Twenty pounds in Land was sufficient to maintain
the Degree of Knighthood; as it does appear in the ancient Treatise De modo
tenendi Parliamentum tempore Regis Edwardi, filii Regis Ethelred; which also
does concur with the Act of Parliament Anno primo Edw. 2. de militibus: by
which Act of Parliament Census militis, the Estate of a Knight was measured by
the value of Twenty pound Lands per Annum, and not by any certain content of
Acres. And with this does agree the Statute of Westminster, cap. 35. and Fitz.
Not. Brev. 82. where Twenty pounds Land per Annum in Soccage is put in equipage
with a Knight's Fee. And this is the most reasonable estimation; for one Acre
may be more worth in value than many others.

And it is to be observed, That the relief of a Knight, and of all Superiors
that be Noble, is the fourth part of their Revenue by the year; as of a Knight
five pounds, and so of the rest.

And because this Tenure does concern Service in War, the Tenants are therefore
called Milites Militia: for though the word does properly signify a Soldier,
yet antiquity has appropriated that name to the chiefest of Military
Profession. In our Law they are styled Milites, and never Equites; yet so, that
Miles is taken for the self same that Chivalry is. Bracton fol. 79. makes
mention of Rode Knights, that is to say, serving Horsemen, who held their Lands
with condition that they should serve their Lords on Horsback. And so by
cutting off a piece of a Name (as our delight is to speak short) this name
Knight remains with us; for Armiger, scil. the Esquire, which is a Degree
under the Knight, was in the Military Service to serve on foot.

Note, He that holds by a whole Knight's Fee, must be with the King Forty
days well and completely arrayed for the War, which is to be understood to
serve on Horseback. And in all Nations the name of this Dignity is taken of
Horses; for the Italians call them Cavelieri; the Frenchmen Chivaleris; the
Germans, Regters; our Britains, Murgeghe, all riding; and in Latin we call them
Equites aurati; for at their Creations, besides the Sword and Girdle, gilt
Spurs were added for more Ornament. And when a Knight does commit any offense
for which he is by the Law to suffer death, the use has been in the beginning
of his punishment to degrade and deprive him publicly of his Honor of
Knighthood (for it is but with life leas'd, or taken away, Mills 81.) by
ungirding his Military Girdle, by taking away his Sword, and broken, his Spurs
cut off with an Hatchet, his Gauntlets plucked from him, and the Escocheons of
his Arms reversed.

And in the Statute made 24 Hen. 8. chap. 13. entitled an Act for Reformation
of Apparel, It was permitted for Knights to wear a Collar of Gold, named the
Collar of SS.

And although this Dignity of Knighthood had its original, and was given to men
of War and Prowess; yet in all Successions of Ages, and in all Nations, the
same also is bestowed upon men of Peace by the Sovereign Power to deserving
persons, whereby the Service of the Commonwealth at home is made equal with
that abroad: For as Tully says truly, Parvi sunt arma foris, nisi est
consilium domi. But Experience, the faithfullest Counselor and best Mistress,
has made it manifest both in this modern Age, as well as in that of Tullie's,
that the Camp has bred more eminent Statesmen, and happily as good
Politicians, as the long Robe: Perhaps for this Reason, one aims chiefly at
Glory and Honor, which easily attracts admirers and favorers; the other at
Riches and indirect Negotiations, which begets Envy and private Enemies.

He that receives the Dignity of a Knight kneeleth down, and then the King
slightly smites him upon his Shoulder, and says unto him these words in
French, Sois Chivaler au nome de Dieu; and afterward says moreover, Avance
Chivaler: See the Book of Titles of Honor due to the Earl-Marshal for the
making of Knights, 176. For a Knight is not made by Letters Patents, or by the
King's Writ, as those of higher Dignity, but by the Sword; for this Honor is
supposed to be given on the sudden, and therefore is commonly done by the
Sword, although the King may by his Letters Patents create a Knight.

Earls in ancient times had a power of Knighting; but now neither may the
Prince, or any other of the Nobility, make a Knight, but only the King, or
Lieutenant General by his Commission. No man is born a Knight, as he may be to
Titles of Honor by Patent; but a Knight may be made as soon as a Child is
baptized, except Knight Bannerets. Note the printed Book of Titles of Honor,
fol. 218, 313. the first Knight. With us in England there are diverse sorts of
Knights, whereof Cambden 171. and Mills do write at large: But amongst the
Romans there was but one Order of them, and they were next in Degree unto the
Senators. And they who simply, without any Addition, be called Knights,
howsoever they are in order ranked last, yet by institution they are first, and
of greatest Antiquity; and the other Orders are but late Attributes, according
to the several inventions of particular Princes. And I do not remember that in
our Books of Law I have read any thing concerning the Order of Knights with
Addition, viz. Knights of the Honorable Order of the Garter, Knights
Bannerets, and Knights of the Bath. But in the Statute 12 Hen. 8. cap. 13. it
is enacted, That every Knight of the Garter may have three Chaplains, whereof
every one may purchase license or dispensation, and receive, have, and keep two
Benefices with cure of Souls: but they of this Order which I now treat of, are
called Knights of the Spur, or Knights Batchelors.

Between Doctors of the Civil Law and Knights has ever been question for
precedence, since either of them has been in credit in the Commonwealth: as
may appear both by the Comparison that Tully makes between Lucius Murena, a
Knight of Rome, and Publius Sulpitius a Lawyer, either of them standing for
Consulship, in his Eloquent Oration made for Murena; and many Disputes of
Bardal and Bardus, arguing the Case Pro and Con: which though it be disputable
in Foreign Parts; yet here in England it is without Controversy, and the
precedence thereof is undoubtedly the Knights. But if they be both of equal
degree of Knighthood, then it goes by Seniority. The Opinion of some men
lately has been, That Knights Lieutenants (that is to say) such Knights as
either have been Ambassadors in Foreign Parts, or Judges within the Realm, may
and ought to have, during their lives, precedence above men of their own rank
after their Offices expire; and sub Iudice his est, not determined by Judgment.
But admitting it so to be, by way of Argument in that case; yet the Heralds do
deny that privilege to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, or Justices of
the Peace, who have their limited Jurisdiction of Magistracy confined them: but
the former are generally Magistrates throughout the Realm, and their employment
concerns the whole Commonwealth; and having the public Justice and Honor of
the whole Estate committed unto them, do more meritoriously draw from thence a
great respect of Honor, according to the generality of their Administration
and Employments, which an inferior and more con^^ned Magistrate cannot have.

The name of a Knight is a name of Dignity, and a Degree, as is the name of
Duke, Earl, etc. and in all Actions he shall be slyled Knight; otherwise the
Writ shall abate.

A Knight also must be named by both his Chri^tian and Surnames, as Sir A. B.
Knight. But those Degrees honorable that are made by Patent, may be named only
by their Christian Names, and by their Title of Honor, as Gilbert Earl of
Shrewsbury: and that for two causes; First, because of their solemn Creations (
and nomen dicitur a noscendo;) Secondly, there is but one part of that Title of
Honor within England, and therefore it is certain what person he is; but
otherwise of Knights, as it is certainly known in the 8 Edw. 4.24. a. And
Prisot, Chief Justice, says, in the 32 Hen. 6. 26. b. That if an Esquire be
made a Knight, he loses his Name of Esquire; but though a Knight be made a
Nobleman, or of any higher Degree, he does still retain the name of Knight, and
so ought to be styled in all Writs.

Also if a man do recover in an Action by the Name of John Styles, Esquire and
afterward be made a Knight, he must sue his Scire Facias by the Name of Knight.

And this name shall not die with him; for if they were bound in an Obligation
by the Name of Gentlemen or Esquires, and afterward one is made a Knight, and
dies, the Plaintiff in the Action to be brought against his Executors, must
name him Knight, otherwise the Writ shall abate.

If a Grant be made to H. D Knight, when he is not a Knight, it is a void
Grant: but if it be a Feoffment with Livery, the Livery makes it good. If the
Plaintiff or Demandant do in his Writ name the Defendant or Tenant Esquire when
he is a Knight, the Writ shall not only abate, but also the Plaintiff may not
have another Writ by Iourneys account.

But by the Statute made 1 Edw. 6. chap. 7. it is amongst other things enacted,
That albeit any person or persons, being Justices of Assize, Justices of
Jail-delivery, or Justices of the Peace within any of the King's Dominions, or
by any other of the King's Commissions whatsoever, shall have the fortune to be
made or created Duke, Archbishop, Marquess, Earl, Viscount, Bishop, Baron,
Knight, Justice of the one Bench, or of the other, Sergeant at Law, or Sheriff,
yet that notwithstanding he and they shall remain Justices and Commissioners,
and have full power and authority to execute the same in like manner and form
as he or they might or ought to have done before the same. By the Satute of 1
Hen. 5. chap. 5. it is enacted as follows, That every Writ, Original of
Actions personal, Appeals, and Indictments, and in which an Exigit shall be
awarded to the names of the Defendants, in such Writs, Oginal, Appeals, and
Indictments shall be made the Additions of their Estate, Degrees, etc. And a
little after it is provided, That if the said Writs of Actions Personal be not
accordding to the Record and Deed, by the Surplusage of the Additions
aforesaid, that for this cause they are not.

John S^iles Gent. is bound by Obligation to one W. B. the Obligor is
afterward made Knight, the Bond is forfeited; W. B. by his Attorney draws a
Note or Title for an Original, according to the Defendants Degree, although it
varies from the Original Specialty, as it ought to be made by the Statute: But
the Cursitor mistaking, did make the Original only according to such Addition
as was specified in the Obligation, omitting his Degree or Dignity, and the
Entry of the Capias alias and pluris was according to the said Original; But in
the Exigit and Proclamation, and Entry of it, the Defendant was named according
to his Degree of Dignity: upon a Writ of Error after a Judgment, doubt was, If
this might be amended in another Court than where the Original was made; and at
the last it was resolved by all the Court, That the Record should be amended by
the Cursitor, and made according to the Note and Title delivered unto him by
the Attorney.

It appears in our Books of Law, that the highest and lowest Dignities are
universal; for as if a King of a Foreign Nation come into England by his
Majesty's leave (as it ought to be) in this case he shall sue and be sued by
the Name of a King; So shall a Knight sue or he sued by the name of a Knight,
wheresoever he received that Degree of Honor: But otherwise it is as if a
Duke, Marquess, Earl, or other Title of Honor given by any Foreign King or
Emperor, yea, although the King by his Letters Patents of safe Conduct do name
him Duke, or by what other Foreign Title of Dignity he has; For Experience
teaches that Kings joined in League together by a certain mutual (and as it
were a natural) power of Monarchs (according to the Law of Nations) have
admitted one another Servants, Subjects, and Ambassadors graced with the Title
of Knighthood. Therefore though a Knight receive his Dignity of a Foreign
Prince, he is so to be styled in all Legal Proceedings within England. And
Kings were wont to send their Sons unto their Neighbor Princes to receive
Knighthood at their hands, thinking that it was more honorable to take Arms of
some other, le^t affection might seem to prevent Judgment, when the Father gave
them that Honor. Thus our King Henry the Second sent unto David King of Scots,
and Malcombe King of Scots unto our Henry the Second, and our Edward the First
unto the King of Castile, to take of them Military Arms: For these terms and
phrases they used in that Age for the Creation of a Knight.

And Knights in all Foreign Countries have ever place and precedence according
to their Seniority of being Knighted, which privilege is denied to Noblemen;
for be they never so ancient, in Foreign Countries they shall go below, as
Puisnes. The Degree of Knighthood is not only a Dignity and Honor to the
party, (for so it is termed in Brook's Title Additions 44.) but an Honor to
the Kingdom: And therefore it has been an ancient Prerogative of the Kings of
this Realm, at their pleasure to compel men of worth to take upon them that
Degree upon payment of a Fine. But we see by Experience in these days, that
none are compelled thereunto, and that is the reason, wherefore, if the
Plaintiff be Knighted having the Writ, it shall abate, because he has changed
his name, and that by his own Act.

And for that cause also, by the Common Law, not only the King, but every Lord
of a Manor ought to have of every of his Tenants a reasonable Aid to make his
eldest Son a Knight: And all Lands are subject to these Aids, except only
ancient Demesne, and grand and petty Serjeanty-Tenures, as the Law has ^een
anciently delivered: And in Io. Shelden 131. where also it is said, one that
wrote a little after the Statute of Westminster the first, allows as a good
bar to the Avowry, for the Tenant to plead that the Father himself is no
Knight; so that one not Knighted cannot claim this Aid of his Tenants, Bri^an.
cap. de prices de avers.

And it was at the liberty of the Lord to make more or less of his Tenants by
the Common Law in this Case; but by the Statute of Westminster the first, Chap.
35. it is put in contrary, viz. forasmuch as before this time reasonable Aid to
make ones Son Knight, or to marry his Daughter was never put in certain, nor
how much should be taken, nor at what time, whereby some levied unreasonable
Aid, and more often than seemed necessary, whereby the people were sore
grieved: It is provided that from henceforth, of a whole Knight's Fee, there be
taken but Twenty shillings; and of Twenty pounds in Land holden in Soccage,
Twenty shillings; and of more, more; and of less, less; after that rate. And
that none shall levy such Aid to make his Son a Knight, until his Son be of
fifteen years old; nor to marry his Daughter until she be of the Age of seven
years: And of that there shall be mention made in the King's Writs formed on
the same, when any will demand it.

And if it happen that the Father, after he has levied such Aid of his
Tenants, die before he has married his Daughter, the Executors of the Father
shall be bound to the Daughter for so much as the Father received for the Aid.
And if the Father's Goods be not sufficient, his Heir shall be charged
therewith unto the Daugher. And this Aid is so incident, that although the Lord
do confirm unto the Tenant to hold by Fealty and certain Rent, and release unto
him all other Services and Demands; yet shall he have the Aid to make his
eldest Son a Knight. But the King was not bound by the Statute aforementioned,
because the King was not named in the Statute: Therefore by the Statute 25 Edw.
3. chap. 11. the King's Aid were brought to a like value.

The intention of the Law is, That an Heir until the Age of One and twenty
years, is not able to do Knights Service. But such a presumption of Law does
give place to a Judgment of proof to the contrary, as Bracton says, S^abitur
presumptioni, donec probetur in contrarium. And therefore when the King, who is
the Sovereign Judge of all Chivalry, has dubbed him a Knight, he by this has
adjudged him able to do him Knight's Service, and all men are concluded to say
the contrary to it: And therefore such an Heir being made a Knight, either in
the life time of his Father, or afterward during his minority, shall be out of
Ward and Custody both for his Land, and Body, and marriage by the Award of the
ancient Common Law. By reason also that the Honor of Knighthood is so great,
that it is not to be holden under by any; yet if the King do create such an
Heir within Age a Duke, Marquess, Earl, Viscount, or ^aron, by this he shall
not be out of Ward and Custody both for his Land and Body. And therefore it is
propounded by the Statute of Magna Charta, chap. 3. Ita tamen quod si ipse, dum
infra aetatem fuerit, fiat miles, nihilominus terra remaneat in Custodia
Dominorum suorum. So that although such an Heir within Age be made Knight, and
thereby to this purpose is esteemed as of full Age; yet the Land shall remain
in Custody of the Lord, till his Age of One and twenty years by the purview of
the said Act.

Question: If the Son and Heir of the Tenant of the King by Knights Service,
etc. be made Knight in Paris by the French King, whether he shall be out of
Wardship after the death of his Father, or no? for thereby he is a Knight in
England: Coke's seventh part, b. 2 Edw. 4. fol. tamen vide in Coke's sixth
part, 74. b. mention is only made of Knights made by the King himself, or by
his Lieutenant in Ireland. But when the King does make an Heir apparent within
Age of a Tenant by Knights Service a Knight in the life of his Ancestor; and
after the death of his Ancestor the said Heir being within Age, shall in this
Case be out of Ward, and shall pay no value for his marriage, neither shall the
Lord have the Custody of the Land; for in that Case, by the making of him
Knight in the life of his Ancestor, he is made of full Age; so that when his
Ancestor dies, no interest, either in the Body, or in the Land, shall invest
in the Lord; but the Knight may tender his Livery as if he were of full Age:
And in that case the King shall have primier Seisin, as if he had been One and
twenty years of Age at the time of the death of his Ancestor, and not
otherwise. For the Statute of Magna Charta does not extend unto it; for the
purview of it does extend only when the Heir in Ward ( infra aetatem) is made
Knight, then remanet terra in Custodia, etc.

But when the Heir is made Knight in the life of his Ancestor, then the Custody
cannot remain, which never had any inception or essence.

Also when the Heir, after the death of his Ancestor, within Age is made
Knight, if after tender made to him he within Age do marry elsewhere, yet he
shall not pay the forfeiture of his marriage; for by the making him Knight he
is out of Ward and Custody of his Lord, for then he ought to be sui Iuris, and
may employ himself in feats of Arms for defense of the Realm, etc. and
therefore may not be within the Custody of another; and none shall pay any
forfeiture, but when after any refusal he does marry himself, during the time
when he is under the custody and keeping of his Lord: And this does appear by
the Statute of Merton, chap. 6. Si se mariturierit sine licentia Domini sui,
and ei conferet maritagium suum, etc. which words cannot be understood when he
is out of Ward and Custody, no more than when he is married after the Age of
One and twenty years. Note hereby, that the King may prevent his Grantee, or
other Lords, of the double value by Knighthood: Yet in such case, presently
after the Heir is made a Knight after the death of his Ancestor, the Lord may
have a Writ de valor maritagii for the single.

Also by the ancient Common Law of this Realm, if a Villain be made a Knight,
he is immediately infranchised: And if a Ribald, or a man of base birth and
condition had struck a Knight, by the ancient Law he should have lost his hand
wherewith he offended.

But in France it was anciently adjudged, that when the Lord of a Villain had
Knighted his Villain, being a Gentleman he became free, and had his Honor
law^ully; but if another Lord had Knighted him, nothing had been wrought by it,
for none could manumit him but his Lord; and till Manumission or Knighthood he
had civil freedom for his ground, but was not capable of it, except by the King
only.

It was enacted by Parliament in the sixth year of the Reign of King John, in
haec verba, Rex Vicecom. etc. Sciatis quod consensum est cum assensu
Archiepiscoporum, Comitum, Baronum, and omnium fidelium nostrorum Angliae quod
novem Milites per totam Angliam invenient decuriam Militum been paratorum
aequis and armis ad defensionem Regni nostri.

There has ever been, and still is, great use of the Services of Knights even
in Civil Affairs, and concerning matters of Justice: as in a Writ of Right,
which is the highest Writ in Law for trial of Titles touching the Inheritance
of Lands; the Tenant is at his Election to have his Trial by great Assize, or
else by Battle; if by the great Assize, the Writ De magna Assiza eligenda shall
be thus, viz.

Rex Vicecomiti salutem, etc. Summone as per bonos summonitores quatuor legales
Milites de Comitatu tuo, quod sint coram Iusticiariis nostris ad primam Assizam
cum in parts illas venerint ad eligendum super sacramentum suum, 12 de
militibus de visum de N. qui melius sciant and velint dicere veritatem
adfaciendam recognitionem magnae assurae inter A. petent. and B. tenent. de uno
messuagio cum pertinentiis in N. unde idem B. qui tenens est posuit secum
magnam Ass. nostram and petit recognitionem fieri utrum eorum habent jus in
messuagium praed. B. qui tunc sit ibi auditurus illam electionem, and habeas
ibi nomina praed. milit. ad hoc breve, etc. And upon the Return of this Writ,
those four Knights must appear gladiis cuncti, Dier 79. fol. 103.

If the Tenant make his Election by Battle, each parties are to choose their
Champions, and the Court shall award the Battle, and the Champions shall be at
Mainprize, and sworn to perform the Battle at a certain day in the Term; and
idem dies shall be given to the parties, at which day and place a List shall be
made in an even and plain Ground there quadrant, that is to say, every way
sixty foot square; and the Place or Court for the Justices of the Common Pleas
without, and upon the Lists furnished with the same Clothes which belong to
their Court at Westminster, and a Bar shall be there made for the Sergeants at
Law; and the Robes of the Justices and Sergeants shall be of Scarlet, with
their Coifs on, as it was the Thirteenth of Eliz. and then was made
Proclamation with three O Yes: And the Demandant first was solemnly demanded,
and did not appear; whereupon the Manuperors of the Champion were demanded to
bring forth the Champion of the Demandant, who came into the place apparelled
with red Sandals upon his black Armor, bare legged from the Knee downwards,
and bare headed, and bare Arms to the Elbows, being brought in by a Knight,
namely Sir Ierom Bows, who carried a red Battoon of an ell long, tipped with
horn, and a Yeoman carrying the Target made of double Leather; and they were
brought in at the North side of the Lists, and went about the sides of the
Lists until they came to the midst of the Lists, and then came toward the
Bar, before the Justices, with three solemn Congies; and there was he made to
stand on the South side of the place, being the right side of the Court: And
after that the other Champion was brought in in like manner, at the South side
of the Lists, with like Congies, by the hands of Sir Henry Chequie Knight. etc. and
was placed on the North side of the Bar, and two Sergeants, being of the
Counsel of each part, in the midst between them. This done, the Demandant was
solemnly called again, and appeared not, but made default. Bowham, Sergeant for
the Tenant, prayed the Court to record the Nonsuit, quod factum fuit. And then
Dyer Chief Justice, reciting the Writ and Content, and Issue joined upon the
Battle, and the other of the Champions to perform it, and the prefiction of
this day and place, did give final Judgment against the Demandant, and that the
Tenant should have the Land to him, and to his Heirs for ever; and the
Demandant and his Pledges de prosequendo in misericordia Reginae: And
afterward solemn Proclamation was made that the Champions, and all others
there present (which were by estimation above Four thousand persons) might
depart every man in the peace of God and the Queen, and sic fecerunt cum magno
clamore, vivat Regina.

Also if false Judgment be given in the Country, which is the Sheriffs Court,
then the Writ shall be thus; Henricus, etc. Vicecomiti Lincoln. salutem; Si A.
fecerit, etc. tum in pleno Comitatu tuo per breve nostrum de recto inter
Iohannem L. petentem, and Will. B. tenentem de uno messuagio and centum acris
terrae cum pertinentiis in C. unde idem I. L. queritur falsum sibi factum
fuisse Iudicium in eodem, and Record. illud habeas coram Iusticiariis Iuris
apud Westminsterium tali die sub sigillo tuo, and per quatuor legales Milites
ejusdem comitatus, and illos qui Recordo illi interfuerunt, and summoneas per
bonos summonitores praedictum B. quod tunc sit ibi auditurus Recordum illud,
and habeas ibi sua nomina quatuor militum and hoc breve. Fitz. Not. Brev.
itidem E. And those four must be Knights indeed. Also the Justices upon
consideration of the usual words in every Writ of Venire Facias, Coram etc.
Duodecim tum Milites quam alios liberos and legales homines, etc. say that
these words [ tum Milites] were not at the first put into the Writ without
effect, Plowden 117. b. For it seems that in diebus illis, some Knights were
returned upon every Venire Facias.

By the Statute of Magna Charta, cap. 12. It is ordained that Assizes of Novel
Disseison and Mortdancester should not be taken any where, but within the
Countries where they happen, by the Justices of Assize, and the Knights of the
Shire; vide Westminster 2. chap. 30. And by the Seven and twentieth of Edward
the First, chap. 30. de finibus levandis, amongst other things it is enacted,
That for the utility of the Realm, and the more assured conservation of the
Peace, the Justices assigned to take Assizes in all Shires, where they take
Assizes as it is ordained, immediately after the Assizes taken in the Shires
shall remain both together if they be Lay; and if one of them be a Clerk, then
one of the most discreet Knights of the Shire being associated unto him that is
a Layman, by our Writ shall deliver the Goals of the Shires, as well within
the Liberties as without, of all manner of Prisoners, after the form of the
Goal Delivery of those Shires before time used.

Also in the Statute of Westminster 21. cap. 38. de non ponendis in Assizis and
Iuratis, it is provided, that the said Statute shall not extend to Grand
Assizes, in which it behooves many times Knights to pass, not resident in the
County, for the scarcity of Knights, so that they have Lands in the Shire. And
by the Law Knights having Land may be returned upon Juries in ordinary Trials
between party and party, as other Freeholders may be. And therefore in a
Challenge to the great Assize under Edward the Third, one was challenged pur
ceo qu'il fait abaner; or as the Abridgment has it, a Baronet; but it was not
allowed: and the Reason is given; Car s'il soit a Baner, and ne tient pas per
Baronie il serra en l'assise.

Of the double parity of England, that is, of Barons, and all Dignities above
them, being Peers of the Realm, and all other under them, are Peers amongst
themselves; for notwithstanding that Dignity of Knighthood, they are reckoned
amongst the Commons. And we daily see that Knights do serve in Parliament as
Members of the Commonalty. Nevertheless the Sheriff in his discretion will not
impannel Knights, but in special and great Causes: As in Cases of Indictments
of a Peer of the Realm, they are to be enquired and found by Knights and
Esquires, though their Trial shall be only by their Peers. And in 38 Hen. 8.
Henry Howard Earl of Surrey, Son and Heir apparent of Thomas Duke of Norfolk,
was attainted of High Treason, and was tried also by Knights, Esquires, and
Gentlemen, and not by Lords or Peers of the Realm, because he was not of that
Dignity by Creation.

Since the use of making every Earl first a Baron of some place (which began,
as most Writers treat, about the time of Henry the Eighth) it has been a
Custom to style their Heirs apparent Lords and Barons, with the Title of their
Father's Barony (when Viscounts, or Baron's Heirs apparent are only styled
Esquires;) but this is only a piece of Civility, and of mere fashion; yet it is
allowed of in Heraldry, with whom the Rule is, That the eldest Son of every one
of a created Degree is as of the next Degree under him, which may be applied to
Dukes, Earls, and the like: But in Legal Proceedings they enjoy no such matter,
nor have by their being Heirs Apparent any Prerogative of the greater Nobillty.

And in case where a Peer of the Realm is party Plaintiff or Defendant in any
Action or Suit, if the Sheriff do not return one Knight at the least to be of
the Jury, the said Noble Person may Challenge, and for that only cause quash
the whole panel.

By the Statute of Carlisle 15 Edw. 2. it was enacted, That he who levied a
Fine should appear in proper person, to the intent that his Age, Idiocy, or
other defect might be discovered by the Judges. Nevertheless upon Impotency,
whereby he cannot come in Court, two, or one of the Justices, by the consent of
the rest of the Justices, shall go unto him and take his Recognizance; and if
but one of them go, he shall take a Knight with him, and shall certify it in
the Bench of Record, to the intent that all things incident to the fine be
examined by them, and then the fine may be levied. But after this good Statute,
a worse Custom and Use has come in place: For by a Dedimus potestatem out of
Chancery to one Knight, and to a Justice of the Peace of the County in such
cases, is procured and directed to a Knight and two others, who perhaps be
neither Knights nor Justices, but perhaps men of small estimation, and unto two
or three of them, without saying Quorum the Knight shall be one; and two of
them without the Knight have taken the Recognizance of the Fine, ibid. 101. b.
But great prejudice this practice of omitting the interposing of the usual
Service of Knights in this behalf has been to many, and scandalous to the Law
of the Land, they sometimes taking Recognizances of a Fine from a Feme Covert,
as if she were sole, and many times acknowledged by Justices. If a Tenant do
lay an Essoin de morbo lecti, he may have a Writ out of the Chancery to warrant
it, by which it shall be commanded to four Knights to view him; and if they see
him sick, then they are to give him day, to the end of a year and a day. Note
the Register, fol. 177. b. Quod Coronator non elegatur nisi sit miles in, etc.
juxta formam Statuti Westminster. 1. cap. 10.

It is a received Opinion, that Knights are excused from attendance at Leets,
and Britton 29. and 36. is cited to prove it. And by a large understanding of
the intent and meaning of the Statute of Marlbridge, chap. 10. For the ancient
Common Law had such respect to the Degree of Knighthood, that they, nor their
eldest Sons, were compelled to find Pledges in the Leet or Law-days; for the
Statute of Marlbridge aforesaid was not Introductiva novae Legis, for it was
before the Conquest. And the Common Law is not by this Statute abridged. And by
the Book called the Mirror of Justice, mentioned in the Preface to Coke's ninth
part, it is said that Knights are excepted: And so it appears that the practice
was as well before, as immediately after the making of that Statute of
Marlbridge; and Interpretatio Practica is a principal way and form of
Interpretation of Laws. The Lord Chancellor's Speech, in the Case of Postnati,
fol. 58. And in Divinity, Praxis sanctorum est interpretatio praeceptorum,
ibid. 66. But a Knight, and all Superiors and Inferiors, are bound by Law to
attend the County or Sheriffs Court wherein he dwells, and at his peril to
take notice of the proceedings thereof: For if a Man be Outlawed of Felony at a
County Court, and one of the same County not knowing of the Felony does receive
him, he is Accessory. Also when the King does Summon his Parliament, Writs
shall be sent to the Sheriff to make choice of Knights of every Shire in this
form; Rex Vicecom. N. Salutem, quia de avisamento and asse^su nostri Concilii,
pro quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotiis nos, statum, and defensionem Regni
nostri Angliae, and Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus quoddam Parliamentum
nostrum apud Civitatem nostram Westminster. duodecimo die Novembris proxime futuro
teneri ordinavimus, and ibidem cum Praelatis magnatibus, and proceribus dicti
Regni nostri colloquium habere and tractare, tibi praecipimus firmiter
injungentes, quod facta Proclamatione in prox. Commit. tuo post receptionem
hujus brevis nostri tenendi die, and loco praed. duos Milites gladiis cinctos
Magisidouers and Discretos Com. praed. etc. and electionem and parts sub
sigillo tuo, and sub sigillis eorum qui electioni illi interfuerunt nobis in
Cancellaria nostra ad dictum diem, and locum certifices indilate. See the
Statute 23 Hen. 6. cap. 15. where amongst other things it is enacted, That the
Knights of the Shires for Parliaments hereafter to be chosen, shall be notable
Knights of the same Counties for the which they shall be chosen, or else such
notable Esquires or Gentlemen being of the same Counties, as shall be able to
be Knights.

Peers of the Realm are by intendment of Law sufficient of Freehold; and that
is one of the Reasons wherefore no Capias or Exigit lieth^ against them for
Debt or Trespass.

But the Law has not that Opinion of the Knights sufficiency of Freehold: for
he may be a Knight without Land; therefore, and then he is not to be returned
of any Jury or Inquest, howsoever he may be worthy and sufficient to serve the
Commonwealth in Marshal Affairs. The Wives and Widows of Knights in Legal
Proceedings, and in Courts of Justice, have not the Title of Lady, as the Wives
or Widows of Noblemen have; yet by the Courtesy of England that Title is given
them.

And if in any action they be not called Ladies, for that cause the Writ shall
not abate for that Surplusage, because Domina is general to Women, as Domini to
Men. So where Women after Fourteen years of Age are called Dominae for Ladies
or Dames; and with us anciently marriageable Women were called Dominae; and in
our old English Leets, Dames.

First, Dominae is often used for Women generally, as a special Honor for that
Sex, being not out of fashion at this day; nor with the French; as also amongst
the Italians, Domina for them is familiar. But if she be named Comitessa or
Baronessa, whereas she is no Countess or Baroness in Law, then without question
the naming of her so shall abate the Writ.

By the Statute of Magna Charta, chap. 21. Knights are freed from Cart-taking,
that no Demesne Cart of them shall be taken.

By the Statute 1 Iacobi, cap. 27. it seems that Knights Sons may keep
Greyhounds, and Setting-Dogs, and Nets to take Pheasants and Partridges in,
though they cannot expend Ten pounds per Annum, nor be worth Two hundred
pounds; for by the express words of the Statute, all the Sons of Knights are
excepted.

Observations concerning Knights Batchelors.
A Baronet cannot claim the Privilege that Knights have from Cart-taking by
Magna Charta 23.

A Baronet's Son cannot keep a Greyhound, etc. because he is not within the
Statute of 1 Iac. 27. unless he has Ten pounds per Annum, tamen qu^re; See the
said Statute, and Statute 22 and 23 Car. 2. Quaere whether the Baronets
Addition does abate any Action. If one be Knighted in the life time of his
Father, it frees him from Wardship; but contra of a Baronet. Knights are
excused from attendance at Leets, which Baronets are not.

Note, That by the Statute 12 Car. 2. chap. 24. the Court of Wards, Tenures in
Capite, Liveries, Ouster le maines, and other dependence upon the Court is
taken away; and then was repealed the Statute 32 Hen. 8. chap. 6. 33 Car. 22.

A Knight Bachelor is a Title (as before noted) borrowed from Horsmanship, and
therefore ought to be represented by the Ef^igies of a Captain of a Troop of
Horse.

I shall here set down the manner of making Knights about the year of Christ
500, near which time King Arthur Reigned in England, as I find it in Sir
William Segar's Book of Honor Military and Civil, page 53. where he says,
That a Prince being minded to make a Knight, commanded a Stage or Scaffold to
be erected in some Cathedral Church in his Kingdom, or some spacious place near
unto it, to which place the Gentleman was brought to receive that Honor; and
being come, was forthwith placed on a silver Chair, adorned with green Silk.
Then it was demanded of him if he were of a healthy Body, and able to undergo
the Travel required in a Soldier; also whether he were a man of honest
conversation, and what credible Witnesses he could produce to affirm the same.
Then the Bishop or chief Prelate of the Church took the Bible, and holding it
open before the Knight in presence of the King and all others, spoke these
words; Sir, you that desire to receive the Order of Knighthood, swear before
God, and by this Holy Book, that you shall not fight against this mighty and
excellent Prince that now bestows the Order of Knighthood upon you, unless
you shall be commanded so to do in the service of your own King; for in that
case, having first yielded up the Collar, Device, and other Ensigns of Honor
now received, it shall be lawful for you to serve against him, without reproach
or offense to all other Companions in Arms. But otherwise doing you shall incur
Infamy, and being taken in War, shall be subject to the pains of death: You
shall also swear with all your force and power to maintain and defend all
Ladies, Gentlewomen, Widows, Orphans, and distressed Women; and you shall shun
no adventure of your person in any War wherein you shall happen to be.

My Author further says, That this Oath being taken, two of the chief Lords
led him to the King, who presently drew forth his Sword, and laid it upon his
Head, saying, God and St. George (or what other Saint the King pleases to
name) make thee a good Knight. Then came to the Knight seven Noble Ladies
attired in white, and begirt a Sword unto his side; which being done, four
Honorable Knights put on his Spurs. These Ceremonies being past, the Queen
took him by the right Arm, and a Duchess by the left, and led him to a rich
Seat placed on an Ascent, where they seated him, the King sitting on his right
hand, and the Queen on his left; then the Lords and Ladies also sat down upon
other Seats three Descents under the King: And being all thus seated, they were
entertained with a Delicate Banquet or Collation, and so the Ceremony ended.

Of Degrading of Knights.
DEgrading of Knights is not very customary, Examples being seldom found, it
being used only for great and notable Facts and Offenses against Loyalty and
Honor; as absenting themselves dishonourably from their King's Service; for
leaving their Colors, and flying to the Enemy; for betraying Castles, Forts,
and the like heinous Crimes.

The manner of Degrading a Knight has been as follows: When a Knight had
been found thus disloyal or corrupt, he was to be apprehended, and armed
Cap-a-pe, as if he was going to the Wars, was to be placed upon a high Scaffold
made for that purpose in the Church; and after the Priest had sung some Funeral
Psalms, as are used at Burials, as though he had been dead, first they take of
his Helmet to show his face, and so by Degrees his whole Armor: then the
Heralds proclaiming him a disloyal Miscreant, with many other Ceremonies to
declare him Ignoble, he was thrown down the Stage with a Rope; and this was
done about the time of King Arthur, as is affirmed by Mills, fol. 84.

Also about the Degrading of Knights these things have also been used; as the
reversing their Coat of Arms; by seizing of their Equipage (except one Horse)
ne qui dignitate f^ctus est eques cogatur pedes incedere; b^ cutting of the
Spurs from their Heels, and by taking away their Sword and breaking it. But of
late the Martial Law is usually put in Execution, both in our Civil Wars, as in
France, and elsewhere; that is, to dispatch such traiterous persons by a File
of Musketeers.

KNIGHTS OF THE Round Table. CHAP. XXII.
THE Founder of this ancient Order of Knighthood was Arthur King of the
Britains, who reigned about the year of Christ 516. whose Valor was so great
and admirable, that many now living do believe the same rather fabulous than
real. This Noble King having, as Sir William Segar notes, driven out of
England the Saxons, conquered Norway, Scotland, and the greatest part of France
(where at Paris he was crowned) and returning home, lived in such great Renown,
that many Princes and worthy Knights came from all Parts to his Court to give
Evidence of their Valor in the Exercise of Arms. Upon this he erected a
Fraternity of Knights, which consisted (as some say) of Four and twenty;
others, a greater Number; amongst whom he himself was Chief: And for the
avoiding of Controversies for taking place when they met together, he caused a
Round Table to be made, from whence they took their Name; which said Table (if
you will believe the Inhabitants of Winchester) hangs up in their Castle, where
they used to meet; and the time of their meeting was at Whitsontide.

Into this Society none were admitted, whether Britains or Strangers, but such
as did make sufficient proof of their Prowess and Dexterity in Arms, and such
as were Renowned for their Virtue and Valor.

The Articles which they vowed to keep, were; To be always well armed, both for
Horse or Foot Service, either by Land or Sea; and to be always ready to assail
Tyrants and Oppressors; To protect and defend Widows, Maidens, and Children;
and to relieve all that are in necessity: To maintain the Christian Faith,
contribute their Aid to Holy Church, and to protect Pilgrims: To advance
Honor, and suppress Vice: To bury Soldiers that wanted Sepulchers: To ransom
Captives, deliver Prisoners, and administer to the cure of wounded Soldiers,
hurt in the Service of their Country: To Record all Noble Enterprises, to the
end that the Fame thereof may ever live to their Honor, and the Renown of the
Noble Order.

That upon any complaint made to the King of Injury or Oppression, one of these
Knights, whom the King should appoint, was to Revenge the same. If any Foreign
Knight came to Court, with desire to show his Prowess, these Knights ought to
be ready in Arms to answer him. If any Lady, Gentlewoman, or other oppressed or
injured person, did present a Petition declaring the same, whether the Injury
was done here or beyond Sea, he or she should be graciously heard, and without
delay one or more Knights should be sent to make Revenge: And that every
Knight, for the advancement of Chivalry, should be ready to inform young Lords
and Gentlemen in the Orders and Exercises of Arms.

For what I can find, there was no Robe or Habit prescribed unto these Knights;
nor can I find with what Ceremony they were made; neither what Officers did
belong unto the said Order, except a Register to record all their Noble
Enterprises.

Not to pass over this Noble Arthur, give me leave to repeat what I find
mentioned of him by Sir William Segar in the said Chapter. This valiant Prince,
not confining himself to the narrow limits of his own Kingdom, left the
Government thereof to the management of his Cousin Mordred, and began his
Journey, or rather Conquest (for in all places he found Fortune to favor him)
And after his many Victories gained of the Saxons, Scots, Norwegians, Romans,
Saracens, and French; in the end, being laden with Honor, he returned into
England, but found Mordred a Traitor, as usurping the Government, and
obstructing his Landing: But all that he could do was in vain; for being
landed, he fled to London, but the Citizens refusing to give him Entrance, he
went into Cornwall, where King Arthur gave him Battle, which proved unfortunate
to them both, for Mordred was slain by King Arthur, who was also desperately
wounded; and after this wound (as some say) he was never found alive or dead,
which made the Poets to feign that he was taken up into the Firmament, and
there remains a Star amongst the Nine Worthies: Which fancy is founded upon
the Prophecy of old Merlin, which was his Counsel, and esteemed as a Prophet;
who for many years before affirmed, That King Arthur, after a certain time,
should resuscitate and come unto Carlion, to restore the Round Table. He wrote
this Epitaph: Hic jacet Arturus, Rex quondam, rexque futurus.


According to Andrew Favin, there was an Order of Knighthood called Knights of
St. Thomas, which was instituted by King Richard the First, after the surprisal
of the City of Acon, and consisted of all English men. Their Patron was St.
Thomas Becket; their Garment was white; and their Ensign was a red Cross
charged in the midst with a white Escallop. But A. Mendo believes that these
Knights were rather some of those which joined themselves with the Knights
Hospitallers, for that they wore the same Habit, followed the same Rule, and
observed the same Customs as did the Knights of St. John of Acon.

KNIGHTS OF THE THISTLE, OR OF St. Andrew in Scotland. CHAP. XXIII.
HVNGVS, King of the Picts, the Night before the Battle that was fought betwixt
him and Athelstan King of England, saw in the Sky a bright Cross in fashion of
that whereon St. Andrew suffered Martyrdom; and the day proving successful unto
Hungus, in memorial of the said Apparition, which did presage so happy an Omen,
the Picts and Scots have ever since bore in their Ensigns and Banners the
Figure of the said Cross, which is in fashion of a Saltier.

And from hence it is believed that this Order took its rise, which was about
the year of our Lord 810. For King Hungus and Achains (Confederates against
Athalstan) went barefooted (in a devote way) to the Kirk of St. Andrew, to
return thanks to God and his Apostles for their Victory; vowing for themselves
and their posterity, ever to use the said Cross in their Ensigns in any warlike
Expedition.

The principal Ensign of this Order is a golden Collar composed of Thistles,
intermixed with Annulets of Gold, to which hangs the figure of St. Andrew with
his Cross, and this Epigraph, Nemo me impune lacessit. But for their common
Ensign they wore a green Ribon, to which hung a golden Thistle crowned with an
Imperial Crown, within a Circle of Gold, with the said Epigraph.

Their grand meeting was annually on St. Andrews day, in the Church of the Town
so called; and during the Solemnity of the Feast, these Knights (which were in
number Thirteen, in allusion to our Savior and the Twelve Apostles) were
richly apparelled, and in their Parliament Robes, having embroidered on their
left Shoulders St. Andrews Cross within a blew Rundle, and in the Center of the
said Cross was a Crown composed of Golden Flower de lis.

Having thus treated of the several Degrees of Knighthood which are or have
been used amongst us: In the next place I shall give the Reader an account of
diverse Degrees of Knighthood in other Kingdoms, although many of them are now
Extinct.

ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD Which are or were Instituted in PALESTINE AND OTHER Parts
of ASIA. CHAP. XXIV.
Knights of the Holy Sepulcher in Jerusalem.
THIS Order of Knighthood is held to be the most ancient of all those Orders
that took their beginning in the Holy Land; and is said to be instituted about
the time that the Temple of Jerusalem was regained from the Sarazens, which was
in Anno 1099.

Some Authors say, That Philip King of France was the first Instituter of this
Order; but Favin says that it was Baldwin the first King of Jerusalem, who
made the Regular Canons (which then resided in a Convent near adjoining to the
said Sepulcher) Knights of the said Order, whose chief Duty was to guard the
Holy Sepulcher; to relieve and protect Pilgrims; to fight against the Sarazens
and Infidels; and to hear Mass every day. The Armorial Ensign belonging unto
them was two red Crosses united into one.

When the Christians were expelled the Holy Land, these Knights settled
themselves at Perugia in Italy: But by the Bulls of Pope Innocent the Eighth,
Anno 1484. they and all their Goods were annexed and joined to the Knights
Hospitallers, then residing at Rhodes.

Knights Hospitallers of St. John Baptist in Jerusalem, called Knights of the
Rhodes, now of Malta.
SOmewhat before the Christians took the City of Jerusalem from the Sarazens,
certain Christian Merchants of Naples, who traded to these parts, obtained
leave from the Caliph of Egypt (who had then the Government thereof) to dwell
near the Sepulcher of Christ, and to erect a small House for the entertainment
of themselves and Pilgrims, and called it The Hospital of Christians; together
with a small Oratory dedicated to the blessed Virgin Mary. After that the
number of Christians increasing, they built another House for Women, and
dedicated it to St. Mary Magdalen; and at length they built a more large House,
which they dedicated to St. John Baptist, the others being too small for the
entertainment of Strangers that thither came for Devotion, and here they
entertained and cured the diseased amongst them. And for their Religion,
Charity, and Hospitality they began to become eminent; and having took St. John
Baptist for their Patron, they obtained the title or name of Brethren
Hospitallers of St. John Baptist of Jerusalem: Then received they the regular
Habit of black, with a white Cross on the Garment near their left Shoulder, and
vowed Obedience, Poverty, and Chastity.

This Order is said to be first instituted in Anno 1099. by one Gerard of the
Province of Toulouse, a man of a holy life, and had large privileges conferred
upon them by King Baldwin the first, who created them Knights, and permitted
them to use Arms, and to fight against the Sarazens and Infidels for the
Defense of the Christian Faith, and to be Guardians of the Holy Sepulcher. At
this time they acknowledged their Obedience to the Patriarch of Jerusalem; but
growing in wealth, they obtained the favor of the Pope to be absolved from
their Obedience, and was by Pope Adrian the fourth received under the
protection of the Papal See.

Gerard being dead, they elected one Raimond for their Rector or great Master,
to whom authority was given that he should govern and command all Knights of
this Order wheresoever dispersed. This Gerard, after he had digested and
enlarged their Laws and Institutions, divided that whole Body into three
Classes; to wit, Knights, Ecclesiastics, and Servants: And since which time
the succeeding Great Masters have much added to their Privileges and
Dignities; and his Title is now The Illustrious Prince of Malta and Goza.

Saladine having made himself Master of Jerusalem, these Knights retired to the
City of Acres, which being also taken, they seized upon the Isle of Rhodes,
where they continued as Masters, until forced thence by Solomon the Great in
Anno 1522. After which they betook themselves to the Isle of Malta, which with
Tripoli and Goza were granted to them by the Emperor Charles the ^ifth, Anno
1530. and the same year was confirmed to them by Pope Clement the Seventh: and
in this Isle they yet continue, and are as a Bulwark to that part of
Christendom.

Knights Templars.
ABout the year 1118. Hugo de Paganes, Godfrey de St. Omer, with seven other
Gentlemen, out of Devotion went into the Holy Land, where they determined to
erect, and enter into a Brotherhood; and being come to Jerusalem, they
consulted what they should do (though to the hazard of their Lives) that should
be a service acceptable to God, and praiseworthy of men: And being informed
that in the Town of Zaffo there resided many Thieves that used to rob the
Pilgrims that resorted to the Holy Sepulcher, they resolved to make the passage
more free by destroying or dispersing these Robbers. And for the encouragement
of these Gentlemen in so good an undertaking, the King assigned them lodgings
in his Palace adjoining to Solomon's Temple, from which place they were called
Knights Templars.

And the King and Patriarch finding their Actions very successful, furnished
them with many necessary Provisions: And although their charitable Service made
them acceptable unto all, yet for the first Nine years they were in so great a
strait, that they were forced to take the Charity of well disposed people;
however there resorted unto them many Christians, so that their number was much
increased. And there being all this while no Habit or Order assigned them, Pope
Honorius, at the request of Stephen Patriarch of Jerusalem, prescribed unto
them an Order of Life, whereby they were to wear a white Garment; and Pope
Eugenius added thereto a red Cross; and in the presence of the said Patriarch
they made their Vows of Obedience, Poverty, and Chastity, and to live under the
Rule of Regular Canons of St. Augustine. Being thus entered into an Order, they
elected an Head or Great Master; and in process of time, through the daily
increase of their number, and their famous enterprises, not only for securing
the passages, but also for waging War both by Sea and Land against the
Infidels, they became highly favored of the Christian Princes, who assigned to
them great Revenues to be spent in God's Service; and in process of time they
became exceeding wealthy and powerful, so that they grew proud, and withdrew
themselves from the Obedience of the Patriarch of Jerusalem, and joined with
the Pope. But in the end they found not the favor from the Pope as they
expected; for by him, or through his consent, upon some infamous crimes charged
against them, their Lands and Possessions were seized upon, and otherways
disposed of, their Order suppressed, and they themselves imprisoned, condemned,
and cruelly executed; but according to the Opinion of many Authors, they were
unjustly accused by subornation of Witnesses, merely to gain their Revenues,
which according to Dr. Heylin, were exceeding great, having no less than
Sixteen thousand Lordships in Europe.

Knights of St. Lazarus.
THis Order at the first Institution was only a Brotherhood of Religious Monks,
and became an Order of Knighthood in or about the time of St. Basil, being
first instituted upon a most charitable account, to wit, to take care of
persons infected with the Leprosy (which was a Disease very frequent in the
Eastern parts) by reason of which they were separated from the Society of men;
and had assigned to them a famous Hospital in Jerusalem, called St. Lazarus,
for the reception of Lepers.

And through the incursion of the Sarazens and Barbarians in these parts, this
Order was (as it were) extinguished; but when the Latin Princes joined together
in a Holy League to expel them the Holy Land, these Religious Men entered into a
Martial Discipline, and performed great Service, insomuch that they gained
great fame and esteem of Baldwin the second King of Jerusalem, in whose time
this Order much flourished under the Government of a Great Master: And about
the year 1150. they made their Vows of Obedience, Poverty, and Chastity before
William Patriarch of Jerusalem, and submitted themselves to the Order of St.
Benedict: They also constituted several Orders to be observed amongst them;
viz. to wear a green Cross; and that all before they entered into this
Knighthood, should prove themselves born in Wedlock of Christian Parents, and
to be a Gentleman by the Fathers and Mothers side; also to be of an unblameable
life and conversation, and to perform daily certain Religious Ceremonies.

Knights of St. Bass.
THese Knights were founded under the Rule of St. Basil, and were also called
Knights of St. Mary. Their Garment was sky color, with a gold Cross, which
they wore before their breast, having in the midst thereof the picture of St.
Basil, their Patron, and were Officers and Servants to the Kings of Armenia.

Knights of St. Katharine at Mount Sinai.
THE reason of the Institution of these Knights (which was about the year of
Christ 1063.) was to guard and defend the Sepulcher of St. Katharine their
Patron (whose Body is said to be buried in Mount Sinai, near to which place a
Monastery was erected and dedicated to her Name) to secure the passage for
Travelers who came thither for Devotion sake, and to entertain them during
their abode.

They lived under the Rule of St. Basil the Great, vowed Obedience to the Abbot
of this Monastery, and wore a white Garment. But when the Turks became Masters
of these parts, this Order of Knighthood suffered very much; notwithstanding,
some Remains of the Order does yet continue.

Knights of the Martyrs in Palestine.
THese Knights followed the Rule of St Basil, and wore on their Garments a red
Cross, in the midst whereof (within a Circle) was the Figures of Cosmas and
Damianus, their Saints and Patrons, who were martyred.

Their Hospital or place of abode bore the name of their Saints; where they
exercised all Acts of Charity to sick Strangers and people in necessity; to
redeem Captives taken by the Sarazens, and to bury the Dead.

ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD IN SPAIN.
Knights of the Oak in Navarr.
THE Inhabitants of the Kingdom of Navarr being almost overrun by the Moors,
notwithstanding their great Army raised to oppose them, for that they wanted an
experienced General to command them; at length one Don Garcia Ximenes (who had
betook himself to a religious and solitary Life) was persuaded to take upon him
that Command, which was about the year of Christ 722. And as he was marching
out of the City to fight the Moors, there appeared to him from the top of an
Oaken Tree the sign of the Cross, which was adored by an innumerable quantity
of Angels. In this Battle he gained so signal a Victory, that the people
elected him their King; and shortly after he instituted this Order of
Knighthood, investing therewith the Nobles, and persons of Renown in his
Kingdom, whom he obliged to defend the Christian Faith, and to own Obedience to
him and his Successors, Kings of Navarr. The Habit that he assigned them was a
white Garment, having thereon a plain red Cross set on the top of an Oaken Tree
in its Verdure.

Knights of the Lilly in Navarr.
GRacius King of Navarr, the sixth of that Name, lying in a languishing and
sick Condition, sent to St. Savior de Lyra, and other places of Devotion, to
the end that prayers might be made for his Recovery: In which time in the City
of Naiera (where he kept usually his Court) there was found the Image of our
Virgin Mary issuing out of a Lilly, holding her Son betwixt her Arms, and
suddenly after (if you will believe the Story) the King not only recovered his
health, but diverse other Miracles were done on diseased people in that place;
and in honor whereof the King (in Anno 1048.) erected this Order, which
consisted of Eight and thirty, of which himself was Sovereign, as were his
Successors to be after him. The Badge which these Knights daily wore on their
Breasts was a Lilly embroidered in Silver; and on Festival days they wore a
double Chain of Gold interlaced with Letters M. after the manner of a Gothish
Letter, with an enamelled Lilly in an Oval Medal hanging at it; and their Habit
was white.

Knights of the Band.
THIS Order was first erected by Alphonso King of Spain, in Anno 1368. and for
this reason; The King considering that he had many Enemies to deal with, for
his better security, thought it convenient to institute an Order of Knights,
making himself Master thereof, which he did a little before his Coronation in
the City of Burgos in great Solemnity; the whole Night being spent in the
Monastery of St. Mary Royal in watching and prayer, and the day following,
after Mass, they were invested with a red Ribon of about three Inches broad,
which went cross their left Shoulders like our Knights of the Bath, being the
Badge from whence these Knights took their Name. Their Articles are at large
set down by Sir William Segar, which being too many to repeat, are here omitted.

Knights of the Dove in Castile.
THIS Order, according to Favin, was first instituted by John the first, King
of Castile, about the year 1379. in the City of Segovia. The Collar of this
Order was composed of pieces which represented the figure of the Sun in his
Glory, to which hung a golden Dove enamelled white, and encircled with rays:
But the King dying the same year, and before it was well received, it became of
no great esteem.

Ordo de la Scama in Castile.
JOHN the second, King of Castile, for the stirring up his Nobles to assist him
in his Wars against the Moors, in Anno 1420. did erect this order, which took
so good effect, that in a short time the Moors were subdued. Their Ensign,
according to Ios. Micheli, was a Cross composed of Scales of F^shes, from which
it seems to have took its Name; for Scama in the Spanish signifies the Scale
of a Fish. These Knights were obliged to fight against the Moors, to accompany
the King in the Wars, and to die in the defense of the Christian Religion.
Their Rules and Statutes for their Government were ordained by the said King,
upon whose death this Order lost much of its splendour.

Knights of the Lilly in Aragon.
THIS Order was erected by Ferdinand King of Aragon, in Anno 1403. and
dedicated to the honor of the blessed Virgin, in token of a signal Victory
which this King obtained against the Moors. The Collar was composed of
Bough-pots filled with white Lillies, interlaced with Griffons.

Knights of Mount-joy.
THIS Order was first instituted in the Holy Land, for the securing these parts
against the Moors and Sarazens, and lay in Garrison in a Castle built on the
point of a Mountain near Jerusalem: And after the loss of the Holy Land, these
Knights retired into Spain, and performed good Service against the Moors; but
in process of time this Order fell to decay, and were incorporated into the
Order of Calatrava. Their Habit was a red short Mantle; and on their Breasts
they wore a white Star with five Rays. They observed the Rule of St. Benedict;
which afterward was changed to that of St. Augustine, and vowed Poverty,
Chastity, and Obedience.

Knights of Acon, or Acres.
IN the City of Acon these Knights resided, where they used all Duties of
Charity to Pilgrims that went to the Holy Land. They assumed the exercise of
Arms in imitation of the Knights Hospitallers: They followed the Rule of St.
Augustine, and wore a black Garment, whereon was a white Cross Pattee; but Ios.
Micheli Marquez says it was a red Cross; and in the midst thereof stood the
figures of St. John and St. Thomas.

After the City of Acon was taken, they removed into Spain, where they
flourished, receiving great favor from Alphonsus the Astrologer, K. of
Castile; but after his death by little and little they decayed, and in the end
were united to the Knights Hospitallers.

Knights of St. James in Galicia.
THIS Order of Knighthood (called by the Spaniards Cavalieri di san Iago) is of
great esteem amongst them; and was first erected upon this occasion: When the
Arabians had almost subdued the Country, the remainder of the Spanish people
refusing to live under the Obedience of so barbarous a Nation, retired unto the
Mountains of Asturia, where they settled a Government; and after their abode
there some few years certain Nobles or Gentlemen of great quality (to the
number of Thirteen) upon a serious consultation to regain their Country,
resolved to enter into a Fraternity, and to begin a War against the Moors and
Barbarians. The Ensign which they wore was a red Cross in form of a Sword, with
an Escallop Shell on it, in imitation of the Badge of the Pilgrims that go to
Jerusalem to the Sepulcher of St. James the Apostle. They elected one chief
Governor, who was called Great Master, who with the Thirteen other Knights had
power to choose or remove any Knight at their discretion; and to make Statutes
and Orders for the well Government of the said Society at their Day of Meeting
(which is Annually) on the Feast day of All Saints in great State, having large
Revenues to support their Grandeur; this Order being esteemed the chiefest in
Spain.

Knights of St. Savior in Aragon.
DON Alphonso, for his better enabling to force the Moors out of Aragon (about
the year of our Lord 1118.) did erect this Order, electing a certain number,
which he chose out of those Spanish and French Nobles, that assisted him in his
Wars against the Moors; which Honor engaged them to pursue the War against
them the more vigorously. The Moors being subdued, King Alphonso established
these Knights in the place of the Knights Templars in Montreal, and had a rule
of living somewhat conformable unto them (save only to marry) and were obliged
to support and defend the Holy Church, and Christian Faith against the Moors.
Their Habit was a white Mantle, and on their Breast they wore a red Cross. But
when the Moors were expelled (being the chief end for which they were
instituted) these Knights were laid aside, or at leastwise not regarded, and
their Revenues joined to the Crown.

Knights of St. Julian de Pereyro, or of Alcantara.
THese Knights take their name from the place of their Institution, viz. the
City of Alcantara in Castiglia (seated on the Tago) where they had a stately
Church, and were richly endowed: They had many Privileges and Orders observed
amongst them; their Habit was a black Garment, having on the Breast a green
Cross; and their first great Master was Ferdinando the Second, King of Leon and
Galicia, about the year of our Lord 1176.

Knights of Calatrava in Castile.
THIS ancient Order was first instituted by Don Sanchio the third, King of
Toledo, about the year of Christ 1158. and took its Name from the Castle
Calatrava, which is a Frontire both of Toledo and Castile; which place the
Moors took upon their Victory they obtained against Don Rodrigro King of Spain,
in Anno 714. but after above Four hundred years continuance they were forced
thence, and the place given to the Knights Templars by Don Alphonso Emperor of
Spain, to be maintained as a Garrison against the Incursion of the Moors; but
they not being able to maintain and defend it, withdrew their Garrison; upon
which, lest the Moors should become Masters of it again, the King by his
Charter gave the said Castle and Village to one Don Raymund, formerly a Knight
of great Fame, and then Abbot of St. Mary de Fitero, who fortified it, and
began the said Order of Knighthood, which flourished very much, and became
exceeding powerful, so that the Moors durst not make any further Attempt. The
Habit that they wore was a black Garment, with a red Cross on their Breast, and
had many great Privileges, and as great Possessions in diverse places of Spain.

Knights of Truxillo, or Trugillo.
THIS Order took its appellation from the City of Trugillo, seated in
Estremadura in Spain; but as for the time of its Institution Writers are silent
in; but certain it is, they were in being in the year of our Lord 1227. for one
Don Arias Perez Dallego, then Master of the Order, took this City from the
Moors, and there settled a Brotherhood of Knights and Priests, who lived after
the manner of a Convent, but what was their Badge or Habit, and what Orders
were observed amongst them, is also not certainly known.

Knights of our Lady, and of St George of Montesa in Valencia
THese Knights took their rise from the dissolution of the Knights Templars in
Valencia, and were instituted by James the Second, King of Aragon and Valencia,
in Anno 1317. for the better defense of his Kingdoms against the Inroads of the
Moors; but were subject to those of Calatrava before spoken of. The place
assigned them for their abode was at Montesa, where they had a College built
and dedicated to St. George by the Pope at the instance of the King. The
Statutes of the Order are the same as those of Calatrava; they vowed Conjugal
Chastity; their Habit was white, with a plain red Cross; and their first Master
was Guilielmus de Eril, a valiant Soldier.

Knights of St. Mary de Merced in Aragon.
JAMES the First, King of Aragon, although for his Conquests against the Moors
was Surnamed the Invincible; yet had he the ill fate to be a Prisoner to Simon
Earl of Montfort in France, where he suffered many troubles, and endured great
hardship, which made him thoroughly sensible of the Miseries the Christians
endured under the tyranny of the Moors. Whereupon he made a Vow to the blessed
Virgin Mary, that when he was freed from his Captivity, he would endeavor the
Redemption of the Captive Christians: And being set at liberty, he heaped up
great Sums to be employed accordingly; and by the advice of Raymond de Penafort
his Confessor, a Dominican Friar, and Pedro Nolasco a Noble Cavalier, he
founded an Order of Knights in Barcelona, called la Neuva Merced, so named by
the blessed Virgin, who in a Vision appeared at one and the same time in one
Night to the King, to Raymond, and Nolasco, giving this Order its Name, and
directing them in the whole Institution, because of the great good which the
Christian Captives should receive by this means.

This Order was founded in Anno 1218. and their Feast day for the celebrating
the same, was Annually on St. Laurence the Martyr in August. Their Habit was a
Coat and Scapular of Ordinary white Cloth, and garnished with Ribons and
Cordons, wherewith they fastened it about their Necks; and from the upper part
thereof was a Cap that covered half their Head, but the Monks wore their Coats
and Scapulars much longer than the Knights. These Knights professed Conjugal
Chastity, and Obedience to their Superiors. The first General or Master was
Pedro Nolasco, who was sent into the Kingdom of Valencia to redeem Captives;
which Journey proved so successful, that in the space of six years he ransomed
no less than Four hundred; nor cease they to send abroad their Agents to
Algier, Fess, and other places for Redemption of Christian Captives. And being
an Order thus Charitable, great sums of Money are Annually collected and put
into their Hands for that use; and few die (of any account) in Spain, but
bequeath a Legacy to this Order, insomuch that they have great Revenues.

Knights of the Rosary in Toledo^
THE Country of Toledo being grievously oppressed by the Moors, Roderick
Archbishop thereof, assembled together the Nobles and Chiefs of the City, and
told them of the great necessity to give their assistance for the defense of
the Country, and the extirpation of the Moors, which they readily embraced, and
many of the Nobles entered into this Order; which was instituted for the defense
of the Catholic Religion, to fight against the Moors, and to say continually a
Rosary of the blessed Lady. They were of the Dominican Order, and their Ensign
was the figure of our Lady of the Rosary upon a Cross flory, quarterly Argent
and Sable.

ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD IN FLANDERS.
Knights of the Golden Fleece, called Toizon d'Or.
THIS Order of Knighthood was instituted by Philip Duke of Burgundy, and Earl
of Flanders, in Anno 1429. being moved thereto with devout Zeal to undertake
the Conquest of the Holy Land: The Patron of this Order was St. Andrew: The
Sovereign, he to whom the Dukedom of Burgundy does lawfully descend. The number
of these Knights at the first Election were Four and twenty besides the
Sovereign; all of Noble Blood; which were afterward much increased by the
Emperor Charles the Fifth.

Their Habit a Cassock of crimson Velvet, and over it a Mantle of the same,
lined with white, which opens on the right side, and is turned upon the left
over the Shoulder, embroidered round about with a Bordure of Flames, Fusils,
and Fleeces; and a Hood of crimson Velvet on their Heads. The Collar is of Gold
wrought of Flames and Fusils, with the Toizon or Figure of a Golden Fleece
which Jason won at Colchos, or as some suppose, Gideon's Fleece, which
signifies Fidelity or Justice uncorrupted. And this Collar or Toizon they are
obliged upon a Penalty always to wear, not to make any alterations; and to sell
or exchange it is deemed most unlawful.

The Sovereign has in himself authority absolutely to give and bestow this
Honor, when and to whom he pleases: And whosoever enters into the said
Dignity, must first renounce all other Orders of Knighthood; nevertheless all
Emperors, Kings, and Dukes are excepted, unto whom it is dispensed that they
may wear the Ensigns of this Order, if they be the chief of their own Order.
These, with other Statutes and Ordinances, the Knights are sworn to observe and
keep. The day of their Assembly was first on St. Andrews day, which since was
changed to the Second of May, and that but once in three years, unless the
Sovereign otherwise pleases.

To this Order does belong four principal Officers; viz. a Chancellor, a
Treasurer, a Register, and a King at Arms, called Toizon d'Or.

ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD IN PORTUGAL.
Knights d' Avis.
IN the Year of our Lord Don Alphonso Henriquez, first King of Portugal, gained
from the Moors the City of Evora; and for the fortifying and securing of this
Garrison, he sent thither several brave Commanders, who took upon them the Title
of Knights of St. Mary of Evora, who not long after were called Knights d' Avis
from a Castle of that Name, seated on the Frontiers of Portugal, which the King
gave to Ferdinando de Yannes, Master of Evora, to which Castle he and his
Brethren removed from Evora. The Badge of this Order is a green Cross flory,
like those of Calatrava. They took upon them the Rule of St. Benedict; and none
were to be admitted into this Order, but such as were Gentlemen by the Fathers
and Mothers side two Descents.

Knights of the Wing of St. Michael.
DON Alphonso Henriquez, King of Portugal, being sorely oppressed by Albara the
Moor, King of Savil, for the freeing his Country, raised an Army; and before he
gave them Battle, commanded all his Soldiers to pray to their particular
Saints for happy Deliverance; and the King offered up his Prayers to St.
Michael the Archangel, being the Saint he was much devoted unto. When the
Armies were engaged, St. Michael (as the Story goes) appeared on the King's
right side, and fought against the Moors, who were routed, and lost the day.
And in Commemoration of this great Victory, at his return home (which was in
the Year of our Lord 1171. or thereabouts) he instituted this Order of
Knighthood, who for their Badge had a red Sword crossed with Flowers de lis,
and this Motto, Quis ut Deus. These Knights (before their growing out of use)
were of the Cistertian Order, followed the Rule of St. Benedict; and by their
Obligation were to secure the Borders of the Countries against the Incursions
of the Moors, to defend the Christian Religion, and to succor the Widows and
Fatherless.

Knights of St. James.
THE Portugals being still oppressed by the Moors, the King Don Denis the
Sixth, out of his great affection to relieve his people, did in the year of our
Lord 1310. institute this Order, and by the Assistance of these Knights (which
were victorious in diverse Battles) at length he quitted his Kingdom of them;
for which signal Service they had many privileges conferred upon them by the
King, which caused them much to flourish. They profess Conjugal Chastity,
Hospitality, and Obedience: Their Ensign is a red Sword, like that of St. James
in Galicia: Their Habit is white; and none are to be admitted until they have
proved their Gentility by Blood.

Knights of Christ.
THE Knights Templars being dissolved, and their Estates confiscated, Don Denis
King of Portugal, sent to Pope John the Two and twentieth, to desire that an
Order of Knights might be instituted in Castro Marin, which was a Frontier Town
of the Enemy, and very commodious for the building a Fort for the resisting the
Neighboring Moors which did much annoy his Kingdom; which request seemed so
reasonable, that the Pope (in Anno 1319.) instituted this Order, commanding
that they should observe the Cistertian Order, and enjoy the same Privileges
and Indulgences formerly granted to their Great Master and Knights; that they
should take the Oath of Fidelity; that all the possessions in the Kingdom of
Portugal formerly belonging to the Knights Templars should belong to these
Knights, who were obliged to make War against the Neighboring Moors. Their
Habit was black, with a Cross Pattee, Gules, charged with another of Argent,
which they wore on their Breasts.

ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD IN FRANCE.
Knights of Jesus Christ.
THIS Order of Knighthood was instituted in Anno 1206. by St. Dominick, chiesly
to fight against the Albigenses or Heretics, and prescribed to them a white
Habit, with a Cross flory, quarterly Sable and Argent, to be worn upon their
Breasts; and that they should elect a Master; and this Order was approved of by
Pope Innocent the Third in Anno 1215. They professed Obedience and Conjugal
Chastity. When their business was ended for which they were instituted, they
laid away their Arms, and wholly devoted themselves to a Religious Life, and
admitted into their Society Widows and Virgins.

Knights of the Passion of Jesus Christ.
THIS Order was instituted by Charles King of France, and Richard the Second,
King of England, for the Re-conquest of the Holy Land, the overthrow of the
Enemies of Christ, and the advancement of the Catholic Faith amongst the
Eastern people.

In the chief Convent of the Holy Chivalry (which was to be beautified with
stately Structures, as Palaces, a Castle, a Church; and to be richly endowed,
and in common amongst them, that they might the better follow the Exercise of
their Arms, and other Duties) all things of public Concernment were to be
heard and debated in the presence of the King by five sufficient Counsels. The
two principal Officers of the Chivalry were, first the Grand Justiciary, who
had the disposal of all chief Offices and Places, and to whom belonged the
Judgment of all criminal Affairs, and next the Grand Bailiff, who was to
administer both Civil and Criminal Justice; besides several other Officers of a
lower degree, as the Potestate, the Senator of the General Chapter, the Ten
Executors of Justice, and the Charitable Commissaries, etc. And for their
better living according to the Rules of Order, they were to vow Obedience,
Poverty, and Conjugal Chastity.

The Habits which these Knights were appointed to wear, was a civil colored
Cloth Coat, which should reach down half way their legs, which was to be girt
about them with a Girdle of Silk or Leather about two fingers broad, a red Cap,
and over the said Coat a Mantle of white Cloth or Stuff, with a red Cross of
Cloth or Serge about two fingers broad, which was on the Breast from the top to
the bottom, and so round the Waist.

The number of these Knights were to be about One thousand; and each Knight was
to have his Esquire armed at all points, with three Varlets; one to carry his
Helmet and Lance, another to carry his Mail, and the third to lead his
Sumpter; and in time of Peace two or three Horses and Servants, according as
the Ability of the Chivalry would allow. But although this Order was erected
upon so good a Design, yet no great progress was made therein, for it died
almost in its birth.

Knights of the blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel.
KIng Henry the Fourth being desirous to have a new Order of Knighthood, made
his application to Pope Paul the Fifth, who in Anno 1608. confirmed this Order,
and prescribed diverse things (according to the desire of the King) necessary to
the Institution; and further ordained Pensions to the Great Master and Knights,
out of certain Ecclesiastical Benefices in several places in France. Upon this
the Commandaries and Hospitals of St. Lazarus in France were disposed of for
the maintenance of these new erected Knights; and those Knights of St. Lazarus
that remained in the said Kingdom were joined unto these.

These Knights by their Institution are to be choice Gentlemen of France, whose
Duty is to attend the King's person upon any Expedition of War; they also are
to fight against the Enemies of the Roman Church; and they vow Obedience and
Chastity.

This Order consists of One hundred: Their Feast is celebrated Annually on the
Sixteenth of July. The Badge of their Order is a Cross of eight points, of a
tawny or violet color, with a white Bordure, sewed on the left side of their
Cloaks, and the figure of the Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel placed in the midst
within a Rundle, encircled with Rays of Gold, all wrought in curious
imbroidery. They also wear about their Necks, in a tawny Ribon, the like Cross
of Gold enamelled.

Knights of St. Michael.
THIS Order was erected by Lewis the Eleventh in Anno 1469. whereinto himself,
with others the most principal Peers of his Kingdom of France did enter. And
the Reason that did occasion the King to erect this Order, was in memory of an
Apparition of St. Michael upon the Bridge of Orleance, when that City was
besieged by the English; at which time (as Histories relate) lived a certain
Maiden called Joan, of so rare a Wit and Valor in Arms, that she was reputed
more than a mortal Creature, leading an Army her self in the Field against the
English; for which good Service, when the English had vanquished her Army, and
took her Prisoner, they in Revenge caused her to be burnt for a Witch in the
Market place of Orleance, in which place is since erected a Conduit to her
Memory.

This Order is ornified with a great Collar, whereto hangs the figure of St.
Michael. The Sovereign of this Order is the French King and his Successors. The
number of these Knights at first were Six and thirty, which of late years is
much increased, which does much eclipse its luster. The place of their general
Assembly was at the Church on Mount St. Michael, every Michaelmas day. To this
Order belongs a Treasurer, Chancellor, Register, and a Herald, named
Monsanmichaele. Their Habit, as now used, is as follows; first, Doublet,
Hose, Shoes, Scabard, with the band of his Cap and Feather all white, his
Surcoat Cloth of Silver, with the Sleeves on; over that a Mantle also of Cloth
of Silver, tied over the right Shoulder, and turned up over the left, and
bordered about with a rich embroidery of Cockles and Knots; and over all the
Collar of St. Michael.

Knights of St. Esprit, or of the Holy Ghost.
THIS Order was instituted by Henry the Third of France in Anno 1578. in honor
of Whitsunday, on which day, at an Assembly of Estates General of Poland,
together with those for the Duchy of Lithuania, he was elected King of Poland;
and afterward upon the same Day and Feast he was called and accepted of for
their King.

The number of persons contained in this Order is said to be One hundred,
besides the Sovereign, which is always to be the King: In which said number are
comprehended four Cardinals, five Prelates, the Chancellor, Provost, Master of
the Ceremonies, great Treasurer, and Scribe, who are called Commanders.

Their Grand Feast is Annually celebrated the first of January in the Church of
the Augustine Friars in Paris; but if the King cannot be there present, then it
is to be celebrated where he shall personally be, and in the greatest Church,
there being diverse Ceremonies to be observed by them in the celebration
thereof, which are set down by Sir William Segar, page 88.

Their Robe is like that of St. Michael, only of black Velvet embroidered all
about with Gold and Silver of Flower de lis, and knots of Gold, between sundry
Ciphers of Silver and flames of Gold seamed; also garnished with a Mantle of
green Cloth of Silver, wrought over with the same manner of Embroidery, and
both lined with Orange-coloured Satan: Their Hose and Doublet is white; their
Bonets black, with white Plumes: Their great Mantle they wear turned up over
the left Shoulder, and open on the right: And over all the Collar wrought of
the same embroidery-Work, on which hangs a Cross with the figure of a Dove in
the center thereof.

Note, that these five Orders, viz. that of the Garter in England, that of the
Toizon in Flanders, that of St. Michael in France, that of the Annunciation in
Savoy (yet to treat of) and this of St. Esprit, are reputed most honorable;
and in token of their excelling all other Degrees of Knighthood, are adorned
with great Collars.

Knights of the Order of the Genet.
THIS Order (by Favin) is esteemed the first in France, which was instituted
about the year of our Lord 726. by Charles Martel high Steward of France, in
memory of that famous Battle fought near Tours, where about Three hundred
eighty five thousand Sarazens and Moors, together with their General Abdiramo,
were slain; and the said Charles to reward those that valiantly behaved
themselves in the said Battle, erected this Order of Knighthood, which
consisted of Sixteen, to whom he gave Collars of Gold made of a Triple Chain,
interwoven with enameled red Roses, at the end whereof hung a Genet of Gold
enameled black and red upon a bank of Flowers fairly enameled. Aubertus Meraeus
says these Knights have other Ensigns belonging unto them; as a Ring after the
manner of the Romans, and certain Habits for the Body.

The reason why this Order was so called, was from a great many neat shaped
Horses called Genets, of which a great part of the Founders Chivalry was said
to consist: But others say it took its name from the great store of Genet Furs
taken amongst the Spoils of the Victory. But this Order is now Extinct.

Knights of the Crown Royal amongst the Frizons.
THIS Order was erected by Charles the Great, Son of King Pepin, in Anno 802.
for the rewarding and honoring those amongst the Frizons that had valiantly
behaved themselves in his Army against the ancient Saxons or Lombards, and to
encourage others to acts of Heroic Virtue.

This Order took its name from its Ensign, viz. an Imperial Crown, which these
Knights used to wear upon their Breasts. They were invested with a Military
Belt and a Box on the Ear.

Knights of our Lady of the Star.
THIS Order was instituted by King Robert in Anno 1022. in honor to the Virgin
Mary, but was of no long continuance, being discontinued by King Charles the
Seventh, for that it was grown so common by the admitting into the Order
persons of no merit. Their Habit was Mantles of white Damask, lined with light
carnation Damask, with Surcoats of the same; and on the left side of the Breast
of the said Garments was embroidered a Star of Gold; and on their Collar, which
was much like that of the Order of the Genet, did hand the figure of a Star.
The Ceremony of this Order was on the Nativity of the blessed Virgin, who was
their Patroness; and the place where it was kept, was at the House of St. Owen,
near St. Denis, in the said Kingdom of France.

Knights of the Thistle of Bourbon.
THIS Order was instituted on New-years-day 1370. by Lewis the Second, Duke of
Bourbon, for the corroborating his power and interest for the Aid of Charles
Duke of Orleans, and of his two Brothers Philip and John, against the Faction
of the House of Burgundy. The set number of these Knights were Six and twenty,
of which himself and his Successors, Dukes of Bourbon, were chief.

Their Habit was a Mantle of Skie-coloured Damask, lined with red Satin, with
broad Welts of Gold embroidered on the Collar. The Bonnet was of green Velvet,
with a Tassel of Gold and crimson Silk hanging on the Band: Their great Collar
was of Gold, wrought and enameled with green; at the bottom whereof, in an
Oval, hung the figure of their Patroness the blessed Virgin; as also the head
of a Thistle enameled green and white. And these Knights were obliged daily to
wear a Girdle or Belt of watchet Velvet embroidered with Gold, in the midst of
which was wrought the word Esperance.

Knights of the Porcupine.
THIS Order was instituted by Monsieur Lewis of France, Duke of Orleans, in
Anno 1393. for the further honoring the Baptism of his eldest Son Charles,
which he had by Valentina, Daughter to John Galeas Duke of Millan: and he made
choice of this Device of the Porcupine, with the words Cominus and Eminus for
his Epigraph; which intimated as well something of Revenge, which he bore to
his inveterate Enemy John Duke of Burgundy, as the great hopes he had of this
Child. Of this Order were Four and twenty besides the Founder: Their Habits
were Surcoats of violet Velvet, over which were Mantles of watchet Velvet lined
with carnation Satin; and their Collar was formed of Gold chains, whereto hung
the figure of a Porcupine of Gold upon a hillock of Grass and Flowers enamelled.

Knights of the Croissant of Anjou.
RENE Duke of Anjou, King of Jerusalem and Sicily, instituted this Order in the
City of Anjou in Anno 1464. in honor of God, the support of the Church, and
exaltation of Knighthood: Their Patron was St. Maurice, himself and his
Successors were Chiefs. Their Ensign, which they wore on the right side of
their Mantle, which was crimson Velvet, was a Golden Crescent, whereon was the
word L'oz enameled; and to this Crescent was fastened as many small pieces of
Gold fashioned like Columes, and enameled red, as the Knights had been present
in Battles and and Sieges.

The Order of the Ermine in Bretagne.
THIS Order was instituted in Anno 1450. by Francis the First, Duke of
Bretagne, in memory of his Grandfather John, Surnamed the Conqueror; and
consisted of Five and twenty, of which himself was the Chief. The Habit by him
appointed them was a Mantle of white Damask lined with carnation, with a
Mantlet of the same. The great Collar was of Gold, composed of Ears of Corn in
Saltier, and at the end thereof hung the Ermine, or Mus Ponticus, passing over
a Turf of Grass; at the edge of which was this Epigraph, A mavie. But this
Order expired when the Dukedom of Bretagne became annexed to the Crown of
France.

DEGREES OF KNIGHTHOOD IN ITALY.
Knights of St. Mary the Glorious.
IN the life of Pope Urban, when there was great War amongst the Italian
Princes, which was about the year of our Lord 1233. there were certain rich
Gentlemen of Modena and Bologna, who being fearful of the Troubles, and to be
exempt from the Public Charges, moved the Pope to permit them to live in
contemplation, and to erect a new Religious Order of Knighthood; which for a
sum of Money they obtained. Their Habit was a white Cassock, and a Mantle of a
russet Color; and for their Badge they wore a purple Cross Pattee on their
Breasts. They are commonly called Cavaleri de Madona; and because they had no
Monasteries, but dwelt at their own Houses with their Wives and Children at
ease and plenty, they were termed Fratres Gaudentes. They were obliged to fight
against Infidels, and to protect Widows and Orphans.

Knights of the Holy Ghost in Saxia at Rome.
THE chief Seat of these Knights is the stately Hospital of the Holy Ghost,
founded by Pope Innocent the Third, about the year of our Lord 1198. Before
their admittance they are obliged to bring Certificate of their Gentility: They
profess Obedience, Chastity, and Poverty: They live under the rule of St.
Augustine, and have a Master: Their Ensign is a white Patriarchal Cross, with
twelve points, sewed on their Breast, and on the left side of their black
Mantle. The Revenue belonging to this Hospital is 24000 Ducats daily, with
which they do works of great Charity; as nursing and educating of exposed
Children; the curing of Diseases; relieving the poor, and entertainment of
Strangers for three days.

The Constantinian Angelick Knights of St. George which was formerly in Greece.
THIS ancient Order of Knighthood is said to take its beginning from
Constantine the Great, ^or that he saw by an Angel from Heaven a Cross with
this Inscription, In hoc signo vinces; and the pattern of the said Cross
presented to his view in the Sky he caused to be made of Gold and precious
Stones, and to be carried before his Army instead of their golden Standard
formerly used: And this Cross was also to be engraven upon the Armor of his
Legionary Soldiers. And for the further adoration of the Cross, after his
Triumphal Entrance into Rome upon his Victory over Maxentius, he erected many
Crosses with Inscriptions: and in the principal part of the City he caused his
Statue to be set up, holding a Banner of the Cross with an Inscription.

Their Ensign was a Collar of Gold, to which was fastened a Cross of the same
form, and thereunto the figure of St. George.

Of this Order Constantine elected Fifty of the Noblest Persons in his Empire,
to whom he gave the Standard of the Labarum, and likewise a Collar of Gold; and
constituted several Laws to be observed by the said Fraternity, which were
confirmed by Pope Leo the First, who assigned to them the Rule of St. Basil,
Anno Dom. 456. which said Order has been since confirmed by diverse succeeding
Popes and Emperors.

The Great Masters of this Order have now their Convent at Brianno, near the
City of Venice, and live in great Grandeur, being persons of Eminency, are
subject to no Prince; have the power of coining Money, restoring of Honors,
giving Degrees with the Title of Doctors, creating of Poet Laureats,
legitimating of Bastards; and are privileged to sit at the Table with the Pope.

The Patron of this Order is St. George, and the blessed Virgin Mary their
Protectress. Their Habit is a white Garment, on the left side of which is
affixed a red Cross flory, made of Velvet; in the midst of which is the Labarum
embroidered after the form of the Letter X, with the Letters O upon the one Arm
of the Cross, and A upon the other.

Knights of St. Peter at Rome.
THIS Order was instituted in Anno 1520. by Pope Leo the Tenth, to defend the
Seacoasts, and to fight against the Turks. Their number was Four hundred; who
were assigned to wear in an Oval of Gold the Figure of St. Paul.

Knights of St. George at Rome.
THIS Order was instituted by Pope Alexander the Sixth Anno 1498. But as
Micheli says, by Pope Paul the Third, for the Security of the Confines of the
Adriatic Sea against Pirates, who for their Ensign wore a Cross of Gold,
entow'red with a Circle of the same in form of a Crown.

Knights of St. Paul at Rome.
THIS Order was instituted by Pope Paul the Third in Anno 1540. Their Ensign
was the Figure of St. Paul, which they wore hanging on a Chain of Gold.

Knights called Pios at Rome.
THIS Order was instituted by Pope Pius the Fourth in Anno 1560. which number
at first was Three hundred seventy five, but afterward increased to Five
hundred thirty and odd. Their Ensign is the Effigies of St. Ambrose, which they
wear about their Necks, hanging on a Chain of Gold.

Knights of Loretto.
THIS Order was instituted in Anno 1587. by Sixtus Quintus; whose Ensign was
the Figure of our Lady of Loretto hanging on a golden Chain.

Knights of the glorious Virgin Mary of Rome.
THIS Order took its rise from three Brethren of Spella in Italy, surnamed
Petrignanoes, in Anno 1618. and the cause of its institution was for. the
advancement of the Romish Church, and the suppressing the Turkish Rovers in the
Mediterranean Sea. Pope Paul the Fifth approved of this Order, and gave them
for their Convent the Palace of St. John de Laterane; also the City and Port of
Civita Vechia for their Arsenal of Galleys, together with the government of his
Galleys. These Knights lived under the Rule of St. Francis d' Assise; and the
Pope and his Successors are Great Masters.

The Badge, which these Knights wear on the left side of their Mantles, which
is white, is a Cross of blew Satin embroidered with Silver, and bordered with
Gold, having in the midst a round circle wherein is this Motto, In hoc signo
vincam; and within the said circle is the Letters S. M. From the round circle
issue forth twelve Rays: The ends of the Cross are in fashion of Flower de
lis; on each of which is a Star, which may signify the four Evangelists, as
the twelve Rays do the twelve Apostles.

Knights of Jesus at Rome.
THIS Order was instituted in Anno 1320. by Pope John the Two and Twentieth, at
Avignon in France, and much enlarged by Pope Paul the Fifth. Their Badge is a
plain red Cross, within a Cross Pattee, Gold, which hangs on a gold Chain. And
this Order was chiefly erected for the honoring of some of the Nobles and
Persons of Quality in his Territories.

Knights de la Calza in Venice.
THIS Order was instituted about the Year 1400. in honor of the Inauguration
of Duke Michele Stelo, and consisted of a Society of Noblemen and Gentlemen,
who entered into a Society, and elected a person of Eminence for their Chief;
and afterward the said Order was confirmed, and privileges granted unto them.

On solemn days their Habit was a crimson Senator's Vest; and their Ensign was
a Sun on a Shield, which they used as well for their Seal, as painted on their
Banners.

Knights of St. Mark in Venice.
THE Ceremony in creating these Knights is much the same as the Knights
Batchelors, being dubbed with the Sword, and their Title a bare mark of Honor
only: They are not governed by Laws or Statutes; they have no Revenue, nor are
they under any particular Obligation by Vow, as those of other Orders are. This
Honor is conferred as well by the Duke of Venice, as by the Senate, upon
Persons of eminent Quality, and on such as have merited well of this
Commonwealth, which puts the greater esteem thereon.

Their Badge of Honor, wherewith they are adorned, is a gold Chain, which
hangs over their Shoulders, to which depends a Medal; on the one side of which
is the Emblem of St. Mark, viz. a Lion with Wings, holding in his right Paw a
drawn Sword, and in his left an open Book with this Motto, Pax tibi Marce
Evangelista meus. And upon removing the Body of St. Mark from Alexandria in
Egypt (where he was buried) to this City, which was in the Year 828. This Saint
has been taken for their titular Angel and Guardian; and his Picture was
anciently painted upon their Ensigns and Banners.

Knights of St. George at Genoa.
THIS Order was instituted by Frederick the Third, Emperor of Germany, and
dedicated to the honor of St. G^orge their titular Saint and Patron. Their
Ensign is a plain Cross, Gules, which is fastened to a gold Chain, and wore
about their Necks.

Knights of the Order of the precious Blood of our Savior Jesus Christ at
Mantua.
IN Mantua it is reported that there is kept some of the Blood of our Savior,
with a piece of the Sponge in which he received the Vinegar and Gall; by which
Relics (as they say, great Miracles are wrought; And in honor of which
Blood, as also for the defense and propagation of the Christian Religion, and
for the more noble Cosummation of the Nuptial of Francisco, eldest Son to
Vicentio de Gonzaga, fourth Duke of Mantua; this Order was instituted about the
Year 1608. and consisted of twenty Knights, of which the Great Master was one,
who was the said Duke and Founder thereof.

Their Collar is composed of Ovals of Gold, some the length one way, and some
another; in one of which were these words, Domine probasti, and in the other
flames of Fire slashing about a crucible or melting Pot full of sticks of Gold;
and at the same hanged another large Oval of Gold, wherein were two Angels
standing upright, holding between them a Chalice crowned; on the Table of it
were enameled three drops of Blood, and about the Oval this Inscription, Nihil
isto triste recepto.

Knights of St. Stephen at Florence.
COSMO Duke of Florence and Sienna, having settled his Government, and living
in a peaceable E^^ate, in Anno 1561. erected this Order, calling those that
entered into the said Society Cavalieri de san Steffano. Their Statutes by him
constituted are much the same with those of the Order of Malta; only these have
the liberty to marry.

Their Ensign is a red Cross bordered about with Gold: Their chief place of
Residence is at Pisa, where they have a Church, and a place of Residence built
them by the Duke, as being near to the Haven, which receives the Galleys
wherein these Knights should serve for the checking the Inroads of the Turkish
Pirates.

The Duke himself, and his Successors, is Great Master of this Order, under
whom are diverse other Officers of Reputation. Their Habit is a long Mantle of
white Chamlet, and on the left part of the Breast a Cross of red crimson Satin,
bordered with Gold; and on Festival days they wear a Ribon about their Necks.

Knights of the Knot in Naples.
IEwis K. of Hungary being resolved to revenge the death of his Brother Andrew,
whom Joan Q. of Naples, wife of the said Andrew, had caused to be strangled,
undertook an Expedition to Italy, and much harassed her Kingdom; but after a 3
years War, in A. 1351. they came to an Agreement, and shortly after (with the
consent of Pope Clement the Sixth) the Queen and Lewis Prince of Tarentum were
crowned King and Queen of that Kingdom: And in commemoration of so happy a
Union, the Prince instituted this Order, into which were enrolled Seventy of
the noblest Lords in Naples, together with some Strangers.

Their Habit appointed them was a white Garment; and their Ensign was a Knot
intermixed with Gold. But this Order expired soon after the death of the
Founder.

Knights of the Argonauts of St. Nicholas in Naples.
THIS Order was instituted in Anno 1382. by Charles the Third, King of Naples,
for the advancement of Navigation, which was much wanting amongst the
Neopolitans; but others say it was erected for the preserving of Amity amongst
the Nobles, who were the Persons that were inve^^ed with the said Honor. Their
Ensign appointed them by the said King was a Ship to^^ed in a Storm, with this
Motto, Non credo tempori. Their Habit was a white Garment; and their great
Feast was held in the Convent of that stately Church built by St. Nicholas
Bishop of Smyrna. But by reason of the King's not settling a Revenue thereon,
upon his death it became disused.

Knights of the Ermyn in Naples.
FErdinand the First, King of Naples, having ended the War which he had against
John of Lorain Duke of Calabria; his Brother in Law Marinus Marcianus, Duke of
Sessa, and Prince of Rosiano, had raised a Confederacy against him, and
intended to kill him when they were together, by which means the Kingdom might
be transferred to the Duke of Calabria: But this Plot being discovered, and the
Duke apprehended, instead of causing him to be executed, the King elected him
one of this Order, and also admitted thereunto all the Nobles of his Kingdom.
The Collar, with which they were invested, was of Gold intermixed with mud or
dirt, to which hung an Ermyn, with this Motto, Malo mori quam foedari.

DEGREES OF KNIGHTHOOD IN SAVOY.
Knights of the Annunciation.
THIS Order was instituted in the Year 1362. by Amedeo the Sixth, Earl of
Savoy, Surnamed Il Verde, in memory of Amedeo the first Earl thereof, who
having valorously defended the Isle of Rhodes against the Turks, won those Arms
which are now born by the Dukes of Savoy, viz. Gules, a Cross Argent. The
Collar belonging to this Order is of Gold, on which are these Letters Engraven,
F. E. R. T. which signify Fortitudo ejus Rhodum tenuit; and to this Collar
hangs a Tablet, wherein is the figure of the Annunciation, which is their
daily Badge which they wear about their Shoulders.

This Order at first consisted of Fifteen, of which the Founder was the
Sovereign; which number was afterward enlarged. The Church where the
Ceremonies were observed, and the Chapters held by the Sovereign and the
Knights, was first at Pierre Chastle, which afterward removed to Montmeillar,
and thence to the Hermitage of Camaldule, seated upon the Mountain of of Turin.

Their Habit is now a purple Mantle seeded with Roses and Flames in embroidery
of Gold and Silver, bordered with the Symbols of the Order, fringed with Gold,
and lined with Cloth of Silver, and tissued blew; under which, instead of a
Surcoat, is worn a white Satin Suit embroidered with Silk, and the Breeches
like Trouses half way their Thighs.

In the said Church were entertained Fifteen Priests, who were to say Fifteen
Masses daily to the honor of the fifteen Joys of the blessed Virgin, to the
Souls health of him, his Predecessors, and all who have been, were, or should
hereafter be Knights of this Order.

Amongst the Orders by them observed, every Knight at his death was to give to
the maintenance of the Church One hundred Florins, which was to be paid to the
Prior for the time being. That at the death of any of the Knights, the rest
should assemble themselves to bury the dead in an honorable order, and every
Knight to wear a white Gown, and so make his Offering; each bringing with him
four Wax Torches weighing One hundred pound, and afterward for Nine days to
apparel themselves in mourning: And that every Knight at his burial should give
unto the Church a Collar, a Banner, his Armor and Coat of Arms; all which to
be offered at the day of Entertainment at the Church in memory of the deceased.

Knights of St. Maurice.
AMadis the eighth Duke of Savoy, with ten of his Court Knights, retired
themselves to the Desert of Ripaille, near the Lake of Geneva, where they led a
Solitary and Hermetical Life. And in the Year 1434. as well to honor St.
Maurice the titular Saint and Patron of Savoy, as of his Lance or Sword and
Ring, which as a Pledge of Dominion are delivered to them with great Solemnity
at their Inauguration: This Order was instituted, and was made subject to the
Rule of St. Augustine. The Habit assigned them was an Ash Color or gray Gown
and Chaperon, with Sleeves faced with red Chamlet; also a Vest of the same
girded about them with a golden Girdle, and on the Breast of the Mantle a white
Cross pommette of Cloth or Taffaty.

About Nine years after (the Papal See being void by the Deposition of Pope
Eugenius the Fourth) this Duke for his devout Life was elected Pope ^ which,
with much persuasions he accepted of: But he had not been in it above Nine
years, but he resigned the Chair to Pope Nicholas the Fourth, and retired again
to a Solitary Life at Ripaille, where he ended his days in Anno 1451. and was
interred in the Cathedral of Lausanna.

Knights of St. Maurice and St. Lazarus.
THese two Orders were erected by Emanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy, in Anno
1572. and at the request of the said Duke were confirmed and united into one
Order by Pope Gregory the Thirteenth, who constituted the said Duke and his
Successors Dukes of Savoy Grand Masters thereof, obliging them to set out two
Galleys for the Service of the Papal See against the Turkish Pirates.

Their Ensign is a green Cross of St. Lazarus, charged with a white Cross of
St. Maurice, which they wear either tied to a gold Chain or a Ribon. Their
Habit is a Gown of crimson Tabby, with a long Train, wide Sleeves, and edged
about with white Taffaty, and a Cordon with a Tassel of white and green fixed to
the Collar thereof.

A DEGREE OF KNIGHTHOOD IN SWITZERLAND, CALLED Knights of the Bear.
THE Emperor Frederick the Second going in Pilgrimage to the Abbey of St. Gall
in Anno 1213. gave great Privileges in acknowledgment of their Assistance in
pulling down the Emperor Otho, and establishing himself, and erected this Order
of Knighthood (which he conferred on several Noblemen) which Annually met at
the Abbey of St. Gall on the Sixteenth of October, where all new Knights were
to receive the Order from the Abbot, the Patron thereof; on which day such as
were to be admitted into the Fraternity, were girded with a Military Belt (the
Sword being first consecrated at the Altar) and adorned with the Collar of the
Order.

But this Order took the Title of the Bear in memory of St. Vrsus of the Theban
Legion, who was martyred before the Temple of the Sun at Soleurre in
Switzerland.

Unto this Order the Founder gave a Collar and a Chain of Gold, to which hung
the figure of a golden Bear mounted on an Hillock, enameled with black.

But when this Country became a Commonwealth, this Order was laid aside.

DEGREES OF KNIGHTHOOD IN GERMANY.
Knights of the Tutonick Order of Prusia.
THE first Institutor of this Order was a wealthy Gentleman of Germany, who
dwelt at Jerusalem after it was taken by the Christians, together with diverse
other men of his Country; and being exceeding rich, kept an hospitable House,
relieving all Passengers and Pilgrims that traveled to Jerusalem, insomuch
that his House became (as it were) an Hospital: At length he built near unto
his House a fair Church, which he dedicated to our Lady; and many Christians
resorting thither, as well out of Devotion, as to visit the Sick, they resolved
to erect a Fr^ternity; and having chosen a Great Master for their Governor
(which was about the Year of our Lord 1190.) they imitated the Knights Templars
in their Military Employments, and the Knights Hospitallers in their Acts of
Piety and Charity; and instituted several Orders to be observed amongst them,
being much the same with those of the Knights Hospitallers and Templars, which
were afterward confirmed by Pope Celestine the Third: But their Habit was a
white Mantle, and on the Breast thereof for their Ensign they wore a black
Cross voided with a Cross Potence.

The Holy Land being retaken from the Christians by the Sarazens, these Knights
returned into Germany, where they had not continued long, ere they went to the
Emperor Frederick the Second, and acquainted him that the people of Prusia (who
were barbarous Idolaters) used Incursions upon the Confines of Saxony, and
besought the Emperor's leave to make War upon them at their own Charges, but
with this Condition, that whatsoever they took should be theirs for the
maintenance of the said Order; which request being so reasonable was
immediately granted them, and con^irmed under his Scal: And being thus
encouraged, forthwith took up Arms, in which they were so fortunate, that in a
short time they not only subdued all that Province, but also passed the River
Vistula, and conquered other people, who became their Tributaries, and received
the Christian Faith.

These Knights thus increasing in Riches and Territories, they built diverse
Churches and Cathedral Temples, where resided Bishops, who were enjoined to
wear the Habit of the Order. And near unto the River Vistula was a great Oak,
where (in Anno 1340.) they built the first Cas^^^ and Town, which afterward
took the Name of Mareenburgh, or Burgo (...) St. Maria; where is now the chief
Church belonging to this Order, to which belongs so great Riches, that these
Knights, for Men and Money, might compare with diverse Princes: But about the
Year 1525. Albertus Brandenburgh being Great Master, he renounced this Order,
and became feudatory to Sigismond the First, King of Poland, who raised Prusia
into a Dukedom, and this Albert was made first Duke thereof. But some of the
Knights did afterward elect a new Great Master, and settled in Germany; but
the Order is now of small luster.

Knights of St. Gereom.
THIS Order received its first Institution by Frederick Barborossa the Emperor,
which consisted only of German Gentlemen. Their Habit was a white Gown, whereon
they wore a black Patriarchal Cross set on a green Hillock; and they followed
the Rule of St. Augustine.

Knights of St. George in Austria and Carinthia.
THIS Order was erected (in Anno 1470.) by Frederick the Third, Emperor of
Germany, principally for the guarding the Frontiers of Germany, Austria,
Carinthia, Stiria, and Hungary against the Incursions of the Turks, who before
much harassed these parts: But since the Institution of these Knights they have
received great checks.

Their Ensign is St. George's Cross, which they wear on their Garment, which is
white. They profess Conjugal Chastity, and Obedience to their Great Master,
whose Seat and Residence was the Castle of Mildstad in the Dukedom of
Carinthia, where there was founded a Cathedral Church of Canons under the Rule
of St. Augustine; and for their Protector they have or had the Emperors.

Knights of St. Michael the Archangel.
THIS Order was instituted (in Anno 1618.) by Charles Gonzaga Duke of Mantua
and Nevers, together with the contrivance of his Brother Adolph Count of
Altham, and John Baptist Petrignan Sfortia, chiefly to establish peace and
concord between Christian Princes and their Subjects, and to relate and redeem
Captives. The year following this Order was received at Vienna by sundry
Princes of diverse Countries; and in Anno 1624. it was confirmed by Pope Urban
the Eighth.

Their Habit was a white Mantle, over which they wore a shorter of blew Silk,
with Buskins also of blew, and a black silk Cap: About their Necks on a blew
Ribon hung a gold Cross of eight points, enameled blew; on the one side thereof
was the figure of the Virgin Mary with our Savior in her Arms; and on the
other the figure of St. Michael treading the Dragon under his Feet: And on the
left side of their white Mantles was a Cross embroidered with blew Silk and
Gold, in the midst whereof was the figure of the blessed Virgin with Christ in
her left Arm, and a Scepter in her right hand, crowned with twelve Stars,
surrounded with Rays of the Sun, and a Crescent under her feet; all which was
encircled with the Cord of St. Francis; and the four Angles of the Cross cast
forth each of them a golden Flame. But some differences arising amongst the
Founders of this Order, was the cause of its so sudden dissolution.

Knights of St. Anthony in Hainolt.
THIS Order was instituted (in Anno 1382.) by Albert of Bavaria, Earl of
Hainolt, Zealand, and Holland, upon his Expedition against the Turks and Moors.
Their Ensign was a golden Collar, after the fashion of a Hermit's Girdle, to
which hung a walking Staff, and a little golden Bell.

Knights of the Tusin Order in Bohemia or Austria.
THIS Order (as it is said) was instituted by the Archdukes of Austria, for the
engaging their Subjects to expel the Turks and Heretics out of their
Territories, which for about Two hundred years had there seated themselves;
which cost the Dukes an excessive Charge to maintain a War against them, and to
no great purpose. But these Knights having by Grant for their support what they
gained from them, gave them so great Encouragement, that in a few years the
whole Province was almost cleared of them by them.

Their Habit was a red, and their Ensign was a plain green Cross.

Knights of St. Hubert in Gulick or Juliers.
THIS Order was instituted in Anno 1473. by Gerard Duke of Gulick and Berg, or
Iuliers and Mount, in honor of St. Hubert Bishop of Liege, who died in the
year of our Lord 727. As to their Habit and Ensign, I have met with no account
thereof.

Knights of the Order of St. James in Holland.
THIS Order received its institution in the Year 1290. from Florentius Earl of
Holland and Zealand, who (in his Palace at the Hague) in honor of St. James
created Twelve of his principal Nobles Knights of this Order, whom he invested
with Collars of Gold, or Military Belts of Silver and Gilt, adorned with six
Escallops, to which hung the figure of St. James the Apostle.

DEGREES OF KNIGHTHOOD IN SWEDEN.
Knights of the Brician Order.
THIS Order was erected in the Year of our Lord 1366. by the famous Queen
Bridget, who for her holy Life was styled and enrolled a Saint; and out of her
zeal for the honor of Jesus Christ, the defense of the Christian Religion, the
securing the Confines of her Kingdom, the succouring Widows and Fatherless, and
the maintenance of Hospitality, endowed this Order with a considerable Revenue.

This Order was approved of by Pope Urban the Fifth, who gave them the Rule of
St. Augustine: And their Ensign was a blew Cross of eight points, and under it
a Tongue of Fire.

Knights of the Seraphins.
THIS Order was instituted in Anno 1334. by Magnus the Fourth, King of Sweden,
in memorial of the Siege laid to the chief City of Vpsala. The Collar assigned
to this Order was composed of Patriarchal Crosses of Gold, and of Seraphins of
Gold, enameled red; and at the end thereof hung the figure of our Savior, or
of the Virgin Mary.

Knights of Amaranta.
THIS Order was instituted about the Year 1645. by Christiana Queen of Sweden,
in honor of a Lady named Amaranta, celebrated for her Charity, Modesty, Beauty
and Courage. And by their Oath they were to defend and protect the person of
the Queen, as also the persons of their Fellow Brothers from harm: To his power
to advance Piety, Virtue, and Justice, and to discountenance Injury and Vice.

Their Ensign is a Jewel of Gold, composed of two great A A, one being
reversed; enriched on both sides with Diamonds, and set within a wreath of
Laurel Leaves, banded about with white, whereon is this Motto, Dolce nella
memoria: And this Badge they wear either hanging at a gold Chain, or a crimson
or blew Ribon, which they please.

Here is another Order of Knighthood in this Kingdom of Sweden, called of the
Sword and Military Belt, whose Collar consisted of Swords and Belts conjoined;
but by whom and when Instituted, I am ignorant of.

KNIGHTS OF THE Order of the Elephant IN DENMARK.
KING Christian the First of Denmark, upon a Religious account traveled to
Rome; and amongst other Honors, Pope Sixtus the Fourth, in memory of the
Passion of our Savior, invested him with this Order, and ordained him and his
Successors, Kings of Denmark, Chief and Supreme of the said Order; which was
conferred on the Danish Princes, as a memorial to incite them to defend the
Christian Religion against the Moors and A^ricans.

These Knights were obliged to perform Acts of Piety and Charity, with certain
Ceremonies to be observed, especially upon those days on which they wore the
Ensign of their Order, which was the figure of an Elephant, on whose side,
within a rundle, was represented a Crown of Thorns with three bloody Nails.

Instead of their golden Collar formerly won by them, they now wear about them
a blew Ribon, to which hangs an Elephant enameled white, and beautified with
five large Diamonds set in the midst.

On the day of the Coronation of the King's of Denmark this Order has been
commonly conferred upon the Nobles and most deserving Senators of his Kingdom.

DEGREES OF KNIGHTHOOD IN POLAND.
Knights of Christ, or of the Sword-bearers in Livonia.
THIS Order was instituted by Albert Bishop of Livonia, about the Year of our
Lord 1200. for the propagation of the Christian Religion in those Parts, in
imitation of the Knights Teutonicks in Prusia, to which Order they were united
about the Year 1237. and submitted themselves to their Rule and Habit; by whose
assistance they subdued the Idolatrous Livonians, and brought them to embrace
the Christian Faith. But in the Year 1561. Gothard de Ketler, then Great Master
in the Castle of Riga, surrendered to the use of Sigismond the Second, King of
Poland, Surnamed Augustus, all the Lands belonging to this Order; together with
the Seal of the Order, his Cross, the Keys of the City and Castle of Riga, the
Charters and Grants of the several Popes and Emperors which concerned the same;
the privilege of Coynage, and all other matters concerning the same; upon
which the said Great Master received back from the said King's Commissioners
the Dukedom of Curland, to be enjoyed by him and his Heirs for ever; upon which
this Order became extinguished.

Knights of the white Eagle.
THIS Order was erected by Ladislaus the Fifth, King of Poland, for the further
honoring the Marriage of his Son Casimire the Great with Anne Daughter of
Gerdimir Duke of Lithuania, in Anno 1325. and for their Ensign had a white
Eagle crowned.

KNIGHTS OF THE Order of the Dragon OVERTHROWN IN HUNGARY.
THIS Order was instituted in the Year 1418. by Sigismund the Emperor, Surnamed
the Glorious, for the Defense of the Christian Religion, and the suppressing
the Schismatics and Heretics, which he had been victorious over in many
Battles.

Their Ensign, which they daily wore, was a green Cross flory; on Festival days
they wore a scarlet Cloak, and on their Mantle of green Silk a double gold
Chain, or a green Ribon, to which hung the figure of a Dragon, dead, with
broken Wings, and enameled with variety of colors. But although this Order was
of high esteem for a time, yet it almost expired with the death of the Founders.

Knights of the Order of the Sword in Cyprus.
GVY of Lusignan soon after his possession (as King) of the Isle of Cyprus,
which he had bought of Richard the First, King of England, for One hundred
thousand Crowns of Gold, in Anno 1195. erected this Order in Commemoration of
so good and fortunate a Plantation for Fifteen thousand Persons, which he had
brought thither with him.

The Collar of this Order was composed of round Cordons of white Silk woven in
Love-knots, and interlaced with the Letters S. and R. To this Collar hung an
Oval of Gold, wherein was enameled a Sword, the Blade Silver, and the Hilt
Gold, and about the Oval was this Motto, Securitas Regni.

This Honor of Knighthood the said King (who was Great Master) conferred on
his Brother Amaury Constable of Jerusalem and Cyprus, and on Three hundred
Barons which he had created in this his new Kingdom: But when the Turks became
Masters of the Isle, this Order ceased.

KNIGHTS OF Saint Anthony IN AETHIOPIA.
ABout the Year of our Lord 370. John Emperor of AEthiopia (vulgarly called
Prester John) erected into a Religious Order of Knighthood certain Monks, who
lived an austere and solitary Life in the Desert, after the Example of St.
Anthony the Hermit, and Patron of this Empire, and bestowed upon these Knights
great Revenues and many Privileges. And thus being instituted, they received
the Rule of St. Basil, submitted to his Constitutions, wore a black Garment,
and for their Ensign a blew Cross in form of the Letter T.

Their chief Seat was in the Isle of Meroe, where the Abbots both Spiritual and
Temporal resided; but in many other parts of AEthiopia they have or had great
store of Monasteries and Convents, with about two Millions of yearly Revenue.

These Knights vow to defend the Christian Religion; to yield Obedience to
their Superiors; to observe Conjugal Chastity; not to Marry, or receive any
other holy Orders without license first obtained from the Abbot; to guard the
Confines of the Empire; and to go to War when and where they are commanded.

Into this Order the eldest Sons of Noblemen or Gentlemen cannot be admitted,
but the second Sons may: And if a man of any degree whatsoever (except a
Physician) have three Sons, he is bound to enter one of them into this Order.

Knights of the Burgundian Cross in Tunis.
MVlleasses King of Tunis, who was driven out of his Kingdom by Barbarossa,
that noted Pirate, was again (in Anno 1535.) restored thereunto by the
assistance of Charles the Fifth, Emperor of Germany, and King of Spain. And
being desirous to gain the love of all those that had served in that War, did
(as a reward) confer this honor of Knighood upon all those Commanders that
valiantly behaved themselves in his Service. The Ensign that he assigned them
was the Burgundian Cross, to which was added a Steel striking Sparks of Fire
out of Flint, with this Inscription, BARBARIA; which third Badge hung to a
Collar of Gold.

KNIGHTS OF THE West Indies.
PErsons that performed valiant Acts in War were by the Mexicans advanced to
Honor, and had sundry Privileges granted them; insomuch that their chief
Nobility sprang from the Camp. And Montezuma was so high a Favourer of
Knighthood, that he ordained diverse Orders, which he distinguished by several
Ensigns.

The principal Degree of these Knights were those that had the crown of their
Hair tied with a small red Ribon, with a rich Plume of Feathers, from which
hung so many Branches and Rolls of Feathers upon their Shoulders, as they had
performed worthy Exploits in War. And these were termed Eagle Knights, of which
Order the King was the Supreme.

The Order of the Knights of the Lions and Tigers were the most valiant in War,
and always bore with them their Badges and Armorial Ensigns, and went to the
War (as did the Eagle Knights) armed Cap-a-pe.

The Order of the Gray Knights had their Hair cut round about their Ears, were
not so much honored as the former, and when they went to Wars, were armed but
to the middle.

All these Degrees of Knights had their Apartments in the King's Palace, which
were distinguished by their several Ensigns: And amongst the honorable
Privileges that they enjoyed, they might carry Gold and Silver, wear rich
Cotton, and Shoes after their fashion, and use painted and guilt Vessels; all
which were prohibited the common people.

The Order of Knighthood of the Blood Royal in Peru were of great esteem for
their approved Valor; for before they could be admitted into the said Degree,
their Manhood was sufficiently tried; as in managing the Dart, Lance, and other
Military Exercises; also in Leaping, Wrestling, Running, Shooting, etc. in all
which if they were not very expert, they were thought unworthy to receive so
great an Honor: But being found worthy to be admitted, diverse Ceremonies were
used at their Creation; as putting on them fine Shoes and Breeches; boreing of
holes in their Ears; giving them an Ax; and adorning their Heads with Flowers,
etc. all which was forbidden the common people.

And the Peruvian Lords at their solemn Feasts at Cusco used to dedicate their
Children to Honor, adorning them with Ensigns, making holes in their Ears, and
anointing their Faces with Blood, in token that they should be true Knights to
the Ingua.

The Knights of Cinaloa, which is a Province near New Mexico, were created by
giving them a Bow, and ordering them to encounter a Lion, or some other savage
Beast, which if they slew, they were received into favor and Honor.

The Rt. Honourble. Henry Coventry Esquire his matys. principal Secretary of State
etca. son t^ the Rt. Honourble. Thomas Lord Coventry Lord Keeper of ye. Great
Seal of England:
The Honourble. John Hervey of Ickworth in Suffolk Esquire.^ Treasurer to ye.
Queens maty.:
The honble. William Ashburnham of Ashburnham in ye. County of Sussex Esquire.
Cofferer to his maty. King Charles the 2d.
William Wharton Esquire. Fourth son to y^e. Rt. honble. Phillip Lord Wharton of
Wharton in Westmoreland by Ann Daughter to (...) ^am Carr of Fernihast in
Scotland Esquire. (...) of ye. Grooms of ye. Bedchamber to King James.


SAMVEL GRANT of Crundall in Hantshire Esquire. one of the society of ye Inner
Temple London Esquire.
^ender Molesworth of Spring Garden in ye parish of St. Katherines in ye Island
of Jamaica Esquire. one of his matys. Council (...) ye Sd. Isle second son of
Hender Molesworth of Pencarrow in Cornwall Es^abque; who was lineally descended
from Sr. Walter de Molesworth of Northamptonshire who flourished in Marshall
proess in ye days of King Edw. ye first and went with. him to ye holy wars.
GEORGE LEG Esquire. Governor of ^ortsmouth master of ye Horse to his Royal
Highness James Duke of York Leiutenant of his matys. Forest of Alce holt and
Woolmer in Hantshire and one of ye Deputy Leiutenant of ye Sd. County Comander
of his matys. Shipp ye ^^yall Katherine and one of ye principal Officers of
his matys. Ordnance.
THOMAS FEJLD of Stanstead Bury in the County of Hertford Esquire now married to
Mary eldest daughter of Sr. Thomas Bide of Ware park in ye Said County Knight.


Humfrey Wi^^ley of the J^^ter T^mpl^ Esquire one of the Prothonotar^^s of his
maties. Court of Common ^lea^ at Westminster fifth son of Humfrey W^^rley Esquire of
H^msted hall in ye County of Stafford by Knightley his Wife
^OGER TW^SDEN Esquire eldest son of S^ Thomas Twisden of Bradborne in the parish
of East Malling in Kent Knight. and Ba^^^ one of ye Justices of his matys. Court of
Kings Bench
EDWARD THVRLAND Esquire only son of Sr. Edward Thurland of R^ygate in ye County of
Surrey Knight. one of the Barons of his matys. Court of Exchequer.
EDWARD ROBERTS of the City of Dublin in ye Kingdom of Ireland Esquire now Married
to Alce daughter of Edw: Chute of Surrende^ in ye Weld of Kent Esquire


(...) much Honored Daniel Fleming of (...) in Cumberland and of Rydal hall in
(...) and Esquire of which family and Surname there (...) Lords of ye. manner of
B^ckermet of (...) been Kts. and all ye. rest (that then wedd^d) (...) ye.
Daughters of Baronets^ or Knigh^^^
^^^^ill Skeleton (eldest son of Sr. John Skeleton (...) Leiutenant Governor of
Plymouth) who wa^ (...) of Honor to his maty. in his, exile and now (...) ye
^^oomes of (...) Bedchamber^ and Captain in his Foot Guards.
(...) Mariet of Whitchurch in Warwickshire, and of (...) Pr^ston in
Glocestershire Esquire married one of the (...) and h^yr^s of Sr. Richard Brawn^ of
(...) in the said County of Gloucester Knight.
Walter Chetwynd of Ingestre in ye. County of Stafford Esquire


Samuel Pepys of Brampton in Huntin^^tonshire Esquire Secretary of ye Admiralty his
maty. King Charles ye Second. Descende^ of ye ancient family of Pepys of
Cottenham in Cambridg^^
^^hn Georges of Bawton in Glocestershire Esquire a member of the Honorable house
of Commons for this present Parliament 1677 descended the ancient and Worthy
family of the Georges of Cicester in the said County.
John Butler D. D. Chaplain in ordinary to his (...) King Charles the 2d. and
Canon of Windsor, mar^^ Susanna one of the daughters of Sr. Edward Thomas of
Lamihangle in Glamorganshire Bart.
^^ptaine John Loggan of Idbury in Oxfordshir^ and of Bassetsbury in Com^
Bucks, Married Mary Sole Daughter and heir of Hugh D^rrell of Millend in the
said County of Buckingha^ Gent.


Henry Pilkington of Stanton in the County of Derby Esqr.
George Bowen Esqr. lineally descended from and present heir unto the ancient
family of ye Bowens of Courthouse in ye seigniory of Gower in Glomorganshire.
Henry Gilbert son and heir of Henry Gilbert of Lockoe in Derbyshire Esqr. by
Elizabeth daughter and Coeheyre of Sr. John Barnard of Abington in
Northamptonshire Knight.
John Colwall of the Inner Temple London Esqr.


Samuel Sanders son and heir apparent of Thomas Sanders of Ireton in
Derbyshire Esqr. which married Margaret daughter and Coeheyre of Evers Armyne of
Osgodby in ye County of Lincoln Esqr.
Richard Goodlad of the City of London Esqr.
Lewis Inkledon of Buckland in ye Parish of Branton in ye County of Devon Esqr.
Thomas Rawlins of Langarran in the County of Hereford Esqr.


Colonel Titus of Bushy in the County of Her^ford, one of the Grooms of his
matys. Bedchamber etc.
Tho^ Dereham Esquire of ye ancient family of Dereham at Dereham in Norfolk,
Servant to his Majesty King Charles the 2d.
E^an Seq^ of Boverton in the County of Gla^morgan sergeant at Law, of which
Coat and family see more in the body of the Book Section 6. Chapter ^.
^ndrew Lant of Thorp: underwood alias Thorp Bill^^ in Northamptonshire Esquire son
of Robert Lant of London Merchant by Elizabeth Daughter and heir of Rich:
Andrews of Thorp: vnderwoo^ ^^^resaid Gent. which said Andrew Lant is now
married to Iudith^ (...) daughter of Will Vannam of London Esquire


John Darnall of the Middle Temple London Esqr. now married to Mary daughter of
William Bacon of St. Clements Danes in Middlesex Esqr.
Gabriel Armiger of North Creak^ in the County of Norfolk, and of the Inner
Temple London Esq^
William Dutton Colt Esqr son of George Colt of Colt Hall in Suffolk Esqr by
Elizabeth daughter and Coheyre of John Dutton of Sherbourn in Glocestershire
Esqr. which said William is now married to Lucy sole daughter of Thomas Webb of
-- in Kent Esqr.
Randolph Egerton of Betley in Staffordshire Esqr. first Leivtenant and Major
of his Mat^s. own Troop of Guards under the command of his grace James Duke of
Monmouth first married to Penelope daughter of the Rt. honble. Rob: viscount
Kilmurrey of the Kingdom of Ireland, and now to Eiliz ^aughter and heir of
Henry Murrey Esqr one of the Gent of his Matis. Bedchamber to K. Charles ye
first by Ann now viscountess Banning.


John Wildman of Beaucot alias Becket in the County of Berks Esqr.
Nathan Knight of Ruscombe in Berkshire Esqr intermariat ^th. Margaret Eldest
daughter and Coheire of William Stroode of Ruscombe Aforesaid Esqr.
William Petyt of ye Inner T^mple London Esqr: and Silvester Petyt Gen^ Brother
to ye Sd. Wm. desc^nde^^ (by Gilbert a Younger son of Sr. John Petyt^ From ^^
Ancient family of that name who were Lords of Ardever in Cornwall. tempore H. ^.
John Lamphigh of Lamplugh in Cumberland Esqr. Collonell of a foot Regiment at
Marston Moore in Yorkshire under the Command of his High^ness Prince Rupert of
which. Family see more in the body of the Booke^ section 2d. Chapt: ^.


Thomas Burton of the City of London Esquire
Thomas Madden of ye Inner Temple London Es^ des^ended of ye. Maddens Formerly
of Muddenton in Mil^shire who are now seated at Rousky Castle in (...) County
of Fermanaugh in ye Kingdom of (...).
Godwin Swift of Gooderidge in the County of Hereford Esquire one of the society of
Gra^s Inn descend of ye Family of ye. Swists of Yorkshire
Henry Ra^^sford B. D and Rector of Stanmo^e Magna in ye County of Midd: Married
Mary one of ye. Daughters of John Montfort of Jewing in ye. County of Hartford
D. D. and Residentiary of St Paul's London


Nathaniel Stoughton of St. John's near Warwick in Warwick shire Esquire lineally
descended from the ancient family of the St^ughtons of Stoughton in Surrey; now
married to Ann daughter and heir of Will. Brough, late Deane of Gloucester
deceased, of this family see more in ye body of ye book Section 6. Chap 1.
Capt. John Clifford of Frampton upon Severne in Glocestershire; whose family
have there continued ever since the Reign of Will: the Conqueror, taking its
rise from Puntins a noble man of Normandy who came into England with ye said
Will, whose second son Osbert held ye said Frampton, and from whom, for want
of issue it descended to Walter de Clifford ye predecessor of ye said John. of
which. Coat and family see more in the body of ye book section 5. Chapter 4.
Richard Booth of the City of London Esqr. descended from the Booth's of
Witton in Warwickshire. now married to Elizabeth daughter of John Hopcroft
Citizen of London.
Thomas Stephens Esqr, only son and heir of S. Tho. Stephens of little Sodbury
in Glocestershire Knight, now liveing, whose Grandfather Tho: Stephens was
Attorney General to Prince Hen^ and after his decease to K. Charles ye first
when Prince of Wales, in which service he dyed of this family see more in the
body of the book section 3. chap. 20.


William Iollife of Carswall Castle in Stafford shire Esqr. who first married
Martha eldest daughter of Thomas Foley of Witley Court in Worcestershire Esqr,
and now the Lady Mary Hastings daughter of ye Rt. honbl^. Ferdinando late Earl
of Huntington
Henry Arthington of Arthington in the west Rideing of York shire Esq^
Thomas Modyford of Easttuar in the County of Kent Esqr^ Collonell of a
Regiment of Foot at Port Royal in the Island of Iamaica, son and heir of Sr.
Tho. Modyford Bart. late Governor of the Sd. Island.
Erasmus Smith alias Her^^ of St. Jones in ye parish of Clarkenwell in Midd
Esqr. son of Sr. Roger Smith of Edmonthorp in Leicestershire Knight. dec^ased
descended from ye ancient family of ye Smiths of Withcock in ye s^. County ^c^.
S^. Erasmus is now married to Mary daughter of Hugh Hare Baron of Cole^^^ in
Ireland (...) ye Lady Lucy Mountague daughter of Hen: Earl o^ ^^^chester Ld
(...)


Coll: Robert Werden of Chester, Comptroler to his Royal Highness James Duke
of York, and first Leiutenant, and Major of his Guards, first married to Jane
daughter of Edw: Barnham of Cock hall, in Kent Esqr, and now to Margaret
daughter and heir of Will. Towse of Bassingburn hall in Essex Esquire.
Humphrey Weld of Lulworth Castle in Dorsetshire Esqr Governor of his Ma^ys.
Isle and Castles of Portland and Sands foot, lineally desended from Edricke
Sylvaticus alias Wild^ a Saxon of great renown in the reigns of K. Herold,
and Will. ye Conqueror^whose father Alfrick was brother to Edricke of Stratton
Duke of Mercia^ which sd. Humprey is now Married to Clara daughter of ye Rt. Hon^
Th^^ Ld. Arundel of Warden Court of the Empire
Col^. Thomas Sackevile of Selscombe in Sussex, a Person of great Loyalty,
being one that served his late maty. in all his expeditions, and was one of the
Captains of his life guards, in the beginning of the late wars. He is now
married to Margaret daughter of (...) Henry Compton of Brambletye in Sussex K^.
of the Bath and Uncle to the late Earl of Northampton.
Phillip Doughty of Eashere in the County of Surrey Esquire descended from an
English Saxon family of ye. Dohags who were here Sealed before ye Conguest.


Skynner Bide Esqr. eldest son of Sr. Thomas Bide of Ware Park in the County
of Hertford Knight, now married to Anne daughter of Tho Austen of Hoxton in
Middlesex Esqr.
Captain John Huitson of Cl^asbey in the County of York, one of the Captains
of the Couldstrem Regiment of foot guards to his maty. King Charles the second,
now married to Martha daughter of Sr. William-Cooper of Rattling Court in Kent
Baronet.
Thomas Tomlins of St. Leonards Bromley in Midd.sx Esqr first married to Ann
daughter of Captain Will: Goodladd of Lee in Essex 2dly. to Eliz: daughter of
Ric: Swinglehurst of London Merchant, 3dly. to Eliz: daughter of Reynolds of
East Grenwich in Kent Esqr and now to Susanna daughter of Geo: Cranmer of
Canterbury in Kent aforesd Merchant.
Nicholas Barbon of London M.D. one of the College of Physicians of the S^.
City. now married to Margaret daughter of John Hayes of Hadley in Middsx. Esqr.


Beaumont Dixie of Bosworth in the County of Leicester Esqsr. son and heir of
Sr. Wolstan Dixie of Bosworth aforesaid Bart. now married to Mary sister and
heir to Sr. William Willoughby of Willoughby in Nottinghamshire Bart. deceased.
Richard Winwood of Ditton Park and Quainton in the County of Bucks Esqsr^ son
and heir of the Rt. honble. Sr. Ralph Winwood Knight^ Ambassador Ledger to ^he
States of the united Provinces, and principal secretary of state to King James.
Edward Peck of Samford Hall in the County of Essex sergeant (...) Law to his
maty. King Charles ye 2^. son and heir of Will Peck of Met^^^^old in the
County of Norfolk Esqsr. and interm^ried w^. Gra^e one of ye daug^^^ers ^^d
Coheyr^s of Will Green of East Barnet in Hartfordshire Esqs^.
William Peck of Samford hall in the County of Essex Esqs^. son and ^eyre of
Edw. Peck sergeant at Law and is now married to Gartrude sole daughter and heir
of Sr. Will^ Gr^en of Mitcham in the County of Surry Bart.


Justinian Pagit of Grais Inn in Com Middz Esqss. Cristos Br^ium et Recordorum
Banco Regis.
Joseph Micklethwaite of Swyne in Holderness in the County of York' Esqss
William Mountagu Esqss. (son and heir to ye honble William Mountagu Lord
chief Baron of his matys Court of Exchequer) married to Ann Sole daugh^^^ ^
heir of Ric: Evelyn of Woodcot in ye County of Surrey^ Esqss.
Thomas Robinson of ye Inner Temple London Esqss. chief Prothonotary of his
matys. Court of Common Pleas.


Francis Diue of Bromham in ye County of Bedford Esquire son and heir of Sr Lewis
Diue of ye said place Knight. now married to Theophila Daughter of the Right
Reverend Father in God John Hackett late Lord Bishop of Litchfeild and Couentry.
Owen Feltham of Greys Inn in ye. County of Middlesex Esqr now married to Mary
one of ye. Daughters and Coheires of Alexander Portree of Barnsta^le in
Devonshire Esq^
Francis Wythens of Eltham in the County of Kent Esquire, one of ye. society of the
Middle Temple London.
James Hoare of Edmonton in the County of Middlesex Esquire and one of ye society
of ye. Middle Temple London.


Thomas Foley of Kidderminster in Worcestersh: Esquire eldest son of Thomas Foley
of Witley Court in Worcestersh: Esquire now married to Elizabeth Daughter of Edward
Ash of Halsted in ye County of Kent Esquire.
Paul Foley of Stoak^ Court in the County of Hereford Esquire. second son of Tho:
Foley of Witley Court in Worcester shire now married to Mary daughter of John
Lane of ye. City of London Esquire.
Phillip Foley of Prestwood in the County of Stafford Esquire third son of Tho:
Foley of Witley Court in Worcestershire Esquire now married to Penelope daughter of
ye Rt. Honrb. Wm. Ld. Pagett Baron of Bea^desert.
Tollemach Duke of Lincolns Inn in Middlesex Esquire, Exigenter for London etct. in
ye Court of Common pleas, son and heir of Dr. Edward Duke of Honingto^. in
Suffolk, by Eliz: his wife only daughter of Robert 2d son of Sr. Lionel
Tollemach of Bently and Helmingham in ye Sd. County ^ar^: linealy descended in
a direct male line from ye. ancient family of ye Dukes of Brampton and
Shadingfeild in ye Sd. Coun^y of late Barts.


Thoma^ Walker of y^ Inner Temple London Esqss some time Comptroller of y^ S^.
society. son of Thomas Walker of Warwic^shire Esqss. who is descended from an
ancient family of that name in Leicestershire which. Sd. Tho: (ye bearer hereof)
is now married to Elizabeth daughter and Cohey^e of Hoo Games of Newton in
Brecknockshir Esqs^. of which. Sd. familys see more in ye body of the Book
S^ction chapter.
John Bennet of ^bington in the County of Cambridge Esqss.
John Lewkenor of West Deane in Sussex Esqss son and heir of Sr. John Lewkenor
Knight. of y^ Bath deceased. by Ann daughter and Coheyre of George Mine of Mine in
Shropshir Esqss decended from the ancient family of the Lewke^ors.
Thomas Coxe M.D. Physician in ordinary to his maty. King Charles the 2d.


William Thompson of the Middle Temple London Esquire no^ married to Mary Sole
daughter of John Stephens of Broadway in Worcestershire Gent.
William Atwood of Bromfeild in Essex and Grais: Inn in Middlesex Esquire son and
heir of John Atwood Esquire desceased by Elizabeth daughter and Coheyre of Patrick
Young Esquire son of Sr. Peter Young K^. Abnoner, and privy Councellor of Scotland
to King James.
Thoma^ Plott Esquire secretary to his Highness the Great Duke of Tuscany:
descended of the family of the Plotts of Sparsholt in Berkshire.
John Warner of Brakent wait in the Parish of Kirkby^ overblow in the i^est
rideing of Yorkshire Esquire lineally descended from the Warners of Warner hall in
the County of Essex.


Humphrey Borlase of Treluddro in the County of Cornwall Esqr.
Anthony Keck of The Inner Temple London Esqr.
Jacob Lucie of the City of London Esqr. now married to Mary daughter of John
Sr. John of Coldoverton in ye County of Leicester Esqr.
Richard Pierce of the City of London Esqr.


Roger James of Riegate in Surrey Esqr. of y^ ancient family of Haestract in
Holland, from whom are Descended ye several familys of ye James of Surrey^
Kent. Middlesex. and Essex. wk. Sd. Roger is n^w married to Elizabeth Daughter
of Sr. Anthony Ancher of Bishops bo^^^h in Kent Knight. deceased
Charles Beauvoir of ye City of London Esqr. Des^^nded from the Family of ye
Beauvoir of ye Island of Garnsey
John Evance of the City (...) of (...) London Esqr.
Valentine Crome of Mayden^ Early in Berk^shire Esqr. descended from ye ancient
family of Lewis in Yorkshire.


Thomas Windham of Tale in Devonshire Esquire one of the Grooms of his matys^
Bedchamber; third son of Sr. Edmond Windham of Cathanger in Somerset shire^ Knight
Marshall of his matys^ most honble. household and lineally descended of the
ancient family of the Windhams of Crown-Thorp in the County of Norfolk.
Thomas Stringer of Bexwells in the County of Essex Esq^
Daniel Collingwood of Branton in Northumberland Esr Major to the Queens Troop
of his Matis Guard, Governor of his Matis^ Castle in Holy Island, and Deputy
Leivtenant of the s^id County of Northumberland.
John Iollife of the City of London Esqr descened from the family of Iollifs
of Botham in Staffordshire


John Strachey of Sutton Court in ye County of Somerset Esqr.
Nicholas Martyn of Lincolns Inn in Middlesex Esquire. son and heir of Nicholas,
Martyn of Lincolns ^n aforesaid Esr. deceased, who was descended from the
family of ye. Martins of Admiston, alias, Athelha^^ston, in Dorsetsh: now
married to Dorcas, daughter o^ Richard Graves Esqr. deceased late Reader of
Lincolns Inn^
William Palmer of Winthorp in Lincolnsh: Esq^. Captain of a Troop in the
Regiment of Horse of his Grace the Duke of ^onmouth: Captain General of all
his ^atys. land forces.
Edward Clarke of ye Inner Temple London Esqr. son and heir of Edward Clarke
of Chipley, in ye County of Somerset Esqr. Married Mary sole daughter and heyre^
of Samuel Ieppe, of Suttons court^ in ye sd. county Esquire.


Anthony Row of St. Martins in ye Fields in ye County of Midd^ Esq^ third son
of Sr. Thomas Row of Muswell hill in ye said County. K^
Henry Marwood of (...) Bus^y in Yorkshire Esqr. Son and heir of Sr. George
H^rwood Bart. First married to Margaret fourth daughter of the R^. honorable
Con^ers Ld. Darc^^to his second Dorothy second daughter of Allen Bellingham, of
L^v^ns in Westm^rland Esqr and to his present wife (...) second Daughter of Sr.
Tho^ W^^^worth of Emprall in Yorkshire K^.
Edward Braba^on of Bally arthur in the County of Wic^loe in Ireland Esqr.
second son to the Right Honorable Edward Earl of ^eath deceased.
William L^ggan of Butlers marston in Warwickshire Esqr^ now married to (...)
daughter to (...) Newsham of Chadhurst in ye sd County Esqr


Henry Brouncker of Roumbold-week in sussex and of Brokedish in Norfolk Esqr.
James Vernon of St. Martins in the Fields i.e. Middlesex
, Esqr Secretary to the Rt Noble James Duke of Monmouth. Descended from the
ancient Family of the Vernons of Cheshire who were Barons of Shipbrooke.
Thomas Cudmore of Ke^edon in Essex Esqr. son andheire of Thomas Cudmore Esqr.
deceased^ by Dorothy eldest daughter and Coheire of Sr. Thomas Cecill Knight. son
of Tho: Earl of Exeter^ by Dorothy daughter and Coheire of John Nevill Ld.
Latimer son and heir of Io: Ld. Latimer by Dorothy daughter and Coheyre of Sr.
George Vere. Knight. which. sd. Sr. Tho: dyed Anno 1002. and ^^eth buried in Stamford
Baron in Northa^tons^ among his Ancestors.
Samuel Collins Dr. in Physic, late fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge,
only sonof, John Collins late Parson of Rotherfield in Suss^x, decended from
the ancient Family of the Collins of the Countys of Somerset^ and Devonshire he
wa^^ First married to Ann, eldest daughter of John: Bodenham Esqr. descended
from the family of the Bodenhams of Wiltshi^ and Herefordshire. And now to Dame
Katherine Countess^ Dow^g^^ of Carnwath in scotland, daughter of Io: Abington
of Dowdes well in Glocestershire Esqr. descended from the ancient Family of the
Abingtons.


OF ESQUIRES. CHAP. XXV.
ALTHOUGH by the Civil Law there be no Gentlemen of Title under Knights, but
all the rest went under the name of People; yet with us there are in this rank
which have names of Pre-eminence, whereby they are in Degree above the rest, as
Esquires and Gentlemen, all which give Ensigns of Coats of Arms, and thereby
are distinguished from the meaner People; in which respect Bartoll's Tract de
Ensigns calls them Noble: but yet of weak Nobility; for it has no further
Prerogative in it, than it makes them differ from the baser sort of People.

Of these two sorts of Gentlemen with us, the Esquire has the Priority. But it
seems if an Esquire be named Gentleman, or a Gentleman called an Esquire, it
is no Offense or Fault in Legal Proceedings.

Esquire seems by the common Name we give him in Latin, to have his Original
either for that he carried the Armor of the King, Duke, or other great
Personage; as we read not only in Scripture, as Saul and Jonathan had their
Armour-bearers; but in Poets and other profane Stories, we find that Troclus
was Achilles's Armor-bearer, and Clytus Alexander's the Great; whereupon some
write, that he whom we call Armiger in Latin is a Footman, that with a Spear,
Shield, or Headpiece follows an armed Knight in Battle; or rather, as some
other suppose, it is the Footman armed in the Field: But howsoever the words be
taken, this is sure, That those men were of good account in the old time, as
those that won themselves Credit out of War; and so their Estimation remains
in their Posterity. And as those were in times before, so are these which are
in our days, as descending for the most part from their worthy Ancestors: And
our Books of Common Law does distinguish them thus, viz.

Knighthood is a Dignity, but Esquires and Gentlemen are but Names of Worship:
And Brooks in the Abridgment of that Case, Title Nosman de Dignity, 33. says,
To be a Knight est gradus; but to be an Esquire or Gentleman est status; for
Gradus continet status in se, and non e contrario. Concerning the word
Worshipful, read in the printed Book of Titles of Honor the first Part, fol.
124. and sequentia.

In times past every Knight had two of these waiting upon him, who carried his
Murrion and Shield; and as inseparable Companions, they stuck close to him;
because of the said Knight their Lord, they held certain Lands in Escuage, like
as the Knight himself did of the King by Knights Service.

The beginning of giving Arms in Europe amongst Christians is supposed from the
Holy Wars; for the Turks paint them not: And so with us about Henry the Third's
time they became here more firmly established: And when the Prince enobled any,
he usually gave them the particular of his bearing in Blazon. John Seldom in
his Preface, fol. 5. where you may also see an Example in King Richard the
Second.

But now there are five distinct sorts of Esquires observed; and those that
have been already spoken of are now in no request. Of these sorts the principal
at this day are the eldest Sons of Viscounts and Lord; next are all Noblemens
younger Sons; then are accounted those that are select Esquires for the King's
Body; the next are Knights eldest Sons successively; in a fourth rank are
reckoned those unto whom the King himself together with the Title gives Arms,
or creates Esquires by putting about their Necks a Silver Collar of SS. and in
former times upon their Heels a pair of white silvered Spurs, whereupon at this
day in the Western part of the Kingdom they be called White-spurs, for
distinction from Knights who were wont to wear gilt Spurs; and to the first
begotten Sons only of these does this Title belong. In the fifth and last place
be those that have any superior public Office in the Kingdom; as high
Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, etc. or serve the King in any worshipful
Calling. At the Coronation of Kings and Queens Knights of the Bath are made,
men of worth and honorable blood, to the end that their Majesty's may be
accompanied in their own Honors, every of which Knights having two Gentlemen
to attend them in that Ceremony, who are ever after (by that Service) enabled
to be Esquires during their lives.

But the name of Esquire in ancient time was a name of Charge and Office, and
first crept in amongst other Titles of Dignity and Worship (so far as ever I
could observe) in the Reign of King Richard the Second; vide Sir Thomas Smith
de Republica Anglorum, fol. 26. where he says, That the Esquire is no distinct
Order of the Commonwealth.

A Sergeant of the King's Kitchen may bear the Name and Addition of Cook or
Esquire, according to the Opinion of Newton: But Ienne says, Such Officers of
his Majesty's Household would be much grieved if they should be named by their
Trade or Office. Peradventure in that case the Writ may be good, because of the
Statute, viz. 1 Hen. 5. chapter 5. For the Statute is, That he should be named of
the Town, Degree, State, Condition, or Mystery; and when he was named Cook, he
observed the Statute, for he has named him by his own name of Mystery; and yet
he may be in that case an Esquire, and a Cook.

If a man be an Esquire or Gentleman only by Office, and loses the same, he
loses also that title of Gentility.

Note, That an Esquire or Gentleman is but an Addition to satisfy the said
Statute; but names of Dignity are parcel of the name. And thereupon if a
Praecipe quod reddat be against John a Styles Yeoman, and recovery is had,
whereas the Tenant was a Gentleman, yet the Recovery is good. The same Law
where a Release is made to John a Styles Yeoman, who is a Gentleman; and where
addition is given by the party, where it needs not by the Law (being no
Dignity) it is void. So if a deed be made to a Gentleman by the name of a
Yeoman; for there is a great difference between Deeds and Writs.

If an Esquire be to be Arraigned of High Treason, he may and ought to be tried
per probos and Legales homines, that may expend Forty shillings of Freehold, or
be worth One hundred pounds in the value of Goods: And so the Statute that does
speak of men of his condition has always been put in ure, Dyer 99. b. Note a
Knight has no other privilege by Statute or Common Law.

The King may make an Esquire by Patent, viz. Creamus te Armigerum, etc. Note
the Preface to the printed Book of Titles of Honor, 5. b. and 318.

By the statute 21. Hen. 8. chap. 13. amongst other things it is enacted, that
the Brethren and Sons born in Wedlock of every Knight being Spiritual men, may
every of them purchase License or Dispensation, and receive, take and keep two
Parsonages, or Benefices with cure of souls.

The Son or Sons of any Knight, and heir apparent of an Esquire is privilege
to keep Greyhounds, setting Dogs, or Nets to take Pheasants or Partridges,
though he cannot dispend ten pounds in his own right, or in his Wives right of
Estate of Inheritance, or of the value of thirty pounds of Estate for life.

By the precedent discourse of Knights Batchelors we understand, that all
persons by the common Law are compellable to take the degree of Knighthood, or
to fine, if they are possessed of such an Estate as the King and his Council
shall judge fit to maintain that Port in their Country. And his annual Revenue
deemed fit for that Dignity, and the fines imposed upon such as refused, we
find in our Histories and Statutes to vary with the times; and certainly the
best Esquires, or at least none under the Reputation of Gentlemen were
compelled, although 'twas at the King's pleasure: And therefore 1 Edw. 2. Stat.
de Militibus, the Parliament (says Sanderson) more for ease of the Subject,
than profit of the King, limited it to such as had Twenty pounds per Annum and
better; and afterward 'twas raised to Thirty pounds, and a plentiful Revenue
in those times, when a Dowry of Three thousand pounds per Annum to a Queen, was
deemed a great impoverishment to the Crown and Kingdom:) but the East and
Western part of the World being laid open to the Merchants, money began to be
more common, and by consequence Land to its value; so that in the reign of King
Charles the First Forty pounds per Annum being the rate set for such as ought
to be made Knights, or to fine, many Farmers, Leaseholders, Merchants,
Inholders, and others were called in, whereby above 100 thousand pounds was
brought into the Exchequer: Notwithstanding which diverse persons made Friends,
and took the Degree of Knighthood, which occasioned the extinguishment of the
ancient Tax; For many Esquires by birth, wealth, and education, who bore the
chiefest Offices of Honor and Trust in the Commonwealth, disdained to stoop or
give place to those new dubbed Knights, countenanced the Complaints of the
common people against the Law it self as a grievance, and prevailed so far in
the following Parliament, to get it repealed, as you may see 17 Car. chap. 20.
Since which time the difference between the Degree of Knighthood, and Dignity
of an Esquire, consists only in Title, a double rate in the Pole Tax, and
priority of place, which (as I before noted) is often slighted; unless he be
sufficiently qualified by Birth, Parts, or other generous Accomplishments; or
are Knights of the Field, who are never abridged of their merited Honor, being
acquired according to the original Institution of that Degree amongst all
Nations.

And we see our Parliament men, our Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and the
Honorable Commanders, and Captains of Cavalry and Infantry, for the most
Esquires at their first Election. By the Statute 23 Hen. 6. cap. 15. the
Knights of the Shires shall be notable Knights, or else notable Esquires or
Gentlemen, born in the same Counties for which they are chosen. See the Statute
for the preservation of the Game 22 and 23 Car. 2. by which, and many other
Statutes, they are equally privileged with Knights and other persons of higher
Degree. To represent therefore an Esquire, as now defined, is no easy task;
but according to the ancient Rule, I take him for a Foot-Commander.

The Achievement of an Esquire differs from the Knight Batchelors only in the
Helmet, as you may here observe. I shall also give you other Examples of
Esquires, and amongst the rest the Achievement of my Honored Friend Robert
Logan (vulgarly written Login) Son and Heir to John Logan, Lord of the Manor
of Idbury in Oxfordshire, who was of the ancient House of Restalridge in
Scotland, unfortunately ruined for their Loyalty to Mary Queen of Scots: He
succeeded his Father at Idbury, was High Sheriff of the County; a man eminent
for his Virtue and Learning (amongst whose prayers this Manuscript was found)
exemplar in his life for Charity and Conversation.

THE DEFINITION OR DESCRIPTION OF THE GENTRY OR Civil Nobility OF ENGLAND.
CHAP. XXVI.
GEntleman, Generosus, seems to be made of two words, the one French (
Gentil) honestus vel honesta parente natus; the other Saxon ( Man) as if you
would say a man well born: And under this name are all comprised, that are
above Yeomen and Artificers; so that Nobles are truly called Gentlemen. By the
Course and Custom of England, Nobility is either Major or Minor. Major
contains all Titles and Degrees from Knighthood upwards. Minor all from Barons
downwards.

Gentlemen have their beginning either of Blood, as that they are born of
worshipful Parents; or that they have done something worthy in Peace or War,
whereby they deserve to bear Arms, and to be accounted Gentlemen. But in these
days he is a Gentleman, who is commonly so taken. And whosoever studieth the
Laws of this Realm, who studieth in the University, who professes Liberal
Sciences, and to be short, who can live without Manual Labor, and will bear
the port, charge, and countenance of a Gentleman, he shall be called Mr.
William Mainstone Alias Mayneston of ye. City of London Merchant, Lineally
descended from Thomas Mainston of Vrchinfield in Herefordshire Gent: Temps Edw:
ye. 3d. now Married to Penelope Daughte^ To Sr: Thomas Jones of Shrewsbury in
ye^ County of Salop Knight. one of ye. Justices of his matys. Court of K-Bench
John Bourne of More feilds in the parish of St. Leonards Shoreditch in Middz
Dr. in Phisicks^ non married to Eleanor daughter of George Shyres of Wakefield
in Yorkshir Batche^^^ in Divinity.
John Row of ye. City of Bristoll Gent. Lineally descended from: ye. ancient:
family of ye. Rows of Windley hill: in Derbyshire: Which Said John is now
married: to Lucy Sister and Coheyre of An^thony Hungerford Son and heir: of
Anthony Hu^gerford of ye. Lea in Wiltshire Esquire:
Mr. Peter Vandeput of the City of London Merchant:
John Btome of Sevenoke in Kent Gent.: Ric^ard Btome of Chobham in the Parish
of Westham in Ess^^^ Gent.:
Richard Whitworth of Adbaston in the County of Stafford Gentleman.
Mr. John Vanheck of ye. City of London Merchant descended of a Dutchfamily of
that name:
This C^at^ Armour^ ^ borne by the Stanleys of Devonshire: and is Engraven at
the Charge of Mr. Edward Stanley of Bamstable in the Sd^ County, agreat Lover
of Heraldry, and Promoter of Public Vndertakeings:
Nicholas Air of London Gent: Descended from a Ancient Family of that name
John Farrington of ye. City of London Merchant descended of ye. Farringtons
of Verdon near Faringtonheath in Lancashire. a Family of good Account and
Antiquity.
John Gregory of St. Margarets Westminster in Middlesex Gentleman son of
Leiutenant Collonell William Gregory of East Stockwith in Lincolnshire Esquire a
great sufferer for his maty. in ye. Late Unhappy wars.
Mr. Thomas Shaw of the City of London Merchant now Married to Deborah daughter
of Roger Reeva Late Citizen of London.
R^lph Marshall Gen^t. Secretary to the R^. honble William Earl of Craven,
des^n^ded: from ye. family: of ye. Marshalls of yorkshire
Fran^is Lunde of Parsons Green in ye. Parish of Fu^tham in Middlesex Gen^t.
descended from ye Family of Lunde in ye. County of Yorke^
^^chard Stratford of Hawling and nether Ge^^ (...) Glocestershire Gent,
descended from the^ Ancient family of ye. Stra^fords of Farmc^^ ^n the Said
County.
Thomas Glover of Rain Hill in Lancashire^ Gent. now Married to Rebecca
daughter of Ninian Buther Staplehurst in Kent Gent.
Master, and shall be taken for a Gentleman; for true it is with us, tanti eris
aliis, quanti tibi fueris: And if need be, a King at Arms shall grant him a
Patent for a new Coat, if that there is none that of right does appertain unto
him from his Ancestors; and if so, confirm that upon him. But some men make a
question, whether this manner of making Gentlemen is to be allowed of or no:
And it may seem that it is not amiss; For first, the Prince loses nothing by
it, as he should do if it were in France; for the Yeoman or Husbandman is no
more subject to Tail or Tax in England than the Gentleman: But on the other
side, in every payment to the King the Gentleman is more charged, which he
bears with content; and in any Show, Muster, or other particular Charge of
the Town or County where he dwells, he is at a greater Expense for the
preservation of his Honor: And for the outward show, in all respects he
deports himself like a Gentleman: and if he be called to the Wars, whatsoever
it cost him, he must appear well accoutred, have his attendance, and show a
more manly Courage and tokens of a generous Education, by which means he shall
purchase a greater Fame. For as touching the Policy and Government of the
Commonwealth, it is not those that have to do with it, which will magnify
themselves, and go above their Estates, but they that are appointed
Magistrates, etc. are persons tried and well known. See Sir Thomas Smith Repub.
Angl. Chap. of Esquires and Gentlemen. In the five and twentieth of Queen
Elizabeth the Case was, That whereas it is required by this Statute of the
first of Henry the Fifth, Chap. 5. That in every Writ, Original Process, etc.
in which any Exigit shall be awarded, that Additions should be given unto the
Defendant of their Estate and Degree, etc. And the Case was, That one was a
Yeoman by his Birth, and yet commonly called and reputed a Gentleman; and yet
it was adjudged, That a Writ might be brought against him with the addition of
Gentleman, for so much as the Intention of the Action is to have such a Name
given by which he may be known: This is sufficient to satisfy the Law, and the
Act of Parliament; for nomen dicitur, quia notitiam facit.

But if a Gentleman be sued by addition of Husbandman, he may say he is a
Gentleman, and demand Judgment of the Writ without saying (and not Husbandman;)
For a Gentleman may be a Husbandman, but he shall be sued by his Addition most
worthy: For a Gentleman of what Estate soever he be, although he go to plough
and common labor for his maintenance, yet he is a Gentleman, and shall not be
named in legal Proceedings Yeoman, Husbandman, or Labourer.

If a Gentleman be bound an Apprentice to a Merchant, or other Trade, he has
not thereby lost his Degree of Gentility.

But if a Recovery be had against a Gentleman by the name of a Yeoman, in which
case no Action is necessary, then it is no Error: So if any Deed or Obligation
be made to him by the name of Yeoman.

If a Capias go against A. B. Yeoman, and if the Sheriff take A. B. Gentleman,
an Action of false imprisonment lies against the Sheriff: But if A. B. Yeoman
be Indicted, and A. B. Gentleman be produced, being the same man intended, it
is good.

If a man be a Gentleman by Office only, and loses the same, then does he also
lose his Gentility.

By the Statute 5 Eliz. chap. 4. entitled An Act touching Orders for
Artificers, Laborers, Servants of Husbandry, and Apprentices, amongst other
things it is declared, That a Gentleman born, etc. shall not be compelled to
serve in Husbandry. If any Falcon be lost, and is found, it shall be brought to
the Sheriff, who must make Proclamation, and if the owner come not within four
Months, then if the ^inder be a simple man, the Sheriff may keep the Hawk,
making agreement with him that took him: But if he be a Gentleman, and of
Estate to have and keep a Falcon, then the Sheriff ought to deliver to him the
said Falcon, taking of him reasonable costs for the time that he had him in
Custody.

A Commission is made to take Children into Cathedral Churches, etc. one in
another places, where Children are instructed to sing for the furnishing of
the King's Chapel: These general words, by construction of Law, have a
reasonable intendment, viz. That such Children, who be brought up and taught to
sing to get their living by it, those may be taken for the King's Service in
his Chapel, and it shall be a good preferment to them; but the Sons of
Gentlemen, or any other that are taught to sing for their Ornament or
Recreation, and not merely for their livelyhoods, may not be taken against
their Wills, or the consent of their Parents and Friends. And so it was
resolved by the two Chief Justices, and all the Court of Star Chamber, Anno 43
Eliz. in the Case of one Evans, who had by color of such Letters Patents taken
the Son of one Clifton a Gentlemen of quality in Norfolk, who was taught to
sing for his Recreation; which Evans for the same offense was grievously
punished.

And to the end it may withal appear, what Degrees of Nobility and Gentry were
in the Realm before the coming of the Normans, and by what merits men might
ascend, and be promoted to the same, I will here set down the Copy of an
English or Saxon Antiquity, which you may read in Lambert's Perambulation of
Kent, fol. 364. and Englished thus:

It was sometimes in the English Laws, That the People and Laws were in
Reputation, and then were the wisest of the People worship-worthy each in his
degree, Earl and Churl, Theyne and Undertheyne. And if a Churl so thrived,
that he had fully five Hides of Land of his own, a Church and a Kitchen, a
Bellhouse and a Gate, a Seat and a several Office in the King's Hall, then was
he thenceforth the Theynes right-worthy: And if a Theyne so thrived, that he
served the King on his Journey, rode in his Household, if he then had a Theyne
which him followed, who to the King's Expectation five Hides had, and in the
King's Palace his Lord served, and thrice with his Errand had gone to the King,
he might afterward with his fore-oath his Lord's part play at any need; and of
a Theyne that he became an Earl, then was thenceforth an Earl rightworthy. And
if a Merchant-man so thrived, that he passed over the wide Sea thrice of his
own Craft, he was thenceforth the Theynes right-worthy. And if a Scholar so
thrived through Learning, that he had degree and served Christ, he was
thenceforth of Dignity and Peace so much worthy, as thereunto belonged, unless
he forfeit, so that he the use of his Degree remit.

It is observed, That the Saxons out of all those Trades of life which be
conversant in gain, admit to the Estate of Gentry such only, as increased by
honest Husbandry or plentiful Merchandise. Of the first of which Cicero
affirms, that there is nothing meeter for a freeborn man, nor no man fitter
to make braver Soldier: And of the other, that it is prize-worthy also, if at
the length, being satisfied with gain, as it has often come from the Sea to
the Haven, so it changes from the Haven into Lands and Possessions. And
therefore whereas Gervasius Tilburiensis in his Observations of the Exchequer,
accounted it an abusing of a Gentleman to occupy publicum mercimonium, common
buying and selling; it ought to be referred to the other two parts of
Merchandise, that is to a Negotiation, which is retailing and keeping of an
open shop, and to a Function, which is to exercise Mercery, or as some call it,
to play the Chapman, and not to Navigation, which (as you see) is the only
laudable part of all buying and selling.

And again, whereas by the Statute of Magna Charta, chap. 6. and Merton, chap.
7. it was a discouragement for a Ward in Chivalry, which in old time was as
much as to say a Gentleman, to be married to the Daughter of a Burgess; I think
that it ought to be restrained to such only as professed Handycrafts, or those
baser Arts of buying and selling to get their living by. But to show how much
the case is now altered for the honor of Tradesmen, it may be remembered, that
Henry the Eighth thought it no disparagement to him, when he quitted his Queen,
to take Anne the Daughter of Thomas Bullen, sometime Mayor of London, to his
Wife.

The Statute of Westminster 2. chap. 1. which was made in the Thirteenth of
King Edward the First, was procured especially at the desire of Gentlemen, for
the preservation of their Lands and Hereditaments, together with their Surnames
and Families; and therefore one calls this Statute Gentilitium municipale;
and the Lawyers call it Ius Taliatum and Taliabile.

The Children only of Gentlemen were wont to be admitted into the Inns of
Court, and thereby it came to pass, that there was scant any man found (in
former ages) within the Realm skilful and cunning in the Law, except he were a
Gentleman born, and came of a good House; for they, more than any other, have a
special care of their Nobility, and to the preservation of their Honor and
Fame: For in these Inns of Court are (or at leastwise should be) Virtues
studied, and Vices exiled; so that for the endowment of Virtue, and abandoning
of Vice, Knights and Barons, with other States and Noblemen of the Realm, place
their Children in those Inns, though they desire not to have them learned in
the Laws, nor to have them live by the practice thereof, but only upon their
Parents allowance.

You have heard how cheap Gentility is purchased by the Common Law: but if you
look more strictly unto the perfection thereof, you will find it more
honorable; for Gentlemen well descended and qualified, have always been of
such repute in England, that none of the higher Nobility, no nor the King
himself, have thought it any disparagement to make them their Companions.
Therefore I shall set down the privileges due unto them, according to the Laws
of Honor, as I find them collected out of Sir John Fern, Sir William Segar,
Mr. Carter in his Analysis of Honor, and other good Authors: It is thus found.

The Privileges of the Gentry.
1. PRo honor sustinendo; If a Churl or Peasant do detract from the honor of
Gentleman, he has a remedy in Law, action injuriarum; but if by one Gentleman
to another, the Combat was anciently allowed. 2. In equal Crimes a Gentleman
shall be punishable with more favor than the Churl, provided the Crime be not
Heresy, Treason, or excessive Contumacy. 3. The many Observances and
Ceremonial Respects, that a Gentleman is and ought to be honored with by the
Churl or Ungentle. 4. In giving Evidence, the Testimony of a Gentleman is more
authentic than a Clowns. 5. In Election of Magistrates and Officers by Vote,
the Suffrage of a Gentleman should take place of an Ignoble Person. 6. A
Gentleman should be excused from base Services, Impositions and Duties both
Real and Personal. 7. A ^^ntleman condemned to death ought not to be ^anged,
but beheaded, and his Examination taken without Torture. 8. To take down the
Coat Armor of any Gentleman, to deface his Monument, or offer Violence to any
Ensign of the de^eased Noble, is as to lay buffets on the face of him if alive,
and punishment is due accordingly. 9. A Clown may not Challenge a Gentleman to
Combat, quia conditiones ^mpares.
Many other are the Privileges due to Gentlemen, which I forbear to repeat,
referring the Reader to the Books before cited.

For the protection and defense of this Civil Dignity they have three Laws: The
first, Ius agnitionis, the right or law of descent for the kindred of the
Father's side: The second, Ius Stirpis, for the Family in general: The third,
Ius Gentilitatis, a law for the descent in Noble Families, which Tully esteemed
most excellent; by which Law a Gentleman of Blood and Coat Armor perfectly
possessing Virtue was only privileged.

To make that perfection in Blood, a Lineal Descent from Atavus, Proavus, Avus,
and Pater on the Fathers side was required; and as much on his Mothers line;
than he is not only a Gentleman of perfect Blood, but of his Ancestors too. The
neglect of which Laws has introduced other sorts of Gentleman, viz. men that
assume that Dignity, but are neither so by Blood nor Coat Armor: which style
only hurries them to an unruly pride, which indeed is but rude and false
honor, termed by Sir John Fern Apocriphate, and debarred of all privilege of
Gentility. These Gentlemen nomine non re, says he, are the Students of Law,
Grooms of his Majesty's Palace, Sons of Churls made Priests or Canons, etc. or
such as have received Degrees in Schools, or born Office in the City, by which
they are styled Gentlemen, yet have they no right to Coat Armor by reason
thereof.

As to the Student of the Law, Sir I. Fern allows him the best a^^urance of
his title of Gentleman of all these irregular Gentlemen, as he terms them,
because he is named in some Acts of Parliament; yet (he says) he is also
debarred of all honor and privilege by the Law of Arms.

And anciently none were admitted into the Inns o^ Court (as before noted) but
such as were Gentlem^^ (...) Blood, be their merits never so great: ^or were
the Church Dignities and Preferments bestowed indifferently amongst the Vulgar.
The Jews confined their Prie^^hood to a Family; but Jeroboam debased it in his
Kingdom, by preferring the basest of his people to the best of duties. The
Russians and some other Nations admit none to the study of the Law but
Gentlemen's younger Sons. The decayed Families in France are supported and
receive new life from the Court, Camp, Law and Ecclesiastical Preferments; take
the most solemn and serious, who contemn the World; if such are wanting, to
fill up their Vacancies the Ingeniouser sort of the Plebeans are admitted: by
which means their Church and State is in e^^eem and reverence, being filled
most commonly with the best Blood and Noblest by Birth amongst them; whereas
with us every Clown, that can spare but money to bring up his Son ^or any of
those Studies, bereaves the Gentry of those Benefices, and robs them of their
support; which grand abuse is the cause of the general Corruption in the State
Civil and Ecclesiastic; whereas were this preferment made peculiar to the
Gentry, they would stand more upon their Honor, and live without being a
Burden to their Relations.

The Achievement of a Gentleman has no difference with that of an Esquire,
both their Helmets being close and sideways.

OF YEOMEN. CHAP. XXVII.
THE Yeomen or Common People (for so are they called of the Saxon word Zemen,
which signifies Common) who have some Lands of their own to live upon: For a
Carn of Land, or a Plough Land, was in ancient time of the yearly value of five
Nobles, and this was the Living of a Stokeman or Yeoman: And in our Law they
are called Legal^ homines, a word familiar in Writs and Inquests. And by diverse
Statutes it has been enacted, That none shall pass in any Inquest unless they
had forty shillings Freehold in yearly Revenue, which makes (if the most
value were taken to the proportion of moneys) above Sixteen pounds of current
money at this present: And by the Statute of 27 Eliz. chapter 6. every Juror must
have Forty pounds Lands. In the end of the Statute made 23 Hen. 6. c. 15.
concerning the Election of Knights for the Parliament, it is ordered and
expressly provided, That no man shall be such Knight, which stands in the
degree of a Yeoman.

It appears in Lambert's Perambulation of Kent, 367. that this Saxon word
Telphioneman was given to the Theyne or Gentleman, because his life was valued
at One thousand two hundred shillings; and in those days the lives of all men
were rated at certain sums of Money: To the Churl or Yeoman, because the price
of his head was taxed at Two hundred shillings. Which things, if it were not
expressly set forth in sundry old Laws yet extant, might well enough be found in
the Etymology of the words themselves, the one called a Twelve hundred man, and
the other a Twyhind for a man of Two hundred. And in this Estate they pleased
themselves, insomuch that a man might (and also now may) find sundry Yeomen,
though otherwise comparable for wealth with many of the Gentile sort, that will
not yet for that change their condition, nor desire to be appareled with the
title of Gentry.

By the Common Law it may appear in 1 Ed. 2. de Militibus, and 7 Hen. 6. 15. a.
men that had Lands to the value of Twenty pounds per annum, were compellable at
the King's pleasure to take upon them the Order of Knighthood; and upon Summons
there came a Yeoman who might expend a hundred Marks per annum, and the Court
was in doubt how they might put him off; and at last he was waved, because he
came the second day.

By this sort of men the trial of Causes in the Country proceeds ordinarily;
for of them there are greater number in England than in any other place, and
they also of a more plentiful livelihood; and therefore it comes to pass, that
men of this Country are more apt and fit to discern in doubtful Cases and
Causes of great examination and trial, than are men wholly given to moil in the
ground, to whom that Rural exercise engenders rudeness of wit and mind. And
many Franklins and Yeomen there are so near adjoining, as you may make a Jury
without difficulty; for there be many of them, that are able to expend One or
two hundred pounds per Annum.

As in the ancient time the Senators of Rome were elected a Censu; and as with
us in conferring of Nobility, respect is had to their Revenues, by which their
Dignity and Nobility may be supported and maintained. So the Wisdom of this
Realm has of ancient time provided, that none shall pass upon Juries for the
trial of any matter real or personal, or upon any criminal cause, but such as
besides their Movables have Lands for estate of life at the least to a
competent value, lest for need or poverty such Jurors might easily be corrupted
or suborned.

And in all Cases and Causes the Law has conceived a better Opinion of those
that have Lands and Tenements, or otherwise are of worth in moveable Goods,
that such will commit or omit nothing, that may any way be prejudicial to their
estimation, or which may endanger their Estates, than it has of Artificers,
Retailers, Laborers, or such like; of whom Tully says, Nihil proficiuntur,
nisi ad modum mentiuntur. And by diverse Statutes certain Immunities are given
to men of Quality, which are denied to the Vulgar sort of People: Read hereof
amongst other, 1 Iac. cap. 127.

By the Statute of 2 Hen. 4. chap. 27. amongst other things it is enacted, That
no Yeoman should take or wear any Livery of any Lord upon pain of imprisonment,
and to make Fine at the King's will and pleasure.

These Yeomen were famous in our Forefathers days for Archery and Manhood; our
Infantry, which so often conquered the French, and repulsed the Scots, were
composed of them, as are our Militia at present, who through want of use and
good discipline are much degenerated from their Ancestors valor and hardiness.

As the Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy have certain privileges peculiar to
themselves; so have the Commonalty of England beyond the Subjects of other
Monarchs.

No Freeman of England ought to be imprisoned, outed of his possession,
dis^eised of his Freehold, without Order of Law and just cause showed.

To him that is imprisoned may not be denied a Habeas Corpus, if it be desired;
and if no just cause be alleged, and the same be returned upon a Habeas
Corpus, the Prisoner is to be set at liberty. By Magna Charta 9 Hen. 3. no
Soldier can be quartered in any House except Inns, and other public
Victualling-houses, in time of peace, without the Owners consent, by the
Petition of Right, 3 Car. 1. No Taxes, Loans, or Benevolences can be imposed
but by Act of Parliament, idem.

The Yeomanry are not to be pressed to serve as a Soldier in the Wars, unless
bound by Tenure, which is now abolished: Nor are the Trained Bands compelled to
march out of the Kingdom, or be transported beyond Sea, otherwise than by the
Law of the Kingdom ought to be done: Nor is any one to be compelled to bear his
own Arms, finding one sufficient man qualified according to the Act
aforementioned.

No Freeman is to be tried but by his equals, nor condemned but by the Laws of
the Land. These and many other Freedoms make them most happy, did they but know
it; and should oblige them to their Alegiance to their Prince, under whose
power and government themselves, their Rights and Privileges are preserved,
and quietly enjoyed: yet such is the inconstancy of men's nature, not to be
contented with the bliss they enjoy.

THE SECOND PART OF Honor Civil: Treating of the CUSTOMS, GOVERNMENT,
PRIVILEGES, ARMORIAL ENSIGNS of HONOR OF THE City of London. With the like
Account of the CITIES of ENGLAND: Together with the Chief Town Corporate in
each COUNTY of ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed by Samuel Roycroft, Anno Dom. MDCLXXVIII.

To the Right Honorable and Honorable the Right Worshipful and Worshipful
the Governors, Deputy Governors, Treasurers, Consulls Assistants etca. of these
several Incorporated Companys of Merchants, This Plate is humbly dedicated By
your Honors and Worships most humble Servant Richard Blome
The Atchivement of the Honorable City of LONDON, with the Arms of the Right
Honorable the Lord Mayor, the Court of Aldermen and Sheriffs, for the year of
our Lord 1678.
The Right Honorable Sr. James Edwards Knight, Lord Mayor of the honble City
of London for the year 1678


THE SECOND PART OF Honor Civil: CHAP. I.
ALL Chronologers and Antiquaries do agree, that in the Infancy of the Worlds
Creation, men had no habitation other than Woods, Groves, bushy Thickets,
Caves, and Concavities in Rocks and Sandy Grounds to shelter themselves from
the wind and weather; which places they fenced about with sticks, heaps of
stones, or the like, to preserve them from ravenous Beasts, which otherwise
would annoy them. Then by degrees (as the World increased, and Inconvenience
being the Mother of Invention) they made themselves small Hutts; from Hutts
they came to build Houses, and to cohabit in Hamlets or Villages, and from
thence sprang up Towns, Cities, Castles, and Fortified Places. Then the
Inhabitants of one City or Place waged war against those of another, and the
Victorious enlarged their Territories, and made them their Tributaries; and
thus increasing in number of Inhabitants, formed to themselves a Civil
Government, and growing in Riches, some studied one Art, and some another, some
addicted themselves to Traffic, whilst others employed their time in Martial
Affairs. And what are Cities in these our days, but the nursery, habitation,
and receptacle of worthy, ingenious, wealthy, and munificent brave men; which
made Charles the Quint much to glory that he was a Citizen of Ghent. And Henry
the Great, in answer to a Letter of the King of Spains, wherein he declared his
many Titles, styled himself only Henry King of France, and Burgess of Paris.

Since then that Cities are of such renown, and the Inhabitants thereof so
signal in Coat Armor, as having such a mixture and affinity with the Gentry,
it will be necessary that in this Treatise we take notice of our Cities and
chief Towns Corporate (being places of such concern to the Nation) as to their
Privileges, Governments, Courts of Judicature, Magistrates, their Armorial
Badges belonging as well to the said Cities and Towns, as to their several
Incorporated Companies in London: And first with London.

LONDON the Metropolis, Mistress, and bravery of all England, the King's
Chamber and Epitomy of the whole Kingdom, of so great Antiquity and Fame in
other Countries, that it wants no man's commendation As to its rise, various
are the Opinions of Writers. Ptolomy, Tacitus, and Antoninus calls her
Londinium, or Longidinium; others, Augusta, Troja nova, or Troynovant; others,
Caer-Lud, and others Dinas Belin. It is seated no less pleasantly than
commodiously on the Banks of the Thames, which in its hasty (but not rapid)
course toward the Sea saluteth its walls, and pays its duty to her, dividing
it into two (but unequal) parts, which are again joined together by a most
stately Stone Bridge, sustained by nineteen great Arches, and so furnished with
Houses, that it seems rather a Street than a Bridge. And beyond the said
Bridge, the Thames with a deep and safe Channel, gives entertainment to Ships
of very considerable Burden, which daily bring in their rich Ladings from the
known parts of the traded World. And if we consider its great Riches and
Traffic with other Nations; its Jurisdiction and Bounds, being about twelve or
fifteen miles in Circuit; its populousness and strength in Men and Ammunition
both for Sea and Land Service; its well Government, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical; the civility, ingenuity, and experience of its Inhabitants in
Letters, Arts, Sciences, Manufactures, and Martial Affairs; its stately
Buildings, both public and private; as the Palaces of his Majesty, Whitehall,
St. James's, and Somerse^-houses; the several Houses of the Nobility; its
Courts of Judicature, and Houses of Parliament; its Collegiate and other
Churches for Divine Service; its Inns of Court and Chancery; its Royal
Exchange, built by Sir Thomas Gresham; its Custom House; its Tower, which
contains a Palace, a Prison, Mint, Armory, Wardrobe, and Artillery; its
Guild Hall, where the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen meet about the concerns
of the City, and where their Courts of Judicature are kept; its Halls for the
several Companies; its Colleges and Free-Schools; its Hospitals and
Almshouses; its Theaters, Tennis-Courts, and places of Recreation; and its
great plenty of all sorts of Provision which its Shambles and Markets are
stored with; it may be deservedly styled the Mistress of the World.

Its Government.
This famous City, when under the Government of the Britains, Romans, and
Saxons, was destroyed by the Danes: but AElfred, King of the West Saxons,
having reduced the whole Land to one Monarchy, repaired and re-peopled it, and
committed the custody thereof to his Son in Law Alhered Earl of Mercia, after
whose decease it returned to King Edward, surnamed the Elder, who had it
governed under him by Port-Graves, or Port-Reves, which in diverse Records are
styled Vicecomites, Viscounties, or Sheriffs. In the first of King Richard the
first, the Citizens obtained to be governed by two Bailiffs or Sheriffs, and
afterward obtained to have a Mayor for their principal Magistrate, the first
of which was Henry Fitz-Alwyn a Draper, who was constituted, and so continued
four and twenty years.

The City within the Walls and Freedom thereof is divided into six and twenty
Wards, and the government thereof committed to the care of as many grave
Citizens of good repute and quality, which are Aldermen, each of which having
the overseeing of his respective Ward. And besides these Aldermen, there are
two Sheriffs which are annually chosen, as also a Lord Mayor, who according to
his degree and seigniority of being Alderman after Sheriff, is by the consent
of the Citizens (that is the Livery-men of each Company) yearly elected; and
these are clothed in Scarlet Gowns, and wear Gold Chains; and as Coadjutors,
every Alderman has his Deputy of the Ward, as also Common-Councel-men.

This City by their Charter has ample and large Privileges and Immunities
granted unto it, which has been confirmed and enlarged by most of our Kings
and Queens; as the making of Acts and Ordinances for the regulation and better
government of the several Incorporated Companies, and the Members thereof, so
as they are not repugnant to the Law of the Nation, and detriment of the King;
they have also the power of keeping of Courts, holding Pleas, Assizes, and Goal
Delivery; with the punishment of Offenders by Fine, Imprisonment, or Death, as
occasion requires. The Citizens are not constrained to go out of the said City
to war, without an emergent occasion to suppress a Foreign Invasion; they may
pass Toll-free throughout all England; they have a Common Seal, and Armorial
Ensigns of Honor; and for Recreation have Free Warren or Liberty to hunt about
the said City; with many other Immunities too tedious to set down.

Courts appropriate to the City.
The Hustings is a Court of great Antiquity and Concern, being to preserve the
Rights, Laws, Franchises, Customs, and Dignities of the said City, and is kept
by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen every Tuesday.

The Court of Requests or Conscience, the Judges whereof are some of the
Common-Councel-men, who are monthly chosen by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, and
sit twice every week to hear and determine all matters brought before them
(betwixt Freemen) where the just Debt or Damage does not exceed forty
shillings; for the proof of which, the Plaintiffs Oath is sufficient for them
to award the Defendant to pay the same, either by present (or weekly) payment,
as the said Judges shall think fit; which sentence cannot be avoided, for it is
to be presumed, that no man (especially of some repute, which is to be
considered of) will forswear himself for so small a sum of money.

The Lord Mayor's Court, being an ancient Court of Record, held every Tuesday
and Thursday by the Mayor and Aldermen, and is to redress and correct the
errors and defaults which happen in the Government of the City, and indeed
takes cognizance of all matters which concern the City for Receipts and
Payments of money, the granting Leases, purchasing of Lands, building and
repairing of Houses, and the like, and appointing their several Officers to
look after the same.

The two Sheriffs Courts^ one for each Compter, is on Wednesdays and Fridays
for Trials for Woodstreet Compter, and on Thursdays and Saturdays for the
Poultrey Compter: and each Court has its Judge, which is a Lawyer of good
repute, for the hearing and trial of all Actions brought before them; but if
the Action brought be above 5 l. it may be by the Defendant removed to a higher
Court. And to these Courts belong four Counselors, eight Attorneys, besides
Secondaries, Clerks, Keepers of the Compters, sixteen Sergeants and their
Yeomen, with other Sub-Officers.

The Court of Orphans, which medleth with the Estates of deceased Citizens, to
provide for the Orphans until they come to Age, and to see that an equal
division of the Estate be made, the City being their Guardians.

The Court of Common Counsel, much resembling the High Court of Parliament,
consisting of the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, which may be termed the
Higher House, and the Common Counsel the Lower House: and these make and
constitute Laws and Acts as aforesaid, which are binding to the Inhabitants.

The Court of the Chamberlain for the binding and making free Apprentices, and
for the reforming grievances betwixt the Master and the Apprentice: and this is
an Office of great Trust, and of such Power, that no Apprentice (if not sworn
by him) can set up and open Shop; and those that disobey his Summons, he has
power to Imprison or Fine. This Office is at present committed to the care of
Sir Thomas Player Knight. a Person every way fit for so great a Trust.

The Courts of the Coroner and Escheater, which does belong to the Lord Mayor.

The Court of Policies and Assurances for Merchants.

The Court of Halmote, which is kept by the Master, Wardens, and Court of
Assistance of every Company generally every month.

The Court of Wardmote, or Wardmote Inquest for the whole City, being divided
into six and twenty Wards, every Ward having such an Inquest consisting of
about twelve or sixteen of the Inhabitants thereof, who meet at every
Christmas time, and enquire after the Disorders and Abuses of Tradesmen in
their Weights, Measures, and the like; and according to their Misdemeanors
they make their Presentiments.

The Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, and Goal Delivery of Newgate for the City
of London and County of Middlesex, holden every month at Iustice-hall in the
Old Baily for the trial of Felons, the Lord Mayor being chief Judge, and has
power of Reprieving.

The Court for the conservation of the Water, and Rivers of Thames and Medway.

The Court of the Tower, held within the Verge of the City before the Steward
by Prescription, of Debt, Trespass, and other Actions.

There is no Magistrate in Europe that lives in greater state, and has more
power than the Lord Mayor of this City, which is evident by the noble
Entertainment given to Strangers, and by his great attendance both at home and
abroad: for besides the abundance of inferior Officers, he has his
Sword Bearer, Common Hunt, Common Crier, and four Water Bailiffs, which by
their places are Esquires; then the Coroner, three Sergeant-Carvers, three
Sergeants of the Chamber, a Sergeant of the Channel, four Yeoman of the
Waterside, the Under-water-Bailiff, two Yeoman of the Chamber, with diverse
others.

The public Officers belonging to this City are the two Sheriffs, the
Recorder, the Chamberlain, the Common Sergeant, the Town Clerk, and the
Remembrancer, who by their places are Esquires.

The Sheriffs (who are persons of repute and ability) are annually by the
Commons (that is the Livery-men of each Company) in formality chosen on
Midsomer-day; and the day after Michaelmass the Lord Mayor and Aldermen go with
them to the Exchequer-Chamber at Westminster, where they are presented and
sworn, and the two old Sheriffs also sworn to their Accounts.

On Simon and Iudes day the old Lord Mayor being attended with the Aldermen and
Sheriffs in their formalities, go to the Hustings Court, where the Lord Mayor
elect takes his Oath, and receives from the Chamberlain the Scepter, the Keys
of the Common Seal, and the Seal of the Majoralty, and from the Sword Bearer
the Sword, all which according to custom he delivers to them again. On the
day following in the morning, the old Lord Mayor, with the Aldermen and
Sheriffs, attend the Mayor elect from his House to Guild Hall, from whence in
their formalities they go to the Vintrey, and take Barge to Westminster, being
attended by the Livery-men of diverse of the Companies in their Barges, which
are bedecked with Banners, Pennons, and Streamers of their Arms, etc. which
with their Music makes a pleasing show. Being come to Westminster Hall, having
saluted the Judges, they go up to the Exchequer Bar, where the Lord Mayor
t^keth his Oath, and after some usual Ceremonies in the Hall and at the Abbey,
in seeing the Tombs, they return to their Barges, and are rowed back to London,
and being landed, go to the Guild Hall in great pomp, where a most stately
Dinner is prepared, as well for the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriffs, and the
several Companies, as for the Nobility, Judges, and Gentry that are invited to
the said Feast, which oft-times is graced with the Royal Presence of their
Majesty's the King and Queen, and the Duke of York, etc. The Ceremony of the
day being ended, the Lord Mayor is attended to his House, where he lives in
great grandeur during his Majoralty, looking after the Affairs of the City, to
whose fatherly care the Government thereof is committed.

These, with other Ceremonies in the electing and swearing the Lord Mayor and
Sheriffs, being largely treated of in Stow's Survey, and Howel's Londinensis, I
forbear to speak further of them here, but referr the Reader.

A List of the Names of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs that for this
present year 1678 have the government of this Honorable City, with the Names
of the six and twenty Wards to which the said Aldermen do belong, viz.
THe Right Honorable Sir James Edwards Knight. Lord Mayor, and Alderman of
Candlewick Ward, Sir Richard Chiverton of the Ward of Bridge without, Knight. Sir
Thomas Allen of Aldgate Ward, Knight and Baronet, Sir John Frederick of
Coleman-street Ward, Knight. Sir John Robinson of Tower-street Ward, Knight,
Baronet, and Lieutenant of the Tower of London, Sir John Laurence of Queen-hith
Ward, Knight. Sir Thomas Bludworth of Aldersgate Street Ward, Knight. Sir William
Turner of Castle-Baynards Ward, Knight. Sir George Waterman of Brides Ward within,
Knight. Sir Robert Hanson of Basingshaw Ward, Knight. Sir William Hooker of Cornhill
Ward, Knight. Sir Robert Vyner of Langborn ward, Knight and Baronet, Sir Joseph
Sheldon of Bishops-gate ward, Knight. Sir Thomas Davies of Farendon ward without,
Knight. Sir Francis Chaplin of the Vintrey ward, Knight. Sir Robert Clayton of Cheap
ward, Knight. Sir Patience Ward of Farendon ward within, Knight. Sir John Moore of
Walbrook ward, Knight. Sir William Prichard of Bread-street ward, Knight. Sir Henry
Tulse of Bread-street ward, Knight. Sir James Smith of Portsoken ward, Knight. Sir
Nathaniel Herne of Billingsgate ward, Knight. Sir Robert Ieffreys of Cordwainer
ward, Knight. Sir John Shorter of Cripple-gate ward, Knight. Sir Thomas Gold of Dowgate
ward, Knight. and Sir William Rawstorne of Limestreet ward, Knight. The Sheriffs for
this year are Sir Richard How and Sir John Chapman, Knights.

Having thus in brief treated of the Government of the City, with their
Immunities, Privileges, Courts of Judicature, etc. in general, in the next
place we will treat of each particular Incorporated Company, as Stems thereof.
And first with the several Companies of Merchants, next with the twelve chief
Companies out of which the Lord Mayor is to be Annually chosen, and so end with
the other Companies, as Stars of a less magnitude.

The East India Company, though not the ancientest, yet the most honorable and
eminent, was first Incorporated in the year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
and since confirmed, with diverse other Privileges added to their Charter by
succeeding Kings, having now power of making Acts and Ordinances, so as not
repugnant to the Law of the Land or detriment of the King, for the good and
well government of the said Trade and Company; likewise power to hear and
decide Causes, and to implead, fine, and punish Offenders as they please; to
raise and maintain Soldiers in their Factories, and to man out Ships of war
for their further security, for war offensive as well as defensive, as
occasion requires; also the using of a Seal, and the bearing of a Coat of
Arms, as it is depicted in the Escocheon of Arms of the several Companies of
Merchants.

This Company is managed by a joint stock, which makes them potent, eminent,
and rich, and is found several ways to be very advantageous to the Kingdom; as
in their building of Ships, in the employing and maintaining of thousands, not
only in their Ships, but in their Plantations and Factories, as at Surat,
Cambaya, Bambay, Curwar, Baticale, Calicut, Fort St. George, Pentapoli,
Musulipatan, Ougely, Gonro, Bantam in the Indies, Ormus in Persia^ with some
other places of less concern. And to their Presidents, Factors, and other
Servants they allow good Salaries, and are raised to higher preferments, with
greater Salaries, as their merits deserve. And the great Trade that they drive
to these places, exporting such vast quantities of our Manufactures and
Commodities, and importing so many sundry and rich Commodities, cannot but make
them to be very beneficial to the Nation.

This worthy Company, for the better negotiation of their Affairs, is governed
by a Governor, Deputy Governor, and Committ^e consisting of four and twenty,
who about the midst of April are Annually elected by the Adventurers of the
said Company, of which there must be eight new ones always chosen, and these
meet at their House in Leaden-hall-street London, (called the East India House)
generally twice a week, and keep Courts ^or the negotiation of their Affairs.

The government of this Company for this present year 1678. is committed to the
care of Sir Nathaniel Herne Knight. Governor, Major Robert Thomson,
Deputy Governor, and to the Right Honorable George Lord Berkeley, Sir Samuel
Barnadiston, Sir John Banks, Baronets, Sir William Thomson, Sir Stephen White,
Sir James Edwards, Sir John Moore, Sir John Lethulier, Knights, Iosia Child,
John Iolliff, John Bathurst, Col. John Clarke, James Houblon, Samuel Moyer,
Charles Thorold, Thomas Papillon, Esquires; Mr. Christopher Boon, Mr. Thomas
Canham, Mr. Joseph Herne, Mr. Nathaniel Letton, Mr. John Page, Mr. Edward
Rudge, Mr. Daniel Sheldon, and Mr. Jeremy Sambrook, Assistants.

The Levant or Turkey Company of Merchants, which by their Discovery made the
first Trade into the Seigniory of Venice, and then into the Dominions of the
Grand Seignior, and including the Trade of the East Indies, which as then was
undiscovered to us by Sea, their goods being brought upon Camels and
Ass-negroes to Aleppo and other parts of Turkey: but since the discovery of the
Indies by Sea, the Trade of this Company is something eclipsed for those
Commodities which are now brought us by the East India Company.

The benefit that arises to this Nation from this Company, besides the
employing so many Ships and Seamen, is in the Exporting and Importing of so
many rich Commodities, and in particular, Clothes both died and dressed, at the
least thirty thousand pieces yearly, Kersies, Lead, Tinn, Iron, Steel, Wire,
Pewter, Furrs, pieces of Eight, Sugar, Hides, Elephants-teeth, Brasill, red and
white Lead, Indico, Logwood, Couchaniel, Callicoes, Spices, and several Indian
Commodities. And for these they Import raw Silks of Persia, Damascus, Tripoli,
etc. also Camblets, Grograins, Grograin-yarn, Mohairs of Angor, Woolls,
Cottons, Cotton-yarn of Smyrna and Cyprus, Galls of Mosolo and Toccat, the
Coralls and Oils of Zant, Zeffalonia, Morea, etc. the Drugs of Egypt and
Arabia, also Turky-Carpets, Cordovants, Box-wood, Rhubarb, Worm-seed, Sena,
Cummin-seed, with several other rich Commodities.

This worshipful Company of Merchants was first Incorporated in the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, and since confirmed by her Successors, and have ample
Privileges and Immunities granted unto them; as making of Laws and Orders for
the well government of the said Fellowship, power of deciding Controversies
which arise in the said Company as to their Trade, giving Oaths, imposing
Fines, or imprisoning of Offenders according to their discretion, the using of
a Public Seal, and the bearing of a Coat of Arms, as is set forth in the
Escocheon of Arms aforesaid.

And for the better management of the Affairs of this Honorable Company, they
are governed by a Governor, Deputy Governor, and Court of Assistants,
consisting of 18, who in the Month of February are Annually chosen by a general
Consent, out of the Members of the said Company, and these meet and keep Courts
monthly, weekly, or as often as their occasions require, for the management of
the concerns of the said Society; as binding and making free, electing and
sending over Consuls, Vice-Consuls, Factors and Servants to Constantinople,
Smyrna, Aleppo, Cyprus, and such places where their Factories are kept.

The management of the Affairs of this Honorable Company, for this present
year 1678. is committed to the care and prudent government of the Right
Honorable George Lord Berkeley of Berkeley, whose worthy parts and great love
to Traffic makes him every way so fit for it, that the Company for these
several years past, have by an unanimous consent elected his Lordship their
Governor, John Buckworth Esquire Deputy, Mr. John Harvey Treasurer, Mr. Thomas
Vernon Husband, Sir John Lethulier Knight. Charles Thorold Esquire John Morden Esquire Mr.
Thomas Pilkington, Mr. Richard Poulter, Mr. Henry Griffith, Mr. John Morice,
Mr. Richard Onslow, Mr. Thomas Hartopp, Mr. Walter Conventrey, Mr. William
Hedges, Mr. Jasper Clotterbook, Mr. Abraham Wessell, Mr. Richard Nicol, Mr.
Bernard Saltonstall, Mr. George Carew.

The Russia or Moscovy Company of Merchant Adventurers for discovery of new
Trades, was first Incorporated in the beginning of the Reign of King Philip and
Queen Mary, upon the Discoveries of Lands, Territories, Seigniories, and Isles
by Seas lying Northwards, North-eastwards, and North-westwards from England,
and was afterward confirmed by Act of Parliament in the eighth year of the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, so that now they enjoy several Immunities and
Privileges; as to raise Arms for the subduing of Countries in the limits
aforesaid, and to enter thereon, and set up the English Standards; to make Acts
and Ordinances for the good of the said Society, so as they are not repugnant
to the Laws of the Kingdom; to punish Offenders by Fine or Imprisonment, to use
a Common Seal, to bear a Coat of Arms, etc. as is here depicted.

The Commodities that this Company Exporteth are, woollen Clothes both died and
dressed of all sorts, Kersies, Bays, Cottons, Perpetuances, Fustians, Norwich
Stuffs, Lace, Thread, Lead, Tinn, Pewter, Allom, Copper, much defective Wines
and Fruits, not fit to be spent in this Kingdom, with most sorts of English
Goods. And for these and the like they Import Potashes, Tarr, Cordage,
Cable-yarn, Tallow, Wax, Isinglass, several sorts of Hides in the Hair,
Goat Skins undrest, Cordovants, tan'd Hides, Hogs-brissles, raw Silk, Linseed,
Slod, Bever wool and wombs, several sorts of rich Furrs, Seal-skins, Rhuberb,
Castorum, Agarick, Train-oyl, Flax, Hemp, Linen, Caviare, Salmon, Stockfish,
Codfish, etc.

This worshipful Company of Merchants is governed by a Governor, four Consuls,
and Assistants consisting of four and twenty, who on the first of March are
Annually chosen out of the Members of the said Society: and for this present
Year 1677. the management thereof is committed to the care of John Iolliff Esquire
Governor, Sir Benjamin Ayloff Baronet, Samuel Moyer Esquire Charles Thorold Esquire
Mr. Charles Carill Consuls, to Mr. Edward Bell Treasurer, and to John Gould Esquire
Mr. Daniel Edwards, Mr. Benjamin Glanvile, Mr. James Young, Mr. Benjamin Colds,
Mr. George Grove, Mr. Francis Pargiter, Mr. George Carew, Mr. Heritage Lenten,
Captain Gervase Lock, Mr. Edward Grace, Mr. Thomas Thursby, Mr. Thomas Hancox,
Mr. John Ashby, Mr. Richard Adams, Mr. Edward Davenport, Mr. Thomas Hawes^ Mr.
George Cooks, Mr. Gilbert Ward, Mr. Joseph Wolf, Mr. John Porter, Mr. John
Osborne, and Mr. John Penning Assistants.

The Eastland Company, first Incorporated in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and
confirmed by King Charles the Second, and by their Charter have ample
Immunities and Privileges granted to them, and as large a scope to traffic
in, including the Trade of the Kingdoms, Dominions, Dukedoms, Countries,
Cities, and Towns of Norway, Swedeland, and Poland, with the Territories of the
said Kingdoms, as also in Lettow, Liffland, and Pomerland, from the River Odera
Eastwards, and likewise in the Isles of Findland, Eoland, and Ber^tholine
within the Sound.

The Commodities by this Company Exported are, Woollen Clothes, Perpetuances,
Kersies, Serges, Norwich Stuffs, Cottons, Lead, Tinn, Pewter, Stockins, Hats,
Gloves, together with several Southern and Eastern Commodities, as Sattins,
Silks, Spices, etc. and the Commodities by them ^mported are, Deals, Masts,
Timber, Oars, Balks, Clapboards, Bom-spars, Cant-spars, Pipe-staves, Wainscot,
and Quarters, Flax, Hemp, Linen-cloth, Fustians, Cordage, Cable-yarn, Pitch,
Tarr, Tallow, Hides, Potashes, Wheat, Rye, Iron, Lattin, Copper, Steel, Wire,
Quicksilver, rich Furrs, Buck-skins, Train-oyl, Sturgeon, Stock Fish, Mather,
with several other good Commodities.

For the management of the Affairs of this worshipful Company, they are
governed by a Governor, Deputy Governor, and Court of Assistants, consisting
of four and twenty, who are yearly elected out of the Members of the said
Society in the month of October, and keep their Courts for the management of
the concerns of the said Company as others do, having also large Immunities
granted unto them.

The present Governor for this Year 1678. is Sir Richard Chiverton Knight.
Governor, Francis Asty Esquire Deputy Governor, Randolph Knipe Treasurer, Sir
Benjamin Ayloffe, Edward Bilton Senior, Esquire John Dogget Esquire Nathaniel Tench Esquire
Peter Rich Esquire Mr. Thomas Canham, Mr. Henry Moody, Mr. Edw. Bilton Junior, Mr.
Samuel Feake, Mr. William Rivett, Mr. Hugh Vpton, Mr. William Nutt, Mr. William
Cooper, Mr. John Mathews, Mr. Oliver Westland, Mr. Edward Harwell, Mr. Abraham
Wessel, Mr. Joseph Martin, Mr. Thomas Philpe, Mr. Thomas Warren, Mr. William
Tailor, and Mr. John Sayer Assistants.

The Royal Affrican Company of England was by his Majesty's great prudence and
care, for the general good of this Nation, and of his Foreign Dominions and
Plantations, erected into a Company, and is likely to prove the most beneficial
Trade that belongs to his Crown, as well by the Commodities Exported and
Imported, as by the Negro Trade.

The Goods of English growth Exported are, Says, Perpetuances, Broad-clothes,
Welsh-plains, and other Woollen Manufactures in great abundance, besides
quantities of other English Goods and Stuffs; the large consumption whereof
does not only enable the Tenant the better to pay his Rent, and maintain his
Family, but also sets many thousands of poor people at work, in making, dying,
and dressing of these Stuffs and Clothes: And together with these Goods of
English growth, are also sent vast quantities of Foreign Goods, chiefly
imported by our East India Company, by which his Majesty's Customs, the wealth
of his People, and the Navigation of this Kingdom are much increased.

The Foreign Commodities Imported are, Gold, Elephants-teeth, Wax, Hides, and
other Commodities almost all as good as gold.

And as to the benefit of the Negro Trade, it is such, that by it all the
American Plantations are yearly furnished with great quantities of Slaves, not
elsewhere to be had; by whose labor, and the Planters industry, the King and
his People are very much enriched.

The bounds of this Companies Trade are large, viz. from Sally in South-Barbary
to Cape Bona Esperanza inclusive.

The Voyage out and home is short, usually within the compass of a year. Many
ships and seamen are constantly employed in the Companies Service; who for the
securing their Trade, have at a very great expense erected several Forts and
Factories all along the Coast of Guiny, without which the Trade cannot possibly
be preserved to this Nation; and for that very reason this Trade cannot be
managed but by a Company and a joint Stock; for no private person will undergo
the Charge of Forts and Factories abroad, besides such as Venture one Voyage,
and perhaps no more, do usually consult the cheapest way in their Exports, and
will not have that care to send so good and merchantable Commodities as a
Company who are constantly to trade thither will, who are obliged so to do, as
well for supporting the credit of their trade, as for bringing our English
Manufactures into a better reputation than those of our Neighbors, which this
Company has really effected in several Commodities formerly bought in Holland,
as Says, Muskets, Knives, etc. being now all Exported of our own make.

And of this difference in and between the Commodities send by the Company, and
those sent by private Traders, the Natives of Guiny (who are a sagacious
people) are very sensible by the ill-dealings they have met with in that kind
from some private Traders, which has been a thing very disadvantageous to our
English Manufactures and Trade: but these mi^chiefs have been removed ever
since his Majesty's settling the Trade in a Company, with prohibition to all
such interloping Traders.

This Company consists of a Governor (who is his Royal Highness James Duke
of York, the very life of the said Company under his Sacred Majesty) a
Sub-Governour, Deputy Governor, and a generality mixed of diverse Noblemen,
honorable, Persons and eminent Merchants, to the number of about two hundred,
out of which are Annually chosen by Vote at a general Court four and twenty
Assistants, of whom any six with the Governor, Sub-Governour, or
Deputy Governor, make a Court, which by their Charter dated Sept. 27. 1672. is
called a Court of Assistants, and empowered for the well ordering and governing
of the Affairs of the said Company, subject nevertheless to a general Court
when occasion requires.

The management of the Affairs of this Honorable Company for this Year 1678.
is committed to the prudent care and government of his Royal Highness,
Governor, Sir Gabriel Roberts, Sub-Governour, Benjamin Newland Esquire
Deputy Governor. Twenty four Assistants, viz. Sir John Banks Knight and
Baronet, Sir Thomas Bludworth Knight and Alderman, Mr. Benjamin Bathurst,
William Earl of Craven, Sir Peter Colleton Knight and Baronet, Mr. Roger
Chapel, Mr. Samuel Dashwood, Thomas Lord Viscount Fauconberg, Edward Hopegood
Esquire Mr. Peter Joy, Sir Andrew King, Mr. John Mead, Sir John Mathews, Mr.
Nicholas Mead, Mr. Thomas Nichols, Lawrence du Puy, Esquire Mr. Peter Proby,
William Roberts Esquire Mr. Edward Rudge, Col. John Searle, Mr. Benjamin Skutt, Sir
William Turner Knight and Alderman, Mr. Thomas Vernon, Mr. William Warren.

The Coat of Arms and Motto belonging to this Company is also depicted in the
Plate of Arms of the Companies of Merchants.

The Company of Mercers, being the primier Company in London, was Incorporated
into a Fraternal Society in the seventeenth of King Richard the Second, and
has ample Privileges and Immunities granted unto them; as holding of Courts
for the negotiation of their Affairs, etc. and have their Hall or place of
meeting, a thing accustomary to all other Societies in London. They have a
common Seal. And the Armorial Ensign of Honor given them to bear and display
on their Banners is, Gules, a demy-Virgin, her hair disheveled, crowned,
issuing out, and within an Orle of Clouds, all proper. To this Company Sir
Thomas Gresham, a worthy Member thereof, was a liberal Benefactor, giving them
and the City of London the Royal Exchange, with all the Buildings thereto
belonging, upon trust that they should perform as in his Will and Testament is
d^clared, viz. That the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen shall find four to
read Lectures of Divinity, Astronomy, Music, and Geometry within Gresham
College (a large Structure also given unto them) and to give to each Reader 50
l. per Annum; and the Company of Mercers to find three Readers in the same
place, viz. for the Civil Law, for Physic, and Rhetoric, with the yearly
stipend of 50 l. a piece; which gift has been since confirmed by Act of
Parliament; where every day (except Sundays) in the Term time the said Lectures
are read.

This worshipful Company (as indeed all others are) is governed by a Master,
Wardens, and Court of Assistants.

The Company of Grocers, Incorporated in the twentieth Year of King Edward the
third, bears for their Coat Armor, Argent, a Cheveron, Gules, between nine
Cloves, Sable.

The Company of Drapers, incorporared in the seventeenth of King Henry the
sixth, bears Azure, three Clouds radiated, proper, each adorned with a triple
Crown, Or. This Company is not a little dignified by having Sir Henry
Fitz-Alwyn Knight. noble by birth, a brother of their Company, who was the first
Lord Mayor of this City, in which Dignity he continued four and twenty years
and a half.

The Company of Fishmongers were incorporated in the eight and twentieth of
King Henry the Eighth into one brotherhood, being before two Campanies, viz.
the Stock-fishmongers, and the Salt-fishmongers. They bear for their
Coat Armor, Azure, 3 Dolphins naiant in Pale between two pair of Lucies
Saltire-ways, proper, crowned, Or, on a Chief, Gules, three couple of Keys
crossed as the Crowns.

The Company of Goldsmiths, incorporated in the sixteenth of King Richard the
Second, bears quarterly Gules and Azure, in the first and fourth a Leopard's
head, Or, in the second and third a Cup covered between two Buckles of the last.

The Company of Skinners were incorporated in the first of King ^^chard the
Second. (...) Coa^-Armou^^s ^^my^, on a Chi^f, Gules, th^ee Crowns, Or, with
Caps thereunto of the first. This Company has been highly enobled by having of
their Society six Kings, five Queens, one Prince, nine Dukes, two Earls, and
one Lord.

The Company of Merchant-Taylors, incorporated in the seventeenth of King Henry
the Seventh, bears Argent, a Tent-Royal between two Parliament Robes, Gules,
lined, Ermyn, on a Chief, Azure, a Lion passant guardant, Or. This Company has
also been dignified by having of their Fraternity eight Kings, eleven Dukes,
thirty Earls, and four and forty Lords.

The Company of Haberdashers were incorporated into a Brotherhood of St.
Katharine in the six and twentieth of King Henry the Sixth, and were confirmed
in the seventeenth of King Henry the Seventh, and named The Merchant
Haberdashers. The Coat Armor belonging to them is, Nebule of six, Argent and
Azure, on a Bend, Gules, a Lion passant guardant of England.

The Company of Salters bears for their Coat Armor, per Cheveron, Azure and
Gules, three covered Salts, Or, sprinkled, Argent.

The Company of Ironmongers, incorporated in the third of King Edward the
Fourth, bears Argent, on a Cheveron, Gules, between 3 Gads or pieces of
Steel, Azure, as many pair of Shackles or Manicles, Or.

The Company of Vintners, incorporated in the Reign of King Edward the Third,
bears Sable, a Cheveron between three Tuns, Argent.

The Company of Cloth-workers, incorporated in the (...) bears Sable, a
Cheveron, Ermyn, beween two Habicks in Chief, Argent, and a Tessel in base, Or.

The Company of Dyers, incorporated in the nine and fortieth of King Henry the
Sixth, bears Sable, a Cheveron engrailed, between three Madder-baggs, Argent,
banded or corded, Or.

The Company of Brewers, incorporated in the sixth of King Henry the Sixth,
bears Gules, on a Cheveron, Argent, between three pair of Garbs Saltire-ways,
Or, three Tuns of Barrels, Sable.

The Company of Leathersellers, incorporated in the sixth of King Richard the
Second, bears Argent, three Bucks trippant reguardant, Gules.

The Company of Barber-Chirurgeons, were incorporated in the Reign of King
Edward the Fourth. They bear for their Coat Armor, divided by St. George's
Cross, thereon a Lion of England, quarterly, the first and fourth, Sable, a
Cheveron between three Fleams, Argent; the second and third per Pale, Argent
and Vert, a Rose, Gules, crowned and seeded, Or.

The Company of Apothecaries bears Azure, Apollo in his glory, with Bow in
one hand and Arrow in the other, bestriding the Serpent Pythom, all Or.

Thus having briefly treated of the City of London the Metropolis of the
Kingdom, with some of the chief Incorporated Companies, our next business shall
be to treat of the Cities in England, with the principal places or Shire-Towns
in every County.

CHAP. II. Treats of the Cities of England, with the Shire or chief Town
Corporate in each County; and first with Berkshire.
READING, the chief Town in Berkshire, pleasantly seated near the Thames, and
on the Kennet, which with other Rivers that fall into the Thames, does
sufficiently water it. The Town is large, having three Churches for Divine
worship; its Houses are well built, and was once beautified with a fair and
rich Monastery, and a strong Castle. It is a place well inhabited, and enjoys
a good Trade, especially for its Cloth and Malt. The Town is incorpo^ated, and
governed by a Mayor and twelve Aldermen, and as many Burgesses or Assistant^;
and has a Steward and other Sub-Officers; sends its Representatives to
Parliament: And the Arms is Azure, a King's-head proper betwixt an R and an E
in Fess, Or, and four other heads in Saltire, proper.

BEDFORD, the chief Shire-town, well seated on the Banks of the River Owse,
which severeth into two parts, but joined by a fair Stone Bridge which has at
each end a Gate House to obstruct the passage if need requires. It is a large
Town, numbering five Parish Churches; is well inhabited. It is a Town Corporate,
which electeth Burgesses for Parliament; and is governed by a Mayor, two
Bailiffs, two Chamberlains, a Recorder, Town-Clerks, with other Sub-Officers.
The Arms or Armorial Ensigns of Honor belonging to this Town is, a demi Eagle
with the wings displayed over a Castle upon a Hill, all proper.

BVCKINGHAM, the County-Town, well seated on the Banks of the Owse, which
almost encloseth it, and having for convenience of pa^sage three Stone-bridges.
It is a fair, well-frequented and inhabited Town. The Town is governed by a
Bailiff, twelve principal Burgesses, a Steward, etc. and as a Town Corporate
sends its representatives to Parliament. The Arms appropriate to this Town
is, party per Pale, Gules and Sable, over all a Swan, Argent, crowned and
chained, Or.

CAMBRIDGE the chief Shire-Town, although the City of Ely is therein seated. It
is a place of great antiquity, and of no less fame and resort for its
University, which is it chiefest Ornament, being adorned with sixteen Colleges
and Halls. Its Houses are well built, is a place of good extent, numbering
fourteen Parish Churches. The chief Magistrates are a Mayor and Aldermen, with
Sub-officers; and as a Borough-Town, sends its Representatives to Parliament.
viz. two for the University, and two for the Town. The Arms appropriate to this
Town is, Gules, a Bridge with three Wall-Towers thereon, proper, in Chief a
Flower de Lis, Or, between two Roses, Argent, and in Base three Vessels in the
water, all proper.

ELY, a City of more antiquity than beauty, being but meanly built, nor well
inhabited or frequented, and would be far less, were it not the Sea of a
Bishop. It is a place that enjoys ample Immunities; for in the Isle of Ely
the Bishop has all the Rights of a County Palatine, and bears chief sway
therein, and appoints his Bailiff and other Officers.

CHESTER, or WEST-CHESTER, a City of great antiquity, and pleasant situation on
the Banks of the Dee, over which it has a fair Stone Bridge. It is of about
two miles in circuit within its Wall, on which are seven Watch-towers, and
gives entrance by four Gates and three Posterns; and of these, the Eastern-Gate
is said to be one of the stateliest in England. Here is a large Castle strongly
seated on a rocky Hill, wherein is the Shire-hall for the deciding all matters
concerning the County Palatine. This City is beautified with fair Buildings,
has ten Parish Churches besides its Minster or Cathedral, is well inhabited
and frequented by Gentry and Tradesmen. The Government is committed to a Mayor,
two Sheriffs, four and twenty Aldermen, a Recorder, and other Sub-Officers; it
enjoys ample Immunities, sends Burgesses to Parliament. The Arms
appropriate to this City is, in Pale dexter, Gules, three demi Lions guardant,
Or; and in the sinister, Azure, two Garbs, Or.

LAVNSTON, the chief Town in Cornwall, seated on a branch of the Tamer, a large
Town Corporate, governed by a Mayor and his Brethren; and amongst its
Immunities electeth Parliament men, It is a place well inhabited, enjoys a
good Trade, and the more as being the place where the Assizes are held. The
Arms born by this Town is, Gules, a Castle with a Watchtower on the top, Or,
within a Bordure, Azure, charged with an Orle of eight Tents, Argent.

CARLISLE, the chief place in Cumberland, a City of great antiquity, and well
situated for the convenience of water. It is defended by a strong Castle and
Citadel, and fenced about with a strong Wall; is graced with fair and well
built houses, and beautified with a Cathedral Church of curious workmanship; it
enjoys several Immunities, sends Burgesses to Parliament, is governed by a
Mayor, twelve Aldermen, and other Sub-Officers. And the Coat Armor belonging
to this City is, Argent, a Castle between two Roses, Or, on a Chief, Gules, a
Lion passant guardant of the second, the Base wavy, Argent and Sable.

DERBY, the chief Town in the County so called, a very large, populous, well
frequented and inhabited Borough-Town, which electeth Parliament men; is
governed by a Mayor, 9 Aldermen, 14 Brethren, 14 Common Counsel, a Recorder,
Town Clerk with other Sub-Officers. The Arms belonging to this Town is a Heart
cumbant upon a Hill in a Park paled, all proper.

EXETER, the chief City in Devonshire, commondiously seated on the River Ex,
over which it has a fair Stone Bridge. It is a sweet and well compacted City,
but of that largeness, that within its Walls and Suburbs, which are large, are
numbered fifteen Parish-Churches, besides its Cathedral or Minster, a fine
Structure. It is a place well inhabited and frequented, enjoys several
Immunities, sends Burgesses to Parliament, is governed by a Mayor, four and
twenty Aldermen, a Recorder, with Sub-Officers. The Arms belonging to this City
are, Party per pale, Gules and Sable, a Castle triple-towred, Or.

BARNSTABLE, a Maritine Town in the North part of Devonshire, situated in a
most pleasant Plain, upon the Banks of the Taw, over which it has a long and
stately Stone Bridge sustained by sixteen Arches, built by one Stamford a
Citizen of London, having been incorporated before the Conquest, at which time
it was encircled with Walls and Gates, and had forty Burgesses within the
Walls, and nine without; to which was added a Castle built by Iudhaell of
Tottenes, who received many Revenues in the said County from William the First,
by Clientuary right, which was since the Seat of the Tracies, who were Lords of
the said Castle; which Town, by many Grants and Charters, which they had from
Henry the First and diverse succeeding Kings, is endowed with many fair
Privileges, and by King John was invested with the Privileges of the City of
London. It is governed by a Mayor, two Aldermen, a Recorder, Deputy-Recorder,
all Justices of the Peace; it has a Lord High-Steward, which Office was last
born by his Grace George late Duke of Albemarle. Besides the Mayor, it has a
Council consisting of four and twenty Burgesses, out of whom the Mayor is
yearly chosen: It has Coroners and all other Officers within the said Town; it
has a Court of Record every Monday fortnight, wherein all Actions real,
personal, and mixed, may be tried without limitation; it sends two Burgesses to
Parliament; it has in it a great clothing Trade for the making of that sort of
Drapery, so well known by the name of Barnstable-Bayes. It is blessed with a
sweet and wholesome Air; has fair and well built Buildings altogether of s^one
and brick; it has an eminent Free School, which has sent forth many worthy
men into the Church and Kingdom. It has a Market on Fridays, which is very
considerable for Corn, Cattle, Sheep, Wool, Yarn, and all Provisions. The
Government for this present year 1676. is committed to the care of Mr. Richard
Hooper Mayor, Mr. Christopher Hunt, and Mr. John Palmer Aldermen, Mr. Thomas
Mathews, Mr. Richard Medford, Mr. Roger Ieffrey, Mr. William Westcomb, Mr.
Arthur Ackland, Mr. Thomas Cox, Mr. Richard Harris, Mr. Ieffery Webber, Mr.
Thomas Cole, Mr. Jews Rosier, Mr. Joseph Fraine, Mr. Thomas Harris, Mr. John
Fairechild, Mr. Henry Drake. Mr. Rawleigh Clapham, Mr. Richard Ealisbury, Mr.
Hugh Marshall, Mr. Edward Stanley, Mr. Thomas Lugg, Mr. John Stevens, Mr.
Thomas Webber, and Mr. Henry Fraine Burgesses. The Coat of Arms belonging to
the Corporation is, Gules, a Castle, Argent.

DORCHESTER, the chief Shire-Town, pleasantly seated on the From, and on the
Roman Causie, called the Foss-way; a neat compacted Town, graced with well
built Houses; has three fair Streets, and as many Parish Churches. Its a Town
Corporate, governed by two Bailiffs, eight Aldermen a Recorder, etc. and has
the election of Parliament men. The Arms born by this Town is, Gules, a Castle,
Argen^t in its front the Arms of England and France quartered.

DVRHAM, the chief place in the Bishopric, being a City of good antiquity, and
no less pleasantly than commondiously seated on the River Wear, over which it
has two large and spacious Stone-Bridges. It is a fair, neat, and well
compacted City, beautified with fair buildings, which are well inhabited; and
for Divine worship has six Parish Churches besides its Cathedral, a large
structure. It is dignified with the Sea of a Bishop, and sends Burgesses to
Parliament. The Coat Armor belonging to this City is, Azure, a Cross flory,
Or, between four Lions rampant, Argent.

COLCHESTER, the principal Town in Essex, a place of great antiquity, and in
former times of no less fame than largeness, numbering fifteen Pa^ish Churches,
many of which are now reduced to ruins, with abundance of its Houses. It is
commodiously seated on the Colne not far from the Sea, which does occasion it
to be a place of a good Trade, and to be well inhabited by Tradesmen and those
that have relation to Sea affairs. It is a Town Corporate, which sends its
Representatives to Parliament; is governed by two Bailiffs, twelve Aldermen, a
Recorder, with Sub-Officers. The Arms appropriate to this Town is, Azure, a
Cross trunked, Argent, between three Coronets, Or.

BRISTOL, a City which next to London claims the priority of all others in the
Kingdom; it is a County incorporate within it self; is governed by a Mayor,
Court of Aldermen, Sheriffs, and other Sub-Officers, and enjoys all
Immunities and Privileges in as ample a manner as the City of London, being
much one and the same. It is a City of a sweet and delightful situation, is
adorned with many fair and well built Edifices, and its Streets are so neatly
ordered with Common-shores under ground, that no filth is to be seen to annoy
the Inhabitants. It is a City of a large extent, numbering eighteen Parish
Churches besides its Cathedral. Its Port is good and commodious for shipping,
which does occasion a very great trade, and to be well inhabited and frequented
by Tradesmen and Merchants. The Arms belonging to this City is, Gules, a Castle
upon a Hill by the Sea side, and a Helm of a Ship under sail passing by, all
proper.

There are belonging to this City several incorporated Companies, but that of
most note and repute is the worthy and honorable Society of Merchant
Adventurers, who drive a considerable trade to most parts of the traded World,
being governed by a Master, Wardens, and Court of Assistants, having their Hall
for their public place of meeting for the keeping of Courts for the
negotiation of their Affairs, having ample Immunities granted unto them. And do
bear for their Coat Armor, Barry unde of eight pieces, Argent and Azure, on a
Bend, Or, a Dragon volant, Vert, on a Chief, Gules, a Lion passant guardant,
Or, between two Besants.

GLOUCESTER, a City of good antiquity, pleasantly seated on the Severne, over
which it has a fair Stone Bridge. It is also a County within its self,
enjoys large Immunities, sends Burgesses to Parliament, and is governed by
a Mayor, two Sheriffs, twelve Aldermen and Recorder, with Sub-Officers. The
City is not large, yet has twelve Parish Churches besides its Cathedral, a
fair structure, and is beautified with a handsome College and many neat
Buildings. The Arms belonging to this City is, Or, three Cheverons, Gules.

WINCHESTER, the chief and principal place in Hantshire, being a City of great
antiquity, and famous in the times of the Romans, Saxons, and Normans; the
situation is no less pleasant than commodious; is about a mile and a half in
circuit within its Walls, besides its Suburbs; and has five Parish Churches
besides its Cathedral; it enjoys several Immunities, and sends Burgesses to
Parliament. The Arms belonging to this City is, Sable, three Lilies proper.

SOVTHAMPON, a place of good account in Hantshire, commodiously seated on an
Arm of the Sea, which makes it to be a place of some trade. The Town is large,
garnished with well built Houses; for Divine worship has five Parish Churches;
and is fenced about with a double Ditch and Walls. It is a Borough Town,
enjoys ample Immunities, sends its Representatives to Parliament, and is
governed by a Mayor, Bailiffs, and Burgesses. Bears per Fess, Argent and
Gules, three Roses counterchanged.

HERTFORD, the chief Town in the County so called, it is seated on the Lea,
once a place of a larger extent, and of more beauty than at present. It is a
Borough Town, electeth Parliament men, and is governed by a Mayor, nine
Burgesses, sixteen Assistants, a High Steward, who is always a Noble man, a
Steward of the Court of Records, and other Sub-Officers. The Arms belonging to
the Town is, a Heart in a field, proper.

HEREFORD, the chief place in Herefordshire, being a City of great Antiquity,
and of a pleasant situation. It is a l^rge place, numbering six Parish Churches,
and beautified with well built Houses. It enjoys large Immunities, sends
Burgesses to Parliament, is governed by a Mayor, six Aldermen, a
Common Counsel, Recorder, etc. The Arms belonging to this City is, Gules, three
Lions passant guardant, Or.

HVNTINGTON, well seated on the banks of the Owse, over which it has a fair
Stone Bridge. It is a very large and ancient Borough-Town, of good antiquity,
and of a greater extent than now it is, having formerly fifteen Parish
Churches, which time has reduced to four. It is governed by a Mayor, Aldermen,
and Burgesses; has the election of Parliament men; and bears for their Arms
or Seal a Huntsman with his Dog, Staff, etc.

CANTERBVRY, the chief City in Kent, a place of great antiquity, being said to
be built nine hundred years before the birth of Christ. It is graced with
diverse good buildings; has for Divine worship fourteen Parish Churches besides
its Cathedral, a spacious building. It is governed by a Mayor, Aldermen,
Recorder, and other Sub-Officers; enjoys large Immunities, sends Burgesses
to Parliament, and is well Inhabited and traded unto. The Arms of this City is,
Gules, three Martlets, Or, on a Chief, Argent, a Lion passant guardant of the
second.

ROCHESTER, also seated in Kent, an ancient City, no less pleasantly than
commodiously seated on the banks of the Medway, over which it has a stately
Stone Bridge, sustained by diverse Arches. The City is not large, having but one
principal Street, which is well inhabited by Tradesmen. It is governed by a
Mayor, Court of Aldermen, Recorder, with other Sub-Officers, and has the
election of Parliament men. The Arms belonging to them is, Argent, a Cross,
Gules, with an R in the Center, Or, in Chief, a Lion of England.

LANCASTER, pleasantly^ seated on the banks of the Lune, over which it has a
fair Stone Bridge; a Town of good antiquity, and at present indifferent large,
containing several well ordered streets; its Houses are well built, but of no
great trade, nor over-well inhabited. It is a Town Corporate, governed by a
Mayor, two Bailiffs, twelve Brethren, four and twenty Burgesses, two
Chamberlains, a Recorder, etc. and amongst its Immunities, sends Burgesses to
Parliament. The Arms of this Town, Party per Fess, Vert and Gules, in Chief, a
Quadrangle of Castles walled, Argent, and in a Base Lion of England.

LEICESTER, the chief Shire Town, pleasantly seated on the banks of the Stour;
a Town more famous for its antiquity than beauty, being said to be built by
King Lear 844. years before the birth of Christ. It is a Borough-Town, sending
its Representatives to Parliament, and is governed by a Mayor, Aldermen, and
Sub-Officers. The Arms that this Town bears is, Gules, a Cinquefoil pierced,
Ermyn.

LINCOLN, pleasantly seated on the banks of the Witham, where it divides it
self into several streams, and is passed over by diverse Bridges. It is a City
of great antiquity, and has been far more spacious and magnificent than now it
is; for (according to William of Malmsbury) it was one of the best peopled
Cities in the Island, and contained fifty Parish Churches, which now are
reduced to fifteen. It is at present a large, well inhabited and frequented
City, enjoys a good trade, is dignified with a See of the Bishop, enjoys
several Immunities, sends Burgesses to Parliament, is governed by a Mayor,
two Sheriffs, twelve Aldermen, a Recorder, and other SubOfficers; and is a
County of it self, whose liberties extend twenty miles in compass, and is
called The County of the City of Lincoln. The Coat Armor belonging to this
City is, Argent, on a Cross, Gules, a Flower de Lis, Or.

STAMFORD, seated on the edge of the County adjoining to Rutlandshire and
Northamptonshire, from which it is parted by the River Weland. It is a fair,
large, and well built Town Corporate, containing several streets, is beautified
with well built Houses; for Divine worship has six Parish Churches, is begirt
with a Wall, is well inhabited and frequented, and enjoys a good trade,
especially for Malt here made in great abundance. The Town is governed by a
Mayor, Aldermen, Recorder, and Sub-Officers, enjoys several immunities, and
sends Burgesses to Parliament. The Coat of Arms belonging to this Town is, per
Pale, Gules, three Lions passant guardant, Or, and Checky, Or and Azure.

MONMOUTH, the chief Town in the County so called, a place no less pleasantly
than commodiously seated on the Rivers Wye and Munow; a fair, large, well
built, inhabited and frequented Town, enjoying large Immu^ities, sends
Burgesses to Parliament, is governed by a Mayor, two Bailiffs, fifteen
Common-Councellors, and other Sub-Officers. The Armorial Ensign of Honor
belonging to this Town is, three Cheverons, surmounted by a Fess,

NORWICH, the chief place in the County of Norfolk, a City of great splendour
and antiquity, which has sufficiently withstood the shocks of ill Fortune;
notwithstanding it is at present a fair, large, well built, populous and well
frequented City, numbering thirty Parish Churches be^ides Chapels; enjoying a
great trade, especially for its Stuffs, Stockings, and other Manufactures here
made. It is a City which enjoys large Immunities, sends Burgesses to
Parliament, is governed by a Mayor and other Officers, and is dignified with an
Episcopal See. The Coat Armor belonging to this City is, Gules, a Castle
tripletowred, Argent, in Base, a Lion of England.

NORTHAMPTON, the chief Shire-Town pleasantly seated on the River Nine, over
which it has two Bridges: A large Town numbering 4 Parish Churches, and is now
(since the late fire which almost consumed it to ashes) replenished with well
built Houses, being in great likelihood to be more splendid than formerly. The
Inhabitants enjoy a very considerable trade for an inland Town, especially for
Leather and Shoes. The Town is governed by a Mayor, two Bailiffs, twelve
Magistrates, a Recorder, with Sub-Officers, enjoys ample Immunities, and
sends Burgesses to Parliament. The Coat Armor beloning to the Corporation
is, Gules, a Watchtower on a Hill, proper, supported by two Lions rampant, Or.

PETERBOROW, a City in Northamptonshire, well seated on the River Aufona or
Nen, over which it has a Bridge which leads into Huntingtonshire. It is a
City of great antiquity, but suffered much by the destructive hand of the
merciless Danes. It is a place of no great extent, having but one Parish Church
besides its Cathedral, but is replenished with well built Houses. Amongst its
Immunities, it sends Burgesses to Parliament, is the Sea of a Bishop, and
bears for its Coat Armor, (...) two Keys in Saltire, between four cross
Croslets fitchee,

NEWCASTLE, commodiously seated on the banks of the Tyne, over which it has a
fair Stone Bridge, sustained by twelve Arches. It is a large Town, being about
two miles in circuit, being environed with a strong thick Stone-wall, which
has seven Gates for entrance, with many round Towers and square Turrets; its
Houses are well built, and its Streets fair and well ordered; for Divine
worship has four Churches; is a place very well inhabited by Merchants and
Tradesmen, and enjoys a considerable Trade both by Sea and Land, having
several Vessels belonging to the Town; but is of chief note for its Coal-trade,
for which it is famous. It is a Town well served with Provisions, having two
Markets weekly besides its Shambles. Here is an eminent Grammar School for the
education of Youth. It is a Town and County of it self, being incorporate and
governed by a Mayor, Recorder, ten Aldermen and a Sheriff, with several
Officers attending the Mayor, as a Sword Bearer with a Cap of Maintenance, the
Water-Bailiff with the great Mace, and seven Sergeants at the Mace; also the
Town Clerk, and Clerk of the Chamber, two Coroners, and eight Chamberlains. The
present Mayor and Aldermen for the Year 1676. is, Tho. Ienison Esquire Mayor, Sir
William Blacket Baronet, Alderman, Sir Robert Shaftoe Knight. Recorder, Sergeant at
Law, Sir Francis Anderson Knight. Mark Milbank Esquire Henry M^ddison Esquire Henry
Brabbant Esquire Ralph Ienison Esquire Thomas Davison Esquire William Carr Esquire Ralph Gray
Esquire and Timothy Davison Esquire Aldermen, Henry Ienison Esquire Sheriff. The Mayor has
his Common Counsel consisting of six and thirty. Amongst the Immunities that
this Town enjoys, it sends Burgesses to Parliament. The Arms belonging to the
Town is, Gules, three Castles, Argent; their (...) is out of the Battlement of
a Castle, Argent, a demi Lion rampant, Or, sustaining a Flag with St. George's
Cross: their Supporters are two Sea-horses, Agent.

NOTTINGHAM, the chief Shire Town, of a pleasant situation, a large Town,
beautified with well built Houses, has fair Streets, and a spacious
Marketplace. It is a Town of great antiquity, as is evidenced by its many
places of remark yet to be seen. It is a Town well inhabited and frequented,
enjoying a very good trade for an Inland Town; amongst its Immunities, sends
Burgesses to Parliament, is governed by a Mayor, six Aldermen, two Sheriffs,
with Sub-Officers; and bears for their Coat Armor, Argent, two ragged Staves
in cross, Vert, between three Coronets, two in Chief, and one in Base, Or, the
ragged Staff in Pale, passing through the Coronet in Base.

OXFORD, the glorious Seat of the Muses, a place of great antiquity, and at
present a fair and stately City, adorned with well built Houses, and beautified
with diverse curious structures; as the King's Palace, now the Manor-House, the
sixteen Colleges, eight Halls, the Schools; wherein is a famous Library, and a
stately Theater erected at the sole charge of Gilbert Sheldon late Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury. It is honored with an Episcopal See, sends four
Burgesses to Parliament, two for the University, and two for the City, and
enjoys ample Immunities. It is a large City, numbering fourteen
Parish-Churches besides its Cathedral, and of a pleasant situation on the banks
of the Isis, and in a healthful Air, which makes it to be the better inhabited.
The Arms belonging to this City is, Bendy wavy, Argent and Azure, an Ox, Gules,
passing over a Ford, proper.

OKEHAM, the chief Town in Rutlandshire, ^eated in a rich Valley, an
indifferent good and well inhabited Town. Here is an ancient privilege or
custom which the Inhabitants claim, that is, if any Nobleman enter within
their Precinct or Lordship, as an homage he is to forfeit one of his Horse's
shoes, unless he redeem it with money; and the truth of this is apparent by the
many Horseshoes nailed up on the Shire-hall door; and their badge is a Horshoe.

SHREWSBVRY, the chief Town in Shropshire, pleasantly seated on the banks of
the Severn, which encompasseth it on all parts, except toward the North. It is
a place which for largeness, numbering five Parish Churches besides a Chapel,
neatness of buildings, largeness and variety of streets, and populousness, may
be ranged with Cities in the first rank. It is a place of a great resort,
enjoys a great trade, and is well inhabited both by the English and Welsh. It
is governed by a Mayor, four and twenty Aldermen, and eight and forty
Common Counsel, and has a Recorder, Steward, and Town Clerk. It sends its
Representatives to Parliament, and enjoys several Immunities. Their Coat Armor
is Azure, three Leopards heads, Or.

BATH, a City in Somersetshire, seated on the Avon, over which it has a fair
Stone Bridge. It is a place of great antiquity, as does appear by the several
Roman Inscriptions and Images commonly found in the City Walls; and where the
Abbey now stands, it is said, was a Temple consecrated to Minerva the Goddess
of Fountains and Rivers. This place is famous for its Baths, found good for the
curing of Aches and other Distempers in the body of man, which does occasion it
to be well inhabited and resorted unto. It is a fair, neat City, governed by a
Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Counsel, with Sub-Officers; enjoys several
Immunities, sends Burgesses to Parliament; and bears for its Armo^ial
Ensign of Honor, as is here depicted.

WELLS, another City in Somersetshire, of no large extent, but well inhabited,
and of good account, being the Sea of a Bishop, under whose Jurisdiction is
that of Bath. Its buildings are fair and good, its Cathedral a stately Pile of
building, adjoining to which is the Bishop's Palace. This City is governed by a
Mayor, seven Masters, sixteen Burgesses, a Recorder, Town Clerk, etc. and has
the election of Parliament men.

LITCHFIELD in Staffordshire, a City of great antiquity and note in former
times. It is indifferent large, containing three Parish Churches besides its
Cathedral, a beautiful structure, adjoying to which is the Bishop's Palace; its
Houses are well built, and its Streets well ordered The government of the City
is committed to the care of two Bailiffs and a Sheriff (which are elected out
of four and twenty Burgesses) a Recorder, Town Clerk, etc. it sends Burgesses
to Parliament; and bears for its Coat Armor in an Escocheon, a Landscape with
diverse Martyrs in several manners massacred.

STAFFORD, the chief County-Town, where the Assizes and Sessions are held for
the County. It is a fair Town, beautified with two Parish Churches, a
Free School, a fine square Marketplace, and other good Buildings, and its
Streets are large and paved. It is governed by a Mayor and Burgesses, has a
Recorder, Town Clerk, etc. it electeth Parliament men, and enjoys ample
Privileges. The Coat Armor is Or, on a Cheveron, Gules, a true Lovers Knot of
the first.

IPSWICH, the chief place in Suffolk, which for its largeness containing twelve
Parish Churches besides St. George's Chapel, its diverse Streets, populousness,
and trade both by Sea and Land, may deservedly be reckoned for a City. It Is a
Town Corporate, well privileged, sends Burgesses to Parliament, is governed by
two Bailiffs yearly chosen out of 12 Portmen, and four and twenty
Common Counsel, also a Recorder, Town Clerk, and other Sub-Officers. The Arms
of this Town is, per Pale Gules and Azure, a Lion rampant, Or, between three
Sterns of Ships, Argent.

CHICHESTER, the chief place in Su^sex, seated on the banks of the Levant,
which at a small distance loses it self in the Sea. It is an indifferent large
City, numbering five or six Parish Churches besides its Cathedral. It is
beautified with good buildings and spacious streets, especially the four that
lead from the four Gates of its Wall, and cross one another at the Market
place. It is a City endowed with many Privileges, and sends Burgesses to
Parliament. It is governed by a Mayor, Aldermen, Recorder, and Sub-Officers;
and bears for its Coat Armor, Guttee, Argent and Sable, on a Chief
engrailed, Gules, a Lion of England.

COVENTRY, the chief place in Warwickshire, a City situated near the Center of
England, bounding the Campane from the Woodland, drawing in the advantages of
both: Ancient, as Arviragus the British King, made eminent by the Mercian
Leofrick, famed by successive Lords and Kings of England; heretofore entrusted
with a Mint-Royal, graced with the Session of the highest Judicature, the Kings
Bench, and styled Camera principis; favored with a wholesome and temperate Air;
its Approaches, Avenu's and Ambient Walks, grateful and pleasing to all
beholders; for spacious and continued Cause-ways not equalled by any City in
England, nor inferior to most for clean and well paved Streets, refreshing
Springs, useful Aquaducts, and goodly public Structures; once a famous Mart
and Empory, resorted to for Commerce and Trade from Ireland, the Northwest and
other parts of England; leaving us its large Vaults, Warehouses, Cellarages,
Drapery, Steel-yard, and public Halls, as indications of its former opulency
and splendor.

It offers to view, amongst other remarkables, four Steeples and three
Churches, whereof two are Parochial, viz. Trinity and St. Michaels; that, an
ancient well built Church, in form Cathedral, which being impaired by a late
fall of its beautiful Spire, is since restored to its former luster at a vast
expense and charge: this, a stately, large, and brave enlightened Fabric; a
curious Shell, whose Content is one hundred yards in length, and seven and
twenty yards in breadth, besides several Isles and Chapels both on the North
and South sides thereof, supported by neat and slender Pillars, with five
Isles, whose Steeple for tower and lofty tapering Spire gives place to none in
England. Bablack Church (one of the three) is a solid Antique Structure, its
form Collegiate, where Divine Offices are performed but at some Festivals in
the year.

It has gloried in a matchless Wall; and though its form was irregular for a
defensible Fortification, yet was it built strong, broad, high, and large in
circumference, now only guessed at by its ruins and its twelve lofty Ports o^
Gates yet standing.

No place compares with this City for a most beautiful Cross of large
dimensions and height, adorned with variety of Statues, Figures, and
Sculptures, richly laid over with Gold, and set off with becoming Colors.

It has (among others) one magnificent Hall called Aula Sanctae Mariae, fit
for a celebrious Congress or Assembly.

Here is a fair Grammar School, founded by John Hales Esquire, yet styled
Schola Regis Henrici Octavi; and another School of late erection for poor
Children by Mr. Christopher Davenport, late Alderman. Appendant to both is a
Library with learned Authors, both Print and Manuscripts; of which Schools the
Mayor and Aldermen of this City are Visitors. The Hospitals are 2, well and
plentifully providing for twenty Blue-Coats, eleven poor men in black Gowns,
and two Nurses in the one, and eight other married Couples in blue Gowns in the
other, and a Nurse.

To it is annexed very large and rich Commons, great Annual Loans and G^fts
distributed amongst poor young and hopeful Tradesmen, together with frequent
remembrances of some noble Benefactor or other, who intrustred the City to
dispose of their bounty to others, as among themselves, viz. forty pounds per
Annum to St. John's College in Oxford, and forty pounds per Annum to several
other Cor-Proporations.

Also near the said City, at a Pool called Swanswell, is a Spring which fills
a seven Inch Diameter, of which water the quantity of five Tun an hour is daily
raised to the top of a Turret six and thirty foot high, by a stream out of the
said Pool containing nine cubical Inches, which moves an overshot Wheel and a
triangular Crank with Balances and Buckets, being an heaving or lifting
Engine; from hence the water is conveyed into the Streets of the City and
Houses of such Inhabitants as will and do take the said water at an Annual
Rent. This Water-work was begun by Thomas Sargenson Mason, and Bartholomew
Bewley Plumber, in the year 1630. and has been since altered and put into the
form it now works, in the year 1658. and so continued by Thomas Bewley, Son
of the said Bartholomew, who is the present prietor.

The City is owner of a rich Delf or Mine of Coals near adjoining to it, which
is hoped will in a little time add much to its Revenue, the present Undertakers
using that method for the mastering of the Water, which the inadvertency of
former Undertakers either could not contrive, or at least not effectually
prosecute.

The staple Commodity of the place is Cloth; but to how low an ebb that trade
is now come to, every place can report and competently judge, as well as this
City.

Its Government consists of Annual Officers, ten Aldermen or Justices, with two
standing Councels, viz. the Upper, the Second or Common Counsel. The Annual
Officers are the Mayor, Recorder, two Sheriffs, Steward, Coroner, two
Chamberlains, tow Wardens, and some other Attendant and Ministering Officers.

The Mayor is the eye of the Body, the King's immediate Lieutenant, having the
precedence of all. Prince Henry himself, when in Coventry, refused to take the
better hand of him when modestly the Mayor offered it, saying, He would not
resume a right of his Fathers Graunts.

This Authority is Solitary or Social: Solitary, as to be Clerk of the King's
Market, Steward and Marshal of the King's House, to be in Commission for
Arrays, and Head of the twelve Companies. Social, in the upper Council, which
consists of Aldermen and some Candidates for the Majoralty, where he orders and
manageth the particular Affairs and Revenues of the City, distributes the
bounty of Benefactors, sometimes calling in the Assistance of the second
Council, arbitrarily chosen by him and his Brethren, out of the wealthiest and
discreetest Citizens, and consisting of five and twenty, who are as Witnesses
of their just administrations, as well as Advisors, in all Alienations of City
Lands and Grants of other nature.

The Aldermen are Justices of the Peace in as full Latitude as any other,
having ten Wards or Precincts assigned them, with an Appropriation of a Ward to
each Alderman, as to some respects, though otherwise every one is Justice
throughout, both as to the City and County of the City, which is of large
extent. Of these Justices there are of the Quorum four, viz. the Mayor,
Recorder, and two eldest Aldermen.

The Mayor's Insignia are a Sword, a Hat of Maintenance, a great Mace, and six
smaller, with a Tip-staff; the Robes black, lined with Furr, and on solemn and
festival days Scarlet lined with Foins.

The present Aldermen and Justices for the year 1676. are William Ielliff
Alderman, now Mayor the second time; the Right Honorable James Earl of
Northampton one of his Majesty's Privy Council, Recorder; Joseph Chambers,
James Nailer, Julius Billers, William Vale, Ralph Phillips, Nathaniel Harryman,
Thomas King, Thomas Bewley, Abell Brooksby, Humfry Burton Coroner, Sir Richard
Hopkins Knight. Sergeant at Law, Steward.

As to the Rights, Immunities, Privileges, when and by whom granted, together
with all other things coincident to this City, from its first appearance to its
ascending Grandeur and Declining or Cadency, they are most amply and learnedly
mentioned to our hand by the Pen of the learned Mr. Dugdale, Norroy King of
Arms, to whom we referr the Reader.

The Arms belonging to this City are, parted per Pale, Gules and Vert, an
Elephant, Argent, on a Mount, proper, bearing a Castle on his back, Or.

WARWICK, the Shire-Town, of good account, being the place where the Assizes
and general Sessions for the County are kept; it is indifferent large,
containing two Parish Churches, besides some demolished; its Houses are well
built, its Streets spacious and good; is a place well inhabited, and enjoys a
good trade, especially for Malt. It is governed by a Mayor, twelve Brethren,
four and twenty Burgesses for Common Counsel, a Recorder, etc. s^nds Burgesses
to Parliament. The Arms born by this Town is, a Castle triple-towred, having on
the dexter side the Sun in its glory, and on the sinister a Crescent, on the
top of the two fronting Towers stand two Watchmen with this Inscription upon
the Ring of the Seal, Sigillum Ballivi Burgensium Warwici.

APPLEBY (anciently Aballaba) was a City in the time of the Romans, and the
chief Town in Westmerland (as it remains still) at, and before the Norman
Conquest; insomuch that the County took Name from it, and was sometimes called
the County of Appilby. It is traditionally reported concerning this place, That
it was under the Jurisdiction of a Mayor, when London was only governed by a
Bailiff; which how true it is, I shall not concern my self; but the beginning
of the Majoralty of London (formerly governed by Portgraves) is commonly
reckoned from the first year of Richard the First: and Appleby had a Charter
from Henry the First (who was Son to the Conqueror) of very great Privileges
confirmed by King John (as is yet to be seen) and all the Kings of England
successively. It continued a place of great account till 1176. (the 22 of Hen.
2.) at which time it was utterly destroyed by the incursion of the Scots under
William their King, as appears from a Stone in the School-Garden-House. And it
should seem then, in regard of its Loyalty and Sufferings, this King took
compassion upon it, and (in all probability) builded their Church dedicated to
St. Lawrence; and for their Arms gave them his own Coat, with an honorary
distinction, Gules, three Lions passant guardant in Pale, crowned, Or, with
this Inscription on their Seals, SIGILLVM COMMVNITATIS BVRGII DE APPILBY; and
on the Reverse St. Lawrence on the Grid-Iron, kept down by force, and burning
in the Flames, from which arises a Flag or Standard with three Lions (as
before) and the Devise this, HIC IACET LAVRENTIVS IN GRATICVLA POSITVS, to show
it resisted even unto fire. Now this King Henry the Second was the first (as
all Antiquaries agree) who bare for his Arms three Lions; and therefore it must
needs be a great honor to the place, and undoubted sign or token of its
Loyalty (a quality for which it now is, and ever was famous) that he should
signalize it with his own Coat, distinguished only by an honorable addition of
three Crowns. And though Mr. Cambden (whose footsteps Speed follows) tells
us, out of William of Newburg, That William King of the Scots took this place
and Brough by a sudden surprise, a little before he himself was taken at
Aulnwick in Northumberland (which is very true); yet they are all mistaken in
this, That these two places were not recovered till King John's time; for it is
certain, The Scots (after the Country had got themselves into an Array) were
beaten back, and their King taken Prisoner: And it is certain also, that though
King John did bestow them on Robert de Veteripont for his good service; yet he
recovered them not from the Scots, for they came into his hands ( propter
transgressionem factam per Hugonem de Morevilla) by reason of the forfeiture of
Hugh de Mervil (a great man in those parts and the same (if I mistake not) that
killed Thomas a Becket) as was given in upon Inquisition taken at York, die
Iovis proximo post mediam quadragesimae Anno Regni Regis Edwardi 3.

And notwithstanding this fatal overthrow, ^o much of the Town was continued,
till the Reign of Richard the Second (who began in 1377) that it paid to the
King in Fee-farm Rent twenty Marks per Annum at 2 d. a Burgage, which amounts
to two thousand two hundred Burgages, besides other Houses: But in 1388. (as
appears by Records) die Martis in festo Sancti Stephani Martyris (which was
about the eleventh of Richard the Second) it was so burned down and wasted by
the Scots, that of that Rent, upon several Inquisitions found and returned,
there remained to the King only two Marks per Annum, so that nine parts in ten
were utterly destroyed.

But notwithstanding this great devastation that was never repaired, it does
still retain its ancient Privileges, which are in every respect the same with
York, as appears from the confirmation of Henry the Third (in whose time here
was an Exchequer, called by the Name of Scaccarium de Appleby) and King Iohn^s
Charter, which I have seen; wherein is expressed and firmly commanded, That his
Burgers of Appleby shall have and enjoy all the Liberties and free Customs
which his Burgers of York have, well and peaceably, freely and quietly, fully,
wholly, and honorably (with a Prohibition, That none shall attempt to disturb
them thereof); And also, That they shall be free from Toll, Stallage, Pontage,
and Lestage all England over; praeterquam in Civitate London, nisi forte Cives
Eobor' quietantias inde habent libertates suas in Civitate London; which
exception does very much confirm and strengthen their Privileges to them.

The Corporation consists at present of a Mayor, with two Bailiffs, a Court of
Aldermen, twelve in number, a Recorder, Common Counsel, and Sergeants at Mace,
with their Attendants: And (if the Town were able to bear it) might take the
same Privileges with York in every thing, according to their Charter, which
has been confirmed by all the succeeding Kings of England; and if any would
know what those Privileges are more particularly, I referr him to York, where
he may possibly meet with satisfaction. In the mean time take these which are
now in practice at Appleby, viz.

They have power to Arrest for any Sum without limitation.

To elect and send two Burgesses to Parliament.

To acknowledge Statute-Merchant before the Mayor.

To take Toll both in Fairs and Markets.

To seize Felons goods, Felones de se, Waifes, Strayes, Forfeitures, and
Escheats; all which do belong to the Mayor for the time being, who takes place
of the Judges of Assize, as the Lord Mayor of York is wont to do.

Their Aldermen are some of them Gentlemen of the Country, for the greater
honor and credit of the Town, who in time of their Majoralty have their
Propraetors or Deputies there. The present Mayor and Aldermen for the present
year are, John Thwaites Esquire, Mayor, Lancelot Machell of Gackanthorp Esquire who
was first Mayor after the King's return, and tore in pieces Oliver's Charter in
open Court, before he would accept of that Office, which he had declined all
Oliver's time: Richard Brathwate of Warcop, Esquire and Justice of Peace, who
contested with the Judges, and took place of them Virtute Chartae, Robert
Hilton of Morton, Esquire, Justice Jf Peace, Edward Musgrave of Askeby Esquire
oustice of Peace, Thomas Warcop of Colby, Gentleman, John Routlidge of (...)
Gent. Alderman Leonard Smyth, Alderman William Smyth, Alderman Robert Harrison,
Alderman John Lawson, Alderman Thomas Robinson, Alderman John Atkinson, which
six last are all of Appleby.

Appleby was very eminent for its Loyalty in the late Civil Wars, and most of
the Aldermen (except those whom Oliver Cromwell obtruded upon them) suffered
many imprisonments during his Tyranny; and so likewise did most of the Gentry
round about: for it is the glory of the County of Westmerland, that there was
not one Person of quality in it who took up Arms against his King, and but two
or three in Cumberland.

SALISBVRY, the chief place in Wiltshire, a City of great antiquity, and in the
time of the Romans, of great fame; at present a fine, neat, and well bui^e
City, beautified with fair and well built Houses; its Streets are commodious
and large, has a stately Minster or Cathedral, to which adjoyneth the Bishops
Palace. It is a place well inhabited and frequented, enjoys a good trade, and
amongst its Immunities sends Burgesses to Parliament. The Arms belonging to
this City are, Azure, a Sword and a Key in Saltire, Or, on a Chief, Argent,
three Lozenges, Gules.

WORCESTER, the chief Shire-Town, commodiously seated on the Banks of the
Severn, over which it has a fair Stone Bridge with a Tower upon it. It is a
City of great antiquity, and at present of good account, being graced with well
built Houses and well ordered streets, is well inhabited, enjoys a good
trade, especially for its Clothings here made in great quantities. It is a
place of a good largeness, containing nine Parish Churches besides its
Cathedral: It is governed by a Mayor, a Sheriff, six Aldermen, four and twenty
principal Citizens, eight and forty Common-Councel-men, two Chamberlains, a
Recorder, Town Clerk, etc. The Arms of this City is, Argent, a Fess between
three Pears, Sable.

YORK, next to London, claims the Priority of all Cities in the Kingdom, a City
of great antiquity and fame in the time of the Romans; nor has it been much
eclipsed in its luster in all succeeding Ages, and is at present a large, fair,
and beautiful City, numbering thirty Parish Churches, and adorned with many
splendid Buildings, both public and private; it is very populous, and much
resorted unto, and inhabited by Gentry and wealthy Tradesmen. It is a City and
County of it self, enjoying ample Immunities, sends Burgesses to Parliament,
is governed by a Lord Mayor, twelve Aldermen clad in Scarlet, two Sheriffs,
twelve Common Counsel, a Recorder, eight Chamberlains, and other Sub-Officers.
It is a place of great strength, being encompassed with a strong Wall, on which
are many Turrets and Watch-houses, and has for entrance four Gates and five
Posterns. The Coat of Arms belonging to this City is, Argent, on a Cross, Gules
five Lions passant guardant, Or.

HVLL, a Town of no great antiquity, but of considerable account, being very
large (though containing but two Parish Churches) is graced with fair buildings
and well ordered and paved streets, is very well inhabited and frequented by
Merchants and Tradesmen, having good store of Vessels belonging to the Town,
and the more by reason of its Commodious Haven, Custom House, and Key, its
Inhabitants driving a considerable inland and beyond sea Trade for diverse good
Commodities. It is a place of an impregnable strength, and that made so as well
by Nature as by Art. It is a Town and County Incorporate of it self, electeth
Parliament men, is governed by a Mayor, twelve Aldermen, a Common Counsel, with
other Sub-Officers, and have ample Immunities granted unto them. The
Coat Armor born by this Corporation is, Azure, three Coronets in Pale, Or.

RICHMOND, seated on the River Swale, over which it has a Stone Bridge, which
said River was by the ancient English esteemed very sacred, for that in it
Paulinus the first Archbishop of York, baptized in one day above ten thousand
men, besides women and children. It is a large Town Corporate, containing two
Parish Churches, is graced with well built houses, its Streets are paved and
well ordered, has a spacious Market place, is well inhabited by Gentry and
Tradesmen, enjoys a good Trade chiefly for Stockings, and Woollen knit Caps
for Seamen. It is governed by a Mayor and Aldermen, with-Sub-Officers, and
amongst its Immunities sends Burgesses to Parliament. The Arms of this Town is,
Gules, an Inner Bordure, Argent, over all a Bend, Ermyn.

A TABLE OF THE Contents or Heads Of the several CHAPTERS IN THE TREATISE OF
Honor and Nobility.
FIRST PART. HONOR MILITARY.
OF War, and the causes thereof. fol. 3 Of Soldiers 4 Of Ambassadors or
Legates 5 Of War, and the inclination of the English to it ibid. Of Captains,
Generals, Marshals, and other chief Commanders. 7
SECOND PART. HONOR CIVIL.
CHap. I. Of Honor general and particular, 11 Of Gentry, and bearing of Arms
12 Principles of Honor and Virtue that every Gentleman ought to be endowed
with 13 Of precedence ibid. Chap. II. Of the King, or Monarch of Great Britain
19 Chap. III. Of the Prince 24 Chap. IV. Of Dukes 32 The form of a Patent of
the Duke of York, temp. Jacobi. 33 Ceremonies to be observed in the Creation of
a Duke 36 Chap. V. Of Marquisses 37 Chap. VI. Of Earls 39 Chap. VII. Of
Viscounts 44 Chap. VIII. Of Lords Spiritual 45 Chap. IX. Of Barons 48 The
definition of a Baron ibid. The Etymology of the name of a Baron ibid. The
antiquity and dignity of Barons, and the sundry uses of the Name 49 The tenor
and proper signification of the word Baron ibid. Chap. X. Barons of Tenure 50
Chap. XI. Barons by Writ 52 Chap. XII. Barons by Patent 56 Chap. XIII.
Privileges incident to the Nobility, according to the Laws of England 59
Certain Cases wherein a Lord of the Parliament has no privilege 65 Chap. XIV.
Nobility and Lords in reputation only 68 Chap. XV. Of the Queen Consort, and of
Noble Women 69, 70 Ladies in reputation 75 Chap. XVI. Of Knighthood in general
77 Chap. XVII. Knights of the Garter 79 Chap. XVIII. Of Knights Bannerets 84
Chap. XIX. Of Baronets 85 The president of the Patent of Creation of Baronets
88 The Catalogue of the Baronets of England according to their Creations 91
Chap. XX. Knights of the Bath 105 A Catalogue of the Knights of the Bath made
at the Coronation of King Charles II. 107 Chap. XXI. Of Knights Batchelors 108
Observations concerning Knights Batchelors 116 Of degrading of Knights 117
Chap. XXII. Knights of the round Table 118 Chap. XXIII. Knights of the Thistle,
or of St. Andrew 120 Chap. XXIV. Orders of Knighthood in Palestine and other
parts of Asia 121 Knights of the holy Sepulcher in Jerusalem, ib. Knights
Hospitalers of St. John Baptist in Jerusalem, now called Knights of Malta 122
Knights Templars ibid. Knights of St. Lazarus 123 Knights of St. Bass ibid.
Knights of St. Katherine at Mount Sinai ibid. Knights of the Martyrs in
Palestine ibid.
Orders of Knighthood in Spain.
Knights of the Oak in Navar 124 Knights of the Lily in Navar ibid. Knights of
the Band 125 Knights of the Dove in Castile ibid. Ordo de la Scama in Castile
ibid. Knights of the Lily in Aragon ibid. Knights of Mountjoy ibid. Knights of
Acon or Acres ibid. Knights of St. James in Galicia 126 Knights of St. Savior
in Aragon ibid. Knights of St. Julian de Pereyro, or of Alcantara ibid. Knights
of Calatrava in Castile ibid. Knights of Truxillo ibid. Knights of our Lady,
and of St. George of Montesa in Valencia 127 Knights of St. Mary de Merced in
Aragon, ibid. Knights of the Rosary in Toledo ibid.
Orders of Knighthood in Flanders.
Knights of the Golden Fleece, or Toison d'Or 128
Orders of Knighthood in Portugal.
Knights d'Avis 129 Knights of the Wing of St. Michael ibid. Knights of St.
James 130 Knights of Christ ibid.
Orders of Knighthood in France.
Knights of Jesus Christ 131 Knights of the Passion of Jesus Christ ibid.
Knights of the blessed Virgin Mary of Mount-Carmel 132 Knights of St. Michael
ibid. Knights of St. Esprit ibid. Knights of the Order of the Genet 133 Knights
of the Crown Royal amongst the Frizons ibid. Knights of our Lady of the Star
ibid. Knights of the Thistle of Bourbon ibid. Knights of the Porcupine 134
Knights of the Croissant of Anjou ibid. The Order of the Ermyne in Bretagne
ibid.
Degrees of Knighthood in Italy.
Knights of St. Mary the Glorious 135 Knights of the Holy Ghost in Saxia at
Rome ibid. The Constantinian Angelick Knights of Saint George, formerly in
Greece 136 Knights of St. Peter at Rome ibid. Knights of St. George at Rome
ibid. Knights of St. Paul at Rome ibid. Knights called Pios at Rome ibid.
Knights of Loretto ibid. Knights of the Glorious Virgin Mary at Rome 137
Knights of Jesus at Rome ibid^ Knights de la Calza in Venice ibid. Knights of
St. Mark in Venice ibid. Knights of St. George at Genoa ibid. Knights of St.
Stephen at Florence 138 Knights of the Knot in Naples ibid. Knights of the
Argonauts of St. Nicholas in Naples ibid. Knights of the Ermyne in Naples ibid.
Degrees of Knighthood in Savoy.
Knights of the Annunciation 139 Knights of St. Maurice 140 Knights of St.
Maurice and St. Lazarus ibid Knights of the Bear in Switzerland 141
Degrees of Knighthood in Germany.
Knights of the Tutonick Order of Prusia 142 Knights of St. Jerome 143 Knights
of St. George in Austria and Carinthia ibid. Knights of St. Michael the
Archangel ibid. Knights of St. Anthony of Hainolt 144 Knights of the Tusin
Order in Bohemia ibid. Knights of St. Hubert in Juliers ibid. Knights of the
Order of St. James in Holland ibid.
Degrees of Knighthood in Swedeland.
Knights of the Brician Order 145 Knights of Seraphins ibid. Knights of
Amarantha ibid. Knights of the Order of the Elephant in Denmark 146
Degrees of Knighthood in Poland.
Knights of Christ, or of the Sword-Bearers in Livonia 147 Knights of the white
Eagle ibid. Knights of the Order of the Dragon overthrown in Hungary 148
Knights of the Order of the sword in Cyprus ibid. Knights of St. Anthony in
AEthiopia 149 Knights of the Burgundian Cross in Tunis ibid. Knights of the
West Indies 150 Chap. XXV. Of Esquires^ 151 Chap. XXVI. Of Gentlemen 154 The
privileges of the Gentry 156 Chap. XXVII. Of Yeomen 158 Chap. I. The second
Part of Honor Civil, treats of the Privileges, Coat Armor, etc. of London,
and the Cities and chief Towns Corporate in England 161 London, its Government,
Courts, etc. 162 The Names of the Lord Mayor, and Alderme^ 164 The Incorporated
Companies of Merchants ibid. The chief Companies of London 167 Chap. II. Treats
of the Cities and Shire-Towns of England. Counties Towns f^l. Berks Reading 170
Bedfordshire Bedford ibid. Bucks Buckingham ibid. Cambridgshire Cambridge ibid.
Cambridgshire Ely ibid. Cheshire Chester 171 Cornwall Launston ibid. Cumberland
Carlisle ibid. Derbyshire Derby ibid. Devonshire ^xeter ibid. Devonshire
Barnstable ibid. Dorsetshire Dorchester 172 Durham Durham ibid. Essex
Colchester ibid. Glocestershire Bristoll ibid. Glocestershire Bristoll
Merchants ibid. Glocestershire Gloucester 173 Hantshire Winchester ibid.
Hantshire Southampton ibid. Hertfordshire Hertford ibid. Herefordshire Hereford
ibid. Huntingtonshire Huntington 174 Kent Canterbury ibid. Kent Rochester ibid.
Lancashire Lancaster ibid. Leicestershire Leicester ibid. Lincolnshire Lincoln
ibid. Lincolnshire Stamfor^ 175 Monmouthshire Monmout^ ibid. Norfolk Norwich
ibid. Northamptonshire Northampton ibid. Northamptonshire Peterborow ibid.
Northumberland Newcastle ibid. Nottinghamshire Nottingham 176 Oxfordshire
Oxford ibid. Rutlandshire Oakham ibid. Shropshire Shrewsbury ibid.
Somersetshire Bath 177 Somersetshire Wells 177 Staffordshire Litchfield ibid.
Staffordshire Stafford ibid. Suffolk Ipswich ibid. Sussex Chichester ibid.
Warwickshire Coventrey 178 Westmoreland Apleby 179 Wiltshire Salisbury 181
Worcestershire Worcester ibid. Yorkshire York ibid. Yorkshire Hull ibid.
Yorkshire Richmond ibid.
A TABLE of the Effigies and Achievements of the Nobility and Gentry in the
Treatise of Honor Civil and Military.
The Effigies of the Duke of Albemarle fol.9 The Effigies of the Earls of
Carlisle 10 The Effigies of the Earls of Craven ibid. The Effigies of the Lord
Bellasis ibid. The Effigies of Bertram Ashburnham ibid. The Effigies of the
Lord Chancellor Finch 14 The Effigies of the Earl of Shaftesbury as Lord
Chancellor 14 His Majesty's Effigies 19 His Majesty's Achievement 19
DUKES.
The Effigies of the Duke of Buckingham 32
Achievements. numb. ^ol. D. of Albemarle 6 32 D. of Buckingham 5 32 D. of
Grafton 11 32 D. of Monmouth 7 32 D. of Newcastle 8 32 D. of Norfolk 3 32 D. of
Richmond 10 32 Prince Rupert 2 32 D. of Somerset 4 32 D. of Southampton 9 32 D.
of York 1 32

MARQUISSES.
Effigies of the Marquess of Winchester 37
Achievements. Marquisses of Dorchester 3 37 Marquisses of Winchester 1 37
Marquisses of Worcester. 2 37

EARLS.
Effigies of the Earls of Aylesbury 39 Effigies of the Earls of Burford 39
Achievements. A
E. of Airly 77 39 E. of Anglesey 51 39 E. of Arlington 57 39 E. of Aylesbury
55 39 B
E. of Banbury 29 39 E. of Bath 52 39 E. of Bedford 7 39 E. of Berkshire 26 39
E. of Brecknock D. of Ormond 47 39 E. of Bridgwater 15 39 E. of Bristoll 21 39
E. of Bullingbrook 23 39 E. of Burford 68 39 E. of Burlington 56 39 C
numb. so. E. of Cardigan 50 39 E. of Carlisle 53 39 E. of Carnarvan 36 39 E.
of Castlemaine 80 39 E. of Chesterfield 38 39 E. of Clare 22 39 E. of Clarendon
48 39 E. of Craven 54 39 D
E. of Danby 64 39 E. of Derby 4 39 E. of Denbigh 20 39 E. of Devonshire 19 39
E. of Donegall 76 39 E. of Dorset and Middlesex 12 39 E. of Dover 32 39 E. of
Down 79 39 E. of Droheda 74 39 E
E. of Essex 49 39 E. of Exeter 14 39 F
E. of Feversham 67 39 E. of Fingall 75 39 G
E. of Guilford, D. Lotherdale 62 39 H
E. of Huntington 6 39 I
E. of Incsiquin 73 39 K
E. of Kent 3 39 E. of Kildare 78 39 L
E. of Langford 72 39 E. of Leicester 16 39 E. of Lincoln 9 39 E. of Lindsey 31
39 E. of Litchfield 61 39 E. of Londonderry 69 39 M
E. of Manchester 25 39 E. of Marl^orough 28 39 E. of Mougrave 27 39 N
E. of Newport 37 39 E. of Northampton 17 39 E. of Northumberland 65 39 E. of
Norwich 59 39 E. of Nottingham 10 39 O
Earl of Oxford 1 39 P
E. of Pembroke 8 39 E. of Peterborow 33 39 F. of Plymouth 63 39 E. of Portland
40 39 E. of Powis 60 39 R
E. of Renelaugh 71 39 E. of Rivers 30 39 E. of Rochester 44 39 E. of Rutland 5
39 S
E. of Salisbury 13 39 E. of Sandwic^ 46 39 E. of St. Albons 45 39 E. of
Scardale 43 39 E. of Shaftesbury 58 39 E. of Shrewsbury 2 39 E. of Stamford 34
39 E. of Strafford 41 39 E. of Suffolk 11 39 E. of Sunderland 42 39 E. of
Sussex 66 39 T
E. of Thanet 39 39 W
E. of Warwick and Holland 18 39 E. of Westmoreland 24 39 E. of Winchelsey 35
39

VISCOUNTS.
The Effigies of Viscount Falconbergh 44
Achievements.
Viscount Brounker 14 44 C
Viscount Camden 5 44 Viscount Conway 4 44 E
Viscount Emula Lord Fairfax 15 44 F
Viscount Falconbergh 7 44 Viscount Fitzharding 16 44 H
Viscount Hallifax 9 44 Viscount Hereford 1 44 K
Viscount Kilmurrey 13 44 M
Viscount Mountague 2 44 Viscount Mordant 8 44 N
Viscount Newport 11 44 S
Viscount Say and Seal 3 14 Viscount Stafford 6 44 Y
Viscount Yarmouth 10 44 Achievements of BISHOPS.
Canter^u^y 1 45 Chester 7 ^5 Durham 6 45 Ely 8 45 London 3, 5 45 Sarum 4 45
York 2 45

BARONS.
The Essigies of the Lord Baltemore 48
Achievements. A
L. Albergavenny 1 48 L. Allington 67 48 L. Arundel of Trerice 59 48 L. Arundel
of Wardure 22 48 L. Astley 43 48 L. Aston 65 48 L. Audley Earl of Castlehaven 2
48 B
L. Baltemore 66 48 L. Bellasis 45 48 L. Berkeley of Berkeley 4 48 L. Berkeley
of Stratton 52 48 L. Biron 36 48 L. Brook 24 48 L. Butler Earl of Aran 62 48 L.
Butler Earl of Ossery 60 48 C
L. Carrington 39 48 L. Chandois 17 48 L. Clifford 61 48 L. Cornwallis 54 48 L.
Coventrey 31 48 L. Crew 57 48 L. Crofts 51 48 L. Cromwell Earl of Arglass 11 48
L. Culpeper 42 48 D
L. D'arcy 6 48 L. De la Mere 55 48 L. De la Ware 3 48 E
L. Eure 12 48 F
L. Finch Lord Chancellor 63 48 L. Fitzwater 7 48 L. Frechevile 58 48 G
L. Gerard of Brandon 47 48 L. Gerard of Bromley 20 48 L. Gray 26 48 H
L. Hatton 37 48 L. Herbert of Cherbury 34 48 L. Holles 53 48 L. Howard 32 48 K
L. Kingston 68 48 L
L. Langdale 50 48 L. Leigh 35 48 L. Lexington 48 48 L. Lovelace 28 48 L. Lucas
44 48 M
L. Maynard 30 48 L. Mohun 33 48 L. Montague 25 48 L. Morley 5 48 N
L. North 16 48 L. Norris^ 18 48 P
L. Pagit 15 48 L. Petre 19 48 L. Poulet 29 48 R
L. Roberts 27 48 L. Rockingham 46 48 S
L. Sandis 9 48 L. Stanhope 21 48 L. Stourton 8 48 T
L. Tenham 23 48 L. Townesend 56 48 V
L. Vaughan Earl of Carbery 38 48 W
L. Ward 41 48 L. Whartou 13 48 L. Widdrington 40 48 L. Windsor 10 48 L.
Willoughby 14 48 L. Wotton 49 48 Achievements of Women.
Gam's 3 76 Duchess of Richmond 1 76 Castle-Stuart 2 76 Sedley 4 76 Effigies
of Knights of the Garter.
Earl of Arlington 3 79 Marquess of Worcester 2 79 His Royal Highness Duke of
York 1 79 Effigies of a Knight Banneret.
Sir William de la More ^ 84 BARONETS. Achievements. A
Atkins 5 85 Aucher 47 85 B
Bacon 3 85 Banks 42 85 Barnadiston 24 85 Bridgman 23 85 C
Carteret 1 85 Corbet 30,31 85 Craven 10 85 D
D'arcy 25 85 F
Forster 26 85 G
Gerard 6 85 Gleane 19 85 Glynn 40 85 Graham 41 85 Grimston 2 85 H
Hanmer 38 85 Head 44 85 Hobart 29 85 Holland 46 85 Hunlock 39 85 J
Jason 20 85 K
Lowther 34 85 Lucy 37 85 M
Mathews 12 85 Mauleverer 7 85 Middleton 22 85 Molineux 14 85 More 45 85 O
Osborne 16 85 P
Percivale 33 85 Peyton 9 85 Puckering 11 85 R
Ratcliffe 4 85 Reresby 48 85 Robinson 27,36 85 S
Shaw 43 85 T
Tempest 13 85 V
Verney 28 85 Viner 17 85 W
Walter 15 85 Wheler 35 85 Wilbraham 32 85 Williams 32,85 85 Wittewrong 8 85
Wolstonholme 18 85 KNIGHTS. Achievements. A
Atkins 2 108 B
Bennet 3 108 Berkenhead 13 108 Beversham 48 108 Booth 41 108 Brathwait 26 108 C
Chicheley 22 108 Churchill 30 108 Clayton 19 108 D
Daniel 6 108 Davies 10 108 Dolman 23 108 Drake 14 108 F
Fairborne 27 108 H
Hacket 20 108 Hanson 35 108 Harding 45 108 Hustler 33 108 J
James 40 108 K
Kirk 46 108 L
Langham 28 108 Low 39 108 Lynch 8 108 M
Marsh 47 108 Maynard 36 108 Middleton 43 108 Mompesson 7 108 N
North 21 108 P
Pargiter 15 108 Pelham 9 108 Peyton 38 108 Pitfield 42 108 Player 12 108
Prichard 11 108 R
Raynsford 17 108 S
Sheldon 34 108 Shorter 37 108 Smith 32 108 Southwell 4 108 Sympson 24 108 T
Talbot 18 108 Theobalds 44 108 Thompson 29 108 Turnor 31 108 W
Waller 16 108 Williamson 1 108 Windham 5 108 ESQUIRES. Achievements. A
Armiger 34 151 Arthington 50 151 Ashburnham 3 151 Atwood 82 151 B
Barbon 60 151 Beauvoir 90 151 Bennet 78 151 Booth 47 151 Bowen 22 151 Brabazon
103 151 Brouncker 105 151 Burlase 85 151 Burton 41 151 Butler 19 151 Bide 47
151 C
Chetwynd 16 151 Clarke 100 151 Clifford 46 151 Callingwood 95 151 Collins 108
151 Colt 35 151 Colwall 24 151 Coventrey 1 151 Coxe 80 151 Crome 92 151 Cudmore
107 151 D
Darnall 33 151 Dereham 30 151 Dive 69 151 Dixie 61 151 Doughty 56 151 Duke 76
151 E
Egerton 36 151 Evance 91 151 F
Field 8 151 Feltham 70 151 Fleming 13 151 Foley 73,74,75 151 G
Georges 18 151 Gilbertson 23 151 Goodlad 26 151 Grant 5 151 H
Harvey 2 15^ Hoare 72 151 Huitson 58 151 J
James 89 151 Inkledon 27 151 Iollife 49,96 151 K
Keck 86 151 Knight 38 151 L
Lamplugh 40 151 Lant 32 151 Leg 7 151 Lewkenor 79 151 Loggan 20,104 151 Lucy
86 151 M
Madden 42 151 Mariet 15 151 Martyn 98 151 Marwood 102 151 Micklethwaite 66 151
Modyford 51 151 Molesworth 6 151 Mountague 67 151 P
Pagit 65 151 Palmer 99 151 Peck 63,64 151 Pierce 88 151 Pepys 17 151 Petyt 1
39 151 Pilkington 21 151 Plott 83 151 R
Rawlins 28 151 Raynsford 44 151 Roberts 12 151 Robinson 68 151 Row 101 151 S
Sackvile 55 151 Sanders 25 151 Seys 31 151 Skeleton 14 151 Smith 52 151
Stephens 48 151 Stoughton 45 151 Strache 97 151 Stringer 94 151 Swift 43 151 T
Thompson 81 151 Thurland 11 151 Titus 29 151 Tomlins 59 151 Twisden 10 151 V
Vernon 106 151 VV
Walker 77 151 Warner 84 151 Weld 54 151 Werden 53 151 Wharton 4 151 Wildman 37
151 Windham 93 151 Winwood 62 151 Wyrley 9 151 Wythens 71 151 GENTLEMEN'S
Achievements. B
Blome 5 154 Bourne 2 154 E
Air 9 154 F
Farington 10 154 G
Glover 10 154 Gregory 11 154 L
Lunde 14 154 M
Mainstone 1 154 Marshall 13 154 R
Row 3 154 S
Shaw 12 154 Stanley 8 154 Stratford 15 154 V
Vandeput 4 154 Vanheck 7 154 VV
Whitwath. 6 154

FINIS.

