Guild Hall London. December the 11th. 1688. By the Commissioners of
Lieutenancy for the said City.
Ordered,
THat Sir Robert Clayton Knt. Sir William Russel Knt. Sir Basil Firebrace Knt.
and Charles Duncomb Esquire be a Committee from the said Lieutenancy to Attend His
Royal Highness the Prince of Orange, and present to His Highness the Address
agreed by the Lieutenancy for that purpose: And that they begin their Journey
to Morrow Morning.

By the Commissioners Command,
Geo.Evans, Cl. Lieut. London.

To His Highness the Prince of ORANGE.
The Humble Address of the Lieutenancy of the City of London.
May it please Your Highness,
WE can never sufficiently express the deep Sense we have Conceived and shall
ever retain in our Hearts, that Your Highness has exposed Your Person to so
many Dangers both by Sea and Land for the Preservation of the Protestant
Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, without which
unparalled Undertaking we must probably have suffered all the Miseries that
Popery and Slavery could have brought upon us.

We have been greatly Concerned that before this time we have not had any
Seasonable Opportunity to give Your Highness and the World a Real Testimony
that it has been our Firm Resolution to venture all that is Dear to us to
attain those Glorious Ends which your Highness has proposed for Restoring and
Settling these Distracted Nations.

We therefore now Unanimously present to Your Highness our just and due
Acknowledgments for that Happy Relief you have brought to us, and that we may
not be wanting in this present Conjuncture, we have put our selves into such a
posture that (by the Blessing of God) we may be capable to prevent all ill
Designs, and to preserve this City in Peace and Safety till your Highnesses
Happy Arrival.

We therefore Humbly Desire that your Highness will please to repair to this
City with what convenient speed you can for the perfecting the Great Work which
Your Highness has so Happily begun to the General Joy and Satisfaction of us
All.

December the 17th. 1688.
THE said Committee this Day made Report to the Lieutenancy that they had
Presented the said Address to the Prince of Orange, and that his Highness
Received them very Kindly.

December the 17. 1688. By the Lieutenancy.
Ordered,
That the said Order and Address be forthwith Printed.

Geo. Evans.


