LAMENTATIO CIVITATIS. OR, Londons Complaint Against her CHILDREN in the
COUNTRY.

SHOWING Her Weakness, Poverty, and Desolatenesse. Blaming their Unkindnesse,
Inhospitality, and Diffidence toward her.

Discovering to them her Consolations in God in this her Trouble: Chiding their
want of Knowledge of God and his Chastisements. With Advice unto them. Taken
from her own Mouth.

AS ALSO A Brief Account, how many died in the Years 1529, 1603, 1625, 1630,
1636, 1637, 1638, 1646, 1647, 1648. with this present Year 1665. Likewise
several Preservatives against the Infection.

JOB 19.21. Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, Oh ye my friends, for the
Hand of God has touched me.

JOB 33.27, 28: He looked upon men, and if any say, I have sinned, and
perverted that which was right, and it profited me not, He will deliver his
soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see light.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Rogers at the Duke of Monmouths Head in the Park
Southwark, and are to be sold at his House, or at Tho. Glasbrook at
Brooks-wharf. 1665.

TO THE HONORABLE REVEREND and WORSHIPFUL Magistrates, Ministers and
Physicians, And all other my Christian Children, who out of a good Conscience
toward God, stays by me in this my grievous Affliction, Greeting,
SIn is the Cause of all Judgment, and the Bewailing of our own and other men's
sins, is the only way to have judgment removed in Mercy; Misery is the
Touchstone whereby true friendship is tried; God has tried you, and I have
found you such as I may trust. Therefore all the blessings that I can conceive
in my heart, both of this world and that which is to com be upon you, for
comforting my drooping spirit, and strengthening me now in my weakness.

And now let me entreat your Patronage of this Complaint, to defend me from the
Calumnies of my Children, who have deserted me in the time of my Calamity,
though they that are fled have not left me out of obstinacy, but fearfulness
and want of knowledge: This your Patronage I entreat for Edification, desiring
with the Apostle all things may be done with meekness. And the Blessing of God
the Father, the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Fellowship of the Holy
Ghost be with you all.

Your Nursing Mother
LONDON-CITY.
LAMENTATIO CIVITATIS.
SHall we receive good at the Hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? Naked
came I out of my Mothers Womb, and naked must I return thither; the Lord gives,
and the Lord takes away, and blessed be the Name of the Lord.

As Physicians are distracted with the many infirmities of an old patched up
Patient, (which disease in him to take away first, that the other make not head
against his life,) so I now poor, distressed, rejected, diseased London, once
the Phoenix, now the Owl; once the Paragon of beauty, now a Pattern of
deformity; lately the crown and pride of great Britain, now a skarcrow and
scorn; know not which way to turn me first. My God is angered, my household
plagued, my hopeful children dispersed. Which last grieves me not least, that I
should nourish children, who should in time of need so forsake me. I have
solicited God in supplication. I have comforted my family with my best
adjutation; but my sorrows increase, and my friends decrease, which makes me
send out (in the bitterness of my soul) this Exclamation against them, this
Declaration to them.

Ah well said S. Chrysostom; Quod est in Arboribus humor, hoc est in hominibus
Amor: The love in men is like juice in trees, which humor seldom revisits the
root being once sent forth, but shoots forward into sprigs, leaves, or fruit:
so childrens love seldom reflects on the Parents, but boundeth forward to some
other object. And so deal you (my children) with me, whose ungratefulness I
much pity, though it may be you regard it not. But howsoever, I must discharge
my Conscience in relating your faults, that so (if in your absence some of my
lewd sons prey on your goods) you may not blame me for not informing you: nor
when you return (if you taste of correction) you may not take hainously my
reforming you. And least you think I speak without cause, consider my
weakness. poverty. small company.


And that you are not guiltless, neither of these miseries, nor undeserving my
expostulations, I pray consider your unkindness to God and me inhospitality to
the needy. diffidence in Gods providence.


And yet that I am not comfortless, mark my confidence, nor loveless to you,
observe my counsel, in that I wish you to reclaim. repent. believe.


And lastly, Commend me (I can scarce say kindly) to those untaught Country
people, whom neither fear of God, nor knowledge of his Word, nor example of my
Civil Government, nor kind entertainment, nor leasing, nor lending, nor
trading, nor my large contributing to their Briefs, can win to the kind
welcoming of my children, dispersed through their infirmity, nor to the burying
of them without inhumanity. And let those know my displeasure, who care not
though I starve for want of food, who keep back the people as much as in them
lies from bringing sustenance hither, for fear the Plague should come thither
in a pair of Panniers. But their fault I will put last, as the least in
comparison of yours, who fright them with your amazedness. But you should have
had more hope in God, more trust in his Word, more love to me, more respect to
your selves, then thus to expose your bodies dead, or alive (in this case) to
the rude courtesy of the ignorantly fearful (I had almost said) faithless
Country.

And all this comes to pass because I am touched with infirmity, which what it
is you shall know; my infirmity is natural. spiritual.


My spiritual infirmity is sin in general, but in particular security in
prosperity. unsensiblenesse of visitation. murmuring in want, abusing plenty.


Which you my Children have not been behind-hand to augment, neither are you
guiltless. Have not you infected my Air with swearing, my Taverns (which I
erected to comfort the sorrowful) with spewing up your surquedny? My shops with
cheating, my Churches with hypocrisy, my Suburbs with bandry? What sin am I
tainted withal, of which you have not the tincture? What paint have I put on,
of which you have not the Visor? You have grinded my poor, you have eat my
people like bread, you have sold them for old shoes, you have oppressed by
might, and Bankruptism, you have left debts unpaid, you have opened a way for
unconscionable men to undo others by your departing, and left me, last of all,
to desolation, as if you were none of those who had augmented my sin, and
therefore need not partake of my punishment. These Mischiefs you have left
behind you, though your bodies are absent, and I feel the smart of yours and
mine own folly.

There are some of you, who are absent, whose nakedness (with Constantine) I
had rather cover with my cloak, then discover. But I see some wilfully let go
the Plough, and never look after it; I see Shepherds smitten with fear, sheep
scattered, hearers fickle, for want of due ordering, Church Discipline
rejected, Sacraments neglected, the bread of life vilified, your selves in
counsel and example despised. I am benefited by your prayers and pains,
therefore will I spare reproof, as not worthy to do it. But yet observe (I pray
you, especially the most of you that are fled) how your people grow dissolute,
their natures insolent, their ears itching, their appetite greedy, their heads
distracted, their hearts unsettled. I accuse no Father of the Church, for they
have no particular place of residency, the care of all the Churches lies on
them, and they deputed you over particular Congregations, for your own good and
the peoples also, that the Church may want no tendance. Yet I say not, that you
have been the fountain of all this. For you my lay-children (for the most part)
cannot complain for want of teaching, since you have followed so little, and
played the wantons with your bread.

And if their sins would spur away as fast as they, I should complain of no
other infirmity. But Quicquid delirunt isti plectuntur Achivi, whatsoever you
have done I find the scourge of it, and with my poor inhabitants may say with
David in the person of my Savior; The rebukes of those that offended thee fall
upon me. Yet I excuse not my self, nor my residents as Innocent, but would not
have my self only censured, because I bear the punishment. I have not truly
bewailed my Rebellions against my late Sovereign, sacrilegiously robbing my
Churches of their Orthodox Ministry, and turning the deaf ear to those sweet
Singers of Israel, and followed the bleating of Jeroboams Calves. Thus having
reduced my self to the Proverb, Like People like Priest; and no sooner did
those sons of Corah blow the Trumpet of sedition, but presently my multitudes
and strength, which should have been a Safeguard to the King and Kingdom, I did
rebelliously sacrifice to the ruin of both: And the better to make Religion
and Reformation a pretense for my Rebellion, I imposed Oaths and Covenants on
my children, contrary to the Laws of God, the Command of my King, the Law of
the Land, and mine own Conscience. I no sooner had brought to pass that wicked
device which I had plotted against the Church, my King, the Kingdom, and mine
own soul, but presently contrary to those Oaths and Protestations wickedly
betrayed the best of Kings into the treacherous hands of the worst of men. And
though with Judas I repented my self, and would have no hand in his death, yet
when it was done I was not truly humbled for so grievous a sin, but still with
Ahab went on to do wickedly. And since, though God has by a mavelous hand of
Providence, restored our Gracious Sovereign, whom God long preserve, unto the
Throne of his Father, and my Judges being as at the first, and my Counselors
as at the beginning, the Church established in its primitive Purity, by
enjoying its Liturgy, teaching my children as well how as to whom to pray; or
if they would be so pious as to pray by the spirit, our Holy Mother the Church
has sufficiently provided, they may pray with understanding also; yet
notwithstanding I have remained as schismatical as ever, being as unthankful
under Mercies, as I was incorrigible under Judgments. I know, O Lord, thy
Judgments are just, and that thou in faithfulness has afflicted me. Have
mercy upon me, O Lord, after thy great goodness, according to the multitude of
thy tender mercies do away my offenses, for I acknowledge my wickedness, and am
sorry for my sin. Oh turn to me again thou Lord of Hosts, show us the light of
thy Countenance, and we shall be whole. I know also that I have the poor with
me, a rude people, whom I cannot rule, whose necessity has hardened them, and
their defection driven them to Commit sin with greediness. And as Cooks frame
all things to the palate, and omit things profitable; so do they (says Philo)
omit good, and turn all things to their present pleasure. But I have a
generation here likewise, who make Conscience of sinning, whose tears are
daily poured forth, and prayers sent out, and ejaculations shot up for my
restoring, who ( I do hope) shall be heard in that they pray for, and I shall
be cured, and they shall be blessed.

The second kind of infirmity or malady.
In the mean time my sorrows are multiplied not more by sickness then by
scandalls of weak Fantasies, and by the comfortless desertion, and decession
of my children. My scourge inflicted on me is the Plague: A disease fearful
enough, yet not half so fearful as my sins, through which I have run boldly
enough, and in which the Countrey-people has taken part with me. A Disease
which David chose before Famine or the Sword, Let me fall into the hand of God
and not of man. A disease, which is some sign of Gods favor: For he has not
suffered Famine to blast our Fields with her barren breath, neither has he
said, Sword cut through this Land: But like a Father he has taken us in hand
himself; as David calls it, the Chastisement of his own hand, Let me fall into
the Hand of God. A disease, that was the last blow that God took at Egypt, and
the common scourge of Israel, and usually set on by an Angel, whose stroke
moved the mud of man's nature to his own ruin, which else lies still and
settled, and destroys man some other way in time. I confess, that I have heard
related, that some of my Sister Cities have been infected by strange accidents:
but God is my Master, and not Fortune my Mistress, some say the Infection
happens by constellatious, ominoes aspects, evil conjunctions, unseasonable
weathers, but these must extend themselves then beyond a City, and her Suburbs,
because in these occurrents the air is rainted, and then not kept within the
compass of one Cities Hemisphere.

Some have been (they say) infected by mere stinks: they are noisome indeed, but
have no more relation to kill this way by a Plague, then by other ways and
diseases, which they may breed and bring to pass. Bad fumes are discommodities
that I am much troubled withal by reason of my noisome children, and idle
servants, but yet my breath is not so obnoxious as is reported: for if it were,
five would die to one that does die, it being the common breath, by which all
with me does live; and being there is two weak bodies for one strong (counting
women and children*) And beside, if my breath were infectious, then would those
creatures, whose nature have affinity with man (as Swine, Cocks and Hens)
receive such infections in the streets, as would forthwith slay them, though
they were not kept up in Plagued houses. Therefore do not scandal me, and add
affliction to the afflicted, but consider God is my Rock, and his Word is my
Pillar, and the ground of Truth. I know that God may use outward means to
infect and suffocate. But least we should lean too much to nature, he does not
(in Scripture) reveal this disease so executed: but either he does express it
done by an Angel, Numb, 19.45.
or else does silence the execution thereof in a mute anger. Job was smitten
with scab^, yet the Scripture attributes it to the devil; and why should we
think but that in a disease so mortal, so quick dispatching as this; but that
he used his good Angel, incensed with his Masters displeasure, or else sent
Satan to buffet us for our presumptions.

Our Church acknowledges the Plague to be Gods arrow, and Hippocrates calls it
(...). And therefore for Gods cause, lest you detract from his honor, lay it
upon me. I know that those houses, wherein God has smitten one (for want of
care and means,) may and do taint others, but what is this to my breath, or
that men should think therefore that I am totally infected. Or if one go abroad
out of such a house into a Congregation, and there (because they have not been
aired first) taint an other (as we surmise): or sometimes one being afraid of
another, their heart faint, and their blood turns, and they die of the plague,
their passions (though not stricken) helping to work the humors of their
bodies to a sore; is this sufficient to forget the operation of God in this
Plague, or condemn me, or leave me utterly desolate? God has said, that he
will send evil Angels among us, yet these can but vex them to whom their
license extends; yet I make no doubt, but God makes the Pestilence ordinarily
to cleave to a man by infection, but this does not hold always that he does so,
and when it does take one by infection, it is not always mortal.

And this is the infirmity, with which I am at this time afflicted. And that I
draw you not into error, take the judgment of other Ancients, and let none
think by an obscure evasion, to make me the more to be shunned in necessary
neighborly comfort, by saying the Plague in Scripture and ours were not all
one; because theirs were sudden, ours were lingering. For God made those sharp,
that we which were to live under the times of mercy, 1 Cor. 10.11.
might be warned by his Severity to them. And if he had suffered them to have
lived under the stroke as Hezekiah did, it would have broken out of them, as it
did on him and us at this day. God is more merciful to us then, who by space
between his strokes calls to repentance. But let not us abuse this mercy, and
cry out rashly, and childishly (before God touches us) that all London is
infected. Indeed lying and breathing under Gods stroke, oftentimes infects
others: has not God therefore given you learned Physicians to your brethren,
to help you with Preservatives against the infection, though they cannot
recover the fish that is stricken? And if we use these good means, has not God
given us his Word, which declares his power, in restraining not only the
infection, but the violence of his Devouring Angel also, as our King James of
blessed memory called it in his Parliament-Oration. And have not our
Magistrates most worthily and carefully provided to shut them up, or dispose of
them elsewhere, who have been stricken: Which course might do some good, but
that we lack persons and purses to keep in, and keep the sick when they are
within. All these things being observed, I need not be left like Job on a
dunghill, nor my infirmity be so much shunned, that I and my children should be
so many miles severed.

The Venereal Pox is ten times a baser disease and more absolutely infectious,
yet my sons (I shame to own them) that have it, are called Good-fellows. Men
will not stand upon it to drink either Wine or Tobacco with them, who are more
fit (not for the Pesthouse) but the Pistrinum, the Bridewel. The Chyrurgions
never shun to cure these, but because the hand of God is upon me, and a less
infectious disease, though more pernicious; I am shunned of some Pastors and
people, Physicians and Chyrurgions, as if they stayed, they should be all dead
men; whereas this disease is a picking and culling out of men, to set forward
(as in a muster) which causes it to take at the beginning one here, and
another half a mile off, then leap thither again, where it was first, and take
them away, which at first it left, (as the weekly Bills testify) neither can
it be proved, that all these have by any contracting or conventing ever met
together, especially since houses were shut up. So that (as Fernelius says)
this disease has an hidden beginning, and why not an hidden procession? But
only that in continuance, some accidents do befall, upon which our reason has
more ground to traverse and discourse.

But some will say, the Plague is mortally infectious, and therefore it is
wilful murder to stay if I may go. I cannot say so, If it be thy place and
calling to stay But I say, thou then do kill them wilfully (by thine own
argument) whom thou leavest behind, or set to keep thy sick: except thou
think that servants and poor keepers may be killed up by authority.

But surely, if it were but well observed, my infirmity rather deserves an
humble reverence, then to breed a scandal, or an offense. If it were merely
natural, men might like natural men fly from it. But as it is secretly hidden
from the Heathen (as Galen and Hippocrates) who grant the beginning thereof to
be very secret: so the Scriptures declare unto us that hidden beginning, that
so we might know under what covert to hide us. The 91 Psalm tells us in verse
the 1.4. Of the shadow and wings of the Almighty. Therefore the Septuagint
translates that Psalm where we find the word Pestilence, by the word ((...))
which signifies a word. Or else they call it ((...)) a thing arguing the strange
nature thereof. These learned Jews went to the cause of the Plague. I am not
ignorant, that the Heathen learned Physician Galen called it ((...)) because of
his destroying nature, and mortal disposition, and Hippocrates called it
((...)) because of his spreading nature. These men went no farther then the
effect, which was visible, but the invisible operator and operation was hidden
from them, and therein they did but guess. The Scriptures call us to an
outward admiration of this wonderful work, and an inward adoration of God who
is the Enlarger and Restrainer hereof, who makes such sweet Promises in the 91
Psalm concerning deliverance from it; as, Thou shall go on the Asp and the
Dragon. Which Mellerus on that Psalm says, signifies the Pestilence, and used
by the Psalmist; Vt vim veneni significantius exprimeret; yet not the force of
it to infect, but to kill; for the sting of the Asp poisons but those whom it
strikes, it imparts not the same force to another, not contacta, no not by
touching of the body so stung. Yet this my infirmity does, yet always not
absolutely to death, nor does it always infect to sickness ( Deo invante) for
we see that your Searchers, Keepers, Sextons, Bearers, are the seldomest taken
with it.

Therefore the beginning of this my infirmity being invisible, the procession
doubtful, the destroying selective, (as it were Morbus rationalis, a disease
that did cull out of discourse or reason men appointed to die, and not always
infect the next adjacent places): my learned and reverend so^res of former
times in my affliction divinely have called for Metaphysical perfumes. Mr.
Fenton in his spiritual Pers.
So did Mr. Fenton in his spiritual perfume, as if Kitchin-fire did as much
good to purge away this disease, as our pots of Frankincense does in my
streets, when the wind blows it all to one end. And that we might have recourse
to God above (though not without outward means) another of my well reputed
Sons counts no fantasy, that print (as it were) of a blow on some. Mr
Holland in his sp. Pr


The sores we may know from whence they are; the tokens ordinarily we discern,
but from whence is this? This seems to be ((...)) or Plaga, a blow indeed so
termed, Rev. 16.9. All these does but show us, whom first and mainly to believe
upon, the God of spirits, who can call back his Sergeants and withdraw his
Action, and forgive our debt and forbear our lives till some other time.

Yet I fear me all this will not drive my smells on of your nose. If stinkes
does it, do you think the stinks will be ever the less when so many thousand
are dead? No. And yet you will come to Town then, and when here is the more
stir, here will be the more stink.

Object.
But why did not my stinks kill you before now?

Answ.
Because (say you) God gave not the Word?

Object.
Why does not then the most stinking places (as the shambles, infect first, now
God has given the Word?

Answ.
Because God will not have it so, you will say. True, by the same reason you may
be saved here, and die there, or here when you come back, because God will have
it so.

Object.
But you will say, if it comes not only by such means, why happens it upon the
City rather then the Country?

Answ.
Because God is ever liberal of favors toward great Congregations, his favors
are more plentiful, more visible, and men are more sensible of them. And
therefore you shall find the Apostles (for the most part) dedicating their
Epistles to Cities; and the Prophets likewise bending their prophesies thereto.
Now where he is most plentiful in these, he is also of his corrections. So to
Israel; no people better fed better taught, soundlier whipped. And it is most
equal, that when men abuse ((...)) 1 John 1.4. Psalm 91 3.
the clear Word of Life, they should have ((...)) the bemudding word of death.

Secondly, it is done to the City for the Countries example, that the Pagi, and
the Villages round about might tremble, and that the pagani thereof might leave
off their paganish conversation, and stand in awe and sin not; which things if
they do not, though we have the sharp ends of the Rod, they may have (as
heretofore) the stumps. Mistake me not, I do not hope for it, I fear it. For
remember when God afflicted us the last time, when we had Ziim, had not you
Iim? When we had the Scritchowle, had not you the night Raven? When we had the
Pestilence, had not you the Plague also? You had; and you did taste of mine
infirmity.

Therefore consider what I have declared of it, and use all good medicines, but
above all medicines take Faith, Hope, and a good Conscience. You shall find
them (my dear children) of more force then the greatest Antidote. Remember the
promise of God in that 91. Psalm 14, 15.16 verses, Psalm. 91.14, 15, 16.
count it precious, let it be thy Buckler, as it is in the fourth verse.
Mollerus on that Psalm says, Eos qui certa fide in Deum recumberent tutos fere
a pestis saevitia that those which trust in God shall be free. So Mr. Cupper on
the same Psalm. And St. Chrysostom on the same Psalm says; Securus habitat in
terra, and prolixam vitam inventat, He shall dwell secure, and find a long
life, but totum hoc fit per spem, says he. True it is, for we see some escape
fire and sword with boldness, others overcom their enemies with fortitude, and
shall not the Quintessence of fortitude, the spirit of valor (which is
confidence in God) do much more? Does not godliness profit to all things, both
to this life and that which is to come 1 Timothy 4.8? If any one object that godly
men die of it, it is true does God deceive their trust in that? No. He gives
them life, and a better life. For God will not be stinted to temporaries by his
own children; and if he takes one away in this mind, I hope he does him no
wrong. Some wicked men you will say escape too. That is, because God will be
better then his word to all men, that the mouths of all men may be stopped. He
spares evil men sometime, that they may fulfill their sin; he takes away the good
from the evil to come. And this is thy encouragement, that if he spares of
both sorts, why not thee, if thou stayest in thy place, and necessary calling?
But thou fear to die, because neither prepared in faith nor profession.
Therefore I conclude my disease to be sore, as to be most infectious, yet God
can restrain it, and though he has sent out his evil Angel, yet I will trust
in the good Angel of the Covenant. Do you so likewise, that you may be partaker
of my faith, not mine infirmity; and cry, O Lord; thou have been our refuge
from one generation to another. You have seen my infirmity, the nature of it,
the principal remedy against it. What else is to be used in natural cure
against natural infection, I leave to your learned and grave brothers of
Physic. I have prescribed that which never failed Probatum est, Jam. 5.17.

Poverty.
But this is not all my trouble, for my sorrows are increased like my sins:
sickness has consumed my substance; and I may justly say with David, I am
weak and poor.

My poverty lies in being void of Trading. Money. Victual.


All which I am well nigh destitute of at this time. This I confess to be
justly inflicted on me for my pride, with which I have sought to out
face-Heaven. My tinckling feet, and my tiptoe pace, my horned Tyaraes, and
crisped curled locks, shinne-pride and shoe pride, fulness of bread has
made me lift my heel against my Maker. I said in my prosperity I should never
be moved; but thou, O Lord, have turned thy face, and I am troubled. My
children have bin so full fed, that they have fallen out among themselves, the
meanest thinking themselves as good as the Magistrate, and the mighty refusing
to look upon the cause of the mean. My Merchants have been the Companions of
Princes, but now are gone, their place is scarce to be found. How has my back
groaned with heavy burdens, and now Issachar stands still for want of work. One
waine may carry all I sell in a day. I have had such trading that I could
scarce find time to serve God, but now every day is an Holy Day, because I
have profaned his Holy day (even his blessed Sabbath) which have been
dedicated to him, as a remembrance of his glorious Resurrection. But I have
lain dead in sins and trespasses. I have given liberty to my servants to
execute their wills in Sabbath-breaking, and deceiving: now God has proclaimed
liberty for them to the Pestilence, to wandering, to idleness My apprentices
have been the children of Knights and Justices of the Country, (which they
accepted at my hands joyfully) but now my children are cast out by those swains
like dung, rated like beggars, served like swine in hogstyes, buried in the
high way like Malefactors. But whither does my grief transport me? This the
Country shall hear of hereafter.

I have opened my Coffers to the Countries wants full often, and have some of
them in bonds still, but now I want it for my poor Children, and they neither
look to discharge their debt, nor in requital of my kindness will show pity to
my dispersed and despised Children.

I have had feasts admired at, whose very sight has cloyed the appetite, and
my very Reason has turned Ccok to cocker the p^late of my Wantons, I would
those feastings had stocked my poor kindred in my Suburbs, and set them to
work, that there might be no complaining in my streets: with which sacrifice
God would be well-pleased. The worst servant in my house has had bread enough,
and now I starve for hanger: for many of my children cry for bread, and I fear
me die of the Stomach Sickness, as well as the Spotted Sickness, if there
were a Bill could be gotten of all diseases. David's tears are my repast; his
sighs my repose. Jobs Message is the news most rife on my Exchange. One robs
me of my Asses, another of my Camels, my Sheep are consumed, my Children are
bruised, my self stricken with boiles and sores. I see nothing but my
nakedness. Those great Gates which were wont to be furnished with spangled
star-like beauties, are now the lodging for poor Children, or places for dung
and draught. My Chamber and Treasury, which was wont to be my refuge, can no
more supply my wants, it has been so swept; Beside, the stock of my
Corporations has been broken to maintain my wants, and yet my Children cry for
bread: and their brethren that remain are pressed with their maintenance, and
urged almost beyond their ability to find them necessaries.

This misery makes me again remember my folly, who have wished for some means
that might consume some of my Children, I being not able to maintain them, and
God has now said Amen to my ungracious desires; for he has taken them away
who might have served for my defense. And now I see, when God sends mouths, he
sends meat also, for though I have buried so many thousand, I have nothing more
then I had in wealth or trading; Nay, there are many who would be glad their
houses were visited, that they might be kept by the parish, because they have
nothing to eat. Yet I have some wicked wretches, who have learned of some
Countrey-farmers when they want, to grumble against God for something, and when
they have Gods plenty to murmur for nothing. For their eye is evil because Gods
is good.

When they have Corn enough, they say it is worth nothing, and they can make
no money of it; but they can make themselves Curses with it, for hording it up,
when they should make bread of it for the poor. It they have bread for their
Babes, and food for their Hinds, and provision for their Beasts, and a
reasonable price for the remainder; have they not sufficient? Yes more then
they deserve, Such as these have helped to hale a Curse from God, and by their
means it is I am so lean in looks, so lank in purse, so empty in stomach. But
I have deserved my self more then all these punishments doubled, yet shall they
escape who help to increase them? No. That is my fear, that God has not yet
done, and my grief, that mine own Children should farther provoke him, and help
to aggravate my sorrows.

For I am not only weak by sickness, poor, being destitute of means, but
forsaken, being desolate and forlorn of Company. But here lies my Comfort.
Psalm 9.18.
The Poor shall not always be forgotten; the expectation of the needy shall
not perish for ever. And although it may be asked in respect of my Babylouish
sins, how is that golden City ceased? Yet I have this hope in Gods mercy,
that Isa. 14.4, 30
the first borne of the poor shall feed, and the needy lie down in safety.
For as Saint Austin has it, Pauper est in animo Dei, non in sacculo; the poor
is in Gods mind, not in his purse, so that his purse may be scattered upon the
rich, but his mind runs on the poor.

^^^olate ^^sery.
But yet who would think Children should be so unkind to a Mother, who has
educated them in the knowledge of God, and in the experience of her
bosome-love, to let their Mother be forlorn of Company. My company that I
stand in need of, but want^ are Ministers. Physicians. Traders.


The one would help me being soule-sick, the other being body-sick, the third
being belly-sick. There are others, whom I find missing too, as my Lawyers, by
whose Science it has been spoken of me as it was of the City Abel: 2 Samuel 20
18.
They shall ask counsel at Abel, and so they ended the matter. But some of my
sons have bereaved me of that good report, and have almost made it, If they
ask counsel at London, so they may begin the matter, let it end when it will.
These men I miss, but I do not want them, except those who walks by the rule
of a good Conscience, those that do Jus dicere, or Jus dare, these I do esteem
and respect; And as for those that do Ius esse, swallow the Law, but not Jus
edere, bring little to light; those that fill Westminster Hall, but to little
purpose. I blame not those Honorable and grave persons, who are many of them
employed by my Royal Sovereign, and the Father of my Country. And I know that
their judicious Consultations may benefit me wheresoever they are, for these I
earnestly pray that God may keep them in all times of trouble.

There be others whose company I miss, namely, those whom God has given in
great abundance, whose very House keeping might have relieved some, refreshed
others: but their countenance and good example of fasting and praying, would
have encouraged all, but they are gone, and they neglect to employ that Talent
which God has given them in charge; But some Charitable and sincere persons
still remains with us, He that gives to the Poor lends unto the Lord: the
Charitable person shall be blessed, and happy are those persons that shall
fully execute their charge as he does. But they sit in the Country secure, and
thank God they are there. Indeed, if they had stayed here, pitying my distress,
aiding me in weakness, by disbursing their money, and exercising their places,
and afterward (when God had ceased his hand, and they given him condign thanks
for his mercy) they then solacing themselves in the pleasant shades, might
thank God for his preservation, and their recreation with a safe conscience.
But to thank God for his Connivency in their natural courses (except for his
mercy that therein they be not consumed) is false fire, and savors more of the
Kitchen then the Conscience. Let them thank their Coach-horses, for I have so
fed their Masters (for the most part) that I am sure they could never have
gotten half so far without them.

But the higher my childrens groans rise, the more I look about me, and the
more help I still miss. Where be my Chyrurgions now, that can mortify and
revive a wound when they list; and rub over an old sore, and pick many a pound
out of the paring of a man's toe, that can scarrifie a green wound, and
canterize an old one? Where is the aid I should have of these skilful men?
These are shavers in their kind: but at this time they had rather carve at a
Capon, or Anatomize a Rabbet, then Lance a sore, and do their duty out of a
good conscience to their sick Mother. If a man that is hanged fall to their
share, who but they to cut and carve! but to what purpose think you? As the
Priest did of old, Pectoribus inhians spirantia consulit exta, gape upon his
guts, and then make good cheer for their own. These have the terms of Art
explained, the secrets of Nature opened, but to what purpose, if it be done to
admiration rather then operation; and to show the work of Nature, and yet not
to help Nature? For now I stand in need, I am posted from the Physician to the
Chyrurgion, by the Chyrurgion left to the Barber; where, if I will wash, and be
gone, and so forth, I may, he can do no more.

But I did suppose, that my Physicians would not have stirred. Men that have
Antidotes at Command, Electuaries, Pomanders, and what not, whole Apothecaries
shops full of Conceits and Receipts, to keep all the Cinque Ports of man's body
inviolable. Or if a man be sick, they can, or who can (under God) resta^re
nature, and restore health? They have many Powders and Antidotes for other men,
or for their money, but none to strengthen their own heart, so much as to stay
in a City where the Plague is. To these men belongs that saying, Luke 4.23.
Medice cura teipsum. And this question which was most noisome, Jobs disease, or
the Plague: and this demand, which conduces most to salvation; the opinion of
a Naturian, ( the Plague is infectious) or the prescription of Divinity ( he
that has an office, let him wait on his office.) If you think the latter, hoc
age and vive, our blessed Savior shall approve you, When I was sick you
visited me. Why are we bidden to honor them? Because, says the Son of
Syrach, They be ordained for thy health. Are they so? the more uncharitable and
unconscionable they to leave me in this distress. But since I have set them on
Horseback, they are rid away. My Savior said, that the sick needs the
Physician, not the healthful. Yea but they say, the Physician now stands in no
need of the sick, for he has filled his purse, and is gone. Oh sweet
Samaritane, if thou had done so to them or me, when thou foundest me lying
in the high way to Hell and Death, what had become of us? Well, had I but for
all this the Priest to stand by me in this Leprosy, I could have borne it: but
as a wounded spirit none can bear, so neither can I suffer the loss of my
spiritual salve: I blame not you, that have two cares, and two cures, (for you
are gone every Summer to discharge your office to your Country sheep, and when
that is done, I know you will return) but you have no charge to pay your
charges but my purse.

And especially you that leave your Pastoral charge in the Country, taking up
your Litter (Lecture I should say) and yet Litter as you use it, making of
London a Station till your own ends be achieved, or till some cross befall me,
and then you are gone. Nay, because you would not be said to forsake my people,
you have sent my people away before with your great persuasions to fly. You
love not two livings till you have them, but a Living and a Lecture, is an
easy task, because they are not two cures of Souls, and it is true; for one
is a wounding of Souls for want of cure.

But this may be defended you think, for there is much difference between the
Temple, and Mat. 23.16.
the gold of the Temple in swearing, so it may be there is in Preaching. He
that has the charge of two Temples, that is something; but he that is called to
one, and takes the gold of another or two, with neglect of his own, that is
nothing: for my money may be taken, and your sheep left upon the Downs in the
Country, with any Hireling that will do it cheapest. And though my
Citie-children lie sick, and so the rest wants food it matters not, you have
other sheep then, let the Parson look to these, say you, let the Physician,
says he, let the Chyrurgion, says he, let the Curate, says he, and so with
Job I am brought to the Ash-heape. But if my children would be ruled by me,
they shall choose such as will stand to their Teaching, and them also, in life
and death, sickness and in health, doing their duty out of a good Conscience.

But let me not condemn the just with the unjust. There are some of this
reverent profession, who are worthy of double honor, who have abode with me in
temptations, the Lord show mercy to them, and to those worthy Physicians, who
have not been ashamed of my bonds, nor childishly affrighted at my infirmity.
And those Chyrurgions who have addicted themselves to my health, the Lord
remember them when they are in trouble; with all the rest, who have with me
humbled themselves under Gods hand, and administered sweet comfort when it was
bitterness with me. My respectful eye shall ever be upon them, and their names
as occasion shall serve, exalted to my power, and that beyond ordinary
discourse. Especially those Aarons, who have stood betwixt the living and the
dead. In mean time, accept these ejaculations to God for you in requital: The
Lord hear you in the day of trouble, the name of the God of Jacob defend you,
strengthen you when you lie sick upon your bed, and deliver you not unto the
will of your enemies.

But would one think my Tradesmen should go, if but for their profit sake. But
the Devil knows their mind, that skin for skin, and all that a man has, he
will give for his life. But yet Gods servants have ever preferred his service,
their calling; before their own lives. Moses would rather suffer affliction
with his Brethren, then live in Pharaohs Court. Vriah would not lie with his
wife, nor eat, nor drink unto mirth, while Gods Host was in the field. And
Solomon says, It is better to go to the house of mourning then feasting. But
these are all too little to persuade you, till I set before you your faults, as
well as mine own defects.

Which are these Unkindness.
Unkindnesse. Uncharitableness. Distrustfulnesse.


Your unkindnesse appears in these four particulars: First, in disgracing me;
Secondly, in your Countrey-merriment; Thirdly, in your leaving me desolate;
Fourthly, in not paying your debts.

Your disgrace appears in leaving my streets bare, my Temples empty, my shops
shut up Beside, you have made my savor to stink in the Country through your
rashness, and their ignorance. Secondly, your unkindness appears in your
jocound behavior in the Country, at whose lightness those Sylvans wonder, as
at people more unnatural then themselves. Me thinks you should fear least
benumming death might creep on your Angles (which I see conveyed along my
streets for your pleasure) like the sleepie venom of the Cramp-fish. Or while
you shoot in pastime, you should fear least the P^al. 91.5.
arrow that flies by day should aim at you in earnest. You bewray the weakness
of your affection to me, and your fellow brethren, your unsensiblenesse of Gods
hand, and your shallowness in Religion, even by this. Thirdly, have you not
adventured me to the common spoil? If God did not watch the City: The Lord
Mayor.
If I had not one Son left me whose care has showed him a Father to me, how
might my doors be broken open, my Chests ransackt, mine Obligations torn, my
Bonds canceld? You will not believe this, yet some of you (I fear me) will be
sensible of it. God continue him in this care, and reward him for it. You have
fastened your doors with Padlocks, some have Powder to blow them open. When you
return, complain not what you have lost; least I smile at your folly, and seem
to pity your misfortune. Fourthly, have you not left some of your debts
unpaid, by which I should be relieved, never considering what may become of you
and yours; and then how your Creditors hearts must be turmoild to seek after
their own. Has not many of you carried away the better part of your estates in
money, and sowed them by the highway as the Lord has scattered your bodies? I
could name some, but time will bring them to light.

Uncharitableness.
To this add your uncharitableness, and then see whether I speak without
cause, which first appears in not relieving the poor, who like a Cripple
cannot follow your nimble Coursers. I am not ignorant that some have given out
of their superfluity, others out of pure charity, but the most have not: and
so the little which is left, is consumed, and like Pharaohs kine, we seem never
the fatter; for what is this among so many?

Secondly, it shows it self in condemning the poor; (that they are so obvious
to the Plague) as if God had a quarrel against none but them. I know they are,
for the most part, ill livers, intemperate of tongue, and appetite, gross
feeders; and such as disorderly thrust themselves into danger, all this may
conspire to their ruin, by preparing their bodies for other diseases as well
as the Plague: for this disease takes hold of them more then others, because
they be most in number: but my penny-fathers have not all escaped it, nor the
finest feeders, and therefore your judgment of the poor is somewhat too harsh.

Thirdly, It appears in not assisting me in your prayers. It may be you will
say, that you do in private: if I had seen it here, I would have more easily
believed it: for many of you are gone, where you mind little of Preaching,
though you have fat pasture. And how you will forget your duty, when you are
not taught it, I may justly fear.

Other inconveniences you have brought about, as discouraging those that stay,
they weakly conceiving that they are but dead men. Some are of a stronger
temper, but yet Comes in via pro vehiculo est; your company might have been a
great ease unto them.

Again, by your departing indiscreetly, how have you disjoynted the Country
with fear, procured rough usage to your selves, and caused me to fare the worse
for your sakes; for I can scarce get provision from the Country, and so my
misery is doubled.

Distrustfulness.
But though you have forsook me, I could never think you would have forsaken
your God, but rather received evil at his hands as well as good. But you have
either in this, distrusted Gods will, that he will not I speak of those who by
their place and calling should not have stirred but sto^ to their charge
save you, or else his power that he cannot save you, the Plague being a disease
of a depopulating nature; or else you mistrust that this Plague came by some
accident; and so it does Catch that catch may, every one that comes near it.
But my Savior says, That a Sparrow falls not to the ground without the will
of your heavenly Father. But you will say, that you take your flight as a means
to bring Gods will to pass in saving you: you say well, if you can prove it.
Do you think that God will save none that stay? Or that he will spare all you
that be abroad? I dare not say so. I fear you would feign wrest Gods will to
yours. I grant that evil things coming from the hand of God, may and ought to
be avoided when God shows a man a gap to go out at; but this must not be the
Gap of our own fantasy. When God leaves a man a lawful gap, he does not
cross some positive point of Religion. And if the case be doubtful, then are
we to bend our selves to that course, which may suit best with the Analogy of
Faith, and not to our own particular, except that particular hold also in as
full grounds of Religion, as the other course. Therefore in all such passages
we are to observe, that what we do be not against piety, charity, nature,
civil policy: as that we decline not from God, from our neighbor, from our
kindred, nor from the Commonwealth.

And these wholesome Rules, my reverent Sons have laid down in former times,
though misconceived of some of their followers, who willing to please their own
nature, have catched something from them, not observing their whole intent. I
make no doubt, but in general, and open punishments you may, and ought to shift
for your selves by removal, as in famine Abram did; and in persecution from one
City you may fly to another, says my Savior. But in an uncertain punishment
(wherein none can assure themselves absolutely in going or staying, of life and
death) when Religion and Nature rather invites us to stay, it is vain fear to
fly, or else self-love without religious respect: except you be such an one as
by flight neither hurts other nor others. Or else you be such Mr. Balmford in
his Dial. of the P^st. p. 69.
whose residence is not necessary. But who are unnecessary, (if they be members
of a Common wealth) I know not, except women, and young children, and some
servants; or sojourners, or Gentlemen, who have no relation to me as necessary
members. For if you think the rich men may go, then has the middle sort little
to do; so that in fine, they will not find themselves very needful: and let
them go too and then others shall have nothing to do; and then I shall have
none left but the poor, nor of them but only such as can make no escape into
the Country, and so the subject of the Physician and the Minister being almost
gone, there will be little need of them too. And for the Magistrate, it will
scarce be worth his pains; he may appoint an under officer to keep the poor
folks in order. But a Commonwealth is a body, and one member methinks should
nourish another; but especially in a Christian Commonwealth. For as Job speaks
in his own person, a man in misery should be comforted of his neighbors, but
men have forsaken the fear of the Almighty: the latter part of the verse I may
say with him concerning you: You were ever taught to stand to your Calling;
especially in a doubtful, and invisible Correction.

One of my worthy Sons, a Doctor of Physic, did much blame you in a time of
the Plague, for your unnatural starting one from another. And as I remember
these were his words: Dr. Hering Epist. before his defense printed 1624.
It remains that acknowledging the Pest his Contagion, we notwithstanding
(who are Christians) carefully avoid that faithless and Paganish fearfulness,
whereby we are made to break all the bonds of Religion, Consanguinitie,
Alliance, Friendship, and Policy. So that you see how careful they were, and
yet how headstrong you have been. We do the Pagans wrong to put this
fearfulness on them, for they strive to do the uttermost duties to the sick,
and the dead. It is now Christian fearfulness, the more our shame.

Some of you will say, that God it may be sent it to scatter the City, and
punish the pride thereof that way: that is hidden from thee, though likely:
but thou know, that God uses to send crosses for sin, and yet withal to
try us whether we will cleave to him or no. But you have forsaken him, his
Word, and me also. Some I fear will ask, Why may not they fly as well as the
King and State, (indeed some have been forwarder then his Majesty in that
business) their lives are as dear to them? 2 Samuel 28.3.
Oh remember what David's Worthies said unto him, Thou art worth ten thousand of
us, he that thinks not so, 2 Samuel 21.17.
knows not what the light of Israel means. The King is the head and tower:
the Council is the heart of a Land, and ought to be defended from diseases,
least the life be endangered. Beside, their affairs are such as that they may
be considered of in other places as well as here. For want of these
considerations I am almost beggered, I was at a low ebb before, by an
unnatural rebellion against my Sovereign, but now it is full flood with me, but
of misery, because of my sin.

Thus am I left disconsolate, because God has touched me; and as Euripides,
(...), every friend shuns the distressed, but if I should so deal by you,
(whose servants are dead, whom you set to keep your goods) all might run to
ruin. But I have not so requited you, nor will while I am able to help you.
For though you have forsaken me, yet my God has not, and therefore for his
sake, I cannot but love you, and wish you well; and I pray God that a fear of
no worse thing drive you home, then that which has driven you abroad.

But now I remember where you are, and how both you and I have been abused by
those rough-hewen and unnatural persons (who have neither knowledge in, nor
sense of your brother Jacobs afflictions) I cannot show my Comfort in God, nor
my Counsel to you, till I have uttered my stomach to them, whom I condemn of
ignorance and hard-heartednesse.

The Countries ignorance.
First, of ignorance, I might say of manners, but that you will grant at the
first word; I also might say of Covetousness, as hording of Corn, but you are
contented to be convinced of that, so you may get my money. But I say I condemn
you of ignorance, which is the fountain of all this misdemeanour. For you are
ignorant, first, of God, and secondly, of Gods hand, and that appears, by your
strange fables of the Plague, as if God had no stroke in that disease rill you
feel it. You more reverence the Clouds, then the Creator; and have better skill
in the Weather* then the Scripture. You can discern the face of Heaven, but not
the season, nor the time of Gods visitation; And many of you also are ignorant
of charity toward them whom God has afflicted.

Hard-heartednesse.
How could it else com to pass, that you are so shie both of them untouched, and
me being visited, and to others of my Children distressed. Some of those, who
are whole, you keep from the sight of their friends, and put them to shift for
their lodgings. They whom God smites by the way, you let them die in ditches,
or draw them to a hole like dogs; and this (I perceive) you would not do, but
for fear their carcasses should infect your air. But I fear God has worse
rods in pickel for you then so, without you show more love to your Brethren.

Can you be so cruel to a Mother in Israel, to whom the best of you have been
beholding to me either for coin or Counsel? Worse then Barbarians, They fell
nn the other extremity.
for they would comfort poor ship wrackt Paul, and though they misconceived him
while the Viper was upon him, yet they thrust him not out till they saw
farther: and so you, when my disease has left me, will come fewning up to me,
and offer me your service: but I shall believe you at leisure; I fear me few
such as you will be approved at Gods bar for this, when I was sick you
visited me. But if you have a botched horse with his back full of ulcers, you
can find a Farrier to cut out the exorbitant flesh: but let a Sonneor a
Daughter of Abraham die for want oftendance. If one of you have an Ox or an
Ass die in a ditch, you will help him out, (and may, though it were the
Sabbath Day in case of necessity) but you can let your Brother Christians die
in a Ditch. Your Inne-keepers profess hospitality, and if a man will, he may
drink like a Swine: but if the afflicted of God desire repast or repose, they
must lie with the Swine. If their Chambers reek with the smoke of Erebus, and
stink (like a dead dog) of spewing, that is not infectious because they are
used to it. But if a Christian come from me weary with travail, though he has
no disease, yet he is kept out with Bills least his breath should infect their
stinking rooms.

Some of them can keep a Fox in a Coverlet, and a W -- in a Closet whose soul
already has burst forth often with odious soars, and Infectious swellings,
but they can make no shift for a sick Body, whose soul would bankrupt them to
imitate the patience thereof under Gods hand; but they must drop down without
commiseration. Do you neither fear God, nor man that you are thus insolent? If
a man dye he must be dragged, at a Horse tail like Hector, or drawn with men
like Tamberlaine: If he live, he must lie in sollitude, or misery: Oh base
Heathenisme; unheard of Barbarism; I see there is no Tyrant like superstitious
opinion. If I should give my fury the Bridle, I should set such marks on you in
this my rage, as a Lioness robbed of her Whelps would do, or send out some
Satyrs, whose sharp scourge should make you hide your selves. But O God thou
have taught me Patience, and I entreat thee if I have offended in this, pardon
the exuberancy of my passion, which swells so high to think on my childrens
calamiy aggravated by these men's cruelty. I have now played the part of a weak
Woman overcom with injury, yet I have not Outrun the Constable, for he is in
the Country.

But now I must show these men, (lest they laugh at my anger, and rejoice at my
tribulation) that though I am grieved, I am not discouraged. And to my
Children, that I love them, though I do (not without cause) reprove them, I am
not disheartened, First, because I have hope, that this Plague is Gods purge,
Comfort in God.
to make me more healthie in soul and body. In soul for it is good to be
afflicted, and those whom God loves he chastises. I hope it is Gods rod not
his sword, to correct me, not to destroy me: His fire to purify, not to
inflame and consume me.

And this not without reason; for

First, this course my God has used heretofore, to bring me into the right way.

Secondly, because he has not given me to slaughter of my enemy, nor famine,
but has given me hope of the fruits of the earth, and has taken me into his
own hands to chastise me, and I know with him there is mercy, and with my
Savior there is plenteous Redemption.

Thirdly, because he does it by degrees, as so many warnings that I should ask
forgiveness before he strike again, when as he might consume me at once.

Fourthly, because he has left me as yet the pillars of my age, to lean on
like Jachin and Booz; good Ministers, as monitors to remember me, and good
Magistrates as Fathers to provide for me. But above all, the frontispiece of
beauty, built upon these pillars, a good and gracious King, whole heart I
know, and hear, does pity my distress.

Fifthly, I hope it will purge my body from bad humors, as vicious persons:
Nay, I know it has already of abundance, and the rest will stand ( I hope) in
more awe.

And again, It savours of mercy, in that the poor is taken from him, that is to
strong for him (namely this hard world) and God has made more room under me.
And if I provoke him not farther, and draw his punishments out longer by
distrusting, or presuming, or for want of repenting, all may turn to my good in
an extraordinary measure. If my proud flesh were but abated, and my plurisie of
vain desires wasted, my stinking weeds extirped, I know the Lord can heal me
in a trice, and would too, for he wills not the death of sinners; and to his
children his love never had beginning, and therefore can never have ending.

Some good men are taken away, and many lay it not to heart. I could not well
spare them, but only for the Lord, here is so few upon the earth. But he will
take them also, least his Children like Prodigals should assume their Portion
in this life. Therefore despise me not you of Idumea in the Country, but mark
Obediahs Prophecy against them Obed. 5.10.
that commiserate not Jacobs affliction. And be not thou a rod, helping to
beat Gods Children, least my Heavenly Father afterward (to show his love, and
ease my grief) throw that rod into the fire of his fury likewise. And say not
with thy self, that my Children brought it to thee, for it was begun this year
in the Country as soon as in the City.

Therefore harden not your hearts, but by your timely repentance prepare your
selves, either to entertain it, or prevent it. And howsoever your weakness
has prompted you on to use this violence, yet because we are Brethren, and so
may continue in Love, and Peace, as well as in profession of truth, my prayers
shall be poured out for your preservation from inward errors, and outward evils.

Counsel to them.
And you my dear Children, wheresoever you are dispersed, take not too hainously
my reproof, since it is just, nor reject my Counsel, since it is the token of
my love. I know your hearts are here, unless your treasures are there. Why
should they, or we be thus separated, but rather come together, and join heart
and hand together, and help to keep the blows from one another: or else ease
the smart of them when they are given, by our best charitable endeavors. I
know if all but the poor had gone, God would not have destroyed them all, least
you should want subjects for your charity. Or if they had gone too, yet he
would not have ended his quarrel against my walls, but either have followed you
in hot pursuit by the way side (as he has done many) or else he would have
waited till you had returned, and have begun again, least you should have
gloried in your own inventions.

The last of these is yet to be feared. And therefore reclaim your erroneous
confidence in your flight. Else though that my heart pant after you, though my
arms would feign embrace you, yet I love you so well, that I would not draw
you to inconveniencie. Therefore for your health and preservation thereof, by
some good Antidote against your change of air, I refer to your learned
brothers of Physic: not that I think my whole air is infected, or mortal,
but sickly to any that comes out of a fresher air, and more dangerous now
because you have somewhat to fright you. To strengthen your heart take this
Cordial, Repentance, and a good Conscience, urged from Gods mercy, and built on
his Word, and will tempered together. And for a good Perfume, take the Lords
incense, Exodus 30.34.
appointed in Exodus, viz. Myrrh, clear gum, Galbanum, and Frankensence.
Which some ingredients, have relation to Prayer and Profession, Faith and
Charity. These may be your practice, and your contemplation; not to hold to
your nose of vain glory, or hypocrisy, as, Exodus 30.38. But to offer to God
out of the Censor of a zealous heart. And then thou shall smell it, and others
too, and God be satisfied, and thy house well ayred: and then thou may
return with safety and comfort. And if God do touch thee with the Plague,
thou shall have the Pledge of his love: if with the Pest, and not mortally, yet
he has the Test and reproof of thee, and thou the proof and trial of him. If
he give thee the blow of death, and the word of life also, he does thee no hurt.

When thou come, come with this consideration; for it is mine, and I have
found it effectual: Neither would I be rid of his word of life revealed in the
preaching of the Gospel in my Temples, to be eased of his hand of sickness on
my houses.

Come therefore to your old habitations, not to your old sins: and as God
has swept my house, to desire him to garnish it with virtue, and furnish it
with graces, Least worse things happen to me and you. And glory not in your
inventions, or worldly policy, or care, but in Gods power and mercy, that we
may safely rejoice together, and magnify his great Name in his holy Temple.
And think not they on whom the Tower of Siloam fell, were greater sinners then
the rest of the people, but unless you repent, you will all perish.

Neither do you (my children) which are here resident, boast against your
weaker brethren: be not high minded, but fear. Let not the custom of Gods
judgment harden thee, but relate unto thy wandering brethren Gods wonders in
this judgment, and mercies in this sickness, to his glory, and thy comfort,
and their encouragement. And if there be any evil lurk in thy heart, which the
broom of Gods wrath has not swept out, repent speedily, least thou brag
before the Victory, and so God cut thee off suddenly. That so doing you may
live in love and peace together to your lives end.

For if this Canker-worme do no good, he has a Palmer-worme ready to bring
famine, if that prevail not, he has a Catter-piller that unsensiblie shall
devour your Commonwealth, and the brother shall betray the brother for want
of love, or for love of gain. If that serve not to reclaim you, he has
Locusts of Heretics, and enemies to extirpe us, and pill us bare of every
good thing; and so what one leaves, the other shall devour. And therefore
prevent this Morphew that begins to spread over my body by timely repentance,
by a seasonable and humble acception of this kind correction: which God turn
unto good, and seal unto your souls, that the remembrance hereof may be a
scourge sufficient to you upon every falling into sin. That your hearts may
smite you, and you return, before God turn upon you in his just conceived
wrath. Fall not to complaining, but to compunction; look not at the deadness
of trading, but the deadness of faith, and God shall work all for the best.

This I wish may be done when you meet, and before you meet. 2 Samuel 23.17.
For as David drank not the water of Bethlem, which was bought with blood (but
sacrificed it) so neither ought you to bestow your deliverance on your ends,
but on Gods honor, which has cost the life of so many thousand. In the mean
time, the Lord keep you all in soul and body, until our meeting, and after,
even to the coming of our Lord Jesus.

LORD, many ask thee much, t'whom much if had
Would do much hurt, few things would make me glad;
Few ask thee few things, one would me complete,
Give me that one thing, I Will no more treat;
This One I need, one fills, makes me run over,
Give me this One thing, CHRIST, and I have store.
This One I crave, will crave, twice, thrice, again,
This One thing granted, grateful I Will remain,
That I once brought to Christ, his Saints may bring,
This One Grace given me, hence a thousand spring;
For this a thousand thanks, and vows I Will pay
To thee ten thousand Praises sing for aye.
An exact Account of those that were buried of all Diseases, from the 17. of
March, 1591. to the 22. of December. 1592. As also them that dyed in the Years,
1603, 1625, 1630, 1636, 1637, 1638, 1646, 1647, 1648. with this present Year,
1665.
From March the 17 1591. to December. 22. 1592. were Buried of all Diseases --
25886 whereof of the Plague 11503.
1603. Total of Burials -- 38250 whereof of the Plague 30585.
1625. Total of Burials -- 54082 whereof of the Plague 35428.
1630. Total of Burials -- 10554 whereof of the Plague 1317.
1636. Total of Burials -- 27415 whereof of the Plague 12102.
1637. Total of Burials -- 14270 whereof of the Plague 3603.
1638. Total of Burials -- 16621 whereof of the Plague 508.
1646. Buried of the Plague -- 2436.
1647. Total of Burials -- 16452 whereof of the Plague 5285.
1648. Total of Burials -- 11509 whereof of the Plague ^93.

1665.
Tot. Pl. April 25. 398 2 May 2 388 0 May 9 347 9 May 16 353 3 May 23 385 14
May 30 399 17 June 6 405 43 June 13 558 112 June 20 611 168 June 27 684 267
July 4 1006 470 July 25 2785 1843. July 11 1008 725 July 18 1761 1089

The Total of all those that Died in the Years aforementioned of the plague, to
this present July the 25. 1665. -- -- 108022.

DRaw near, fond man, and dress thee by this Glass.
Mark how thy bravery, and big looks must pass
Into Corruption, Rottenness, and Dust,
The frail Supporters that betrayed thy Trust.
O weigh in time thy last and loathsome state,
To purchase Heaven for tears, is no hard rate.
Our Glory, Greatness, Wisdom, all we have,
If misemploy'd, but add Hell to the Grave:
Only a fair redemption of Evil times
Finds Life in Death, and buries all our Crimes.
Certain easy, excellent, and cheap Receipts against the Plague.
1 TAke the root of Zodoars (that is perfect and good) a few Raisins of the
Sun, and a small quantity of Liquorish. Champ it with your teeth, and swallow
it down. Take this every morning, it is an excellent Preservative.

2. Lay a piece of Gold, or some Leaves of pure Gold asteep in the juice of
Lemmonds 12 hours or more, then take it out, and give the Patient the same
juice with a little good wine, and the Powder or Decoction of Angelica-roots.

3. Take Ivie-berries that were ripe, and are well dried, make them into a fine
Powder, and take half a dram of it in two or three ounces of Plantain-water.
Sweat well.

To know whether the Plague be curable or not. Take Galbanum, make it soft, and
spread it upon a linen cloth, and apply it to the sore, if the disease be
curable it will stick, that you can scarce pluck it, but if not curable, it
will not stick.

FINIS.

