Aleyn blazon of the City of LondonMayor.

A Common Council HOLDEN The first day of May 1660.

ORdered by this Court that the Kings Majesty's Letter and Declaration directed
to this Court, and now read, be forthwith printed and published.

Sadler.



Printed by James Flesher, Printer to the Honorable City of London, 1660.

CHARLES R.
TRusty and Wel-beloved We greet you well.
In these great Revolutions which of late have happened in that Our Kingdom to
the wonder and amazement of all the world, there is none that We have looked
upon with more Comfort, then the so frequent and public manifestations of
their affections to Us in the City of London, which has exceedingly raised Our
Spirits, and which, no doubt, has proceeded from the Spirit of God and his
extraordinary mercy to the Nation, which has been encouraged by you, and your
good example to assert that Government under which it has so many hundred
years enjoyed as great felicity as any Nation in Europe, and to discountenance
the imaginations of those, who would subject Our Subjects to a Government they
have not yet devised; and to satisfy the pride and ambition of a few ill men,
would introduce the most arbitrary and Tyrannical Power that was ever yet heard
of, how long we have all suffered under those and the like devices, all the
world takes notice, to the no small reproach of the English Nation, which we
hope is now providing for its own security and redemption, and will be no
longer bewitched by those Inventions: how desirous we are to contribute to the
obtaining the peace and happiness of Our Subjects, without further effusion of
blood; and how far we are from desiring to recover what belongs to Us by a
War, if it can be otherwise done, will appear to you by the enclosed
Declaration, which together with this Our Letter. We have entrusted Our right
trusty and welbeloved Cozen the Lord Viscount Mordant, and our trusty and
welbeloved Servant Sir John Greenvile Knight, one of the Gentlemen of Our
Bedchamber to deliver to you, to the end that you and all the rest of Our good
Subjects of that Our City of London (to whom We desire it should be published)
may know how far We are from the desire of Revenge, or that the peace,
happiness, and security of the Kingdom should be raised upon any other
foundation then the affection and hearts of Our Subjects, and their own
consents: We have not the least doubt of your just sense of those Our
condescentions, or of your zeal to advance and promote the same good end, by
disposing all men to meet Us with the same affection and tenderness, in
restoring the fundamental Laws to that Reverence that is due to them, and upon
the preservation whereof all our happiness depends: And you will have no reason
to doubt of enjoying your full share in that happiness, and of the improving it
by Our particular affection to you. It is very natural for all men to do all
the good they can for their native Country, and to advance the honor of it.
And as we have that full affection for the Kingdom in general, so we would not
be thought to be without some extraordinary kindness for Our native City in
particular, which We shall manifest on all occasions, not only by renewing
their Charter, and confirming all those privileges which they have received
from Our Predecessors, but by adding and granting any new favors which may
advance the Trade, Wealth, and Honor of that Our native City, for which We
will be so solicitous, that We doubt not but that it will in due time receive
some Benefit and Advantage in all those respects, even from Our own observation
and experience abroad: and We are most confident We shall never be
disappointed in Our expectation of all possible service from your affections.
And so We bid you farewell.

Given at Our Court at Breda the (...) day of April, 1660. in the Twelfth year
of Our Reign.
To Our Trusty and Wel-beloved the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of
Our City of London.
CHARLES R.
CHARLES by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all Our loving Subjects of what degree or quality soever, greeting:
If the general distraction and confusion which is spread over the whole
Kingdom, does not awaken all men to a desire and longing that these wounds
which have so many years together been kept bleeding, may be bound up; all We
can say will be to no purpose: However after this long silence We have thought
it Our duty to declare how much We desire to contribute thereunto. And that as
We can never give over the hope, in good time to obtain the possession of that
Right, which God and Nature has made Our due, so We do make it Our daily suit
to the Divine Providence, that He will in compassion to Us and Our subjects,
after so long misery and sufferings, remit and put Us into a quiet and
peaceable possession of that Our Right, with as little blood and damage to Our
people as is possible; Nor do We desire more to enjoy what is Ours, then that
all Our subjects may enjoy what by Law is theirs, by a full and entire
Administration of Justice throughout the Land; And by extending Our Mercy where
it is wanted and deserved. And to the end that the fear of punishment may not
engage any Conscious to themselves of what is past to a perseverance in guilt
for the future, by opposing the quiet and happiness of their Country, in the
Restoration both of King, Peers and People, to their just, ancient, and
fundamental Rights; We do by these presents declare:

That We do grant a free and general Pardon, which We are ready upon demand to
pass under Our Great Seal of England, to all Our subjects of what degree or
quality soever, Who within Forty days after the publishing hereof, shall lay
hold upon this our Grace and Favor, and shall by any public Act declare their
doing so: And that they return to the Loyalty and Obedience of good Subjects,
Excepting only such persons as shall hereafter be excepted by Parliament; Those
only excepted, let all Our Subjects, how faulty soever, rely upon the word of
a King solemnly given by this present Declaration, That no Crime whatsoever
committed against Us or Our Royal Father, before the Publication of this,
shall ever rise in Judgment, or be brought in question against any of them, to
the least endamagement of them, either in their Lives, Liberties, or Estates,
or (as far forth as lies in Our power) so much as to the prejudice of their
Reputations by any Reproach or term of distinction from the rest of Our best
Subjects: We desiring and ordeyning that henceforward all Notes of discord,
separation and difference of parties be utterly abolished among all Our
Subjects, whom We Invite and Conjure to a perfect Union among themselves under
Our Protection, for the Resettlement of Our just Rights and theirs in a Free
Parliament, by which upon the word of a King, We will be advised.

And because the passion and uncharitablness of the times have produced several
opinions in Religion, by which men are engaged in Parties and Animosities
against each other, which when they shall hereafter unite in a Freedom of
Conversation will be composed or better understood: We do declare a liberty to
tender Consciences, and that no man shall be disquieted, or called in question
for differences of Opinion in matters of Religion, which do not disturb the
peace of the Kingdom: And that We shall be ready to consent to such an Act of
Parliament, as upon mature deliberation shall be offered to Us, for the full
granting that indulgence.

And because in the Continued distractions of so many years, and so many and
great Revolutions, many Grants and Purchases of Estates have been made to, and
by many Officers, Soldiers and others, who are now possessed of the same, and
who may be liable to Actions at Law upon several titles, We are likewise
willing that all such differences and all things relating to such Grants, Sales
and Purchases shall be determined in Parliament which can best provide for the
just satisfaction of all men who are Concerned.

And We do further declare that We will be ready to consent to any Act or Acts
of Parliament to the purposes aforesaid: And for the full satisfaction of all
Arears due to the Officers and Soldiers of the Army under the Command of
General Monck. And that they shall be received into Our service upon as good
pay and conditions as they now enjoy.

Given under our sign manuel and Privy signet at our Court at Breda this 4/14
day of April 1660. in the Twelfth year of our Reign.
FINIS.
Aleyn blazon of the City of London Mayor.
A Common Council holden the First of May 1660.
ORdered by this Court, that the right Honorable the Lord Mayor do acquaint
the Lord Viscount Mordant and Sir John Greenvile (who brought the said Letter
and Declaration) That this Court do return most humble and hearty thanks to
his Majesty for his gracious Condescentions to, and owning this Court and City
expressed in his Majesty's said Letter and Declaration: And do likewise return
hearty thanks to the said Honorable Persons that brought the said Gracious
Message: And do declare this Courts ready submission to his Majesty's
Government: And that in Testimony thereof they had now taken down the
Commonwealths Arms, and Ordered his Majesty's Arms to be set up. And further
that this Court do beg the favor of the Lord Mordant to return with an Answer
in writing to his Majesty from this Court. And also that this Court do intend
very speedily to send Members of their own to wait on his Majesty.

Sadler.


