The Present Practice OF MUSIC VINDICATED Against the Exceptions and New Way
of Attaining MUSIC Lately Published by Thomas Salmon, M. A. etc. By MATTHEW
LOCK, Composer in Ordinary to His Majesty, and Organist of Her Majesty's
Chapel. To which is added DVELLVM MVSICVM By JOHN PHILLIPS, Gent. Together
with A LETTER from John Playford to Mr. T. Salmon by way of Confutation of his
Essay, etc.

Martial Lib. 3. 67. Irasci nostro non debes, Cerdo, libello,
Ars tua, non vita, est carmine laesa meo.
Innocuos permit sales. Cur ludere nobis
Non liceat, licuit si jugulare tibi?
London, Printed for N. Brook at the Angel in Cornhill, and I Playford near
the Temple-Church. 1673.

To the Reader.
THough I may without scruple aver, that nothing has done Mr. Salmon more
kindness, than that his Books have had the honor to be answered; yet have I
been forced to afford him this favor, rather to chastize the Reproaches which
he has thrown upon the most Eminent Professors of Music, than for any thing
of Learning that I found in him. Those Gentlemen he accused of Ignorance, for
not embracing his illiterate Absurdities; for which it was necessary to bring
him to the Bar of Reason, and to do him that Justice which his Follies merited.
Though for the same he gets by this I shall not much envy him; with whom it
will fare, as with common Criminals, who are seldom talked of above two or
three days after Execution. The Gentleman might have slept in a whole skin, had
he not challenged all the World; in which, how well he has behaved himself, you
may, if you please, in reading judge; and so farewell.

M. L.
To my FRIEND Mr. MATTHEW LOCK, On his ingenious Discovery of those MUSICAL
INNOVATIONS Held forth by the Author of An Essay to the Advancement of Music,
etc.
AS MARSYAS, though by MINERVA taught,
While with insipid Novelties he thought,
Great PHOEBUS of his Luster to deprive,
Was for his bold presumption Flead alive:
So while our LOCK the APOLLO of our Age,
This MUSICAL PHANATICK does engage;
He both o'recomes and punishes his Pride;
Though he Flea's not his Skin, he Tawes his Hide.
J. Phillips.
A LETTER of THANKS To Mr. THOMAS SALMON For the Vindication of his Essay, etc.
SIR,
To the Favors formerly acknowledged by me, and since repeated by you, you
have obligingly added in the Vindication of your Essay so many others (though
of far different Nature to them, yet doubtless with the same, if not greater
heartiness) that I was at a loss how to put my self into the least Capacity of
manifesting the thankfulness they deserve, without looking back, and
endeavoring (if possible) to find out their true Rise; wherein if I fail, I
shall willingly acknowledge my fault, and beg your pardon.

Sir, In your Essay (page 10) you are pleased to affirm, That the dark and
tedious Principles of Music, the bugbear Terms and confused Cliffs, hindered
the access to it. Page 11. That the long discourse of Gibberish, a fardle of
hard Names and fictitious Words, called the Gam-vt, to be learned backwards and
forwards by heart, as though a Man must be exact in the Art of Conjuring before
he learned Music, terrified the Beginner. Page 15. That you cannot tell any
thing that persuades Musick-Masters to trouble their Scholars with an
impertinent difficulty, but a pernicious humor in some Men still to do what
has once been done, howsoever useless and unprofitable; and that though the
Gam-vt be retained, they think it insufficient. Page 16. That they are to be
blamed for not beginning the Naming of their Notes with Mi. Page 19. That
intolerable perplexity which arose from the Alteration of the Cliffs, caused
some charitable but lazy Wit, to invent Tablature, whereby the Notes are
Mechanically clouded in Letters, and so darkly, that the most quick sighted
Musick-Master cannot tell what they mean, till he find out the Tuning, and the
Scholar, so instructed, condemned ever to be ignorant of the rational part of
his Music, etc. for the Voice and Instruments, not capable of that literal
Expression, People learn by rote, and quickly forget what like Parrots they
ignorantly prated. Page 22. A MusickMaster cannot trust to the Observation of
Intervals in passing from one Cliff to another. Page 24. Musick-Masters will be
loath to consent to a Way, wherein every young Practitioner may rival them.
Page 25, 26. Some Musick-Masters returned me such Objections, as betrayed their
misapprehension of my design, and their unwillingness it should come into
practice; upon which account I have put my self to the trouble of writing these
Papers, that they might the more clearly perceive the convenience of our
Hypothesis: And if afterward they should remain peevish, and obstinate against
the use of it, their Scholars might be able to right themselves, and demand a
remission of more than half their slavish Task, for to learn the Notes and con
their places, is the very drudgery of Music, etc. which, when once Men find it
will save them half the trouble, they will embrace it as readily, as if I were
Emperor of the World to command it. Page 27. But if after all this,
Musick-Masters shall double the time in teaching their Scholars, in hopes of
double Gain; or their Scholars be such Fools to undergo that expense of time
and trouble; give me leave to laugh* and let them have their labor for their
pains. Page 32. I will make a wild Comparison to show how madly Custom
persuades Musicians to reckon. Page 36. By how much Musicians have been wanton
in their various Cliffs for Singing, they bring in Evidence of the Mischief it
makes. Page 47, 48. I should think this unworthy my pains, unless the
difficulty were so great which demands redress, and necessity required me to
answer the perverse obstinacy of some, who would oppose even the justest
Alterations; Vitio malignitatis humanae vetera semper in laud, praesentia in
fastigio esse. But if any shall contemn this because Easy and Natural, let
them remember what a grave company of such Contemners were baffled in setting
an Egg upright, till they were showed how. Page 74. If there be a nearer and an
easier way (than the Old Scale) why should not those Guides be so honest to
lead us in it? etc. Truly if Musick-Masters will continue obstinate, to
maintain such needless difficulties, they may like some (Musicians) be left to
play by themselves in Fiddlers Island. Page 78. Pity me ye confounded Sons of
Nimrod, that I must still suffer the Curse of my old confused disorders. Page
88. I have heard many Scholars in vain importune their Masters for some
Directions to this purpose (viz. to Play or Compose an Air or Consort) whose
Charity notwithstanding has been so straight, or else their Ignorance so
obstinate, that their just entreaties were frustrated. For which Page 90. Now a
Master is ranked in the same order with those Empyrical Traders, who have a
parcel of Musical Receipts, but understand not one Note of their Composure.

These, Sir, These bold and untrue Aspersions thrown on All Masters of
Practical Music, and All Gentlemen and others that have learned their way, as
if your taking a Degree had authorized you to abuse Men; together with the
perpetual magnifying your self, and the Brat your Essay, were the Motives of my
inserting a Merry Proverb or Simily here and there in my Observations; and
those if I mistake not of your doubty manner of Vindicating it.

Sir, I have been told, that Generosity is a constant Attendant on Noble and
Heroic Spirits, and should have believed it, had I not heard of many Great
Ones that abhorred the found of the very word; but you, Sir, by those showers
of Bounty heaped on me in the Vindication of your Essay, have made so absolute
a Convert of me, that I hold it a Duty necessary to let the World know, how
admirably your Tongue speaks your Heart. Sir, you have prevented a long Journey
and much trouble for its discovery in your Title Page, by slily concealing the
Titles of those real Favors their Majesty's have been graciously pleased to
confer on me in both their Services, that thereby you might take advantage to
render me contemptible to all that know me not, and all other your
tenderhearted Proselites, who believe you are already in possession of some
Infallible Chair, and consequently can speak or write nothing but Truth: As
fair an Introduction for your following Discourse as Heart could wish! In your
Advice to the Reader, you tell him Moorfields and the Bear-Garden are
Entertainments only for the Rabble, your old Cronies; to prevent therefore my
being drawn into the Lists of their Active and Martial Achievements, you, to
render me impudent as well as ignorant, have placed me on the Grand Theater of
the World, bidding Defiance, first, to your Learned Patron Dr. Wallis; then, to
the Royal Society and all Mathematicians that have been, are, or shall be;
andlastly, to Modesty, Honesty, Piety, and whatever else relates to God or Good
Men.

Behold, Sir, an Abbreviate of your transcendent additional Favors! Favors
indeed! and when really considered, such as in all probability could not
proceed from any but your self, your Epistoler, or that Great Prince who
pretends Right to all that is donable in this World.

But of their Particulars hereafter. At present give me leave, if you please,
to admire that so much Prodigality should be used to so little purpose;
especially when I reflect on that great and extraordinary Call which
necessitated you (as your self confess) to this Act of Reformation: for no
sooner can I cast my Eye on the Vindication, but I lose the Essay; this
proposing a nearer and easier way to the attaining of Practical Music; that
running quite from it to what either we have already past, or to what is merely
speculative, or at most insignificant to us: So that upon a true account, when
your jingling with, and playing on my words, with your perpetual wresting or
falsifying them, are laid aside, there is not one word in the Vindication makes
good the Title and Contents of the Essay, but your own bare affirming you have
demonstrated it; which how true it is, I appeal to all Masters of Practical
Music, who are, and ought to be Judges in this Case of Practice.

Yet, Sir, left your Whirligig Members should think me too severe, and judge
that I write rather out of spite and malice to your Person, than against your
Opinion (which you and your Dearly Beloved have already proclaimed though Heaven
knows for what!) be pleased to remember, that from Page 10. to Page 27. in my
Observations, I demonstrate, by the Old Scale, by the brief Explanation of it,
and by the several Examples there inserted, the Convenience and Necessity of
the Cliffs, as they are universally received, on the one side; and the
intricacy and perplexity which perpetually attends your B M T's mutability
(without which you cannot advantagiously write any thing according to your own
Rule that has the extent of a well-design'd Composition) on the other. But
what is your Answer to this? not one word, though it be the Hinge on which the
whole Discourse depends, as to Practical Music, and which was your Task; but
(after a long Digression from it, intermixed with all kind of abusive Language)
an old stolen Cycle, to tell us, an Octave is an Octave, that Music is part of
the Mathematics, which no Man yet ever doubted of that pretended to Music;
and an Argument (if any one will take it for such) backed with such a Scheme,
as being truly applied, undeniably destroys all you pretend to build, and
confirms what so furiously you would destroy; notwithstanding your desperate
threatening to pull down (Sampson-like) the Observer in your ruin, and crush him
with five times the weight of his own Objection: For, those absurdities which
you charge the Old Scale with, are really none, but evident Fortifiers of its
certainty; being that wherever the C sol favt Cliff is placed, the second
Space below is perpetually G sol re vt.

music Example. Unisons



And that one absurdity, which you confess to be in your New Way, by the
assistances of your Lieger Line and Exoticks, multiplies on every Note
throughout your whole Scale.

music Example. Unisons



Or thus: musicetc.

musicetc.



This, Sir, is so evident in it self, that it needs neither Argument nor Scheme
to maintain or demonstrate it to any Person endued with Common Sense. And
truly, Sir, according to this Rate, this excellent Method of Proving, you may
Write and Answer Books, with as much ease as you pretend you could Command the
World; for nothing can come amiss to so great a Mind; the Examples of ruined
Monarchs touch you not; the Infamy attending Libellous Scriblers holds not your
hands; what you will, must be; what not, not: And this is that, and only that,
which I can any way perceive the World is ever like to have from you, excepting
your new invented Wheel of Seven Spokes for a Tyler or Carpenter to reach the
top of a House with, instead of his old Ladder; your New Way of Account, to
tell a Farmer Paul's Fair will be D in the fourth Octave, instead of the Twenty
fifth of January; and the incomparable B M T for a fair Lady to Learn (with all
Expedition) the singing of a Base in Confort: which Posterity may admire you
for, though the present Age be not so good natured. But to proceed:

In my Observations (Page 33. and 34.) I mention the ridiculousness of
confining the Viol to a Tuning, incapable of being used well in more than one
Key, whereas the Old Way enjoyed all; and particularly do manifest your
contradicting your own Rule of keeping every Octave and Part within the System
of Four Lines, by planting the first Note of an Example taken from Mr. Simpson
in a Sixth Line, and putting the same Note that is to be Played on the same
String and Fret, here in the Line, there in the Space, then again in the Line,
after that in the Space, and so forward to the End of the Lesson. This, Sir, to
any Man's thinking might have deserved some Answer! but it is put off with a bare
employing your Conjuring Exoticks, and telling the World I understand not the
Viol; which how true it is, and how much to your pretended relieving the Fland,
Eye, and Understanding from those troublesome and needless perplexities you
charge the Old Scale and Tuning with, I leave to your self to judge* being very
much assured, that if you are insensible or the ^on-performance of what you
have so boldly undertook, you are unfit to be taken farther notice of than as
an unskilful impertinent Wrangler. But, Sir, whether I do or do not understand
the Viol, it matters not; it is evident I did not abuse your Publisher in
asserting (...) that he knew the impossibility of it. And that you may do so to
if you please, take for an Experiment the ^ollowing Example, and when you have
tried it ^he Old Tuning, apply it to your New called Vni^ersal One, as in the
first Example in the following Page.

First Example for the Violl Tuning ^ Almond ^ ^

The Second Example for the Harpsicord An Entry. ^ ^ ^ ^

This, Sir, though you are resolved not to be Confuted, may at long run
Convince you, that I do understand the Viol; that it is impossible to perform it
on your new confined Tuning; and that you have undertook what you understand
not; nor are ever likely to bring to pass, the way you go to work. And indeed,
no one that does understand Music can expect other: For while we must be one
while in the Line with a Note, another while in Space with the same Note; one
while condemn the Monosyllables for Gibberish, Conjuring, and the learning of
them the very drudgery of Music; another while command the use of them, then
eat them; here to fix Mi in one of two places only, there in any place; here
obliged to the use of four Lines only, there to fourteen, or as many as you
please; here tied to the use of Notes as the most easy and intelligible way,
their to the lazy-witted Invention of Tablature; here to express Music in the
most familiar words, there to abandon the plain English of a great or lesser
Third, Fourth, Fifth, etc. to embrace the old Heathen Greek Terms, and what
not? while I say we are braved from our own fixedness to those pitiful
shilly-shally's, and altogether insignificant and impertinent pretenses; what,
Sir, can be expected? Truly nothing that I can any way imagine; except perhaps
that thereby we might be made instrumental to proclaim to the World. That a
young Graduate had lately Published Two Books, as exactly agreeing with their
Titles as a Pretended Gospel-Minister's Sermon in the late Civil Wars did to
his Text (the one being Fear God, Honor the King; the other, an impudent
Persuasion to carry on the begun Schism and Rebellion:) but not to so ill an
End, though in all probability with as much Pride and Contempt. Proportionably
you go on, trifling with the Harpsichord and Lute, as if the One were
previously made for the sole use of your unbarb'd Jews-Trump, the Cycle, and
your Servants B M T; or the Other most eloquently Harmonious when untouched.
For to what end the first is made a Phanatick; the last, when used, silent (for
so, by a wilful mistake both of my words and meaning, you have made them)
except to keep up the laudable custom of swelling your Book, and amusing the
Reader, I know not.

I must confess, Sir, I have not the Practical Use of the Lute; yet have
Composed several things for it; and from thence am sufficiently convinced, that
the way of Tablature is much easier and properer for that Instrument, and the
expression of its excellency, than the way of Notes; however I shall not judge,
but refer it to those to whom it properly belongs, viz. such Lute-Masters as
are qualified in both Capacities. But as to the Harpsichord, I could smile at
your idle Imagination, that a Man must have two Heads for the using two Staves
of Lines, for his two Hands our Cliff-way; and but one Head for the use of a
like two Staves and two Hands your BMT way, did I not fear there might be a
more than ordinary Mystery in it; that is to say, One great Loggerhead with
huge great Saucer-Eyes, like those in the Turkish Paradise, to be Champion in
the Cause; and then, Woe and well-a-day! but I hope better things. In
confidence whereof, I shall boldly affirm, that among the many ways of Writing
for that Instrument, the most intelligiblest to the Understanding, and easiest
to the Eye, is that which divides the Staves of Lines, and Hands, on the middle
Key thereof; and so gives occasion to ascend and descend (generally) without
the least alteration of Cliffs.

[See the second Example in Page 10.]

This, Sir, your Four Line BMT way, is wholly incapable of; and so incapable
of, that in the Example you took from Mr. Thetcher, and inserted in your Essay,
you were forced to acknowledge, by several times chopping and changing your
signifying Letters in that short Lesson.

To object, some things may notwithstanding be done that way, is short of your
Glorious Pretenses, where you undertake All, Easier, and in half the Time; the
contrary whereof is so notoriously known, that, besides the Masters, several
Lovers of Novelties, after a little experience, have with scorn laid it aside.
Among others, a Person of Honor, Educated, in a School near this City, had
your Essay presented her piping hot, with such Commendation as the Presenter
thought it really deserved; the Lady, with as much thankfulness received it,
thinking every Minute a Day till the presence and assistance of her Master
might make her happy in the enjoyment of this new invented Benefit. The Hour
came, and to work they went; but, O the fickle state of Lovers! e're many days
was expired, the heat was so abated, that there was not Charity enough left to
keep it out of the fire, had not the Masters earnest entreaty preserved it from
that cruel Death: but all in vain* for the thing being heartless, after a short
time, consumed by that lingering Disease which Squire Ralpho long before
Prophesied would be the end on it; and so farewell it; but not, Sir, to your
Vindication of it: For there you promise such Advantages, as the World was
ignorant of before; there, the Reasons of what it Acted by; and there, that All
Compositions should with Ease be Transposed from one Key to another, etc. Very
pretty! if a Man would believe it. Sir, the Advantages you so perpetually boast
of, are already sufficiently manifested and known to be Mistakes, only to
abuse the Masters and delude the Ignorant; and consequently need no more taking
notice of: Your assuring the Dr. of the now easiness of transposing
Compositions from one Key to another, is a thing so frequent, that no one is
esteemed a Master who cannot do it Proper; and he the contrary, that does it no
better than you have done your Aurelia in in your Essay. But, that Men should
Act and Teach Rationally, and not understand the Reason of their so Acting and
Teaching, till you peeped into the World; is to make them Beasts, and too too
subtle for any but your self to unriddle, who have stock enough to say any
thing.

For my own part, Sir, I never pretended to more of the Mathematics than what
was practicable in Music, and that I have so evidently demonstrated (if you
can but give credit to your self) that I stand amazed at the confidence of
Contradicting ^no one till now, ever being so mad, after he had seen a Man do a
thing, to teach him how he should do it; yet this is our Case; and this no
Person can be ignorant of, that is capable of apprehending, that all Creatures
that have Ears are apprehensive of Sounds, but not of distinguishing them;
those, whose Ears Nature has prepared for Practical Music, by dividing and
sub-dividing a String (for Example) come to experience their difference and
distances; and from thence, by comparing them, to Tones, which (the Ear having
distinguished into Consonants and Dissonants) they Arithmetically divide to the
greatest quantity Practicable ( viz. 32.) and thence, by Harmonical Proportion
of whole, half, and quarter Tones (altogether sufficient for use) advance to
That we call Composition, the Mother of all Vocal and Instrumental Music. More
of the Mathematics than this, Sir, (excepting what belongs to the Mechanical
Pant thereof for the Making Instruments) signifies nothing to us; This, and not
the poring after idle and unpracticable Notions, being that which the Schools
deservedly honor with the Degrees of Bachelor and Doctor, above or equal to
all other Sciences. The rest therefore if you please (for you are infinitely
free) you may bestow on your unprofitable Speculators; who, so long as they can
think of lengthening a String, or adding to Number, will never want employment.
This I mention, not in the least to contradict those Honorable and Excellent
Persons, whose very Recreations, by their diving into the Bowels of Nature for
the Improvement of Art, prove daily advantageous to the World; or to prove that
Music has got the whip-hand of her Sister Sciences, and already arrived to the
utmost of Practical Excellency; and so needs none; but to show, that after all
your Hectorish Bravadoes* you have most manfully, like your self, quitted the
Field of Practical Music, and run for shelter to the Nature and Causes of
Sounds, which properly belongs to Philosophy, and which you, in confidence
perhaps that all Men would greedily swallow your imaginary Gudgeon the Essay,
particularly waved in the last Page thereof.

And now, Sir, I might with very much reason finish my Letter; but least many
of your admiring Readers may be ignorant of the Subject you undertook to write
on, it will not be amiss I think to give them an Example or two within their
own Spheres, of the wild Consequences you draw from the plain Words in my
Observations; as also, to make a particular inspection into some few (amongst
many) of those obliging Favors, you, and your Goodman, Mr. Sr. Min Here,
Monsieur, Senior Don, Dominus sine Nomine de Norwich (that Grand Master of
Grammatical Criticism and Cocorism) have so graciously Complemented me with,
and so conclude.

Where, in my Observations, I give an account of the timely check I took, when
I thought my self to be more than ordinarily knowing (a fault Youth is too
subject to) you infer All young Men must be Fools.

When I instance the continued Ignorance of the Bear-Garden-Usher at the end of
his Annual Procession, you come out with your, Ergo, I turn all those venerable
Ancestors into Great Bears.

When I wonder, that throughout your whole Discourse of Musicks Advantages over
other Recreations, you mention nothing of the Divine Use thereof,
notwithstanding the many Commands and Examples recounted in Holy Writ to that
purpose, you roundly conclude, I am ignorant that God is a Scripture-Name.

When I prove the Old Scale to be the most certain and easiest way, yet
proposed, for the attainment of Music, by the regular ballancing the extreme
Parts thereof with removing the C Cliff, and the impertinency of yours, you cry
out, I Would build a Ladder to reach the Triple Tree of Preferment.

When I insert a Physicians probable for the Explanation of the super-abundant
Excellencies of your B M T, you infer, I deter all that understand or profess
Physic from the Study of Music.

These, and the like Patterns, your Northern Hector has been exactly careful to
conclude by; for from the Exceptions I have made in some of my Writings against
the ill performance of some, and needless Mathematical impositions of others,
he stoutly avers, I am the only Confounder of all Music; though almost in the
same Breath, he commends me for my Ability in that Art, and seriously persuades
me to continue my Studies therein. Which I Will assure you, Sir, I take for no
small Favor, seeing that, by his Exception against Mood, Time, and Prolation,
without which, no Music ever was or can be made, he bountifully manifests his
wilful or real ignorance of the Subject he pretends to vindicate.

But Trim Tram, it is all could be expected; the whole business being as it
seems, rather to write, than what, or how? And truly, Sir, had I affected such
kind of Fooling (to speak no worse on it) I might with as much show of reason
conclude thus from your Discourse and manner of Writing:

Guido lived in an ignorant Age,
But T. S. stands on Guido's Shoulders:
Ergo, Those Venerable Ancestors
T. S. has studied are Great Bears.
And in all probability, might have given the World as much satisfaction in
that profound way of Arguing, as either of you.

But, Sir, you are not contented to let me escape thus; my Heart as well as
Opinion you dissect, and there make such a discovery of Venom, if the
unblemished Fame and sacred Credit your Epistoler gives you, prove true; that I
should wonder how I lived, did not Experience give a better account of my
Vitals.

The first Viper you meet with, is Malice, which doubtless is a Grand Imp of
Iniquity wherever found; but, Sir, that a bare opposing an Opinion concerning
Practice, should be that Beast, is a thing no ingenious Man can imagine; and for
your pretty Person, I do assure you, I never saw any thing that could beget more
than pity toward it, in pretending to so much Learning, and having so little
Civility.

The second, is Lying; wherein, bating Childish Excuses, and artificial Stories
to pass the time with now and then, I never knew my self formally guilty of;
but truly, Sir, were the Saddle set on the right Horse, an Acquaintance of mine
would have a great Burden; for he cannot be content to belie his Neighbors,
but himself too. Who, but he, Sir, do you think would have affirmed, That the
Observer would have approved the Essay (and rendered himself a Knave to
Posterity) for a good Fish-Dinner souc'd in Wine? Who, but he, would protest
that he never required or used more than one ascititious Line over or under the
five, when in the Plate of his Diagram he adds another, and both contrary to
his first Principle, for Four Lines only? Who* but he* that the Observer was
forced to quit, the Places of his Obligations at Hackney for his ill behavior?
(the contrary whereof will with Truth and Modesty, be testified by all the
Persons, from the Mistresses to the Servants, during his Converse there.) And
who, but he, or Old Nick for him, That those excellent Young men of His
Majesty's Chapel, did many of them perfectly understand the Rudiments of
Music before His Majesty's happy Return? The contrary being so evident, that
for above a Year after the Opening of His Majesty's Chapel, the Orderers of
the Music there, were necessitated to supply the superior Parts of their
Music with Cornets and Men's feigned Voices, there being not one Lad, for all
that time, capable of Singing his Part readily.

Profaneness and Immodesty advance next: Concerning which, I have not as yet
attained to that Pharisaical Sanctity (or rather Hypocrisy) to justify every
Word or Action of my Life, I am more sensible of the Defects of Humane Nature,
and hope, shall be more and more, till my happy Change come. But to write
profanely, is a thing I ever abhorred, and in confidence I never was guilty of
that Sin, I challenge you, and your Brother Trumpeter, to produce one Word that
any rational Man shall judge to be so. And for Immodesty, it is pleasant to see,
how, after you, and your angry Admirer's detesting that Paw in my Observation,
and crying out against it, it is such stuff as a Man would not touch with a pair
of Tongs (as if you were of that Sect who pretend to have found an Art for
Propagating Mankind without Females) that neither of you can keep it out of
your Mouths, you are so in love with it: A cunning way to correct Vice,
doubtless! and not much unlike those Brethren of iniquity, who could quickly
espy a Mote in their Brothers Eye, but not take the least notice of the Beam in
their own, planting themselves into the Row of the Just, with this misapplied
Salvo, To the clean all things are clean. This is Profaneness too, Sir, is it?
If it be, it is only to those whose straight-laced Consciences will permit them
to strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel; not to those who endeavor to walk by
that great Law of Doing as they would be done to. And so farewell Profaneness,
and your never to be honored Apocryphal Beast.

Ignorance succeeds; which I heartily acknowledge my self to be stored
sufficiently with, especially in the Scholastic way of Railing, wherein you,
and your Honorable Hand-man are excellent: But, that after the spending most
part of my Studies in Composing Divine Hymns and Psalms, both in Latin and
English, taken out of the Holy Scripture, either immediately as they lie, or
collected as occasion required, to remain ignorant that God is a
Scripture-Name; this, Sir, is a Favor above all Favors, and which through my
sides darts at all the Lay Catholics in the World, but I Will leave them to
answer for themselves. The reason of this Charge was, because I said, you
mentioned not a word of the Divine Use of Music in your Essay; which under
favor, Sir, I must say, and say again; for, for you to urge that God was the
Author of it, is short of the purpose, he being the Author of every good and
perfect Gift, whether used in or out of his Divine Service; or, to say that
'twas used as a means to allay Readiness Anger; for the care of his Courtiers,
whether Priests, Prophets, or others, were to find a Cunning Harper to quiet
him, not to procure an Act of Devotion in him; no more than what is done in the
Case of one bitten by a Tarantula.

But the Case is thus: That as you begun your Book with the Advantages of
Music above other Recreations; so, after you had spun out your Discourse, and
waved even Philosophy to mix with it, which you know, Sir, is but the Handmaid
to Divinity and Divine Worship; you conclude it, without so much as taking
notice of either, thus: But this is so far from our Practical Proposal, that it
may suffice to have given these hints, and so withdraw, lest while I plead for
Music, as a noble and lawful Divertisement, it should be found guilty of
encroaching upon those more serious Studies, to which it is to be only a
Recreation.

By what has hitherto been said, I hope, Sir, the indifferent Reader will be
satisfied, that the Malicious, Lying, Ignorant, Immodest, Profane Parts of
your Charge against me, are not on my side; but have with as much Modesty as
their nature would permit, returned from whence they came; though from your
self, nothing is to be expected, being you have long since declared your
resolution, never to be convinced. There remains now, one only little Favor,
which you have been pleased to bestow upon my Person, that Mind and Body might
be equally Habited, which is, your rendering me Squint-Eyed; and truly, Sir,
it is of the same Tincture with the former.

Had I been Purblind, Copper-Nos'd, SparrowMouth'd, Goggle-Ey'd, Hunch-Back'd,
or the like, (Ornaments which the best of my Antagonists are adorned with) what
work would there have been with me? but, thanks be to Heaven, Nature has done
her part, and so prevented your farther Liberality on this poor Body of mine,
and consequently saved me the Labor of following your Tract into such
unfrequented Paths* as you have been forced to run through, from the Subject
you first undertook, to Make a Book, that whosoever shall put himself to the
trouble of a serious perusal of, will not at all wonder, that Books are
Published of the Contempt of the Clergy, when such as you, who have undertaken
the Cure of Souls, should spend that Precious Time, in vilifying and detracting
those Persons, especially Musicians, who have been so favorable in their frank
Instructions and Assistances to your self; the due reward whereof in many grave
Men's Opinion, being rather a P -- than a P --

And so, Sir, with the like Advice you were pleased to give me, from the good
Example of Mr. Chr. Simpson (referring the Piquant Part of your Book to the Man
in Buff) I take my leave, remaining,

Sir, Your very thankful Servant, M. L.
From my Lodgings in the Strand, July 24, 1672.
Duellum Musicum: OR THE MUSICAL DUEL.
WHat a murrain is the matter here? that a Man cannot give his Friend half a
dozen Lines, but he must be so hufft and bufft, and rebufft, and snufft and
pufft at, by a halfwitted Trinitonian? A Universitie Chicken that peep-peeps
about the Town still, with his Shell upon his Head. What Strange Cimmerian
darkness have we lived in hitherto, that we must be beholding to this upstart
Ignis Fatuus to light us into the right Paths of Music? What a dismal
obscurity does this quick-sighted Argos find our Noble Science wrapped in, that
he so obsequiously

(...) But I shall leave that Idol of Bell and the Dragon, to be altogether
demolished by a Person, whom the Vindicator seems very much to slight, even Mr.
I. Playford himself, whom I think an Antagonist deep enough in all Conscience
for such a Master of Arts as he is: And that notwithstanding the Vindicator
twits him with writing himself Philo-Musicae (a Fault no Scholar would have
taken notice of from such a Person) yet I cannot find, but that by his own
sedulity he has attained to more knowledge in Music than ever the Vindicator
is like to do; and that he has done more for the Advancement of Music than
ever that Bauble the Essay is like to produce. Such Novelties and Paper
Projects as these, unless the Person be of a subtle Ingenuity, his Arguments
very weighty, and the Use and Profit of the Invention be very apparent, are but
Volusi Annals, merely Charta cacata: And therefore for this bauling Codrus, I
am resolved to have a fling at his Jacket, though I lose by the bargain. As for
the Observer, because I dare not presume, though the rash Essayer does, to be
so Excellent in Music as he is, I shall therefore leave him to his own Affair:
Only as the Vindicator has his touches at me by the by; so I am resolved to
have my touches at him by the by.

In the first place I observe, He has been very kind to his Pamphlet, to
commend it into the Hands of a Person who is reported to be very little
affected with the Subject, either desiring his three dumb Brats might be taught
to speak, or else reprieving his Infant Cogitations from the Tragical Candle,
or more dishonorable death of the Close-stool; which else must have been their
certain Fate, had they fallen into the Hands of any other Man, who (to use the
Language of his own Sect) had understood the empty Nothingness thereof.

Page 2. He wonders He should receive so little respect, since he professes
himself to be a Graduate of one of the most Noble Universities in the World.
And truly I wonder how he durst profess himself one of the number. Surely he
was either a very great Truant, or else of a very unperforable Pericranium; for
he shows but a slender sign of his University-Education: Where he seems to have
spent his time rather in the more laudable Exercises of Trap and Cricket, than
in any sound Reading; having only leisure to adorn, and all to bedeck his
surreptitious Master-of-Art-Ship with the flatulent, drossie, and unwholesome
part of Mock-Learning. So that his Alma Matter has the least reason in the World
to thank him for his taking notice of her. Much better had it been, since he
would give himself the Title of Master of Art, to have wrote himself ex
Ambubajarum Collegio; a thing we should have much sooner believed, than his
being of Trinity College.

He is very angry to be compared to the Gentleman Usher of the Bears, which he
out of his great Experience in reading Venerable Ancestors, terms the
Metamorphosis of himself into a Iackanapes. For my part, I confess, I can pick
out no such Meaning out of the Words; however it is fitting the Gentleman should
have the Liberty of his own Interpretation, since no body knows what shape best
becomes him, better than himself.

He goes on, And all those Venerable Ancestors we read -- Pray, good Sir, let
me entreat you to leave out the We: You read Venerable Ancestors! -- ridete
mortales -- Men that read Venerable Ancestors, never want what is common to all
Mortals, only some few Masters of Art, the thing called Common Sense; and when
they take an Author to pieces to answer him, never mistake the plain and
palpable Meaning of the Words. I am not so fond, to think the Observer so
unwary, to compare such a dwindling Vindicator to David, in that sense which he
assumes to himself, that is not able to conquer the little wrigling Magots he
snaps at: Or to liken him to Hercules, otherwise than as the Proverb led the
Observer, to show, by his silly beginning, what a wise end he was like to make.

He now comes to an open Confession of his Inabilities: though afterward, out
of a most disingenious Repentance, he would fain put it off with an Ironie, by
which, he endeavors to insinuate a larger Commendation of himself; but the
Plot's discovered, and, as the Devil would have it, by his own particular self;
for he that a little before was aspiring to be a Goliath, a David, a Hercules,
now condescends to be granted a Sot, a Coxcomb, nay any thing, rather than not
have a Name in the World. Truly it is pity no body will take the pains, to make
him the Subject of another Moriae Encomium: I humbly conceive, it would be no
Paradox, as the Former was. He makes a small attempt to be a kind of an Oedipus
also, and to put forth a Riddle; talking, numine Fanatico afflatus, of
Burlesque upon Poetry, and Verse upon Burlesque: pretty words indeed, however he
had the good luck to come by 'um; but since they stand there without Rhyme or
Reason, we are bound to believe, that he made use of 'um only to show us his
great skill and reading in Venerable Ancestors.

He goes on, with much meekness confessing himself to be what indeed he is, a
very inconsiderable waster of clean Paper; rendering himself much more
contemptible by that vain and ridiculous superbity, that peeps through the
Pillory of his own feigned Humility. Truly those notable Expressions of
Augur-hole, and behind the Wainscot, do very well become him: A right
worshipful Master of Arts, and of long standing, and a very great Ornament to
one of the most Noble Universities in the World, that has hardly yet forgot his
Childish Plays of All Hid, and Fools Corner.

But now, Libera nos Domine; there is a strange Hobgoblin stands in his way,
which his foresaid Humility seems much to fear, but his foregoing Pride seems
much to scorn; A terrible Fellow in Buff; to encounter whom, he seems to have
put a great share of that little wit he has, upon the dry Grindstone of his
empty Common placeBook; where after a long search, he finds Mercury to be in
Conjunction with Mars, and therefore gives him the Title of Epigrammatical
Poetafter. See how this University Mushrome begins to swell with the Poison of
his own conceited Imaginations. He that has as little judgment in Poetry, as he
has in Music, and understands an Epigram no more than a wild Inhabitant of
Nova Scotia, will be nibling at Characters, as little to be regarded as his
Ponderous Essay, or his impertinent Vindication that follows.

Nescis, creed mihi, quid sint Epigrammata, Flacce. It might be expected
perhaps the poor Worm should turn again, when trod upon; but 'twas expected
withal, that his Trinity Loins of Mutton should have inspired his Genius with
a more keen Fancy, especially against a Man in Buff; for I do not find that the
most piercing of all his Paper-Pellets has made the least sign of a razure in
any part of the Buff-Coat he so smartly shoots at. But ye cannot blame him for
making so ill use of his weak Artillery, that appears to be so fettered and
entangled in the application of a Story. Gentlemen, 'twas in short thus:
Mars^as was a Phrygian, a party per-pale half Scholar, half Ignoramus, who
would needs propose to Apollo a Thing called an Essay for the Advancement of
Music: Apollo laughed at it, but because he would not be his own Judge, he
chose many others; and then returns an Answer. Marsyas replies, by way of
Vindication. But the Judges found the Essay and the Vindication to be so
extraordinary frivolous, that they ordered Marsyas to be flead alive for his
presumption. This Story grates upon the Ears of the Trinity Scholar (as it
behooves every Man to look to his own Flesh) and therefore to allay the fury of
a certain Spirit in Buff, which his own Guilt has discovered, he has provided
himself, from the Hands of some Southwark Sorcerer, as is conjectured, of a
most powerful Charm or Spell, consisting of two Trithemian Words,
Epigrammatical and Poetaster; for that you may be sure was his intention,
seeing most Charms are commonly composed of insignificant Words. And to make it
the stronger, he has found out another piece of Witchcraft, which he calls
Defunct. A word, which I do assure him the Man in Buff never so much as dreamt
of; being nothing but what his quaint cunning only did invent, to raise to
himself the superstructure of a paltry University Quibble, and that with so
much straining at wit, as easily discovers the costiveness of his Brains. They
that will take the pains to read it, may thereby soon find out, what a Great
Master of Art can do, if he be hard put to it. But had a Man praised him, it had
been all one, for it is not the quality, but the quantity which he grumbles at.
For now he seems not so mad that Verses were made upon him, but that there were
no more of the same kind; as if he measured the goodness of Lines, by the
length of the Vicars Hourglass, or the tediousness of his own Repetitions.
Gentlemen, I am but one, and therefore let me desire you to make a Collection
among ye, that this our second honest Tom Coryat may not want the full desire
of his heart. And so good Mr. Sheepskin the Man in Buff most kindly bids you
Farewell.

Thus far the Exordium. Now enter Vindicator in propria persona, yclad not in
Buff, but in a color something a kin to it, with a little mixture of Red. If
you like him not in that shape, you may imagine him to be some Mountebank
curvetting upon the Sage with a Remedy for Frenzies, or a sleepy Potion for
Chyrurgeons to use while they cut off Gangrened Limbs; for the following Pages
are such Hum-drum, drowsy, heavy, impertinent stuff, that a a Man can hardly
read 'um over without putting himself to all the inconveniences of Opium: It Is
like Lethe or the Lotos Tree. And one would swear that the Author had either
drank the one, or eat of the Fruit of the other, for he presently falls into a
fantastical Dream, and seems to sit talking idly to himself of a certain
A-rithmetical Mystery of the Beast, which he has compendiously reduced from the
Numbers 666 to the Number 81. A subtle kind of trifle that might perhaps have
troubled the Brains of Napier or Broughton, or somebody else as mad as they, or
himself, but never to be admitted within the Verge of a sensible Observation.
His supposition of a Tavern-Invitation, is nothing but mere Schoolboys
prattle, and favors only of the Folly of a contemptible Scribler.

But now, guilty by his own confession of the drowsy flatness of his foregoing
Lines, the Gentleman promises much Wit, an abundance of Wit, yea even a
superfluity of Wit; but proves the arrant'st Cheat in Nature; there not
appearing from him from this place to his very Finis, so much as one University
Punn, to save his credit: Only a few undigested Ironies, ill-contriv'd
Reproaches, scandalous Misquotations, and pitiful Vaunting of his own mighty
Acts, with a here I have him and there I have him, I Will pull him down, and I Will
crush him; all which are so far from Wit, that they only smell of the Lees and
Grounds of the College-Butlers Tappings. They afford not discourse sublime
enough for a Suburb Coffee-house.

He begins with a Tale of a Tale; but I dare say, had the Scarecrow, which he
has (...) sick, with his Fardle of newfangled Gingombobs, to think with an
insipid Nickname, to sully the Skill of a Person so much above the reach of
his Capacity. Had he produced as much Salt, as (if he had petitioned for it)
the lowest Fo^m in Paul's School could have lent him, he might have made some
progress in his Attempt. It Is no wonder Men say the World is turned arsie
versie, when the Sign-Post shall presume to undervalue the Sign. But presently
as if the Gentleman had mistaken his Mark, he calls the Observer the Sun's
Rival Luminary. Come, quoth he, see the Circuit of thy Rival Luminary, see the
like Circulation of the imitating Blood. What a heavenly Rapture is the
Gentleman now in? How his fond Soul skips and leaps, like a fat Heifer in the
plentiful Elysian Fields of Nonsense? But whence all this joy? only to behold a
Conundrum of his own Invention, stolen out of Old Butler, though to disguise the
Theft he has periwigg'd the pretty Engine with about half a dozen small Lines of
his own Trimming. There you find the thing that tickles his his Spleen; BMT
riding Triumphant in a Chariot graced with one Wheel, while the Vindicator like
Biton, or Cleobis draws about his three Cybele's to be adored in the
pig-market, in hopes of some strange remuneration. An excellent Gimcrack for
the Foot-boys in Lincolns-Inn-Fields to throw Dice upon: For to say truth, his
pilfer'd Scheme, so admirable in his own Eyes, is but a mere toy, and shows you
nothing, but what has been for many Years lippis and tonsoribus notum.

Therefore let him e'ne take his Rota, and present it to the grave Burghers of
the Commonwealth of Oceana; for I find it is somewhat of the Nature of the
Stork, 'twill hardly live under a Monarchy.

Now heavens preserve the three fair Goddesses, BMT, for their Celestial Auriga
is just about to drive them through a most uncouth Desert, where they are like
to meet with all the Encumbrances that can put them to the squeek, or stop the
merry motion of their single-wheel'd Chariot. Here you shall find them jolted
by the stump of a Hexacordon; there half over-turned by a rude heap of
Pentachordons; in another place ready to be tumbled down the precipice of a
Tetrachordon. By and by he whirls through an enchanted Vale of he sinks again,
as he himself confesses, into the tedious repetitions of his beloved Essay; as
if he had undertaken to be a Champion rather for the Cuckoo than the
Nightingale. And his wonderful drift is to bring his Dear Firstborn into the
favor of the World, which he would fain have ^o cherish his malapert
Stripling; and to believe that he writes man, before the poor Child can speak
plain. By which he thinks to angle to himself a notable business: For, quoth he
to himself, If I could but persuade the World, that all my Forefathers were
puppies to me; and that there was nothing of true Music upon the face of the
Earth, before I came to be Two and Twenty Years of Age; then would all the
ignorant race of Mortals be forced to come from the North, and the South, and
the East, and the West; yea, from every point of the Compass, to learn Music
of Me: And I should be the only Teacher under the spreading Canopy of Heaven.
Now that this is the Advancement of Music, which he so craftily designs, is as
plain as his pretty picture before his Book, for why? He is come already from
proposing, to professing; and to show what high things he aims at, he invites
all His Majesty's honorable Servants to go to School to him at Hackney, Famous
for the Seminaries of young Girls; but never famous that ever I heard of before
for the Instruction of His Majesty's Honorable Servants: They may take their
Bottles and their Baskets, and go if they please; but I fear the blemish he has
laid upon them of wanting the knowledge of the Nature and reasons of Music,
till furnished from such a Bawble-stall as his, has quite knocked out the
brains of his Infant project. And so Gentlemen, you may safely pass over to his
32 p. without the least detriment to your future knowledge: For I Will say that
for him and a fig for him, that he is the most cautious person how he puts his
Friends to the trouble or necessity of writing much, that ever I met with.

In his 32 p. you may find him simp'ring to himself, with a Sardonick smile to
see his publisher, (as he out of his copious stock of most ingenious and
scurrilous Eloquence terms it) so arrogantly assaulted. See how this little fly
upon the Coach-wheel, would vaunt and strut if it could! Good lack aday! what a
crime it was to assault his publisher? How the poor thing begs and scrapes for
applause! as if his deserts were such as could keep his publisher from being
assaulted. Alas, we understood the worth of his Publisher, without the
assistance of his lean Commendations: And we hope so well of him, that when he
was pleased to countenance such a parcel of Thrums and Mop-rags, as was the
worshipful Essay, 'twas only in compliance with Horace, a better Author than
ever he will be; who tells ye, that sometimes it is -- Dulce desipere in loco
-- which we are the more apt to believe, because it is very credibly affirmed
that the Gentleman has since openly and heartily disclaimed and deserted the
Vindicator's forlorn cause as altogether unworty of his Patronage, declaring,
he never gave him countenance or Commission to write so many extravagant
falsities and fopperies, or to sow his scandals and abuses within the verge of
his protection.

His taxing the Observer with understanding nothing but Morley, Simpson, or
Greetings Instructions, I only mention to complete the number of his predantick
Follies; but shall leave it to impartiality it self, to proclaim the difference
between the Vindicatours green Extravagancies, and the Observers Experience.

As for his scandalous reproach thrown upon the Observer, as if he were
ignorant of the Names of God, Iubal, or Saul, as it is a cavil founded upon a
shallow surmise of his own; an unseemly reflection, without any ground, upon a
man's Religion, so it betrays him not only to a hard opinion of his
Scholarship, but of his Gentility, and that he has converst more with Kitts and
Petticoats, than with men of Education.

But now the Scene alters, and enter Vindicator, like Sampson, between the two
Pillars of Dagons Temple, ready to pull down the Observer in his ruin. Truly
for strength, I fear Sampson will outdo him; but for going blindly to work,
it is a Cockpit lay of the Essayers side.

Hoyday -- What Is here? More of his Learning? More Blossommings of his Master
of Artship? Stop him there. He has robbed the University of all her reason at
once; and hid the Promethean Theft in an old rotten, dirty, mustie Thing, which
as I suppose, he intended for a Syllgoism.

S'life quoth Keckerman! What abominable dunce made this? Sacrament! quoth
Burgersdicius, In the name of the Lords of Holland and West-Freesland, What Is
here? Bless me! quoth Ramus, I vow, quoth he, I never saw such a grisly,
dismal, horrible spectacle in all the Parisian Massacre. And surely those great
Logicians might well wonder: For such a misshapen, deformed, crump-shoulder'd,
Baker-legg'd piece of Vanity, was never born of a Man's brain. Twenty Bears in
Twenty Years cannot lick it into form: And to use the palms of his own hands,
and fasting spittle for the same purpose, would wast him into an Anatomy. With
what face can he pretend to be a graduate of one of the most Noble Universities
in the World, and produce such a what shall I call it, for a Syllogism. The
Gentleman indeed had need cry p. 59, hold his sides, while he mocks at other
folks, that has so ridiculously hampered his own reputation, in the snare of
such a counterfeit piece of St. Martins Ware. Who can believe the Essayer knows
fingers from toes, as he thinks he does, p. 59. that can no better distinguish
between a Syllogism and a Chimaera, or between Logic and Canting. He would do
well to carry it to Bartholomew Fair, 'twould be as pretty a sight to a Scholar
as the Tall Woman, or an African Monster. Now that you may behold this Sign of
the Elephant and Castle, turn to his 41 p. where you shall find the Pageant
dressed up in all its Pontificalibus.

That way which requires an absurdity five times over is much more to be
exploded than that which requires it but once.

But the Observers Old way does require the same (condemning) absurdity five
times, which the Essayers New one requires but once.

Therefore the Observers Old way is much more to be exploded than the Essayers
New one.

My first Objection against this Sillogism (shame faw the lugs of our Master of
Art) is, that though it consist of English words, yet that it is neither true
sense, nor true English: A sad story, that a Master of Art cannot make English
of English. That way which requires an absurdity five times over, and that way
which requires it but once. Did ever any Master of Art so forget himself, as to
grant that any Art or Science can require an Absurdity? For, Dato uno Absurdo
sequuntur Mill.

Behold here a Trinity Fly entangled in the Cobwebs of his own Learning. Is
this the bragging Puller down and Crusher that Rodomontado'd so but just now?
View where the mighty Sampson lies with the locks of his own ambitious strength
quite cut off by his own Dalilahs BMT. And now Master of Art, have a care,
have a care, for the Philistines are upon thee. The Common Law of Sense and
Reason which thou have broken, Prosecutes thee. Thomas Salmon, M. A. of Trin.
Coll. Oxon, hold up thy Hand; for thou stand endited for the felonious
murder of a Sillogism, contrary to the Statutes of Logic in that case made and
provided; and more than that, for counterfeiting the Kings English, and the
Stamp of Sovereign Reason; of all which thy Country has found thee guilty: And
now what have thou to say why Sentence should not pass against thee according
to Law? March to the Place of Execution; and so the Lord have mercy on thee,
for a Poor Scholar.

Having objected against the English; I am in the next place to condemn the
form of the Sillogism; For this is a certain Rule, Conclusio non differt a
questione.

But his Major and Conclusion are so far from agreeing, that the Conclusion
which ought to be a part of the Argument, quite varies from it. His Major is,

That way which requires an absurdity five times over, is much more to be
exploded then that which requires is but once.

His inference is,

Therefore the Observers old way is much more to be exploded than the Essayers
New one.

Let them that are dim-sighted put on their Spectacles, and try if they can
find the Essayers New one in the Major; which ought, as he intended his
Sillogism, to have been the extreme term of his first Proposition; which being
left out in the Major, dashes his whole Sillogism in pieces against the known
Maxim of Logic.

Quod non debet esse plus aut minus in conclusione, quam fuit in premissis. In
the next place, there ought not in a Sillogism to be more than three Terms. But
in the Medium of this Sillogism you shall find a fourth Term by the name of the
Same Condemning shouldered in; to what purpose

(...) And thus much as concerning a thing called a Sillogism, the Author of
which, being a certain young man, I advise to take the Observers Horn-book, and
his Accidence, and two pieces of Bread and Butter clapped together, and get him
to School again, and to leave off his Fooling with Essays and Vindications,
and diving into Arguments, till he have got more Wit and more Learning.

But because the Sillogism will not take, he is resolved to be-lye the
Observer; telling ye an idle story, that the Observer makes the Syllable Vt to
force the Tongue against the Roof of the Mouth. This is altogether false: He
tells ye indeed, that there are Consonants which will do it, as most certainly
there are; but ascribes no such efficacy to that particular Syllable, as he
with his usual gift of mistaking, endeavors to demonstrate. And therefore his
supposition that the Observers Tongue hung the wrong way, was but an effect of
the wrong hanging of his own giddy Brains.

But this is common: Even in the next page, behold another piece of his wonted
mis-quotation. The Observer cries out, O Resormation! how amiable art thou in
the Nostrils of them that cannot see! Was it ever heard, felt, or understood,
that the Toning of the Voice must take its rise from a Semi-tone, etc. This the
Vindicator calls a resolution in the Observer to be for the future guided by
his seeing, feeling, and understanding Nostrils, and terms it a most excellent
expression to show a further advancement of his Learning. A meaning he could
never have picked out of the words, had not some Jacob Behmen enlightened his
Pericranium, as indeed it is very fit that one Heretic should help another. But
it is a strange thing, that he that so much scorns the Hornbook, should want a
fescue for his own understanding. Is it not a miracle, that a Vindicator should
so grope in the dark, and blunder through his adversaries text, that carries
such a spiritual Lanthorn about him, besides the Flambeaus of his own Wit and
Memory.

But so it is, that now again because he cannot Answer the Question proposed,
(as no body did ever expect he should,) that therefore he gives his old
preceptor Misquotation a Letter of Attorney to speak for him. Truly, my dear
Friend, three false Quotations in less than two Pages, are not so commendable a
virtue as you may imagine. What will the World think of your Book, crammed with
so many imperfect and insipid untruths? A most special Vindicator, who because
he cannot answer Objections proposed, will raise other stupid ones of his own,
which he thinks himself to have a more facil way of confuting. For whereas the
Observer thought it strange, that the Toning of the Voice should take its rise
from a Semi-tone. He taxes the Observer of accusing him for beginning to learn
the Monosyllables from a Hemi-tone. To which the Vindicator answers, p. 54,
That those Sillables are not learnt for any airy pleasantness in themselves,
but as rudiments to distinguish Notes and half Notes, etc. Gentlemen you hear
his acute and pertinent reply, set off with a ridiculous Though I have often
told him.

What a Magnificent Bubble is this, to talk of telling and answering, and at
the same time to betray such a sottish dotage, as not to know what a true
answer is. The thing is so plain, that 'twould be a Vindicators folly to insist
further on it.

The conceit of having so exquisitely answered that Objection, has set him a
crowing most violently upon his own dunghill. His imagination is highly
tickled with the Observers telling him that Mistress Mi is rambled out of her
Apartiment and turned Queen. But quoth he, Let her ramble into all the
Apartiments about the Town, she shall never want a gentleman Usher, as long as
he is able to man her. And of this, he is as sure as that four two pences make
two groats. How pleasant the Gentleman is, now he has got an opportunity to
fancy himself in Luteners-Lane; for you may guess at his haunts, by his single
Money. You see, as early day as it is, how expert he is: And would you have
thought such a modest young man had been creeping into the Houses of Iniquity
already? But the Devil oft-times carries youth to those places, out of his
great zeal to make them detest their Vices. Come, come, never blush for it: As
good abroad as at home; For if Mistress Mi be a Queen, she is one of his own
making; (perhaps not the first has been made at a Boarding-School,) and so the
Gentleman Usher returns back to his Bedchamber, wholesomely to advise him, to
look well to the Calves of his own Legs, and not to be so vainly merry with
his smutty and ungentle flections upon other men's Conversations.

He tells ye, he honors Mr. Simpson, and yet some Pages before, looks upon him
so much beneath his great reading, that he only thinks him a Companion for the
Observers mean Capacity. The best on it is, we look upon him as a real Exception
to all true Maxims. For if honor were in honorante, while he is the bestower,
sad were our Condition. But there is no such thing in him, or that can come
from him; it is rather a blemish, than a praise, to be well spoken of by him;
and therefore let him honor e'ne who he pleases.

He proceeds to a great Astonishment at the Observers resentment, against any
propagating the knowledge of Music, thereby thinking to raise to himself a
vain ostentation of his own endeavors. He means doubtless, the famous Essay: A
worshipful Advancement of Music indeed, which the most ingenious Author durst
not trust into the World, without the strong recommendation, and most notable
blessing of a Publishers Preface. For which courtisie of helping a lame dog,
Ferunt and aiunt, that some body or other had paid him in pecuniis numeratis
four Pound ten Shillings, which rendered that somebody a wise man, and the
Counterfeit Essayer a mere Musical Cully: And shows you how little Wit or
Memory he had, to tax the Observer for being Mr. Playfords hireling. Alas! had
the Gentleman found there had been any reputation to have been gotten by the
Essay, He would soon have wrench'd it out of the Vindicators feeble hands, and
assumed it to himself.

And therefore I would have this idle contemner of the Observer, forbear those
Hackney-windy-Bottle-Ale-expressions of my Essay, my way, my Octaves, my
Circulation. 'Twere a modesty more becoming him, than the folly of an
impertinent Vindicator, and more worth his while, for the fame he will get by
his works. But amongst the rest of his My's, What think you of My Stationer? By
my troth, he is well hope up with an Author. I pity the poor man's case, for in
a short time the City will find him out, and then he must either fine or hold.

In his 70. p. he prosecutes the Observer for spoiling his Marriage, as he
pretends, for declaring him to have a rubical Complexion. What a strange Map of
Modesty this is, to be dashed out of Countenance by his own Face? No, No, my
dear Friend, it is not the Color will injure you; but you are so bashful, so
modest, so nice, so startled at the very sound of a baudy word, that it makes
the Women believe you have only a little heat in your Face, and none no where
else. Otherwise a Masculine complexion would rather promote, than disappoint
your Conjugal attempts. Nay, I dare affirm, (if it be not as I say) that the
Ladies are so mild, so courteous, so meek, so endearing, so obliging, so
tenderhearted, and merciful, that they will never reject a young man's suit for
a pimple upon his Nose; nor consent to that wicked intention of the Observer;
or rather, that wilful mistake of his, of throwing dust in a Squires Face,
where he should have daubed his Pommatum. But whence comes this red Face? not
by Drinking, nor Smoking. But as Dr. Lower learnedly tells ye, Ladies; lib. de
Sanguine, a Book which ye have all read, by the errancy of the Blood, which
causes a great confluence of Spirits to the Brains. A reason well urged to
understanding Widows and Maids, but not to Illiterate men. For how can this be
applied to a person that has neither Brains nor Spirits? It Is you, therefore,
(Ladies) that are guilty, and not the Observer. It Is you that have kindled
those fires in his Breast, that have so sadly scorched his Countenance; Disdain
not therefore your own Martyr. What though you have tanned his Face with the
flaming beams of your Beauty; yet is his Mind as white as Snow, and his
Thoughts as pure as Lambs-Conduit-Water. For surely no Pharisee did ever
pretend to more Piety and Virtue, than he assumes to himself on every slight
occasion. Nihil est te Sanctius uno -- Nay, this very redness of his Complexion
forsooth, must be the Gentleman Usher to his Godly life. He Will make ye believe
shortly, that his Nose is the Sunshine of the Gospel. But all is not gold that
glisters; for methinks, with a little crum of Riboldry, as he terms it, in the
Observers Answer, (such as has been ever allowed in Satirical replies) I
thought at first the modest maidenly Gentleman would have fallen into a Fit of
the Mother; but when I found him chomping and chawing it so often in his
Vindication, it was apparent then, that 'twas not Anger which had overcome him;
but the sweetness, and Honey-combness of the expression, that had so ravished
his palate, so that he could even have swallowed it. He does so tongue it, and
lick it, as if 'twere his dear Concubine BMT. So often and needlessly repeated,
as if he took occasion to scold at the Observer, only that he might have an
oppotunity to dandle the delicious sucket upon the tip of his lascivions
Instrument of tasting.

He endeavors now of his great gratitude, to the Observer, to show you, that
he has not been only at the University, but at School too, though where with
most advantage to his Learning, will puzzle a good Casuist to judge. However,
in Robbing Peter to pay Paul, he has made a hard shift to transcribe a certain
Epigram out of Val. Martial, as he calls him; a way of citing Martial that I
never knew a Scholar much guilty of; but perhaps he took Val for Martials
Christen name, and then I cannot blame him for using that cunning mark of
distinction. But what has Martial to do with the Observer? why, nothing that I
know of; but only to tell ye, that the Observer wears a Peruque as many other
men do, and that he has made use of a youthful expression, to put a deserved
mockery upon the Harlotry Dalilah's, of such a young Pragmaticus. Who, if he
had so pleased, might have observed, that the very Author whom he cites, makes
use of far more ribaldry (as he calls it) when he meets with such an
Impertinent, as the Essayer, and thinks it convenient to have his guils well
rubbed with his Satyrick Salt. For example, being to reprehend the folly of
some trifling Essayer or other of his time, a great Braggard, though but a
small performer, and Scandalously invective against his Seniours and
Superiors; He handles him without Mittins, as you may perceive in the
following lines presented the Vindicator in liew of his own Transcription.

Lib. 10. Epist. 11. Nil aliud l^qu^ris quam Thesea, Perithoumque
Teque putas Pyladi, Calliodore, Parem.
Dispeream, si Tu Pyladi prestare matellam
Dignus es, aut Porcos pascere Perithoi.
Thou talk of Theseus and of Perithous,
And cry'st, great Pylades is much below us.
Never let me live, if such a bouncing soft
Be worthy but to scowr the Chamber Pot
Of Pylades, or for a brace of juggs
To cleanse the Sties of Perithous Hoggs.
This, in brief, since he is pleased to remit the Observer to my Construction,
is all the Character that I can give of his Works. For what has Green tail, and
Onion-like Fornicotar to do with a difference about the Gamut. But the
Gentleman must be al a mode; For now we can neither plead nor argue contrary,
but the particular lives and conversations of men must be ravel'd into, to make
slender arguments for weak Themes, and feeble Causes: A kind of unmannerly
Oratory, that deserves to be convinced rather by Horse-Logick, than by replies
of Pen and Ink.

Page 78. He says there is one serap of an Argument behind yet. That these
Gentlemen, meaning the Kings Servants, attained to their eminence in Music by
the Old Scale. What fairer Argument would this great Musician have, than such a
one, to prove that there is no need of his Ledger du main? If the Scale now in
use be a sufficient cause, what need He, or any other such unskilful Busie-body
trouble their brains whether it be the Causa sine qua non, or no? 'Twere pity,
quo he, but the Scale were cut in Alablaster, and showed among the Tombs. And
'twere pity, quo I, but His geugaw, BMT, were cut in Paper for Comfit-makers
Boxes; or more seriously laid up among John Tradescants Bawbles. Surely since
those Gentlemen he speaks of did not attain to their Eminency by inspiration,
as no question but their own Mortality will confess the contrary; it is a very
strange piece of overweening rancour in the Vindicatour, to deprive the Poor
Harmless Gamut, of that petty Honor, which is due to the rudiments of all
Sciences: Just like the Mountebank Paedagogues about the Town, that will be
reviling the stanch Foundations of Ancient Lilly, to usher in their pedantical
lucubrations, and to get themselves a silly credit in the World, by seeking to
cajole the Parents of their Scholars with their own newfangled Heresies. And
all this while, where lies the stress of so much Trinitonian fury, but only
against the miserable Vt, and forlorn Re? For* Mi, Fa, Sol, La, are his white
Boys still, and admitted into the School-Room to converse with his young
Gentlewomen, BMT as formerly. Would ye know the reason; on my word it is a
profound one* For, thinks he, now the Gamut is gelt, it may be trusted among
Maiden Gentlewomen, which before was somewhat dangerous, when it had the two
testicles of Vt and Re, annexed to it. Though I wonder how BMT themselves escape
his lash, there being as much reason why Base, Mean, and Treble, damm'd
obsolete Terms of Music, should suffer the scourge of this Innovating Whipping
Tom, as Gam ut and A re.

Therefore might our worthy Vindicator have spared his frivolous conceit, that
Those Gentlemen came to be no more eminent for having read the Scale, than the
Macedonian for conquering the World, because his name was Alexander. An
inference that has no more coherence with sense than Bedlam with any thing of
Trinity-College but himself.

It Is a Ianus-like fancy, that looks two ways at once; one part of his
Argument rows one way, and the other looks another way; or to make it yet
plainer, as if one Waterman should row one way at the head, and another the
quite contrary way at the stern, till they pull the Boat in pieces; which
indeed is the true Character of all the Arguments in his Book. True reason
would have kept him close to his text, and have told him there was as much
likelihood of Alexanders learning the principles of War, as there was, that the
other should be taught the Rudiments of Music; so that if he will grant our
Musicians to be eminent, It will be an easy thing, without his assistance, to
prove that the first ground and source of their Eminency arose from their
knowledge of the Scale, which is the first principle of Music; as we may well
believe the first rise of the Macedonian's greatness was from the great
knowledge he had of the first Elements of War; which being the primary grounds
of his Knowledge, were the primary cause of that greatness which he attained by
his Knowledge. And thus I suppose, the Hornbook and Primar were the first
Originals of that great learning to which our Vindicator imagins himself to
have so sublimely clamber'd. But this is common sense, and therefore a thing
too mean for him to take notice of, or else without the verge of his
understanding.

(...) Pamphlet; the beginning of which is nothing to the purpose, the middle a
very nonsensical piece of Impertinency, and the latter part a parcel of
undigested Nonsense, concluded with the grossest brand of Infamy that ever was
fixed upon the sober and ingenuous Part of the World, whom he so foully accuses
to have entertained such kind thoughts of his obnoxious Raillery; a scandal,
which if they forgive him, will bring them within the verge of a most desperate
forfeiture: though never to his advantage; for it will but make the young
unwary Icarus soar with the more boldness above his understanding, till he melt
his Wings, and plunge himself into all the deepest Abysses of Absurdity.

Thus much for Tobit, now for his Little Dog following him. A certain kind of
Letter-Monger, that with much Imprudence, nothing of Truth; much of Confidence,
nothing of Learning; comes a day after the Fair, to set his probatum est to the
Mountebankeries of his Master Quack. He was mightily overseen that he did not
fix a Label of the Musical Cures wrought by his Benefactor, like a
Covent Garden Charlatan: Then might the worshipful Title of the Essay and
Vindication have been more happily exalted, as frequently they were, by the
Industrious Stationer, jigg by jowl, with no Cure no Money, or the Three
Infallible Medicines, upon every post of the City, when backed with so many
Attestations as one of Melpomene's Knights of the Post, with a little labor
could have easily brought him. You may know what part of the Creation he is, by
his Braying. This is he that follows the Vindicator, as the Bell-man's Cur
follows his Master. A kind of Beetle engendered by the heat of a Trinity
Meteor, who while the most radiant Luminary moved in our Hemisphere, slept all
the time, but He being set in the Ocean of his own Fopperies, up comes this
drowsy Insect, buzzing into your Ears the Vindicators Praises; like the
Dor-flies, with which the Young Painter in Boccace so affrighted his Master
^ufa^macco. This is he, who being perhaps as well paid for his Letter, as the
other was for his Preface, stands ready like the Fool in the Play, to justify
whatever mistakes the Vain glorious Squire shall be guilty of. I should have
expected this Miserable Tooter, with his diminutive Trumpet to have stood at
the Door of the Monstrous Vindication to draw in Customers, with a step in
Gentlemen; and not to have come sneaking at the end of a Pamphlet, as if he
were only the Vindicators Excrement, and indeed that very Apocriphal Fart he
speaks of, fizzled from the tail of his own Musical Pedagogue, and fastened
upon him, as my Lady puts her scapes upon Button. You may easily take the
Height of his Knowledge without a Jacobs Staff; for he tells ye, he has
received considerable advantages from the Essayer. This is just according to
the Proverb Asinus Asinum scabit. But now -- Cedite Romani -- Cedite Graii --

By'r leave, Gentlemen, for a Hyperbole, would make the very Hoops of the Tun
of Heidelbergh fly. But your Credit, quoth he, is too Sacred -- Sure the
Vindicator must be either a Nazarite from his Cradle, or some particular vow of
separation to the Lord; else how ridiculously looks the grand and Royal Title
of Sacred so undecently bestowed upon the low Credit of a bare Young
BMT-monger, and more indiscreetly suffered by an Ostentatious Vindicator. But
let him write another Pamphlet, though never so simple, and Majesty shall
hardly suffice him; let him but add a fourth, and you shall find N. E. will
make him a God. Well Mr. N. E. I find you can part with your Commendations at a
cheap rate: Though I had thought, men ought to have valued their Certificates
at a higher price, then that of Herrings and Mackaril. But this it is, when
inconsiderate start-ups will be scribbling, that know not how to guide their
Pens. In my opinion we will allow the puffed up Vindicator to take all N. E's.
petition'd-for Praises to himself, and make his best of them. Let him but wear
them a little in the wind, and he will soon discover the baseness of their Metal:
For is there any person so mad, as to think Sodomy the more commendable, beause
a Cardinal once wrote in praise of it. However we find large Commendations
given to the Nonsense and arrogance of an Essay, and a more unnecessary and
loathsome Vindication. Which indeed renders the Commender the greater Impostor
of the two. Thus they that will undertake to praise and sell their tinsel Wares
for right Silver or Gold, are far greater Cheats than they who make them for
such. Men, and Scholars especially, that intend their Encomiums should be
believed, should consider whom and what they praise; and not with such an
insipid Prodigality wast the Jewels of Commendation, as if they were casting
Beans by peck-fulls to fat Boars. Such Magnifyings, rather become
Discommendations, while the unwary Epistle-maker does but baffle his own good
Intentions to his Friend. So that if any of the Two, be happy in the Famous
Letter of N. E. it is the Observer, while his Reputation grows to be the more
notorious, by the weak endeavor of a frivolous Author to load him with a heap
of paltry Scandals, and empty Forgeries. A lewd extoller, and by consequence a
more contemptible dispraiser. It Is well known that the soundness, if not
profoundness of the Observers Judgment and Skill in Music, and the Excellency
of his performance favored by so great a Monarch and his Queen, both whom he
serves in fair repute, are far above the envy of such a Momus as N. E. or the
hairbrain'd Invention of BMT. And therefore, Zoile, quid solium subluto podice
perdis?
Spurius ut fiat, Zoile, merge caput.


Neither do I find this Letter-Missive-Gentleman, teazing only the Observer;
but in his testy Choler, yerking also at Hudibrass, Rablaise, and Don Quixot,
Authors in their kind, whose Trenchers he is not worthy to scrape; not without
a modicum of invective against those necessary assistances of Music, Mood,
Time, Prolation, and Ligatures of long Notes; which if Fiddlers, and shallow
Composers have laid aside, are yet such strict Observances, as render them of
far greater Consequence to a Learned Musician, than his Epistolary ignorance is
aware of.

If this be one of the sober and ingenious part of the World of which the
Vindicator brags, He Is a sad Mortal, God wot; A miserable Dogger-Boat for such
a matchless Essayer to venture the Shipwreck of his Sacred Credit in. A doughty
Squire to accompany the Invincible Champion of BMT. Let them e'ne go together
with their Musical Hoop; which if it ever bring them any advantage, besides
that of Pence a piece, for tumbling through, like Hocus Pocus's, is past the
belief of more of the sober part of the World then I am apt to believe either
of them acquainted with.

TO THOMAS SALMON, M. A. of Trinity College, Oxon. Author of the Essay to the
Advancement of Music.
Sir,
SInce you have engaged me, as well as Mr. Lock and Mr. Philips, by putting my
Name with theirs in your Book, and that in such abusive and scoffing Language;
I conceive my self obliged to join with them in acknowledgment of that your
kindness. If my Lines savor not of your Academical Learning, I hope you will
excuse me; however, I shall do my endeavor to write more civilly than you,
though in a more homely Style. The Thanks, Sir, which I intend to return, is
only a brief account of those few Inspections which I have made into your new
and elaborate Essay to the Advancement of Music, etc. with some short Reply's
in defense of the Old Scale of Music. This being a Work of no great
difficulty, I have the more readily and willingly undertaken it; and (for a
return of your Favors) shall make bold to present you with these my Remarques.

First, Before your Title Page appears the Picture of a Fine young Lady (of
Musical Education in Hackney School no doubt) Playing and Singing to her Lute.
'Twas excellent policy to fix such a fair Bait there, for it will most
certainly catch both the Eyes and Hearts of all our new soft-headed Gallants;
and undoubtedly draw more Spectators to your Book than ever Merry Andrew did to
his Master Jacob Halls Stage.

Next is the Title, or a Description of what is held forth in your Book, in as
many large promising Words and Truths, as there is in those Mountebank Doctors
Bills; which are pasted up at every pissing Corner; (and it was ingeniously
done of your Stationer Mr. Car to paste your Title also in the same places,
since they do so well correspond;) it is in these words, An Essay to the
Advancement of Music, by casting away the perplexity of different Cliffs, and
uniting all sorts of Music, Lute, Viol, Violin, Organ, Harpsichord, Voice,
(with etc. to include all other kinds, as Bagpipes Jews-trump, Drums, Trumpets,
Tongs, etc.) in one Universal Character. And that we might not think this Work
designed by a mean or obscure Person, it follows, By THOMAS SALMON, Master of
Arts of Trinity College in Oxford. But how well this is made out by you in your
following Discourse, I leave to the judgment of all ingenious Musicians.

In the following Page is an Epistle by Mr. John Birchensha, your Publisher, no
mean Person in the Science of Music, witness his Learned Templum Musicum, and
this his Epistle, or Flambeau, to Light all Musicians out of their Egyptian
Darkness, to behold the New Light or Musical Elysium held forth in your Essay:
And this Commendatory Epistle is so subtlely and plausibly done, to the
Advancement of your new Reformation, that he deserves double the Reward he
received for it. It begins thus: There is not any Art, which at this day is
more Rude, Vnpolish'd, and Imperfect in the Writings of the Ancient and Modern
Authors, than Music; for the Elementary part thereof, is little better than an
indigested Mass, and confused Chaos of impertinent Characters, and
insignificant Signs. It is intricate and difficult to be understood; it
afflicts the Memory, and consumes much time, before the knowledge thereof can
be attained: Because the Cliffs are diverse; their Transpositions frequent; the
Order and places of Notes very mutable; and their denominations alterable and
unfix'd. These things being considered by the ingenious Author of this Book,
(who endeavors only a reformation of the Regulative Principles of Practical
Music) he has here presented thee with an Eexpedient, for the redress of
these Obstacles, etc.

Now, Sir, you being that ingenious Author here mentioned, which has by your
elaborate Pains, great Learning, and subtle Invention, found out this new
Expedient or Reformation, I shall leave the Publisher and Epistle, and proceed
to examine the several Particulars and great Advantages proposed to us by your
Book.

The first Chapter is nothing to the purpose of Reformation, but a bare
Discourse of the Advantages of Music, which is frequent in all Authors that
have written of that Science.

The second Chapter is entitled, The Gamut Reformed: Here the Axe is laid to
the Root, and you begin your Reformation thereof in words of reproach and
defamation, thus: That which first of all terrifies a Beginner, is a long
Discourse of Gibbrish, a fardle of hard Names and fictitious Words, called the
Gamut, presented to him perfectly to be learned without Book, till he can
readily repeat it backwards and forwards; as though a man must be exact in the
Art of Conjuring before he might enter upon Music. Are not these pretty Bugbear
Words, to fright Boys and Girls ever from learning Music by such a Gamut, that
is compounded of hard insignificant Words to Conjure up Devils? This, Sir,
shows, that because you understand not the excellent Use of that Gamut, and its
Words or Names, you are therefore offended with it, and endeavor to persuade
others to the same opinion with your self, which is ever the practice of
Innovators. Certainly, Sir, Men of greater knowledge in the Science of Music
than you can pretend to, have declared them of better Use; who tell us, That
they are Words or Names, by which Notes or Sounds are called and known in their
distinct and proper places; and Notes or Sounds comprehend Music, and Music
is known rather to expel Devils than raise them; it did out of Saul, but, Sir,
what operation it may have upon you, I know not. You go on in these Words, But
I am certain if he can say, G, A, B, C, D, E, F, G, it will do to all intents
and purposes [as well]. We thank you for this as well, but, Sir, will it do no
better? then why do you propose it to us, when there is no advantage in it? Are
we not much beholding to you, Sir, to deprive us of our Old Scale, which is
Universally approved, and by known experience found to be perfect and good. And
impose upon us this New one of your own production, lame and deformed, a
thin-gut Monster, which has neither Speech nor Language, whereby it may be
understood; yet are you so in love with it, that you would fain lick it into
some kind of form: But your Tongue (though well hung) is not long enough.

Your next words are these, For the plain truth is, there are but seven Notes
in all, only repeated over and over again in double and treble proportion. You
say very right, Sir, but this is demonstrated more plain in the Old Scale than
in your New one, as thus it appears: In the Old Scale the seven Notes and their
Names are repeated three times over in words at length, on their proper and
assigned Rules and Spaces: In yours but once, and that in single Letters only;
which you tell us is to be done over and over in double and treble proportions.
Surely this needs must confound a Beginner, there being no plain demonstration
to guide him, but only your Eight single Letters, and his own Imagination.

Page 14. your words are these, Those aforesaid hard Names are nothing to the
purpose, they cannot declare a Note to be in a different Octave. This declares
again, that you do not, or wilfully will not understand the Old Scale,
notwithstanding Mr. Lock lately sent you an excellent pair of Observing
Spectacles for that purpose, with which if you view the Old Scale, you will see
there are different names enough in each of the Octaves, to distinguish them in
their proper places of Bass, Mean, and Treble. Is not the Octave to Gam ut in
the Bass G sol re ut in the Mean? To A re, A la mi re; To B mi, B fa b mi; To C
fa ut, C sol fa ut; To D sol re, D la sol re? Here are diverse Names sufficient
to distinguish between the Octaves of the Bass and Mean. So in the Treble, or
higher Octave there are different Names, as C sol fa, D la sol, E la; which
Names are in neither of the lower Octaves of Mean and Bass. Therefore this
Objection against the Old Scale is removed, and may be fixed more properly upon
your New one, which consists only of Eight single Letters, set down in this
Chap. Page 17. and there named The New Gamut: So that all a Beginner has to
distinguish your Octaves by, is to say A in the first, and A in the second, and
A in the third, which is the whole design of your -- what do you called --
Hypothesis, or circulation of Octaves; and probably might hold good, if all
that learned your way, were taught to Sing by Letters, or Tablature; for by
Notes they cannot: And this it was which made you scratch your head to the
purpose. But what will not a man do, before he will scratch a hole in it: Alas,
your New Gamut is so young, it cannot speak, nor ever would, unless you seek out
for help; wherefore, rather than it should continue speechless, you will take
confidence, and borrow out of the Old Scale those Gibbrish Words or Names of
Notes, Sol La Mi Fa, etc. which but a little before you render so terrible to a
Learner. He that shall read your Page 15. will have cause to smile to hear how
ridiculously you quarrel against the Old Scale; yet in the four last Lines
thereof your words are these -- Wherefore that We may know how to place Mi,
They give us this Rule, (not so, for you take it) which always holds good, (a
civil acknowledgment) viz. before Mi ascending to name Fa Sol La, and after Mi
descending La Sol Fa.

Now Sir, you have gotten this Old Rule, I will insert your following words in
the next Page, that it may appear to all Judicious persons what a pretty
confusion you make about ordering them for the Mouth of your New Gamut.

Now that which they are to be blamed for in this is, that when they have given
their Scholars a Notional understanding of this direction, their practice is to
take their rise from Sol, and Sing Sol La Mi Fa Sol La Fa Sol; as though Sol
was the syllable from whence they should take aim, by which means they never
perfect their main rule, and so as Mi alters, are confounded in naming their
Notes; whereas, if in their practice they begin with Mi, and so Sing forwards,
Mi Fa Sol La Fa Sol La Mi, they would at once learn to rise an Octave with
their Voice, and gain a readiness in this Rule, which they are always to
account by in whatsoever condition they find Mi.

It is to no purpose to plead that Sol is for the most part in the Cliff line,
and therefore ready to begin with as they go upward; because these syllables
are practiced only in order to other Singing; now Songs begin not with Sol, and
go forward in that method, but upon any Note, and so skip about, that no Rule
can be observed, but that which we contend for always to be practiced.

This is indeed the language of your whole Book, (as it will appear to such as
shall read it) it is such a Babel of confusion, Fardle of contradictions, and
Impossibilities: Such a Mathematical Rat-Trap of Nonsense, as the like was
never made in Crooked-Lane. In the former Chapter you confine the Notes, here
the Names, and set them in the Stocks together; as appears by these your next
words, Page 18.

We are sure, what we have undertook, is sufficiently proved, that G, A, B, C,
D, E, F, G, will do as well as the old hard Names; and for the placing of Mi,
you must take the usual Monosyllables, so you order them in the most
practicable method, viz Mi Fa Sol la Fa Sol La Mi.

So that here Mi is always in your first line G, Fa in A, Sol in B, and La in
C; and so ascending in your first Octave, you begin Mi again in the second: All
by way of Circulation.

And so again in the 20th Page of your Vindication, your words are these, How
happy would it be for the ease of Music, and the exactness of Tuning, if the
same proportions were ever fixed to the same places of the Septenary (or your
Octaves) i. e. Mi always in B. And again, in Page 49. And about the
confinement of Mi with the avoiding regular flats and sharps, I have delivered
my Judgment in the Description of my Whirligig: (That is your Cart Wheel with
Seven Spokes:) The first beginning in Mi and as it makes a turn round, it comes
to Mi again. So that all you give us for a New Gamut, is your Whirligig, or
Wheel of seven Spokes, marked with G A B C D E F, which you say is a speedier
way to attain Music then to take a long Journey on foot by the Old Gamut. And
since your nearest way to it is the furthest about, let those that like it take
it, and your second Chapter to boot: I have done with it. If this will not do, I
have yet more in Vindication of the Old Scale of Music.

I come next to your Third Chapter, (in which and the former is contained your
whole Design) Entitled The Cliffs reduced to one Universal Character. The first
Page of it is nothing to the purpose, but a fardle of words about Tablature,
etc. But in the middle of your next page your words are these, The present
Practice (or Old Way) is to make three Cliffs, whose Notes* by which they are
called, are a Fifth above one another; and according to the most convenience in
writing, are usually assigned to there places, as in the Scheme.

And since you have done us the kindness to insert a Scheme of our three
Cliffs, in your Book, (which you borrowed out of Mr. Simpson's Compendium, Page
4. as you do all your other Examples from him and other men) I doubt not to
prove that your new Invented Cliffs BMT will Be-e M p T y of any Invention you
pretend to the Advancement of Music.

An Example of the Three proper Cliffs assigned to each Part.
music Bass. Mean. Treble.



By these Three Cliffs, as they are thus planted in there usual and proper
places, may be Pricked any Song proper for that Part, and in the compass of the
Voice, and without any transposition (except it be in the C sol fa ut Cliff)
which is universally proper to the inward or middle Parts, and is so transposed
sometimes for convenience of Pricking; especially in Cathedral Music, where
Anthems and Services of five and six Parts do require it: Nor does the
transposition of that Cliff create any confusion to a Beginner, as you vainly
allege; for Vocal Music is seldom learned by men of Forty or Fifty Years old,
but by those that are young, whose Voices are proper to the Treble, and by that
Cliff are only taught; nor is the C sol fa ut Cliff now much used (unless as I
said before) in Cathedral Music. If you cast your Eye upon those several
Collections of Airs and Songs, which I have lately published, you will find I
have not made use of the C sol fa ut Cliff in all the second Part of the
Musical Companion, which consists of Songs of Two, Three and Four Parts; but
Printed them all in the G, or Treble Cliff, as proper to be Sung by Men or
Boys. As to my Psalms in Four Parts, which are Printed in three Tenor Cliffs
and a Bass; I could have Printed them as well in Three Treble Cliffs, had I
thought all had been so ignorant in the use of our Cliffs as I am assured you
are: It being usual and common for Men to Sing those Songs which are pricked in
a Treble an Eighth lower, where the Parts are so Composed, that they do not
interfere with the Bass. And if Music be made difficult (as you say) by the
transposition of one of our Cliffs, I shall plainly demonstrate that you have
made it ten times more difficult and confused, by the frequent transposition of
your Three new invented Cliffs BMT, in your new whim-wham Circulation of
Octaves; which according to your Hypothesis is thus set down in your Diagram.

music Bass. Mean. Treble.



In Page 38 and 39 you give us these following Rules and Directions, viz. 1. In
any place, where the Notes rise or fall an Octave (which is usually the cause
of greatest distress in this case) set the next Note in the same place, only
changing the letter of the Octave, which will direct you to Sing it an eighth
higher or lower; as you may see these three Notes, which required three
different Places, in three different Cliffs, are here situated all upon the
same Line, only with the letters of their Octaves prefixed at first sight,
palpably discovering what they stand for.

By which means the Octave only* not the Cliff is altered, neither is there the
lest shadow of the old confusion; for the G, which I instanced in, or any other
Note in this case, will stand in every part in the same place. And certainly,
one that has but very indifferent skill in Singing, can rise or fall an Octave,
when the prefixed letter shall give him timely warning of it. 2. If the Notes
ascend, or descend by degrees, and you have occasion to go far into anoth^r
Octave, when you come to an higher G, alter the Signal Letter, and it falls
upon the lowermost Line; the like discretion also must be used in descending:
By which means, and good forecast, no Song can be so spiteful and u^lucky, but
may be evidently and conveniently written in the compass of four Lines, which
is the STATVTE OF OUR HYPOTHESIS, the lowermost beginning with G, the uppermost
ending with F; and the higher and lower Notes than these, by the change of the
Signal Letter, ought to be lodged in their own Octaves, to which they do belong.

Hitherto I hope, Sir, I have proceeded fairly; and because it shall appear so,
I will here, according to this Statute of your Hypothesis, give one or two
Examples of both together, and leave it to Judicious Judgments to determine
where the confusion, or transposition of Cliffs is most frequent, and which is
most pleasant to the Eye of the Learner.

An Example according to the Rule of the old Gamut, wherein the whole Scale is
Pricked down proper for Vocal Music, in two Cliffs only, viz. the Bass and
Treble; in which compass may be Pricked any Song without any transposition.
music Example.



music The same your New Way is thus,



music A common Tune of a Psalm, picked according to the Old Rule or Scale of
Music.



music The same Tune Pricked your Way.



Now behold, good Sir, is not this Tune pricked according to the STATUTE of your
Hypothesis or new Method you would impose upon us? I am sure it is. In our way
there is no Transposition of Cliffs, but in yours, in this short Tune of Twenty
eight Notes, your M T Cliffs are Transposed or Imposed no less than Eleven
times; and are not the Notes cunningly planted for a Beginner to Sol-Fa? It Is so
retrograde to our old Rule, that when our Notes Rise your Notes Fall, and when
ours Fall yours Rise, to the Eye. Had I not heard otherwise, I should have
imagined you had been a Quaker, you so imitate them, who act all by contraries,
against the established Rule both in Church and State; for because our Three
Cliffs, Bass, Mean, and Treble, are distinguished by three known Characters out
of the Old Scale, your Three Cliffs must be otherwise, B for Bass, M for Mean,
and Tr for Treble: An excellent Reformation* and to as much purpose, as he that
changed the Name Kingdom into Commonwealthdom.

But I cannot find, Sir, in all your new Essay any provision for Tenors and
Contratenors; you never thought of Cathedral Men, which are the greatest number
of Singers in the Land; sure your design is, that since you cannot do as the
late Reformers did, sequester them of their Means, you will sequester them of
their Musical Cliffs, Tenors and Contratenors: For this, I remember Mr. Lock
gave you a Check in his Observations, and wondered you could be so uncivil: to
which (in the 49th Page of your Vindication) you answer, if he still grumbles
that Scholars cannot tell which is a Contratenor, or lower Mean, or the like,
for them that cannot understand the nature of the thing, let there be writ over
them, This is a Cock, and that is a Bull; which Itake to be an easier remedy
than to learn all the variety of old Cliffs. From whence (according to your
method) I may draw this Inference, That the Gentlemen of His Majesty's Chapel,
and all Catherdral Singingmen, are presented by you (for the Advancement of
their Music with little better than a Story of a COCK and a BULL; for which I
shall leave them to give you thanks, and proceed further in the Vindication of
our Cliffs.

Since all your whole Design, Sir, is to have Music confined, and kept to the
Statute Rule of your Hypothesis, which is by three Octaves fixed to constant
Rules and Spaces, in the compass of Four Lines, for the Pricking of all Songs;
why did you not give us some Examples thereof in your Book, but tell us, That
no Song can be so spightful or unlucky, but it may be evidently and
conveniently written in the compass of Four Lines, by the Rule of OUR
Hypothesis: Your omission in this case, gave me occasion in insert for
foregoing Tune of a Psalm; I could have pricked down many more (but this may
suffice any ingenious person) to have showed you the Beauty of the Mistress of
your Invention; but I suppose you perceived by her limping and hopping what was
her Distemper, which made you prescribe her a Leiger-Line, and if that would
not perfect the Cure, then to add thereto an ascititious Line, which together
would prove an Infallible Remedy for the Rickettiness of your dearly Beloved B
M T, and no doubt enable her to walk in the same path and state with the Old
Scale: For though in many places you plead hard for the keeping to the Statute
of your Hypothesis, viz. Four Lines, as for instance, in page 73. your words
are these, But left any one should still run droaning in his own way, I shall
mind him of OURS, and tell him again, W E do not reckon upwards, as it the
Lines were continued together; neither make WE any Cliffs five Notes asunder,
but WE complete on Octave in the Systeme of Four Lines, which reaches to Ffaut,
and then begin the Systeme of the next Four Lines in the Middle Part with G
again; as after Saturday night comes Sunday morning; Or to explain your
meaning, it is thus; after you have gone up seven Rounds of the Ladder, you must
come down again to the first to go the eighth: Yet notwithstanding this, you
tell us before in page 23. of certain Notes which you call Pilgrim Notes, that
have higher and lower steps to go, and will not be fixed in any constant
dwellings (now for these in your next words are some Crumbs of Comfort, for you
have provided them Lodgings let them ramble whether they please) but that the
following Contrivance shows me it may, and is here already adcomplished Welcome
LeigerLine Handy-Pandy, now, shall we have a Leiger-Line, or no Leiger Line?
you resolve this doubt in the aforesaid page 73. when you tell us, if for
convenience of Pricking, WE allow the Systeme to be of [Five] or [SIX] Lines,
etc. Rejoice O ye Musical Notes, here is a Jail-deliver! you shall be no longer
confined in the Prison of a Four-Line Hypothesis. But till this was done, Sir,
your Mrs. Aurelia, with her Song of Four Parts, could not appear; which you
tell us, page 82. Mr. Theod. Stefkins transcribed for you; I wonder, since you
were not capable of doing it yourself, you did not require the assistance of
your Publisher in that as well as in all the rest: In page 37. where this Song
is fixed as an Example, that it may be done your Five-line way, and not in your
Four-line way, your words and these; But that you may see how unnecessary those
former various Cliffs are, how conveniently a Song will fall in the Systeme of
Five Lines, for though an Octave is completed in Four, yet you may take such a
liberty, etc. Therefore, Sir, that you may see we can present you with this
Song in less various Cliffs than you have done, I have transcribed it in the
same Key you have put it in, that when it is compared with yours, the World may
judge wherein lies the Advantages your propose.

A. 4. Voc. Mr. Pelham Humphryes. ^

When Aurelia, etc. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

I have but one Example more, by which may be judged now you have got a Ledger
Line to make Five as well as we, whether you be not almost come back into our
Old Way of Pricking, as well as you did before into the use of the Words of our
Gamut.

The Old Way.

Bass. Mean. ^

Unisons in their proper places. Treble. ^

Unisons in their proper places.

Your New Way.

Bass. Mean. ^

Unisons out of their proper places. Treble. ^

Unisons out of their proper places.

By this Example I prove your Universal Character of having G always on the
First Line to be confused, whatever pretenses and plausible words you give us
to the contrary: for to make the same Note to be in two places at one time (in
the Space in the Bass and on the Rule in the Mean) is to sit between two
Stools, whereby the A -- of your whole Design will fall to the ground. If you
could have kept to your first Rule of Four-line Octaves, you had committed that
absurdity but once, and that in your Octave Note only, but now by your
Leiger-Lines you advance it in as many Notes as you please; whereas on the
contrary, you may see dour Unisons of the Bass when they come into the Mean,
are, if in Space in space, if on Rule on Rule, and the like 'twixt the Mean and
Treble. By all which it will appear, that our Gamut is a perfect Rule, and so
are our Cliffs in their use, without any difficulty or confusion, how
ridiculously and ignorantly soever you have rendered them.

Thus far I have Vindicated the Old Scale; I could have enlarged much further,
but as I turned over both your Essay and Vindication, I met with so many
impertinent Impossibilities and Contradictions, especially about instrumental
Music, so confusedly jumbled together; and not finding the Gittar (the only
School-Instrument) so much as mentioned in all your Book, and your Hypothesis
being so pertinent to it; I had not patience, but threw them aside, as unworthy
the perusal of any Person skilled in Music.

Sir, Your humble Servant is anything but your new Musical HYPOTHESIS, John
Playford.
August 26. 1672.
FINIS.

