AN OLIVE-LEAFE OR, A Bud of the Spring. VIZ. CHRIST'S RESURRECTION, and its
end, viz. The conversion of Sinners, and a Christians complete Relief.

Opened by NICHOLAS LOCKYER, Minister of the Gospel.

Why seek ye the living among the dead?

LUKE 24.5. If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above.

COL. 3.1. I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness.

PSALM. 17.15. Old things are past away, behold all things are become new (says
a holy man of our State) in Christ's resurrection. Cyril Tom. 1. de adoratione
in spiritu and veritate, lib. 17. treating upon the First-fruit-offering, which
he applies to the Resurrection of Christ. p. 610.

Printed by E.G. for J. Rothwell, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign
of the Sun and Fountain in Paul's Churchyard near the little North gate. 1650.

To all the Lords people: Grace and peace by our Lord Jesus Christ, be
multiplied.
It Is my work as a man, more as a Christian, most of all as a Minister of the
Gospel to search out the secrets of the Gospel, in their notion and
operation. Certain persons were appointed to stand upon Mount Gerizzim and
bless, and yet nothing they did this way is mentioned: and certain others
appointed to stand upon mount Ebal and curse, and what they did this way set
down particularly and largely (...) D^ (...) 12, 13, 14.
Is God more apt to curse then bless? Why Solomon should make all the
instruments of the Temple of Gold, and mention them particularly to the very
hinge, and never mention the Arc; does this abide Wood, when all the rest
Gold? or is Wood as splendid, and as precious as Gold? The Scripture is full of
these Secrets, as to the notion of truth: but, O how full of secrets is truth
in its operation in our hearts! In this latter I am most a Student, and yet
least a Proficient; though I have but little skill in the notion, yet far
less in the mysterious operation of the Gospel. What experiences Christ has
imparted, in much love, I here present unto you: they may be much added unto,
by heavenly influences proper and peculiar to every Christian Reader, and by
his own travels in these ways of wisdom. We are called little ones: and
indeed so we are whilst here, little in all things but ignorance and impotence.
Yet we little ones have great ones waiting upon us, and these have more
privilege then we whom they wait upon, which is another secret, for they
always behold the face of our father: Matthew. 18 10.
which if we could do too, we should in his light see light, understand all
mysteries and all knowledge, all truth in notion and operation: which should
make us wait for the appearing of Christ, and long till this change come, that
Lords have as much as their servants which attend upon them. Blood carries the
life and the exquisite spirit and sense of nature with it, and yet has not
sense nor feeling it self: so truly is it with us Ministers, we are the Salt
of the earth, the blood and spirit of the World, such as carry exquisite spirit
and sense through the mystical body, and yet feel just nothing (upon the
matter) our selves. which makes us so short of what we should be, in the
revelation of the mysteries of the Gospel; I speak in this, principally of
one, who has his births in divine things, to much out of due time and due
measure, yet has to bless God, that I can condemn my self. The more
Heavenly in our lives, the more the best knowledge falls in of it self with
us. Living creatures which lie hid in the earth long, for a great part of the
year together, have (we say) no blood, or very little, a drop or two about the
heart. If our souls lie hid in the earth much (as these times tempt this way)
you will have little good blood or spirit in you; a drop about your heart to
keep you from Hell hereafter, and that will be all; not enough to keep you
from many Hels here: much less will you have so much blood and brave spirit,
as to search and find the deep things of God belonging to your peace, crown,
and glory. The wind at one point of the Heavens, and at one season of the
year, is called a Husband to all things which spring upon the face of the
earth, 'tath in it then such a spirit of generation and nutrition: Favoni^ a
favendo, bi^ vini^ vocat^^.
this wind makes all things in this season so smile upon us: and this wind
blows all the year long, and is still with us, whilst we have our conversation
in Heaven. Oh how sweetly, how generatingly does that wind which blows where it
lists blow upon us who are in all our ways traveling homeward! Several
things you will find, Christians, in this book; some, about Christ's
resurrection: the blooming of this Tree is judged by some, to have been in the
Spring; if at the fall, yet then do some Trees bloome again. I have seen ripe
fruit and blossoms together, so is always on Jesus Christ that tree of life,
ripe fruit for any to feed on, at any season, and yet vigor still Budding and
blossoming again for more. This work speaks that miracle repeated, a dry rod
blooming and bearing Almonds: one blossoming at the fall; one after many
plunges raised, to give witness, and set seal to Christ's resurrection. You
whom I know and much love, well understand my often infirmities, and so at what
after season I blossom and bear; and therefore will (I hope) for rarity sake,
keep these blossoms, and small fruits, to admire Christ the orderer of all
times and seasons, who can make Spring when he will, and in what he will.

Yours in the bowels of Jesus Christ, and labors of his everlasting Gospel,
Nicholas Lockyer.

To the Reader.
HIs grace bestowed upon me was not in vain. 1 Cor. 15.10.
This Scripture, Christian Reader, makes much impression upon my Spirit. The
dew of Christ's youth falls little upon my heart, yet I receive more then I
give: but little is mine in all, yet much (if God has not judged it too much)
because in vain. A little of the true Treasure is too much to lie dead, yet so
it does very much in my heart; I wish it may not be so in thine. If one had
much he might do much; but when little, one can do nothing. We are unthrifty
to get, and then make excuse for an unprofitable life, that we have nothing to
impart. I confess that to have and to use are two distinct gifts; yet
plenitudes will constrain vent, dropping, and leaking, and so wear bigger
passage, by a continued still power pushing within. I am indeed in a straight,
whether it be grace in vain for me to be silent, or to speak in print to all
the world, who can speak so little to any purpose, to a far narrower
compass and capacity. Let my weakness (Christian Reader) be covered, and
Christ in a manger be beautiful to thee, and offer the myrrh of thy soul
unto him, in what mean dress soever thou find him: gather up the fragments
and crumbs of his Table, let nothing be lost; then his grace in this weak work
will not be in vain. I am truly of his opinion who was rather willing to
beautify Italy, then his own house; if Christ may increase in his honor,
though I decrease in mine, I have my end. All things should be done in
conscience of duty, Neque si ^ec^^^ agas apud, neque si cum altero coni^abas,
vacare officio potest. The Badger is called in Hebrew Shesh because he has six
spots.
whether to the Commonwealth, or to ones Family, or to ones self alone, yea
and when alone: So indeed is this little work done, in much duty and
conscience, to Christ's glory, and the good of poor souls. Thou will find the
Printer, the Author, a Badger, with more then six spots: yet Badgers spotted
skins were accepted to the use of the Tabernacle: so let these spotted labors
of us thy friends be accepted, to the use and benefit of thy precious soul.

Thine in the Kingdom, and patience of Christ, NICHOLAS LOCKYER.

To all the Lords people, grace and peace by our Lord Jesus Christ be
multiplied.
YE are called a flock of holinesses. (...) sanctitatum pecus. Ezekiel. 36.38.
Blessed is that people, whose popularity is rather in graces then in persons;
in flocks and troops of holinesses, rather then in flocks and troops of men.
Holiness puts every person in the ninth place, and makes him an hundred
millions in number; by which account a few flocks of holinesses would be an
innumerable company of men, Gods Host, Mahanaim, bina castra, two Hosts, ten
Hosts, ten thousand Hosts. Flocks of holinesses are not only numerous, but
glorious. Flocks of Flowers in the spring, flocks of Pearls like Pibles upon
the Seashore, all facing the Sun; yea or flocks of Suns looking forth like the
morning, from several serene parts and points of our Horison, and all facing
one another, not so glorious as flocks of holinesses facing Christ, and Christ
them. The shepherd is not smitten, but smild on now, and yet these flocks of
holinesses are scattered. Our Princes (as the Prophet speaks) not altogether
Kings, Isa. 10.8.
but altogether servants and slaves to diverse lusts: instead of so many Vines,
Isa. 7.23.
so many Brambles, as the same Prophet speaks; through the wiles of that wicked
one, and the just judgment of God. The root of this bitterness has lain hid
long, and been that. Achan which has troubled us, to wit, a heart not perfect
with God, denying the power of what we profess. The Gospel is (...) 1 Cor.
13.12.
a riddle, and so is the heart: and yet if either be hid, we perish; I fear
both (though these times of much light) lie hid; such sad perishing of leaf
and tree could not else be.

Spiritual inspection is the subject of this piece presented to you; if it may
lay open to you, what has laid open you to others, will be matter of blessing
God and his, poor servant, who has his work to unravell riddles, and tread
out labyrinths with the thread of the Scriptures, and finds only this light to
discover darkness. If a man will be safe, he must obey necessity Vt omnes,
intelligans fi salvi esse velint, necessitati p^tendum. sull.
The Scripture and thine own heart, are two necessary things to be searched;
cast off the study of these, and you cannot be safe. Obey necessity, read two
Volumes over and over all the days of thy life, the written word and thine
unwritten heart; the one riddle unriddles the other: the Volume without opens
the Volume within, and is a Glass to bring Christ and the soul face to face.
The trial of our faith is precious, whether by the rod or by the word: by both
grace is refined much, which is very precious to a sincere heart. Comparing our
selves often with Christ shames us, humbles us, conformes us, and so derives his
beauty whom we so intensely look upon, which is a pleasant translation from
deformity unto beauty and glory. Imbecillitate alierum non nostra virtute
valeamus, says Tully of taking those who tyrannixed, who made many Laws, and
proximae quaeque dutiores, and the last still worst:
By the weaknesses of others, and not by our valor do we prevail, says a
great Statesman. So truly may I say, by our weaknesses, sloth, carelessness,
the devil more prevails, then by his own strength simply considered, though a
creature very strong. We so cut off our own locks, and cast off our own
mercies, our own armor, and walk naked, laying aside Ordinances, Scriptures,
and all close conversation with God and our selves, that satan slayes us heaps
upon heaps, with the jaw bone of an Ass, with any rotten foolish thing,
carries us captive at his will.

Much confusion is now amongst us, of which God is not the author, but satan
and our selves. Unsoundness swells: the heart lifted up, falls under the power
of darkness, the devil, and all confusion. Take heed Christians of
hypocrisy, its property is pride: pride puffes up, and then God pulls all down
to worse then nothing: a little of this leaven leavens the whole lump: be
purging out therefore daily, every little of this leaven, that when satan and
temptations come, they may find nothing (if possible) of hypocrisy in you.
Lie at those breasts which give sincere milk. Let your souls conceive by pure
streams. Persons who venture in preaching, do not you venture in hearing. It Is
a ventrous age, such as no eye ever saw more, and less laid to heart. Among
all wonders amidst us, this is surely the greatest, that there is not yet
shipwreck of all, considering how venterous all are, and of and to what parts.
In that ministry in which you cannot see your selves, surely you cannot see
Christ, how much and how often so ever he may be named, as it is true e contra.
Grievous wolves are entered in among us, tearing and rending all that is
hopeful; the sense of this makes me to complain, not any bodies doing well.
Such who take not honor to them selves, but are called, the meanest in the body
under the conscience and assistance of this, may be a blessing to his brethren
below and above him. Grievous Wolves are entered in, and the more grievous
because of our own selves, Acts 10.30
as the Spirit of God has foretold; and of these would I could warn you night
and day with tears. Wild beasts are abroad, never more, nor more grievous, and
yet we are loath to believe that it is evening, or any thing enclining unto
Sunset: if in spirituals we were as promising as otherwise, I should think so
to. I look for much good, but not in such ways as many of us take. If wounds
in the body be no vent for the rottenness, pride, and filth of our souls; if
misery be unsanctified, it becomes like theirs below, everlasting. If we yet
do wickedly, and deal hypocritically with our God, who has brought us out
with a strong hand, from the Iron yoke, and the burning brickill, surely seven
times more will misery multiply upon us until we die, because we have despised
him which speaks from Heaven, and as much from Heaven, and from that excellent
glory (I think) as to any of the Gentile world. A perverse spirit God has
mingled amongst us, that we can neither smite nor smile with God, we can
neither mourn nor dance to him, which does thus to us: which spirit is no
small judgment, but is as the nerves of the whole body loosened; and then how
all should hold together long, is unlikely. God magnifies his grace. It Is true:
but not always to be abused. We may lean upon grace, but not trample it under
foot; God will distinguish between these two, if we cannot. Lets all lean upon
our beloved: but what is more and inconsistent with this, proceeds from the
guile of our spirits, and that wily one, and will be a Spiders Web, and make
the shame of our nakedness to appear in the day of his appearing, who is the
searcher of all hearts: which apparition he loves and waits for, who is till
then

Yours in the labors, travels, and bonds of the Gospel, Nicholas Lockyer.

A Table of the principal things contained in this TRACT.
THat priority in Spiritual things is a dignity page 3. It Is the fruition of a
Virgin-love ib. Tath more evidence of love with it, and more certainty p. 4, 5
It should much work upon our hearts, to be of the first which enjoy favor in
the greatest things p. 6 The resurrection of Christ is the foundation of man's
salvation p. 7 Upon the resurrection of Christ bears the confirmation of Gods
oath to the elect, for the accomplishment of their eternal good p. 8 Upon the
resurrection of Christ bearea the infallible determination of Christ's state as
the natural Son of God p. 9 Upon Christ's resurrection bears his installment to
Mediatorship p. 10 Upon the resurrection of Christ bears the converting vigor
of all visible Ordinances p. 12 Christ's resurrection is a seal of the
resurrection of all, good and bad, and that all shall come to judgment p. 14,
15 The day of judgment will be dreadful to the wicked, for several reasons
p. 16 The danger of such doctrines as overthrow the resurrection p. 19 Christ's
resurrection much for the consolation of the godly. We are delivered from the
guilt of sin p. 20 From the power of sin p. 24 From the rigor of duty p. 26
Christ being risen, he is improving his raised state to our good in the world
to come p. 29 What we should infer to our selves (who are the people of God)
from Christ's resurrection, respecting the world to come, see p. 29, 30 Christ
precisely called to be the messenger of the covenant p. 33 Christ's unction, and
how his unction upheld, to be present and equal, always alike to all things
p. 33, 34 What Christ's blessing of man properly is p. 37 The conversion of the
Jews will not be universal, strictly taken p. 38 Christ not sent to turn
every one of the Jews p. 42 Universal grace ungrounded p. 43, 44 The
Scriptures which would contradict themselves, by the doctrine of universal
redemption p. 44 Objections about universal redemption answered p. 45 It is
Christ's proper work to turn sinners from their sins p. 48. A type of this p.
49 Faith is conversion p. 49, 50 Conversion but in part in this world p. 51 The
hardest work of a Christian is turning from his sins, and this bears upon the
shoulders of Christ, therefore 'twil be done p. 52 If this be the work of
Christ to turn sinners from their sins, then sinners should not hinder him
when about his work p. 54 This being the work of Christ, let him not want
work, present your sinful states unto him 55 We are to be isntrumental every
one in our places, to turn sinners from their sins p. 57 How persons in
authority may be very useful this way p. 58 That men of power should endeavor
the conversion of the Jews: Scriptures of much weight inciting thereunto p.
60, 61
The Contents of the second Part.
PRovidence of God to his people, various p. 72 Prosperity of his providence p.
74 The proceeding of God toward men seems sometimes to be without justice ib.
Gods people and the wicked are cautionated hence, lest they make ill use from
this kind of providence p. 78 Take heed of tempting God p. 83 Labor to be
quick-sighted, to discern the providence, of God p. 85 The works of God against
the workers of iniquity shall be just p. 88 Object. Wicked men bring forth evil
devices Aus. p. 92 When the works of God clear their righteousness against the
unrighteous p. 93 Admire not evil men in their advantages p. 96 Take heed of
smiting a godly man for his conscience 101 Uprightness defined p. 10^ Its
symptoms p. 111 Morning fittest time for duty p. 120 Tender mercies are
Christ's siniles p. 129 Truth with its effects p. 135 Continuance in grace is
the being of grace 150 Diligence in divine things make spiritually rich p. 172
Use of Examination, to find out hypocrisy p. 186 The perfection of our state
consists in this, to receive much, and to do much p. 226 Integrity conquers
and crowns the soul, wherein it is p. 234 The works of God, the more
immediate, the more strong and operative p. 243 The works of God the last
medium to his end p. 245
ERRATA.
FOr principle p. 10. l. 19. read principally, for too read two, p. 74. l. 25.
for handle read dandle, p. 78. l. 24. for weary read wary p. 111. l. 15.

AN OLIVE-LEAFE: OR, A Bud of the Spring.
ACTS 3.26. Unto you first God having raised (...) son Jesus, sent him to
bless you, in turning away every one of you from his iniquities.


THe Apostle Peter's preaching is set out in this Chapter, to whom directed, and
with what winning wisdom man aged. To the Jews directed, and in a downright
style and phrase. Ye denied the holy one and the just, and desired amurtherer,
and killed the Prince of life, v. 14, 15. And yet wisely and winingly this
Apostle makes their apology. And now brethen I wot that through ignorance ye
did it, as did also your Rulers: and also this more may be said for you, ye
have but accomplished a foreordained thing; yea, a foretold thing, and that by
the mouth of all his Prophets, v. 17, 18. repent therefore that your sins may
be blotted out, and he shall send Christ to you, whom you have crucified, to
serve you in these saving works; do not stumble at him, it is he which God
spoke of by Moses, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise unto you, v. 22,
etc. And the same which Samuel and all Prophets after him spoke of: and then
further adds, Ye are of the blood of those which thus prophesied, children of
the Prophets, children of the same covenant. Ye are the children of the
Prophets, and of the Covenant which God made with our Fathers, etc. v. 22. ye
being a firstborn, Christ the firstborn is first sent to you; to you first in
his Prophets, to you first in his own person, to you first after his
resurrection. Unto you first, God having raised up his son Jesus, sent him to
besse you, in turning away every one of you from his iniquities.

Grace, according to its manner of tender, and according to the nature of the
thing it self, are the two parts of this verse, or the two things contained in
this one Scripture: for its manner of tender, this Sun did first rise upon
the Nation of the Jews; such a temporal station as a Nation, does this term
[you] here mean. To you first, etc.

This Nation God formed from the womb, as he says, Isaiah 44.1, 2. (i.) from
the first man; out of one loyne he made as many as the staries of Heaven for
multitude. This Nation which he formed from the womb, had the womb of the
morning, the first tender of the dew of Christ's youth; which being mentioned
here as a privilege and preferment, I note, That priority in Spiritual things
is a dignity and honor. Who was in Christ before me, Romans 16.7.

It Is the fruition of a Virgin love, The Lord has trodden the Virgin daughter
of Judah as a Wine Press; for these things I mourn, Lam. 1.1.5. What shall I
liken to thee, O Virgin daughter of Sion? thy breach is as the sea, Lam. 2.3.
Therefore called a Virgin, because the first whom God chose, and the first of
all Nations which chose God, and were especially protected by him, from such as
were destroyers.

laughs: and this another type, and applied to the Gentiles by the Prophets.
What comes in the evening, has not with it such a present evidence of love,
but rather of the contrary. See an illustration of this Exodus 16.13. the
Quails came in the evening which was a curse, and the Manna in the morning
which was a blessing.

Priority in spiritual things has with it also a more certainty of kindness
and goodness: between praesentia and futura, there is a great deal of
difference in point of certainty, and so every one argues; A Bird that is
caught is a more certain something then that in the field, which may be caught:
a sinner pricked at heart, and turned to God now, is a more certain something
then that which may fall out next Summer, next Sermon, or next year, as we
count and put the order of certainties. A Nation that enjoyes the Gospel at
present, has a more certain something then they which may enjoy it an hundred
years hence, if we speak of certainty as we count, and put the nature of it:
for concerning what is behind, and yet to come, we still are apt to question,
will it be? will it ever come? every one at first sets forth good Wine; but
that good Wine should come at last, is not according to the law of custom and
order so ordinarily expected.

count it so, and let it work upon your hearts. We are of the last of the
Nations to whom the bloody cup came, and yet of the first from whom removed;
our blood broacht last, and yet God puts his singer upon the rent first. Two of
us were grinding at the Mill, and I was taken first; nay the other not taken at
all. Amongst many thousands which wallow yet in their sins, I am taken out as
a kind of first fruits to God, and to the Lamb. O what ingenuity and
sweetness this should beget in the spirit of man toward God!

Prefer God in all things; put priority upon him in all his affairs. I will
seck him, first intend him. In the morning shall my prayer prevent thee. Psalm.
88.13. I might have been the first of them that went down into the pit, I will
be of the first that shall go up like the Tribe of Indah against all Gods
enemies: there was but one in my fathers house marked out unto Spiritual
Kingship, and 'twas I, the unlikeliest and unloveliest; there is but one that I
mark out to cleave to, and advance, and that is Christ.

ACT. 3.26. Unto you first God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to
bless you, etc.


GRace in its tender, and the thing it self tendered, I made the parts of this
Verse; of the first I have spoken a little, of the next in our next work. Grace
it self is here mentioned in its cause or foundation, which is Gods raising
Christ from the dead: and in its formality, blessing him to us, to turn us from
all our sins. The blessedness of man in its cause, I am first here led to
handle, by the order of the words. God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent
him, etc. The resurrection of Christ is the foundation of man's salvation. Hence
is that manner of ex^ion of the Apostle, I am a Pharisee, (...) the hope and
resurrection of the dead, etc. Act. 23.6. (i.) for preaching hope and salvation
by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, which was the thing we know he zealously
did, was he persecuted: by which words we see that the hope of man is founded
upon the resurrection of Christ from the dead. A like pregnant place, Act.
13.32, 33. And we declare unto you glad tidings, how that the promise which was
made unto the Fathers, God has sulfilled the same unto us their children, in
that he has raised up Jesus again, as it is also written in the second Psalm,
Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee.

Therefore being a Prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to
him, that of the fruit of his loins according to the flesh, he would raise up
Christ to sit on his Throne; he seeing this before, spoke of the resurrection
of Christ, etc. Act. 2.31. David did personate all the Elect, as Abraham all
believers, and in him God swears to all the elect, that Christ should be
actually given in our nature, and die, and not be left in grave to perish* but
be raised to the Throne, to do all the works belonging to our eternal
salvation.

of Christ's state, as the natural son of God, and so the messenger indeed of
the covenant, and no impostor. Had not Christ been indeed the natural Son of
God, his soul had been left in grave, (i.) in Hell, he had perished
everlastingly in that undertaking. And (...) determined as it were by
definitive sentence.
determined to be the Son of God with power, according unto the Spirit of
holiness by the Resurrection from the dead. Romans 1.4. Compare this with Act.
13.33. God has fulfilled the same to us their children, in that he has raised
up Jesus again, as it is also written in the second Psalm, Thou art my son,
this day have I begotten thee. God calls the day of Christ's resurrection the day
of his propagation, and for this reason, because this did as evidently declare
and determine him to be the natural Son of God, as if but in that day
begotten, whereas his generation otherwise properly considered, was from
eternity and ineffable; and therefore is it that the Prophet says, Who can
declare his generation? Christ's resurrection determines him infallibly to be
the natural Son of God, and so God coequall with his Father, and a firm
foundation of hope, in all things wherein appointed of God to be hoped in:
which is the opening of that 1 Pet. 1.21. Who by him do believe in God which
raised him from the dead, and gave him glory, that your faith and hope might be
in God. God gave him glory by his resurrection; what is that? why gave testimony
by this to all, that Christ was his own natural Son, begotten from eternity,
and so God coequall with him; that so our faith and hope in Christ might be all
one for firmness as in the Father himself, being truly God.

yea rather that he is risen again. Who is he that condemns, it is Christ
that died [yea rather that is risen again] who is even at the right hand of
God, who also makes intercession for us. Romans 8.34. This is the foundation of
his installment and endowment to be head over all, and to derive life and
conduct, and whatsoever else is noble to all the mystical body. And he is head
of the body the Church, who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead,
that among all he might have the pre-eminence, Col. 1.18. This opens that
Scripture, Act. 13.34. And as concerning that he raised him up from the dead,
now no more to return to corruption, he said on this wise, I will give you the
sure mercies of David. Christ being raised, upon this is founded his
Mediatorship, his pre-eminence in Heaven and Earth; and this makes all sure to
the seed of his loins. Christ is said in the second Psalm, in the day of his
resurrection to be begotten; and in the first of the Colossians, he is said
upon the same ground, to be borne from the dead; One calls his resurrection a
generation, the other calls it a birth; because 'twas as both, like Isaac's
resurrection from his death; his father received him from the dead, and 'twas
to him as if he had been again begotten, and again born; and this last
generation and birth, rather then the first, the foundation of the Covenant:
for upon this last generation and birth breaks forth the oath and the
covenant, and all that train of glory and preferment to Abraham, and his seed;
yea (to use the expression of the Apostle) upon this rather then upon the first
birth.

Wherefore of these men which have accompanied with us, all the time that the
Lord Jesus went in and out amongst us, beginning from the baptism of John to
this same day, must one be ordained to be witness with us of his resurrection,
Act. 1.22. In which place we see what all the visible ordinances of God are
principally to hold out as their and our vigor and life, to wit, Christ risen
from the dead. The like Scripture is that Act. 4.33. And with great power gave
the Apostles witness of the Lord Jesus (and observe the effect of this
ministry thus pointed) and great grace was upon them all, Act. 2.36, 37. and
by both you shall see in what especially is wrapped up the converting vigor of
visible ordinances. Therefore let all the house of Israel knew assuredly, that
God has made the same Jesus whom ye have crucified both Lord and Christ, (i.)
raised him up, and set him at his right hand. Now when they had heard this,
they were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter, and to the rest of the
Apostles, men and brethren what shall we do? Now when they heard this; what?
why that Christ whom they had crucified, God had raised and advanced; That the
Apostles found the vigor of their ministry involved and evolved in and by this
point, is hinted by that in the fourth of the Acts, 1, 2. And as they spoke
unto the people, the Priests and the Captain of the Temple, and the Sadduces
came upon them, being grieved that they taught the people, and preached through
Jesus the resurrection from the dead. It seems, this point most pricked the
heart, and spoiled their party. Not only the Apostles found this the piercing
point of their ministry, but also all the Prophets; see Act. 26.22, 23. Having
therefore obtained help of God, I continue unto this day witnessing both to
small and great, saying none other things then those which the Prophets and
Moses did say should come: that Christ should suffer, and that be should be the
first that should rise from the dead, and should show light unto the people,
and to the Gentiles. With this place compare Luke 24.44. Christ to take off the
admiration of his Disciples at his reviving, and coming again after death
amongst them, and sitting and eating with them, says, These are the words
which I spoke unto you while I was yet with you, that all things must be
fulfilled which were written in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in
the Psalms concerning me.

This point is of dread to the ungodly. As in Adam all die, so in Christ all
shall be made alive, 1 Cor. 15.21. Christ's resurrection is a seal of the
resurrection of all, good and bad: Nay, Christ being risen, all shall rise and
come to judgment; to this height the Apostle carries this point. Because he
has appointed a day, in which he will judge the world in righteousness, by
the man whom he has appointed, whereof he has given assurance unto all men,
in that he has raised him from the dead, Act. 17.31. I collect from the
Scripture that Christ's resurrection seals two things to us, that all shall
rise, and that all shall come to be judged by him. And O wicked man, how
dreadful will this judgment be to thee? It Is dreadful for a Christian to be
brought now before Christ in the Court of conscience, as he sits there, and
makes that weak part of man to speak against one in his stead, as I gather by
that of Ioh; And do thou open thine eye upon such a one, and bring me into
judgment? Job 14.3. and calls man a shadow. Man here, is indeed but a shadow,
gone of an instant, as flower; and yet to bring this shadow into judgment
before Christ, as he sits in the Court of conscience here, O how unsusserably
dreadful it is to a good man! but how dreadful then to a bad! but how
dreadful will it to be a wicked man hereafter, when brought before Christ
personally, and in all his glory as Judge of all the world, with ten thousand
of his Saints, as Jude speaks, when neither Judge nor Judged a shadow; when
every wicked man shall be brought in a durable condition and state of body, as
well as of soul, to bear a blow, a bruise, a wound, and the rankling of it in
every vein, from head to foot, to all eternity?

Several things lead me to think that the great day of Christ's judicature
will be very dreadful to all the wicked: One, because man shall appear then
not as a shadow, but as a substance, as an everlasting substance, to bear the
height of Gods displeasure. Secondly, because his sins also shall not then
appear as a shadow. Alas, it is but the shadow of sin, that revives and
appears in conscience now; and yet when this resurrection is, of the shadow
of sin, man dies, is fear round about; but then sin in its substance, the
heart of sin, yea sin with all its demensions, longitude, latitude, height,
depth, breadth, every secret which now no eye sees; the books shall be then
opened, and every idle word, and idle thought shall be set in order, and all
the dead stretched out and laid naked before him with whom we have to do; yea
and set in order before the soul it self, and conscience made to say, all
this is true: When there shall be such a resurrection of the dead, of all the
dead, sins dead and gone out of memory for many scores of years, all
together made to revive in conscience at once, with all their circumstances of
time, place, and the like, in their full strength; and Christ by in all his
glory, and all the Saints and holy Angels, seeing all as plainly as the man
himself; these things make me think 'twill be then a very dreadull day to all
ungodly wretches. The Apostle Paul was possessed with this thing better by far
then I am, and labored to possess his hearers, with it, as now I do you.
Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men. 2 Cor. 5.11. What is
this terror? why the point I am upon; read the Verse foregoing; For we must all
appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that everyone may receive the
things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or
bad: Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men. Christ being
risen, all shall rise; all men, and all their actions, good and bad; and these
shall be proclaimed all over the world at once, all over two worlds at once met
together; this to the wicked will be terrible indeed, the very glimpses of this
are terrible: therefore sure the thing it self far more. When Paul reasoned
with Faelix about judgment to come. Faelix trembled, Acts 24.25. When Herod
did but think that John the Baptist was risen again whom he had murdered, how
it affrighted him. Herod feared John when alive, but much more after he arose
and lived again, Mark 6.15, 16. one from the dead is terrible. Persons in their
resurrection are other persons for majesty and terror: so sins in their
resurrection, are other sins for bigness, dread, and horror; all these
meeting will make horripilation in perfection, every hair of thy head stare,
every eye-string stretch, and every heart-string twist together, and tear; and
yet no eye shall pity thee, of all that innumerable company of just men made
perfect that then shall appear and sit upon thee.

Let no wile cause you to evade the weight of things. And when they heard of
the resurrection of the dead, some mocked, and others said, we will heat thee
again of this matter, Acts 17.32. Do not in your hearts scoff at this truth,
though weakly held out unto you: do not put far from you the evil day: do
not in your hearts deny the resurrection, or say it is past already, as
Hymenens, and Phyletus, who overthrew the faith of some, and their words did
eat as a canker, 2 Timothy 2.8. Thus do some men now, who tell us that the
resurrection is past, and they introduced into a new world, and the day of
judgment past, making things of the greatest substantialitie, truth, yet
believe not that such things bear upon it; as I think that great man was one,
of which we read Acts 26.25, 26, 27. I am not mad most noble Festus, but speak
forth the words of truth and soberness: for the King knows of these things,
before whom also I speak freely; for I am persuaded that none of those things
are hidden from him, for this thing was not done in a corner, etc. a man is
judged a mad man, when he presses upon great men, especially great and weighty
points.

This point also is much for the consolation of all the children of Christ.
Christ was delivered for our effences, and raised again for our justification,
Romans 4.25. As the end of Christ's death was to satisfy, so the end of his
resurrection is to justify, to give testimony before God, Angels, Men, and
Devils, that he has gone through all in our stead and person well, and to
demand an acquittance from God in our name, for all debts and demands
whatsoever he can make in order to us, according to that of the Apostle, Who
shall his any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is God that justifies; who
is he that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again,
who is even at the right hand of God, Romans 8 33, 34. Christ being risen, and
come before his father spotless, as having done all things entrusted well, his
father is forced to justify him, and so all the elect in him; hence when any
lays charge and challenge to us, whether Satan, sin, or conscience; this
obligation is upon God by Christ's resurrection, to stand up, acquit, and
justify us, who is greater then all that can condemn us, yea greater then our
own conscience in his justification of us, as he is greater then our own
concience in his condemnation of us; and this is that which over bears and
over-ruleth all, which would overbeare our spirit, and our peace. This is the
life of that Scripture also, 1 Cor. 15.7. If Christ be not risen, your faith is
vain, ye are yet in your sins. Which Scripture shows where sinners should
take hold to justification, in Christ, as risen and justified in our person;
faith should particularly make application of this, that I am justified in him,
and so all my sins done away in his acquittance and justification. Christ
being risen and justified, I am justified in him; this is the proper motion and
exercise of faith in this point; I know that my Redeemer lives. Jeb takes
particular hold of the resurrection of Christ, (i) hold in his own behalf,
that he should live also by him. And this opens that difficult place of
Scripture, Romans 10.9. If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and
shall believe in thine heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be
saved. (i.) that Christ is risen, and acquitted, as personating thee. The words
do not mean a historical faith, the believing of such a history: but an
applicatory faith, as I mentioned; and he that does thus believe, is indeed
saved and delivered from the bond and condemnation of his sins. This will be
better strengthened and evidenced, by referring it to proper examples. Abraham
believed in God that quickened the dead, says the Apostle: which points first
at Isaac, and in him to Christ. Now what was Abraham's faith in God, concerning
Isaac? merely, that God would raise him, and put life again into him? etc No;
his faith was, that God would quicken him from the dead, and give him again
into his bosom to be his heir, and his Isaac, his laughter, joy, glory, and
crown of his family: and this shows how he believed in Christ whom Isaac
typisied; that God would quicken him from the dead for him; that he would raise
Christ, and give him into his bosom, to be his heir, his Isaac, his laughter
and joy; that God would take Christ from the grave, and acquit him and Abraham
in him; or else Abraham's faith in that mystery of Isaac, would have been
imputed to him for righteousness. He against hope believed in hope: so should
we, against all that sense, Satan can say about our sins, still believe in
God that quickneth the dead; that God has raised and acquitted Christ, and
therefore me, being personated in him. And this was Iohs faith concerning
Christ's resurrection, he was not merely historical in this point, but
evangelicall and applicatory, as plainly appears by his words, I know that my
Redeemer lives, that God quickneth my Isaac from the dead, whom I shall see for
my self.

As we are delivered from the guilt of sin, by this that Christ is risen, so
from the power of sin; Romans 8.11
therefore is this point I am upon, Canaan milk and honey, to all the people
of God. He that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken our mortal
bodies, by his Spirit which dwells in us: therefore are we debtors not to the
flesh, to fulsill the lusts thereof, but to this quickening spirit by which the
deeds of the body are mortified. The rising of the Sun of righteousness, is
in the little world as the rising of the natural Sun in the great world;
that which makes all rise, open, and revive with it, infuseth vigor, warmth,
spirit, which makes all the creation renew, and give forth fresh glory and
verue still. And this is the meaning and opening of the Prophet Malachy, who
uses this very metaphor; To you which fear my name shall the Sun of
righteousness arise, with healing in his wings, and ye shall go forth and
grow up as calves of the stall. That Christ is risen, shall be to all you that
fear Gods name, to your diseased, infirm, ungrowing spiritual condition, as
the rising of the Sun upon a debile body; that which shall send forth a
power, spirit and vigor into your souls, which shall heal all your diseases,
and make you full of spirit, and springing abundantly. Nature is excited by the
rising of the Sun, and strengthened to bud, blossom, and bear. Paul was
well aware of the great benefit of this point I am now upon, as appears by
his high expression of this matter. And what is the excellent greatness of his
power to us ward who believe, according to the working of his mighty power,
which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead, and set him on his
right hand. Ephesians. 1.19, 20. You which believe have advantage by the
resurrection of Christ, to pray for and expect such a power as is exceeding
great to work in your souls for the subduing of your sins, and quickening of
you to all good, as wrought in Christ when raised, (and then surely the power
of God wrought in height in Christ, if ever) so far forth as finite States
are capable of the operation of such an infinite power and virtue; which is a
foundation of singular consolation, in order to all our present weakness,
deadness, and unheavenlinesse; and all this virtue promised to be given to
such as fear him. Such a Sunshine upon thee, O poor Christian, Christ being
risen, as thou art not aware of; what glory and virtue, healing and growth it
will raise thee to! Such a Sun is risen upon thee, which will make thee rise
and shine every day more and more, unto the perfect day, which will make thee
perfect to every good work, to do his will. Now the God of peace which brought
again from the dead our Lord Jesus, make you perfect in every good work to do
his will, working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight.

of this tabernacle, and betaking by his resurrection to a more spiritual
state, going from a natural to a spiritual body by his resurrection, is a
mystery; it speaks the Law dead which obliged the natural body of Christ, and
so his natural soul, as one truly man as we are, to do all the will of God:
this obligation in his natural body he answered, and then laid it down, and by
his resurrection takes up another state, a Spiritual body; laid down his
natural body, marries himself again unto another, to wit, a Spiritual body:
that body upon which the Law took hold being gone, the Law is gone to, (i.)
one being changed, the other is changed. Romans 7.4.
Ye are become dead to the Law by the body of Christ, that ye should be married
to another, even to him who is raised from the dead, that we should bring forth
fruit unto God. But now we are delivered from the law, that being dead wherein
we were held, we might serve him in newness of spirit. The meaning of which
words is, that we are apt to account that the Law in the strictness of it,
took hold of Christ whilst here in the body, and was exactly answered, and
together with that body dissolved, and not any more to take hold of any body
personated in that, but we as he are married to another, a more Spiritual,
Evangelicall and raised condition of duty and consolation. Christ being risen,
and in his natural body answered and abrogated the rigor of the Law in our
person, is now our standing obedience with the Lord at his right hand, and so
we are to look unto him for perfection, in order to all that which the Law
commands, and say to all the demands of the Law, that we are dead to them
through the body of Christ, and married to another. To this a greeth Heb.
10.10. By the which will we are sanctisied, through the offering up of the body
of Jesus Christ once for all. Out of love to Christ, who did thus out of love
to us, sow his natural body, and raised it a spiritual (in all simplicity, as
far forth as we can) we should tread in his very steps of that Law which he
exactly answered, and if possible attain his resurrection, walk in Gods will,
as Christ did on earth, and as Christ does now in Heaven; this is called in
Scripture dying unto sin, and living unto righteousness, and being perfect
as our heavenly father. The Law is Gospel, thus Gospellized; and the Gospel
is Law, thus legallized.

And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you
to my self, that where I am ye may be; because I live ye shall live also. That
Christ is risen, and lives again, you ought from this to deduct to your selves
the highest consolation; that you shall rise and live, as now he does. Job does
in this sort, and at this height comfort himself. I know that my Redeemer
lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth; and observe
what he deducteth from hence, and though after my skin Worms destroy this
body, yet in my flesh shall I see God, whom I shall see from my self. If a man
dies, shall he live again? yes; how does this appear? why Christ that was dead
is risen, and lives in glory, and all his glorious works live with him; and
where he lives, you and your works shall live also; there shall be a
resurrection, ascension, and glorification of all: which should make one
willing and waiting to die, and change lives, this for that; thus did Job upon
this ground. Thou art a poor creature, broken, torn, and spoiled in thy body,
in thy soul, in thy name, in thy state, that thou scarce live, but visibly
die daily; (...). 1 Cor. 5.1.
why know, that if thy (...) dissolved, were but turned to (...) quite
dissolved; that which is so mouldring, if it were all quite down, there would
be a resurrection which would repair all, and make thy life and livelihood a
life and livelihood indeed, as Christ's is now in glory. How active Christ was
after his resurrection, to post away as it were, about this great work, to
take possession of Heaven for us, and to prepare a life and livelihood like his
own, is very observable; read John 20.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. the story is
concerning Mary, who after Christ's death sought him mourning, with this design
to take him away, as appears by her words at the fifteenth verse, Sir, if
thou have borne him from hence, tell me where thou have laid him, and I will
take him away. Upon this Christ discovers himself to her in the next verse,
and withal says unto her, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my
father, but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my father, and
your father, etc. It Is probable, for as much as Christ said to Mary as soon as
he had made known himself to her, touch me not, that Mary was on upon her
design to take him away, to draw him away with her to some better place then
where she found him, and to pursue her design upon the living, which she meant
upon the dead; which tender love, how vigorously did Christ withstand, that he
might without all delay improve his resurrection, to our highest good; to take
possession of God, and all that glory in which now he lives? Touch me not, that
thou stay me not in the least from seizing upon thine and thy brethrens
welfare; tell them that I am as diligent after death as I was before death, to
do and accomplish my fathers will, and my brethrens full blessedness; and by
how much the more Spiritual and active body I have now then before, by so much
the more spirituous in my pace about my peoples good, and incapable of all that
may in the least hinder. I conclude all, with the saying of the Apostle to
Timothy, 2 Timothy 2. v. 7, 8. Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee
understanding in all things: remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David,
was raised from the dead, according to my Gospel.

ACT. 3.26. Unto you first God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to
bless you, in turning away every one of you from his iniquities.


SEnt him to bless you, etc. Christ did not take this honor to himself to be
the messenger of the Covenant; but was called, precisely called, called by
name, as it is said of Cyrus; Call his name Emanuel; his name shall be called
the Lord our righteousness; call his name Jesus. Called by name outwardly, and
by nature inwardly sealed. Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for
that which endures to everlasting life, which the son of man shall give unto
you, for him has God the Father sealed. John 6.27. (i.) poured grace into his
lips, all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Collof. 2.3. and maintained
this full unction in its full vigor, to be present and equal always alike,
for quickness of understanding, and aptness to action, and to success of
action in all his undertakings; which broad seal of Heaven God did put upon
Christ, with as great delight as this state of worth, and so sent him in all
fullness of endowments, and with all fullness of content and triumph: See all
these Isa. 42.1. Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul
delights: I have put my Spirit upon him, he shall bring forth judgment to
the Centiles. Here is Christ's Oil, and his fresh Oil, as the Psalmist has
the expression, to wit. Christ's unction, and his upholding in this unction, to
be equal in vigor at all times unto all actions; which differenceth his
unction from ours; for even a gracious heart amongst us, is very unequal in
his abilities and performances; one day strong, another day weak; one day
wise, and another day, and in another thing, a beast: and thirdly, here is the
delight of the father in sealing the son, with this broad and beautiful
seal, which is all the glory of his fathers house cast upon him; for what more
could be done for Christ, to make him an effectual and honorable Savior? And
withal you have in this one verse one thing more, a pregnant proof of this
seal, [he shall] bring forth judgment to the Gentiles; this expression could
not possibly follow at this height, if Christ's, seal had not such glorious
things in it as I have told you; if his unction were not upheld at this height,
to be equal in his motion unto all undertakings, the necessary certainty of
his productions would fail, or at least be in danger so to do, that one could
not with that freedom and boldness as here God does, say this of Christ,
behold he shall do this, and he shall do that. A like place for this great
point, see Isa 45.13. I have raised him up in righteousness; and I will direct
all his ways: here is Christ's fresh Oil, and I will direct all his ways: we
though the people of God, and sealed to in our measure, yet in many of our
ways are left of God unto our selves; Christ is in all his ways directed by
his father; the dew of his youth is always youthful, always under a full
sail of assistance of the Spirit that is upon him, and so always equally able
to any work in our behalf; or else this could not follow in the verse at this
height which it does -- he shall build my City, and he shall let go my
captives, etc. A like place to both these, as a glorious type of this glorious
truth, is in Psalm. 89.20, 21, 22, 23, etc. I have found David my servant, with
my holy Oil have I anointed him; then observe in the next verse his fresh
Oil, and in what height of expression it is expressed. With whom my hand shall
be established, mine arm also shall strengthen him, the enemy shall not exact
upon him; I will beat down his foes before his face, and plague them that hate
him, etc. I humbly conceive the glory of Christ's unction to be here gloriously
shadowed, with whom Gods hand was established, and by which made to all things
invisible, as David to some things visible, still prosperous, and carrying all
before him, as one and the same at the day of death for vigor and strength unto
war, as when he first took the field.

Thus sent, Christ is able, certainly able to bless: which is the next word to
be opened. -- Sent him to bless you, etc. (i.) to restore the ruined condition
of man. Bana, which signifies to build, is used by way of metaphor in the Old
Testament, to signify to bless; to note, what properly it is for Christ to
bless man, to build up his ruined state (...) pull down all old pieces, and
(...) and build up all from the ground new; not to leave this work of pulling
down old and rotten remainders, til all be down; and not ceasing building until
all be made new, as right and tight, as beautiful and glorious as at first,
and more; bigger rooms, bigger lights, better situation and outlet. Elephas
supposing Ioh to be like an old house rotten and ruinous outward and inward,
observe what he says, if thou return to the Almighty, thou shall be built up,
or blessed; thou shall put away iniquity far from thy Tabernacle.

But what blessedness is, is mentioned in the following words; namely to have
our sins pardoned, and our hearts changed, which do inseparably go
together, and therefore one put to comprehend both, as here, To turn every one
of you from your iniquities. The generality of the Jews conversion is twice
spoken of in one chapter. Romans 11.26. And so all Israel shall be saved, as it
is written, There shall come out of Sion a deliverer, and shall turn away
ungodliness from Jacob* V. 32. for God has concluded them a^ (...) unbelief,
that he might have me^ ^n all. O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom
and knowledge of God, etc. Of which language the Prophets in the old Testament
are full. And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man
his brother, saying know the Lord; for they shall all know me, from the least
of them to the greatest of them, says the Lord; for I will forgive their
iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more. Ier. 31.34. And yet this
conversion when it shall be accomplished, will not be so general as strictly
and individually to involve all; for many of the Jews after these promises are
accomplished, notwithstanding the glorious testimony God shall then give of his
Son, shall remain in their unbelief and rejection of him, as appears by
these Scriptures compared together. Dan. 12.1, 2. And there shall be a time of
troubles, such as never was, and at that time thy people shall be delivered,
every one that shall be found written in the book; and many of them that sleep
in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to
shame and everlasting contempt. To which add V. 10. Many shall be purified and
made white, and tried; but the wicked shall do wickedly, and none of the
wicked shall understand, but the wise shall understand. The Scripture calls the
coming in of the Jews a resurrection, so does the Prophet here; but this
resurrection will be but partial; Many of them which sleep in the dust of the
earth shall awake, and many shall be purified and made white; not all, but
every one that is found written in the book; that is, the election of God will
distinguish and carry it still, even then when they shall come in most plenty
to Christ, like Doves to their windows: some, and that a considerable number
of these people, even then when Jesus Christ shall appear to make this
glorious resurrection, will notwithstanding all the glory that Christ shall come
with to make his own welcome, stand still in their unbelief and rejection of
him, which then will bring a dreadful curse and separation upon them from that
glorious Church; for no unclean thing shall abide in this clear and Cristal
Church; and this curse shall be as Cains curse and separation from that
communion and Church wherein he was, and whereof such a visible member; and by
this, as Cain, shall these wretches then be marked, and distinguished
manifestly amongst men, to their everlasting shame and contempt. To strengthen
this, take another Scripture. Revel. 21.3, 4. etc. compared with the eighth
chapter, speaks of the glorious state of the Jews, which God will hasten in
his time. And I John saw the holy City, new Jerusalem, coming down from God
out of Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her husband. And I heard a great
noise out of Heaven, saying, behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, and be
will dwell therein, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be
with them, and be their God; and he that sat upon the Throne said, Behold I
make all things new, etc. he that overcommeth shall inherit all things, and I
will be his God, and he shall be my son: but the fearful and unbelieving,
and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and
idolaters, and all liars shall have their part in the lake which burns with
fire and brimstone, which is the second death. Mr. Brightmans judgment upon
this place, is, according to what I have said, that even then when the glorious
state of the Jews shall be, will some of them be found in these lusts here
mentioned, and so be cursed and separated, as I have said, from fellowship with
them. Wherefore that expression, all Israel shall he saved, and so this
expression in my Text, to turn every one of you, notes only the great
abundance which shall then be brought in; a great multitude, as the word is
used, and concerning this very matter, Revel. 19.6. And I heard as it were the
voice of [a great multitude] and a^ the voyc^ of many waters, and as the voice
of mighty thunderings, saying Hallelujah, (...) Lord God omnipoten^ (...)
^eth^le^ u^ be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him, for the marriage of
the Lamb is come, and his wife has made her self ready, etc.

If this Text, as applied to the time of the Jews second call, til the time of
their fullest income and turning to God, cannot mean all; surely it cannot mean
every one as applied to their first call, to which I think my Text does
properly belong. Christ was not sent to turn every one of this people; for he
says expressly to them in his ministry, that he came not to call the
righteous, to be a Physician to those were well: but came to call the poor,
blind, halt, maimed, some of the meanest outwardly and inwardly; poor, lost,
self-condemned creatures, which is the meaning of that place, Isa. 59.20. And
the Redeemer shall come to Sion, to them which turn from transgression in
Jacob, says the Lord. To them which turn from transgression; leshabei ad
redeuntes, says the original; the redeemer shall come to turn them which are
turning. There is a generation of sinners which confess they are what they
are, dogs, devils, viler then any, in bonds and chains, as the Prophet
speaks of some that should come after Christ in chains, Isa. 45.14,
I am a Publican, a harlot, a covetous wretch, one that has many devils in
one, a lost creature if Christ do not look upon me: why these are redeuntes,
sinners turning, and these is Christ come to turn and save: these are sinners,
others are righteous; these are sick and diseased, and so would prize a
Physician; Lord, if thou can do any thing, help me, for I can do nothing;
here does Christ lend a hand, and a heart; and this is the visible instituted
order of his way for the salvation of man.

Every one] is not here taken distributively, singula generuns: but
collectively, genera singulorum; some of every kind, and of every rank, etc.
Christ healed every disease, says the Scripture, (i.) diseases of every sort.
All men are liars, says the Prophet; and every man is an hypocrite, says
another Prophet; (i.) all ranks of men, high and low, not simply and
individually; for then he that said so had been a liar and an hypocrite to. And
Aristotle himself in his Polit. lib. 2. cap. 2. shows the use of universal
terms, that they are not sometimes in a strict sense universally to be taken,
as you may see in the beginning of that Chapter, where speaking of the Greek
word (...), he says that sometimes it does mean every one individually, and
sometimes not. The like may be said of this universal term in the Text (...),
and so it must be carried here, or otherwise this Scripture would contradict
others.

The Scriptures which would be otherwise oppugned are these. Matthew. 1.21. shall
save his people, which surely notes some restriction. Isa. 52.15. So shall he
sprinkle many Nations; he does not say all. And Isa. 53.11. By his knowledge
shall my righteous servant justify many; who these many be, see John 6.37. All
that the father gives me shall come to me, and he that comes to me I will in
no wise cast out. Christ is said to save such as come to him for salvation;
redeuntes as I said erewhile; but all do not come to Christ, nor never will,
but only such as the father has given to Christ. As thou have given him power
over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou have given
him. John 17.20. Conversion is an actual life; and this Christ is said to give
to those only which the father has given to him, (i.) to the elect.

And whereas it is said, That as in Adam we all die, so in Christ we shall all
be made alive; and so consequently that Christ is sent to make all alive, and
to turn every one to God: the Apostle answers himself, writing to the
Galatians, showing that his meaning is not, that the efficacy of each, to wit,
the first and second Adam, is in the same manner necessarily extensive; but
says, that the efficacy of the one indeed is necessarily extensive; but the
efficacy of the other extensive only of free grace through faith, to them to
whom Christ shall give this. But the Scripture has concluded all under sin,
that the promise by the faith of Jesus might be given to them which believe
Gal. 3.22. All by Adam die, not that all by Christ should as necessarily be
made alive; but that the free grace and promise of life may be given to those
whom he shall please to enable to believe: so that the efficacy of the one is
necessary, and the efficacy of the other, to wit, the death of the second Adam,
voluntarily and wholly at Gods pleasure, and so argues nothing against the
sense and meaning which I give of my Text, every one only to mean some. By
this other Texts which in the letter sound as this that I have mentioned, and
as the Text which I am upon does, are to be expounded. God is in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, that is, some of all sorts, Jews and
Gentiles, who are given to Christ from eternity; Christ is to manifest the
purpose of God from eternity to these, to die for them, to call them, to
justify them, sanctify them, and glorify them; and to none else, but put for
their stumbling and their fall: and of this no reason to be given, but Gods
will, having such an absolute power over the creature, as the potter over the
clay; nor will he bear the striving of man in dispute to any further medium,
then his will. Let the potsherd strive with the potsherds of the earth, etc.

Finally, all may be resumed and rendered for the opening of this clause, in
other words to the same effect. -- To turn every one of you, (i.) who are by
the purpose of God to be turned: and so the expression not stricty noting the
universality of persons to be turned, but the strict propriety of Christ in
this work of turning souls to God. Christ is to turn every one that is to be
turned; this Christ which you so despise, and so little esteem; not a soul
amongst you can be turned and saved from your sin, but by him. Thus do many
of the learned read and render these words: and thus does Christ himself open
that place, Isa. 54.13. And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord, etc.
(i.) all which are taught, are taught by him, and can by none else come to
learn unto life. Thus does Christ explain this place of the Prophet, as
appears by his words, John 6.44, 45. No man can come to me, except the Father
which has sent me, draw him, and I will raise him up at the last day, as it is
written in the Prophets, and they shall be all taught of God: (i.) all that are
taught are taught of God, and none else can learn this mystery of coming to
Christ, and believing on him, but such as are taught of God.

So that this clause of my Text, being thus opened, the point you see to be
stood upon, naturally arises to be this, That it is Christ's proper work to
turn sinners from their sins: a business devolved by joint consent upon him,
the Father and the holy Spirit working in and by him, and no otherways, to
this great end, the conversion and salvation of man. The Scriptures which
concur to this truth, are many, Isa. 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon
me, because the Lord has anointed me, to preach good tidings unto the meek;
he has sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the
captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound, etc. This place
confirms the point, and also what I have before said, that Christ is not sent
to turn all, but a generation of sinners which are turning; the meek and
broken in heart, (i.) such as are self condemned, and lie under the bleeding
sense of their own wretched condition; pricked at heart with the sting of sin,
which may be, and yet in no actual state of grace; to be Physician to these
sick, wounded, bleeding, and dying ones, is Christ's proper place and
employment. To this may be added, Acts 5.31. Him has God exalted with his
right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and
forgiveness of sinner. The like Scripture is, 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful
saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to
save sinners, of whom I am chief. It Is Christ's proper work you see, and his
alone, to turn and save sinners from their sins.

The type of this read Romans 9.10. When Rehecca also concerved by one, even by
our father Isaac. But one in the bed, to wit, Jesus Christ, by whom the holy
seed is begotten: Christ casts that immortal seed into her womb, by which the
generation of the new creature is made, and none but he; he begets, brings
forth, and breeds up; hence called, the author and finisher of our faith: and
faith is called conversion, because indeed it is the formality of it Jesus said
unto them, except you be converted and become as a little child, ye shall not
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And then in the following words says, Whosoever
shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, Matthew. 18.6. What he
calls conversion before, Here he calls faith, because faith indeed is conversion;
the soul crediting Christ in what the word says of him, and so resigning it
self wholly to him, to be ruled by him, and by his will, and not any longer by
his own lusts and sins; and this is the turning of the soul from sin,
which my Text here speaks of. There are several things in faith, to
understand, to credit, to submit, and simply to submit; to submit as a child,
who does not contend or dispute, but says in his heart, my father bids be do
thus, and this is enough; and all these Christ works in the soul, and none
else. Christ enlightens the soul, shines into the heart, and makes it see what
had never been told of. Isa. 52.15. Christ meekens and humbles the soul,
pricks the heart, lets out all those corrupt things which swel and pusse up the
spirit against God: Christ takes off headiness, rashness, and bows the heart
to hearken and consider; and then works to will, persuades Iaphet, O that I had
a dwelling in the tents of Shem, that I could believe on Jesus Christ, Who is
he Lord, that I might believe on him? and then works to do, to trust in him
to deny all and follow him: and now is the soul turned from its sins.

But this is but in part. This state of soul is called a heart after Gods own:
one in this world as Christ; which is not strictly to be taken, as if any
whilst in this world were so pure and unmixed in affection and action, as
Christ, so separated from sin* in his nature and life in this world, as he
was; but it means what a converted man is in his intention, in his endeavor,
and in Gods acceptance. The heart truly turned to God, aims and intends a
course and motion in this world exactly like Christ, has respect to all
Christ's commandments, without distinction of Great and little, as the
Pharisees and hypocrites were wont to make; loves all, and would with all his
heart, all his ways were so direct as to keep all Gods statutes; to this
height is his aim, his desire and endeavor; for this he prays, sighs,
groans; and in this heavenly industry continues, runs, and is not weary,
that if by any means he might attain the resurrection from the dead; and this
in Gods acceptance, is a heart as Gods own, and holy as he is holy, and turned
and separated from sin as he.

If this be properly Christ's work to turn you from your sin, Mica. 7.19. he
will break every bond, and remove every weight which presses down; greater is
he that is in you, then the greatest corruption that is in you; the grace of
Christ is sufficient to withstand what intices, and to destroy what intices;
for this cause is Christ manifested to withstand, yea to destroy the works of
the Devil. Christ does turn us from corruption, to destroy it. The covenant
is, that Christ shall set in our heart as a resiner, and purifier of Silver,
and shall purify thee as they do those mettles, that thou may offer an
offering in righteousness, a pleasant offering; and this being the covenant,
every thing shall conduce to this fruit, the turning thy heart from thy sin,
(i.) the purging and refining of it, instructions, corrections. I will turn
mine hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, says the Lord;
therefore surely this hard work will be down; Goliath will be slain, and a
little thing shall do it. If Christ be long ere he do a necessary work, it is
probable that he will do it very remarkably, with some pibble of the brook.
with some Jaw Bone thrown by, will he smite to death at once heaps upon heaps,
all that has smote to death the peace and comfort of thy soul so long; not by
might, or by strength, does Christ do this, that thine eye may be much sixed
upon: but by a still blow within, by his Spirit, shall be the death of that
which has been the death of thy life hitherto. If Christ work all our works
in us, surely this work which is all, the turning of the heart from sin, he
will not leave undone, he will purely purge thy soul, renew a right spirit
within thee*

If this be the work of Christ, to turn sinner from their sins, then when
Christ is about this work do not hinder him: he stands at the door and
knocks; yea more calls, To you O men I call; whosoever is simple, let him turn in
hither: yea points, this is the way, walk in it: nay, and blocks up all other
ways; sometimes crosses, and punishes the man in other courses, hedges him up,
that he cannot find his way; convinces, salts the soul with fire, makes the
man's own heart condemn him* all this speaks Christ about his work* to turn
thee from thy sin: and indeed if thou sinde these things, Christ is at his
work hard, O take heed of opposing and contradicting his glorious work. It Is
ordinary with men when conscience begins to awake, and to smite when the Spirit
begins to stir, to quench and stisle those things with more excess of
sinning, to stop their ears when the call of Christ begins to sound loud in
their conscience, and so p^^cke and pierce, and bring sin to remembrance: why
thou that thus do art in league with sin and death; thou will not be
turned from thy sin, therefore thou shall die ^rein; and thou shall know in
death that (...) was nigh thee, and this will aggravate thy doom, that the
kingdom of God came so nigh thee: I was traveling with thee Christ will say,
and thou could not bear the pangs of the birth; I was lancing thy wound, and
thou could not endure it, I would have healed thee, and then thine iniquity
broke out, then thou ragedst when I set thy sins in order before thee, and
had rather be killed thy self, then that I should kill thy sin.

Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that which endures to eve
lasting life, which the son of man shall give unto you; for him has the
Father sealed, Joh. 6.22. That this is Christ's work, should be made a ground of
faith to us in going to him, for he is under the Law of his place, faithful in
all things to him that appointed him, (...), Non non ejiciam, says the
original.
and sealed him: therefore he says, He that comes to him, be will in no wise
cast out, Joh. 6.37. And hence that of the Apostle, This is a faithful saying,
and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ came to save sinners, the chief of
sinners. Let this point be of all acceptance unto you; you that have slain
Christ, and your own souls, yet think what Christ is made unto you, he is made
to make you, to new make you who have marred your selves, and waits thus to be
gracious and his meat and drink is to be pulling such brands out of the fire,
and to quench them before they be quite burnt. Christ is able to subdue all
things to himself, and as willing. You have done thus and thus says God* yet
be not desperate; I Sam. 12 20. so say I to you, great sinners.

is indeed upon one, but the means in and by which he does this, bears upon
many shoulders, Magistrates, Ministers, yea every one that is turned, is by the
law of that very condition, as converted, to labor to convert others; and as
advantages are more, so to be more isntrumental this way: general calling,
and particular calling, both sometimes engage this way. Offices in government
have this scope to bear up God, and to beat down that and be a terror to that
which would deface him. God has a double power, by which he does his great
works in this world, one secret and invisible, in which he alone is; of which
see Genesis 1.4. And God saw the Light that it was good, and God divided between
the light, and between the darkness. Since this act of separation, light will
not have communion with darkness; being parted, they constantly keep apart,
oppose, and continually conflict and expel each other, and this is by a secret
power of God invisible; and this is spiritualized by the Apostle, and applied
to sin and grace, 2 Cor. 6.14. What fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? and what communion has light with darkness? That the heart
is made of darkness light, that these two are separated, and continually keep
so; that grace and corruption continually conflict, and are continually
contradictory; this is by a secret power of God invisible. But then God has a
visible power, these are all his Ordinances, Magistracy, Ministry; these are
Jakin and Boas, the two external pillars of all grace and good in this world;
the pipes by which, and in which he conveyeth vigor and force against sin,
and unto good.

How persons in authority may be subservient to this great design, to turn
men from their sins, is set forth in two places, Genesis 4.7. If thou do well,
shall thou not be obeyed? and shall not thy younger brother be subject to thee,
and acknowledge thy birthright, and be guided and ruled by thee? thus
Ainsworth comments upon this place. Holiness in men of place makes majesty and
terror upon all unholinesse; clear as the Sun, and then terrible as an Army
with Banners: be learned, yea, be holy, ye that sway the Scepter: or else ye
will not be isntrumental in the hand of Christ, to turn men from sin, but to
draw them to it. The second Scripture is in the 2 Chronicles. 17. at the third and
fourth verses; you have Iehosaphats holiness, and answerably Gods owning of
him. And the Lord was with Iehosaphat, because he walked in the first ways of
his father David and sought not unto Balaant, but sought the Lord God of his
father, and walked in his commandments: therefore the Lord established the
Kingdom in his hand, and all Judah brought to Jehosaphat presents, and he had
riches and honor in abundance, and his heart was listed up in the ways of the
Lord. Also in the third year of his reign he said to the Princes, even to
Ben^ail, and to Obadiah, and to Zechariah, and to Nethanel, and to Micah, to
teach in the Cities of Judah: and with them he sent Levites, even Shemajah and
Nethaniah, and Zebadiah, etc. and they taught in Judah, and had the Law of the
Lord with them, and went about throughout all the Cities of Judah, and taught
the people. And the fear of the Lord fell upon all the Kingdoms of the Land
that were round thout Judah, so that they made no war against Iehosaphat.
Iehosaphats heart was lifted * up in the ways of the Lord, Gabah and here used
to be of same force wi^h ^he Hebrew (...) of Sarah principem se gessit, used of
Jacob see Hos. 2.3, 4.
(i.) he carried himself boldly and freely, without base fear and carnal
respect: the word is Gabah, and of the same force with Sarah Principem se
gessit, behaved himself Princely, in and for the ways of the Lord: this was
for his personal holiness; and how he improved his place and power to turn
people from their sins, you have heard in Verse. 7, 8. and this brought plenty
and peace round about.

Two things you see concern men in place, to subserve Christ in this great
work of turning sinners from their sins; to be holy themselves, and to plant
the means of holiness; neglect these, and reglect all, to bring peace and
plenty into this poor Land. Wherefore stir up your selves unto these things,
and in this work, tender not one place but all; England. Wales, Ireland.
Gentiles, yea and the Jews: think, if it be possible. how you may be
isntrumental for the good of that forlorn people: and now you are removing
guilt from the Land, that you would do it thoroughly, and leave if possible
none upon us, respecting Jew or Gentile. The Scriptures by which I would urge
to this, are two; and of two sorts: one of promise, the other of severe threat.
That of promise is Isa. 32:20. Blessed are ye that sow beside all waters, that
send forth thither the sect of the Ox, and the Ass. It Is a blessed work to
be sowing beside all waters, to be propagating the Gospel every where, to be
breaking up all grounds that lie fallow, and silling the world with weeds and
tares; but to send forth thither the Ox and the Ass, that is painful
instruments to that poor people the Jews, to call upon that Shulamite return,
is peculiarly and eminently blessed: and the multiplication of this expression,
Return O Shulamite, return, return, which Master Brightm^n applies to the
Jews, makes me to think, it is not a vain repitition, but to intimate that
various Gentile Nations, shall call that poor forlorn people to embrace
Christ, (i.) contribute the utmost of their assistance, to bring that elder
sister to return to her first husband, that it may be much better with her
then it is now; and O how gladly would I have England be the foremost in this
blessed work, to give the first call to the Shulamite, who were the first I am
afraid, that gave sharp repulse and expulse unto them. The other Scripture I
would urge you with, is threatening to all that shall deal hardly with that
people. Zach. 2.8, 9. For thus says the Lord of Hosts, after the glory has he
sent me to the Nations which spoiled you; for he that touches you touches the
apple of his eye: for behold, I will shake mine hand upon them, and they shall
be a spoil to their servants, and ye shall know that the Lord of hoasts has
sent me. After the glory has he sent me to the Nations that spoiled you, (i.)
after God has accomplished the restitution of this people, who shall be the
visible glory of all Nations; then will God visit all those Nations who have
been injurious to this people, and by this people injured, be revenged upon
them, like as Mordecai and his brethren upon Haman and his followers; for this
remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles in the midst of many people, as a
Lion among the beasts of the Forest, as a young Lion in the midst of the
flocks of sheep or goats; the original is either, who if he go thorough, both
treads it down, and tears it in pieces, and none can deliver. Mica. 5.8. To
this agrees Mica. 4.13: Arise and thresh, O daughter of Zion, for I will make
thy horn iron, and I will make thy hoofes brass, and thou shall beat in
pieces many people, etc. Isa. 16.4. In mercy shall the throne be established.
this is in that place added.
I remember Gods speech to Moab, Let mine outcasts dwell with thee Moab; but it
would not be, and answerably they smarted. The Jews are Gods outcasts; but
surely we may collect from the threats that are made, to them which hardly use
them, that Gods call to the Nations, as to Moab, that we would let his outcasts
dwell with us, and dwell comfortably with us; and be as tender of injuring
them, as of injuring the apple of our eye: for truly it is injury enough, that
the guilt of Christ's blood is upon them* uoon their souls; that loammi, the
mark of Gain a vagabond, is upon their foreheads; those which make these
servants and slaves, shall be a spoil to their servants, as the Prophet speaks
in the place before cited, (i.) shall be made so themselves by this people whom
they have so used.

Consider you who are in places of power, how you are called in Scripture, the
whole stay of bread, and the whole stay of water. Isa. 3.1, 2, 3. and healers,
and binders up, Isa. 3.7. and your salve, by which to heal and bind up, I have
told you, namely to live holy, and to plant the means of holiness among all
people, Gentile and Jew; and short of this, surely you will not be healers and
binders up, and so have your name for naught. If you say, this is troublesome
and costly, I will answer, as the Prophet, Isa. 45.18 For thus says the Lord,
that created the Heavens, God himself that formed the Earth, and made it: he
established it, he created it not in vain, not to be empty, says the
original; which rendering best answers the clause that follows, he formed it
to be inhabited, I am the Lord, etc. The earth was not made to be empty, says
the Prophet; if no part of the earth was made to be empty and useless, then
surely not the fat and fertile parts of the earth: you Londoners are watered
with wealth, like Eden, the garden of God; you are the fat and fertile part of
the Lands and therefore surely you are not made to be empty; fruitful
exhalations by the love of Christ, should be made and ascend from your full
purses, and fall in dewes and silver-drops all the Land over, where poor
barren places are, and people starved by thousands, in body and soul. Then for
pains and labor, I would say this to you, it is easier to bear the burden of
duty upon our bodies, then to hear the burden of guilt for the neglect of
duty, upon our souls. If the City and Kingdom lie tumbling still in
blindness and wickedness, and no means used to serve Christ's providence, to
turn these poor creatures from their sins, where will all the sins of the
Kingdom lie) at whose door, and how heavy? The cry and scrich of one lost
soul started up in thy conscience, will more tug and waste thy spirits, then
all other pains and travels we now exhort unto. A holy man bewailes much our
condition, that we know not the reason of the original names of many things,
though we know our father Adam did name all things significantly: as why the
day is called in Hebrew jom, See Ains worth on Genesis 1.5.
and the night lailah: howbeit (says he) by affinity with other words it
seems the day was named jom, of the tumult, stir, and business in it; and
the night lailah, of the howling and yelling of wild beasts in it. This day is
jom, stir and business for God, all out and in action for him; and if thy day
be not thus jom, thy night will be lailah indeed, howling and yelling, which
will be more pain to thy spirit, then any pain otherwise possibly can be.
Then as for the day, it is observable how the Scripture calls it in the New
Testament, (...).
(...), 2 Cor. 11.25. a night-day, ghnereb-boker, an evening-morning, in Daniel.
It is used by the Apostle, and so by the Prophet, to note a natural day,
consisting of day and night. I may safely spiritualize this term, and tell you
at this time, that this is your day for work, and it is a night-day, a day to
take up day and night, if need be, for the glory of God, and the good of many.
Or it is a night day, not all day; not jom, jom, as that glorious day is
called, which they keep above. Prove. 8.30. I was daily his delight; the
original is jom-jom, I was day-day his delight; Heaven is day-day: spend your
night-day now faithfully for Christ, to turn sinners from their sins, and
you shall shine as Stars; yea as the the Sun in your day-day hereafter.

FINIS.

