Tulse Mayor.
Martis Vicesimo primo die Octobr. 1684. Annoque Regni Regis CAROLI Secundi,
Angliae, etc. Tricesimo Sexto.
IT is Ordered by this COURT, That the Order hereafter following, (Against
Servants being Retained without a Testimonial,) Made at the last Quarter
Sessions held for this City, shall be forthwith Printed and Published; And that
all the Aldermen of this City do cause their Beadles to go from House to House
within their respective Wards, to give Notice of the said Order to the several
Inhabitants therein.

Land. ss. Ad General' Quarterial' Sessionem pacis Domini Regis, tent' pro
Civitat' London, per Adjornament' apud Justice-Hall in le Old Bailey, London,
die Mercurii; scilicet, Octavo die Octobris, Anno Regni Regis CAROLI Secundi,
nunc Angl', etc. Tricesimo Sexto.

WHEREAS by a Statute made in the Fifth year of the Reign of the late Queen
ELIZABETH, containing diverse Orders for Servants, (amongst other Things) It is
Enacted, That no Person or Persons that shall depart out of a Service, shall be
retained or accepted into any other Service, without showing before His or Her
Retainer such Testimonial, as is in the said Statute specified, to the Chief
Officer of the Town Corporate, and in every other Town and Place, to the
Constable, Curate, Churchwarden, or other Head Officer of the same, where He or
She shall be retained to serve, upon the pain that every such Servant or
Servants so departing without such Certificate or Testimonial, shall be
Imprisoned until He or She procure a Testimonial or Certificate; The which if
He or She cannot do within the space of One and Twenty Days next after the
First day of His or Her Imprisonment, Then the said Person to be Whipped and
used as a Vagabond, according to the Laws in such case provided. And that any
Person retaining any such Servant or Servants, without showing any such
Testimonial or Certificate, as is aforesaid, shall forfeit for every such
Offense Five Pounds. And if any such Person shall be taken with any counterfeit
or forged Testimonial, then to be Whipped as a Vagabond, as by the said Statute
(whereunto relation being had) more fully appears. And whereas it is
generally Experienced throughout this whole City, as well by the Nobility and
Gentry, as other good Citizens and Householders Inhabiting in the same; That
Servants having no such Certificates and Testimonials when They depart out of
one Service and come to be retained into another Service, and the Neglect of
putting the said Law in Execution, gives great Occasion to very many Servants
to become Idle, Loose, and of Evil-Behaviour, and oftentimes to Cheat and
Purloyn from their Masters and Mistresses, and when they come to be retained in
a Service upon Liking, without a Testimonial, take Their first Opportunity to
run away with their Masters or Mistresses Goods. It is therefore thought fit,
and Ordered by this COURT, That according to the said Statute, No Servant or
Servants who shall depart out of any Service, shall be Retained or Accepted
into any other Service without showing such Testimonial as aforesaid. And that
the Aldermen of the several Wards within this City do take some meet and
effectual Course for the Publishing hereof, to the end all Persons concerned
may take Notice, and may become conformable hereunto.

Wagstaffe.

Printed by SAMVEL ROYCROFT, Printer to this Honorable City.


