coat of arms of the City of London

AN ACT OF COMMON-COVNCEL FOR THE WELL-ORDERING and establishing of the WATCHES
within This CITY, and payment of the Beadles Salary.

Tudor rose Scottish thistle French fleur-de-lis depiction of Irish harp

Printed by Richard Cotes, Printer to the Honorable City of London. 1643.

AN Act of Common Council, for the well-ordering and establishing of the
Watches within this City, and payment of the Beadles Salary.
Commune Concilium tentum in Camera, Guild Hall Civitatis London, nono die
Octobris, 1643. Annoque Regni Domini nostri Caroli, nunc Regis Angliae, etc.
decimo nono, coram Isaac Pennington Majore (secundo tempore) Civitatis London,
Johan. Wollaston Milite, and Aldermanno, Majore Civitatis Londini electo,
Johan. Glyn, Armiger. ejusdem Civitatis Recordatore, Thoma Atkin, Johan.
Warner, Johan. Langham, Willi. Gibbs, Willi. Barkley, ejusdem Civitatis
Aldermannis, and Johan. Fowke and Jacobo Bunce, Aldermannis and Vicecomit'
ejusdem Civitatis, necnon majore part Communariorum de Communi Concilio
ejusdem Civitatis tunc and ibidem Assemblat'.
FOR the better ordering and establishment of the Watches, to be hereafter
duly observed and kept, within this City, and Liberties thereof, and also for
payment unto the Beadles of the several Wards within the same, a competent
Salary or Wages, for and in respect of their service to be performed, it is
enacted and agreed by this Common Council in manner as follows, viz.

First, That the number of men to watch every night in every Ward, throughout
this City and Liberties, shall be thus appointed, viz.

Algate 34 Dukes place 10 Aldersgate 44 Martin le Grand 12 Bishopsgate 80
Broadstreete 30 Billingsgate 30 Bridge within 25 Bassingshaw 12 Breadstreete 26
Cornehill 16 Candlewicke 24 Cordwayner 24 Cheap 25 Colemanstreete 32
Cripplegate within 40 Cripplegate without 90 Castle Baynard 40 Dowgate 36
Farringdon within 50 Muckwellstreete 4 Blackefryers 14 Farrindon without 130
White friars 8 Bridewell Precinct 8 Bartholomew the Great 10 Bartholomew the
Less 4 Limestreete 11 Langborne 34 Portsoken 60 Queenehithe 40 Towerstreete 40
Vintrey 34 Walbrooke 20

Secondly, That the Alderman, Deputy, and Common-Councell-men of every Ward, or
the major part of them shall appoint a certain place within the Ward where the
Inhabitants that are so appointed to watch, shall first meet, and shall also
appoint to what places they shall afterward go unto to watch in the said Ward;
and that the Beadles the day preceding every watch shall give to all the
Constables of each Precinct in the Ward a list of the names of every Inhabitant
that is to watch each night in the several divisions of the said Ward, that
every Constable may know what persons he is to warn to watch every several
night, and that the Constable do the day before his watch night warn them
accordingly.

Thirdly, That the Beadle shall in the presence of the Constable and one of the
Supervisors hereafter mentioned call over the names of those whose course shall
be to watch each night respectively, as well at the hours appointed for their
meeting in the evening, as also at the time appointed for the breaking up of
the watch in the morning. And that they the Beadle and Constable, or one of
them, in case the Supervisor be absent at any of the said times, shall take a
note in writing, of the names of such of the said Inhabitants then appointed to
watch as shall be absent from their watch at the hours appointed, evening or
morning, or any part of the night. And shall deliver the said note the next day
to the Supervisor or Supervisors, that they may prosecute against them
according to the direction of the seventh Article hereafter expressed.

Fourthly, That every one of the Trained Bands within this City, when his
course shall be to watch, shall appear, (except he be actually in service in
the Trained Bands) and watch in his Arms, viz. the Musquetteers with Powder,
Bullet, and Match lighted, but not discharge or shoot off any piece during the
time of his watch on pain of imprisonment, unless there be just cause to do
it; and the Corselets, in stead of a Pike, with a complete Halbert, and a
Sword: And the other watchmen, not being of the Trained Bands, to watch with a
good Halbert or a brown Bill.

Fifthly, That the Deputy or one of the Common Council men of every Ward, or
such trusty person as they or one of them by writing under his or their hand
shall appoint, shall have delivered unto him out of the Cities store a small
barrel of Gunpowder, containing ten, twenty, or thirty pounds, occording to
the largeness of the Ward, with a fitting proportion of Match and Bullets, and
such person to cause the said Powder to be Papered up half an ounce in a
Paper, and to deliver, or cause to be delivered, the same to every Musquettier
that does appear to watch, allowing two half ounces for two charges, and two
yeards of Match; and that a fit proportion of Gunpowder, to the quantity of
half a pound or a pound, and a quantity of Bullets be kept in a readiness in
the Court of Guard, or some other convenient place every night for supply, if
in case there be need to use the same. And the said Deputy,
Common-Councell-men, or such other person as they shall appoint, shall give an
account to the Alderman of the Ward for the time being of the well husbanding
of the same ammunition when it is spent, and that then to receive a like
quantity again for a new supply.

Sixthly, That two or more honest and able men shall be nominated and appointed
in every, Ward by the Alderman, Deputy, and Common-Councell-men, or the major
part of them for the time being, to take care and oversee that the watches
appointed as aforesaid in every Ward be from henceforth duly kept; and that
the Constables, Beadle, and Watchmen, perform their duties, and therefore for
that purpose a List shall be delivered unto the said Supervisors in writing
under the hands of the Alderman, Deputy, and Common-Councell-men of the names
and sirnames of the men so appointed to watch, and of the several places where
they are assigned unto to watch every night. Which said Supervisors shall take
notice of the said Inhabitants that absent themselves at any time from
watching, and likewise of such Constables and Beadle as shall at any time be
remiss or negligent in performance of their duties, and from time to time
shall present the names of such defaulters to the Lord Mayor for the time
being, or to some other of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, that punishment
may be inflicted upon the said defaulters, according to Law, and that the said
Supervisors respectively, if occasion shall be, shall prosecute and give in
evidence against every such delinquent where occasion shall require: and they
for their pains and care in the premises, so long as they shall carefully and
justly perform their trust committed to them, and execute the same to the good
liking of the Alderman, Deputy, and Common-Councell-men of the Ward, or the
major part of them, shall be exempted themselves from wratching, and shall have
such an allowance as was heretofore agreed on by Act of Common Council, namely
the one half of the fines to be set and recoved on the defaulters, or any
such reasonable allowance as shall be thought fit to be allowed them or any
one of them by the Alderman, Deputy, and Common-Councell-men, or the major
part of them in writing under their hands of every Ward respectively; which
said allowance is to be raised of the Inhabitant of the said Ward, and not
elsewhere.

Seventhly, That the watches from Michaelmas to our Lady day, shall begin at
the latest before nine of the clock in the night, and continue until at least
six of the clock in the morning. And from our Lady day till Michaelmas, shall
begin at the latest before ten of the clock at night, and continue until at
least four of the clock in the morning The time of this manner of watching to
begin from henceforth.

Eigthly, That such rates by way of Fifteen, as are herein afterward set
down and expressed to be raised on the several Wards of this City, shall be
yearly granted, and to begin at our Lady day last past.

Ninthly, For the Beadles Salary and such other necessary occasions of the said
Ward, which said several rates shall be collected and gathered by such person
and persons, and at such time and times as from time to time shall be appointed
and directed by the Alderman, Deputy, and Common-Councell-men of every Ward, or
the major part of them in writing under their hands, and the said Collector or
Collectors to pay all that shall or may be collected to the Deputy, or one of
the Common-Councell-men of every Ward who shall be by the major part of them in
writing under their hands appointed to be a Treasurer for the receiving
thereof, and for the disbursing and paying the same as he shall be by the major
part of them by such writing directed to the uses aforesaid. And if any person
or persons shall refuse to pay the said rates, or any part thereof assessed on
him or them for the uses aforesaid, that then the Collector or Collectors, with
the assistance of any Constable that he or they shall call, shall by virtue of
this Act distreine for the same, and the said distresses carry away and detain
until satisfaction shall be made of the sums for which they are distreined.

The yearly Rates by way of Fifteens for the serVerall Wards for the uses
before said, are as follows, viz.

Algate 4 Aldersgate 3 Bishopsgate 3 Broadstreet 3 Billingsgate 3 Bridge within
3 Bassingshaw 3 Breadstreet 3 Cornhill 3 Candlewick 4 Cordwayner Cheap 2
Colemanstreet 4 Creeplegate within 4 Creeplegate without 4 Castlebaynard 3
Dowgate 3 Farringdon within 2 Farringdon without, viz. Saint Sepulchers 6
Fleetstreet 3 Saint Andrews 6 Limestreet 4 Langborne 2 Portsoaken 3
Queenehithe 4 Tower 2 Vintrey 3 Walbrooke 2

And in case' any of the aforesaid wards shall desire to pay their Beadle or
Beadles Salaries any other way then by way of rates as aforesaid, and shall
certify that their desire unto the Common Council at or before the next
Common Council to be holden after Saint Thomas day next, this Court approving
and settling of the same on such wards in such a way and manner as they shall
so desire does think fit that such ward shall be exempted from raising or
paying the said rates in their several wards as aforesaid.

FINIS.

