City of London coat of armsLane Mayor.
LONDON ss. Ad Generalem Session' Pacis Dom' Regis, tent' pro Civit' London'
per Adjornament' apud Justice-Hall in le Old Bailey, London', die Mercurii,
scil. Octavo die Maii, Anno Regni Domini nostri WILLIELMI Tertii, nunc Regis
Angl', etc. Septimo: Coram Thoma Lane Milite, Majore Civitat' Lond', Roberto
Clayton Mil', Patien' Ward Mil', Roberto Jeffery Mil', Thoma Stamp Mil', and
Willielmo Ashhurst Milit', Aldermannis Civitat' praedict', and Salathiel Lovell
Mil' Servien' ad Legem ac Recordatore ejusdem Civit', ac al' Sociis suis
Justic' dicti Dom' Regis ad Pacem in Civitat' praed' conservand'; Necnon ad
diversas Felon', Transgr' and al' Malefact' infra eandem Civitat' perpetrat'
audiend' and terminand' assign'.
WHEREAS many great Disorders are frequently committed and done in
Publick-Houses, within this City and Liberties thereof, by diverse disorderly
Persons resorting thereto and abiding therein at late and unseasonable times in
the Night, to the ruin of many Families, and to the harboring and encouraging
of Thieves and Robbers, to commit many Thefts and Robberies, to the great
disturbance of the Peace, contrary to Law, and to the dishonor of the
Government of this CITY: For prevention of which great Evils and Mischiefs, It
is Ordered by His MAJESTY'S Justices of the Peace, That all Vintners,
Coffee-sellers, Alehouse-keepers, Victuallers and other Publick-House-keepers,
within this City and Liberties thereof, do not henceforth permit or suffer any
person or persons to be or continue in their respective Houses tippling or
drinking after the Hour of Ten of the Clock in the Night time. And it is
further Ordered, That the several Constables and other Officers, within this
City and Liberties thereof, Do cause all persons offending herein, to be
Presented and Prosecuted for keeping Disorderly Houses, and be punished
according to Law. And it is further Ordered, That this ORDER be Printed and
Published, for the better observance thereof.

Goodfellow.

Printed by SAMUEL ROYCROFT, Printer to the Honorable City of London, 1695.


