Londons Flames Discovered by INFORMATIONS Taken before the COMMITTEE,
Appointed to Enquire after the Burning of the CITY OF LONDON.

And after the Insolency OF THE PAPISTS, etc,

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1667.

INFORMATIONS Taken from the COMMITTEE, etc. In a Letter from Alanzon of the
23d. August Newstile, Written from one Dural, to a Gentleman in the house of
one of the Ministers of the French -Church in London, called Mounsieur Heralt,
there were these Expressions, viz.
PRay acquaint me with the truth of certain News, which is common in this
Country, that Fire from Heaven is fallen upon a City called Balke, situate on
the side of the River of Thames; where a world of people have been killed and
burned, and houses also consumed. Whiich seems a word of Caball cast out by
some that were knowing, and others that might be ignorant of the Signification
of it.

Mrs. Elizabeth Styles says, That in April last in an angry dispute she had
with a French Servant of Sir Vere Vanes, He hastily replied. You English
Maidens will like the Frenchmen better, when there is not an House left
between London Bridge and Temple-Barre, which she answering, I hope your eyes
will never see that, He replied, This will come to pass between June and
December.

William Tisdale informs, that he being about the beginning of July, at the
Greyhound in St. Martins, with one Fitz Harris an Irish Papist, He heard him
say; There will be a sad desolation in September, and in November a worse. In
December all will be united into one, whereupon he asked where this desolation
would be, he answered him, in London.

Mr. Lite of Ratcliff, having some discourse with one Mr. Langorne of the
middle Temple, Barrister, reputed a zealous Papist; about February last, after
some discourse in disputing about Religion, be took him by the hand and said to
him, You expect great things in 1666, and think that Rome will be destroyed,
but what if it be London?

One Kiteley of Barking in Essex, informs that one Yaxley a Papist of Ilford in
the said County, came into their House August the 13th. being in discourse with
his Mother; said, They say that next Thursday, will be the Hottest day that
ever was in England, She replied, I hope the hottest season of the year is now
past, To which he answered, I know not whether it be the hottest for Weather or
Action: The said Yaxley, coming to the same House, the week after the Fire, Mr.
Kitely said to him, with some trouble; I have often thought upon your hot
Thursday, To which she replied, It was not indeed upon the Thursday, but it
happened upon the Sunday come sennight after; Mr. Yaxley hearing these evidences
produced against her, endeavored to avoid the words, saying, that upon the
13th. of August she did tell Mr. Kiteley, That they say next Thursday, will be
the darkest Thursday, that ever was in England, but not otherwise; Which she
affirms to have received from one Fynchman; an old woman of Ilford, next being
examined before a Justice of Peace, to discover the Truth thereof, denied that
ever she said any such words to Mrs. Yaxley, or that she had any discourse with
her about any such matter, as to the subsequent words, she the said Yaxley
denied ever to have spoken them, but Mr. Kiteley offered in her presence, if it
should be demanded, to bring his Mother and Wife to testify the same.

William Ducket Member of the House, Informs that one Henry Baker of Chipnam,
in the County of Willis, coming from Market with one John Woodman of Relloway
in the same County, the Thursday before the fire began in London, they had some
discourse about buying a yoke of fat Bullocks, wherein they differed, because
Woodman who was to sell them, was desired to keep them a while in his hands,
but the said Woodman denied so to do, for that as he alleged, he would not
stay in the Country till that time, on which Baker would have them delivered to
him, and being asked where he was going? he refused to tell; asking, What he
had to do to make that question? And riding a little farther, the said Woodman
expressed these words; You brave blades of Chipnam, you made Bonfiers lately
for beating the Dutch, but since you delight in Bonfires, you shall have your
belly full of them ere it be long; adding, that if he lived one week longer, he
should see London as sad a London as ever it was since the world began, and in
some short time after, he should see as bloody a time in England, as ever was
since England was England: This discourse was not much taken notice of, at that
time when it was sp^ken; but when the City of London was burning, the said
Henry Baker gave this information to the said Ducket; and hereupon issued out a
Warrant to apprehend Woodman, but he was gone out of the Country, and cannot be
heard of since

Robert Hubert, of Roane in Normandy, who acknowledged that he was one of those
that fired the house of Mr. Farmer a Baker in Pudding lane, from whence the
fire had its beginning; confesses, that he came out of France with one Stephen
Pedilow, about four Months before the fire began in London, and went into
Sweedland with him, where he stayed also with him as his companion four months,
and then they came together into England in a Sweedish Ship, called the
Skipper, where he stayed on board with the said Pedilow, till that Satturday
night on which the fire break out, where Pedilow taking him out of the Ship,
carrying him into Pudding-lane, and he being earnest to know whether he was
carrying him? he would not satisfy him, till he brought him to the place, and
then he told him that he had brought three Balls, and gave him one of them into
his hand to throw into the House, and he would have been farther satisfied of
the design, as he said before he would execute it; but Pedilow was so impatient
that he would not hear him, and then he did the fact, which was, that he put a
Fireball at the end of a long pole, and lighting it with a piece of match, to
put it in at a window, and stayed till he saw the house on a flame; he
confesses there was three Accomplices, whereof Pedilow was the chief

Mr Graves, a French Merchant living in St. Mary-ax informs; That he had known
Hubert ever since he was four year old, and he ever observed him to be a person
of a mischevious inclination, and therefore fit for any villainous enterprise,
and because of the knowledge he had of him, he went to visit him in Prison,
when he saw him he could not but commiserate his condition, wherein he had
brought himself; and for his better discovery of the fact, he told him the said
Hubert, that he did not believe that he had done that fact which he had
confessed guilty of, to which Hubert replied, Yes I am guilty of it, and have
been brought to it by the infligation of Pedilowe, but not out of any malice
to the English Nation, but from a desire of that Reward he promised me, upon my
return into France. [It is observable that this miserable Creature, who
confessed himself before the Commissioners to be a Protestant, was a Papist,
and dyed so;] and the aforesaid Pedilow, the said Mr. Graves informs, that he
had a full knowledge of him, and knew him to be a very deboist person, and
acute to any wicked design; and moreover for a clearer conviction of the guilt
of the foresaid Hubert, Lowman the Keeper of the White-Lyon, was commanded to
set him upon an Horse, and go with him to see if he could find out the place
where he threw the fire-ball; upon which Hubert, with more readiness then those
who were well acquainted with the place, went to Pudding lane where the very
House which was first fired stood; saying, Here stood the House, the Jailer did
endeavor to draw him off from that belief, and put him upon seeking for some
other place, but he positively persisted in what he first said, and affi^med
that to have been the said house: It being intimated to the Committee, that
notwithstanding the confession of the said Hubert, it was confidently reported,
that the fire in the forementioned Farmers his house began by accident, so the
Commissioners sent for him the said Farmer before them, who being examined
said, That it was impossible that any fire should happen in his said house by
accident; for he said. After twelve of the clock at Night, he had gone through
every Room thereof, and found no fire but in one Chimny, where the room was
paved with brick, which fire he dilligently raked up in the Embers; He was then
asked, whether no window or door might let in wind to displace those Coals; He
affirmed, There was no capacity for any wind to disturb them, and that it was
absolutely set on fire on purpose.

Dawes Williamson Esquire one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace informs. That
he saw a man apprehended near the Temple, with his pocket stuffed withh
combustible matter, made of Flax, and Towe, and such like matter.

Dr. John Parker informs, That he saw a person throw some Combustible matter
into a shop in the Old-Bayly, which he thinks was the shop of an Apothecary,
that immediately thereupon he saw a great smoke, and there was the smell of
Brimstone, the person that did this immediately ran away, but upon the outery
of the people he was taken by the Guard.

Randal Harsland, and Humphry Bowyer, they all agree, that they saw a person
fling something into a House near St Tant^ings Church, and that thereupon the
House was on fire, and the smoke thereof filled the House on the other side of
the way, and when this was done there was no fire near by a quarter of a mile.

Michael March, an Officer of the Trained-bands in a Company of Sir Richard
Browns, apprehended a woman in the time of the fire, at the Nags-head in
Leaden-Hall-street, with an Instrument like a dark Lantern made, as is
conceived, to lay a train of Powder, and it was fi^led with Gunpowder, there
was two more of the same (...) in his Company, they being asked for what use
they employed the said Instrument, they would give no account thereof.

Nawson Killingworth Esquire informs, tha^ he apprehended a person during the fire,
about whom he found much combustible matter, and certain block things of a
large figure, he could not endure to hold them in his hand by reason of their
extreme heat, this person was so surprised at first, that he could not answer
to any question, but being on his way to White Hall, he acted the part of a
madman, so continuing while he was present with him

Sir John Maynard a Member of this House, informs he had some of that
Combustible matter in his hand, and though it was in its natural consistency
unfired, yet the heat was scarce to be endured by the touch.

Mr. Freeman of Southwark Brewer, whose house there was lately burned, informs
that on the day his house was fired, being a quarter of an hour before three,
happened a paper with a ball of wildfire, containing near a pound wrapped up in it
in the nave of a wheel, in an outer house where lay a great quantity of Timber,
how this house was fired he knows not; but this he affirms to the Committee,
it could not be by accident, because there had not been any candile or fire in
the house where the Hay lay that whole day, and the Hay being laid up before
Midsomer very dry, it could not possible be set on fire within it self, and
moreover he said the Hay-lof^t was on fire on the top of the house, and that
the fire spread from one end of the roof to the other in an instant

Mr. Richard Harwood says, I being nere the Feathers-Tavern by St Paul's, on
the 4th. of September something like wildfire by the sparkling and spitting of
it, appeared, whereof he gave notice to some soldiers nere there, who caused
it to be quenched.

I had order from the Committee, that I traced several apprehended upon strong
suspicion during the fire, and committed to the Guard, but I could not make
farther discovery of them.

A Letter.
SIR,
HEaring that you are Chairman of the Committee, for examining the firing of
London, I thought good to acquaint you with this information that I have
received; William Champress Hat band-maker, now living on Horsey-down, was upon
Tuesday morning September 4 th. 1666. in Shooe-lane, and there me with a
Constable, who had apprehended a Frenchman, whom he took firing an House with
fire balls, and charged the said Champress to assist him, he carried the said
Frenchman to Salisbury-Court, but finding that burning down, he went into
Fleet Street, and was presently called upon by the Commander of the Guard, to
know what the matter was, the Constable told him, he had apprehended one firing
an House in Shooe-lane, He examined the person in French, and committed him to
the Guard of the Soldiers, and told the Constable he would secure him, and
carry him along with him; the Constable asked him if he should go along with
him to give his evidence, he replied, He had done enough, but what became of
the Frenchman he knows nothing,

Your most Humble Servant. S. G.


Taken up at Leedes by Mr. Thawites man a Recusant.
Cover the Fire ye Hugonots,
That have so branded us with Plotts:
And henceforth no more Bonfires make
Till ye avaunt in the Stygian-Lake. etc.
Dated the 5th of November, Anno Salutis 1666. and Anno primo Restitutionis
Romanae Religionis in Anglia.
In a Letter directed from Ipswich, for the honorable Sir Robert Brooks in the
Parliament at Westminster* is intimated that about the 30th. of August last,
one of the Constables of Scoton in horse-meare hundred, being upon the search
of that Town about Hearth-money, was told by one Mr. William Tompson a Roman
Catholic in that Town, That though times were like to be sad, yet if he found
any cause to alter his Religion, he would see that he should not want; and
farther said to him, what would you say if you should see that London was burnt?

An Affidavit of a Frenchman that said, there was three hundred engaged in the
firing the City of London.
The information of Richard Bond, of the Parish of Giles in the fields,
Iron-monger, Samuel Page, Francis Cogin, William Coals, Edmund Dakins, and
Richard Pardoe, taken the 18th of September 1666. by me Sir Justinian Truin
Knight, one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex,
upon oath as follows.

Richard Bond, says, That on Thursday last, about twelve or one of the clock
at night, there was a Frenchman, brought by the Watch, to the info^mers
fathers house, at the sign of the White-Hart in Kings street, taken as a
suspicion person, and the said person being questioned by them the Informant,
and others present, whether he was not one of those that fired the City, or had
any hand therein or any private knowledge thereof, or knew any that had
designed it; the said person, answered a great while in a perverse manner,
quite differing from the questions; but being farther desired to tell the
Truth, and being told, that if he were guilty, it was the only way to save his
life, he did at first obstinately deny that he knew of any Plot, whereupon a
young man took the Prisoner aside to the end of a Room, and after some
discourse between them, they both returned to the Informant, and the rest of
the company, and the said young man said to us plainly, in the hearing of the
Prisoner the French man, That he had confessed that there were three hundred
Frenchmen in a Plot, or Conspiracy; upon this the Informant and others spoke to
the French man in these words; Well Master you have done very well to confess,
and no doubt but you may have your Pardon, if you confess all that you know of
this Plot; And thereupon farther asked him, if there were no more then three
hundred persons in the said Plot? He answered, No, there are no more then three
hundred, Then we enquired who they were, and how he came to know they were
three hundred, to which he would give no direct answer, but put it off with
other extravagant discourse, and being asked why he came to St Giles Parish
where he was apprehended, He told a story that he came from Islington-fields,
where his Masters goods were, but the goods were now removed he could not tell
whether, but his Master bad him go up and down the fields, but would not tell
him upon what occasion, or for what end he was so to do, and he being asked
whether there were three hundred men engaged in this design? He replied, That
there were three hundred engaged in it: And the Names of the Persons present at
the Prisoners Confession of the Plot were, Edmund Dakings Seniour, of Holborn,
near Turn-stile, Littingam Bell living by Holborn, and another young man.

The Information of William Coals of Cow-Lane London, and Samuel Page of Gyles
in the Fields Weavour, Edmond Dakings, of Gyles in the Fields, and Francis
Cogin of St. Andrews Holborn, and Richard Pardoe Victualler, and one other
rending to the Confirmation of the foregoing Walloone.

An Extract of a Letter from Heidleberge in the Palatinate September 29th. 1666.
SIR,
YOurs of the 6th. current came to me on Wednesday, and brought me tidings of
the burning of London constantly believed amongst the Irish to my knowledge,
this fifteen years since, was to happen this year, on which they do also
promise to themselves and others, the Introduction of the public exercise of
the Catholic Religion.


This was sent to Mr. John Altock, who lived in Gravel-lane in Shadwell and
negotiates the busi^ess of the Palatinate, and will produce the O^iginal if
there be occasion.

In a Letter to Sir John F^ederick and Mr. Nathaniel Terne, from Northampton,
the 8. of September 1666. subscribed Henry Chowne; wherein is mentioned: That
he the said Chowne had thoughts to come to London that week, but they we^e in
distraction concerning the Papists, fearing they would show themselves all that
day; and that he had been to search a Papists house, within six miles of that
place he with another Justice of the Peace met with the Gentleman's brother, who
is a Papist going to London, whom they searched, and found a Letter which he
had received coming from his Sister, twenty miles off from him, wherein is
expressed, That a great deal of business is in hand, not to be committed to
paper as the times are.

Bakers Information to Ducket, concerning John Goodman, about the destruction
of London.
Upon the 9. of September 1666. being the Sunday after the Fire began in the
Ci^y of London, one Henry Baker of Chipnam in the County of Wilts Butcher, came
and gave them this Information, That the Thursday Se'night before the Fire
began in London, it being his fortune, coming from the Devizes Market, to fall
into the company of one John Goodman Husbandman, who discoursing with him about
a Yoke of Oxen, as is inserted before in the Report.

The Information of one Cherrel Schoolmaster in Enfield.
Upon Friday August the 31. Mrs St. George and her eldest daughter Susan, both
Popish Recusants, came to visit Mrs. Rebeccah Eeves at her house in Enfield,
where speaking concerning the Session of the Parli^ment drawing near, Mrs. St.
George told her, That some were like to be called to account for a plot; being
asked for what? told her in her ear, For burning the City. When Mrs Eeves heard
of the Fire, and going to a place where she might see it, she met with Mrs.
Susanna St. George, and among other discourse, told her how much her mothers
words which she spoke before the Fire, did run in her thoughts, which she
repeated to her daughter; who made this reply, That her Mother was very apt to
talk, and that she had been forced to keep her Mother within doors during the
Fire, fearing that she should talk. After this destruction by fire, Mrs. Eeves
met with Mr. Coal, another Recusant, and one of the same Family; she also
related Mrs. St. Georges words to him; who made this return, That she was a
worthy woman to keep counsel. The Lady St. George at Enfield at the Lord of
Lincolns house, declared to M^s. Rebecca Eeves, That in few days the City of
London should be in ashes. This was spoken about Two days before the Fire
happened.

Mrs. Eeves of Enfield before Mr. Holland and Mr. Marvill, Members of
Parliament, December. 20. 1666 concerning Mrs. St. Gloege.
Mrs. Rebecca Eeves of Enfield, three or four days, or within a week before the
Fire, receiving a visit in her own house from Mrs. St. George, among other
discourse Mrs. St. George asked her, What news she heard? and if she knew when
the Parliament sat? She replied; She thought suddenly. The other asked, If
Mrs. Eeves heard of any that were to be called in question before the
Parliament?

Eeves About what?


St George. About a Plot.


Eeves. What Plot?


St. George. About firing the City.


Eeves. I hope God will preserve the City; people use not to be called in
question before the fact.


So that Discourse was waved at that time. At the time of the Fire Mrs. Eeves
went out to look toward the fire, and Mrs. St. George and one in the company
(but she cannot fix the person) replied, A fine woman to keep Counsel, after
the fire Mrs St. Georges daughter came to Mrs. Eeves house, Mrs. Eeves asked
her, if she remembered what her Mother said? who answered, My Mother is such a
woman she will speak what she thinks, And afterward said, That she had much
ado to keep her Mother in, in the time of the fire, for fear she should speak
something, that she might be questioned for, At this instant discourse Mrs.
Eeves daughter and others of her family were present St. George and his wife
and family have left Enfield about six weeks agone, and there are many more in
the Neighborhood: Its reported that at the House of Mr. Cook and other
Recusants there was great Coaching, drinking and rejoicing at the time of the
fire. December 20th. 1666.

Rebecca Eeves.

A Letter directed and sent by a Papist to Mr. Lamb, from Tarleton in
Lestershire, from a person unknown as follows.
My friend,
YOur presence is now more necessary at London then where you are, that you may
determine how to dispose of your Estate in Southwark, for it is determined by
humane Council (if not frustraed by divine power) that your Liberty will
shortly be destroyed; your capacity is large enough to understand; proceed as
your Genius shall instruct.

Vale, cave, cave, fuge.

The Liberty of Haring in the County of Essex.
The Information of Robert Hubert a Frenchman taken at Rumford the 11th. of
September 1666. before Carry Harvie, alias Milemay Esquire one of the Justices
of Peace for the Liberty of the County aforesaid.
HE says that about Midlent he came out of France, with one Stephen Pedilow a
Frenchman and stayed with Pedilow about four months as his Companion, and then
they came together into England in a Sweedish Ship, called the Skipper, which
was laden with Iron, Steel and Copper plates, and says, that the Masters name
of the Ship is also Skipper, and that Pedilow kept the Examinant on board that
Ship which lay at St. Ka^harines brewhouse, but Pedilow himself went several
times into the City and came on board again, and had often private discourse
with the said Master of the Ship, and says that when the City was on fire, he
this Examinant was sent out by Pedilow, who had given him a Fire ball, and bad
him fire an house near the Kings-Pallace, for which the said Pedilow gave him a
shilling, and promised him a greater Reward when he came into France which
fireball this said Examinant says, he fired and threw into the window of an
house near White Hall on Tuesday night, which fired the same house, and he
stayed there and saw it burn two or three hours; and farther says that
Pedilow, bad him not make use of this firebal till he saw the City on fire, and
then to do it, which he did accordingly, and then went to find the Ship, but it
was gone; and further says, that Pedilow had two fire balls himself, and the
said Examinant said, other diverse frenchmen have fireballs, and says also,
that when this Examinant came last to the Ship, the said Master directed him to
find his comrade Pedilow at his Chamber or Lodging, but at what house he
confessed not, and said that not finding the Ship aforesaid, he came this way
to go toward the Sea Coasts, in hope to find the said Ship, or some other to
get a passage home if be could.

Robert Hubert,

The Information of John Lowman, Keeper of his Majesty's Goal for the County
of Surry.
IN obedience to an order directed to me from the Right Honorable the Committy
of the House of Commons, then sitting in the Speakers Chamber the 20th of this
instant October 1666 on Thursday the 4th. of October, according to my order I
did carry Robert Hubert to St. Katharines-Tower by water to let me know where
the Sweedish Ship lay, that brought him and other Frenchmen from Stockholm, and
he brought me to the Dock, over against Mr. Corsellis his Brewhouse, and did
verify to me, and Mr. Corsellis, that the Ship lay there till such time, as he
with Mr. Pedilow and others, did go and set fire to Mr Farmers house; and the
Examinant says farther, that Mr. Pedilow did fix two fire balls to a long
pole, and that he the said Robert Hubert did six one in the same manner, and
did put it in at the same window, but withal the enquiry, and diligence I could
make and use, I could neither find, nor hear of any such Ship or Vessel; and
from thence I carried the said Robert Hubert to Tower Hill and desired him to
show me the house they did fire, and he said it was near the Bridge, but we
went along Thames Street, toward London b^idge, but before we came at the
Bridge, the said Robert Hubert said, the said house was up there; (and pointed
with his hand up Pudding-lane,) so I had him go to the place, and he went along
upon the Bricks and rubbish, and made a stand, then I asked one Robert Pain a
Porter, which was the Bakers house, and he told me that was the house where
Hubert stood, so I went to Robert Hubert and stood by him, turning my back
toward the Bakers house and demanded which house it was he fired, directing to
some house contrary to that house, but he turning himself about, said, This was
the house, (pointing to the Bakers house) that was first fi^ed; Then by reason
of his lameness, I set him on an horse and carried him to other places, but no
other place he would acknowledge but nodded back again to the Bakers house, and
said again, That was the Bakers house, pointing to the said Bakers house: And
this I do humbly certify, to the Honorable Committy by me John Lowman Keeper
of his Majesty's Goal, for the County of Surrey.

At the Committee appointed to receive Information touching the insolency of
Popish Priests, and insolency and increase of Popery.
Ordered that the several Informations precedent in persuance of the said power
of the Committee be reported to the House in reference to the Insolency of
Popish Priests, and insolency and increase of Papists.

AS to the increase of Popery Mr. Hancok Minister of Chillnock informs, that
meeting with one Mr. Tompson about a month since coming from Mass out of
Somerset House-Chapple, and discoursing with him about his Religion, asked him
if there were many turned lately, To which Mr. Tompson answered, Thousands, and
being demanded what encouragement was to it? Replied, There will be a change
suddenly.

The Report of his carriage at the Committee.
Mr. Tompson being summoned before the Committee, carried himself very
insolently, they have commanded me to report it, Being asked whether he had not
a Shop in Summerset house, where Popish books and Popish knacks are sold? He
said, He had, and that his men sold such Books and Beads and other things, and
said there was one Crucifix and new Relics, but wished he had some good, he
said he was a Roman Catholic, and thanked God for it, he said he was no
Priest, but wished he were in a capaci^y to be One, he said he had not taken
the O^ths of Alleagegeance and Supremacy, nor would he, he said he would take
any Oath that any Christian Prince should require, but not the Oath of
Allegiance, intimating some mixture in it, he said he had taken then the Oath
of Allegiance to the King of Spain, and was a Subject to him.

Mr, Ash minister of Cluppel in Surrey, Informs, That being at Cofield in
Lestershire this last Summer, he saw a great resort on sunday to Cofield-house,
the house of a Papist, and asking some that were going thither, what the
occasion of their resort thither was? they told him they were going to Mass,
and that one Mr. Robinson Priest, did say Mass, Mr. Ash did likewise inform,
that he thought the great number of those that went thither to Mass on Sunday
at that house, was as great as the Protestants that went to the Parish Church.

Mr. Wiling Deputy Ordinary of Middlesex, did inform, that (...) his accustomed
attendance on the Prisoners at Newgate about the time of Execution, that Romish
Priests and particularly one Mr. Harvey a Jesuit, have constantly used to
resort the Prison at those times, and do persuade the prisoners to become
Papists, and that diverse have been altered in their Religion by him, and turned
to Popery.

Mr. Hatton informs, that on the 6th of October, he went to Newgate, and
meeting with one Haward under Keeper at the door, desired to speak wi^h Hubert
the Frenchman, who was then condemned, Haward told him he could not speak with
him yet, for Mr. Harvey the Queen Mothers Confessor was in private with him,
and said, that this Harvey used frequently to come to the Prison after
Condemnation, and where one prisoner dyed a Protestant, many did dye Papists,
Mr. Hatton said, that after some stay he saw Mr. Harvey come out from Hubert,
and then he was admitted to have seen him.

Mr. Hawking Keeper of Newgate did Inform that the said M^. Harvey the Jesuit
did frequent the Prison under pretense of the Queens charity, and did spend
much time with the Prisoners in private, and particularly did so before last
Execution, night after night.

Mr Hawking said likewise, that of the Nine that suffered, eight dyed Papists
whereof some he knew were Protestants when they came into the Prison.

It appeared upon sevearl Infoamations, that Mr. Harvey and other Priests, did
not only resort to Newgate at times of Execution, but likewise to the
Whi^e-Lyon in Southwark, and other places in the Countries, and used their
endeavors to pervert dying Prisoners.

Thomas Barnet late a Papist informs, that when he was a Papist, and resorted
to Gentlemen's houses in Barkshire that were Papists, there was also in every
Gentleman's house a Papist Priest, and instanced the houses of diverse private
Gentlemen in that County, and others did inform the like in Surrey.

Mr Cottman did inform (that one Mr. Compert) late a Preacher at S. Hall, did
in discourse tell him the said Cottman, that the Judgments of God upon this
Kingdom by the Plague last year, and lately by the fire in London, were come
upon the Land and People, for their forsaking the true Roman Catholic
Religion, and shaking off their obedience to the Pope, and that if they would
return to the Church of Rome, the Pope would rebuild the City at his own
charge; Compert said likewise to the said Cottman, That if he would come and
hear him preach the next Sunday, at his house in Queens-street, he would give
twenty reasons to prove, that the Roman Catholic was the true Religion, and
his the false, and that one Bible had a thousand falsities in it, and that
there was no true Scripture but at Rome, and in their Church.

Compert at the Committee confessed, that he had formerly taken Orders from the
Church of Rome, but said he had now renounced that Church, and taken Orders in
England.

The next thing is the Information of their Insolency; and I shall begin with
their scorning and despising of the Bible.
ONe Thomas Williams, an Officer in Sir William Bowyers Regiment, informs, That
one Audley a Papist seeing a woman reading in a Bible, asked her why she read
in that profane Presbyterian Bible, and said, a Play-Book was as good.

Thomas Barret of Bingfield informs, That being at one Mr. Youngs house in
Bingfield, at Battlemew tide last, Mr. Young said to the brother of this Thomas
Barret, in his hearing, That within two years there should not be a Protestant
in England.

Thomas Barnet informs, That being at Mr. Doncasters house in Bingfield one Mr.
Shellers son in law to Mr. Doncaster, and both Papists, said to this Informant,
who was then likewise a Papist, The people take me for a poor fellow, but I
shall find a thousand or two thousand pounds to raise a party of Horse, to make
Mr. Hawthorns and Mr. Blackwels fat guts ly on the ground; for it is no more to
kill an Heretic, than to kill a Grasshopper; and that it was happy for this
Thomas Barnet that he was a Catholic, for by this means he should be one of
those that should be mounted.

Mr. Linwood a Scrivener in White-chappel, informs, That about the 20. of
October last meeting with one Badley a Papist, and discoursing with him, told
him, That there was amongst the Papists as great a Design as ever was in
England, and he thought it would be executed suddenly. Being asked how many
Papists there were about London? He answered, About seven thousand, and in
England an hundred thousand well armed.

Mr. Oaks his Affidavit.
Mr. Oaks a Physician dwelling in Shadwel, informs, That a little after the
burning of the City of London, one Mr. Carpenter a Minister came to his house
on Tower-wharf, and spoke to him to this purpose: I will not say I am a Papist,
but this I will say, I had rather die the death of the Papists, and that my soul
should be raised with their resurrection, than either of Presbyterian,
Independent or Anabaptist; and I tell you, the Papists have hitherto been his
Majesty's best Fortification; for when Presbyterians, Independents and
Anabaptists forsook and opposed him, they stood by him and helped him; and take
it on my word, the Papists in a short time, will lay you all as low as that
house; (pointing to an house that was demolished) for they are able to raise
Forty thousand men, and I believe, the next work will be cutting of throats.
This was sworn by Mr. Oaks, before Sir John Frederick member of the House.

Mr. Pilkington being present when the words were spoken, does affirm them all.

Henry Young a Distiller of Hot-waters, informs, That about the month of April
in the year 1661, being in the Jesuits College in Antwerp, one Powel an
English Jesuit persuaded him to turn a Roman Catholic, and said, That if he
intended to save his life and estate, he had best turn; for within seven years
he should see England of that Religion. Young replied, the City of London will
never endure it. Powel answered, That within five or six years they would
breeak, the power and strength of London in pieces, and that they had been
contriving it this twenty years. The said Young did likewise inform, that after
coming into England, one Thompson and one Copernel, both Papists, did several
times say to him, That within five or six years at farthest, the Roman
Catholic Religion should be all over this Kingdom.

Joseph Goodwin of Darking in the County of Surrey, informs, that about a month
since, one Edward Complin a Papist said to him, You must all be Papists
shortly, and that now he was not ashamed to own himself a Roman Catholic, and
to own his Priest, (naming two that were in Darking in the house with two
Papists) and likewise said, that in 24 hours warning the Papists or Roman
Catholics could raise thirty thousand men as well armed as any in Christendom.

William Weaver of Darking, informs, That the said Ed. Copernel did tell him,
The Roman Catholics in England, could in 24 hours raise 30000 Horse and arms;
and upon saying so, pulled out his Crucifix and Bedes, and said, He was not
ashamed of his Religion.

John Graunger of Darking, informs, that about a year since being in his house
reading the Bible, one Thomas Cooling, a Papist, said to him, Are you still a
Church-goer? Had you not better turn Roman Catholic? If you stay whilst you
are fetched, none will abide you. And said further, That there was a man beyond
the seas had prophesied, That in Anno 1666. if the King did not settle the
Roman Religion, in England, he would be banished out of the Kingdom, and all
his posterity. And Cooling further said, That he being lately turned a Roman
Catholic, he would not be a Protestant again for all the world; wishing
Graunger again, in the hearing of his Wife, (which she affirmed to the
Committee) to turn his Religion; for all the said Prophesies would come to pass
in the year 1666.

Robert Holloway of Darking aforesaid, informs, That one Stephen Griffin, a
Papist, said to him, That all the blood that was shed in the last civil War,
was nothing to that that would be shed this year in England. Holloway demanded
a reason thereof, in regard the Kingdom was in p^ace, and no likelihood of
trouble, and said, Do you Papists intend to rise and cut our throats when we
are asleep? Griffin answered, that it is no matter, if you live you shall see
it.

Ferdinand de Marcedo a Portugal, and some few years since a Roman Papist, but
turned Protestant, informs, That one Father Banto, a Jesuit, did the last year
tell him at Paris, That if all England did not return to the Church of Rome,
they should be destroyed the next year.

Mr. Samuel Wightman of the middle Temple, Barister, informs, That about two
years since, one Mr. Genison, a Pop^sh Priest, wished him to turn Catholic,
and he should want neither profit nor preferment, Mr. Wightman obj^cted, that
he intended to practice the Law, which he could not do if he turned Papist, for
he must take the Oath of Supremacy at his being called to the Bar, and if he
were a Papist he must not take it. Mr. Genison replied, Why not take the Oath?
It is an unlawful Oath and void ipso facto; And after some pause, said further;
First take the Oath, and then I will convert you; And further said, That the
King would not own himself Head of the Church; And also said, You in England
that set up the DUTCH to destroy our Religion, they shall be the men to PVLL
DOWN YOVRS.

Mun Stanley an Officer in the Duke of Ormonds own Regiment, informs, That
coming lately out of Ireland, and with him one Oriel, who owned himself of the
Order of Jesuits, and commissionated from the Pope to be Lord Primate of
Ireland and Archbishop of Armagh; Oriel discoursing with him, told him, That
there had been a difference between him and some others of the Jesuits in
Ireland, and that particularly one of the occasions was, that one Father Walsh
and some others of the Jesuits there, did dispense with the Papists in
Ireland, to take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, by virtue of a standing
Commission from the Pope they had, to do it during this Kings Reign; and Oriel
thought they ought not to do it by virtue of the standing Commission, but
should take a new Commission from the Pope every year to do it. And said
likewise, That he brought Eight Boys out of Ireland to carry to Flanders to
breed up in the Colleges. And at his taking ship to go into Flanders, he shook
his feet toward England, and termed it Egypt, and said, He would not return to
England, till he came with Fifty thousand at his heels.

FINIS.

