
WHEREAS diverse Persons rudely disposed, within this City, have of late years
been observed to behave themselves in an uncivil and insolent manner toward
Persons of Quality; by means whereof diverse that would otherwise be forward to
come within the City for supply of their Occasions, are forced to repair to
other Places, least they should suffer here by the Violence and Rudeness that
is too often committed and acted in the Streets of this City, to the great
Scandal and Disreputation of the Government, as well as Prejudice and Loss of
the Trade and Commerce of this City. These are therefore by the Advice of my
Brethren the Aldermen and the Commons of this City in Common Council assembled;
in His Majesty's Name straightly to charge and command all Persons within this
City and the Liberties thereof, as they will answer the contrary at their
utmost Perils, to behave themselves at all times in a civil and orderly manner,
with due Respect and Regard to all Persons of Quality, Ladies and Gentlemen,
that shall think fit to repair at any time to this City upon their Occasions.

And because the Misdemeanors and Rudeness of Car-men, Dray-men and other
Persons hereafter mentioned committed in the Streets are too notorious: These
are therefore straightly to command, That from henceforth no Car-man, Dray-man
or other person with a Car or Cart or the like, do presume to run against or
obstruct any Gentleman's Coach in their Passage in any the Streets of this City,
but give them full space and freedom of Passage without the least Disturbance,
Affront or Injury to be offered to them, their Servants, Horses or Coaches.

And also that Tankard-Bearers, Porters, and other Persons laden with Burdens
or of inferior Quality do forbear to run against, justle or offer the least
uncivil Action to Persons of better Quality, and that they do constantly give
them place in their passage on foot through the Streets.

And all Vagrants, Beggars and other idle and lewd Persons are hereby enjoined
not to presume to place themselves in, or wander about any the Streets and
public Passages of this City. And all Constables and other Officers are hereby
charged and required to intercept and apprehend all such Persons, and deal with
them according to the Law in that behalf.

And whereas throwing of Squibs, Fireworks, Football Play and the like, are
at certain Seasons frequently practiced by Apprentices and others in the
Streets, which is a great Grievance and Annoyance to the public Passages of
this City, Whereby much Mischief is often done, and is an occasion of great
Fear to Passengers. These are therefore further to command all Apprentices and
other young Persons to forbear from time to time all such rude Practices.

And that all Masters of Families do look to and secure their Sons, Apprentices
and Servants in the well ordering of themselves and giving due Obedience
hereunto.

And all Persons are to take notice, that the Observation hereof is strictly
required. And all Offenders in any the particulars beforementioned shall
suffer the utmost Penalties can be inflicted upon them.

Given at Guild Hall, this Five and Twentieth day of March, 1673. and in the
Five and Twentieth Year of His Majesty's Reign.
God save the King.
Printed by Andrew Clark, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON.


