LONDONS LAMENTATION.

Or a fit admonishment for City and Country, Wherein is described certain
causes of this affliction and visitation of the Plague, year 1641. which the
Lord has been pleased to inflict upon us, and withal what means must be used
to the Lord, to gain his mercy and favor, with an excellent spiritual
medicine to be used for the preservative both of Body and Soul.

Londons Charity
the Countries Cruelty


London, Printed by E. P. for John Wright Junior. 1641.

LONDONS LAMENTATION:
Or a fit admonishment for City and Country.
O Lovely London, the beauty of England, and admiration of the world, leave off
thy haughty pride, and ambition, and put on thy suit of Repentance, and
Humility, for thy people have broken their peace with the mighty Champion the
Almighty God and governor of us all, his sword is drawn against us, and what
is the cause? Alas it is the multitude of our sins; how many times has our
gracious God been pleased to forgive us, in hope of our amendment? But alas,
it is soon forgotten and out of mind! there are but few living about the City
of London, that are of any age but may remember the time of dolor and woe, that
was in and about this City of London, some eleven years since, and since that
again, God made a proffer to give us warning: O do but think how death did
then play his part, the clamor of Bells sounded mournfully in our ears, to
call some or other to their last home, and our hearts always trembling for
fear of our selves, our eyes weeping for the loss of our friends, wheresoever
we went, griefs and lamentations were our companions: sighs and sobs our
comforters, whilst woe and misery were our daily objects: the dross of this
world was then worth naught, we would have given all we had, so that we
might have bribed death and taken any condition for longer life: but no man
might ransom himself, or redeem his brother; the raging Pestilence took
away the rich with the poor, the young with the aged, leaving our houses
desolate, did fill our sepulchers with the dead: what heart of stone was there
whose eyes were spectators of this woeful sight, and did not mourn and shed
tears, but all this was soon forgotten, for truly I think I may say with a
safe conscience, that in a twelve month after, the sins of the people was
grown as great as they were before: thus in former time he has laid his hand
of visitation upon us, in hope to make us amend our lives, but now alas, we do
exceed the former time, in our abominable profaneness, even our drunkenness,
whoredom, swearing, despising of Gods Word, contemning of his Ordinances, our
dissolut Sabbath-breaking, all which does cause the very earth to mourn, the
beasts of the field to repine, and the comfortable Sun which sometimes does
make the grass and flowers to spring, is now ready to burn them all away, if
God should go to justice and pass judgment upon us according to our deserts,
we should be utterly consumed, but he with a merciful visitation does warn
us to repentance, therefore return O London, and put on thy mourning garment,
that thy neighbors round about thee, may be provoked to commiserate thee in
this thy affliction. For, what earthly Judge living in the whole world is
there, that will always show favor to an extraordinary malefactor? or, what
earthly King will always give pardon to a rebellious subject? and shall the
mighty King of Kings always give pardon to us that are rebellious sinners? Now
seeing it is apparent that sin is the cause of sickness: It may appear as
plainly that prayer must be the best means to procure health and safety, let
not our security and slothfulness give death opportunity, what man or woman
will not seem to start, at the sign of the red Cross, as they pass by to
and fro in the streets? and yet being gone they think no more on it. It may
be they will say, such a house is shut up, I saw the red cross on the door
but look on thine own guilty conscience, and thou shall find thou have a
multitude of red crimson sins remaining in thee, thou can spy the mote in
thy brothers eye, but thou can not see the beam in thine own eye* if thou
see thy neighbor punished with Gods angry visitation, do thou fall to
prayer for fear the Lord lay the like on thee, suppose thou were at Sea and
see thy neighbors drowned before thy face, by reason of the storms and
tempests, wilt not thou presently seem to pull in thy sails and escape
drowning if thou can possibly? yes sure, I think thou will, do thou see
thy neighbors house on fire? it behooves thee to be careful of thine own:
in like manner, it behooves one and all of us, to be careful at this time,
let others harms be our arms, for God has sent forth his Angel of wrath,
and nothing can appease him but prayers, we must sprinkle out cheeks with
tears, as the children of Israel did the posts of their doors with the blood
of the Paschall Lamb: Let us turn to the Lord with fasting, weeping and
mourning, it is he that must be our Physician, for there is no help in any
mortal man, but only in God: if the Lord should strike us with famine, that
were a thing would torment us ten times more, or if the Lord should give us
over to the hand of our enemies, that were a thing most lamentable, do but
think what care and dolor appertains thereto, would it not grieve any
Christian to see their goods distributed before their faces themselves, like to
be murdered, or their poor Infants slain before their eyes? O this is a
thing most lamentable and full of fear: but thanks be given to God, we are not
troubled with no such thing, nor I hope never shall be. It is our sins have
made this breach with God, and it must be our Prayers that must stop this
breach, therefore let all good Christians pray to Almighty God to cease this
visitation.

Good people all pray, fast and pray,
That is the chief and only way,
'Twill cause the Lord his wrath to stay,
Let this be done, use no delay.
Now death does play an envious part,
He strikes full many to the heart,
Yet from grim death never soome to start,
It Is God that may release our smart.
Leave off to sin, and sin no more,
Repent in time thy sins deplore,
Death now is ready at thy door,
It Is time thy sins for to give ore.
Now learn to live as thou would dye,
And to the Lord for mercy cry,
Mind thou the Lord which rules on hie,
So die to live eternally.
A special or spiritual medicine for this time of infection or any other time.
FIrst, let the Patient that is in danger of any infection or any other
disease, take and use this spiritual medicine, first in the morning when thou
arisest out of thy bed, fall down on thy knees, and give God thanks, that he
has preserved thee the night past from all dangers, and desire him of his
mercy, to preserve thee the day following, bless his holy name and magnify
him, for he is thy maker, and thou art his creature, thus pass away the day
in the service of the Lord, and at night when thou lie down to sleep, desire
the Lord to be thy keeper and defender, arm thy self with Faith, Hope, and
Charity, be sure let no envy remain in thee to terrify thy conscience, the
best thing to prevent envy is Patience, and that will strenghten thee against
all the assaults of Satan, the World, the Flesh, or the Devil: let not the
poison of covetousness, rest in thy bosom, hate pride, for it is an
abomination unto the Lord, use no idolatry, lying or swearing, for those are
evils that proceed from the Devil, let thy dealings be just and true, let thy
heart imagine no evil, and set thy tongue speak the truth: strive to do that
which is good, and let it tend to the glory of the Lord, feed the hungry, cloth
the naked, comfort the afflicted, and thy reward will be great in heaven, and
having done all this which be fits each true Christian for to do, thou may
sleep securely, and rise in this morning speedily, serve the Lord willingly,
and praise his name thankfully, stand up courageously, fight Gods battle,
manfully bear all crosses boldly, suffer sorrows patiently, so may thou
live everlastingly, and gain heaven eternally, which God of his mercy grant us
when we die, Amen: let all men say the same.

A necessary prayer for this time of visitation.
O Eternal and everlasting God, we poor sinful and sorrowful creatures do
here prostrate our selves before thy Divine Majesty, beseeching thee to behold
us poor sinful creatures, here in the City of London, we have sinned O Lord,
we have grievously offended thee, not knowing how to plead to thee for mercy,
but we know thy Mercy does much exceed thy Justice: yet Lord we cannot say,
that thou do use any injustice in punishing in for our sins, for O Lord we
must needs confess our sins cry loud in thy ears for vengeance, but Lord be
graciously pleased to show us mercy, we are now hated and despised of all the
country people round about us, good Lord look on them with the eyes of mercy
and have compassion on us, and forgive us for thy Son Jesus Christ his sake,
let his crimson blood wash away our scarlet sins, Lord write our names in the
Book of life, and blot our sins out of thy remembrance give us thy grace to
amend our lives, that we may be heartily sorry for our sins committed, and
sin no more for fear aworse evil happen unto us.

FINIS.

