By the Mayor.
WHereas by neglect of executing the good Laws and Statutes against Rogues,
Vagabonds, and Sturdy beggars That vermin of this Common wealth does now
swarm in and about this City and Liberties, disturbing and annoying the
inhabitants and Passengers, by hanging upon Coaches, and clamarous begging at
the doors of Churches and private Houses and in the Streets and common ways;
veguiling the modest, laborious and honest poor, (the proper objects of
Charity) of much releife and Alms which otherwise might be disposed to them
by bountiful and well minded people: And by this means and their corrupt and
profane communication, do bring dishonor to God, scandal to Religion, and
shame to the Government of this City: And for as much as it is intended and
resolved that for Reformation of this living Nuisance, the said Laws and
Statutes shall be henceforth duly and strictly executed within this City and
Liberties thereof, and the penaltyes and punishments thereby appointed, imposed
and inflicted upon all Persons offending against the same: I do therefore give
notice thereof, And in the name of his Highness the Lord Protector, do hereby
require and Command all Constables and other Officers and Persons whatsoever
within this City and Liberties, to be diligent and watchful about their
duties herein: For better information whereof and that none may excuse himself
by pretense of ignorance, I have caused some branches of the said Statutes of
most Common concernment to be added hereunto, expecting that accordingly every
Constable do presently apprehend (and so continue to do during his said
Office) all such Rogues, Vagabonds and Sturdy beggars as shall be found in his
parish or precinct, or shall be brought or sent to him by any of his
Neighbors, and to send to Bridewell the place of Correction) such of them as
live within this City and Liberties, who are there to be received and dealt
withal according to Law; and such as live not within the Liberties aforesaid,
to whipp and pass away to the place of their dwelling or last abode. And that
all other Persons do apprehend or cause to be apprehended all such as they
shall see or know to resort to their houses to receive or beg any Alms, and
carry or cause them to be carried to the next Constable, And that in all other
things they give that furtherance to this work as by the Law is required. And
further I do hereby require all and every the said Constables, to the end
their dwellings may be the better known and more readily found, that they have
their staves see or fired at their street doors, plainly to be seen by all
Passengers. And moreover, that on the first Wednesday in every month at four
of the Clock in the afternoon, they deliver in to the Corporation for the
poor at Weavers Hall, a list of the names and firnames of all such Rogues and
Beggars as shall by them respectively be apprehended, whipped and passed away,
with the time when and the place to which they are sent. As they will answer
the contrary at their perils. Dated the Twenty third day of January 1655.

To all and every the Constables within the City of London and Liberties
thereof. Sadler.

39 Eliz. cap. 4.
EVery Rogue, Vagabond, or Sturdy Beggar that shall be taken begging, vagrant,
wandering, or misordering themselves, shall be apprehended by any Constable of
the Parish where such Person shall be taken, and be stripped naked from the
middle upwards and be openly whipped, till his or her body be bloody and
shall be forthwith sent from Parish to Parish by the said Officer, the next
straight way to the Parish where he was b^rn, if the same may be known by the
parties confession or otherwise, And if the same be not known, then to the
Parish where be or she last dwelt, before the same punishment, by the space
of one whole year, or if it be not known where he or she was borne, or last
dwelt, then to the Parish to which he or she last passed without punishment
etc.

39 Eliz. cap. 4.
If any Constable be negligent and do not his and their best endeavors for
the apprehension of such Vagabond, Rogue, or Sturdy beggar, and to cause every
of them to be punished and Convayed as aforesaid, then the Constable in whom
such default shall be, shall loose and forfeit for every such default Ten
shillings.

39 Eliz. cap. 4
. Also if any Person do disturb or let the execution of this Law, or make
rescusse against any Officer or Person authourised for the due execution of the
premises, such Person offending shall forfeite for every such offense five
pounds, and be bound to the good behavior.

1 lac. cap. 7.
Every Person or Persons shall apprehend or cause to be apprehended, such
Rogues, Vagabonds and Sturdy beggars as he or they shall see or know to resort
to their houses to beg, gather, or receive any Alms, and him or them shall
carry or cause to be carried to the next Constable, upon pain to forfeit for
every default Ten shillings.

1 lac. cap. 7.
And if such Constable do not cause the said Rogues, Vagabonds and Sturdy
beggars to be punished and Convayed as aforesaid, such Constable shall forfeit
and loose the sum of Twenty shillings for every default.

Printed by James Flesher Printer to Honorable City of LONDON.


