arms arms By the Mayor.
WHereas in Order to the Re-building of the City, and before any further
Progress can be effectually made in that most Considerable Affair, it is of
Absolute Necessity, that a Just Survey and Mensuration be had and taken of all
Foundations of Houses and other Buildings, destroyed in the late Dismal Fire,
for the stating and ascertaining of every ones Interest and Propriety: And to
the making of this Survey and Admeasurement, it is as necessary that the said
Foundations be first made clear and naked from Rubbish, without which no Artist
can perform this Service to every Man's right and just satisfaction; which
hitherto, how earnestly soever the same has been pressed and persuaded by
former Precepts, has been almost totally neglected, to the great
Discouragement of the Magistrates, and retarding of those Proceedings, which
otherwise by Gods Blessing, His Majesty's, and the Parliaments Favor and
Assistance, and the Endeavors of good Citizens, had by this time far prevailed
toward a beginning of this Work. Upon all which, My Self, and my Brethren the
Aldermen, with the Commons in Common Council Assembled, seriously reflecting,
and withal considering what further Discouragements, Damages, and
Inconveniences, more Delays and Loss of Time may bring upon this Affair;
which needs to be quickened and kept in heart by Speedy, Active, and Vigorous
Management and Prosecution: Having also Advised how the said Survey may be
soonest taken, and with most Ease, least Charge, and fullest Security to every
Proprietor; did Yesterday the Ninth Day of this instant October, Agree a^^
Order:

First, That all Proprietors of the late Houses consumed by Fire, shall for the
Purposes beforementioned, cause the Foundations, every One of his Own House,
to be cleared from Rubbish, and the Bricks and Stones of every such House, to
be conveniently for his Own Use in Re-building, piled up, within Fourteen
Days, now next ensuing.

Secondly, That the said Surveys and Admeasurement of Foundations be presently
after such Avoidance and Clearing of the Rubbish, and Pileing up of the Bricks
and Stones, taken in hand, and carried on with all Speed and Effect, by the
Care and Management of Doctor Wr^n, and Mr. (...) Hook, Reader of the
Mathematics in Gresham College (who are willing to undertake the same) in
Concurrence with the City-Artificers, who are appointed to be assistant in this
Service.

Thirdly; That there shall be allowed to the Surveyors who shall be assigned to
every Ward, for the Survey and Measuring the said Foundations, and to the Clerk
and Beadle, or other that shall be appointed to attend them for the orderly and
methodical entering and registring the same Surveyes and Measures, viz. for
every Foundation Eighteen pence, to be paid by every respective Proprietor, and
divided betwixt the said Surveyors, Clerks, and Beadles, or others, in such
proportion as shall be agreed and directed by the said Undertakers. Nor is any
man to be grieved, that there is the same rate and allowance made for small and
lesser Houses, as there is for large and greater, considering that the trouble
of Surveying and Registring a small House, is upon the matter, if not
altogether, one and the some, or as much as of a greater: And that the rate is
in it self so moderate and easy, that the least House without this care and
provision, could not be Surveyed and Registered, but at a much greater charge.

Fourthly, and Lastly, That when the Surveyors shall begin in every Ward,
timely notice thereof be given by the Surveyors, that all Proprietors may
attend to evidence and assert their own Ground and Interest. And that the
Alderman, Deputy, and Common-Councillmen (or some of them will be likewise
present) may see to the indifferent and impartial carriage of the matter for
every man's right and satisfaction.

I do therefore, by advise of my Brethren the Aldermen, hereby publish and
declare the said Orders made in Common Council for the accelerating and
promoting of this great Concernment; requiring in His Majesty's Name, all
persons concerned to apply themselves presently to the clearing of the said
Rubbish, and in all other things to give their ready obedience to the said
Orders and Directions, as they wish the restoration of the City to its former
State and Glory, and the preservation of their own particular Right and
Interest, (which must otherwise suffer) and will answer the contrary at their
uttermost perils.

Dated the 10th. day of October 1666. Weld.

Printed by James Flesher, Printer to this Honorable City.


