THE ADDRESS OF THE LORD MAYOR, Aldermen and Common Council Of the City of
LONDON, To the Honorable, the House of Commons, The 13th Day of March, 1688.
Together with the Answer of the Right Honorable HENRY POWLE, Esquire, Speaker
to the House of Commons, thereunto.

March 14. 1688.
I do hereby appoint Joseph Watts, to print the Address of the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London, presented to the House of
Commons the 13th instant; together with the Answer given to them by their
Speaker, at the same time,

H. Powle, Speaker.



LONDON, Printed for Joseph Watts, at the Angel in S. Paul's Churchyard, M DC
LXXX IX.

Die Mercurii, 13 March 1688.
THis Day Sir H. Edwyn, and Sir Tho. Fleet, Sheriffs of the City of London
Attended the House of Commons, with an Address from the Lord Mayor, Aldermen
and Common Council of the said City; which they presented at the Bar of the
said House, and was as follows;

To the Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in Parliament Assembled.
WE, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons of the City of London, in Common
Council Assembled, presume to Address our selves to this Honorable House, with
our most Humble Thanks for your Excellent Conduct of Affairs in this Time of
our great Exigency and Extremity, when our Lives, our Religion, and our Estates
were so eminently threatened; and especially for the Address to His Majesty the
5th. Instant: Declaring your Resolution to assist and stand by His Majesty, in
supporting His Allies abroad, in reducing Ireland, and in Defense of the
Protestant Religion, and Laws of this Kingdom.

Dated at Guild Hall, the 8th. of March, 1688. By Order of the Common Council,
Wagstaff.

After their being withdrawn some short Time, the Sheriffs were called in
again, and the Speaker gave them this Answer.

Mr. Sheriffs,
THE House has considered of the Address you have Presented from the City of
London, and have commanded me to return you this Answer; That they have taken
Notice of the most Eminent Courage and Constancy the City has showed in this
late Revolution, and the Services they have done to the whole Kingdom on this
Occasion, and particularly, the advancing so considerable a Sum of Money, as was
lent by you to His Majesty, upon His first coming hither, at a Time, when the
Condition of the Affairs of this Kingdom did so much require it.

I am further Commanded to tell you, That this House does accept of your
Address with great Kindness, and do give you their hearty Thanks for the same;
with this further Assurance, That your Care for the Public shall never fail of
receiving from them the like returns.

FINIS.

