Levett blazon or coat of armsMayor.
Jovis decimo quarto die Decembris, 1699. Annoque Regni Regis WILLIELMI Tertij,
Angliae, etc. Undecimo.
WHEREAS notwithstanding several good and wholesome ORDERS of this COURT
heretofore made for the Prevention of Forestalling, Regrating and other Abuses
in the Fish-market of Billingsgate, diverse Frauds and Exactions are yet there
daily practiced, which is much occasioned by the Remisness of Officers in
putting the said Orders in Execution. Now for the better Remedying and
Preventing such Evil Practices for the time to come, it is Ordered by this
Court, that the Hours heretofore limited for the Opening and Beginning of the
Fish-market at Billingsgate, shall hereafter be strictly observed (That is to
say) from Lady Day to Michaelmas, to begin at Four of the Clock in the Morning;
and from Michaelmas to Lady Day at Six of the Clock in the Morning; and that
the said Markets for the ^uture shall from Lady Day to Michaelmas end at Eight
of the Clock in the Evening; and from Michaelmas to Lady Day at Six of the
Clock in the Evening; And that the said respective Times for Beginning and
Ending the said Market may be the better known and observed, It is Ordered that
the Market-Bell there shall be constantly rung by the Yeomen of the Waterside,
at the respective Hours aforesaid; And it is also Ordered, That if any Person
shall before the said respective Hours of Four and Six in the Morning presume
to Buy, Sell or Expose to Sale in the said Market any Sort of Fish (except
Herrings, Sprats, Mackerel and Shellfish) every such Offender shall be
proceeded against, as a Forestaller of the Market, as by the Laws now in force
against Forestalling and Regrating is directed and appointed.

And the Yeomen of the Waterside are hereby strictly enjoined every Morning
and Evening to ring the said Bell precisely at the Hours aforesaid; and that
the said Yeoman and Under-Waterbailiff do carry all Persons that shall Buy or
Sell, or Expose to Sale Fish there, contrary to this present ORDER, before the
Right Honorable the Lord Mayor for the time being, or some other of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for this City, to be bound over, and prosecuted
according to Law.

And that the Mischiefs and evil Practices intended to be remedied by a late
Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for making Billingsgate a Free-Market for
Sale of Fish, may be effectually prevented. It is further Ordered, That if any
Person or Persons whatsoever shall employ or be employed by any other Person or
Persons to contract or buy in or at the said Market any Quantity of Fish, to
the intent to be divided by Lots, or in Shares amongst any Fishmongers or other
Persons, in order to be put to Sale by Retail, or otherwise; or if any shall
Ingross or Buy in or out of the said Market, any Quantity of Fish other than
what shall be for his own private Use, or for Sale in his or her own Shop or
Shops, that then the Yeomen of the Waterside and Under-Water-Bayliff, or one
of them shall give Information thereof, and prosecute every such Offender or
Offenders, accordding to the Directions of the said Act; And if any of the said
Officers shall be remiss or negligent in putting this ORDER in due Execution,
he or they shall be proceeded against with the utmost Severity.

And that no Person shall or may pretend Ignorance hereof, it is Ordered, that
this ORDER be forthwith Printed, Published and set up in the most Public
Places at Billingsgate aforesaid, and be so continued from time to time by the
Officers of this City attending the said Market.

Goodfellow.

Printed by Samuel Roycroft, Printer to the Honorable City of LAND0N, 1699.


