London's FLAMES: Being an Exact and Impartial ACCOUNT OF Diverse Informations
Given in to the COMMITTEE of PARLIAMENT, By Diverse Members of Parliament, and
many other Persons of Quality (whose Names are inserted in this Book)
Concerning the Dreadful Fire of LONDON in the Year 1666. and the many other
strange Fires which have happened since.

Together with what was said by Mr. Langhorn, now a Prisoner, and Condemned for
the Horrid Popish Plot, concerning the Great FIRE.

Wherein is plainly proved, That the PAPISTS were the Contrivers and Actors in
the Burning of that GREAT and NOBLE CITY.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1679.

INFORMATIONS Given in before the Committee, etc.
In a Letter from Alanzon, of the 23d of August, New Style, Written from one
Dural, to a Gentleman lodging in the House of a Minister of the French-Church
in London, called Monsieur Heralt, were these Expressions, viz.
PRAY acquaint me with the Truth of certain News, which is common in this
Country, that Fire from Heaven is fallen upon a City called Balke, situate on
the side of the River of Thames; where a world of People have been killed and
burned, and Houses also consumed. This name was given to London by its
Godfather Cabal, who thereby inform their own, but amuse the adverse Party.

Mrs. Elizabeth Styles says, That in April last, in an angry dispute she had
with a French Servant of Sir Vere Vane's, he hastily replied, You English
Maidens will like the Frenchmen better, when there is not an House left
between London Bridge and Temple Bar, which she answering, I hope your Eyes
will never see that, He replied, This will come to pass between June and
December.

William Tisdale informs, that he being, about the beginning of July, at the
Greyhound in St. Martins, with one Fitz-Harris an Irish Papist, He heard him
say; There shall be sad Desolation in September, and in November a worse. For
in December all will be united into one; hereupon Tisdale asking where this
Desolation would be, the said Priest answered him, in London.

Mr. Lite of Ratcliff, having some Discourse with one Mr. Langhorne of the
middle Temple, Barrister, reputed a zealous Papist, about February last; after
some Discourse in disputing about Religion, he took him by the hand and said to
him, You expect great things in 1666. and think that Rome will be destroyed;
but what if it be London?

One Kiteley of Barking in Essex, informs, that one Yaxley a Papist, of Ilford
in the said County, came into their House August the 13th. who falling into
Discourse with his Mother, said, They say that next Thursday, will be the
hottest day that ever was in England. She replied, I hope the hottest Season of
the year is now past. To which he answered; I know not whether it be the
hottest for Weather or Action: The said Yaxley, coming to the same House, the
week after the Fire, Mr. Kitely said to him with some trouble; I have often
thought upon your hot Thursday, To which she replied, It was not indeed upon
the Thursday but it happened upon the Sunday come sevennnigt after; Mr. Yaxley
bearing these Evidences produced against her, prompted her to avoid the words,
saying, that upon the 13th of August, she did tell Mr. Kitely, That they say
next Thursday, will be the darkest Thursday, that ever was in England, but not
otherwise; Which she affirms to have received from one Fynchman. An old Woman
of Ilford, who next being examined before a Justice of Peace, to discover the
Truth thereof, denied that ever she said any such words to Mrs. Yaxley, or that
she had any discourse with her about any such Matter; as to the subsequent
words she the said Yaxley denied ever to have spoken them, but Mr. Kitely
offered in her Presence, if it should be demanded, to bring his Mother and Wife
to testify the same.

William Ducket Member of the House, Informs that one Henry Baker of Chipnam,
in the County of Wilts, coming from Market with one John Woodman of Rolloway in
the same County, the Thursday before the Fire began in London, they had some
Discourse about buying a Yoke of fat Bullocks, which Woodman was to sell, and
was desired by Baker to keep them a while in his hands, but Woodman replied
that he would not stay so long in the County, whereupon Baker demanding whither
he was going? he refused to tell; asking, What he had to do to ask that
Question? And riding a little farther, the said Woodman expressed these words;
You brave Blades of Chipnam, you made Bonfires lately for beating the Dutch,
but since you delight in Bonfires, you shall have your belly full of them ere
it be long; adding, that if he lived but one week longer, he should see London
as sad a London as ever it was since the World began, and in some short time
after, he should see as bloody a time in England, as ever was since England was
England: This discourse was not much taken notice of at that time when it was
spoken; but when the City of London was burning, the said Baker gave this
Imformation to the said Ducket; hereupon was issued out a Warrant to apprehend
Woodman, but he was gone out of the Country, and cannot be yet heard of.

Robert Hubert, of Roan in Normandy, confessed that he was one of those that
fired the House of Mr. Farmer a Baker in Pudding-Lane, from whence the Fire had
its beginning; and also says, that he came out of France with one Stephen
Pedilow, about four Months before the Fire began in London, and went into
Sweedland with him, where he stayed also with him as his Companion four
Months, and then they came together into England in a Sweedish Ship, called
the Skipper, where he stayed on Board with the said Pedilow, till that Saturday
night on which the Fire broke out, where Pedilow taking him out of the Ship,
carried him into Pudding-lane, and he being earnest to know whither he was
carrying him, he would not satisfy him, till he brought him to the Place, and
then he told him that he had brought three Balls, and gave him one of them into
his hand to throw into the House, but he desiring further Satisfaction about
that Design before he proceeded, Pedilow began to chaff and would not hear him,
seeing which, Hubert consents, and according to his Orders puts the Fire-ball
to the end of a long Pole, which after he had lighted it with a Match, he put
it in at the Window, and there staid till he saw the House on a flame; to this
Fact he confesses three Accomplices whereof Pedilow to be chief.

Mr. Graves, a French Merchant, living in St. Mary Ax, informs; That he had
known Hubert ever since he was four year old, and he ever observed him to be a
Person of a mischievous inclination, and therefore fit for any villainous
enterprise, and because of the knowledge he had of him, he went to visit him in
Prison; when he saw him, he could not but commiserate his condition, whereinto
he had brought himself; and for his better discovery of the Fact, he told him
the said Hubert, that he did not believe that he had done that Fact which he
had confessed himself guilty of, to which Hubert replied, Yes, I am guilty of
it; and have been brought to it by the Instigation of Pedilow, and not out of
any malice to the English Nation, but from a desire of that Reward he promised
me, upon my return into France. [It is observable, that this miserable
Creature, who confessed himself before the Commissioners to be a Protestant,
was a Papist, and dyed so;] and as to the aforesaid Pedilow, the said Mr.
Graves informs, that he had a full knowledge of him, and knew him to be a very
debauched Person, and ready to any wicked Design; and moreover, for a clearer
conviction of the guilt of the foresaid Hubert, Lowman the Keeper of the White
Lion was commanded to set him upon an Horse, and go with him, to see if he
could find out the place where he threw the Fire-ball; upon which Hubert, with
more readiness than those who were well acquainted with the place, went to
Pudding-lane, where the very House which was first fired stood, saying, Here
stood the House; the Jailer did endeavor do draw him off from that Belief, and
put him upon seeking for some other place, but he positively persisted in what
he first said, and affirmed that to have been the said house. It being
intimated to the Committee, that notwithstanding the Confession of the said
Hubert, it was confidently reported, that the Fire in the forementioned Farmer
his house began by accident, so the Commissioners sent for the said Farmer
before them, who being examined, said, That it was impossible that any Fire
should happen in his House by Accident, for that, after twelve of the clock at
Night, he had gone through every Room thereof, and found no fire but in one
Chimney, where the Room was paved with Brick, which fire he raked up in the
Embers: He was then asked, Whether no Window or Door might let in Wind to
displace those Coals? He affirmed, That it could not be conceived that Wind
should there disturb them, but rather that it was absolutely set on fire on
purpose.

Dawes Williamson Esquire, one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, informs,
That he saw a man apprehended near the Temple, with his pocket stuffed with
combustible matter, made of Flax and Tow, and such like stuff.

Dr. John Parker informs, That he saw a Person throw some Combustible matter
into a shop in the Old Bayley, which he thinks was the shop of an Apothecary;
that immediately thereupon he saw a great smoke, and smel't, as it were, the
smell of Brimstone; that the person that did this immediately ran away, but
upon the outcry of the People he was taken by the Guard.

Randal Harsland and Humphry Bowyer, they both agree, that they saw a Person
fling something into a House near St. Antholins Church, and that thereupon the
House was on fire, and the smoke thereof filled the House on the other side of
the way; and when this was done, there was no fire near by a quarter of a mile.

Michael March, an Officer of the Trained-Bands, in a Company of Sir Richard
Brown's, apprehended a woman in the time of the Fire, at the Nags-head in
Leaden-hall-street, with an Instrument like a dark Lanthorn, made, as is
conceived, to lay a Train of Powder, and it was filled with Gunpowder, (there
were two more in her Company) they being asked for what Use they employed the
said Instrument, they would give no account thereof.

Nawson Killingworth Esquire, informs, that he apprehended a Person during the
Fire, about whom he found much combustible matter, and certain black things of
a large Figure, which he could not endure to hold in his hand by reason of
their extreme Heat; this Person was so surprised at first, that he could not
answer to any question, but being on his way to White Hall, he acted the part
of a Madman, so continuing while he was present with him.

Sir John Maynard, a Member of this House, informs, he had some of that
Combustible matter in his hand, and though it was in its Natural consistency
unfired, yet the Heat was scarce to be endured by the touch.

Mr. Freeman of Southwark Brewer, whose House there was lately burned, informs,
that the same day his House was fired, about a quarter of an hour before three,
was found a paper with a Ball of Wildfire, containing near a pound wrapped up
in it, in the nave of a wheel, in an outer house, where lay a great quantity of
Timber; how this house was fired he knows not; but this he affirms to the
Committee, it could not be by accident, because there had not been any Candle
or Fire in the House where the Hay lay, that whole day; and the Hay being laid
up before Midsummer very dry, it could not possibly be set on fire within it
self; and moreover, he said, the Hay-loft was on fire on the top of the House,
and that the Fire spread from one end of the Roof to the other in an instant.

Mr. Richard Harwood says, That he being near the Feathers Tavern by St.
Paul's, on the fourth of September, something like Wildfire by the sparkling
and spitting of it, appeared, whereof he gave notice to some Soldiers there,
who caused it to be quenched.

A LETTER.
SIR,
HEaring that you are Chairman of the Committee, for examining the Firing of
London; I thought good to acquaint you with this Information that I have
received. William Champress Hat-band maker, now living on Horsey-down, was on
Tuesday morning September 4th 1666. in Shoe-lane, and there met with a
Constable, who had apprehended a Frenchman, whom he had taken firing an House
with Fireballs, and charged the said Champress to assist him; he carried the
said Frenchman to Salisbury Court, but finding that burning down, he went into
Fleetstreet, and was presently called upon by the Commander of the Guard, to
know what the matter was; the Constable told him, he had apprehended one firing
an House in Shoe-lane. He examined the Person in French, and committed him to
the Guard of the Soldiers, and told the Constable he would secure him, and
carry him along with him, the Constable asked him, if he should go along with
him to give in his Evidence, he replied, He had done enough; but what became of
the Frenchman, he knows not.

Your most Humble Servant S. G.

Taken up at Leeds by Mr. Thwaits's Man, a Recusant.
Cover the Fire ye Hugonots,
That have so branded us with Plots:
And henceforth no more Bonfires make,
Till ye avaunt the Stygian-Lake, etc.
Dated the 5th. of November, Anno Salutis 1666. and Anno primo Restitutionis
Romanae Religionis in Anglia.

In a Letter directed from Ipswich, for the Honorable Sir Robert Brooks in the
Parliament at Westminster, is intimated that about the 30th of August last, one
of the Constables of Scoton in Horse-mear hundred, being upon the Search of
that Town about Hearth-money, was told by one Mr. Wiliam Tompson a Roman
Catholic in that Town, That though times were like to be sad, yet if he found
any cause to alter his Religion, He would see that he should not want; and
farther said to him, what would you say if you should see that London was burnt?

An Affidavit of a Frenchman, that said, there was three hundred engaged in
the firing the City of London.
The Information of Richard Bond, of the Parish of St. Giles in the Fields,
Ironmonger; Samuel Page, Francis Cogin, William Coals, Edmund Dakins, and
Richard Pardoe, taken the 18th of September 1666. by me Justinian Truin,
Knight, one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex,
upon Oath, as follows.

Richard Bond says, That on Thursday last, about twelve or one of the Clock at
night, there was a Frenchman brought by the Watch to the Informers Fathers
house, at the sign of the White Heart in Kings street, taken as a suspicious
Person; and the said person being questioned by them, the Informant, and others
present, whether he was not one of those that fired the City, or had any hand
therein, or any private knowledge thereof, or knew any that had designed it;
the said person answered a great while in a perverse manner, quite differing
from the questions; but being further desired to tell the Truth, and being
told, that if he were guilty, it was the only way to save his life, he did at
first obstinately deny that he knew of any Plot, whereupon a young man took the
Prisoner aside to the end of a Room, and after some discourse between them,
they both returned to the Informant, and the rest of the Company, and the said
young man said to us plainly, in the hearing of the Prisoner the Frenchman,
That he had confessed that there were three-hundred Frenchmen in a Plot or
Conspiracy; upon this the Informant and others spoke o the Frenchman in these
words; Well Master, you have done very well to confess, and no doubt but you
may have your pardon if you confess all that you know of this Plot; and
thereupon asked him, if there were no more than three hnndred persons in the
said Plot? He answered, No, there are no more than three hundred; then we
enquired who they were, and how he came to know they were three hundred, to
which he would give no direct answer, but put it off with other extravagant
discourse, and being asked why he came to St. Giles Parish where he was
apprehended, He told a story that he came from Islington Fields, where his
Masters goods were, but the goods were now removed he could not tell whither;
but his Master bade him go up and down the Fields, but would not tell him upon
what occasion, or for what end he was so to do; and he being asked whether
there were three hundred men engaged in this design? He replied, That there was
three hundred engaged in it. And the names of the persons present at the
Prisoners Confession of the Plot were, Edmund Dakings Seniour, of Holbourn near
Turn-stile, Littingam Bell living by Holbourn, and another young man.

The Information of William Coals of Cow-Lane London, and Samuel Page of S.
Gyles in the Fields Weaver, Edmund Dakens of the same Parish, and Francis Cogin
of St. Andrews Holborn, and Richard Pardoe Victualler, and one other tending to
the Confirmation of the foregoing Walloone.

An Extract of a Letter from Hiedleberge in the Palatinate, September 29th 1666.
SIR,
YOurs of the 6th current came to me on Wednesday, and brought me tidings of
the burning of London, constantly believed amongst the Irish to my knowledge,
this fifteen years since, was to happen this year, on which they do also
promise to themselves and others, the Introduction of the Public Exercise of
the Catholic Religion. This was sent to Mr. John Altock, who lived in Gravel
Lane in Shadwel, and negotiates the Business of the Palatinate, and will
produce the Original if there be occasion.

In a Letter to Sir John Frederick and Mr. Nathaniel Herne, from Northampton,
the eighth of September 1666, subscribed Henry Chowne; wherein is mentioned,
That he the said Chowne had thoughts to come to London that week, but they were
in distraction concerning the Papists, fearing they would show themselves all
that day; and that he had been to search a Papists house within six miles of
that place, he with another Justice of the Peace met with the Gentleman's
Brother, who is a Papist, going to London, whom they searched, and found a
Letter which he had received, coming from his Sister, twenty miles off from
him, wherein is expressed, That a great deal of business is in hand, not to be
committed to paper, as the times are.

Bakers Information to Ducket, concerning John Goodman, about the Destruction
of London.
Upon the ninth of September 1666. being the Sunday after the Fire began in the
City of London, one Henry Baker of Chipnam in the County of Wilts, Butcher came
and gave in this Information, That the Thursday Se'night before the Fire began
in London, coming from the Devizes Market, he happened into the Company of one
John Goodman, Husbandman, who discoursed with him about a Yoke of Oxen, as is
inserted before in the Report.

The Information of one Cherrel, a Schoolmaster in Enfield.
Upon Friday August the one and thirtieth, Mrs. St. George and her eldest
Daughter Susan, both Popish Recusants, came to visit Mrs. Rebeccah Eeves at her
House in Enfield; where, speaking concerning the Session of Parliament drawing
near, Mrs. St. George told her, That some were like to be called to account for
a Plot; being asked for what? told her in her Ear, For burning the City. When
Mrs. Eeves heard of the Fire, going to a place where she might see it, she met
with Mrs. Susanna St. George; and among other Discourse, told her, how much her
Mother's words which she spoke before the Fire, did run in her thoughts, which
she repeated to her Daughter; who made this reply, That her Mother was very apt
to talk, and that she had been forced to keep her Mother within doors during
the Fire, fearing that she should talk. After this destruction by Fire, Mrs.
Eeves met with Mr. Coal, another Recusant, and one of the same Family; she
also related Mrs. St. Georges words to him; who made this Return, That she was
a worthy Woman to keep counsel. The Lady St. George at Enfield, at the Lord of
Lincoln's House, declared to Mrs. Rebeccah Eeves, That in few days London
should be in Ashes, This was spoken about two days before the Fire happened.

Mrs. Eeves of Enfield. before Mr. Holland and Mr. Mervil, Members of
Parliament, December. 20. 1666. concerning Mrs. St. George.
Mrs. Rebeccah Eeves of Enfield, three or four days, or within a Week before
the Fire, receiving a Visit in her own House from Mrs. St. George, among other
Discourse, Mrs. St. George asked her, What News she heard? and if she knew when
the Parliament sat? She replied, She thought suddenly. The other asked, If
Mrs. Eeves heard of any that were to be called in question before the
Parliament?

Eeves. About what?

St. George. About a Plot.

Eeves. What Plot?

St. George. About firing the City.

Eeves. I hope God will preserve the City; people use not to be called in
question before the Fact. So that Discourse was waved at that time. At the time
of the Fire, Mrs. Eeves and Mrs. St. George went out to look toward the Fire,
and one in the company (but she cannot fix the Person) replied, A fine Woman to
keep Counsel. After the Fire, Mrs. St. Georges Daughter coming to Mrs. Eeves's
House, Mrs. Eeves asked her, if she remembered what her Mother said? who
answered, My Mother is such a Woman, she will speak what she thinks. And
afterward said, That she had much ado to keep her Mother in, in the time of
the Fire, for fear she should speak something that she might be questioned for.
At this Discourse Mrs. Eeve's Daughter and others of her Family were present.
Mr. St. George hereupon, with his Wife and Family, left Enfield about six weeks
after, but left many more in the Neighborhood. It Is reported, that at the
House of Mr. Cook and other Recusants, there was great Coaching, Drinking, and
Rejoicing at the time of the Fire. December the 20th. 1666.

Rebecca Eeves.

A Letter directed and sent by a Papist to Mr. Lamb, from Tarleton in
Leichestershire, from a Person unknown; as follows.
My Friend,
YOur presence is now more necessary at London than where you are, that you may
determine how to disp^se of your Estate in Southwark, for it is determined by
Humane Council (if not frustrated by Divine Power) that your Liberty will
shortly be destroyed; your capacity is large enough to understand: proceed as
your Genius shall instruct.

Vale, cave, fuge. The Liberty of Haring in the County of Essex.
The Information of Robert Hubert, a Frenchman* taken at Rumford, the 11th. of
September 1666. before Carry Harvie, alias Mildmay Esquire, one of the Justices
of the Peace for the Liberty of the County aforesaid.
HE says, that about Mid-lent he came out of France, with one Stephen Pedilow
a Frenchman, with whom he stayed about four Months, as his Companion, and then
they came together into England in a Swedish Ship, called the Skipper, which
was laden with Iron, Steel, and Copper Plates; and says, that the Master's
name of the Ship is also Skipper, and that Pedilow kept the Examinant on board
that Ship, which lay at St. Katharines Brewhouse, but Pedilow himself went
several times into the City, and came on board again, and had often private
discourse with the said Master of the Ship; and says, that when the City was
on fire, he, this Examinant, was sent out by Pedilow, who had given him a
Fire-ball, and bade him fire an House near the Kings Palace, for which the said
Pedilow gave him a shilling, and promised him a greater Reward when he came
into France; which Fire-ball, this Examinant says, he fired, and threw into
the window of an House near White Hall, on Tuesday Night, which fired the same
House, and he stayed there, and saw it burn two or three hours; and further
says, that Pedilow bade him not make Use of this Fire-ball till he saw the
City on fire, and then to do it* which he did accordingly, and then went to
find the Ship, but it was gone* and further says, that Pedilow had two
Fireballs himself; and the said Examinant says, diverse other Frenchmen have
Fireballs; and says also, that when this Examinant came last to the Ship, the
said Master directed him to find his Comrade Pedilow, at his Chamber or
Lodging, but at what house he confessed not; and said, that not finding the
Ship aforesaid, he came this way to go toward the Sea Coasts, in hopes, either
by that or some other Vessel to get a Passage home.

The Information of John Lowman, Keeper of his Majesty's Gaol for the County of
Surry.
IN Obedience to an Order to me directed, from the Right Honorable the
Committee of the House of Commons, then sitting in the Speakers Chamber, on
Thursday the 24th. of October, I carried Robert Hubert to St. Katharines-Tower
by Water, to show me where the Swedish Ship lay, that brought him and other
Frenchmen from Stockholm; he brought me to the Dock, over against Mr. Corsellis
his Brewhouse, and did certify to me and Mr. Corsellis, that the Ship lay
there till such time, as he with Mr. Pedilow and others, did go and set Fire to
Mr. Farmers house; and the Examinant says further, that Mr. Pedilow did fix
two Fireballs to a long Pole, and that the said Robert Hubert did fix one in
the same manner, and did put it in at the same Window, but with all the Enquiry
and Diligence I could make or use, I could neither find, nor hear of any such
Ship or Vessel; and from thence I carried the said Robert Hubert to Tower Hill,
and desired him to show me the House they did fire, and he said it was near the
Bridge, but we went along Thames Street, toward London Bridge, but before we
came at the Bridge, the said Robert Hubert said, the* house was up there; (and
pointed with his hand up Pudding-lane,) so I bad him go to the Place, and he
went along upon the Bricks and Rubbish, and made a stand, then I asked one
Robert Pain a Porter, which was the Bakers House, and he told me that was the
house where Hubert stood, so I went to Robert Hubert and stood by him, turning
my Back toward the Bakers house, and demanded which house it was he fired,
directing to some house contrary to that house, but he turning himself about,
said, This was the house, (pointing to the Bakers house) that was first fired;
Then by reason of his Lameness, I set him on an Horse, and carried him to other
places; but no other Place he would acknowledge, but nodded back again to the
Bakers house, and said again, That was the Bakers house, pointing to the said
Bakers house: And this is humbly certified, to the Honorable Committee by me
John Lowman Keeper of his Majesty's Goal, for the County of Surry.

At the Committee appointed to receive Information touching the Insolency of
Popish Priests, and the Increase of Popery.
ORdered, That the said several Informations by this Committee taken, be
reported to the House in Order to the Discovery and Suppression of the
Insolency of Popish Priests, and Increase of Popery.

Concerning the Increase of Popery.
AS to the Increase of Popery, Mr. Hancok Minister of Ghilnock informs, that
meeting with one Mr. Thompson, about a month since, coming from Mass out of
Somerset-House-Chappel, and discoursing with him about his Religion, asked him
if there were many turned lately? To which Mr. Thompson answered, Thousands,
and being demanded what encouragement there was to believe it? Replied, There
will be a change suddenly.

The Report of his carriage at the Committee.
Mr. Thompson being summoned before the Committee, carried himself very
insolently, which Behavior of his I am commanded to report. Being asked
whether he had not a Shop in Somerset House, where Popish Books and Popish
Knacks are sold? He said, he had, and that his men sold such Books and Beads
and other things, and confessed a Crucifix and some Relics; he said he was a
Roman Catholic, and thanked God for it; that he was no Priest, but wished he
was in a Capacity to be One; that he had not taken the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, nor would he; that he would take any Oath that any Christian Prince
should require, but not the Oath of Allegiance, intimating some mixture in it;
he said further that he had then taken the Oath of Allegiance to the King of
Spain, and so was his Subject.

Mr. Ash Minister of Cluppel in Surrey, informs, that being at Cofield in
Leicestershire this last Summer, he saw a great Resort on Sunday to
Cofield-house, the house of a Papist; and asking some that were going thither,
what the occasion of their Resort thither was? they told him they were going to
Mass, and that one Mr. Robinson a Priest, did say Mass. Mr. Ash did likewise
inform, that he thought the number of those that went thither to Mass that
Sunday, was as great as that of the Protestants that went to the Parish Church.

Mr. Wiling Deputy-Ordinary of Middlesex, did inform, that in his Attendance on
the Prisoners in Newgate, he had observed, that the Romish Priests,
particularly one Harvey a Jesuit, did constantly, about the times of Execution,
frequent that Prison, and by Persuasions endeavor to fix their Principles in
the Prisoners; of whom the said Harvey had seduced many.

Mr. Hatton informs, that on the sixth of October, he went to Newgate; and
meeting with one Haward, under-Keeper at the door, desired to speak with Hubert
the Frenchman, who was then condemned. Haward told him he could not speak with
him yet, for Mr. Harvey the Queen Mothers Confessor was in private with him,
and said, that this Harvey used frequently to come to the Prison after
Condemnation, and where one Prisoner, dyed a Protestant, many dyed Papists. Mr.
Hatton said, that after some stay he saw Mr. Harvey come out from Hubert, after
which he was admitted to him.

Mr. Hawking Keeper of Newgate, did inform, that the said Mr. Harvey the Jesuit
did frequent the Prison under pretense of the Queens Charity, and did spend
much time with the Prisoners in private, and particularly did so night after
night before last Execution.

Mr. Hawking said likewise, that of the Nine that suffered, eight dyed Papists,
whereof some he knew to have been Protestants when they came into the Prison.

It appeared further upon several Informations, that Mr. Harvey and other
Priests, did not only resort to Newgate at times of Execution, but likewise to
the White Lion in Southwark, and other places in the Countries, and used their
endeavors to pervert dying Prisoners.

Thomas Barnet, late a Papist, informs, that while he was of that Persuasion he
often resorted to the houses of such Gentlemen in Barkshire as were Roman
Catholics, every of which houses had its Romish Priest; and of this he gives
Instances in the houses of several private Gentlemen in that County. The like
Information give others against the County of Surrey.

Mr. Cottman did inform, that one Mr. Compert (late a Preacher at S. Hall,) did
in Discourse tell him the said Cottman, that the Judgments of God upon this
Kingdom by the Plague last year, and lately by the Fire in London, were come
upon the Land and People for their forsaking the true Roman Catholic Religion,
and shaking off their Obedience to the Pope; and that if they would return to
the Church of Rome, the Pope would rebuild the City at his own Charge. Compert
said likewise to the said Cottman, That if he would come and hear him preach
the next Sunday, at his house in Queens-street, he would give twenty reasons to
prove, that the Roman Catholic was the true Religion, and his the false, and
that our Bible had a thousand Falsities in it; and that there was no true
Scripture but at Rome, and in their Church.

Compert at the Committee confessed, that he had formerly taken Orders from the
Church of Rome; but said he had now renounced that Church, and taken Orders in
England.

The next thing is the Information of their Insolency; and I shall begin with
their scorning and despising the Bible.
ONe Thomas Williams, an Officer in Sir William Bowyers Regiment, informs, That
one Audley, a Papist, seeing a woman reading in a Bible, asked her why she read
in that profane Presbyterian Bible? and said, a Play-book was as good.

Thomas Barret of Bingfield informs, that being at one Mr. Youngs house in
Bingfield, at Bartholomew tide last, Mr. Young said to the Brother of this
Thomas Barret, in his hearing, that within two years there should not be a
Protestant in England.

Thomas Barnet informs, that being at Mr. Doncasters house in Bingfield, one
Mr. Shellers, Son in Law to Mr. Doncaster, both Papists, said to this
Informant, who was then likewise a Papist, The People take me for a poor
fellow, but I shall find a thousand or two thousand of Pounds to raise a party
of Horse, to make Mr. Hawthorns and Mr. Blackwels fat Guts lie on the Ground;
for it is no more to kill an Heretic, than to kill a Grasshopper; and that it
was happy for this Thomas Barnet that he was a Catholic, for by this means he
should be one of those that should be mounted.

Mr. Linwood a Scrivener in White-chappel, informs, That about the 20th. of
October last meeting with one Badley a Papist, and discoursing with him, he
told him, That there was amongst the Papists as great a Design as ever was in
England, and he thought it would be executed suddenly. Being asked how many
Papists there were about London? He answered, About seven thousand, and in
England an hundred thousand well armed.

Mr. Oaks his Affidavit.Mr. Oaks, a Physician dwelling in Shadwell, informs,
that a little after the burning of the City of London, one Mr. Carpenter, a
Minister, came to his house on Tower-wharf, and spoke to him to this Purpose; I
will not say I am a Papist, but this I will say, I had rather dye the Death of
the Papists, and that my Soul should be raised with their Resurrection, than
either of Presbyterian, Independent or Anabaptist; and I tell you, the Papists
have hitherto been his Majesty's best Fortification; for when Presbyterians,
Independents and Anabaptists forsook and opposed him, they stood by him and
helped him; and take it on my word, the Papists in a short time, will lay you
all as low as that house; (pointing to an house that was demolished) for they
are able to raise forty thousand men, and I believe, the next work will be
cutting of Throats. This was sworn by Mr. Oaks, before Sir John Frederick
Member of the House.

Mr. Pilkington being present when the words were spoken, does affirm them all.

Henry Young a Distiller of Hot-waters, informs, that about the month of April
in the year 1661. being in the Jesuits College in Antwerp, one Powel an
English Jesuit persuaded him to turn Roman Catholic, and said, that if he
intended to save his Life and Estate, he had best to turn; for within seven
years he should see England of that Religion. Young replied, the City of London
will never endure it. Powel answered, that within five or six years they would
break the Power and Strength of London in pieces, and that they had been
contriving it this twenty years. The said Young did likewise inform, that after
coming into England, one Thompson and one Copernel, both Papists, did several
times say to him, That within five or six years at farthest, the Roman
Catholic Religion should be all over this Kingdom.

Joseph Goodwin of Darking in the County of Surrey, informs, That about a
Month since, one Edward Complin, a Papist, said to him, You must all be
Papists shortly, and that now he was not ashamed to own himself a Roman
Catholic, and to own his Priests, (naming two that were in Darking, in the
house, with two Papists) and likewise said, that in twenty four hours warning
the Papists or Roman Catholics could raise thirty thousand men as well armed
as any in Christendom.

William Weaver of Darking, informs, that the said Edward Copernel did tell
him, The Roman Catholic in England could, in twenty four hours raise three
thousand Horse and Arms; and upon saying so, pulled out his Crucifix and Beads,
and said, He was not ashamed of his Religion.

John Graunger of Darking, informs, that about a year since, being in his house
reading the Bible, one Thomas Cooling, a Papist, said to him, Are you still a
Church-goer? Had you not better turn Roman Catholic? If you stay whilst you
are fetched, none will abide you. And said further, That there was a man beyond
the Seas had prophesied, That Anno 1666. if the King did not settle the Roman
Religion in England, he would be banished out of his Kingdom, and all his
Posterity. And Cooling further said, That he, being lately turned a Roman
Catholic, he would not be a Protestant again for all the World; wishing
Graunger again, in the hearing of his Wife, (which she affirmed to the
Committee) to turn his Religion; for all the said Prophecies would come to pass
in the year 1666.

Robert Holloway of Darking aforesaid, informs, That one Stephen Griffin, a
Papist, said to him, That all the blood that was shed in the last Civil War,
was nothing to that that would be shed this year in England. Holloway demanded
a reason thereof, in regard the Kingdom was in Peace, and no likelihood of
Trouble, and said, Do you Papists intend to rise and cut our Throats when we
are asleep? Griffin answered, that is no matter, if you live you shall see it.

Ferdinand de Marcedo a Portugal, and some few years since a Roman Catholic,
but now turned Protestant, informs, That one Father Banto, a Jesuit, did the
last year tell him at Paris, That if all England did not return to the Church
of Rome, they should be destroyed the next year.

Mr. Samuel Wightman of the middle Temple, Barister, informs, That about two
years since, one Mr. Genison a Popish Priest, wished him to turn Catholic, and
he should want neither Profit nor Preferment, Mr. Wightman objected, that he
intended to practice the Law, which he could not do if he turned Papist, for he
must take the Oath of Supremacy at his being called to the Bar, and if he were
a Papist he must not take it. Mr. Genison replied, Why not take the Oath? It is
an unlawful Oath, and void ipso facto; and after some Pause, said further,
First take the Oath, and then I will convert you; And further said, That the
King would not own himself Head of the Church; And also said, You in England
that set up the DUTCH to destroy our Religion, they shall be the men to PVLL
DOWN YOVRS.

Mun Stanley, an Officer in the Duke of Ormands own Regiment, informs, That
coming lately out of Ireland, and with him one Oriel, who owned himself of the
Order of Jesuits, and commissionated from the Pope to be Lord Primate of
Ireland, and Archbishop of Armagh; Oriel discoursing with him, told him, That
there had been a Difference between him and some others of the Jesuits in
Ireland, and that particularly one of the Occasions was, that one Father Walsh
and some others of the Jesuits there, did dispense with the Papists in Ireland;
to take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, by virtue of a standing
Commission from the Pope they had, to do it during this Kings Reign; and Oriel
thought they ought not to do it by virtue of the standing Commission, but
should take a new Commission from the Pope every year to do it. And said
likewise, That he brought eight Boys out of Ireland to carry to Flanders to
breed up in the Colleges. And at his taking Ship to go into Flanders, he shook
his Feet toward England, and termed it Egypt, and said, He would not return
to England, till he came with fifty thousand at his heels.

An Information concerning the late Fire in Fetter-Lane.
MR. Robert Bird, whose House it was that was set on Fire, informed, That his
Wife retained one Elizabeth Oxley to be her Servant (supposing her to be a
Protestant) upon Monday the 24th of February last, but she came not to her
Service until the 6th of March after. That upon Wednesday night the 9th of
April last, about two or three of the clock in the morning, the said Servant
came to his Bedside and awaked him, telling him There was a Fire in Holborn:
Whereupon he asked her, How she knew it? She answered, By the noise in the
Street. Whereupon he arose, and looked into the Street, but there was little
noise or light; so he staid at his Street-door, until he was informed by two
men that passed by, that there had been a Fire, but it was put out again:
whereupon he returned to Bed, well pleased he had so watchful a Servant, and
fearful of Fire: But none of his Family heard any thing thereof, until informed
by the said Oxley, as he believes. That on Thursday the 10th. of April, he was
told, the said Oxley went not up to Bed till about eleven a Clock: That before
he went to Bed, he looked to the Doors, Windows, and Rooms, to see if all were
safe from Fire and Thieves, (as his custom was) and was the last up in the
Family, as he thought. That being in Bed and asleep, about twelve of the clock
that night he was awaked with a great beating at the door by the Watch, and the
said Oxley coming immediately to him, told him, There was a Fire: To which he
said, He was sure it was not in his House, but gave her the Key of the
Street-door; who ran down, and let in the Watch and Company; and he coming
down, found a large Press in his Closet, (for keeping Books, Papers, and
Writings, on a light Fire, but by the mercy of God, and the great help he had,
the Fire was put out, and his House preserved. That his Wife with some
Neighbors immediately going to the said Oxley's Lodging Room to see if all was
safe, found that she had packed up her Clothes and things ready to carry away,
and her Trunks locked up, but nothing left in them of value: Whereupon he
demanded of the said Oxley why she had packed up her Clothes? She answered,
that she and his other Maid Martha had packed up her things to save them. Then
he asked the said Martha, Why she had packed up in that time, when the Lives of
the Children and Family were in that danger? who positively denied that she
packed up any thing; Whereupon, and for that he was sure when he went to bed
there was not a spark of Fire in the Closet, and considering that the said
Oxley at the first knocking at the door, though she lay two pair of stairs
above his Chamber; and being informed that she had not put out her Candle into
the Candlestick, nor burnt it, but pulled it out, and hid the Candlestick; and
from the manner of her Carriage used when she perceived she was suspected; he
positively Charged the said Oxley with Firing his House, and caused her to be
kept safe all that night: And the next day being Charged by the Neighbors with
Firing the House, she at last Confessed the same, by setting the Press in the
Closet and his Papers on Fire about Twelve of the Clock, when he and his Family
were asleep. And he said* that she the said Oxley might have gone out at a Back
door of his House, and carried away any of his Goods and Plate, if she pleased
at any hour in the night, without Firing his House; the Key of the Back door
lying in the Kitchen, and laid there by her self. And he said, nothing of value
was found in the said Oxley's pack, made up by her, as aforesaid, but her own
things.

Elizabeth Oxleys Examination.
Elizabeth Oxley upon her Examination said; That about Michaelmas last she
became acquainted with Nicholas Stubbs, who had several times used many
persuasions to turn her Papist; and after her showing a liking to it, and that
he supposed she had embraced that Persuasion; in his Discourse to her at
several times, he told her, that before the 28th of June next, she should see
all the Protestants destroyed that were in England; that the Pope should be
King over England; that all that would turn to the Popish Religion should live
far better than now they did; that all the Land were Heretics, and it were a
Meritorious Act to destroy them; and that all such as were Papists should have
Marks upon their Hats, whereby to distinguish them from Protestants, that they
might not be destroyed amongst them. Adding, that the Nation do believe that
all things will be over before the 28th day of June, but they would be
deceived, for all should be destroyed at or before that time. That the Duke of
York was the bravest Prince living, and that he was gone out of the Kingdom,
lest the Heretics should cut off his Head, and he would not return till they
were destroyed; that the Lords in the Tower would not one of them Suffer, for
they would come off well enough, being to be tried by the Lords; and that the
Scaffolds were set up but for fashion-sake. That she telling the said Stubbs
that she was Hired to Live with one Mr. Bird about the middle of Fetter-lane,
he used persuasions to her at several times to set Fire on her Masters House;
telling her, if she would do it, he would give her five pound, and gave her
half a Crown, and said, he would have other Houses in Holborn Fired at the same
time by others: That she being with the said Stubbs on Sunday before the said
Fire, promised to Fire her Master's House on Thursday or Friday night
following; and accordingly on Thursday night she took a Candle and set Fire to
her Master's Papers in his Study, which were in a kind of a Press; and then
being on a light Fire, she shut the doors, and went up stairs into her own
Chamber in the top of the House, and packed up her own Things, and Undressed
her self, lest her Master should suspect her, and there stayed till a great
Knocking was at the Door, and the Watchmen crying out Fire; whereupon she run
down Stairs, and cried out Fire, and her Master gave her the Keys to open the
Door; which done, all hands were employed to quench the Fire. And she says,
she did not set-Fire on her Masters House out of any Malice to him, nor with
intent to Rob him, but merely to carry on the Design which Stubbs had proposed
to her, and out of hopes of his Reward.

The Examination of Nicholas Stubbs.
Nicholas Stubbs upon his Examination owns, and sets forth to have used such
Discourse to the said Elizabeth, as she declares in her Examination; and
says, he did persuade her to Fire her Master's House, and was to give her five
Guineys for doing it, besides half a Crown in hand: And says, that one Father
Gifford, a Priest, and his Confessor, had put him on this business, and told
him it was no sin to Fire all the Houses of Heretics and Hugonites.

That he acquainted Flower, alias Darby, a Barber in German-street, and one
Roger (...) another Irish man, that Lodged at the Coach and Horses in the same
Street. That the said Father Gifford promised him 100l. for the same, and told
him he was to have the Money from the Church. That they used to meet the said
Gifford, and other two Persons in St. James's-fields in the dark of the
Evening, and to discourse of these matters; and that the several Informations
that he had given the said Elizabeth Oxley, he had from the said Father
Gifford; and says, Flower and Roger (...) told the said Stubbs, they would
carry on the said Fire, and that they had Fireballs for that purpose, and that
they would Fire other Houses in Holborn at the same time: That he was at the
Fire in the Temple, but was not engaged to do any thing in it. And said, that
Gifford told him, that there were English, French and Irish Roman Catholics
enough in London to make a very good Army; and that the King of France was
coming with 60000 men, under pretense to show the Dauphin his Dominions; but it
was to lay his men at Diep, Bulloign, Callis, and Dunkirk, to be at an hours
warning to be Landed in England, and he doubted not but it would be by the
middle of June, and by that time all the Catholics here will be in readiness;
all were to rise; in order to bring him in. That the Papists here were to be
distinguished by Marks in their Hats; that the said Father Gifford doubted not
but he should be an Abbot or a Bishop when the work was over, for the good
service he had done. That, at their Meeting, Father Gifford used to tell them,
it was no more sin to kill a Heretic than a Dog, and that they did God good
service in doing what mischiefs they could by Firing their Houses. That it was
well Sir Edmondbury Godfrey was murdered, for he was their Devilish Enemy; That
Coleman was a Saint in Heaven for what he had done. And says, he is fearful he
shall be murdered for this Confession, Father Gifford having Sworn him to
Secrecy; and told him he should be Damned if he made any Discovery, and should
be sure to be killed; and that he should take the Oaths because he was a
Housekeeper, and that it was no sin: And says, that Gifford and Roger (...)
told him, when their Forces met about the middle of June, then have at the --

FINIS.

