Levett blazon or coat of arms Mayor.
Martis vicesimo quinto die Junij 1700. Annoque Regni Regis WILLIEMI Tertij.
Angliae, etc. Duodecimo.
THE King's most Excellent Majesty, and His late Religious and Gracious Queen,
as also the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, having frequently
expressed their great Sense of the deplorable Increase of Profaneness, Vice
and Debauchery in this Kingdom, and their earnest Zeal and Desires of
Reformation, and Prevention thereof for the future: And His said Majesty having
by His Royal Proclamation Commanded and Required all His Magistrates and
Ministers of Justice, to put the Laws in full and due Execution against such
Offenders. This Court, as well in Obedience thereunto, as out of their own
hearty Desire to promote Reformation in the Premises, to the Honor of Almighty
God, of the King, and of this City, and the good Government thereof, having
taken into their serious Consideration the great Profaneness, Vice and
Debauchery too frequently used and practiced in Bartholomew-Fair; And to
prevent the same for the future, Do hereby strictly Charge and Command all
Persons concerned in the said Fair, and in the Sheds and Booths to be erected
and built therein or Places adjacent, that they do not Let, Set, Hire or Use
any Booth, Shed, Stall or other Erection whatsoever, to be used or employed for
Interludes, Stage Plays, Comedies, Gaming-places, Lotteries, disorderly
Musick-meetings, or other Occasions or Opportunities for Enticing, Assembling
or Congregating idle, loose, vicious and debauched People together, under
Color and Pretense of innocent Diversion and Recreation; But that all Booths,
Sheds, Stalls, Shops, and other Erections during the said Fair, to be had and
made, shall be used, exercised and employed for Merchandises, Trade and
Commerce, according to the good Intents and Purposes designed in the Granting,
Erecting and Establishing the said Fair. And all Persons are hereby Required to
take notice hereof, and yield Obedience hereunto, as they will answer the
contrary thereof at their Perils.

Goodfellow.

Printed by Samuel Roycroft, Printer to the Honorable City of London. 1700.


