AN Act of Common-Councill Of the City of LONDON, (Made in the first and second
years of the Reign of Philip and Mary) FOR Retrenching of the Expenses OF THE
Lord Mayor and Sheriffs, etc. PUBLISHED With Additional REASONS for putting the
said ACT in present Execution. And now offered to the Consideration of all good
Citizens, by some Well-wishers of the present and future Prosperity of the said
City. Presented to my Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs.

LONDON, Printed for Fr. Smith, at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhill, near
the Royal Exchange, 1680.

Anno primo and secundo PHILIPPI and MARIE.
AT this Court after the reading of a certain Bill, lately devised and drawn
for and concerning the Diet of the Lord Mayor, the Sheriffs, and the Aldermen
of this City for the time being, to be kept and observed at their Tables, the
tenor whereof hereafter ensues: It was read and agreed, enacted and accorded
by Authority aforesaid, That the same Bill should be entered on Record, and the
whole Contents and Articles thereof, and every of them be from henceforth duly
observed, and put in execution, from time to time, according to the purport,
true meaning and effect of the same.

By the Lord Mayor, his Brethren the Aldermen of the City of London, and
Common Council of the same.

FOrasmuch as the Testimony as well of diverse and sundry good Ordinances,
presented for the reformation of the great Excess in Fare, and other things,
used and accustomed in Mayors and Sheriffs Houses; and at the Mayors Feasts of
this honorable City of London, do evidently show, and declare unto us that our
ancient, wise and prudent Forefathers have many and often times attempted the
redress and amendment of the same. And the great dearth of Victuals, and
excessive Charges within these days does abound, as is well known to all men,
compels us now at this present to take Order therein. For as it has, and
does plainly appear, the Charges of the Maioralty and Shrevalties are so huge
and great, that almost all good Citizens fly, and refuse to serve in this
honorable City, only because of the great Excess and Chargeable Fare and Diet
used in the time of the said Offices.

For remedy whereof, and for the advancement of the Commonwealth, Be it
therefore enacted by the Lord Mayor, and his Brethren the Aldermen, with the
assent and consent of the Commons in this present Common Council assembled, and
by the Authority of the same, That from henceforth it shall not be lawful
either for the Mayor or Sheriffs of this Honorable City that now are, or that
hereafter shall bear and have the said Rooms and Offices, to be served at his
or their several Tables in any of their Houses at Dinner, or at Supper, with
any more Courses than one.

And that neither they, nor any of them, shall have at one time any more sundry
Dishes of Meat at that one Course upon the Sunday, or other Festival days,
being a Flesh-day, than Six, whether the same be hot or cold; and one or two of
the same six Dishes to come to the Board as hot as a Reward, if they will,
after the first three or five are served to the Board. And upon every Holy Day,
being a Fish-day, at their said one Course, Seven diverse Dishes of Meats, and
not above. And at the same one Course every Working-day, being a Flesh-day,
Five Dishes, and not above; and every Working-day, being a Fish-day, at their
said one Course, Six Dishes of several Meats, and not above.

Provided always, and it is agreed, That neither Brawn, Collops with Eggs,
Sallads, Pottage, Butter, Cheese, Eggs, Herrings, Sprats, Shrimps, or any
Shellfish, nor no kind of Fruit unbaked, shall be accounted for any of the
said number of Dishes of Meats abovementioned. Provided also that the Lord
Mayor of this City for the time being, may always, both Working-day and
Holy Day, at his pleasure, have and be served at his said one Course with one
Dish of Meat, either of Fish or Flesh, more than is before limited and
appointed by this present Act and Ordinance, Any thing contained therein to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Also, that it is agreed and enacted, That neither the Sergeants, nor other
Officers of any Lord Mayor's House, nor the Sergeants, Yeomen, nor other
Officers of the Sheriffs Houses for the time being, shall have at any time more
sundry Dishes of Meat, either at Dinner or at Supper, upon the Flesh-days, but
Three, whether the same be hot or cold; and upon the Fish-days to have Four
sundry Dishes of Meats, and not above, whether the same be hot or cold.
Provided always, and it is agreed, That neither Brawn, Sallads, nor any
suchlike meats as is before excepted, shall be accounted for any of the said
Dishes, for the Sergeants, Yeomen, or other Officers, Any thing in this said
Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Also it is further ordained and enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That none
of the Aldermen, or Commoners of this City for the time being, shall at any
time from henceforth exceed or pass the number of Dishes of Meats above limited
and appointed for the Sheriffs as aforesaid, either at their Dinners or Suppers
in their own proper Mansion Houses, Brawn, Sallads, and other like things as
aforesaid excepted; nor in any of the Halls of Companies at any Feast or time;
Nor that there be no Swan, Crane nor Bustard, which were wont to be called
Headpooles, shall be spent at any Feast kept in any of the Halls of any
Companies, upon the pain of forfeiture of every such offense toties quoties,
Forty shillings.

And be it further enacted by Authority aforesaid, as well for the ease and
commodity of the Aged Persons, as also for the avoiding of the great
unquietness that often happens at the said Feasts, from henceforth a certain
convenient number of the Clothing, as well of the principal Crafts, as of the
meaner Companies, which were accustomed to dine at the Mayors Feast, shall be
abated; And there shall remain to dine at the said Feast a certain number of
every such Company as has been accustomed to dine at the said Feast, the
number whereof shall be yearly appointed by the Lord Mayor, and his Brethren
the Aldermen of the said City for the time being; And shall be served at the
said Feast but with one Course, and but Six Dishes in the said Course for one
Mess, besides the Brawn, if it be on a Flesh-day; And if it fall on a Fish-day,
then to have Seven Dishes at a Mess, besides Butter, Eggs, and such like, as is
above recited and declared. Provided always, that when it shall happen any
Ambassador, or any of the Privy Council to be at the said Feast, that then for
their Board only, to be amended and ordered by the discretion or the said Mayor
and Sheriffs for that time being; And no Banquet after Dinner to be had, except
Ipocras and Wafers, as in time past has been used.

And the Festival-days that were wont to be kept by the Mayors and Sheriffs in
their several Houses; that is to say, the three Holy Days after Whitsontide,
and the Dinners kept at Bartholmewtide from henceforth to be left, and laid
down by the said Mayor and Sheriffs. And the Feasts of Christmas and Easter,
with the Holy Days next after, to be used and kept by the said Mayor and
Sheriffs, as heretofore has been accustomed, and to keep the Order as is
aforesaid.

It is also ordered and enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Sheriffs
of this City for the time being, from henceforth shall have but Fourteen
Sergeants, and Fourteen Yeomen apiece. Provided always, that all such Sergeants
and Yeomen as now are in Office, shall still remain in the same, except by
Death, or by some other just occasion or offense, they shall be removed out of
any of the said Offices, Any thing herein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And it is also by the said Authority enacted, That the said Sheriffs of this
Honorable City for the time being, shall from henceforth give to every of
their Sergeants and Yeoman two Gowns at the times accustomed, and no other
Liveries; And to every other Clerks of the Compters, and such as have been
accustomed to have had Gowns at Christmas, to have only one Livery-Gown, and
no more.

And it is further ordained, That from henceforth there shall no With be set
home neither at the Mayors nor Sheriffs Houses; Neither shall they keep any
Lord of Misrule in any of their said Houses.

And it is further established and agreed by this Common Council, That every of
the Aldermen that shall at any time hereafter go about to excuse or discharge
any of his said Brethren, or other person or persons aforesaid, of his or their
default or offense, committed or done contrary to the tenor and true meaning
of this present Act, shall forfeit and lose for every such time of his or their
so doing, Forty shillings; so that it be duly proved before the said Mayor and
Court of Aldermen for the time being.

And that all and every the Penalties aforesaid to be forfeited, shall be
forthwith, upon the trial thereof, be laid down, and paid in the inner Chamber
of Guild Hall before a Court of Aldermen: The one moiety of every such
Forfeiture to be to him or them that shall present the same, and the other
moiety to be distributed toward the sustentation of Christ's Hospital.

Item, Forasmuch as the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of this City for the time
being, shortly after their first entry into their said several Offices and
Rooms, be yearly at great and exceeding Expenses and Charges, for and by reason
of the great and sumptuous Feast, which they for the Honor and Renown of the
same, do keep and make in the Guild Hall, called the Mayor and Sheriffs Feast,
as well to and for such Noblemen of the King and Queens most Honorable Council,
Ambassadors of Foreign Realms and Potentates as are bidden and desired to
vouchsafe to come unto the same; as also to and for the Aldermen and Worshipful
Commons and Citizens of the same City: Be it therefore also ordained, enacted
and established by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Lord Mayor and
Sheriffs for the time being, shall yearly from henceforth at the time of the
making of their said Feast, have of the Free-gift of the said City, out of the
Chamber of the same City, of the Common Store and Treasure of the said City
there, toward the relief of their said Charges, and Expenses of the said
Feast, the sum of One hundred Pounds of current Money of England. And that this
present Act shall be a sufficient Warrant and Discharge unto the Chamberlain of
the said City for the time being, for the yearly payment of the same Sum of One
hundred Pounds accordingly.

READER,
AS by this Act you may observe, that our Predecessors taking notice that the
Extravagancies of Mayors and Sheriffs caused (as they say) almost all good
Citizens to fly and refuse the service; so to prevent that Mischief in the
future, they limited them in their living to the Method directed by this Act.
And if when little was spent besides the growth of our own Country, Beer and
Ale being then their drink, they thought it their Wisdom to set bounds to
Luxurious Profuseness, there is much more reason for it now, when Debauchery is
come to that height, that the fifth part of the Charge of a Shrievalty is in
Wine, the growth of another Country. And when Feasts, hardly heard of in former
times, are risen to that Excess, as would be scandalous to mention, as those
called the Chequer and Spittle Feasts, the first costing in Wine betwixt
Seventy and Eighty Pounds; and the latter, after the pretended Service of God
in hearing a Sermon, costs above Three Hundred Pounds to each Sheriff. And
though much after this rate is the rest of the Year spent, yet when the Example
of this Act is urged for laying aside these sinful Feasts, and reducing the
rest unto this Pattern, which is a wholesome Law, some who should see to the
putting it in execution, will not hear of it; and possibly because they would
have others be as profuse as themselves have been, though there are these
Reasons for Reformation herein.

I. Because nothing can tend more to the Advancement of any City or Country
than the having wise and good Magistrates; And that so long as the great
expense of Shrievalties continue, the City must, as this Act suggests, have an
eye to Wealth, more than Parts or Virtue, in the Choice of their Sheriffs; and
that such as their Sheriffs are, such will the Court of Aldermen be: And
therefore as necessary for the good Government of this great City, the charge
of Shrevalties ought to be reduced to such an Order and Method, as may be an
Encouragement to Men of more Honesty than Riches to serve the Place.

II. No Man has reason to be expensive in his Shrievalty; because though the
Court of Alderman has a Rule for supplying, as any die, their vacant places
out of those that have served Sheriffs, yet they make their Election to depend
upon the uncertain humor of their Court, thereby frustrating when they please
all Compensation for the Expense and drudgery of a Shrievalty, as lately
appeared in their Choice of Sir Simon Lewis, one of their present Sheriffs,
rejecting Sir Thomas Stamp, who had served the Place several years before with
good approbation, and was presented to them by the Ward he lives in as a
deserving Person. And whereas each Ward when they want an Alderman, do present
two Commoners to the Court, for them to choose one, the Ward of Bassishaw, to
the end that Sir Thomas might unavoidably be chosen, joined the younger (and
not the elder) Sheriff with him, not thinking that an old Sheriff would be
baulked, to choose one that had not served his Year; and yet notwithstanding,
the Court by their Prerogative passed by Sir Thomas, to the disappointing of
the Ward that sent him. And this Example is I suppose a good reason for
Sheriffs in the future not to spend more in their Shrievalties than is
necessary, when their Reward is so uncertain.

III. Because as the Wisdom of the Nation did by Act of Parliament prohibit the
profuse Hospitality of the Sheriffs in the Counties; so there can be no reason
assigned why the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex should not voluntarily
observe the Prudence of that Prohibition as well as other Counties; or why the
Citizens of London should not exercise the same discretion as the Gentry (at
this time) do in many Counties, where, by an Agreement among themselves, they
have retrenched the Charge of Shrievalties.

IIII. It is against common Sense and Reason that a Ministerial Officer in this
City, contrary to the Rules of all other Countries, should in a way of
Servitude waste his Estate, when the expending of his strength and time in a
faithful discharge of his duty is all that can be incumbent upon him, or can be
justly expected from him.

V. If great Hospitality, or rather a luxurious way of living, be for the
Honor of the City, as some do vainly pretend, the Charges ought in Justice to
be born by them for whose Honor it is, and not by persons who do not seek or
desire the Employment, but have it imposed upon them. And by common consent and
usage of all other Countries, an extravagant way of living is not accounted the
Honor of a Nation: for if it were, we should find it more practiced by Princes
than it is; and if it be not used by Supreme Magistrates, mere Ministerial
Officers have much less cause to do it.

VI. That the management of this Expense is in a rude and disagreeable way to
any sober person, a great part of it being spent in Popular Feasts, where the
Ravenous Attendants and their Rabble Acquaintance, are like so many Beasts of
Prey; and all the Year after, such of them as are made use of, do from
pretended Custom, command that which they call their due in the Sheriffs
Houses, as if they were their Masters, and not they theirs, a thing odious to
all good Men, and ought to be reformed.

VII. That the Debauchery in this Expense is a sin before God, and were it
known, would be a scandal in the sight of Man; as appears, in that of Three
thousand Pounds Expense in all manner of ways, above Five hundred Pounds is in
Wine; when a Lord, or Gentleman, that formerly lived at the rate of Ten or
Twelve thousand Pounds per Annum, did not, as is well known (but thirty years
ago) spend an hundred Pounds in Wine.

VIII. It seems inconsistent with Right Reason, and Common Sense, that one who
is but the Lord-Mayors Servant, attending upon him every day, and at most but a
Public Ministerial Officer, and no Magistrate, should be at so great a Charge,
especially when he can have no other Prospect, than a present serving his
Generation with the toil and expense of his strength and time.

It is said of Philip the second K. of Spain, that as a means to subdue the
Netherlands, by reducing them to Poverty, and so to depend upon him, he
provoked the Chief of them, by the Example of his Governors high and splendid
living (to whom to that end he gave extraordinary Allowances) to live above
their Estates: But since we are happy in a King, that does not the like to us
by such Example, it will be no Credit to this City to have it recorded in
Story, that the Ruin of it proceeded from themselves, in a voluntary suffering
an Extravagancy, which by the Example of this last Year, seems to be growing;
and therefore it may be wished, before it be too late, that the mischief hereof
may be prevented, in retrenching the Charge of Sheriffs, by laying aside all
great Feasts, save that of the Lord Mayors-Day, (and yet that any part of that
Charge should be born by the Sheriffs, who are but Servants in it, is against
equal Justice.)

IX. Because should not the Mayors Feast be reduced to the Rule of this Act,
the City is obliged in Justice to pay all Exceedings. For since the Law judging
the whole Charge, as it is thereby stated, to be too much for the Mayor and
Sheriffs to bear, do allow them an hundred Pounds toward it; It does
consequently grant, that if the Rule be transgressed, the City ought to bear
the Charge: for it is not to be supposed that the Mayor and Sheriffs will
voluntarily break a penal Statute, thereby to put themselves (besides the
Penalty of this Law) to extraordinary Expenses.

X. As all Men in Government ought as well to provide against future as present
Mischiefs; so though so long as it shall please God to bless unto us our
present King, we need not fear the Corrupting of Sheriffs; yet not having an
infallible assurance of Virtuous Successors, it may hereafter fall out that if
the Charge of Shrievalties be not retrenched, that so honest Men may be
encouraged to hold, Men of Corrupt Principles may undertake the Service, in
design to give up Themselves and the Liberties of the City to the Bribing
Bounty of future Princes.

FINIS.

