Londons Lamentation: OR, An Excellent New Song On the LOSS of LONDON's CHARTER.
To the Tune of, Packington's Pound.
I.
YOu Freemen, and Masters, and Prentices mourn,
For now You are left with your Charter forlorn:
Since London was London, I dare boldly say,
For your Ryots you never so dearly did pay;
In Westminster Hall
Your Dagon did fall,
That caused You to Riot and Mutiny all:
Oh London! Oh London! Thou Would better had None,
Than thus with Thy Charter to vie with the Throne.
II.
Oh London! Oh London! how could Thou pretend
Against thy Defender Thy Crimes to defend?
Thy Freedom and Rights from kind Princes did spring,
And yet in contempt Thou withstandest thy King:
With bold brazen Face
They pleaded thy Case,
In hopes to the Charter the King would give place:
Oh London! Thou Would better no Charter at all,
Than thus for Rebellion thy Charter should fall.
III.
Since Britains to London came over to dwell,
You had an old Charter, to buy and to sell;
And whilst in Allegiance each honest man lives,
Then you had a Charter for Lord May'r and Shrieves:
But when, with Your Pride,
You began to backslide,
And London of Factions did run with the Tide,
Then London, Oh London! it is time to withdraw,
Lest the flood of Your Factions the Land overflow.
IV.
When Faction and Fury of Rebels prevailed;
When Cobblers were Kings, and Monarchs were jayl'd;
When Masters in Tumults their Prentices led,
And the Tail did begin to make war with the Head;
When Thomas and Kate
Did bring in their Plate,
T'uphold the Old Cause of the Rump of the State,
Then tell me, Oh London! I prithee now tell,
Had thou ever a Charter to Fight and Rebel?
V.
When zealous Sham-Sheriffs the City oppose,
In spite of the Charter, the King and the Laws,
And make such a Riot and Rout in the Town,
That never before such a Racket was known;
When Ryoters dare
Arrest the Lord May'r,
And force the King's Substitute out of the Chair:
Oh London! whose Charter is now on the Lees,
Did Your Charter ever warrant such actions as these.
VI.
Alas for the Brethren! what now must they do,
For choosing Whig-Sheriffs and Burgesses too?
The Charter with Patience is gone to the pot,
And the Doctor is lost in the depth of the Plot.
St. Stephens his Flayl
No more will prevail,
Nor Sir Robert's Dagger, the Charter to bail:
Oh London! Thou Would better have suffered by Fire,
Than thus thy old Charter should stick in the Mire.
VII.
But since with your Folly, your Faction and Pride,
You Sink with the Charter, who strove with the Tide,
Let all the Lost Rivers return to the Main
From whence they descended; They Will spring out again;
Submit to the King
In every thing,
Then of a New Charter New Sonnets we'll sing:
As London the Phoenex of England never dies,
So out of the Flames a new CHARTER will rise.
Printed by N. T. at the Entrance into the Old-Spring-Garden.


