THE Lamentations of the Prophet JEREMIAH Paraphrased.

Suitable to the exigencies of these times.

P. Jeremiah. 9. 1. O that my head were water^, and mine eyes a fountain of
tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my
people. S. Luke 19. 41. Jesus, when He was come near, beheld the City, and wept
over it,

42. Saying, If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the
things which belong unto thy peace! But now --

London, Printed November. 11. the day on which His Majesty, God bless Him,
retired from Hampton Court.

M. D. C. XLVII.

To the Reader.
THe sad condition of this unhappy Nation, so parallel to that of the Jews both
in her Sin and Punishment, may be a sufficient Apology for the setting forth
of these most pathetical Lamentations of the Prophet Jeremiah. Which being so
perfect an Idea and representation both of what we have unjustly done against
the sovereign Majesty of Heaven and Earth, and of what we most justly suffer
from the same most righteous hand, I am confident the propounding of them to
the public view in this plain and familiar Paraphrase cannot be less
acceptable and welcome, then it is seasonable and proper. The undertaking of an
Epicaedium in general will be soon justified by the carriage of all sorts of
people in the case of common danger by Fire or Water; every one then
contributing his best assistance, either at the pump or bucket. And it will be
quickly understood why in special I conformed my sense and expression of our
present miseries to the language of the Prophet Jeremiah, or rather of the Holy
Ghost himself, if we consider the strange squeziness of soul most people are
possessed with, in their several glosses and interpretations of our unnatural
distractions. My desire is, as to insinuate and work kindly upon the affections
of all, though of never so different judgment, in the serious and passionate
meditation of our common miseries, so indeed not to provoke any gall, or rub
harshly upon any sore, while the consideration of our present sad condition is
represented only in general to the sober and solemn thoughts of pious and well
affected souls. This if I can obtein I have my end; and shall satisfy my self
with this assurance, that, if God have not decreed the present ruin of the
Nation for our great unthankfulness, we shall yet enjoy the Gospel of Peace,
and the Peace of the Gospel. And let all the people say, Amen.

The Lamentations of the Prophet JEREMIAH.
CHAP. I.

That multitudes of people had in it?
How is she as a widow now bemoaned?
She that among the Nations enthroned,
Among the Provinces a Princess was,
How does she now pay tribute? how? alas!

Tears, cruel tears, her fairest beauties break:
Among her lovers none her grief allay,
Her friends are turned foes, and her betray.

Great servitude and great affliction:
Among the heathen rest she finds none,
But greater straits of persecution.

Her solemn Feasts keep with devotion.
Her gates are desolate, her Priests do sigh,
Her Virgins are afflicted bitterly.

Does prosper; for the Lord has brought her low:
The multitude of her transgressions
Inslaves her children to the Nations.

Her Princes here and there, like Hearts, do run,
Yet find no pasture: nor does strength remain
Her from the fierce pursuer to mantein.

Of her affliction, all the merry Mays,
All the delightful things she did enjoy,
When cruel foes her people did destroy,
And none did help: thus was she, all forlorn,
Seen by her foes; her Sabbaths were their scorn.

Therefore she wanders far, and finds no rest.
All, that once honored her, her now despise,
Her nakedness was sport unto their eyes.
Yea, quite ashamed of her self for lack
Of Grace and wit, she sighs and turns back.

Comes never to her mind, to make her mend:
So by Gods wrath she wonderfully fell;
She had no comforter of peace to tell.
On my affliction, Lord, cast thou an eye,
For, lo, my foe himself does magnify.

Lay vanquished by her foes triumphant spear.
And she has seen, o hight of all disgrace!
The heathen folk invade her Holy-place;
On whom was laid of old this strict command,
Come never, never, on this Holy land.

Themselves with meat, their pleasant things do give:
See, Blessed God, consider these my throes,
How vile I am become unto my foes.

Is all this nothing that befalls me?
Was ever any sorrow like to mine?
See, was there ever such a naked vine?
Was the Almighty vengeance ever seen
So hard on any, as on me't has been?
Or was there ever such a day of wrath,
So cruel, as to me this proved has?

Which did in his just anger them torment.
For me he spread a net, he turned me back;
I desolate and faint all comforts lack.

Which on my neck ly wreathed heavily.
My strength is gone; the Lord has made me fall
Into their hand; rise up I never shall.

My mighty men, my chiefest joy and crown:
He an Assembly did against me call,
Which should my young men crush, my maids enthrall.
The Virgin, Judahs daughter, was by God,
As in a winepress, pitifully trod.

Whole floods of tears my soul and body drown,
Because the comforter that should releeve
My soul, does unto me no comfort give.
My children most disconsolately cry
Because of the prevailing enemy.

To comfort her: the Lords command is gone
Concerning Jacob, that his cruel foes
Should hedge him in, him round about enclose.
Nor wonder at it, since Jerusalem
Is as a menstrous woman among them.

Against the Holy Laws which he me gave.
All people hear, I pray, my grief behold,
My virgins, my young men for slaves are sold.

I of my Priests and Elders was bereaved,
Who in the City did give up the Ghost;
For want of meat, alas! their souls were lost.

My troubled bowels yern: I do confess
My rebel-sins: my heart relents, o God;
Death me bereaves at home, the sword abroad.

But yet to comfort me did none appear.
When all my foes had heard my troubles story,
That thou had done it; Lord, how did they glory!
But when that Day, by thee prefixed, begins,
Their woes shall be like mine, as were their sins.

So do to them as thou have done to me
For all my sins. Dear God, hear my complaint;
My sighs are many, and my heart is faint.
CHAP. II.

Invelop'd in a cloud of wrath and shame!
How from the Heaven to the Earth, to Hell,
Cast down the beuty of his Israel!
Why did be in the day of his feirce heat
The footstool of his glory so forget!

Quite swallowed up without compassions.
He with the ground, o Judah, levelled has
Thy strongest Holds in his inflamed wrath:
Thy towers to the Earth he has cast down,
Polluting both thy Princes and thy Crown.

In His just indignation down fell:
His right hand from before the enemy
He has drawn back; and against Jacob he
Burned like a flaming fire, which no bound
Observes ever, but devoureth round.

Stands armed on his right hand, as does a foe.
All that were pleasant to the eye he slew;
And what was most desirable to view,
Within thy daughters rich pavilion,
His fury like a flame did seize upon.

Did all her Princely palaces orethrow:
Her strong holds he destroyed, and brought upon
Thy daughter, Judah, lamentation.

Took down, as if some gardens slighter fence:
Her places of Assembly, Solemn Feasts,
And Sabbaths are forgot in Zion: Priests,
And Kings, anointed with the sacred horn,
Are now become the subjects of his scorn.

The holy place, once called by his name.
Her Palace and Gods house her foes possessed,
Who made a noise as on a solemn Feast.

To ruin; he has stretched out a line:
See, how it works: The Rampart and the wall
Do both lament, do both together fall.

Is broken down: her King and Princes are
Among the Gentiles: see, the Law is gone,
Her Prophets find from God no vision.

Ashes upon their heads they cast; and fit
Sackcloth about their loins: her virgins sigh,
Hang down their heads, and wail their misery.

Such troubles never were by any felt:
My liver's poured out: see, all conspire
My daughters ruin; Famine, Sword and Fire
Combine against her; nay the sucklings faint
In her, among all Cities once the Saint.

When in the City streets they famished ly,
And swooning, ready to pour out their soul
Into their mothers laps, who them condole.

O daughter of Jerusalem? my care
Is what to equal to thee, that I may
Some comfort to distressed Zion say.
Thy breach, great as the sea, who can conceal?
The greater mischief is, none can thee heal.

By them thy sins have not disclosed been.
False burdens they to thee did represent
Not the true causes of thy banishment.

They hiss and wagg their heads at thy mishap.
They say, Is this Earths joy, this Zion? this
The paragon of beauty and of bliss?

They hiss and gnash their teeth, they thee deride.
See, see, she is swallowed up: This is the day
We looked for, have found, have seen. Away.

He has fulfilled the word he spoke of old.
He has thrown down, he has not pitied;
Thy foes set up their horn, exalt their head.

O wall of Zion, full of misery,
Let tears run down like rivers day and night,
Nor rest thou, nor the apple of thy sight.

Before the morning watches pass about;
Thy heart, like water, pour before the face
Of thy dear Lord; and to his holy place
Lift up thy hands; thy childrens life implore,
Who in the streets ly faint at every door.

Shall women eat their children of a span?
Shall Priest and Prophet, Blessed God, be slain
Within that holy place where thou do reign?

My virgins and young men by sword do die.
In that thy day of wrath thou did them slay,
Thou had no pity, Lord; would have no nay.

My terrors round about me thou did call.
When thou wast angry, Lord, none did remain,
None did escape to comfort me again.
They that were swadled and brought up by me
Were all consumed by mine enemy.
CHAP. III.

By his sharp rod of indignation.

Whence will no beams of light for ever spring.

His hand, which me, as fire, did all day burn.

My bones are broken; not one whole is told.

He compassed me with travel, gall and fear.

As they that died of old, remediless.

My chains ly heavy, press me to the ground.

In anger he my prayer shuts out.

My paths are crooked, and I go astray.

For me he, as a Bear, does lie in wait.

Has made me desolate and all forlorn.

Me for the arrow as a mark he set.

My reins to enter, and my soul invade.

Made me their song, me all day gaped upon.

As if I were with gall and wormwood drunk.

Me has he rolled in ashes, girt with hair.

Thou made prosperity from me to cease.

My strength is perished now, my hope is gone.

My wormwood, gall, and desolation.

How low it bows, how humble then am I!

In this I hope, and, hoping, comfort find.

To thee, whose bowels still with mercies flow.

Thy faithfulness is great and knows no bound.

Therefore my hope in him shall none control.
:
That soul that seeks him shall his grace relate.

To wait for the salvation of the Lord.

If in his youth the yoke of God he bear.

Because God laid it on, does not relent.

If to him any hope from thence may grow.

Is filled full with scorn and obloquie.

Nor w^ll me, though a sinner, still reprove.

Are greater far then our transgressions.

Afflict or us, or our posterity.

To crush, as filth or garbage of the street;

Before his face who should the right mantein;

The Lord, the righteous Judge does not approve.

That never by the Lord commanded was?

Proceed not good and evil, truth and ly.

It is but just that sin should have its pain.

And turn to God in deep humility.

To God in heaven, who will grace impart.

No pardon from thy justice can we crave.

Thou did not pity, Thou did execute.

Thou would not hear our cries, though never so loud.

And refuse of the people all abroad.

How open they their mouths, how they us taunt!

Sure desolation and destruction.

My daughters sad estate I much deplore.

Will have no intermission, no release.

And thence behold my grief, and hear my groan.

So dismal is my daughters misery.

Me sorely without cause they did disgrace.

And casting stones my ruin did contrive.

I said* I am cut off, I am undon.

Out of the dungeon, where I was enthralled.

Or at my sighings, Lord, or at my tears.

In mercy thou said to me, do not fear.

Thou did my life redeem in her great need.

Judge thou my cause, o thou my Patron be.

Their thoughts against me all have cruel been.

All their designs against me cursed were.

Thou heardst, and what all day they did devise.

I am their music and their melody.

According to the work of their own hand.

Give them thy curse, let them be never blessed.

Destroy them, o my God, from under heaven.
CHAP. IIII.

How is the gold now changed, most fine that was?
How do the stones, Lord, of thy holy place
Ly scattered in the streets before thy face?

Which with the finest gold might once compare,
How are they now cast by as earthen pots,
By the laborious hand dug out of grots?

From suckling of their young they never rest;
The daughter of my people cruel is,
As is the Ostrich in the wilderness.

Unto his palate: but can faith believe,
That the young children, who naught else can speak,
Should ask for bread, and none to them should break?

Do pine, and in the streets lie desolate.
They that descended of most noble race,
In stead of scarlet, dunghils do embrace.

Proud Sodoms sin and punishment: alas!
As in a moment she was overthrown,
No hand upheld, none stayed her falling down.

No milk so white but they did it outgo:
They were more ruddy then the Rubies are,
Their polishing excelled the Saphyrs far.

Them mourning in the street none knows or hears:
Their skin cleaves to their bones, is withered,
And, like a stick without all moisture, dead.

Then they that slain with thirst and hunger die:
For these do pine away, are stricken through,
For want of fruits which in the field do grow.

They, they, their own, their dearest Infants sees
To satisfy their hunger: These, their meats,
O Zion, when destruction swept thy streets.

And justly poured out his feircest wrath:
A fire burns up thy habitations,
And has devoured the foundations.

Nor People that on Earth's vast bounds do dwell,
Would have believed, our foes, those cruel men,
Should make such havoc in Jerusalem.

The fatal causes of her miseries;
That made a chanel through the City run,
Stained with the blood of saints by them undon.

So in by ways trod their misguided feet,
With blood so much polluted, that who ere
Their garments touched, with blood polluted were.

Depart, touch not, when wandering they fly:
Among the Heathen this was all the talk,
They shall no more or sojourn there, or walk.

He will no more regard, no more them guide:
The persons of the Priests have no respect,
The Elders without favor they reject.

Expecting help from man who is but frail.
We looked, we waited for a Nation,
Which could not help, nor bring salvation.

That going in the streets we go astray;
Our end is near, our days fulfilled are;
Our end is come; of help we quite despair.

Are not so swift and eager, as are they
Our persecuting foes, who on the hills
Pursue, and lie in wait to do all ills.

Is taken in the nets they spread abroad:
Of whom we said, Under his shadow we
Among the heathen shall preserved be.

Rejoice, o land of ^z, in our turmoils:
The Cup of fury shall come round to thee,
And thou shall drunken, thou shall naked be.

Thou shall no more by him be captive led:
But as for thee, proud Edom, God shall visit
Thy sins upon thee, after thy demerit.
Chapter the Fifth.

Consider our reproach, behold our scorn.

Our houses aliens; we have no redress.

Our Mothers are as Widows in distress.

Out wood is sold to us, as to a slave.

We labor hard, no mitigation.

That they, to satisfy us, bread might find.

We bear their sins, we bear their miseries

And none do us deliver (...) their hand.

With wilderness and sword we were at strife.

The cruel storms of famine brake our back.

O Zion, wail'd themselves at their foes feet.

Nor have the Elders honor or repute.

Our children cleft their wood against their mind.

Our young men from their music did retreat.

Our dance is turned to lamentation.

Woe, woe to us, our sins have us undon.

For this our ey is dim, we make complaint.

And foxes walk upon it, to our scorn.

Thy throne from age to age is stablish'd sure.

So long forsake us? o remember yet;

Our days let, as of old, renewed be.

Woe and alas! our God is very wroth.
FINIS.
2 Chronicles. 36. 15 The Lord God of their Fathers sent to them by his Messengers,
rising up betimes and sending: because he had compassion on His people, and on
his dwelling place.

16 But they mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused
his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, til there
was no remedy.



