These Children Orphans singing show,
Though God's above, he dwells below,
Who Clothes their backs and bellies feed,
And gave them fathers in their need.
These fathered fatherless, their Fathers bless,
And warble forth their worth in thankful verse.
blazon or coat of arms

City of London coat of arms

THe Epicureans say God takes no care,
Nor yet regards how poor mortals fare,
But being himself above all sense
Of trouble, grief, and indigence;
Enjoyes himself, and can,
No notice take of man
Nor sees, nor hears,
Their sighs or tears;
Nor minds, nor yet condoles, men's joys or fears.
That the light Lamps of Heaven know their way
And beaten paths, from whence they cannot stray,
The Planets march their wonted pace,
Sun, Moon, and Stars, keep on their race
From night to day, and then,
From day to night again,
Times come and go,
Tides ebb and flow,
Things round redown'd, as days and years do show.
Hold Atheist, stop thy mouth, proceed not thus,
Gods care o'th poor blaspheme not, look on us,
And recollect thy self, for we
On Dunghils droop't in misery,
Had not Jehovah cared,
How here poor mortals fared,
We still had lain,
Pining in pain,
But now in plenty he does us maintain.
Repent of these thy thoughts vain man, behold
How God by us, have these thy thoughts controld,
For living instances we are,
That God for mortals poor takes care,
And does regard the cries,
Of Orphans waterie eyes,
And sends relief
From pain and grief,
Who help and succor to the poor does give.
Wandering we were from Heavens and Earths good ways
In sin and idleness to spend our days,
But now translated from that state
Which led to lewdness, death, hells gate,
And in a hopeful way
To live another day,
When thankful we,
Shall surely be,
And Londons mercy keep in memory.
Blessed be the great PROTECTOR of the poor
Whom fatherless admire, widows adore;
Blessed be his His Highness a special friend.
Vice Protector who
Much favor did on us bestow,
Our Lord Mayor President.
President blessed be,
And blessed his John Cutler Esquire Deputy President. Mr Thomas Read Treasurer.
Deputy,
Lord bless them all
Who hence forth shall
Lend hearts, and hands, to ridd the poor from thrall.
God is the poor man's God, who does express
Himself the Father of the Fatherless,
And men like Gods themselves appear,
To whom poor Fatherless are dear,
Whose works of Charity,
He suffers not to dye,
What thus they spend
To God they lend,
Who will repay with glory in the end.
This is the pure Religion, and this
By Gods appointment leads to lasting bliss;
When Scarlet robes, and Golden chains
Shall come to nothing, this remains,
When creature comforts fail,
Such works as these prevail,
Most certainly
Such seed shall be
An Harvest lasting to eternity.
You that have thus so well begun, go on,
Finish your work, let no man take your crown,
Such works as these their workmen bless;
By spending thus, you shall increase,
This is Gods way of thriving,
Thus give, and get by giving;
What else you save
Others may have;
These works your selves shall find beyond the grave.
The Report of the Governors of the Corporation for employing and Releiving
the Poor of this City of London, and Liberties thereof;
THe said Corporation (through the Pious care and Assistance of the Lord Mayor,
Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London, and other well affected
persons) do at the present maintain, and Educate about 100. poor Children in
Learning, and Arts, whose Parents are either dead or not able to maintain them,
aiming (according as ability by the good providence of God shall be
administered) at the entertaining of some hundreds more; Moreover, there are
many hundred of poor people and families employed by the said Corporation, the
Manufactures of Spinning Hemp, Flax, and Tow, and Weaving of it into Cloth; And
many hundreds more might be employed, in case they did not habituate and
necessitate themselves to an idle course of life, none being refused or denied
employment that will come for it, either to the Wardrobe near Blackfriars, or
to Haiden-house in the Minories, belonging to the said Corporation. Toward the
more effectual carrying on and accomplishing of which good work, so abundantly
conducing to the glory of God, the honor of the Government of this City,
(being Presidentiall in this kind to the whole Nation) the prevention of many
evils and Enormities, so abounding in that sort of people, and the Eternal
good of their Precious Souls: This Corporation earnestly desire the ready
Concurrence and Assistance of the Magistrate, and Ministers of Justice of this
City in causing the known Laws of this Commonwealth to be put in Execution 39
Eliz. 4. and 1 Jac. 7.
for suppressing of Vagrants, and common Beggars, able to work, who come in
troops from the out parts of this City, and make it their constant practice, to
spend the day time in Begging, and a great part of the nights in Drinking, and
Revelling. And then repair to the City again for fresh supplies, to the great
dishonor of this City, the scandal of Religion, and hindrance of the Charity
of many Pious and well affected People toward this good work.

Printed by James Flesher, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON, 1655.


