armsBy the Mayor.
THE Right Honorable the Lord Mayor (by and with the Advice of the Aldermen
his Brethren) does hereby think fit to publish and declare, That all manner of
persons within this City and the Liberties thereof, do from time to time duly
observe and conform themselves to the Laws and Ordinances established for the
suppression of Abuses, Disorders and Misdemeanors, and settlement of Peace,
Order and Quiet amongst his Majesty's Subjects: And that his Lordship does
purpose to use his best Care and Endeavor to enforce the Execution thereof,
and inflict the utmost Penalties upon all such persons as shall be discovered
to neglect or fail in their duty therein; And does require all Citizens and
Inhabitants, and more especially all public Officers to be aiding and
assisting for the discovery of all persons that shall be found to practice and
commit any manner of such Disorders and Enormities.

And particularly his Lordship does earnestly admonish and command all Citizens
and Inhabitants of this City deeply to consider, examine and observe the points
of their OATHS, as first the Oath of Supremacy, provided for Extirpation of the
Romish Religion. Secondly, the Oath of Allegiance ordained for preservation of
the Honor and Fidelity due to his Majesty. Thirdly, the Oath taken by all
persons admitted to the Freedom of this City, which for want of Consideration
is in many particulars and frequently infringed, and the good and necessary
Franchises and Customs of this City thereby violated.

That all persons do refrain unnecessary and profane SWEARING and CURSING in
ordinary Converse, for which the Penalty of Twelve pence is by the Law
appointed to be paid or levied by way of Distress for every Offense, or (in
case no Distress can he had) the Offender to sit three hours in the Stocks.

That no Vintner, Innkeeper, Alehouse or Coffee-house-keeper do permit any
SPORTING or TIPPLING in their Houses on the Lord's Day; nor any persons meet
there to sport, tipple or use unlawful or unseasonable exercises, on the
Penalties in that Case appointed by the Statutes of this Realm. And that no
Herbs, Fruit or other things be exposed to sale, nor any Hackney Coachman stand
and ply in the Streets on that Day. But that all persons do seriously apply
themselves to the observation of the said Day, by exercising themselves thereon
in the duties of Piety and true Religion, publicly and privately, according to
the directions of a late Act of Parliament, and not wasting their time idly,
and in unprofitable discourses in Coffee-Houses, of late too much practiced.

And that none do presume to keep a Common Bawdy House or Gaming-House for the
reception of lewd and dissolute persons, which have been observed to occasion
the ruin and destruction of many Apprentices and Young Men within this City:
And that none do repair to any such Houses; or be a common Drunkard, or
quarrelsome and a disturber of the Peace, or a promoter of Strife and Variance
between others: Which are all Offenses against the Law, and to be punished in
such manner as by the Law is directed.

And that no person do keep any public House, or sell Ale, Coffee or other
like Liquors, unless they be duly Licenced for that purpose.

And further that no Vintner, Brewer, Butcher, Baker or other do sell any
Bread, Wine, Beer, Flesh or other Victual whatsoever, but such only as shall be
good and wholesome for Man's Body.

And all Bakers are to keep the Assize appointed: And that all Weights and
Measures used in common Traffic shall be duly sized and sealed.

And his Lordship does hereby straightly command all Constables to apprehend and
take all sorts of Beggars, idle and suspected persons, and if they see cause to
make search in any Victualing-house or other place suspected to harbor such
loose and suspected people, and to carry them to Bridewel, as the Statute
directs, wherein is contained also a Penalty for the Constables neglect herein.
And that the said Constables do duly hold their Watches every night with their
full numbers, and at the hours appointed, and suffer no persons to pass the
Street at late and unseasonable hours, unless they can give a good account of
themselves and their occasions.

And his Lordship does expect, That all manner of persons within this City and
Liberties, do in all particulars demean themselves as becomes them within the
bounds of Justice, Sobriety and good Order, conceiving himself obliged in Duty,
and for discharge of his Trust, to inflict such due Punishment upon all
Criminals and Offenders, as the nature of their Offenses shall require; and he
does expressly charge all Constables and other his Majesty's Officers within
this City and Liberties, and all Citizens of this City, (as they tender the
good Government, Peace and Welfare thereof) to discover and give Information
either to his Lordship, the Court of Aldermen, or any of his Majesty's Justices
of the Peace within the said City, of all persons offending and misdemeaning
themselves, wherein they shall from time to time receive all due encouragement
and countenance.

Dated at Guildhal the 31 day of January in the 31 year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc.
God save the King.
Printed by Samuel Roycroft, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON, 1679.


