Londons Defiance to Rome. A Perfect NARRATIVE OF The Magnificent PROCESSION,
and Solemn Burning of the POPE at Temple-Barr, Nov. 17th, 1679.
(Being the Coronation-Day of that Never-to be-forgotten Princess, Queen
ELIZABETH.) With a Description of the Order, Rich Habits, Extraordina^y
Fireworks, Songs, and General Tryumphs attending that Illustrious Ceremony.
Segnius irritant animos, demissa per Aures,
Quam quae sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus --
Hor.
SOlid and Heroic Virtue, as it often bestows a Crown where it does not find
one, so when Joined, it Adorns a Sovereign Diadem, far more gloriously than
Diamonds and Rubies; It not only Erects Stable Thrones for Princes in their own
Peoples hearts, but by a secret Innocent Conquest makes them Reign over the
Subjects of their Neighbors; And, renders their Empire as large as their Fame,
Which it Embalms to posterity, and proves a better and more lasting Monument
than a Tombstone of Marble, or Porphirie: The World has not at any time
yielded a Nobler Confirmation of this Truth, than in our Match-less
Virgin-Queen, Elizabeth; It Is now above an Age (by Sacred Measure) since that
bright Star Disappeared to Mortals; and yet, How fresh and glorious does her
Memory shine this day, with all True Englishmen? If we inquire by what Charms
she Conciliated this Universal Renown, we shall find it was not by any
Sham-Maximes of little M^tchivellian Policy, but by those truly Royal
Qualifications of Generous Honor, Clemency, Justice and Love toward Her
People, particularly a firm Relyance on their Advice in Parliament, and an
Active Zeal for the Protestant Religion, whereof (throughout the World) She
both declared and showed Her Self the Protector; which will ever be the True
Interest of the English Throne: And, whoever shall dare Whisper any Prince of
this Nation hereafter to the contrary (though their Heads were as Big as
Golia's, and their Looks as Starched and Grave as Cato's) will yet, in the end;
prove Fools and Sots, as well as Traitors and Villains.

That pious Princess, thus Armed with an Upright Heart, the Blessing of Heaven,
and Entire Affections of Her People, not only defied all the Popes Curses, and
Plots of their Emissaries, but likewise Baffled the Power of Spain, then, no
less hopefully grasping at Universal Monarchy, than others since: She also
Assisted Holland, preserved the Reformed Churches in France, subdued diverse
Popish Rebellions in Ireland; and, full of Honor, as of Years, after a Long*
and most Prosperous Reign, left Her Kingdoms in peace; and, so Blessed and
Glorious a Memory behind Her, That Her Statue was generally set up in the
Churches of London: And, though the Cursed Popish Incendiaries, by their Horrid
Treachery in 66. Demolisht those Monuments, yet could they not Extinguish the
Remembrance of Her Virtues, but still the Anniversary of Her Coronation was
Celebrated as Festival; To render which more Illustrious, A Number of Worthy
True Protestant Gentlemen, taking notice of the Insolence of the Papists, who,
after all the Late Miraculous Discoveries of their several Hellish
Conspiracies, have still the Impudence to feed themselves with Hopes of
Succeeding in their Traitorous Designs of Enslaving these Nations. And
particularly for that they had, last Year, acted part of their Revenge on the
TEMPLE, by a Treacherous Devastation of that Honorable Law-Academy (Inferior
to no one Foundation of that kind in the World) because some of the Students
were thought to have been then Concerned in Exposing their Fopperies, The
Conspirators soon after threatening That eminent Society, That they should
shortly have Fires enough to Divert them, which their Villainous Confederates
quickly accomplished as aforesaid, on such Just Provocations (we say) these
Publick-spirited Gentlemen, nothing regarding the Malice of Hell and Rome --
were pleased, this Year, to prepare a more Extraordinary Representation, to
Express their Own, and the Cities, indeed the Whole Nations Defiance, and Just
Detestation of Popish Idolatries; An Entertainment so Seasonable, so Orderly
Managed, and so Universally Joined in, and Applauded, That we could not but
think it fit to give the World a Brief, and True Account thereof; the rather,
to Correct some False, and Imperfect Relations hereof; the Truth being as
follows.

On the said 17th of November, The Bells General about the Town began to Ring
at Three a Clock in the morning. At the approach of the Evening (All things
being in Readiness) the Solemn Procession began, setting forth from Moorgate,
and so passed first to Algate, and thence through Leaden-Hall-Street, by the
Royal Exchange, through Cheapside, and so to Temple-Barr, in the ensuing Order,
viz. 1. Came 6. Whiflers to clear the way, in Pioneers Caps, and Red Wastcoats.
2. A Bellman Ringing, and with a Loud (but Dolesome) Voice, Crying out all the
way, REMEMBER JUSTICE GODFREY. 3. A Dead Body, representing Justice Godfrey, in
Decent Black Habit, carried before a Jesuit in Black, on Horseback, in like
manner as he was carried by the Assassins to Primrose-Hill. 4. Next after Sir
Edmundbury, so mounted, came a Priest in a Surplice, with a Cope Embroidered
with Dead Bones, Skeletons, Skulls, and the like, giving Pardons very
Plentifully to all those that should Murder Protestants, and Proclaiming it
Meritorious. 5. Then a Priest in Black alone, with a great Silver Cross. 6.
Four Carmelites in White and Black Habits. 7. Four Gray Friars in the proper
Habits of their Order. 8. Six Jesuits with Bloody Daggers. 9. A Consort of
Wind-Musick. 10. Four Bishops in Purple and Lawn Sleeves, with a Golden Crosier
on their Breast, and Crosier-Staves in their hands. 11. Four other Bishops in
Pontificalibus, with Surplices, and rich Embroidered Copes, and Golden Miters
on their Heads. 12. Six Cardinals in Scarlet Robes and Caps. 13. The Popes
Doctor with Jesuits Powder in one hand, and an Urinal in the other. 14. Two
Priests in Surplices with two Golden Crosses.


Lastly, The Pope in a lofty glorious Pageant, representing a Chair of State,
covered with Scarlet, the Chair richly Embroidered and Fringed, and bedecked
with Golden Balls and Crosses; At his Feet a Cushion of State, and two Boys in
Surplices with White Silk Banners, and Bloody Crucifixes and Daggers, with an
Incense-Pot before them, Censing his Holiness, who was arrayed in a splendid
Scarlet Gown, lined through with Ermin, and richly daubed with Gold and Silver
Lace; on his Head a Tripple Crown of Gold, and a glorious Collar of Gold and
precious Stones; St. Peter's Keys, a number of Beads, Agnus Dei's, and other
Catholic Trumpery. At his back, his Holinesses Privy Counselor (The degraded
Seraphim) Anglice the Devil, frequently Caressing, Hugging, and Whispering him,
and ofttimes instructing him aloud to destroy His Majesty; to forge a
Protestant Plot, and to Fire the City again, to which purpose he held an
Infernal Torch in his hand.

The whole Procession was attended with 150 Flambeaus and Lights, by Order, but
so many more came in Volunteers, as made up some thousands.

Never were the Balconies, Windows and Houses more numerously Lined, or the
Streets closer thronged with Multitudes of People, all expressing their
Abhorrence of Popery with continual Shouts and Exclamations, so that it is
modestly computed, that in the whole progress, there could not be fewer than
Two hundred thousand Spectators.

Thus with a slow and solemn State they proceeded to Temple Bar, where with
innumerable swarms the Houses seemed to be converted into heaps of Men, and
Women, and Children, for whose diversion there were there provided great
variety of Excellent Fireworks.

Temple-Barr being since its Rebuilding, adorned with Four stately Statues,
viz. Those of Queen Elizabeth and King James on the inward, or Eastern side
fronting the City, and those of King Charles the First of Blessed Memory, and
our present Gracious Sovereign (whom God in mercy to these Nations long
preserve) on the outside, facing toward Westminster; and the Statue of Queen
Elizabeth) in regard to the day, having on a Crown of Gilded Laurel, and in
her hand a Golden Shield, with this Motto inscribed -- THE PROTESTANT RELIGION
AND MAGNA CHARTA, and Flambeau's placed before it; The Pope being brought up
near thereunto, the following Song (alluding to the posture of those Statues)
was sung in parts, between one representing The English Cardinal, and others
acting the People.

Cardinal Norfolk. FRom York to London Town we come;
To talk of Popish Ire,
To Reconcile you all to Rome
And prevent Smithfield Fire.

Plebs. Cease! Cease thou Norfolk Cardinal,
See yonder stands Queen Bess,
Who saved our Souls from Popish Thrall,
O Queeen Bess, Queen Bess, Queen Bess.
Your Popish Plot and Smithfield Threat,
We do not fear at all,
For Lo! beneath Queen Besses feet,
You fall, you fall, you fall.
Now God preserve Great CHARLES our King,
And eke all Honest men;
And Traitors all to Justice bring,
Amen, Amen, Amen.

Then having entertained the thronging Spectators for some time, with the
Ingenious Fireworks, a vast Bonfire being prepared just over against the
Inner-Temple-Gate, his Holiness after some Compliments and Reluctancies, was
decently Toppled from all his Grandeur into the Impartial Flames; The crafty
Devil leaving his Infallibility-ship in the lurch, and laughing as heartily at
his deserved Ignominious end, as subtle Jesuits do at the ruin of Bigoted
Lay-Catholicks, whom themselves have drawn in; or as credulous Coleman's
Abettors did, when with pretenses of a Reprieve at last gasp, they had made
him vomit up his Soul with a ^ye, and sealed his dangerous Chops with an
Halter. This Justice was attended with a Prodigious shout, that might be heard
far beyond Somerset House; and 'twas believed the Echo, by continued
Reverberations before it ceased, reached Scotland, France, and even Rome it
self, damping them all with a dreadful Astonishment: It Is probable some
whiffling Semi-Papalines may suggest, that it is rude and indecent to offer such
an Indignity to their Holy Father, because a Temporal Prince thus to execute
him in Effigy; But let them remember, we know his Civil Claims were gained by
Treason and Rebellion, as well as his Spiritual pretensions by Usurpation. At
worst it is but a Rowland for his Oliver; He that takes upon him to Depose and
Murder any lawful Princes that stand in his way, and has actually burnt so many
thousand Protestants, has no reason to complain, that we make so bold with his
Damnable Priestship, as to Fry him in Effigy.

The same evening there were large Bonfires generally in the Streets and
universal Acclamations, Long live King CHARLES, and let Popery perish, and
Papists with their Plots and Counter-plots ever (as hitherto) be confounded, To
which, every honest Englishman will readily say Amen.

FINIS.

