THE ADDRESS OF THE Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London in
Common Council Assembled.
Presented to Her Majesty at Whitehall, August 17. 1693. Published by
Authority. To the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty,
WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen,
and Commons of the City of London, in Common Council Assembled, out of a deep
Sense of the Infinite Goodness of GOD to this Nation, in the Signal Deliverance
of His Sacred Majesty from those Dangers to which he has so lately, for our
sakes, exposed His Royal Person, even to the Admiration of His Enemies, do
Heartily and Unfeignedly, in the first place, return to Almighty GOD our most
Humble Thanks; and, in the next, in all Humility, Congratulate Your Majesty
upon so Sensible a Providence, as the Preservation of that Prince, in whose
Life, not only our Laws and Religion, but even the Liberty of all Europe, is so
entirely wrapped up.

And Your Majesty having been Graciously Pleased by the Lord Keeper to signify
the deep Sense Your Majesty has of the Great Losses at Sea that have befallen
the Traders of this City and Kingdom, and the Directions Your Majesty has
given to a Committee of Your Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, as well
to Examine into the Causes of such Misfortunes, as to take Effectual Care to
prevent the like for the future, by Encouraging Your Majesty's Subjects to make
their Application to the said Committee.

We do with all Cheerfulness render our Hearty Thanks to Your most Gracious
Majesty for so Great a Condescension, no wise doubting but Your Majesty will
continue to give such Good and Seasonable Directions, that the Trade of this
Your Kingdom, in which the Prosperity of it does so much consist, may be better
Supported for the future.

And as we have hitherto, from a Sense of our Duty, demonstrated to the whole
World our Great Zeal for Your Majesty's Service; We having now a fresh
Opportunity of showing the same, by a Cheerful and Unanimous Advancing of Money
for the Present Emergencies of Your Majesty's Affairs, Humbly beg Leave to
assure Your Majesty of our Firm Resolution to continue our Hearty Endeavors
upon all Occasions, to Support Your Majesty's Royal Authority and Government,
against all Persons, to the uttermost of our Power.

Printed by Edward Jones in the Savoy. 1693.


