Several Propositions tendered by the Corporation for the Employing the Poor
of the City of London, and Liberties.
FOrasmuch as it is not simply the present suppression and setting to work of
idle Vagrants and Beggars of all sorts, wherewith the Streets, Lanes, and
several parts of this City, have of late so much abounded, to the great
scandal and dishonor thereof, that can thoroughly accomplish that hopeful
Reformation in this kind that is desired and intended, except some effectual
course be taken for the prevention thereof for the future. And whereas also,
that through the general neglect of most places, poor children maintained by
their respective parishes, and others are bred up like Atheists, after a sordid
loose, and undisciplined manner, care being had only for their present bodily
provision; by means whereof, so much dissoluteness, idleness, thefts,
whoredoms, profane cursing, swearing, and almost all kinds of wickedness do
generally abound in that sort of people, being indeed the most probable, if not
certain consequences of such an education. And furthermore, whereas many
Pensioners and others do eat the bread of Idleness; some through an
accustomed ocitansie, who can, but will not work; and others through an
unavoidable necessity, who would, but cannot procure work: For the hopeful
prevention of the inconveniences aforesaid, the Corporation for the employing
of the Poor of the City of London, do tender to the respective Parishes of the
said City as follows.

1. That the poor Children of this City, and Liberties thereof, from (...)
years old and upward, who now are at home at the Parishes charge, be duly sent
to the Worke-houses belonging to the Corporation, with provision for their
Dinners with them, where they shall have means to learn as well to read and
write, as to be instructed in such manufacturies as they shall be capable of;
Provided, they bring with them the Certificate of the Churchwardens or
Overseers of the poor of their several Parishes respectively.

2. That to this end they shall have two hours in every day allowed them to
learn to read and write, with one hour at noon for their repast, and the rest
of the day, from seven or eight of the clock in the morning, till five or six
at night, to be spent in getting knowledge how to work in some manufactury that
may be useful to this Commonwealth.

3. That for the first quarter of the year (except the Children be grown up, or
are more expert then ordinary) it cannot be expected that any thing should be
given them but their Learning, in respect of that unavoidable loss which will
be sustained in the teaching them any manufacture whatsoever, through the waste
that they will make. But after the first quarter, twelve pence per week shall
be allowed to each Child for their work, and shall be increased as they shall
deserve, which together with what is allowed by the parish for their keeping
and clothes, will be a competent maintenance for each respective Child.

4. That the Pensioners in the several Wards, that are best able, may by
turns weekly accompany the children to the Workhouses, one Pensioner to have
the oversight of ten children, or their abouts, so as to bring them in the
morning, and to return with them home at night; and the said Pensioners may
likewise work upon such manufacturies as they are best skilled in, and be paid
according to their earnings.

5. That the Children who shall be employed by this Corporation, may each of them
have a badg of the Corporation upon their sleeves.

6. That such Pensioners, or other poor as are aged, or that cannot come to
the said VVork-houses, may have materials to work upon home to their own
houses, some of the Overseers of the Parish engaging for the faithful return
of them when they are converted into manufactury, according to the tickets
printed by order of the Corporation, and they likewise to be paid according to
their earnings.

7. That for the straggling Poor, if they belong to any parish within this
City, and the Liberties thereof, then from thence they must have allowance, and
there have habitation, and be regulated as is before expressed concerning the
Parish Children.

8. That when any of these children so regulated, and educated, shall become
fit, through ripeness of age, or otherwise, they may be placed out apprentices
in some useful trades for their future livelyhoods.

Toward the effectual accomplishment of which work aforesaid, the said
Corporation doubt not of the most ready concurrence and help of all pious and
charitable hearts.

18 September, 1650.
ORdered at a Court held by the Corporation for the Poor of the City of London
and Liberties, That these Propositions with the Preamble now read and voted,
shall be forthwith Printed, and dispersed to the Parishes of LONDON.

Signed by the appointment of the Corporation. Per Jo. Marsh, Cler.

London, Printed by Richard Cotes, 1650.


