blazon or coat of arms of the City of London blazon or coat of arms of the
City of London
By the Mayor. To the Alderman of the Ward
Wardmote.
WE charge and command you, that upon Saint Thomas day the Apostle next coming,
you do hold your Wardmote, and that you have before us at our general Court of
Aldermen to be holden (...) the Monday next after the Feast of the Epiphany
next coming, all the Defaults that shall be presented before you by Inquest in
the said Wardmote; and the said Inquest shall have full power and authority by
one whole year to enquire and present all such Defaults as shall be found
within your said Ward, Inquest for the year.
as oftentimes as shall be thought to you expedient and needful, which we will
shall be once every month at the least.

Inquest dying.
2 And if it happen any of your said Inquest to die, or depart out of your said
Ward within the said year, that then, in place of him or them so dying or
departing out of your said Ward, you cause to be chosen one able person to
inquire and present with the other in manner and form abovesaid.

Nonappearance.
3 And that, at the said general Court, you give before us the names and
surnames of all them of your said Ward that come not to your said Wardmote, if
they be duly warned, so that due redress and punishment of them may be had, as
the case shall require, according to the Law.

Watch, light, Vizard.
4 And that you do provide, that at all times convenient, conveniable Watch he
kept: And that Lanterns with light by nightertail in old manner accustomed be
hanged forth: And that no man go by nightertail without light, nor with Vizard,
on the peril that belongs thereto.

Common Council.
5 And also that you do cause to be chosen men, (...) of the most sufficient,
honest and discreet men of your said Ward, to be for your said Ward of the
Common Council of this City for the year ensuing, according to the custom in
that behalf yearly used. And also that you do cause the said men, so to be
chosen to be of the Common Council, to be sworn before you, and in your
presence, according to the Oath by them used, and of old time accustomed; the
tenor of which Oath hereafter ensues:

Ye shall swear, that ye shall be true to our Sovereign Lord the KING that now
is, and to his Heirs and lawful Successors, and readily come when ye be
summoned to the Common Council of this City, but if ye be reasonably excused;
and good and true Counsel ye shall give in all things touching the common weal
of this City, after your wit and cunning: And that for favor of any man ye
shall maintain no singular profit, against the common profit of this City: And
after that ye be come to the Common Council, ye shall not from thence depart,
till the Common Council be ended, without reasonable cause be else by the
Mayor's license: And also that all secret things that be spoken or said in the
Common Council, the which ought to be kept secret, ye shall in no wise
disclose. As God you help.

And that together with the said Oath of their Office, you administer to the
said persons that shall be chosen of the Common Council, the Oaths of Supremacy
and Allegiance, and the other Oath hereafter following.

I A. B. Do utterly testify and declare in my conscience that the KING's
Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his
Highness'es Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
things or causes as Temporal; And that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State
or Potentate, has or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority,
Preeminence or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm: And
therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all Foreign Jurisdictions, Powers,
Superiorities and Authorities, and do promise that from henceforth I shall bear
Faith and true Allegiance to the KING's Highness, his Heirs and lawful
Successors; and to my power shall assist and defend all Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Preeminences and Authorities granted or belonging to the KING's
Highness, his Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown
of this Realm. So help me God, and by the Contents of this Book.

I A. B. Do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify and declare in
my conscience before God and the world, that our Sovereign Lord King CHARLES is
lawful and rightful King of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's
Dominions and Countries; and that the Pope, neither of himself, nor by any
authority of the Church or See of Rome, or by any other means with any other,
has any power or authority to depose the King, or to dispose any of his
Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions, or to authorize any Foreign Prince to invade
or annoy him or his Countries, or to discharge any of his Subjects of their
Allegiance and obedience to his Majesty, or to give License or leave to any of
them to bear Arms, raise Tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to his
Majesty's Royal Person, State or Government, or to any of his Majesty's
Subjects within his Majesty's Dominions. Also I do swear from my heart, that
notwithstanding any Declaration of sentence of Excommunication or Deprivation
made or granted, or to be made or granted, by the Pope or his Successors, or by
any Authority derived or pretended to be derived from him or his See, against
the said King, his Heirs or Successors, or any Absolution of the said Subjects
from their Obedience, I will bear Faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors, and him and them will defend to the uttermost of my
power, against all Conspiracies and attempts whatsoever which shall be made
against his or their Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason or color of
any such sentence or Declaration, or otherwise; and will do my best endeavor
to disclose and make known unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, all
Treasons and Traitorous Conspiracies which I shall know or hear of, to be
against him or any of them. And I do farther swear, that I do from my heart
abhor, detest and abjure, as impious and he^etical, this damnable Doctrine and
Position, that Princes which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be
deposed or murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. And I do
believe, and in conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope nor any person
whatsoever has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part thereof, which I
acknowledge by good and full Authority to be lawfully administered unto me, and
do renounce all pardons and dispensations to the contrary. And all these things
I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge, and swear according to these express
words by me spoken, and according to the plain and common sense and
understanding of the same words, without any equivocation, or me tal evasion,
or secret reservation whatsoever; And I do make this Recognition and
acknowledgment heartily, willingly and truly, upon the true faith of a
Christian. So help me God, etc.

I A. B. Do declare and believe, That it is not lawful, upon any pretense
whatsoever, to take Arms against the KING; And that I do abhor that traitorous
Position, of taking Arms by his Authority against his Person, or against those
that are Commissioned by him. So help me God.

And farther, that you likewise administer to the same persons that shall be so
elected of the Common Council, to be by them subscribed, the ensuing
Declaration.

I A. B. Do declare, That I hold that there is no obligation upon me or any
other person from the Oath commonly called The Solemn League and Covenant; And
that the same was in it self an unlawful Oath, and imposed upon the Subjects of
this Realm against the known Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom.

For that otherwise, if the said persons, or any of them, that shall be elected
as aforesaid of the Common Council, shall not take the said Oaths, and
subscribe the said Declaration, their election and choice is by the late Act of
Parliament, for the Governing and Regulating of Corporations, enacted and
declared to be void.

Constables, Scavengers, Beadle, Raker.
6 And that also in the said Wardmote you cause to be chosen certain other
honest persons to be Constables, and Scavengers, and a common Beadle, and a
Raker to make clean the streets and lanes of all your said Ward, according to
the custom yearly used in that behalf: which Constables have and shall have
full power and authority to distrain for the Salary and Quarterage of the said
Beadle and Raker, as oftentimes as it shall be behind or unpaid.

Roll of names.
7 Also that you keep a Roll of the names, surnames, dwelling-places,
professions and trades of all persons dwelling within your Ward, and within
what Constables Precinct they dwell, wherein the place is to be specially noted
by Street, Lane, Alley, or Sign.

Constables.
8 Also that you cause every Constable from time to time to certify unto you
the name, surname, dewlling place, profession and trade of every person who
shall newly come to dwell within his Precinct, whereby you may make and keep
your Roll perfect: Roll.
And that you cause every Constable for his Precinct, to that purpose, to make
and keep a perfect Roll in like manner.

Inholder. Lodger. Sojourner.
9 Also that you give special charge that every Inholder and other person
within your Ward, who shall receive any person to lodge or sojourn in his house
above two days, shall, before the third day after his coming thither, give
knowledge to the Constable of the Precinct where he shall be so received, of
the name, surname, dewlling place, profession and trade of life, or place of
service of such person, and for what cause he shall come to reside there;
Suspect persons.
and that the said Constable give present notice thereof to you: and that the
said Inholder lodge no suspected person, or men or women of evil name.

10 Also that you cause every Constable within his Precinct, once every month
at the farthest, and oftener if need require, Search.
to make diligent search and inquiry what persons be newly come into his
Precinct to dwell, sojourn or lodge: and that you give special charge, that no
Inholder or person shall resist or deny any Constable in making such search or
inquiry, but shall do his best endeavor to aid and assist him therein.

11 And for that of late there is more resort to the City of persons
evil-affected in Religion and otherwise then in former times has been; you
shall diligently enquire if any man be received to dwell or abide within your
Ward that is not put under Frank pledge, Frank pledge
as he ought to be by the custom of the City; and whether any person has
continued in the said Ward by the space of one year, being above the age of
xii. years, and not sworn to be faithful and loyal to the Kings Majesty, in
such sort as by the law and custom of this City he ought to be.

Beadle.
12 To all these purposes the Beadle of every Ward shall employ his diligence,
and give his best furtherance.

Fire.
13 Also that you have special regard that from time to time there be
convenient provision for Books, Ladders, Buckets, Spouts and Engines, in meet
places within the several Parishes of your Ward, for avoiding the peril of fire.

Streets.
14 Also that the Streets and Lanes of this City be from time to time kept
clean before every Church, House, Shop, Warehouse, Door, Dead-wall, and in all
other common passages and Streets of the said Ward.

15 And where by diverse Acts of Common Council, aforetime made and established
for the common weal of this City, among other things, it is Ordained and
Enacted, as hereafter ensues:

Hucksters of Ale and Beer.
Also it is Ordained and Enacted, That from henceforth no Huckster of Ale or
Beer be within any Ward of the City of London but honest persons, and of good
name and fame, and so taken and admitted by the Alderman of the Ward for the
time being; and that the same Hucksters do find sufficient surety before the
Mayor and Aldermen for the time being, to be of good guiding and rule: and that
the same Hucksters shall keep no Bawdry, nor suffer no Lechery, Dice, Playing,
Carding, or any other unlawful Games to be done, exercised or used within their
houses; and to shut in their doors at nine of the clock in the night, from
Michaelmas to Easter, and from Easter to Michaelmas at ten of the clock in the
night, and after that hour sell no Ale or Beer: And if any Huckster of Beer or
Ale, after this Act published and proclaimed, sell any Ale or Beer within any
Ward of the City of London, and be not admitted by the Alderman of the same
Ward so to do, or find not sufficient surety, as it is above rehearsed, the
same Huckster to have imprisonment, and make fine and ransom for his contempt,
after the discretion of the Mayor and Aldermen: And also that the said
Hucksters suffer no manner of common eating and drinking within their Cellars
or Vaults, contrary to the Ordinance thereof ordained and provided, as in the
said Act more plainly appears at large: We charge you that you put the same
in due execution accordingly.

Measures sealed.
16 And also that ye see all Tipplers, and other sellers of Ale or Beer, as
well privy Osteries, as Brewers and Inholders, within your Ward, not selling by
lawful measures sealed and marked with the City Arms or Dagger, be presented,
and their names in your said Indentures be expressed, with their Defaults, so
that the Chamberlein may be lawfully answered of their amercements.

Strangers born.
17 And also that you suffer no Alien, or son of any born an Alien, to be of
the Common Council, nor to exercise or use any other Office within this City,
nor receive or accept any person into your Watch, privy, or open, but
Englishmen born: and if any Stranger born out of this Realm, made denizen by
Letters Patents, or any other after his course and lot be appointed to any
Watch, that then ye command and compel him or them to find in his stead and
place an Englishman to supply the same.

18 And also that you cause an Abstract of the Assise appointed by Act of
Parliament for Billets and other Firewood to be fair written in Parchment, and
to be fixed or hanged up in a Table, in some fit and convenient place in the
Parish within your Ward, where the common people may best see the same.

Streets.
19 And furthermore, we charge and command you, that you cause such provision
to be had in your said Ward, that all the Streets and Lanes within the same
Ward be from time to time cleansed and clearly voided of Ordure, Dung, Mire,
Rubbish, and other filthy things whatsoever be to the annoiance of the Kings
Majesty's Subjects. Pain 40. s.


Vagrants.
20 And also that at all times as you shall think necessary, you do cause
search to be made within your said Ward for all vagrant Beggars, suspicious and
idle people, and such as cannot show how to live; and such as shall be found
within your said Ward, that you cause to be punished and dealt with according
to the Laws and Statutes in such case ordained and provided.

Jurymen.
21 And also we will and charge you the said Alderman, that your self certify
and present before us at the said general Court, to be holden the aforesaid
Monday next after the Feast of the Epiphany, all the names and surnames truly
written of such persons within your said Ward as be able to pass in a
Grand Jury by themselves; and also all the names and surnames truly written of
such persons being and dwelling within your said Ward, as be able to pass in a
Petty-Jury by themselves; that is to say, every Grand-Jury-man to be worth in
goods an hundred marks, and every Petty-Jury-man forty marks, according to an
Act in that case ordained and provided: and the same you shall indorse on the
backside of your Indenture.

Harlots.
22 Item, for diverse reasonable and urgent considerations us especially moving,
we straightly charge and command you on the King our Sovereign Lords behalf,
That you diligently provide and foresee, that no manner of person or persons
within your said Ward, what condition or degree soever he or they be of,
keeping any Tavern or Alehouse, Ale-seller, or any other Victualling-house, or
place of common resort to eat or drink in, within the same Ward, permit or
suffer at any time hereafter any common woman of their bodies, or Harlots, to
resort and come into their said house, or other the places aforesaid, to eat or
drink, or otherwise to be conversant or abide, or thither to haunt or frequent,
upon pain of imprisonment, as well of the Tenant and keeper of every such house
or houses, and all other the places before remembered, as of the common woman or
Harlots.

Articles.
23 Also that you do give in charge to the Wardmote Inquest of your Ward all
the Articles delivered to you herewith, and that you have a special care of
keeping the peace and good order during your Wardmote, and if any offend
herein, you fine or punish him or them according to Law.

Not failing hereof, as ye tender the common weal of this City, and advancement
of good Justice, and as ye will answer for the contrary at your uttermost
peril. Dated at (...) under the Seal-Office of Mayoralty of the said City, the
(...) day of December, in the (...) year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.

Printed by James Flesher, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON.


