Licensed,

October 14, 1685. Rob. Midgley.

A DIRECT METHOD Of Ordering and Curing People of that Loathsome Disease, the
SMALLPOX; TEACHING The Common sort of People (to whom the Care of the Sick is
for the most part committed) how to go through their Business, with much more
Safety, Ease, Speed, and Certainty than has been hitherto commonly known.

AS ALSO How to prevent the usual Deformity of Marks and Scars, with the most
usual Names of such Remedies as are necessary to be made use of; with their
Dose, and the Manner of Applying them. All made plain to the Meanest Capacity:
For the Benefit of all, But Especially the POOR.

Being the Twenty Years Practical Experience and Observations of John Lamport,
alias Lampard, Practitioner in Chyrurgery and Physic.

Errata. Page 5. l. 4. for or Vitriol, r. of Vitriol. p. 28. l. 3. I Cure,

LONDON, Printed by I. Gain, for the Author, and are to be Sold by Samuel
Crouch at the Flower-de-luce, at the Entrance of Pope's Head Alley in Cornhill,
1685.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Countrymen,
THis small Tractate was intended as an Appendix to another book now almost
ready for the Press, but that occasion which did move me to think of inserting
it at the end of that Book (being augmented) has exposed this sooner to a view
than was intended.

Of how singular use a Treatise of this kind may prove to all sorts of people,
may e^sily be conceived, if we do but consider how hard a matter it is to get
any body but to enter into an infected house; the great Charge it is for poor
people to pay a Nurse, and how ignorant the most of them are of their business
when they are obtained.

Or do but consider what a sad condition it is, when it happens in a Family,
where none has had the distemper, and a Tender is not to be gotten; whereby
the Husband, is constrained to tend the Wife, or she her Husband; or they
sometimes three, four or more Children sick of this Disease: How Joyful would
they be to know my cheap Antidote, for preserving some to tend the rest? Or to
be assured with what Liquor they may boldly and safely refresh their Darling
Husbands, Wives, or scorched thirsty Babes.

Or what would not some pretty Maidens (yea, or young men either) give, to
preserve that beauty they have hitherto enjoyed.

All this have I (by Gods assistance) often performed, far beyond the
expectation or belief of most people, and now for the general good of Mankind
do freely communicate my Experience.

And Lastly, Let me persuade you, not to give heed to those who (out of Envy,
or Self-Interest, Demetrius like) tell you that I do not understand the Subject
of which I have written, because I cry down cooling Liquors as poison to
Febrile people; for I do assure you that I have not Wrote from bare Conjecture,
but from undeniable Experiments; as you will quickly find when you do put my
Advice into Practice.

Wishing you happy Success, with my Prayers to God Almighty, for his blessing
on my Endeavors, under his alone Protection as it is, I Emit it to the World.

He who fault with this does find
I Will thank him when he proves more kind.
I. L.
From my Study in Havant, Septem. 28 die Lunae 1685.
THE CURE OF THE Smallpox.
I Having written a small Treatise concerning the many gross Abuses and
dangerous Errors, commonly used amongst such as do pretend to the Curious Art
of Healing, discovering the evil of such fraudulent Impostors to the Capacities
of plain Country People. Upon hearing the Lamentation of diverse Persons, not
only that the small Pox was spread much about the Country, but also that many
did die of it; did resolve to But the urgency of the occasion, by the raging of
the distemper, has forced this Abortive Birth.
conclude that book with these short but sure Directions for ordering people in
that Disease. Being fully persuaded that I can hardly do my Country much better
service, than to communicate my knowledge herein; having had large Experience,
and wonderful happy Success, as well in curing without much difficulty or
future Mrs. Badmerings familynear to A^hington, and one Gibs at Felpham week.
Marks, as preserving those conversant amongst the sick, from the John Haman
Needle-maker of Chichester.
Infection; being things much desired by all people that do conceive themselves
in danger of this Noysom Disease, w^ll known for Truth to all such as have
employed me.

Yea, whilst I lived i^ Aldingbourne, there was one No^able Example, viz. all
died that had this Distemper not one escaping until three died out of one small
Mr. T. Gre^^.
Family; and one out of a Neighbo^rs H^n. Li^b^ise.
House, yet the former wanted not the Advice of the most famous Men in the
Faculty of Medicine. The later did immediately (after the death of his servant)
seek to me, and God so blessed my Endeavors that not one more died, yet one
Child or Upon enquiry I hear that it was two children and one servant.
more had the Disease; but, if I forget not, they hardly kept their bed a day
for it.

One great Cause of this Disease being so Mortal in the Country, is because the
Infection does make many Physicians backward to visit such Patients, either for
fear of taking the Disease themselves or transferring the infection to others.

By this means the Tending Nurses do generally assume the sole Authority of
Physicians, although that their Experience perhaps is no more, but what they
did gather by their being once a sufferer under the like ignorant practicing
Nurses.

And in case the Master of the Family do give himself the Trouble and Charge of
taking Advice and Remedies of some able Physician, yet this signifies nothing;
for their ignorant Confidence is such, that they will be By help of my
directions the Master or Mistress may be able to guide and control the most
confident Nurse.
guided no farther by it than it agrees with their own shallow Brains, and
Customary Practice.

And considering how hard it is to break or alter an Old Custom that has fully
possessed the fond conceits of a multitude of ignorant people; I have resolved
not to strive against so turbulent a stream* but rather endeavor to make such
(as are not too proud to learn) more able in their Callings, by communicating
my Knowledge, grounded on Reason, and confirmed by many Experiments.

And to begin I will teach an Antidote or preserving Medicine, which is this;

Take flos sulphuris (i. e.) flowers of Brimstone (which is commonly sold by
the Apothecaries) four ounces, of clarified Honey one pound; warm the Honey,
and then stir in the powder, and so keep it in a Gally-pot for your use.

And when you do conceive your self to be in danger of the small Pox, take the
quantity of a Nutmeg or more, at Morning and Evening or oftener if you please.

You may go about your business as at other times, not minding any order of
Diet, for it is a very safe harmless Medicine and never the worse for being
cheap. I have had very happy success in the using it, as there are several
living can bear me Hen. Betsworth a Molecatcher in Chichester.
Witness; and some of them (I believe) will wonder to see me make it so common,
but it is the Real Good of my Neighbor that I do aim at in publishing this
Paper, and not Applause.

Those people that are near a Chemist may do well to get such flowers as have
been twice or thrice sublimed; and the last time from Colcothar; for an Ounce
of such are worth 3 or 4 ounces of those that are commonly sold.

Caution.
But beware that you do not use powdered Brimston in the stead of flos
sulphuris, least you should meet with a little Ratsbane amongst it.

But to my business, when you find some of the symptoms to appear as the
Headache, Drowziness, sometimes motions to vomit, pain in the back, these or
some of these signs being accompanied with a fever (at a season when the small
Pox are rife) you may well Imagine that the Disease has seized the Patient.

When these signs do show themselves (do not run madding to Dr. Dunce or his
Assistance to be let blood) but go to your Chamber (I do not say to your bed)
and drink strong Beer, and now and then a Glass of Sack; and never fear
increasing the Fever by your so doing, for it strengthens Nature to cast out
his Adversary that way which Nature does most incline unto, as sometimes by
Vomit, sometimes by Sweat and Urine.

But I have always given an Antimonial Vomit, as soon as I could possibly have
a fit time to give it, (of which more hereafter) for it does expel such a
quantity of the Morbifick Matter, from all parts of the body, but especially
from the Riv. page 13. says, Aqua Bened. purging upwards and downwards,
brings such a quantity of phlegm not only from the
Head and stomach, b^t from ^he brain also etc
Stomach, that the disease afterward seems to be quite Mastered; no
lightheaded discourse, no unruly actions, no excessive thirst appearing (or
very little) afterward. And this have I done with very happy success very
often; nay I have had some Patients have been angry that they should be
confined to their Chamber for a few Pimples (as they called them); and some
never kept within doors.

But such as cannot have well prepared Antimony, may give a dram of Salt or
Vitriol; and for want of that, give a dram or a dram and half, or two drams
of purified white Vitriol, and those which cannot obtain that neither, were
better to give the like quantity of crude white Vitriol than not to Vomit at
all; for I have always observed that according as the stomach is more or less
loaded with ill humors, so is this disease more or less violent; and not as
some of our Country People conjecture, as people that are fat and corpulent to
be full of the smallpox; and that spare lean people should have but few.

I shall in the next place give my Reader a Taste of some other Authors
Opinion, how far they may be said to countenance this kind of Practice; and
will herein be as brief as possible I can, as having treated more largely in
the forementioned Book, under the Title of Fevers.

Doctor Riverius in his Practice of Physic, page 624, tells us, That the
Cure of Pestilential Fevers must be directed to three things, viz, The Fevers
must be opposed with Coolers and Moisteners, the Putrefaction with There is no
quicker nor safer evacuation than by a Chemical vomit. But do not think that
Tobacco and such like are to be used.
Evacuators and Alterers, the Malignant Quality with Antidotes. In the Chapter
of putrid Fevers, page 576, he says, But if thirst be caused by a Choleric
Humor contained in the Stomach, the said Humor must be voided by Vomit or How
dangerous Stools are, every Nurse can tell you.
Stool.

The C^olerick Humor here spoken of, being stirred, is generally the ca^se of
Super natural Thirst, in all Fevers whatsoever.

In the Chapter aforesaid page 570 he writes thus, Sometime also in the
beginning of these Fevers, Vomit is to be procured, viz. when the Patient is
much vexed with illness of Stomach, and with Vomiting, etc. And many times it
falls out that great quantity of matter is contained in the Stomach and parts
thereabou^s, which must be evacuated as soon as possible may be by Vomit; (then
he gives a good Reason for so doing) seeing no Concoction can be expected of
such Excrementitious matter in so great a Is it best in a great quantity, and
bad in a small?
quantity; and whatsoever the Patient eats or drinks is changed into such like
Humors and increases the matter which is Cause of the Disease. Then by
consequence to pour your cooling Julips, Apozemes, Pippin-Possets, etc. into
such depraved Stomachs, is like to pouring Oil on Fire (to quench it) instead
of Water.

Then he tells us, that Fernelius has well observed, that all superfluity of
Humors in the Stomach, Spleen, Pancreas, Mesentery, and the cavity of the
Liver, is conveniently emptied out by a Vomit, which sometimes will not be
removed by Why then do ^ou use them.
Medicines that work downwards, though diverse times Administered. Thus far
Riverius.

Now I must tell you that the Material cause of putrid Fevers, and the
smallpox is the same; but that which does put it into act, (or sets it on
working) is different: for the smallpox is set on Fire by the contagious And
in put^id Fe^^ers, by ^ating, or drinking to excess; or some violent agitation,
in labor or exercise.
Air; as you may see that a common surfeit (as you call it) when the smallpox
is Epidemical it often turns to be the smallpox, which had otherwise proved
only a putrid Fever. But of this I have given a larger account in another
Treatise, which I hope shortly to publish.

I will say no more of Vomits in this place, having in the aforesaid book
showed almost a Universal use of them, and proved it by undeniable Experiments.

And considering the aversness of many people to this kind of Physic; partly
out of a natural Antipathy, but more from observing the bad Events of ill
prepared Medicines, too frequently made use of by such, whose Idleness and
Ignorance keeps them from the knowledge of good Chemical Remedies; of which
well prepared Vomits are (to my knowledge) of most admirable benefit to sick
People.

Well, if you will not be so suddenly rid of your Disease, as you might be by
vomiting half a dozen times in two hours space; then I must give a touch again
at the order of diet. And here I will tell you again, that if you keep your
Patients from strong Beer to satisfy their Thirst* you do thereby exceedingly
increase the Disease: And note likewise, that if you persuade them to eat
either Flesh or Broth, you do almost as ill; But if you will be feeding them
(though far better it were let alone until they Hunger after it) then give them
now and then three or four spoonfuls of a plain Sack-Posset, or a piece of
White-bread Toast dipped in such strong Liquor as the Patient likes best,
whether it be Sack, White Wind, Metheglin, Cider, March or Mild Beer, or good
Ale: and fear not to let him make his Toast swim in his Stomach if he do desire
it.

And for to make you the bolder I will give you Doctor Thompsons Opinion
herein, in his Book of preserving the Blood, page 164, says he, Let none then
Haesitate to offer liberally what is potulent or liquid to one that is Thirsty,
for it is both necessary and consentaneous to Nature so to do: yea, through this
omission the good juice or solid parts may suffer a deperdition.

And in the next page, having given diverse Reasons for giving strong Beer in
Fevers, he breaks out thus, Away then with these Clogging, Dull, Flat, Vapid,
Debilitating Decoctions of the Kitchen, with all their crude vegitable
Ingredients, most injurious to a febrile Stomach.

Page 166 at Figure 3, he writes thus, As there are a company of Non-sensical
Physicians, who are loath to allow the dry soul of one scorched in a Fever a
sufficient quantity of moisture to allay their Thirst: so are there Multitudes
of Learned Dogmatists (I am certain Egregiously Ignorant in this particular)
who though they assent their Patients should have good store of Liquor granted
them, as properly answerable to the indication of Siccity or drought, yet must
it be so qualified, that it ought by no means to contain too many hot
particles, least they should seem to act contrary to the definition of a Fever
which is as they proclaim it but falsely a preter-natural heat, wherefore they
strictly enjoin Posset Drink made with some poor starvling Liquor,
Barley-water, wherein cooling or very temperate Herbs are boiled, small Beer,
fair Water, Rose Water, with some acid Juice mixed, etc. To this they most
devoutly keep a weak Wretch, not doubting to mitigate (although they have
failed many Million of times) a Causos or any burning Fit.

And a little after he says, That they will by no means approve of a Cup of
Wine, or a draught of strong Beer or Ale (because too hot as it is fancied) the
Principal Corroborating Pray (...) that this an^i^^t, ingenious, i^dustrious,
(...) Artist tells us plainly, that strong Beer, A^ and Wine, which other
Doctors do forbid, be constantly ^res^ri^^ to his ^ati^nts (not only as drink)
but (...) chiefest diet als^*
Diet, which I constantly prescribe to my Patients. Thus far Dr. Thompson.

To proceed, if you can get any of the oil of Sulphur by the Bell, and drop in
6, 8 or 10 drops into a draught of strong Mild Beer now and then, it will
wonderfully help a weak stomach to concoct the ill humors collected therein;
which will much refresh the Patient.

If they come forth ill or seem too flat (as you call it) then give now and
then a Glass of Sack, with a dozen or twenty drops of Elixir Proprietatis
therein; this chears the Vital Spirit ^xceedingly, if the Elixir be good; which
it is h^rd to obtain; for the more excellent a Remedy is; the more are they
which do (through ignorance or Avarice) Adulterate the same.

Therefore take this Course, first observe if it be thick as blood, then it is
Rich or strong of the Ingredients, and the fewer drops will serve for a Dose.
Secondly, Smell to it, if it be strong of the Sa^fron, that is another Token of
its Goodness. Thirdly, Taste a drop on your tongue, for although it be always
bitter, yet the less bitt^r the more better; for that is a sign of being well
dig^sted. But if all these hold, and it has a harsh Taste on the Tongue, it is
not good; as being made with a Menstruum mixed with Oil of Vitriol or Sulphur;
which although I have directed to be given in the Patients Beer, yet in the
Elixir it is not to be allowed; because it does corrode the principal
ingredients, viz. Myrrh, Aloes, and Saffron.

Yet for all what I have said, you had better make use of either of them, then
to have none; although I have seen some sold, that I would not give one ounce
of my own preparing, for four of that; of the reason of which odds, I could
easily make any ingenious man sensible, by comparing them together.

In the next place, there is a Medicine sold in many places by the Name of
Mathews's Pill, but in Truth Doctor George Starkey was the first discoverer of
that Excellent Remedy. But be the Author who it will, its Virtues does
sufficiently declare his worth; for I never saw any thing used by any Physician
that did ever come near it for giving ^ase, and rest in any Fever of what kind
soever.

But I might here make the same complaint as I did about preparing the Elixir,
but I forbear.

But I will teach you the right use thereof according to my many years
Experience.

If your Patient be suddenly taken so ill as to desire to go to Bed, you may
presently give him two Pills as big as a Pease, and a draught of strong Beer
with or after them, and if the party do neither Sleep nor Sweat in an Hour or
two, repeat them again, and Beer as before; and repeat it again, and again too,
if need be. But if sickness does not compel them to their bed, defer the giving
them Pills until bedtime; but do not miss giving two or three at going to bed
during the whole time of Cure.

But do not load them with Clothes (as the common Fashion is) but let them be
covered, as may be well-pleasing to the Patient, and of the two it were better
they are a little too cold, than to be ever so little too hot.

Now because this may seem a Paradox to some people, being so diametrically
opposite to common practice, I will give my Reason for so doing.

If they be too hot, the Vital Spirit flies from the Center to the
Circumference, which should be employed about the Riv. page* 57^. say^, A (...)
^^gard is to be (...).
stomach to concoct (or rather digest) the Morbifick matter ther^in contained;
which is the Fuel that does maintain the fire in this Disease.

Do not all men see how slowly the stomachs of sound People do digest meat (I
do not say d^ink) in hot Weather, for what it does when the season is cold? And
from this Conclusion you may draw a Reason for the giving strong Liquor to
drink to febrile people, viz. that in regard the Appetite to eat Riv. page 5^^.
(...)
is taken away by the Disease, it is very absurd to deny the Patient such
spirituous drinks as has underwent a precedent Such are all s^rts of Wine,
Cider, (...) and all sorts of B^er and A^e, of which that is the be^^ which the
(...).
Fermentation (to ease the stomach of the b^rthen of digesting) so earnestly
desired by Nature (that sure guide to true Medicine) that by the quick
diffusing their vigorous Atoms in the blo^d, the Archeus may thereby be
speedily enabled to conflict with the Disease.

Here perhaps some will say that I do write Ta^tologies; but I answer, so
material a point, being so much opposed, and that by Persons esteemed eminently
Learned, so much to the prejudice almost of all Mankind; cannot be repea^ed too
often, until it has obtained belief of the Audience.

But I have designed this Tractate, not to Teach the Learned, but to Instruct
the poor ignorant Tenders of the sick, and such poor Wretches as are not able
to hire a Tender, much less to pay a silken Doctor to feel their Pulse, whilst
they look over the other shoulder, or hold some perfume to their Noses: I shall
rather refer them to the Judicious Writings of Doctor Starkey, Doctor Thompson,
Noah Biggs, and others; who partly from the works of that profound,
indefatigable, Pyrotechnian Philosopher Van Helmont; and partly from their own
diligent study and labor at the Fire, (the Touchstone of Natural things) have
not only battered some of Galen's Their Method.
Outworks, but made the Foundation of his Philosophy to Totter.

It may here be expected, that I should teach some Excellent Ointment to
prevent the Pits, Marks and Scars, etc. which do commonly succeed this Disease;
but I tell you that if the foregoing Instructions have been but indifferently
followed, there will be no need of the latter.

But for their sakes who (through some occasion or other) have neglected it, I
will give a word or two of this also, for I have been forced to do somewhat in
this kind of Practice; but I would not have my Reader imagine that I do pretend
to an absolute deletion by this way; but only a lessening of the same that they
may not be so much deformed as otherwise.

Receipt.
So soon as the smallpox begin to suppurate, that is in plain English to ripen,
then take ointment of Tobacco being melted and with a Feather besmear the
Patients Face as hot as they can endure it; and when they sit up it will be
better to sit against a Chaffing-dish of Coals for an hour together; but those
that cannot you may do well to cover their faces with soft paper moistened with
the Ointment.

This is the best thing that I did ever see made use of; and yet I have spent
much time amongst them, not only in bare visiting; but have watched several
Nights with such as have seemed dangerous; whereby I had greater opportunity to
observe the Operation of my Remedies: than those who only prescribe a Medicine
by Aim, and sends their Bills to an Apothecary, who oftentimes makes up the
quantity with rotten Stuff for want of good; and with chopping and changing for
want of sorts.

Now if any know better (as I doubt not but better is) I should be glad if
either out of Christian Charity or Human Pity; he would communicate it to the
World for the benefit of poor afflicted Mortals, whose Torment under this
Disease cannot be demonstrated by any Pen; I mean when they have them much, and
happen to be handled according to the common way of Practice; for otherwise it
seems but a light matter to undergo it.

Lastly, I must advise you, not to rely too much on the use of the most
Excellent Medicines that the Art of Man can prepare; for our merciful God that
giv^th us the Assistance of his Creatures, as well for Food as Medicine; can
when he pleases hinder their effect if they are not received with Prayer and
Thanksgiving.

Therefore use the Means, but do not rely on it; but Pray to God with Sincerity
and Faith, that he would direct to and bless the Means, and then you may with
confidence and hope expect comfort thereby. To whose Great Name be Ascribed all
Power and Glory for evermore, Amen.

Advertisement.
THose that have occasion for any of those Medicines herein mentioned, may have
them truly prepared by the Author at Reasonable Rates, if they are not living
too remote from his House in Havant near Portsmouth; or at the George Inn in
Chichester on Mundays, Wednesdays and Saturdays; or at the Half Moon in
Peter^ield on Saturdays only.

Note, My Fever Pills which I have made use of many years, is not the same with
Matthews's Pill, save in the original only; mine containing some eminent
Cordial Ingredients which are not in that. Besides when I do intend it against
the Stone I add a Mineral Salt, which renders it far more Efficacious in that
Disease.

Also I have an Electuary for such as cannot swallow a Pill, which answers
all the intentions of curing this Disease, except Vomiting.

AN APPENDIX.
WHen I had finished this small Treatise and delivered it out of my Hand in
order to be Printed; it came into my Mind that I had given directions to Vomit
such Persons as should be infected with the Small Pox, as the most absolute
speedy means to Extirpate that Disease, but had given no Instruction to the
ignorant Tenders how to govern the Patient during the t^me that it is Working.
Therefore I have supp^ied that defect by way of an Appendix, rather than to
leave it defective in so Material a point.

Therefore I will first show (to such as have a little insight into Astrology)
how to Elect a proper time for the Administration of the Medicine, and then
teach the Nurse how to do her Office.

First observ^ what Sign the Moon is in; for that is the Basis of your Work.

For of all the signs in the Zodiac, those that rese^ble such Beasts as do
chaw the Cud, are by a g^neral Consent of Physicians accounted the best. And I
do know it to be so by my own Expe^ience.

Now which particular signs I do prefer before other, you shall know by my
order in placing them; that which I place first, to be first made choice of.

For I do esteem Capricorn () before all the rest; the next, Taurus (); then
Aries (); after these, Cancer (); Pisces (); Scorpio () and Sagittarius (). The
Moon being in any of these seven will do indifferent well; but the other five I
reject except on very urgent occasion: the worst of the five are Leo () and
Aquarius (). I do hardly ever give a Vomit when the Moon is in either of them,
nor often being in Libra (), Gemini () or Virgo (), but the last is the best of
the last five.

Secondly, Observe with what Aspect, and from what Planet the Moon is beheld,
for I had rather she be void of Course, than to be beheld by any Planet so that
her next Application be good: And I do prefer the ill Aspects of Jupiter () or
Venus (), rather than the good Aspects of Saturn () or Mars (). But the Moon
being in Conjunction () Quartile () or Opposition (), with Saturn () Sol () or
Mars (), beware of giving any purging Medicine. And () and () being so Aspected
you ought to forbear likewise.

Thirdly, Let one of those seven Signs ascend; and carefully avoid the presence
of or Mars therein; neither let them nor the behold the Degree ascending
(partilly) by any bad Aspect, but corporally in the Ascendant in any of those
seven Signs is good.

Much more might be said on this Subject, but I design Brevity, and this is the
ground of all; and what I have written, I have proved by several Thousands of
Experiments. Now such whose Understandings cannot comprehend this, let them
observe when the Moon is in one of those seven Signs, viz,,,,,,,, and avoid
such days as she changes on, the full and either of her quarters.

In the next place I must teach the Nurse how to govern the Physic in the time
of its working.

Therefore when you give any of the Vitriol Vomits, you need not be very
curious, do but thus; give a good draught of strong Mild Beer to the Patient,
and in a quarter, or half an Hour after give the Physic, being dissolved in a
little such Beer, and then some Sugar put into it; which for the most part does
quickly come up again loaded with ill Humors; then presently give the party
another draught of the like Beer warm; do thus as often as the Patient does
C^st, which will be sometimes two, three, or four times.

But if you take an Antimonial Vomit, then you had need to be more Circumspect.

The best that I do know (that is to be had at the Shops) is that which is
called Aqua Benedic^a; being an infusion of Crocus Metallorum of which (if the
Crocus be good) one ounce or an ounce and quarter is a sufficient Dose for a
Man; but that which I have used many years is far more Gentle, and yet the Dose
is much bigger, viz. 4, 5, or 6 ounces. But they are so safe that I commonly
give them to big bellied The Wiv^s of Will. Hartly, and Rich Read. Hen.
Limbric^, all of Aldingbourn n^^r Chichester.
Women, to Ancient People, or to Jane Goodman of Heyshot.
Children of three quarters of a year old or under.

Now these Th^se are the best to prevent the M^rks.
Antimonial Vomits do (for the most part) keep the same order in working, as to
the time, and you may take it any time of the day, either full or fasting, it
matters not, if the Physic be but rightly prepared.

When you have drank your Physic alone, then fast an Hour after it, walking a
little if you are able (for I have often giv^n them to such Goodwise S^one at
the Anchor I^n in Liphook* (...) Por^smouth Road. And Mrs. B^ll then of Wick by
Chichester.
Patients as could hardly turn on their Beds without help) in which time it
will work of it self (if it be strong enough) if not, take near a quarter so
much as you took at the first and stir again.

When the Patient has Cast once, give him a large draught of warm Gray
Posset Drink immediately after the Casting; doing so every tim^ that h^ Casts.

And because I have seen some Country People make their Posset Drink very ill,
I will tell you how, and likewise how much I do usually make to be employed in
the working of one Purge.

I take most commonly two Quarts of Milk, and when it is ready to boil I do
pour thereinto a quart of strong Beer but not too stale (because that would
make the posset have a sour Taste) and so let it stand over the fire until it
be clear.

For the most part these Vomits are just two Hours in the working. And for my
Emeto Cathar (or vomiting Purge) you may eat, drink, or sleep as soon as it is
over, but commonly they do choose to lie down on a Bed.

And that Night I do usually give the Patient three of my Fever Pills as big as
a pease, and a draught of strong Liquor after them, having supped (either not
at all, or) two hours before.

And in regard many people loath Posset Drink (and not to drink good store of
some Liquor were like a Laundress washing with Soap and none or little Water) I
will tell you what will do as well, and that is strong mild Beer or Ale: But
Broth is not good, and Gruel is much worse as I have seen proved.

There is nothing (as I conceive) material now wanting, if you do but Accept it
as kindly, as I have Heartily Communicated the same, not resting on Conjecture,
(for there is no Argument beyond Experience) but making a practical Use of it.
I doubt not but many Thousands will praise God for putting it into my heart to
divulge it so plainly to the World.

It may be some will say that there are abundance of abler Artists, who might
probably have done it more Elegantly. I answer, Since they have not done it,
there is great need that some body else should. For it is not he that can lend
me a Hundred Pounds that is Thank-worthy; but he that lends me Four or Five
Pounds to serve my Necessitous Occasion. And I studied not Or, Eloquence.
Elegance (or Applause) but plainness; that it might be the more Universally
Useful.

Advertisement.
ALL Agues, Sci^tica's, the Scurvy, Hypochondriack Melancholy, with many other
Chronick Diseases, are Radically Cured by the Author, by Extirpating the
occasional Cause thereof.

He also gives speedy Ease and Rest in all putrid Fevers, and Cures them
perfectly in few days, if they are not too far gone.

He Cures the Toothache without drawing the Tooth; and Pleurisies, and
Quinsies, speedily and safely, without Bleeding. He has a singular way of
Easing After-pains, and Gripes in Young Infants; insomuch that the Nurses could
scarcely keep their Beds an Hour together one Night, and there was no need of
Rising the next.

THE POSTSCRIPT To the Indifferent READERS Within the Compass of my
Acquaintance.
Gent.
I Would not have you Despise the Matter for the Meaness of the Style, nor the
Subject for the plainess of the Authors Coat; for a Man is no more known by his
Raiment, than a good Horse by his Trappings, or a good Gun by the Stock. Be not
carried away from the Truth with the Gingling Eloquence of such who by Flattery
have gained a Repute in the World, but try the matter by your own Reason, and
Senses; according to that saying of Aristotle, That we ought to give credit to
Reason, if the things of Reason agree with Experience. I say Try, Enquire, not
what is reported of me, (for Ill Will and Self-Interest pervert Judgment)
therefore enquire of those that have been my Patients, of what Cures have been
done by me of all kinds; whereof many are such as are generally accounted
uncurable. But no more of this at present

But a Word or two of Fevers, in this Disease it is known far and near that my
practice has been quite contrary to the common Custom; I thinking it no shame
to follow Truth, although therefore very few will follow me, the Major Part
aiming more at Greatness than Goodness. And as an Ingenuous Man said once, That
although Truth ought to be followed by all, yet he that keeps too close to its
heels might chance to have his Teeth dashed out; so have I been in danger often
for no other Offense. For I am of his opinion who said, To follow Gallen any
farther than he follows Truth is great wickedness.

Now it cannot seem strange to any Intelligent Person that I should ever and
anon be followed with such cruel Clamors, making all people believe (who are
ignorant of my practice) that through Ignorance and want of good Remedies, I
destroy most that I do take in hand; when the Authors themselves know that it
is as full of Falsity as the Sun is full of Light. But herein they play the Fox
that dispraised those Chimical Vomits and other Chimical Remedies.
Hens and Chimical Vomits and other Chimical Remedies.
Grapes for naught, which he could not reach to Taste.

For I do believe there is not one of a Hun^^^^ that goes so warily upon the
Art of Heali^g as I did, being above Twelve Years a curi^^^ ^^archer into
Galens Doctrine; and as strict (...) observer of their practice that were his
Fol^^^^^, before I did meddle with the Admini^^^^^ion of Ph^sick; but I do
assure you that I ^^^^ived more satisfaction in reading one Chymic^l ^
Author of about four or five shillings price, (...) from all the books that
came to my hand in all ^h^t time. And I never durst to profess any thing in the
Art, but with great doubting before.

Th^n pray consider what a bitter exigent I was at, that must either forsake
Truth it self, (of which our merciful Father had now discovered a Glimpse to me
to sweeten my Labors) or else I must forsake the splendid Society of all the
Prof^ssors both Chyrurgical and Physical, within many Miles of my dwelling; for
such was my unhappiness that there was not one professing the Art of healing
that did rightly understand either Astrology or Chemistry, within fifteen
Miles, or I suppose twenty.

Now I will tell you some of their Practices. Never was any poor Mouse more
narrowly watched by the Vigilant Cat, than I have been by them, or some of
their deluded followers, so that if a Patient Fortune to miscarry under my
care, it is presently ascribed to me or my Chemical Re^edi^^, because I often
act contrary to the Edicts of the Female Counsel, and will not Lead my Patients
by Bleeding, Cupping, Blisters, etc. (as it were through an Earthly Purgatory)
Alamode to their Grave, hereby I say if a Patient of mine Dye, they report all
the Country over that I killed him or her; with most bitter Hyperbolical, false
Aggravations, as extreme swelling, it never work^d, it was too strong, etc.
when it is well known to Thousands now living that if my purging Physic never
work it does no hurt, which has made me the bolder in using it; nor ever have
I had a Patient that died whilst the Vomit strained them, nor above one of a
thousand within twenty four hours after its working was over. Now as watchful
as my Antagonists have been, let them prove to the contrary and I will
subscribe a paper of Recantation, if their Evidence be uninterested persons of
Credit.

I must yet come closer, if they be angry I cannot help it, nor care I for it.

Are not ordinary Fevers the means to carry a great number of people to their
Graves yearly? Let them look over their Books and then tell me, if they have
not lost out of the like number ten for my one.

If this soap will not wash off the Dirt with which I have been so unworthily
bespattered; I will offer one more scowring Remedy. Let any of them come to
matter of Fact, and abide but a fair Trial; and I will lose Five Guinnies, if I
do not Cu^e of Febrile Patients two for their one.

But I suppose they will say, they hardly know any practice that I have had in
this kind. I believe so too, but it is because I any Fever (except Hectic and
Pestilential) in few days, if I am called as soon as the patient does appear to
be very ill and then it is looked at as a thing not worth noting. But you T's
that cannot Credit my Report without proof, if you are near Chichester pray
enquire of Mr. Iennings his Daughter, Mistress Godfrey, and if any thing
thereabout will make against my Discourse I make no doubt but I have a sort of
such Friends as will discover the business without troubling me to search
either my Notes or Memory.

Besides hers being a putrid Fever, I will tell you somewhat concerning a
Malignant Fever. In the year 80 or 81, there were great Numbers of people died
of such Fevers, many whereof were taken with Vomiting, etc. Yet I had the Good
Fortune to cure Eighteen in the Parish of Aldingbourn not one dying in that
great compass of that Disease; Mr. Henry Whitington and his Wife being two of
them.

Now it remains that I give a Reason for this tedious Postscript and so
conclude.

Yet I had overslipt one thing being very proper to be spoken of; and that is
that since the whole Treatise is concerning the small pox, to say a word or two
of my Experience herein.

When this Distemper did rage so much in and about Chichester, (ten or a dozen
years since) it was a great many that fell under my Care, I believe sixty at
the least and yet I lost but one Person of the Disease. Nor was one of my
Patien^s marked with them, to be seen but half a year after. My success being
such that many people thought themselves almost out of danger, if they could
but get one of those Nurses into their houses that did use to Tend my Patients.

Now as to the Reason of this Postscript, I having by Study and Labor
attained to a far better, safer and speedier way of curing Diseases, than was
ever taught by Galen, did think my self bound in Conscience to give my
Neighbors warning of the danger of their Botcherly, Butcherly, Cruel manner of
practice, of Bleeding, Blisters, Cupping, Cauteries, Actual and Potential
Fontinels, etc. whereby I (like Paul at Ephesus) did engage the whole Tribe of
the Medicinal Art against me; and this was not unreasonable neither, for if
they lose these, the chief profit of their Trade is gone.

Then do but consider how vain a thing it is, for one single person to stand
upon his guard against a Multitude of mad, resolute, self-willed opposers. It
is but like one going about to extinguish a Heath-fire, when there are above
one hundred others as exquisite persons, as industriously employed to kindle
the said fire in fresh places whilst he is putting it out where it first arose.
So for me to make any defense against so violent and numerous, mad, heady kind
of people, were but like barking against the Wind; or a Hare to undertake to
Expostulate with a Pack of Hounds.

For me to lose a Patient, there is a Clamor presently just like that in a
Country Village, when a Dog has killed a Sheep; but for a score of theirs to
die, there is no more Notice taken of it than for as many Sheep to lose their
Lives in a Butchers Slaughterhouse.

For the Female Jury have always this healing Balsam ready; Why he did as much
as the Art of Man could do, but alas his time was come. Very true, and so is
his time come that is hanged, although perhaps he might have lived much longer
had not the Executioner's unlucky Knot prevented him.

FINIS.

