elaborate iconographic scene viewed by man writing in book Genesis 28. cap. a 16
ad fin. Heb. 13. cap. 14:15:16 view of a City by the sea

depiction of Jacob's ladder (Genesis 28.11-16) p rti psesthe ton orann nephgta
ka tous gglous tou THeou anabainontas ka katabainontas epi ton uin to anthropou
Joan. 1.52.

depiction of Jacob's altar at Bethel (Genesis 28.17-22) Bethel



inset seal of (?) the Lion of Judah

monogram Design.
W. Faithorne Sculp


THE ASCENTS OF THE SOUL: OR, DAVID's Mount TOWARD GOD's House. BEING
PARAPHRASES ON THE FIFTEEN PSALMS of DEGREES.

Written in Italian, By the Illustrious GIO. FRANCESCO LOREDANO, a Noble
Venetian, 1656. Rendered into English, Anno Dom. 1665.

Ne si comincia ben, se non dal Cielo.

LONDON, Printed by A. G. and J. P. for Robert Harford, at the Angel in
Cornhill, 1681.

decorative headpiece To the most Honored LUCINDA.
AS the kind Sun (which cheers our dying Muse)
From the bright East, brings day, and with it, views
The World's fair Parts; but finding none so sweet
As the Orient Beauties, whom he first did greet;
Back to his Morning Mistress he does run;
Ending his round Heat there, where he begun.
So, though my Rhimes, like straggling Waters, fled
From Wit's clear Spring; from You, the Fountain's Head;
Yet now my Fancy pays its final Stream
To its first Helicon, and fairest Theme.
For sure, it is Heaven's, with your blessed Influence,
('It Is not the Extream's usual Coincidence)
Which as it did at first our Verse Baptize;
So now redeems These from Idolatries.
That their late wandering Feet no more may roam;
But (like the elder Brothers) keep at home.
While You restore our Music, and renew
Our Mind, to sing again to God, and You.
See here our Muse washes her Feet, and all;
Turns Penitent, that had been Prodigal:
And as a Magdalen, with all her Store,
She worships Goodness; but does wast no more.
She sends her Honey back, to that dear Hive,
Where she will be buried, (if not kept alive.)
Then with her Notes, (Swan-like) she will end her Days,
Singing Your Worth, her Requiem, and God's Praise.
To the most Honored LUCINDA.
MADAM,
YOU may smile, while I blush, that You find me speak in Print, when You know I
love no such phrase or thing; because it argues an affectation, which I have
not 'till now, been guilty of. But since it is too general a Disease, that
Poverty and Laziness bring upon Linguists; no wonder if my Converse with some
such, has infected me at this time, when remembering how I used from beyond
Seas to Congratulate Your New-year with some Foreign Present: And finding none
of that Store left by me, (which was dearly bought, and far fetched) I turned
from my Cabinet, to my Closet, and there found this Venetian Crystal, so
finely wrought and pollished by the Author, and not ill set (perhaps by my
putting a File unto it) as I was resolved to make an Offering of it to that
Shrine Your Oratory, wherein are many things worth the admiring; but none more
than the pious behavior of Your self.

This is so excellently useful, as that we may be pardoned for desiring a
Reflection of it. And therefore, Madam, I send this Mirror of Devotions, not
to direct or dress Yours; but to display them unto others, and to do my Duty so
far to all the Good; as to do You Right in the discovery of so rare a Goodness
as Yours is; which has not only emboldened me to venture up the Stairs to Your
Praying-place, and to revisit these Degrees, (whereon I went above ten Years
ago) but likewise to show the World how Your Piety is exemplary like David's;
it has led and instructed a numerous Train to follow You (though very hardly)
up a great way toward the Mountain of Holiness.

And, Madam, since this Age does want such Presidents in Worth, in Goodness,
and in Place, as Your late noble Lord, and Father, have been; we may earnestly
beg of God to add to Your Honor and Prosperity Fifteen Degrees, and prolong
Your wonderful Life marvelously farther than Hezekiah's. If then You might see
Your Sons not go backward in the World, but getting up (like the Children of
Israel) out of Egypt, to the best and most difficult Advancements; I mean, up
the many Steps to the House of God, (there to praise his Blessings, and to pray
for Yours.) I doubt not but it would be a Token of much Comfort and Honor to
Your self, and of as much Happiness and Benefit to them, as to him, who is
ready to say, (with the elder Brother, Genesis 27.31.) Arise, and taste kindly of
thy Son's Service, that thy Soul may bless me also.

TO THE READER.
ALTHOUGH the Author's glorious Dedication of this Book (To the Queen of
Heaven,) together with several other Reasons, would have made me no more in
love with this sort of Complements, than the many are who have wrote long
Discourses against Prefaces, (and so have sentenced themselves with a Witness,
by condemning the very Act in which they were found Guilty:) Yet finding by the
sad Example of most the Ingenious, who have failed in their attempts against
Epistles prefatory (as he did, who designed a great Building without Inlets or
Addresses to it,) that it is a hard matter for People to avoid the Road, and
run over Hedge and Ditch, without being judged Men of odd Designs: I therefore
take the beaten track to the Town, and am content to keep pace with another
Motion; having took no course to appear before, nor being now spurred on to
this Publication by any Sentiments, but those of Gratitude beforementioned.
Were I stung by such a Gad-fly as Vainglory, I would not Print a Translation
now, (which was made above ten years ago) to dub me a Writer; when the Form of
it, as much as the Matter, will be so dull and insipid to the Wits of this
time. (These are for no Book-learning, no writing by Gentlemen, unless it be
(at the Modish Rate) strangely extravagant, profane, or foul.)

Therefore as I leave these Gallants to the Tyranny of that Genius by which
they both act and suffer; so purposely have I dismounted their expectation of
any pass-time from me; for I have slipped the Spring, I have lost the Season for
youthful Publications; and now I seek to have Audience incognito with a grave
Senator.

This, methinks, may be sufficient Proof, that I neither qu^t^, nor expect the
stale Title of an Author, for all I am now like one in a Preface. Most Eyes are
upon Books, as upon a Horse-Race; on the first Start, or at the ending, more
than upon the best part of the Heat.

In short, I tell the Readers what they may find here, though I cannot tell
what they may like; for if they look for much Roman Ceremony, or Papal
Devotion, they will go away unsatisfied: For I have changed the Religion, as
much as the Language of my Author; and allowed my self the same Christian
liberty in turning or trimming this Piece of his, which he likewise took in
some of his Translations: That as the Signor dressed it for his Country, Vede
loquinto Vol. del Sig. Gio. Fr. Loredano, nel praefatio sua, All' Historia
Catal.
I may look after it in mine, and bear the blame, if this Stranger be took for
a Jesuit. If I conceal some of his Expressions, it is not to abuse his intent of
appearing to the World a true Catholic; he is now, I trust, Orthodox, and
English too: Nor would I damp his Spiritual Heats, while I fan Superstition
from his great Ingenuity and Zeal.

I know the Silk his words put on is pure Venetian, of too curious a Fabric
for me to mend, or indeed to meddle with farther than to add a List of courser
Materials to the Piece.

Lest it should seem too nice in its Address to the holy Altars, and there be
reproved (like an Agag) for its Delicacy, (falling under the Censures which
many such Works have incurred, of having more Wit than Zeal in it) and too much
Rhetoric for much Religion) I have rebated the point of Loredano's style; and
where I have cut off some reiterated Elegancies, and Musical words, that (as
long Fuges) were but to the same Tune; I took away the Lap of the Senator's
Robe, I hope without doing him any injury at all.

It Is pity a rich Sleeve should be so long, as to hang (like their
Laticlavians) in the Dirt; Acts 25.23. (...).
or that Berenice's appearance should hinder Agrippa's Christianity.

I am more apt to exclude Tertullus, than St. Paul; and therefore, instead of
Oratory, put in Scripture into the Work; that what is lost in Fancy, may be
retrieved in Devotion.

And surely no time nor labor would be lost, could I be but as much more
useful to the Reader, as I should be just to the Writer, in setting forth his
Thoughts with the same pious Impressions and Advantages which they once brought
to my Heart. To this they have done good, (as I may publicly own;) and I am
not of so strait, so narrow a Spirit, as not to endeavor to communicate a
good, according to the Nature, and my Experience of it.

Indeed before I traveled into Italy, I heard so much ill said of that
Country, (especially of the Venetians in it) that I was possessed with a
prejudice like his, John 1.46.
who cried, Can there any good come out of Galile^? And also prompted by the
irreligion of too many Travelers, to think that Contagion the Epidemical
Disease of Foreigners, (principally those of higher Rank.)

Therefore when I went abroad, lest I should learn Vices more fast than
Language, or live (as formerly) in the proud Greek and Roman conceit, that
every Land was barbarous, but our own; and all the World was naught, but
England. I was curious to find out what was Spiritual (and rightly so called)
beyond Sea, if the lawful Issue of a Noble Laick; I looked upon such a piece of
Devotion as more capable of doing good, than the more elaborate Volumes of
Churchmen; (who are not thought well enough on, because they make it their
business to write well) whereas the slighter Essays of other Gentlemen (which
are not of the long Robe) fall more gratefully into the hands of great Persons,
and by Emulation of the precedent (if no better motive) work often upon them
some Pious effect.

Being acquainted with the Truth beforementioned, and with the mighty number
of Memoires, and other Works, lately put forth by the Noblemen of France, I
ramass'd a good quantity of the most Illustrious modern Writers in Italy; and
amongst them, the first which I laid hold on, was the Third of the seven
Volumes of the Honorable Signor Gio. Francesco Loredano's Works; Stamp. a
Venetia, 1654.
which though set out with all the Garnish that the Poets and Painters could
enrich them with, yet discouraged my perusal of them, because I found the
beginning of this Volume very Toyish and Romantic.

'Till I considered that Men's Books are oftentimes like their Lives; the first
Parts of them slight and youthful, (and such Leaves as will scarce hide a
Nakedness, nay, were better skipt over than perused;) yet their latter Ends may
be Grave and Pious, well-ordered and disposed, as the Frize and Cornice of all
their Works.

So I searched on for the Pearl among the Shells; and left not this great and
brisk Wit, 'till I found him terminate so well in Meditation, as that I fixed
my hand upon his Table, thus to Copy out his Piety, if not his Eloquence; and
to say (to those who cried, Come from among them) Come and see, is not here a
Prophet? Though he might have been formerly a Saul, he is now with the divinest
David; and this his properest Subject merited Discovery, though it lay hid,
like Saul, in a heap of Stuff.

Nor was I content only to open the Mine, or fetch out the Oar; but also to
fine it from the Dross; that this silken Ladder might be useful, where stronger
(like the Bibles) were not so portable, for to raise or keep up some Devotion
in me.

And this, I thank God, it did, by my often looking on it; as La Scala Santa
once had done too, when it happened to me at Rome, (as to St. Paul at Athens)
that I had a good opportunity from an Idolatrous place, to pray with much
Fervor and Charity for my self, and all Men, that we might not be mistaken, or
Hypocritical, in our Worshippings of God, while with Pity I considered the
Superstitions of some Christians there, who adored Stocks and Stones more than
their Maker; and with shame thought upon the Profaneness of others among
Protestants, that would not allow God a peculiar manner, nor place of Worship.

Thus have you the occasion of the Title I give to this Book, and shall have
something concerning the Frontispiece.

Though by the way take notice, that I was never a Promoter of Superstitious
Pilgrimages; nor so far reconciled to the Church of Rome, as to follow her
Steps farther than the Church of England approves them: For all I have gone up
the Stairs abovementioned, and the Ascents of Loredano's Soul, I hope with
some such true Efforts as that Illustrios Senator designed in his Preface, and
endeavored in his Paraphrase; to which good Act, this is but a Scene, or
rather as the Curtain which may now be drawn away, lest it hinder the
Spectators better Objects.

I have fancied the whole Piece to be a Sk^tch of Jacob's Vision, and David's
Psalter, like Israel's Scale, reaching to the Divine Throne, whereon devout
Spirits have scope to run descant up and down, and by the various Motions of
their Piety, (as by the several Degrees of their Understandings) they make
better Music than the imagined Spheres could ever be supposed to do: For
surely, thereupon is grounded the best Harmony of Heaven and Earth; and thereon
we shall meet with a grateful Consort, when we are left never so much alone by
the World.

For they who make no use of the Psalms, nor Feast upon them by frequent
Meditation, are as obnoxious to Errors, as I can be in any of these Thoughts.
Therefore like a Traveling Pilgrim to Mount Sion, I pursue my Journey, hoping
to reach the end of it, by doing some good to my self, if not to others.

And as Jacob was required to make an Altar of those Stones on which he rested
in his Journey (when he beheld Heaven's Eyes upon him, Genesis 35.1.
and Angels moving to and fro for his Succor;) so I thought my self obliged to
make an Offering to God, 2.
(as a grateful Monument) of that which had bettered me in my Progress, and
helped me to see who was with me in the way that I went; 3.
so as to bring me again to my Father's House in peace.

May then these Contemplations (and our whole Lives too) be like Jacob's
Ladder, scaling Heaven it self; and having their highest ones there, (while
some others may be yet upon the low Earth) and while good Thoughts and Actions
(like Celestial Ministers) ascend to Heaven, and condescend to Earth, let God
be set at the end of all we do, that we may receive much Good from such
gracious Prospects, and our Pillars (like Jacob's) be Anointed to God's Service.

For my part, I desire to build no Babel, (of several Languages) but would
bring some Materials unto Bethel; though the top of my performance reach no
farther than to lay the Foot-pace to God's House.

If David (such a Master Builder) thought it Honor enough for him to be but as
one of the Nethinim in the Temple; it will be more than Grace enough for me to
be there (if but as a Gibeonite) in any degree serviceable to the Flames of
^iety, or Wells of Salvation; while I officiate in both those parts of Divine
Worship, the two chief Duties of Religion, Prayer and Thanksgiving.

We see the Soul has several Steps to take, and many Rounds whereby to be
exercised in her Addresses to God; and they are the Perches whereon she can
best recreate or rest her State, while she is in this Cage of the Body. Let us
therefore make her as Musical, and as Harmonious, as we may, therein.

The very Pagan Worship was Spiritual enough to recommend Hymns and Singing to
the Religious, (of what sort soever they be;) and had I not mentioned far
better Motives from Holy Scripture, I should avow my self constrained to this
following Psalmody, by the convincing words of several Heathens, Lib. 1.
Diss^rtationum Arrian. per tot. cap. 17.
such as those of Epictetus, cited by Arrian, and partly quoted in my
Title Page.

Nor am I discouraged in doing that, which others have done better before me;
since I hear the Virtuous throughout every Age, as well as throughout the
Bible, (like those spoken of in the Revelations) singing in the words of the
Princely Prophets, ( David and Isaiah) Come let us go up unto the House of the
Lord, Rev. 15.2, 3, 4, 5.
etc. I was glad when they said, not I Will, but Eamus, Let us go up.

For though my Head or Hand be not publicly engaged in the Service of God, or
of my King; yet neither my Retreat nor Sloathfulness shall make me so bad a
Servant, or a Subject, as not to employ my Pen and Ink, and Blood too, for
Religion and Loyalty, as occasion may be offered.

At present, being happy in a longed-for Recess, I have the grateful Leisure
afforded me (which many good Persons want, and might better improve) to thank
God, that notwithstanding our desperate Provocations of him (which
commensurately heighten our Fears and Dangers) we are not yet sunk down into
that utter darkness of the days of Antichrist, when the saying, or singing of
Psalms, will be rejected with the Church. But we have liberty to go up, with
David, into God's House, and there still beg those surest Mercies which are
best for all Men, as well as for me, and so should be desired for us all.

So be it.

headpiece: portrait of Giovanni Francesco Loredano with coat of arms (repeated
on subsequent pages) Joannes Franciscus Lauredamus
Lauredanus Laureandus Facundus es. Clarus eris in annos THE AUTHOR'S EPISTLE
TO THE READER.
THAT Pen which has so often played the Fool upon the Stage of this vain World
(by soothing most of the fantastic Humors, both of our own Genius, and of the
Age) would gladly now take up, (like a reduced Prodigal) staying the Torrent of
its wilder Courses, that it might a while bemoan its Errors, and beg God's
favor, and so raise its Plumes to a braver pitch; taking a glorious flight to
the highest place of Paradise: For,

The Glory of this World is raked up, or rather buried, in the Ashes of our
Humane Nature; and he is a mad Lover of Vain Glory, who is a pretender to
Immortality, in a Place and Condition, where every thing is Mortal, like
himself.

Here the Author reflects on his former Works, he having writ many Volumes on
the several Subjects here quoted, which have been most curiously set forth with
ingenious Frontispieces and Recommendations.
But how shall we stir up, or awake the Divine Love, that we have either made
sad, and heavy, or made to rest, and cease, from doing us good, by a long
Series of Offenses? Alas! no Tales, or new Romances, dreamed by the finer Wits,
to please or propagate the Ages Vanity; nor any serious Histories drawn (like
Minerals) out of dark Recesses, by the Curiosity of their Undertakers, to
profit and adorn Posterity; no, nor any politic Maxims that dare teach the Art
of Government to the Experience of mighty Princes, will now help us to work
that Blessed Effect.

It is needful to withdraw from the fruitless Works, from the hurtful Charms of
vain Science and Verbosity; to avoid the Point and Praise of Men; to shun the
Title and Esteem of a Master in worldly Arts, and to run with devout Requests
to entreat the offended Goodness, and loving Kindness of our God.

He continually bows down his Ear to such Cries as (bringing with them the
Repentance of the Heart) come in the stead of Holocausts (...) Heaven.
Therefore that I might at last get thither, (though I have been long a
Malefactor) I have walked up some Steps, (laid by the Royal Prophet) which may
bring us safely to God's House, and from thence to Eternal Felicities. And
would to God my Heart could travel more with my Hand, that the Rellishes of my
Soul may be as devout, as those of my Pen may seem! And that I had mounted
these Degrees with such purity of Affection, as this Jacob's Ladder should be
raised, whose top reaches even to Heaven.

So that whosoever desires to rise to the most glorious Palace of the Son of
God, if he would reach unto the ineffable Pleasure of a Divine Vision, he must
walk up these fifteen Stairs which lead to Holiness and Happiness, and the main
Industry labors in vain to get up to these, without Faith and good Works.

Therefore I have here shown (with David) that there are fifteen Degrees to the
holy Mount, and high Place of Heaven; since to advance us thither are so
requisite, not only the eight Beatitudes, but the seven Gifts of the Holy
Spirit: And he that in this Valley of Vision knows not how to pass on from
strength to strength, will surely take the wrong way to Sion.

These are called Steps of Ascent, because who ever intends to make use of
them, should do it for his Advancement unto God; for his climbing up by Grace,
and not suffer his humblest Thoughts to stoop so low, as to give any great
Respect, or Entertainment, unto Earthly Objects.

The five first Degrees are for Christian Noviciats and Pupils, those who begin
their Journey toward Heaven in the way of Celestial Love, and venture to pass
through the difficulties of Temptation, the hardship of Affliction, the Swords
and Pykes of Censure, and Calumniations. They are such as (with David on his
way to Victory) stay themselves on their God, fix their Confidence (with Jacob
in his Journey) upon Heavenly Succors, and rejoice in Spiritual Supports, and
press on forward in the hopes of Rewards; and in fine, have so much true
Humility, as to attribute the small Progress of their Repentance not at all to
their own strength, but wholly unto God.

The five next Degrees assist Proficients in the same Love of God, and of
Religion, who are forward in the way of Mastering their Passions, and so are
more confident, as better Confirmed, not only to further themselves, but others
too, in Divine Contemplations; as well as encourage and invite to a Plus ultra,
to a making on in the Love of God, 'till they have clearly made it out to
themselves.

They can meekly beg of God a Confirmation of his Grace, and of their Strength;
nor expect any reward, nor conceit any Merit, nor seek any Commendation, either
for the exercise of Patience in Adversity, or for doing their Duty in that
Condition wherein God has placed them.

The last five Degrees are for the highest Form of Professors; such as are
nearest the top of Perfecton above, and the Kingdom of Heaven here below; who
can pray for their Persecutors, do good to those that do them hurt, and
accompany their own tried Patience with desires of trying it still more and
more: Begging nothing more of God than Lowliness, and Nothingness of Spirit,
under all the greatest Demonstrations of his Favor, lest (with St. Paul) they
should be exalted above measure, and grow unworthy (by being Proud) of that
Love, with which they long to be made one, in an Eternal Charity. Therefore
taking their Hearts quite off from the World, and divorcing their Thoughts from
Terrene Objects, they employ their whole Man in beginning their Heaven upon
Earth, by the continual blessing and praising of God.

And I pray God these Words may be read with such Thoughts, as may stir up each
several sort of Christians to the devoutest Action within their Capacities,
kindling in every Breast one Spark or other more bright and fervent, than that
can possibly be which is struck out of the black Flint of my Heart, who (like
Absalom) have heaped up more Stones of Guilt for the Erection of a Monument in
Hell, than I have enjoyed Hours of Life, for the steering my Course to the
Glories of Paradise.

Every Book that speaks of God, should be (as a Terminus, or Law-Stone) either
to inform, or reform our Footsteps; and those Columns are not (like Enoch's) of
Worth, nor of Duration, that build not up the House of Wisdom. Those Figures
stand but for Ciphers; those Letters are but Mutes, that do not teach the
Ignorant the Right way, or at least, turn the Erroneous from the Wrong.

Nevertheless I acknowledge my self not less unapt to Correct the one, than
unable to Guide the other, being neither fit for the Office of a Monitor, nor
of a Master.

For what I have written, has been rather to wake my own dying Devotion, than
to watch for the Encomiums of others; and for once I can protest the Puff of
worldly Applause, (which often Tympanies the soundest Minds with Ambition) did
not blow up the Feathers of my Quill to this its present Flight and Undertaking.

He that aspires to Abraham's Honor (to talk with God as a Man speaks with his
Friend) does not give heed to those Whispers of the Serpent, to those vain
Hopes, (I mean) which Fame and Reputation, those (Terrae Filiae) Children of
the Giant, bring along with them to deceive us here.

I once thought to be Dictator to my self alone, because Devotion is a Spirit,
and like Camphire, if let out too far, or blown about, most commonly it is lost,
and vanishes away: But when I viewed David, (like Jonathan) climbing up the
Rock, and commanding his Armour-bearers to follow him. I had also the courage,
both to attend and imitate him, in beckening unto others to creep along with me
upon these Stairs which lead unto David's Fortress, unto the God of Gods in
Mount Sion, and unto his Temple, where every one must speak of his Honor.

And who knows but some others incited (perhaps by my weakest endeavors) may
assist hereafter with better address, those who are getting up these Holy
Rounds (this Scala Santa) of Meditation? As we see a little Star shines before
the Sun, as it were to raise and light up a far greater and more useful Guide
than it self.

But (without any more Preamble) not to detain, or deceive the Reader, let me
tell him, who is not pleased with this Book, That he may be pleased in
regarding the Subject; and if he shall look herein, and find any thing that is
good, it is to be returned with due Interest of Praise to God, the true Owner
of it, who was the Framer of the World from Nothing, and the Maker of Mankind
Upright, though we have sought out many strange Inventions, both to be, and to
do Wrong: So that Mistakes, and Men, go hand in hand together; and all the
Errors here we must yield to be our own.

IN Psalmorum Laudem.
CHORUS. 1. Angelorum, and, 2. Hominum.
CHORUS. THE PSALMS are Paradises Spring;
Streaming Refreshments every way.
They, 1. Wine, 2. Oil, 1. Milk, 2. And Honey bring,
1. To Cheer, 2. To Cure, 1. To Feed, 2. TO Allay.
1. When we are merry, Psalms we sing,
2. When we are afflicted, Psalms we say.
1. They Heaven's, 2. And Earth's Devotions wing,
1. While Angels Praise, 2. Or Men do Pray.

CHORUS. The PSALMS are Paradises Spring,
Streaming Refreshments every way, etc.

decorative headpieceTHE ASCENTS OF THE SOUL.
The first Step upon the First PSALM of Degrees, being the 120 PSALM.
Ad Dominum cum tribularer, etc.
O Most Gracious God, when I have fathomed the tossing Billows of my troubled
Spirit, either by the depth of humane anxieties, or by some thwarting
dispensation of that Providence that moves upon the great Abyss: (and was
termed Fortune, by the Heathens, rolling the whole Globe upon Waves of
uncertain Casualties) Nay, when the Storms of my violent Passions make my
wicked heart like a raging Sea (foaming out nothing but mire and dirt) in
filthy Motions, and in tyrannical or rebellious Actions. O then, with Humility,
Contrition, and Sincerity of Intention, I endeavor to strike sail, for fear of
the Shipwreck of a good Conscience, and make have to put into the Harbor of
thy Goodness and Compassion. Then,

I entreat that unsealed and unexhausted Spring of Mercy, which (without
upbraiding any for want of worthiness) imparts to all of the fullness of his
Grace. I have access to thy Throne, O Father of Lights, and to Thee, O Glorious
Sun of Righteousness, that without respect of persons, have shined upon the
just and the unjust, and look so kindly on the Universe, as to offer thy
Beams and Beauties unto all.

While on the other side, Thou merciful Lord (crowning thy Eternal Glories with
the continued Acts of thy Pity) have so far lessened thy Greatness, as to
receive my Petitions, and not only heard my Prayers by thy Favor, but heaped
up Answers to them by thy Grace. So that my ever-craving needs have never
wanted seasonable supplies, nor my desires wearied out thy Bounty: But every
wish of mine has worn some token of thy good will to Mankind, and every Prayer
has been returned (like an acceptable Messenger) with marks of favor.

Seeing then I was made a Creature by thy Love at first, and a new Creation by
thy Mercy now; I return again, O Father, with the Prodigal, to beg the excesses
of thy Tenderness, the loud soundings of thy Bowels toward me; It Is more than
ordinary preserving or creating goodness that I want: And Thou, my Everlasting
God, have ever been my Savior, so that to deny me now the continuance of thy
Favor, or the blessing of thy Protection would be to loose the fruit of thy
Labor, and the end and Harvest of thy former care.

Therefore let thy Love be still the Banner over me, while the Tongues of those
who are eloquent in fraud and falsehood storm my Ears daily with Inveaglements,
for the drawing my Heart off from paying its due homage of Thankfulness and
Obedience to Thee, the Great and Almighty King.

With the fears of thy Judgments they scare my remembrance of my faults, with
the snares of their Allurements, they would draw me aside out of the way that
leads to Life; And with false Flatteries, they would indulge my compliance with
Sin, and masking Vice under the show of Virtue, seek to betray my soul, (that
is too easy and pliable) to the Charms of Sense, and to the Pleasures of the
World.

But alas! I perceive (though somewhat too late) how these Mouths of Hell, and
Oracles of Satan would christian Cruelty with the name of Justice, and name a
cursed Revenge, the Way of Honor. With them, Covetousness is but Frugality;
Luxury, the Law of Nature; and Envy, noble Emulation. So that being well nigh
lost, and cast away amongst the dark mists or false lights of their vain
conceits, I find my self deterred from good, and stayed unhappily in evil.

And truly, O most gracious God, without the assistance of thy Grace, and the
protection of thy Love, without the buttress of thy Power, and the foundation
of thy Wisdom, What feeble Jericho's are all our Breasts? How may the strongest
Walls of all our Virtues, and the highest Towers of noble Resolutions be pulled
down (as it were with ridiculous Rams-horns) with the Breath of a naughty
Woman, with the blast of an evil Tongue! And who is there (since Adam, Solomon,
Lot, and Peter, were blown down) that can avoid the fascinations either of
flattery, or of falsehood of the Parasite or Calumniator? Who can resist the
force, or withstand the mischief of such insnaring Words, as the Liars Lips
enter the Soul withal?

The Syren's of the World, the Circe's of the Devil, and all the Idols of
Sensuality may sooner be passed by, and more easily got from by the exercise of
Prudence, by the rules of Reason, and by the restraint of Laws, than the snares
that are laid by a deceitful wicked Mouth. And these are so much the more
invincible and unavoidable, by how much they are invisible and unknown, being
spread over with the specious pretenses either of Piety, or of Friendship.

The other mischiefs of this frail state here, may be grievous, dangerous, and
mortal, but none so comparably to a false, malicious, and dissembling Tongue,
which is a painted Sepulcher, full of nothing but Emptiness, Rottenness,
Hollowness, and precipices instead of Amity, Righteousness, Holiness, and
Piety, which it so much pretends to, as that it oftentimes intraps the most
just and innocent, and tramples them under the feet of Calumny and Disgrace.

But O what fruit have you in those things whereof you may be now ashamed? O ye
perfidious Doegs! What Pleasure, what Profit, what Honor do ye gather from
your Lies, and from your falsehoods, O ye deceitful Men? Do ye Flatterers (who
are the most venomous tame Beasts) look for reward, or hope for praise, or
expect immunities? No, no, your Company is too Pernicious, your Teeth too
Poisonous, your Sin too Presumptuous, to expect any thing from Heaven but Hate
and Vengeance.

For the Javelin's darted from a strong and steady arm gash not the Flesh with
deeper wounds than the Words of a treacherous and faithless Tongue pierce the
Soul of the ingenious to the quick. The glowing Coals of Juniper, (which have
the singular property of keeping Fire) do not reserve, or afford so much heat
as an evil Tongue can throw upon our affections, for that (says the Apostle)
is set on fire of Hell.

Wherefore, my God, I trust while thou do rain down Plagues upon such
sacrilegious Sinners (as thou did upon Sodom and Gomorrah, thou will preserve
my soul (as thou did righteous Lot's) that was vexed with the wicked
Conversation of his Neighbors) so that I may not be overthrown amongst the
Pits of Dissimulation, nor be shipwrack'd in those unstable Waters, where many
a wise Pilot has been cast away.

Lord! I would not run on the shelves of such persuasions, as drive men on
further to their own Ruin: But by the wonted effects of thy Omnipotence,
deliver me from those mistrusts and misunderstandings that (too much indulging
the impotence of Nature) take off the Man from doing his Devoir, and from
obeying thy Commands, and stays him amongst sinful Complacencies and Delights.

Against such, O Lord, arm thy just wrath, and let thy disdain strike them on
the Mouths, who full of mischief and deceit become the burying places of others
fame and reputation.

O let the arrows of such cursed Tongues, and the Goals of their traitorous
Mouths, become Thunderbolts to chastise their malice; and lightning, to flash
for ever in their Faces, and fire to punish their Offenses everlastingly.

And here now, Lord, the multitude of my Crimes committed at the instance of
Sacrilegious Tongues, comes (with their Curses) fresh into my mind. Here the
remorses of my Conscience tell me of the Sins (and Plagues) I have contracted
by my compliance with their vain conceits (and company) who have too frequently
taken me off from the performance of my Duty, and the observation of thy Holy
Laws. Woe is me, wicked Wretch! O how weak! O how miserable am I! Like the
Prodigal, I have stayed too long from home, from my Father's Mansion; from thy
Love and Protection! And alas, How long have I stayed in a strange Land, and
rebelled, like Absalom, in the sight of the Sun, before Heaven, and against
Thee, O God! Declaring my self no Son, that I might be a Slave to the Tyranny
of my basest Affections, and a Traitor to my Sovereign Lord! Surely, much too
long and most unhappy has been my Travel through this Wilderness, where I have
made Woldly-mindedness my sole Companion; so that I may say too too many,
because Evil have been the Days of my Pilgrimage.

And surely, no greater mishap can befall a Man, than to find himself outlawed
from thy Care, and made a Vagabond, like Cain, in the Land of Aberrations,
under the Rule of Evil Spirits, and among his own Deceivings and Temptations;
such evil Companions as may well be termed Arabians, from the Rudeness of their
Behavior, the Badness of their Neighborhood, the darkness and deformity of
their appearances, whereby (that Dove) the Soul, that is conversant amongst
them, is blacked and sullied, as if she had layen among the Pots, and lost her
silver Wings, and is by so much the more unpleasant and unfit for the Eyes of
thy Purity, by how much the more pains thou have took to make thy Psyche
without spot or blemish, or any such thing, as the ugliness of Vice disguises
the Soul withal.

Free me therefore, O merciful Lord, from the iniquity and perverseness of
those Tongues that have not known the way of Peace, nor had they known it,
would have loved it; because, like the grand Enemy in the Gospel, they are
continually sowing the Seeds of Hatred, and the Teeth of Discord.

Nay, while they wear the Vizards of kindness and of peaceableness, they
conspire treacherously against the welfare of such as would adore and serve
Thee.

Such Tongues, O God, flattering the sensual Appetite, subjugate Reason unto
it, and make falsehood and blasphemies so allied to them, as that although they
veil the mischief of their deformities, they cannot hide them. For, Can these
Aethiopians change their Skins? No, they will appear the Black Sons of Cham,
and like Leopards, full of Spots, let them daub over their Actions never so
deceitfully.

Lord, I wish that my Soul, being wholly devoted to Peace, may thereby join it
self to thy favor, and not stray at all from thy Commandments, but carefully
trace thy divine Examples.

O Blessed Jesu! Thou have born so good a Will to Man, as to will Peace on
Earth, as well as in Heaven, that Glory may be to God in the Highest. Thou
did teach on the Mount, how that Hatred should be banished, that Envy (not
Justice) should fly from Earth, and that Prayers should be put up for all, even
for our Persecutors, and Kindness reserved for our very Enemies.

Thou gave thy Apostles Peace for the best Present thou could make them on
Earth; Thou did leave them Peace for a Legacy, when thou wentest hence, and
they shall receive from Thee everlasting Peace for their felicity in Heaven.

At thy Birth, the Angels were Heralds, who proclaimed a General Peace; And
what did thy bitter Death bring, but the sweetest pacification? As the first
Words at thy Resurrection were of Peace.

But Gracious God, if thou deliverest me not from that Ishmaelite, (who pursues
me with deadly hatred) and from his Children, who follow him in Flatteries and
Accusations: I see, alas! the Repose of my Soul is so much broken by their
Assaults, and its own Impotencies, as that it may despair of Safety. Because,
without Divine Assistance, no body can resist the Witckcraft of those Tongues,
that are the Firebrarnds of the Devil, and by his instigation, like the Fool in
the Proverbs, throw about Fire and darts, and (as if in jest) work nothing but
mischief and deceit.

The second Step upon the second PSALM of Degrees, being the 121 PSALM.
Levavi Oculos.
O My Soul! What do thou look at? What do thou look for? What do thou
look after? Whence spring the Hopes which yield some ease to the Troubles and
Evils of thy Condition? Who is he that can deliver thee from the Arrests of
Justice? Where will thou be secured from the Thunder of Divine Vengeance? See
round about thee, nay within thee there are Ten thousand Witnesses (who are
accusers also) of the Exorbitances of thy Passion. Observe both by the late and
sad Chastisements of others (not so bad as thy self) how ready the abused
Patience of the Almighty is to change it self into Fury at thy continued
provocations. Is not thy Conscience gnawing thee like a Vulture? and ready to
fly in thy very Face to reprehend the vanity of thy desires, the extravagance
of thy Appetite, the blindness of thy Affection, and the infidelity of thy
Opinions? Therefore gape no longer after the Tantalizing fruit of Sodom; stare
not at the Tinsell Glories of this World; but lift up thy Spiritual Eyes in
Love, and Prayer, and Contemplation, to the Rock of Ages, to the utmost bounds
of the everlasting Hills, to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, those Mountains
of perfection who enclose within the bowels of their Love all the Treasures of
Wisdom and Holiness, and the only means of our Salvation.

Look up unto the top of this Pisgah and see all that blessed Land; see from
this Summit how those lower Heights who never feel the showers of our Sorrows,
nor fear the clouding of their Heads in Darkness, I mean the Beatified Saints
and Angels (who have such glorious Elevations through the Magnetic force of
God's goodness upon theirs) that like the Hill of the Lord they are venerably
to be regarded, and though thy weak sight can reach no higher than these Hills,
O learn from these thy Fellow Creatures the vast distance of thine own
unworthiness! when but compared even to them in whom thou have found Folly, and
be confounded with Shame at thy far grosser failings, so shall thou learn to
turn off the Thorns of the Flesh, to turn out the Love of the World, and to
turn away the Messengers of Satan.

Thou shall learn the right Methods of a sincere and incorrupt Life, thou shall
learn to behold, and beholding admire that Hight of Glory that is above, and
admiring thou shall learn to get up to that innumerable Company of Saints and
Angels already gone to an eternal Passover before the Lord in his Holiest Sion,
and thou shall not only have the Ministry of Angels but the help and protection
of that great Angel of the Covenant the Holy Jesus, to guide thee up safely unto
those who are gone before.

But since, O most gracious God! the Aids which thy Creatures afford are but
instrumental and Ministerial, without force or advantage, but by thy Will and
Permission.

I therefore look from them unto Thee directly, having recourse to thy Pity
only, and imploring thy Assistance.

Thou art my Creator, my Redeemer, my Comforter; my God and my Rock, if thou
should reject my Supplications, to which of the Saints should I turn to offer
them up?

If Thou should deny a Remedy for my weak Condition, from what Angel? or from
what Bethesda could I hope for succor?

If Thou, who art the Fountain of goodness, should deny me to drink freely of
the Waters of Life (for the restitution and repair of my Spiritual health) from
what peculiar Stream or Cistern could one become so Loathsome and despicable, by
reason of Infirmities, as I am, from whom, I say, could such a one as I expect
a draught, nay so little as a drop of Comfort?

It Is true Lord! my yielding to the guidance of a blind Leader has subjected
the liberty of my Will to the Tyranny of my Senses, and These adoring some weak
and brittle reflection of thy Loveliness, (in the fadeing beauty of some dying
Objects) have made Earth my Heaven, and so engaged me amongst worldly
enjoyments, as to give me neither List nor Leisure to regard the delights
above; but a Cloud of terrene satisfactions (which will soon vanish as a Mist)
have taken my Jesus, my true Joy, out of my sight: and I must confess, I have
been less willing to look on the feasting and refreshing Vessels of Heavenly
Joys, than God has been to prepare a Table, and to let down a Banquet for my
Soul.

O! how have I scornfully passed by, and turned my head away from the good
Samaritan? When my Savior has bowed down his Head, even unto my Ear, and
called upon me thus,

Is it nothing unto thee, O thou that passest by? Is it nothing that I have
unbarred Heaven Gates for thee, and broken down the Gates of Hell? Behold and
see quite through my Body, how the way to Paradise lies open to you: and since
there are so many passages made thither for Sinners through my Wounds and
Heart, why will you not believe that I am the Way.

O my dear God! I cannot excuse either my neglects or infidelity; but I know
our grievous offenses do Crown the glorious Actings of thy goodness, and the
innumerable Train of those who are conquered by thy clemencies do make such
splendid Triumphs in Heaven as thou most delightest in.

The wondrous Frame and machine of the Heavens, the spacious Theater of the
Earth, with all the movements and spectators round about them, is the great
Ball thou give unto rational considerations, and was the work of thy Hands
alone.

Nothing it self was matter enough for thy Omnipotency, from whence to build up
the mighty Fabric of the Universe. So that by the same power thou did
Create, thou may also Relieve and Redeem me from the Miseries wherein I am
plunged by my Sins.

Without thy most Divine Assistance all my good intentions flagg and vary from
the strict observance of thy Commands. My Nature habituated and grown old in
Evil, wanting thy help on every side, finds the Precipices of its endless Ruin.
Thou only O my God! may withold my falling, uphold my weak endeavors, and
raise me out of the Gulphs of my Condition which is sinking down to the
lowermost Hell.

Under the safeguard of thy friendly Aspect mine Eyes fear not the blinding of
themselves on Sublunary Glories, my Tongue dares not Profane it self with the
vain discourse of this loose Age, my Feet will not follow the motions of the
Flesh, my Hands will find themselves obliged to pious Actions, and my Ears will
not admit of other sounds than such as Echo forth thy greatness and thy
Glories.

It Is so indeed, most dear Redeemer! that under the Banner of thy Love I fear
not the Forces of those Enemies both to thy Cross and to my Crowning, I am sure
the Captain of my Salvation will put to flight whole Armies of those aliens of
vain and intemperate affections who would Lord it over thine Inheritance, O
Lord! and thou will heal my backslidings so, as that Sin shall not be finished
to bring forth Death eternal.

Comfort thy self then O my Soul! that the care of God in preserving of men is
so great as not to let him seem to slumber when thou have occasion of thy
Shepherds Staff; nor will he prove such a stupid Patron as Baal did, 1 Kings
18.27, 28.
when entreated by his Votaries.

But if thy greater provocations hinder not his pity, this will ever be at hand
to support, to supply thy deficiency; and we have no reason to doubt or deny
the effects of his Vigilance who with such unwearied and constant attendance
makes the Angels wait upon our Motions.

Nay, although we leave, and tire God by our Sins; yet for all our wilful
Defections and Errors God has never yet left or abandoned us.

This great Eye of the Universe is never closed, never blinded by our juglings,
never imposed upon by appearances, never heavy with Sleep; he decks the Glories
of his goodness with the particular kindness which he has for the Sons of Men.

If then the Majesty of the most High not only by the Actings of his bounty,
but by the Ministry of his Angels thus guards and governs, aids and accompanies
frail Humanity; how comes it to pass O my Soul! that thy Affections run from
such Fellowship, from such Defense to expose themselves to the Shadows of
Vanity, or the dangers of Sensuality?

Why do thou venture thy self so alone like Hagar in a barren Wilderness far
from Heaven, from Angels, and from God, to seek for Earthly satisfactions, or
to let a servile corrupt Wilfulness domineer over the?

O resist stoutly the assaults of the common Enemy, who (if it were possible)
would allay the scorching of his own flames by throwing thee and other Souls
into them. Therefore quench the violence of those Tendencies that sink thy Soul
down from Heaven. Master the power of such Affections, as despoiling thee of
thy most noble part would cloth thee with the filthy Rags of Sin: and then
fear not Soul! for God is with thee.

Indeed Lord, if my frailties did not rob me of the favor, thou should be my
Master, teaching me the things which belong unto my peace, Thou should be my
Guide, not only unto but through Paradise. Thou should be my safe Conuoy to
defeat the Enemy of his rejoicing at my falls. Thou also should be my keeper
to detourne me from the Snares which are daily spread for me by the pleasures
of Sense: and I am weak (as Hezekiah once said) Lord do thou undertake for me.
Take upon thee my Guardianship and thou shall see how valiantly I will resist
all the Temptations of the Devil. If thy most powerful Arm do shield my
tender Heart, O Lord! what Power, though ever so insolent, dares shoot an Arrow
or throw a Dart against it? If thy Right Hand be my Support, what Force can
over-turn me? Heaven has no Thunder, Earth has never a Mouth, nor Hell it
self an Abyss for such as sit under the shadow of the Almighty. When the great
God sets his Hand to the Charter of our Protection, or to the securing of our
safety, what alteration can all the changes of the World make on us? None, not
any, Non si ruat Orbis: We cannot wander as e'rewhile from his mind, nor so
grossly transgess his Precepts.

Rejoice then O my Soul! that God has undertook thy defense by all his Divine
care and industry, and has made his Son a Hostage for our security, while he
continually holds thee up by the outstretched Arm of his Favor.

O most Glorious God! it is thou alone that rulest all the Motions, the
Ragings, the Madness of the World, and its Elements. Thou sit above the
Heavens, (says the Psalmist) thou presidest over all thy Works by thy Power
and Mercy, so that thou can allay the force of every Influence in such an
Almighty sort as that the Sun shall have no feavourish Darts, nor the Moon any
malignant Aspects to cast on those who are shielded by thy Protection.

The Fire in its own quality is so violent and greedy, as never to say it has
enough, but after it has devoured all in its way is ready to feed (like Envy)
on it self; how is it by the Heavenly Providence tempered in its unbridled
Nature, and restrained from doing Mischief, as held in from destroying both it
self and others?

What shall I then say of those Flames of sensuality, those Fits of
Intemperance, those Epilepsies of Lasciviousness, those Rapes and Violences
committed upon (and much against) our own Constitutions, which without a
singular effect of Divine Clemency would soon torment and consume our Nature.

And who is there but some time or other plays the Curtius, and desperately
throws himself into the Gulf of Danger, rather than he will offer to turn the
Stream of Pravity, which carries away our Affections so much the more
precipitously and mischievously, as we allow, it Natural and Born ^ us. What
force then O Lord! without thy Sovereign help can bear the Shock of Ambition,
or bridle the fury of Passions, or resist the Assaults of Lust? Thou alone,
most Gracious God! may enlighten the blindness of my Mind, enable the
weakness of my Heart, and invigorate the desperate estate of my Soul.

He that thinks to go out by himself in his own strength alone against the
Uncircumcised Enemies of our Peace, he knows not what he has about him; how
unprovided he is of Armor, and of Force to encounter such Giants as may defeat
him even by the falseness of his own Nature. Man of himself being now so
entangled, (in his own Land as it were) so hampered by his depraved and carnal
Sense, as that his very presuming to fight his Adversary with his own sorry
Weapons, is the showing but of his Pride and Weakness, (the faults charged on
David, and the Sins of Goliath) the defying of the Most High, and the disgracing
the Armies of the Living God.

My safety therefore shall depend only upon Gods defense, whose continual
Guard and seasonable Reliefs, free me from the injurious Accidents happening in
the Day or in the Night. So that all my time and life finds it self exempt, or
secured from such continual Perils as are encountered in an Age so full of Sin
and Violence, and therefore so full of Miseries as this Present is.

O how do thou disarm the furiousness of my Enemies, and of the whole
Creation, Dearest Lord? How do thou stop the Mouths of the fiercest Monsters?
(which are opened against Mankind since the Fall.) It is thou who do blunt
the Cruelties of Thieves and Tyrants, and calmest the most violent Storms, and
humblest the most Lofty Pride. All Misfortunes, all Disasters, all Calamities
are overcome by thy Power, and made beneficial to us by thy Providence.

Continue therefore thy Favors toward my poor Soul, which oppressed by the
weight of its Earthly-mindedness sinks down into the Pit without the support of
thy Love. O^^rcover it as thou did Hezekiah's, and see how the Devil (that is
ever employing his usual Malice) is allways in Ambush, or in open War against
her. With the Complacencies of the Appetite he Charms her, with the Heats of
Ambition he Chafes her, with the Pleasures of Sense he Diverts, with the Snares
of Beauty he Entraps, and with the Glories of the World he quite dazles me,
frail Mortal, so that being near lost and carried away by his cunning Devises
(of which I would not be longer ignorant, O Lord!) I struggle with the utmost
effort to break away from the specious promises and puissance of my Adversary,
that my Mind may not be debauched by the fair shows of the Flesh, nor my Soul
enslaved to the unreasonable passions of the Body: But that she may fly to thy
Aid, imploring thy Succor, and sheltering me under the Wings of thy Protection.

Surely, dear Lord! I have not tired out thy Pity, for all the Maladies of my
Heart do want a continual Medicine; and un-interrupted applications of a Divine
Hand; grant therefore O my God! through thine immediate Care and infinite
Commiseration the whole course of my Life may be so directed as that I may
observe thy Commands, and the end of my Designs may be wholly thy Glory; the
Scope of my Desires, thy Service, and thy Love, the Center of my Affections.

May the bright Emanations of thy Grace so shine upon my doings, as they having
their beginning and end under thy Favor, nothing may draw me from thy Laws, or
from my hopes of Happiness.

In a special manner do I beg thy Help O dear Redeemer! in that hour when the
Man being attacqued with the Horrors of Death, grows faint and weary (like
Thirsting Sampson) and is in danger of quitting the Field to his greatest Foes
and most dangerous Assailants. In that blackest hour (which is the Power of
Darkness) oh let me have thy clearest Guidance! O let me have that supernatural
Assistance which the most dreadful Conflicts do require.

And now cheer up my Soul with the assurance that thou have recommended thy
self unto a faithful Creator, who will keep thee to the uttermost, and defend
thy proceedings. He will not suffer thee to loose the excellency of thy first
being, nor to be always blurred with the Sordidness of Earth. He can Seal up
all thy Faculties in the Contemplation of his Greatness, and having blessed the
Periods of thy Life here, will promote thee to Glory in the Ages of Eternity.
AMEN.

The third Step upon the Third PSALM of Degrees, being the 122 PSALM.
Laetatus sum in his, etc.
O My God! what greater Consolation can a Soul receive here than to be fed with
the Hopes of enjoying thy Divine presence hereafter? The Mirth of this World is
so mixed, so dashed with Vanity or Repentance, that it is no ways comparable to
what Eternal Beatitude can promise. Honors and Earthly Grandeurs are
overloaded with the burden of observances, dissimulations and business,
Worldly Riches are accompanied with Labor, Snares, and Vexatious Contests. The
delights of sense are vanished almost before enjoyed, and of them nothing
remains afterward but dissatisfaction. All the goods of Nature or of Fortune
are very frail and momentary proving their felicities but vain and fantastic.

But the enjoyment of the Light of Gods Countenance, the introduction into the
privy Chambers of Heaven which are hanged with Eternity, and furnished with all
real good is so great a favor, so inestimable a Jewel, so unparalleled an
advantage, as that the Soul it self cannot comprehend much less the tongue
express it.

How am I then arrived? O dear Redeemer! to a blessed pitch of Confidence by
considering though I find my self a very unworthy Sinner yet I may come (as I
am called) into the Land of the living, into the Kingdom of Heaven, and when
this Earthly Tabernacle shall be dissolved, I shall have a Throne, a Seat, a
Building not made with hands, Eternal in the Heavens.

What greater happiness? O my God! can a Soul promise it self, then by
seconding thy divine Commands, be secure of inheriting such a Throne, such a
Seat, such a Kingdom in the portion of the blessed? and in the presence of
Saints and Angels Communicate of thy own Greatness, and of thy Glory? What
delights can equal those of the Celestial Paradise? Speak no more of an Earthly
one, for what satisfactions may keep pace with the Vision of my God? ( Adam
himself could but view his works in the Universe.) But,

O thou great Ineffable, Incomprehensible, Transcendent! Will thou ever become
the Object of those Eyes that have been profaned by Worldly Spectacles? In thy
presence is Life, full Content, and endless Joys, and these I shall as fully
possess, (being instated by thy Favor) as Angels or other perfect Spirits have
them, so my desires shall be still feasted with the Contemplation of thy
Goodness, and my affections shall triumph in their eternal enjoyments and the
insatiable Nature of my Soul and sense will find enough to entertain and quiet
them in the infinite Treasure of thy Love and Wisdom.

But because he deserves no admission into the Clossets of the Righteous who
has made his abode amongst the Carnalities of the World and inslaved his
reason to the service of sin. I pray thee most gracious God, to stay the feet
of my longings from going up too hastily, too rashly: Hold my thoughts yet
longer upon the Reflection of my own demerits, and then afterward fix them on
the sole contemplation of Heavenly things, so I shall better find the
Obligation I have to serve thee with pure intentions, and suitable operations
and not continue still only fit to be shut out of the new Jerusalem that is
above.

That Jerusalem I mean whose walls are built up of several orders of Virtues,
whose stately Palaces are reared by the Law of Moses, the Revelations of the
Prophets, and the labors of the Apostles, the sufferings and Patience of
Saints, and the power of the Gospel, wherein the glorious Majesty of Christ
Resides, and the best Apartments are set off with Love and Charity, and the
Angels are the bright Courtiers; Thrones, Dominions and Powers, chief Officers,
Archangels the Guards, and the blessed inhabitants are the just made perfect.

What then should a man do? or rather what should he not do or suffer, to get
to this Jerusalem above? O my Soul! thou must know that Heaven is a free and
General native Country, that is arrived at not by nobleness of Birth, nor by
the pride of Life or living, not by the glories of Ancestors, nor by the Wealth
nor Honors of the Earth, but by the Holines^acts of our desires, the sincerity
of the Heart, the temperance of the Tongue, and the Righteousness of our
Actions.

Here then my Soul fix all thy Complacencies; thou have already cloyed thy
apetite on the momentary pleasures of a short Life, and thou find how brief
they are in the fruition, how bitter in the recantation of them.

Get up therefore, get up to this new Jerusalem which the pity and goodness of
my God does promise thee, while by his infinite Mercies he lets thee taste the
fruit of his planting, the wonderful Conjunctions of Faith and eternal Glories,
and will let thee partake of the chief good (that common portion of such as are
found worthy to be called the children of God.)

Have thou no reason then, O Soul! to give thy self up absolutely to the
goodness of my God? what should hinder or impeach thy submission? is not this
due to the merits of his goodness and to the demerits of thy former Operations?
Yea surely by so much the more art thou obliged to his service, by how much the
more his bounties have been extended toward thee. Therefore after all this his
payment of thy debt of transgressions, I find thee bound more fast to thy debt
of Duty, to fear Gods Power, to adore his Majesty, to be humbled for my Pride,
and ashamed of my follies.

Heaven is no place thou know for the unclean, there are none but Innocents
or Penitents, such as have needed no Repentance or else have used it.

O thou most gracious Monarch of the World! whosoever pretends to aproach thy
Throne, to partake of thy Glories, or to enter into thy garden of Life: He must
of necessity be installed with the Vesture of thy Grace and be stripped of all
Earthly compliances which so entangle men amongst the snares of Offenses or the
miseries of this Life.

All they who to this time have stayed in the Presence Chamber of the Heaven of
Heavens, have been signalized with the special characters of thy Love (without
which all our endeavors are alike Blind and fruitless,) they alone have gained
that place and honor, by the sincerity of their Consciences, by the purity of
their Lives, by the cleanness of their hands in thy sight O Lord, as says the
Psalmist.

Let this be owned by (those Children of Israel, those chosen people and that
Royal Priesthood of Thine,) who being advanced to an heavenly height by the
steps of their Virtues, have made thy greatness (conjoined with thy goodness)
to be Ecchoed through the Universe, to the shame and confusion of others more
obliged who notwithstanding they be enriched by millions of Benefits yet know
not how to respect the Donor, acknowledge the Gift, or sanctify thy Holy name
therewithal.

Lord I am sensible of the backwardness of my Heart to any gratefulness, it is
conscious of it is own Guilt, and would not go no farther till it has confessed,
how the observation of thy Commands has been the least of its care, and thy
Love, (which ought to have been the first desire of my Heart) has by my
ignorance been so neglected, as that the fading sparks of a beautiful look have
more easily inflamed it then thy presence.

As many Objects as have been offered to my sense, became so many Idols, to the
which my passions were devoted.

Thy divinest Name has been cast out of my Mouth in a Thousand vain
asseverations, and these have been uttered to no other end, then to give
Credence to the vanity of my intentions, or the falsehood of my Speeches. How
then, can these Eyes, these Ears, these Hands, these words of mine, plead
themselves guiltless of any Crime? since they have or would have offended in
all, and this conviction of my own guilt, frights me with the thoughts of thy
comeing with thy Holy ones to judge the World, lest I be then found in the
number of such profane wretches as shall be shut forth of thy Caelestial
Mansions.

I therefore dread that last and great Assizes of thy Saints, most glorious God
I fear that general Summons, and the Assembly of thy first born, least when
that Bench sits upon the examination of my Actions and Omissions, how I have
neglected the directions of their Doctrine, and not imitated the goodness of
their Manners, nor traced the footsteps of their Charity, nor admired the
proofs of their Patience: I being so vile a sinner, (such reprobate silver) may
be rejected, for if I am apprehended without the wedding garment of Christ's
righteousness; I have nothing to say for my self, no plea to make, saving the
inexpressible desire of my poor Soul, not to be excluded with Dogs, but to
enter into the Holiest City the new Jerusalem.

I confess good Lord, that I have neither worth nor will, to follow the
conducts of thy grace, nor to arrive at thy Favor: all the courses of my Life
have been great aggravations of my guiltiness, for I have slighted thy
Omnipotency, by prideing my self in thy extraordinary gifts. The very sight and
heat of the Sun have appeared, not the Loanes of thy peculiar bounty but things
made on purpose for my convenience.

The return and pleasure of each season, has been reckoned the unavoidable
actings of sublunary Creatures. Thunder, Lightning, and storms of Hail, were
too often counted the necessary effects of second causes. Thus Brutish have I
been, thus blind and yet I knew full well there would not be a Breath of Air,
nor so much as a lease wag unless it were by thy appointment, that makes every
Creature live and move and have a Being.

Yet alas, for all I can so speciously declare this, I must confess also that
many a time when my tongue undertook to disclose thy Name, with the due
Attributes of thy greatness; my wild heart has then witheld its assent, and
been ready to give the lie to my speech.

Since therefore all that I can say of my self speaks me very guilty before
thee O Lord, I Plead, not any Merits but those of my Saviors Passions, not any
goodness but that of thy Divine Nature; afford me these, through thy Grace, and
then I shall have that peace (which is an inseparable accident to it) I shall
have such a Magazine of blessing as may render my Soul like a strong fortress,
well provided against the assaults of the World, and the snares of the Devil.

Gracious Lord! I have often begged the favor of thy mercy to draw me out of
that wretched state of my prevarications, and from the slavery of Concupisence,
and from the Tyranny of evil habits, I know how weak, how blind, how false or
infirm, our own Nature finds it self at the best, and therefore he that
supposes (without the assistance of thy goodness, without the armor of thy
Grace, without the encouragement of thy Love,) either to quell the
impetuousness of his Lusts, or to get up to the holy Hill, destroying like a
Jonathan all his enemies in his way, such a one must surely be more then a Man,
or mistakes himself grossly; for he should know it is only from the excess of thy
pity, that a sinner is turned from the evil of his way.

The prodigal soul that has long strayed, can never make up its losses nor
mend its condition, unless it be by the inexhausted treasures of thy Grace.

Help me therefore, and redeem me from the power of Satan unto God, that being
entrusted with thy Talents I may show forth to all thy manifold goodness, and
tender Bowels of Compassions so that sinners (many with my self) may be farther
converted unto Thee, and by my example inflamed with thy Love, renounce Earthly
Toys and pay thy Clemency the due Tribute of penitential Tears.

And from whence dear God! art yet more glorified then by forgiving us poor
sinners? Thy mercies are likewise a guide for ours, since all the Acts of thy
goodness and kindness, may in some degree be imitated by man. He was formed
after thy Image, and the more just and holy he is, the more does he approach
unto Thee. That Prince who best resembles God on Earth, must own his power to
reward or to punish from thy special grant O Jesu.

The Martyrs have essayed to copy out thy patience, the Virgins thy purity,
Confessors thy truth, and Hermits thy Innocence. But alas! How far short are
they of the Original? They have represented thy image as St. Paul speaks but as
in a glass very darkly, and deficiently. For as the Heavens are higher then the
Earth so far more excellent are thy operations and affections then ours,

The proofs of thy goodness are infintly Transcendent and inexpressible,
rather to be admired then exemplifyed, and did not all the Prerogatives of
Heaven and Earth, concur to set forth thy greatness and to speak thee the Lord
of Hosts: Yet thy goodness alone would describe thee most admirably according
as thou declaredst thy self unto Moses, the Lord, the Lord merciful and
gracious, slow to anger and abundant in truth and goodness.

Therefore extend these glorious attributes toward my relief, and advance thy
lovely Titles, by the forgiveness of my sins, I have no farther cause to urge,
but that by how much the more unworthy my Soul is of pardon, by so much the
more will thy pity be adored in the pardoning of me.

The fourth Step on the fourth PSALM of Degrees, being the 123 PSALM.
Ad te Levavi, etc.
COme Lord! O come and and help my sinking Soul, that being seared with many
troublesome Illusions, will let me fall (I doubt) into the dark of sin, I have
experienced to my cost how much the ill propensities of my Nature corrupt my
sentiments, and habituating me to the relish of tentation, almost persuade me
it is impossible to resist.

I live indeed with my self, far from my self, at such a distance from a good
mind, as to be without the neighborhood or acquaintance of my own bad one.

Self love deludes me with false reflexes and gives to vice it self the surname
of Virtue, it makes me a self-deceiver and a gross flatterer of my own
opinions, so that I am apt to spare and connive at my self in the midst of my
greatest delinquencies; but not to entertain my self any longer among the
miseries I contract, nor to cast away my life too blindly amongst errors. I
lift up the Eyes of my Soul to the light of thy divine Presence, and with a
steady Faith, a lively Hope, a most ardent Love, a fixed Contemplation, a
strong Patience, and a sincere Endeavor, I implore thy Assistance, and entreat
thy Mercy.

My sight has lost its ability in regarding worldly Objects, and I would not
enjoy any other Visive faculty, but that which thy wonderful grace may afford
me, let him aim and look at dirt, who full of earthly designs waits for all his
comforts here below, I who for my part store my chiefest Treasure of bliss and
solace in a Heaven above, turn all my thoughts and my affections toward thee,
who art my only Lord and Master; I have ventured again to lift up these two
doors of mine eyes, these humble gates of vision, even to the lofty Throne of
thy Majesty, and my desires have made bold to enter like Esther unto
Artaxerxes, even into the Cabinet of thy graces and glories; unto the bosom of
thy Love Christ Jesus, and they have found admittance hitherto by the
confidence thy goodness, and pity does afford Them in a Savior.

I acknowledge my self like an humble slave that waits for pardon of his faults,
Relief of his necessities, protection from injuries, freedom from his chains,
deliverance from further persecutions, in a word I expect through thee my dear
Redeemer Jesus whatsoever may advantage my outward man, or felicitate my
inward. I am not for retireing any farther from thy presence like a guilty
Cain, since it is by the light of thy countenance, by the favor of thy grace,
that I would chase away the thick clouds of my sins, and never more loose the
light of thee, my Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Thou art the Chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof, the putting thee far
away from us is the foolish and desperate attempt of loosing God, of loosing
his favor indeed as Jonas once did to meet with what is monstrously Horrid,
but not of getting out of thy sight (as that Prophet did experiment) for though
we go down into Hell: There art Thou also and thine eye can reach us.

Therefore will I keep mine eye fixed on thee: O thou Father and fountain of
Lights! and will fear to fall under any such eclipses as thy displeasure, or my
transgressions may bring upon me. I was once so hoodwinckt by the pleasures of
sin, as to be led about fondly by the false glitterings of the World, I have
been dazzled by a frail Woman's beauty so as to think there has been no Heaven
like a kind look from her, nor have I looked at any other happiness, then has
shone from from her eyes, which were two wandering stars alas, which in a
little space of time must set without hopes of shineing out again.

My blind ambition carried me no farther then mortals praises and my designs
smelt of the ground from whence they sprang, my passions grew not feebler while
my person did but waxed more robust as I grew older, and when I became nearer
to my end (and had less need of worldly entertainments such as wealth and
honor,) then I became more greedy after them.

How base is that mental Idolatry inslaves us to the worship of that which has
it self no more value then is given by the opinion of some foolish adorers? and
as the femal graces of shape or complexion come as it were by accident, so
these are subject to ten Thousand casualties from them, neither gave these to
themselves, nor can keep them, (unless by great deceit and Color.) I now see
what phantasmes all those honors are, which are sought with great pain,
possessed with fear, and lost again with torment.

Therefore dearest God! I am returning to thee and leaving worldly pomps and
passions, to thee alone address my prayers, my desires and my vows. I will be
like those Domestics, who serve faithfully and and seek Diligently to please
their Lord, by minding his business, and his beck, that they may please and
profit him to the utmost.

I will attend with longing eyes for thy favor and pardon, and look to thy
mercy seat, while I cast not a glance upon the glories of the world (as I have
done, Psalm 19.
that Basilisk shall no more inven^ome my life by its regards, but shall be
trampled under the feet of my contrition; luxury, and vain glory, shall be trod
down into the dust as low as Humility can lay them or me; and the richest
intrals of both Indies shall have no treasures big enough to bribe my desires
from the service of thy Heavenly Majesty.

Have mercy then, O gracious Lord! have mercy on thy poor indebted steward, and
deliver me from the evil of this defect and transgression, both from sin and
suffering by grace and glory.

If thou do not by the transcendencies of thy power and goodness, free me
from the miseries of my guilt, and restore me to some degree of pardon (which
is Innocence in thy sight) where can I firm my hopes, from whom can I expect
Salvation?

I was formed according to thy Image, imbellished with thy resemblance in a
superfluity of spiritual and temporal indowments, and yet I could not for all
this preserve my self in a state of purity or safety: So that without the
renewed favors of thy goodness, I might expect nothing but thunders and
lightnings from the Throne, and flashes from the lake that burns for ever.
Without thy Assistance O my God! I am afraid of thy foregoing promises, that I
shall not be able to keep my word with thee, nor keep my heart from worldly
lusts, for indeed I have sound my spirit running out of it self too often, into
the Arms of sin and mischief; frail humane nature being utterly disabled from
maintaining thy favor, without thy overruleing grace.

I am not a little sensible of the impotent commotions of my Soul, and the
frequent domineering of my passions, sometimes Ambition drives me after the
seeking a trouble (which our ignorance calls a Title) of Honor. Sometimes I am
wrackt with suspicion of disgrace, or I hunt after reputation by any means but
by godliness. Now I am afraid of dying, or of leaving that to the earth which
was borrowed of her for me: anon I am vexed in the possession or acquest of
Riches which some call felicities, others find to be torments, and then
complain of any slight mischance as if these happened without thy providence,
or were not produced by my demerits.

Thus my state does sufficiently experience, each excess of humane wretchedness
by the agitation of my faculties to my disturbance or danger, nor without thy
help and mercy, Lord can I find how to get out of this wretched condition, nor
how to keep my self well if I were out.

My weak shoulders stoop under the weight of thy commands as if these were like
my sins too heavy for me to bear; and my corruptions exhale matter continually
to cross my resolutions, of not offending thee.

Stay therefore O Lord, and take the sword of thy Spirit, and stop the way for
me. Stetch forth thy hand above the fury of mine adversaries, and shield me
with thine arm against them.

Let not the fiery darts of my Concupiscenses divert or prevent thy bounties or
turn thy patience into displeasure. For (as I have said before) I must again
acknowledge, that (without thy continual aid) I shall become a prey to their
force and malice who (to the disparagement of thy power) would in spite of it
subdue and inslave me.

The Fifth Step on the Fifth PSALM of Degrees, being the 124 PSALM.
Nisi quia Dominus, etc.
IF in defense of my known weakness, thy power O God! were not provided with a
like infinity of commiseration; and if this did not seasonably come in to my
relief, how should I Stem the tide of Passions which dangerously swells up my
breast? what would become of me in such a deluge as they would throw upon me?
Ah! let the purest Soul confess, and the choicest Spirits acknowledge together
with the Elect and confirmed Angels: that if the Holiness of a Savior had not
sheltered theirs; if Jesus had not bid the Waves and Winds be quiet and obey
him; who of them all might not have sunk down and perished in the stormy Lake?
Had not Christ halcyon'd the proud storms of our Passions, had he not quel'd
the miseries of this life, who could have born them? who amongst us could have
rid safe through such tempests? or have held out against such attacks as the
sin beleaguered Soul incounters? None could have promised ease or a sanctuary
to our vexed minds, none could have reached to the serenities of Heaven.

Our strength is weakness (say the Scriptures) if not strengthn'd by divine
supplies. The Metal, or condition of our humanity is too brittle to be
trusted, if not backed by the author of our Salvation.

Keep therefore with my heart continually O God! that the Image of thy Son may
not fall in darkness or in the shadow of death, nor that soul be lost for which
he took to himself a body.

If I have not thine aid O Lord! I cannot get out of the dungeon of my sins,
nor avoid the stings of that infernal scorpion, but thou without looking on the
demerit of my crimes, and the transgressions of my past life, wilt I hope
assist and deliver me from the perils both of soul and body, wherewith I may
be surrounded.

I am ready to cry out who is sufficient for these things? How can I resist the
attempts of the flesh, the allurements of the world, or the assaults of our
cunning adversary the devil? I am entangled as the unhappy Laocoon is said to
be. Aenoid. lib. 2.


When three such poisonous serpents, crawling out of the earth are twisted
against me: They make sure of my ruin; and how can I break the knots of such a
triple League? since the beauty but of one face (adorned with several charms)
had almost got the command of my heart? and the solace of idleness, the sweets
of riches, the savor of vain glory many times captive my affections ere I am
aware of them, what may not the cunning therefore of the Father of these
falsehoods impose upon me, since he differs not in power from the best of the
Angels, but in the manner of his operations, if not restrained by thine
immediate hand?

When such dangerous enemies had attacqued my inconsideratness, and battered my
cowardice, I having but little or no constancy nor integrity, I had certainly
become the prey of their malice, and they must needs have left me in the very
jaws of death and damnation.

Away then from me all ye instruments of sin and mischief above named, go ye
buisy seducers of the best men's ways, Ye with your jugglings dazzle the eyes of
the Soul, that like a Sodomite it should not find the Door of Life, the way to
get into the City of the Lamb, ye so varnish over the Copy of Falsehood, as it
proves a hard matter to discern her from the Original of truth; and our
Consciences are hurt (not purged) by your sugaring over the draught of Sin.

Nevertheless, O merciful God! let that invincible power by which Lucifer was
tumbled down from Heaven, and Hell it self led Captive, free me from these
Hunters after my Life, these noisome Pestilences to my Health, these tyrannick
Nimrods against my Liberty; if their malice be once turned into fury what shall
I do? for if thou had not been my Refuge and Fortress I had fallen through
that baseness of Mind which is incident to the Sinner, who doubts of finding
any Friend in his own Heart, or any Evidence in his Conscience, but what will
be against himself. If thou had not by thy unspeakable bounty afforded me
some patience and perseverance to disentangle me from many wicked devices,
perhaps the Waves of my Afflictions and Trialls would have swallowed up all the
Faculties of my Soul, and made my Heart a Cage of unclean Birds, a Vessel full
of nothing but what was foul and bestial.

But by thy aid I must acknowledge it is that I have given place to Charity and
Forgiveness (without regarding the nice punctilioes of the blinded World) then
when Egged on by the desire of Revenge, (which is the keenest Goad in the sides
of Flesh and Blood) I strove to set up my self far above my self even in thy
Throne of Vengeance. But,

For all I might have once too vainly thought to secure the best share of thy
favor, when I made a Covenant with my Eyes (which are as Tinder to the Fire of
Amorous passions) not to stoop at any Femal Object: and when I farther
attempted to set up the Government of Reason over all the mutinies of my sense,
and so to get a Triumphal-Wreath by the passing safely through those dangers
which threatened to overwhelm my Soul. O Lord! I find now that I Designed too
much; Doing so little and Considering less; that without thy gracious and
continual Assistance, without the extremest Acts of thy bounty my utmost
endeavors had been but Flourishes in the Air, and Paeans before a Victory.
They might have allarmed my Adversary, awaked his greater force and policies.
But the escaping his malicious devices would have been without the compass of
my Power and Arms.

When I perceived this, I could discover also that it was thy good will I
should gain a Conquest, and though my strength was but weakness, yet that this
my weakness should not be wrought upon too far by all the force and cunning of
my Adversaries.

Therefore gracious Lord! I pray, that thy Goodness may have its due praise,
that thy Mercy be greatly blessed, and thy Greatness glorified; since thou have
not suffered my visible or invisible Foes to triumph over me, but thou have
delivered me (like Daniel from the jaws of those Abaddons) who would have torn
and miserably destroyed, even my better part, my Soul.

O that I could immortalize my Voice to resound thy Name more Gloriously! O
that all my Words might become Spirits, and that I could devote them all to the
service of my God, as a small acknowledgment of the grace received from thee!

However I fall short I will endeavor to speak my self not insensible though
unworthy of thy Favors. I will try if my Arms (who have hitherto served as
Chains to embrace the Debauches of the World) may be turned into Columns
erected unto Heaven in Thanksgiving and supplications for thy help. I will try
if my Mouth (which has been the Gate of Dishonesty) may become a Theater
echoing forth thy Praise, as in thy holy Temple. I will strive to fit up my
Heart into a Lamp for thine Altar, where it should be still flaming with a Zeal
for thy Glory.

It has been a Vessel foully savouring of the smutty affections of Earth, but
I hope to cleanse it from such taints, now that I may liken my Soul to a Bird,
which has broken through the Snares of the Fowler.

Thanks to thy Pity gracious Lord! I now find the Devil was not so skillful in
laying his Snares, as thy Wisdom has been in the defeat of his Stratagems. He
like Nimrod is a mighty Hunter, ever pursuing our fearful Hearts, that he may
chase them from their repose and shelter, and then surprise, take, and slay
them. His Toils are the Pleasures of the World, his Darts are a Thousand
Temptations, his Hounds are profane and wicked men, and what pains does this
Enemy of mankind refuse? so that he may but compass his ends, by entangling us
in wretched bondage, and enslaving us under the dominion of Sin?

He has sometimes endeavored to enthral me by a handsome Face, whispering it
out as a Ray of thy fairest Light: and has made use of the Gloworm Luster in
two sparkling Eyes to lead me out of thy way, into a Night of error, and when
therein, now would he scare me with the severity of thy Justice, anon lull me
asleep with the excess of thy Mercy; and then divert me by the evil customs of
others, or charm me by my own bad Inclinations, persuading by false and carnal
Reasonings.

But, dearest God how little does the allurements of this Circaean World
bewitch us? how heavily do the Goads of Sense drive us on? how soon are the
jugglings of the grand Impostor manifest when our Souls are directed, defended,
and instructed by thy Goodness? Let the greedy pursuers pitch their Nets and
make ready their Arrows upon the String, all their designs and Bows shall be
broken by thy commiserating care, O Lord.

If at any time the many incentives to Sin do take hold of me I trust by thy
helping hand to recover my Liberty.

It Is true my blessed Redeemer! these Eyes of mine have strangely confined
their happiness within the proportions of external Beauties. It Is true my Mouth
has not ecchoed thy Glories, but proved the Temple of Sensualities, my Heart
has rebelled against thee, and sworn allegiance to the World, my Hands would
not hold that purity thou requirest in them, nor would my Fancy be less than my
God. For my own Opinion has Exacted my Worship, and I have not been moved at
all toward Offices of Charity; and in Acts of Faith have been weak and
wavering.

But yet Lord it is as true that the Devil all this while has gone cunningly
about me, to watch and to hedge in my ways that I might not escape his
artifices; so that my failings have been occasioned less by my own naughtiness
than by his, and chiefly through his cunning Traps and devices, whereby my
unwary Foolishness has been inveigled.

Now that I can find my self in some such freedom as Repentance brings along
with it. I can discern the Devil's malice, and Sin's Fetters broken, my Sense
being led in Triumph by my Reason. I rally all my Spiritual Forces for the
service of my God, and for the Worship of that goodness which has rendered me
such a mighty Object of it.

Mine Eyes shall summon all their Visive Powers to look up unto Jesus, my Mouth
shall be no longer as sounding Brass or as a crakt Trumpet, giving false
allarms, but like a Seraphim's touched with the fire of thine Altar to echo
forth Thanks and holiness to the Lord. Exodus 4.25, 26.
My Heart shall throw all its affections (now Circumcised) at the Feet of thy
Grace, and my Hands shall be lift up continually to implore and to praise thy
Mercies, O my God; because thou only by the Rays of thy Favor can enlighten
my Soul in such a manner as that it may drop no more into the Darkness of Sin.

All our humane Strengths are nothing worth; no more to be trusted too than the
Reeds of Egypt; all our safety and refuge lies in thy Power. The welfare of my
little World depends on his Arm who has made all the other Worlds, Job 26.6, 7.
and hanged the Universe upon Nothing, stretching forth the Globe over the
empty place.

The sixth Step on the sixth PSALM of Degrees, being the 125 PSALM.
Qui confidunt, etc.
O Ye Sons of mortal men, Psalm. 4.5.
how long will ye turn your Bodies into weapons of Sin, your Souls into Vessels
of Dishonor, your Glory into Shame; your Shame into your Boast? in believing
Vanities, and seeking after false things? On what Rock but Christ can you
anchor the Hopes of your Salvation and Eternity?

Will ye trust the fading Beauties of Flesh and Blood, which are superfluous
gifts of Nature, vanished in a moment, scarcely entertained or taken notice of
before they take their leave and are gone?

Will ye confide on the Vigor and strength of youth? Know Death makes no
distinction of ages, and after a short space of time both Youth and Health are
dissolved into the imperfections of decrepid years.

But perhaps ye will trust (as ye dote) upon the worldly Honors? but ponder a
while what Weights they are; and like Pharisaical burdens too grievous for
most good men to carry. Experience shows that too many, even of the best, by
the desire or Act of Ruling others grow irregular themselves, and disordering
their own thoughts and quiet thereby, distemper their felicities, if not
debauch their Souls: and who so trusts in uncertain Riches is worse than a
Gospel Fool. Gold is but a Wasp though it look yellow, it has Wings to fly
away from us, and stings to leave behind it at its departure, even such stings
as are like Goads, apt to push on our greedy and brutish appetites to the most
sordid and sinful Actions.

But ye would have a Cordial made up of all these ingredients, that rare
Catholicon called Worldly felicity, which ye think might recover and secure the
Spirits from all those Qualmes and Lypothymies that many times seize upon them,
notwithstanding all your false jollities and merry Companions. But alas what is
any happiness of this lower Globe, but like it self turning about. It Is but a
Scene upon this Theater, it is shifted and changed often from one to another;
and appears always moving and inconstant, as long as this life's Opera is acting.

Trust then in God, and in God alone, for if you be under his protection you
need fear neither the Infirmities of Life nor the Injuries of Death.

Let God be your Honor, Joy, Delight, and Treasure; in him consists all
Happiness and Glory. Wherefore,

Blessed God, as long as I am sheltered by thy Divine Goodness, I will not fear
the Tongues of this evil World, nor the Venom of that most evil One, let them
join all the force of their Malice and perfidiousness together, I will remain
firm and unshaken like Mount Zion, and baffle their attempts and deride their
ineffectual fury.

The good Angels are appointed by thy great care over us, to be a watchful
Guard and Bulwark for our weakness, and they are called Mountains of strength
from the excellency of their natures and thy supporting Grace. But for all that
they are not strong enough (or rather not commissioned) to keep us always from
the attacks of Sin, or from the Snares of the Devil.

Doubtless those Guardian Spirits direct us to Good, and very often do turn us
from Evil.

But alas the pravity of our Nature makes it not still capable of Angel-like
persuasion, we are so immersed in the satisfaction of our Lusts, and so inured
to sinful compliancies, that we have neither Ear nor Heart left us to listen to
the Whispers of Holy Spirits. We still want O Lord! thy Admonitions,
Assistance, and Conduct; it is to the Glory of thy Omnipotence only, that I owe
my safety. Henceforth I live with a cheerful trust sprung from the greatness of
thy Mercy, that thou will ever stand by my Soul in its frequent perils, and
every action of my Life shall be smiled on with the favor of thy presence, and
with the direction of thy Will.

For, as the Mountains give a defense and shelter round about the City of God,
so God (who is the Rock of Ages, a vast Mountain of Power and Charity) will
continually succor and secure his People.

Since it is the peculiar effect of thy gracious Providence, O my God! to favor
and defend such who (relying on thy Pity) still implore thy help, and Sanctuary
themselves under thy Providence; this is always ready to lend a helping hand to
such as rightly ask it, and although sometimes the Righteous Cause is oppressed
by wicked Judges, and Cruelty domineers over Goodness, and the Purple of
Tyrants is double dyed in the Blood of Innocents, yet all this is done upon
righteous and wise grounds.

Thereby thou have a mind, O Lord! to try the Constancy of thy Servants, to
Correct their Errors, to exercise their Patience, to brighten or refine their
Graces, or else thou would have them serve for excellent patterns and
directions for others, that they may become thy Portion, and be fit to address
themselves to thee, and then thou suffer not their Slavery to be tedious,
nor their Rod too heavy. Because they who are thus Obedient both to thy
preceptive and providential Will are thy Children, Heb. 12.5, 6, 7.
whom thou Chastisest as a Father, and wilt not suffer the Scourge of the
Wicked to dwell long upon thine Inheritance, Psalm. 80.4.
especially when it earnestly begs Relief.

It would be no less contrary to that Dear Relation thou stand in to us,
than to the proper goodness of thy Nature, not to restrain the fury of the
impious, did not thou hook up Leviathan in dne time, it might be dangerous,
that thy weak and infirm Disciples (waving thy protection) would depart from
thee, and either abandon themselves to Vice (charmed by the short prosperity of
evil doers) or else grow fearful of Persecution, and so put forth their hands
to Iniquity, and render themselves incapable of thy Compassion.

Therefore most Gracious Lord do not forsake them who adore the greatness of
thy Love and Wisdom, and study to observe the Holiness of thy Will and
Pleasure. Heap thy bounties on their Goodness, which has no other end but God
and Righteousness. O how blessed is the Man who by the integrity of his
Affection, has fouled neither Hand nor Tongue in the blemish or blood of his
Neighbor! How blessed is he that by not obeying the usurpations of Sin, has
not made his Reason close Prisoner to his Concupiscence! He is also blessed, who
content with what he has, would not robb nor envy the enjoyments of others.
And he is blessed too, that by the sincerity of his Behavior, by the probity of
his Life, by the faithfulness of his Heart, by the innocence of his Eyes, has
endeavored to fit himself for the High-calling whereunto he is called in Jesus
Christ; and thereby gain thy favor, and work out his own Salvation.

I am assured O Lord that thou powerest forth the Treasure of thy Blessings on
them who make straight paths for their Feet, who keep the way of Righteousness,
and are as constant as Courageous to resist all Vice; since to accommodate the
Thoughts, and fix the Will to thy Dispensations, is the way to get Christ, and
to be found in him, not having our own Righteousness.

But on the contrary, Those who forget thy greatness, O Lord! and fall down to
the Worship of themselves; those who enter the wrong way into their Mother's
Womb, and embowel the Earth to steal away her Treasure, and seem to have no
other end thereby than to bury their Souls and Hopes therein; Those who being
swallowed up in Voluptuousness believe no other Paradise than the delights of
Flesh and Blood: or those who place next their own misfortunes, every
prosperous event of others, such as choke all Virtue by imperious appetites;
and Sacrifice their best faculties unto Fury and Madness; turning all Sobriety
and Reason out of doors. Lastly, such as being lost to themselves, and in their
own Opinions too, sometimes knowing not how to wake themselves out of the
Lethargy of Vice, nor get up beyond the terms of nothing (that is, Sin and
Vanity.) Such as all these are, I say, these unhappily cursed ones, shall be
struck down from Heaven's glorious presence, like Nimrod's Giants, with hot
Thunderbolts, they shall be confounded with Babel's Workmen, and become the
wretched Objects of the severity of such Corrections as are given by a Hand no
less Powerful and Just, than Jealous and Pure. They shall feel the Scorching
of those immortal Flames, which yet can never burn out their Spots, since they
have rendered themselves Heirs of Wrath, and Children of the Devil; whereas the
Righteous (beforementioned, such as may be set far from these Goats) blessed
with thy Love and Protection, O Lord, shall enjoy the serenity of that peace
which resides in thy favor, and surpasses our Understanding.

The seventh Step on the seventh PSALM of Degrees, being the 126 PSALM.
In Convertendo Dominus, etc.
O My God! how can I express the Consolation of my Soul? My Words are lost in
my joy of Heart, and can break forth but lamely at my Lips, for I behold my
self Redeemed, I find my self delivered also from the dangerous Labyrinth of my
winding Errors, thanks be to thy goodness only.

The confused Chaos of my Life has been called to by thy Word, and looked on
by the Beams of thy Grace, nay, distinguished and reformed by thy Son into a
new Lump, a new Conversion.

The mischiefs of my guiltiness are not aggravated by the continual Remorse of
Conscience, but my steps are directed by sweet methods how to keep thy Statutes
to the end.

Terrene Objects have now no privilege to control my Thoughts. My Delights and
Desires retain no other relish than of a Crucified Savior. Mine Ears took up
with the name of Jesus, cannot understand or listen to the low dumb Music of
Vanity. Mine Eyes are fascinated by one glance of thine, and follow none of
those Wildfires which did use to misguide them. My Taste savouring the things of
God, the Glories of another State, disgusts those Treats which Satan
entertained me withal (while he would have me take Stones for Bread:) All those
Appetites which mere most my own, and seemed Connatural to a deluded mind,
(having left me nothing but Shame and Sorrow) they take their leave of me (I
trust for ever) not to return any more (with seven Devils worse than
themselves) to possess me.

Wherefore advanced by so much Grace, and replete with so much Happiness as to
find Favor in thy sight, O most gracious Lord! how great is my Jubilee! how
infinite my Consolation!

Methinks the rough and narrow way to Heaven is now made plain and smooth
before my Face, and my Feet are not apt to wander so as they did formerly, but
are more steadily guided to the Observance of thy Commands: and I find these,
as David says, exceeding broad on every side of me, that I have no Temptation
(without much perverseness) to depart from them. My Conscience does not Goad me
with unsound Repentance, or unsafe Despair. Mine Eyes do not stay themselves on
terrene Objects, except it be to make them more contemptible, even to my
outward sense. The Sin that erewhile was the Idol of my enjoyments, is now the
Subject of my Hate and Abhorrence. My Actions are levelled at the love of
Virtue. My Desires are converted (from the enhansing my Account, and running on
further on the score of guilt) to the making all the satisfaction I can, for
the Debts I have contracted, and my hope is grounded on thy Mercy (not on my
poor endeavors) for the raising up the Pillar of my constant happiness.

And can the Mouth that is filled with such good things savor any thing else
than the repetition of thy Bounty, and the excesses of thy Love? Surely my
Tongue shall be now as the Pen of a ready Writer, and being urged on by the
Solace of my Heart, (shall like the Angels by whom thou do succor me)
resound the Praises, and the Proofs of thy Divinity, far and near, by thy
saving and conserving of my state.

O dearest Lord! thou have condescended, more than once, to seek and to save
that which was in danger to be lost, and to call not the Righteous but Sinners
to thee! How does the particular care thou take of Sinners, even to this day,
increase and burnish the Glories of thy Name, Jesus!

When the very Heathens view the Smoke of Sensualities to a disappearance, and
the brighter Sparks of holy Affections mounting up in lieu of the other in us.
When they observe the Rebellions of our Hearts turned into Evidences of
Obedience, and shall behold such a Worm as I am, the greatest of Sinners, no
longer a servant of Sin but a contemner of the World and a resister of the
Devil; surely they will glorify the Operations of thy Power, and the mightiness
of thy love, in the Pardon and Conversion of so frail a Creature.

Even those very Animals (as the Apostle calls them) who were lost in the
Labyrinths of their vicious Habits, 1 Cor. 2.14, 15.
and sought not the Clew of Repentance to help them out of Perdition. Psalm. 51.
They shall be converted unto thee, through the demonstratio of thy goodness to
others they shall be convinced (as the Idiotae were in the Primitive Church)
and be constrained to magnify thy Kindness, implore thy Mercies, and advance
thy Praises.

For to see a man who in himself is poor and naked, and stripped by his Infernal
Enemies of all succor, divested of all good, and left in a more wretched
condition than the wounded Travellor to Jericho, or than the Daemoniack among
the Tombs to behold such an one clothed and in his right mind, dressed in the
needful habit of Reason, and trimmed up with the ornaments of Grace, installed
in the Throne of Piety, which is at the Feet of Jesus, and there instructed
better than under a Gamaliel. What an Argument of Wonder may be such an
example? and such an one I wish to be; that while I stir up admiration by the
recount of what thou have done for my Soul I may persuade the un-resolved that
thou can do far more for them, and that these are but small instances of thy
Almightiness in respect of its infinity. Thou can do, thou can suffer,
much more for the good of Mankind, if so be they will but credit thy mighty
Works, and not be like Bethsaida and Capernaum. Woe be to such as believe not
the mavelous testimonies of thy good will to the Sons of Men. For did not
thou, Eternal Lord! incorporate thy self with our nature, as if thou did
esteem it braver than thy own Divinity? Art thou not ready to wash out the
stains of our Nature even with the Life and Blood of thy assumed one which has
so wonderfully overvalued ours? Would thou not load thy most glorious person
to remove our Burdens? taking off the pressures of our base Captivity by the
perfect ease of thy Yoke?

Lord Jesu! thou have humbled thy self to a servile state, to a conversation
upon earth, to reconcile contradictions, the Son of God, and the Sons of
Belial, and so to unite the most sinful to the most Holy, though not as they
are impure, as themselves; but as cleansed by thy Grace, and Redeemed to be
thine. By these effectual merits of thy working upon Earth by Water and Blood,
by thy Tears and Prayers, by thine Agony and Bloody Sweat, by thy Cross and
Passion, and by the coming of the Holy Ghost (though he be grieved also) in the
handing of the benefits thou have purchased for such Enemies as we have been,
both to them, to thy Spirit, to thy Love, and to thee. The sense of these
overflowing Bounties like strong perfumes to a weak body, might easily
dissipate my Spirits and untie my being, I might be soon unloosed from Life and
all the World, as I desire to be, by the full apprehensions of their Vigor. In
the mean time good God accept my Heart, all Jubilee, and Thanksgiving, for that
thou have dealt so strangely with thy Servant as to give me enough, nay all,
yea, more than this All, far more then my Capacities or the Universe may
contain. I have all and abound, and what more can a Sinner expect or Receive?
What more can a God do for such a Sinner? Yes, he can still enlarge my measures
for Reception, as well as fill them more and more unto Eternity. Bless the Lord
then always, O my Soul! and least at any time thy Joys should flag or lessen;
be daily taking preservatives against Sin, and get farther from the Plague of
this mortal condition, from the Offending of so Good a Lord; O could I fly out
of the reach of such infection, I might then judge my satisfaction no less
secured than unspeakable! whereas the frequent receipts of thy Kindness paid
here with cold affections or ungrateful acts, cast too often a a damp over the
Wings of my joy, and is a sad abatement of that Towering comfort which I might
pitch upon in the Expressions of thy Love and mine.

Free me therefore I beseech thee, dearest Lord! from the Bondage of my
Corruptions, Suffer not the wounds of Original Sin to rankle or gangrene in my
Heart, least these become so outrageous as to refuse or fear the help of thy
Hand for its healing and binding up.

Such a Wolf did once eat off the Breasts of the beloved Spouse, the Church of
Israel, and turned her to a dry and barren Wilderness. But, Lord, prevent the
spoil that such ravenous furies would make in thy Vineyard, and heal our Souls
though we have Sinned against thee.

Let not the filthyness of my actual Offenses poison the health or Salvation of
my State: let not worldly greatness or sensual pleasures enveigle my Thoughts
from thy worship, to other services (which indeed are mere slaveries and the
basest of such.) But as the Southwinds (or Sirocco's) do usually impregnate and
swell up Torrents, so let the Gifts and Graces of thy Holy Spirit augment all
probity and Virtue in my Soul, tending to the Ocean of Eternal Perfections. And
farther empower my Heart to be truly penitent that the Springs from thence
running through my Eyes, may help to wash off the spots which have besmeared my
Conscience.

I Know, Great God! that whosoever does exercise himself in the Olympicks of
true Devotion, he that outbraves the fashions or flatteries of the World, he
that adores thy Greatness with humility and fixes his hopes on Gelestial
Objects: He it is that sowes to the Spirit such a Seed that will instantly bear
Thirty fold in the return of more Grace, and hereafter an hundred in the
Harvest of Glory. And he that sheds the Teats of Religious mourning upon Earth
shall reap Comfort and Joy in Immortality, when all Tears shall be wiped off,
and Sorrows and Sighings shall melt away.

Give me then leave to attend thee with all sorts of the Grain of Tears. I
would weep for the pardon of my Guilt, to save my self from the Foulness of it,
I would weep for displeasing thee, as for the deserving thy Vengeance, and this
to quench the fervours of my Lusts. I would weep over the Miseries of our
present Mortality, to solace my down-cast Spirit in her clayie Prison and
Relegation. I would weep for my Tamuz, for my Adonis, for my Adonai, for my
self and for others, Ezech. 8.14.
for my vile Idolatries and Prostitutions, for my Spiritual Fornications, for
my own and others manifold defilements, according as thou, dear Lord! did
advise thy people when thou did command them saying, Weep not for me, but
weep for your selves; and I will weep for thee also, O my Adonai, my Love, my
Dove, my Undefiled one, for having treated thee so savagely and occasioned
others to affront thee too, and (...) to procure ease and satisfaction to thy
self, to others, and to me. Even to the screwing up of the Joys and Harmony of
the Celestial Mansions. And Lastly, I will weep to increase my Thirst of that
Country which thou have promised us above, that I may fill up such a Nilus
here, as may render the Egypt of my Condition more fruitful under all thy
Providence.

Now that I find my self embarrassed in great streights, in a World Malevolent
to real Bliss, where the Prince of it is still trying the strength of my
Constancy, and Sense is offering violence to my Reason, where Company by ill
examples and incitements increase my frailties, where Beauty, Ambition, Honors
and Anger, Covetousness and Sloth, would play the Dalilahs to abuse and snare
me; give me leave, O God! while I am a Travelor in the Vale of Misery to dig up
Fountains of Penitential Waters, to cleanse off the Scales from my Eyes which
have been so often blinded by the treacheries of my and Enemies, and thine.

O that I could now cultivate the ground of my Heart by Fasting, Prayers and
Tears, by deeds of Charity and Offices of Devotion and then with the Four and
twenty Elders in the Revelations, demise at thy Feet such Crowns and Palms,
such Talents and Abilities as thou have put into my Hands to account for in thy
Kingdom; for thine is the Dominion, Power and Glory, and thou art only worthy
to receive the Profits of thine own. No Soul can taste more joy than his that
can approach unto thy dreadful Throne with a Conscience so void of Offense (as
not to accuse it self) and with a small treasure of good Works (such a Present
as the Patriark sent the Egyptian Governor, Genesis 43.11.) which may bring whole
sheaves again to us.

Finally, Grant that all my Faculties may count themselves bound to honor thy
name for ever; that my Heart may be all on fire for thy Love, and my Affections
own no other Object nor employ but thy Service, nor my Senses relish other
Beauties, Hopes, or Acquests than those of Heaven and Eternity.

Let me have with thee all the Conditions and Qualifications of a true Votary
in Serving, Imitating and Suffering, serving thy Commands with all my Powers,
Copying thy Actions with all diligence, and enduring all oppositions with an
humble fortitude, that I may reap the fruit of Holiness, and its end
Everlasting Life. Amen.

The eighth Step on the eighth PSALM of Degrees, being the 127 PSALM.
Nisi Dominus aedificaverit.
MY Soul is so beleaguered with dangers, that like a long besieged City; 'twill
fall at last into the Enemies Hands, unless it be relieved by thine extreme
Compassion, what pitiful succor has all things besides thee brought? alas I
can hardly own that I have been helped even by the best preaching of thy
Ministers, nay, what good does Moses and the Prophets to my wretched State? All
thy most holy Doctrine, O thou Holy of Holies! all those most excellent
patterns and precepts of Saints and Martyrs afforded to me, reach not far
enough to jogg my Senses out of the Lethargy of Sin, unless thou stretch forth
thy Arm, O God! (even Christ out of thy own Bosom) and put him into mine, that
that Sun of Righteousness may enlighten and enliven my dark Breast. This has
devoted all its affections to thy service, it is true, but indeed it cannot keep
them to their duty without thy constant overlooking of them. Although in thy
holy Sacraments thou breathest down thy Spirit for us to receive, what care do
we take (for all thine) to Welcome, House, or entertain it by the small
remainders of Faith, Hope, or Charity.

And as all their Efforts are vain and fruitless, who toil to build up their
worldly satisfactions without thy blessings; so is all the industry of the Mind
to no purpose for the acquiring or preserving of Grace, without thy good will
or Divine assistance, since from thee we have our principles and beginnings,
our conservation, protection, and perfection.

Without thee (as thou have told us) we can do nothing but we must likewise
know that thou art not far from any one of us, nor forsakest such as seek thee
truly.

Many do mis-conjecture that the height of Walls, the depth of Waters, the
thickness of Works, the courage of Men, the goodness of Arms, the fullness of
Provisions, the watchfulness of Guards, and the wisdom of Commanders will
secure any Regular Fortification; when alas all the Ramparts will founder, all
the Bastions and Lines fall in together, (like the walls of Jericho) the
Curtains will drop down, or rend in pieces, (being too thin and slight to keep
out an Enemy) while wrapped in them the sleepy Sentinels shall be carried off
to Eternal Slumbers, unless thy Providence and Protection, O Lord of Hosts be
over such a Fortress, for it is thy favor that must be its strong Tower and
Rock of defense, and Magazine of safety; without that all we can do signifies
nothing. How far can humane industry advance to raise a man up (like Jeremiah
out of the Dungeon) from the pit of Sin, or despair? or to support him in thy
presence? till thou say the Comfortable Edict, I will be thou clean? It Is
true the Angels are ministering Spirits, and Holy men help instrumentally to the
conservation of Grace, and to the disposing of our Minds to good by their
exhortations and examples. And,

It Is certain that I am not seldom affected with the consciousness of my
provocations, so that I resolve then vigorously to spend the residue of my
days amongst the Rigors of an Austere Repentance: while my Remembrance shames
me with the Thoughts of thy abused patience (which must needs be turned into
fury, and this be imbittered by delay.) Yet for all this without thy special
Grace and particular assistance all my Resolutions are but Spiders Webbs, my
strongest attempts but as Stubble before a consuming fire, very weak and
ridiculous motions. It is not in Man (says the Prophet) to direct his Steps.

Therefore trust not, O mortal men! either to your selves or to your
possessions; trust not your enjoyments of great Knowledge, or of great
Strength, no not of the chief Natural or Corporeal Faculties, no more than you
would credit the turning Wheel of Fortune, or the Top of worldly Pomp and
Honors.

Can ye think by robbing your Eyes of Sleep, your Minds of Rest, your Limbs of
Ease, or your Bodies of Health, ye may do any thing on your own score, to gain
the applause of Heaven, or to throw open the Gates of Paradise? No, no, the
Roots of your Merit should be set on another Ground, it is not a Plant that
will grow in the barren soil of our Earth, we must have God's daily
Cultivation, his Love, his Shelter, and his Sun too, or else we shall go
without it.

And to obtain some worthiness of thy Regard, some favor in thy sight, a sound
and sincere reliance upon Christ does avail more than all the Watchings,
Fastings, Austerities and Rods, which some make such a bustle withal, and too
often to little purpose; for their rising at Midnight or before Day, is but a
walking in darkness; their arrogant reliance on their own Performances, is but
increasing the difficulties of such achievements as depend not on our own
Strength or Merit; but on God's Free Will, and his alone good pleasure.

Assist me therefore, O most gracious Lord! with such a Grace as may gratify
my humble requests, and graciously receive the submisness of my Heart in all
its acts of Penance with sincerity of Address, of Trust, and Obedience to thee,
and to thee only, (for to which of the Saints may I turn?)

That although I have been long embraced within the Arms of Sin, I may now
break away from that Harlot, and from the bondage of my Guilt, and fly unto
thee for a place of rest in the Bosom of thy Favor and Compassion.

Lord suffer not the naughtiness of my Heart to inveigle me to any further
expectation of Comfort, or hope of Satisfaction, than in those things that are
above, and there promised me by thy Truth and Goodness. Let not Worldly
concerns, or poor transitory Prizes allure my Soul, which stoops too often at low
Objects; she should tower more out of sight of Earth, like a Bird of Paradise,
and direct her mount to that Summit, or height where should be her Airie, and
which was her Country, Ah! did she ply her Wings thitherward (like thy holiest
Dove) she would not be endangered by the Floods of Humane unhappiness, she
would reach home with her Olive and Myrtle branches, with Peace, and Purity.

While Employing all the Labors of my Life and longings of my Heart after a
sight of God in such Righteousness, (as Peace and Holiness bring along with
them) I my self might be secured both in Life and in Death; and I should find
Death but as a sleep and Heaven as an Inheritance, long promised to the
Faithful, and laid up for us in those promises; as laid out in that other Life,
where those who are faithful unto Death may expect a full satisfaction of their
Pains, Hopes and desires, and meet with a farther Solace in a Knowledge of one
another, and of all their Fellow-brethren, even the whole flock of Christ;
which shall then appear in his Presence, and enter into his Joy, and triumph in
his Courts to all the Ages of an happy Eternity.

I will therefore, O my God! assert my self thy Creature, the work of thy
Almighty Power, the Fruit of the Body of Christ, begotten again to a lively
hope by his blood, and seeking Regeneration by his Ordinances, and by my Faith;
so that I may not love the World nor the things of it, but do the will of our
Father which is in Heaven.

But does it not require much Sweat, vast Pains and violent Exercises, and very
great Self-denial, to enter in at the strait Gate, and to walk worthy of the
Denomination of a Son of God? Yea surely. It Is therefore needful to leave off
the pursuit of all those vain complacencies which have served only to amuse
and to deceive me here below.

It Is needful, O my Soul! that thou being armed by devout Prayer and Fasting,
should be sober and watchful to repel the most furious attacks of his
Temptations, who is come forth against thee like a ravenous Lion. It Is needful
for thee to make Reason thy Pilot, Religion thy Load-star for thy better
passage through the waves of this troublesome Life, and if thou steerest wisely
in the faithless Sea of this World, weathering all the storms of Impetuous
affections, thou may at last arrive at the Haven where thou would be: and
as the feigned Son of Jupiter is said to overcome the many-headed Monster, so
thou may by thy several Labors in Charity, Love, Faith, Repentance, and
Restitution, subdue the Hydra of Sin, and approve thy self a Child of God
according to the Apostles assertion.

Now thou may understand that the Sons of God are like Arrows in the Hands
of a Giant, they wound the Hearts of Gods Enemies, and scatter such as delight
in Mischief; destroying and beating down what is evil, quickening Faith and
working Love in the Godly; and the Effects of such Divine Instruments as these,
are the discouragement of Sin, the feeding the Hungry, Clothing the Naked,
succouring the Poor, entertaining the Stranger, visiting the Prisoner, freeing
the Captive, burying the Slain, correcting the Obstinate, counselling the
Ignorant, comforting the Afflicted, assisting the Weak, forgiving the
Injurious, and praying for the Persecutors. In fine, all the most accomplished
performances of the Memory, Will and Intellect, are but as so many barbed
Arrows put into our Hands by God to be shot against his Enemy Satan, and (the
maker of the Devil,) Sin.

How happy then is the Christian Warrior, who makes use of these Weapons! How
happy is the Jonathan that can strip himself of his Harness of Worldly
mindedness, of the full Quiver of his Lusts, of the Girdle of Self-love
(wherewith he is too often girded) for the sake of the Son of David! He is
Lovely as much as Lowly, who can hate himself and all things here below. He is
Just and strong indeed, who can do Violence to his own Interest for the greater
benefit thereby to his Neighbor. He is wise, that can choose a Savior's Thorns
rather than the sweetest Flowers of Sin, which are but for a season. He is
Noble, that makes use of Greatness chiefly for the Glory of God. He is Rich,
that will lavish his Mammon here to make himself Friends therewith hereafter.
And he in truth, is the alone happy man who with ardent affection and continued
watchfulness hears, receives and obeys the truth of thy Work, and allows no
Resting place, no Ark, nor any Asylum, to unlawful desires or inordinate
affections within him.

Such men as these beforementioned, they are who in the midst of the Fire, the
Thunder and Lightnings, Cries and Terrors of the last Judgment, shall never be
daunted in the presence of their Judge, nor by the Indictment of their Accusers.

For being kept in perfect Peace by the stay of their Souls on thee, good Lord!
they are safely brought into the Harbor of a quiet Conscience, and under the
shelter of a mighty Jesus, who is able to save them to the uttermost from all
their Adversaries, and from all such accusations as may not then touch the
justified by Christ, although they may serve to convince other Sinners, and
display the Ungodliness of Sin.

The ninth Step on the ninth PSALM of Degrees, being the 128 PSALM.
Beati, qui timent.
HE that would gain the Beatitude of thy Favor, O Lord! must of necessity fear
thy greatness and obey thy precepts, so that he is the blessed man upon Earth
that knows exactly how to guide his Feet into the ways of Peace, into the paths
of thy Commandments, and does meet with no other inconveniences in his way,
than the doubts he may sometimes encounter about thy Love and Favor to him.
The fear of thy Power, and the Reverence of thy greatness, is so needful, even
for the very best, Dan. 4.31, 32. Ier. 51.9.
else why has thy justest Vengeance armed it self with Thunder to strike down
the presumptuous? Why have thou by Fire from Heaven extinguished the memorial
of Transgressors?

Why did thou command the Waters to climb above the highest Mountains, but
that thou might overcome the greatest Sinners? and show how by thy wrath (as
by thy Love) thou could hide a multitude of faults. Thou have bred Monsters
within men by conscious apprehensions, and often surroundest those Scilla's
with terrors of guilt. Thou have many times suffered thine Enemies to punish
one another by their Cruelties. And not seldom by Earthquakes, by panick
Confusions or Fears, by Portentous Signs, and strange Such as were (...),
frequently heard before the Destruction of Jerusalem.
Voices, thou would instruct all them who listen to thee, speaking either on
Earth or from Heaven, and thou would also correct the infidelity of others,
and thereby convince such how thou art to be feared.

Yet surely the fear that is struck into us by the Effects of thy Power is not
so kindly welcome to thee, nor so agreeable to us, as that which proceeds from a
sense of thy Love and pity: and I know by experience that thou would be loved
chiefly, because thou art Long-suffering, rather than Omnipotent; and thou have
proved thy self most a God by showing mercy, in being not called now the Lord
of Hosts, but the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom dwells the fullness of
the Godhead bodily, and in him thou art our Father which art in Heaven,
Hallowed be thy Name, etc. How wonderfully this advances the proof of thy
Clemency above that of thy Power! to the end that man's Fear and Reverence of
thee may Spring rather from his filial affection, than from thy Supreme
Authority.

And doubtless he that fears thee, O my God! out of a regard to thy Statutes,
that he may not infringe them, nor hazard the Loss of thy Favor, nor lose the
Hopes of his Adoption, or of his Admission into the Joy of his Lord, he surely
reaps the best of Heaven and Earth, the truest Comforts of this life and of a
better. Therefore I wish all Mankind would take such a Course as this! How
healthful then would be your Sweats, how blessed your Pains, how profitable
your Labors, O ye Mortals! who too often spend your Strength in vain, and your
time in fruitless works of darkness. Then your Wealth would not be impaired and
blasted as it is now frequently by the Rapine of others, (...).
by the Rigor of ill seasons, or by a Thousand Cross events, but it would be
an enjoyment as sweet as it is a Possession, and serve for your just
Satisfactions and Necessities, as well as for the profit of many more. The care
you would then take to be Charitable, and the sincerity ye would use in the
Application of your Mammon to good purposes, would make it return double to you
(like Job's Estate) and be preserved to you by God himself: who seeing you not
besmeared with Envy or Covetousness, in respect of these deceitful Goods, or
misled by Pride, or Worldly-mindedness, he would delight in your Abundance
together with your selves, and (while ye tasted the sweets of all your
Industry) he, the good Husbandman (so called John c. 15. v. 4.) would also
taste a grateful, because a gracious Return and Relish of that full Cup of
yours, which he had first put into your hand, as likewise of that penalty
(which we may thus happily undergo) how in the Sweat of our brows we may eat
here comfortably, and get up to God's holy Hill at last.

For let us be convinced, it is by taking pains, and in the fear of the Lord,
that all the Felicities of every estate must be acquired.

Universal Nature has no Bliss, nor Pleasure for such as do not fear and
tremble, pant, and struggle after it, in Gods way. Such as do, lack nothing
(says the Scripture). The Stars and Elements jointly concur, not to fight
against them (as against Sisera) but to pour upon them benign influences, nay
the Incarnate Wisdom of the Deity, which is the Bridegroom of every pious, and
lowly Soul, continually waters the Garden of his Spouse, and (like the Spirit
in the Blood) runs through the abstrusest Channels of the Breast, and sometimes
produces the Peace of God (which passes all understanding,) sometimes it
nurtures Chastity (which is as admirable as rare,) now it presents it modesty,
by which the most exorbitant ambitions may be checked, and then points it out
to the means of acquiring true Honor. Sometimes it exhorts to the Possession
of that Heritage St. Peter speaks of, which is all one with a happy Eternity: 1
Pet. 1.4.
and directs the wandering Thoughts (which were nigh lost upon worldly Objects)
to the contemplation of the Greatness, and of the Goodness of that Portion
prepared in Heaven.

At other times it augments the proofs of a right Charity, which gilds the way
to Happiness.

And thus at last true Wisdom proves a Vine, which being planted in our mortal
earth, proves like Joseph very fruitful, and brings forth Clusters unto
Holiness, stretching out its Roots toward the Well of Life, and its Arms to
kiss the top of Glory, and rests its whole force and State upon the sufficient
strengths of a Savior.

Hence comes it to pass, that all the Operations of such an one as fears God,
spring constantly from his Union with the Eternal Wisdom, and are very complete
acts of Probity and Virtue.

His thoughts mount even to the third Heaven, not stooping in their flight
toward mortal things, for any other reason, than to make it afterward force up
the higher; his Heart becoms so emptied of Vanity, that no Impressions find
long harbor there, but such as Limn out Divine Love. His eyes enamoured with
the Beauties of Heaven, meet no objects here below, but such as seem unworthy
its regards. His Tongue that perhaps had been an Echo to the Licentiousness of
the Age, now utters nothing but what is full of moral conclusions for himself,
full of good Counsels for others, and more full of acknowledgements of God's
kindness to all.

Those his desires which were once inveigled by the prettiness of a Face, by
the possession of Wealth, or by the vanity of Honor, now are settled on the
Glories of Heaven, on the Indies of another World, on the Beauties of Holiness,
on the Charms of the Grace of God, that has appeared unto all men.

And thus the men which are rightly said to fear the Lord, ( Mal. chap. 4.) and
reverence him indeed with sacred Worship, they are renewed in the Spirit of
their minds, and are still fresh and flourishing like Olive-branches in the
House of their God.

They are (Festoons) the Garlands which crown his Temples, and imbellish his
Triumphs for ever more. About their rich adornments and noble stations, we may
find enwreathed such instructions, (as the Psalmist presents us here) Lo! thus
shall be done to the Man whom the King will Honor; Lo! thus shall he be
blessed that fears the Lord.

Whosoever therefore will learn to join Obedience to a Devout fear, by holding
down his own restif Will to the Law of God, and (being jealous of his natural
Infirmities) prove still sollicitous to be safe by taking care not to offend in
Thought, Word, or Deed, such a man may be assured of Divine Grace, and the
Consequence of this both in time, and beyond it also.

Lord, I perceive thou requirest nothing of me but a willing mind; but that
Fear, and that Obedience, that should be as easily, as duly given thee; and
how come we to Sin, but by disobedience? what is the chief occasion of our
offending thee, but the not dreading thine Anger? If I would learn rightly how
to fear, I might shun the Hazards both of Life and Death. Negligence for the
most part makes us Contumacious, whereas on the contrary Fear drives away
neglect, deters us from Vice, learns us Discretion, fences the Soul against
temptation, and plies it to all probity, of which in some sort it may be termed
the chief Cause. Therefore,

Grant me thy Grace, O merciful God! to be qualified by the acts of Love, and
Charity, to fear thy Power and Majesty, without ceasing (as Joseph did,) under
the greatest temptations. Grant that being enamoured with the sanctity of thy
Precepts, I may not be perverted by the enveiglements of Sins, nor by the
vanities of this Age. Grant that loosing my Heart from all Worldly
dissoluteness, it may abide a Vessel of Honor, and Purity, of Holiness, and
Election: By these means, O my God! I shall hope thy blessing, and, dearest
Lord! thou can not deny the effects of thy Grace, toward those who serve
thee humbly, and love thee sincerely, and trust entirely upon thee.

Wherefore, my Soul being parched up with the fervor of my Love for thee,
waits like a thirsty Land, for the Dew of thy blessing to refresh it, so as to
make it recover the verdure of its Hopes, and shoot up like the poor Mustard
seed until its Arms may reach up to Heaven, and take hold of that Glorious
Eternity, which makes thy Church there Triumphant.

Extend thy acoustomed goodness (for thine Arm, O Lord! is not shortened that
it cannot save) and answer, I beseech thee, my Prayers, with such Blessings, as
are still sought for by the good, and feared by the evil, hoped for by the
Faithful, and despaired of by the Castaway. For they are Sanctified Mercies,
and the chief blessing of Sanctification, which secure a future Inheritance, as
likewise many temporal Felicities, of those kinds as are ordinarily thrown unto
the Worst, and but seldom allowed unto Gods own Children, without a
superabundant measure of Holiness, and devout Care; but these being bound up
with the richest Jewels of the Crown, inaugurate us with the Earnest of thy
Spirit, and ensure us that after the troublesome exile of this mortal Life, we
shall be made Heirs of that Glorious Kingdom, which is inconceivably Happy, and
Desirable, and for which we implore thy Favor, through Christ Jesus our Lord.
Amen.

The tenth Step on the tenth PSALM of Degrees, being the 129 PSALM.
Saepe expugnaverunt.
FEar not Temptations, O my Soul! the Apostle says, We should count it all joy
when we enter into them, for these are but to exercise thy Patience, to prove
thy Sincerity, and to justify thy Fidelity. How can thou hope to arrive at
Gods Favor, like one of his dear Children, unless thou endure the Fiery trial?

Resist therefore, O my Soul! if it should be even to Blood, because at last,
even by the Temptation, God can make a way for thy escape, and thy God shall be
with thee, thy tribulation shall but complete the worthiness of thy condition.

How often in the more florid times of Youth, when that cooler reason, like a
Winter fled from the Spring of Sense, (and by the growing heat of this, the
other was driven away:) then how did the great Enemies of my Welfare play their
Game most cunningly, to estrange my Heart from due Obedience to its Maker? How
often did those deadly Foes of mine make use of the Charms of such Beauty, as
had but borrowed all its fine Feathers from Art, and adorned its Trophies with
the spoils of many Graves? and all this to fetter me like a Bondslave, to fix
me to this lower World, so that I might not be able to run the way of the
Commands of God, nor to find the Path of Life, and Tranquillity. Thus my
Companions, whether good or bad, can witness against me, for to both indeed,
(though in different manners) I have imparted the Conspiracy of my rebellious
Affections.

There are some debauched persons, who have too often accompanied me, and there
are some devout persons who have admonished me, when I have been in the midst
of my Extravagancies, and I must confess, (that for all the Aid I have craved,
and the Advice I have desired, of the best men for the mastering of my
Sensualities,) the very Principles, and first motions of my Repentings have
been laid at terribly, and much attacked by the Suggestions, and Temptations of
my invisible Foes, and by the ill examples, and false colors of my apparent
Friends, who indeed have been the mortallest Adversaries to my welfare, by
representing Lust to me, as an unavoidable warmth of Nature; Anger, as the
Effect of my Vigorous Soul; Avarice, as the Daughter of Prudence; Idleness, as
the Balsome of Health; Gluttony, as the needful Magazine for the Body; Envy, as
the wise and usual Virtue of Emulation; Pride, as a convenient quality for
Highborn persons, and to be assumed, together with the titles of our Ancestors.

In fine, by their Tyrannizing over my Will, they have not left tempting of me,
till through their Authorities, and worse Examples, together with my own
Corruptions, I have been drawn into the fowlest Crimes, and most dangerous
Offenses.

But now being armed by the Power of thy Glorious Name, O holy Jesus! and by
the Divinity of thine Instructions, I hope to overcome all the Malice, and all
the Violence of my Adversaries, who shall be so lost in their own Confusion,
and Disappointments, as that they shall only serve to advance the proof of my
Constancy, and to accelerate the destruction of their own Malice.

For alas! how often have these cruel hunters laid snares to entrap my Soul by
Sin? They have allured me by the feigned sweetness of Worldly Pleasures; they
have persuaded me to offend out of a rash confidence of Pardon; they have
diverted me with such Sensualities; as might soonest abuse my Constitution;
they have entrapped me with such false arguments, as might soonest deceive the
simple, and betray the innocent.

Lord! How often have they derided thy Power, with impious, and profane
Discourses, becoming the Oracles of Hell, they have vented Blasphemies against
thy Holiest Name? And, Ah! too often, with Raillery, and Scorn, have they
attacked my Obedience, and overthrown my observance of thy Precepts. Every-ways
they did so batter my Faith, that I seemed to bear in my Bosom the rebukes of
many, and to have the weight of their Sin upon my Shoulders; this was a Load so
insupportable to my weakness, as hereupon my Afflictions became the more
grievous, by their continuance upon me in such a woeful manner.

But Lord! that Sovereign Justice of thine, which deals Rewards, and
Punishments; (and is constantly impartial in thy Corrections, as in thy
Remunerations,) it is that which at last has discovered the Cheats, defeated
the force, and repulsed the pride of those impious Sinners, who ensnared my
Safety, contrived my Ruin, and dug Pitts (as the Prophet says) for my Soul.

Thou, most Glorious God! have done Gloriously, thou have trod down the Pride
of those spurners at thy Greatness, thou have yoaked their stiff Necks, for all
their wild boasting, that they go down with the most pompous Train, and with
the best Company. How will they dwell in darkness? lost in the Confusion of
Eternal Shame, and in the total Eclipse of thy Favor; who with Infernal Malice
did persecute him that worshipped thee, and despised him that served thee, and
hated him that loved thee? Shall such at all enjoy the sweet fruits of thy
bounty? Or be remembered when thou make up thy Jewels, any otherwise than to
be condemned, and blotted out of the Book of Life? No surely, they shall sink
under the weight of their Crimes, and be buried, as well as die, in those Sins
wherein they chose to live.

In the mean time, what Praise and thanks do I not owe to my Gracious
Redeemer's goodness? since thou, Lord! have been so ready to free my Shoulders
from the burden which might have broke my Back, and my Heart from those Snares
that would have endangered my Life or Liberty. With what excess of Pity have
thou corrected the mistakes, and prevented those slips of my Carriage, that
might have drove me down a Precipice of Despair?

Thou, dearest Lord! have washed out the spots of my Uncleanness, which would
have made me odious to God, and Man. Thou have healed those Wounds which were
grown old and rankled by my Carnal compliances, and would have rendered my
safety very doubtful; so that the Enemies of my Salvation, and of thy Glories,
O God! shall no farther triumph over my weakness, nor Captivate my will that is
so bound to thy Goodness.

But those our Enemies who would not have thee to rule over my Soul, may become
like the Herbs growing on the House top, that wither and come to nothing e're
they can attain to any perfection of growth or Beauty. So let their vain Images
be despised and neglected, as that nothing of them may be saved or gathered up
by the meanest care of Men or Angels, at that great day of Harvest, when every
ones Works shall be made manifest of what sort they are.

Deal thus, Great God! with those impious wretches, who are guilty of
High Treason against thy Majesty, and of Felony against my Soul; let them fall
the Victims of thy just Displeasure, and help by their punishment to mitigate
the Sorrows of such poor wretches, as they drew into the Nets of their Sins,
and so into joint sufferance with themselves: and let them glorify thy Name,
even in the Fire, through that probation of thine unalterable Justice.

In the World let them meet with no success, until they Repent; let them have
away like Shadows of the Night, because they have loved Darkness, and ventured
to hide themselves from the sight of God.

Nor may they be Blessed by any one that passes through the Valley of the
Shadow of Death, so that they may be shut out of all hopes of Happiness, for
indeed obstinate Sinners are like the Ground which the Lord has Cursed;
unworthy to have one Shower of good Wishes, or Consolations bestowed upon them
from good men, and much more incapable of the Dew of God's Blessing. But, Ah!
let not my Portion be with such, nor shut up my Life with the Bloody-minded,
but empower me to resist the Malice of the Evil-ones, and so to rely upon thy
Favor, as to live under thy Protection and Cognizance, and to be known for
ever by the white Stone with a new name, even by the blessing of thy holiest
Name, O Lord Jesus! Amen.

The eleventh Step on the eleventh PSALM of Degrees, being the 130 PSALM.
De profundis, etc.
O Lord how wretched, woeful, lamentable is the Condition of a Sinner! who being
turned into his own Enemy does nothing but lay Ambushes for himself; while he
forgets ungratefully thy benefits, he becomes most worthless, and hated both of
Heaven and Earth! He deserves no Mansion but in Hell. Alas, unhappy Sinner! how
art thou forsaken by thy Creator, Redeemer, and Comforter, even by all of thy
God! and thy hopeless state is the more dreadful, being accompanied with the
fearful expectation of Judgment. Thy Crimes bring with them unspeakable
bitterness, because they fore-bode Eternal Torments, and thy Life is but a
continual Death, by reason of the gnawings of Conscience, the Horror of thy
guilt, and the domineering of thine Enemies over thee.

Yet for all this with the lowest Humility that is due to the height of thy
State, and to the meanness of mine own; while the requests of my Heart keep
time with the Words of my Mouth, I am bold to cry aloud for Mercy, and beg thy
Compassion, O Lord God! although thy Mercy and Compassion may seem to stoop too
low, while they take up my Petitions unto thine Ears. And if these are better
employed in hearkening to the Echoes of thy Glories, to the Lauds of thy
Saints, and to the Harmony of Heaven, yet let them not disdain the importunity
of those longings after thee, which arise from a firm desire, and a deliberate
Resolution, and address themselves to the Footstool of thy Goodness.

O Lord, I know the King of Israel is a merciful King. I know thou take
pleasure in hearing the Requests of thy poor Creatures, especially if they
proceed from humble Hearts, and contrite Spirits. I know that thou art ready to
put a stop to the Music of Heaven, and to give a pause to thine own Praises,
rather than the Prayers of such a poor Supplicant's should not be listened to.

Therefore Receive with grateful attention those cries of mine, which bring
with them the true evidences (as I trust) of Conversion, as well as of
Contrition. It is the great prerogative of thy Uncircumscribed Majesty, as to
hear and determine of my guilty State; So by thy Mercy to receive my Petitions,
and reprieve me from the Sentence passed on me by reason of my Crimes.

Therefore I beg thou would not regard the number of my Sins, nor the Quality
and Aggravations of them, which I will not pretend to enumerate by some few
instances, because thou know the minutest grain of my Offenses. Thou have a
particular of them all. And,

Should thou weigh our Guilt in the Balance of thy Justice only, should
thou be extremely severe in thy punishment of what is amiss about us, if thou
should not in thy Displeasure think upon thy pity, and give this leave to
Plead while the other arraigns; O Lord, who might abide thy presence, or stand
before thee in Judgment? The brightest Angels are not pure in respect of thee,
and the most Holy would scarce be safe! Where then should the Wickekd and
Sinner appear, but in the bottomless Pit of Destruction? Had thy Wisdom thought
good to have set thee only upon the Correction of our failings, the World it
self, as well as we, had been long since buried in the Cinders of our last
Funerals; and wholly burnt up with the Fire of thy just Displeasure.

But since thou have set thy Pity and Good Will, thy Son and thy Spirit, as
better Advocates between thy own Purities and thy Creatures Frailties, than
Man's weakened Nature or worse Infirmities could be: for we all are too apt to
set these on pleading for us, as being ever near us, yet, Ah! let us beseech
thee rather to listen to the others in our behalf, hearken to that chiefest
Councellor of thy self and us, the most holy, and gracious Paraclete; and hear
thy Son Interceding for us Wretches, more freely than we hear him instructing
of us.

Continue the incomparable Acts of thy Mercy, and exercise the accustomed
proofs of thy goodness toward us, with the merits of Christ's precious Blood
wash out my spots, with the floods of my Tears quench the fire of my Lusts,
that I may not be found the Heir of Wrath, or Child of the Devil.

For indeed the true Repentance of a Sinner is the sole effect of thy Bounty.
Man that is now made up of nothing but the mud of Earthly Debauches, cannot so
little as look up to Heaven (with the Publican, though he look no higher than
the Clod he stands on) without thy special influencing aid. But this Ray thou
have promised by Ten thousand solemn attestations, and it is the Light of
Mankind which thou have afforded, that it might light every one coming into the
World. Saints and Prophets have born witness that thou art the God of Sins,
if Penitent; thou art the Redeemer of the most vile and miserable when they
truly return to their Father's embraces.

Let it then be an Addition to thy Glories, that thou have more of Pity, than I
have of Provocation, and that thou yet retainest better Dispositions to pardon
Sins, than I have Inclinations to commit them. Through the excess of thy
Goodness, thou have bounded thy own self, and given less to thy Power and
Justice than it might have challenged, and therefore have I long waited for thy
Salvation, O Lord.

I have endured the Stings of delay while I looked for thy Redemption, and
sighed for the effects thereof; and I must avert my Labor has not been in
vain, for I have found the Hopes thou gave me, to be answered; thy Word
concerning me to be true and good; and thy promises to be performed.

They may be left to their own deceivings; who wait upon the vanity of the
world, and build their expectations on mortal assurances. My Heart being fixed
on the verity of thy Covenant, on the certainty of thy Promises, on the Anchor
of a lively Hope, secures it self of meeting with such favor as is inseparable
from thy Majesty.

For my own part, I am guilty of a Thousand Crimes, nor is there any thing in
me but Filth, and Frailty.

I have triumphed in my Vices, as if I had liberty to commit them, and not to
overcome them, even while I denied my betters the liberty of reprending them.

Instead of abasing my self to the Dust, (that Principle of my Being) I have
dared to contend with Omnipotence Death and Hell have been imagined Dreams and
Phantasms, only to scare the simple; and not to be Instruments of thine anger,
to scourge the guilty.

But yet my Soul does humbly now suppose it self an Object, not less proper for
thy incomprehensible Mercy, because of its infinite Unworthiness, and will rely
only upon that Mercy of thine, since it is worse than Folly to trust in any
thing else.

He that does place his hopes under the protection of great men, does but pass
away his Liberty into the Hands of Tyrants. He that founds his security on the
Commonweal's, builds up his Comforts on great Improbabilities. He that counts
Wealth the Mine of all Happiness, is not acquainted with the Wheel of Fortune;
he that sooths himself with pleasures in worldly Knowledge, knows not enough
the weakness and incertainty of our Understandings, as well as of all
intelligible Subjects; and whosoever presumes upon his own Merits let him call
to mind from whence he came, and whither he must return; being liable to
Myriads of Infirmities, and to more than a single Death.

Friends themselves, and Health, (the best of humane enjoyments) are in this
point like Honors, Riches, and other mortal entertainments, very short and
transient, under the influences of a changing state, subject to alterations
from our own age; as much as from the malice of our Enemies.

Therefore, O Mortals! cast your Anchor on no other security but on my God;
there is no Rock like him, as I have experienced. He can Love us freely, and
Defend us fully, he does heal our Infirmities, and makes up our Losses, he
protects our Weakness, and succors our want.

Where he associates, there it is that Felicity both Roots and Flowers; To him
let us have recourse every Watch of the Night, and every Minute of the Day. To
him let us offer up both our Lives and Deaths, the Beginning, and
Accomplishment of all our Undertakings.

For, he that is all Goodness, has no other Scope but our Happiness. Deuteronomy.
32.4.
By how much the more our humane Ignorance tempts us out of the Road to Heaven,
by so much the more his Pity strives to lead us the right way, and to keep us
in it.

For all (...) universal Impiety weaves a Spider's Webb in every ones Mansion;
Prove. 30.28.
and Pride heaps up Mountains of Guilt to defy Heaven; while Avarice scrapes up
Dirt to make an Idol of it, and Lasciviousness dissolves its own pleasure by
excess: though Gluttony returns often with the Dog, and Idleness looks after no
good, nor Anger meets with any thing but Precipices.

Yet for all these the goodness of God abides continually, and is not
discouraged by our Unworthiness, (when even this is aggravated by his Love) but
strives the rather to appear still as far above our Vileness, and beyond our
Merits, as the Heavens are distanced from the lowest Earth.

And, shall I not fly to this City of Refuge, when pursued by a many
ful-mouth'd Sins, that cry aloud for Vengeance? the Diseases and Corruptions of
my Nature, and Condition, are not so inveterate, but there is Balm in Gilead,
and a Physician there, who can ease them.

My Wounds, though festered by long and evil Habits, are not gangrened by
Despair, nor is thy Hand shrunk up into thy Bosom, but thou will put it forth
to reach me a Cure. Thy Remedies, O Lord! are always ready as thy mind to
recover us and thou art never weary of well doing.

Thou alone can reduce me into a state of doing better than I have done, Thou
alone can pour the Oil and Wine into my Hurts, and bear the Charges of my
Recovery. Lord! lay down the price of this, and give Bail for me thy Insoluble
Debtor.

As thou did upon the cursed Tree Redeem thy Israel from trouble, so let the
Merits of thy bitter Passion be the powerful means of my deliverance from the
slaveries of Sin, that I may serve thee without base Fear, without any great
Disease, or Disgust, or Lukewarm indifference.

It must be the heat of thy Love which can dissipate such bad Distempers of my
Soul, as have brought an Ague upon my Devotion, and a Plague upon my Heart.
Lord! see me set right again, by the health of thy Countenance; when I am made
whole, see that I Sin not again, lest worse things fall upon me. But assure the
whole residue of my time, by such a just and severe Repentance, (for my past
Infirmities) as that I may never relapse into them, nor thou strive with me,
who have contended too long with thee: But crowning the greatness of thy
Glories, by the Pardon of my greatest Sins, thou may give me leave to rely
wholly on thy sweet Compassion, till I may take Harbor in a Course of
Sanctity, in the state of Justification, and at last, in a full and perfect
Redemption. Amen.

The twelfth Step on the twelfth PSALM of Degrees, being the 131 PSALM.
Domine, non est exaltatum Cor, etc.
O Lord! I perceive the greatest Enemy of Mankind leaves no means un-attempted
whereby he may draw us out of thy blessed way. Sometimes with prosperous
Success, and sometimes with earthly Grandeurs, he well-nigh masters such (to
their Eternal Ruin) as he durst not assail by Crosses, or by Want.

At other times, when neither fair means nor foul will do his Work, he takes a
stranger course, and represents to those too good Opinions, (which we
ordinarily have of our selves) a long Bead-roll of Religious Performances, that
we Priding our selves in our own doings might infect them, and arrogate that
to our own merit, which is wholly due to thy goodness.

Aristot. in Eth. 1.4. and 4.3. inquit, (...). Ita fecrunt Optimi Gentium
(Stotcorum scilicet and Epicuraeorum) qui dixerunt. Nos exaequat Victoria
Caelo, immo and ipse Philosophorum and Romanorum Imperator, Marcus Aurelius
erat famae suae curiosissimus, etc.
The Best men of all are too much addicted to this Sacrilege; and few there are,
alas! who are so well bred in Humility, as not to like their own Reputation,
or not to covet Glory here, no less than above.

Who does not think too well or too much of his Service, if it appear faithful
to God, and Charitable to others? while he is patient in Adversity, and
temperate in all his Desires; Is he not apt to be exalted above measure?

Therefore while I purpose with my self to avoid the Pride and Pomps of the
World, and to give my self up wholly to the execution of thy Commands, let not
my Heart applaud it self in private, but so turn mine Eyes to thy Testimonies,
that they may not cause, nor discover any Vainglory about me.

Give me such a likeness to my Jesus, such a lowliness of Spirit, as to referr
all things duly to thy bounty, and nothing to my Power or Merit.

And as by the excesses of undeserved loving kindness, thou have advantaged my
Birth with the Characters of Illustrious Parentage. Thou have enriched my
Well-being with many temporal Honors, and Privileges above others: so grant
that I may not exceed the Limits of my Duty, nor presume to take thy Praises to
my self.

For my Birth (whether high or low) was not my choice, but thy good Will, and I
can no more secure my Life, than I could at first choose it. For my Death shall
come as my Life did, when it shall please thee to send it; and that too, shall
pull off all disguises; leaving me naked, as from my Mothers Womb, and in no
better a condition than the poorest Mortal. And this the Princely Job taught
both himself and us, when humbled to the very Dunghill. Job 1.20, 21.


Worldly Honors are designed by thy good Providence to be Spurs to our Virtue,
while we ride through the short Stages of this frail Life, and they should be
looked on as streams issuing from thee their Fountain; so that when we grow
proud of them we kick against thee, and make brutish returns of Ingratefulness
to thy special favors.

Humane Learning (which is mere ignorance in respect of thy knowledge) is an
Ointment that is fly-blown, corrupt and unsavory; when the Philosopher is such
a Fool as to glory in his Wisdom.

Therefore entertain my notions, good Lord! within the compass of a just
moderation, that they may not boil over with conceit, or opinion; nor build
Castles in the Air, (like Aesop's Eagles) soaring above the proper reach of my
own capacities.

Give me, I beseech thee, an exact and sober understanding of my self, that
Pride may have nothing to do within me, nor without. But that Humility may take
its right place about me, and not be wrongfully ejected by Worldly
Circumstances.

Though Titles, Wealth, and Friends, may difference me from others. Gracious
Father! I desire that my best skill may be used in the accommodating me to
others, in the levelling my conceit of my self to him that has the meanest
thoughts of me; while I confess my self as miserable a Sinner as mortal a
Creature, as the most abject wretch in the World can be.

If I strive for Precedence, let it be only as Christ's Disciples did, to be
nearer to Jesus, to outstrip others in Prayer, and Fasting, and such like Acts
of Piety as may prove, that I have drank of his Cup of Grace.

I would divest my self of all such habits as like false Glasses render me
bigger than the Life, and count my best efforts for thee to be nothing in
comparison of what thou have done me, dear Savior! and thus will I traffic
for true Glory, by getting all the Praise and Honor which I can for thee, till
I come into the Harbor of thy Eternal Grace, and Goodness.

Should I indulge the Pride of my Nature, I should lose the pleasure of thy
Love. For Pride is a Sin so heinous as that it could transform an Angel, and
throw him out of Heaven, and Man out of Paradise, for both their High-Treasons
against thy Majesty; whereas Humility is the eldest Sister of the Graces, and
the first born of the Beatitudes, having promises like the Fifth Commandment,
both for this Life and a better; and although Haughtiness of Temper is one of
the Goads of Nature which pushes Man forward (since he was made with
expectation of Dominion) yet Lord! abase this Domineering humor, least Pride,
that is the Queen of Vice, and first begotten Child of Sin, and the immediate
Successor of Wrath, and Vengeance, lest Pride, I say, should get the better of
that Lowliness, I would still keep in my Soul for the better imitation of my
Savior.

When I consider how that dangerous forementioned Crime has armed Legions of
Angels to revenge it; I fear lest it should make me be (not like David in this
Psalm) but like an unhappy Child of Rachel, snatched away from the Bosom of my
dearest Parent, as unworthy of the sweet and precious Milk of thy Word; or of
any Spiritual refreshment.

But for all Humility is so needful, (as the Mother of Virtues) yet a man
should not rely upon the brittle staff of the best natural performances, even
in the very Duty of meekness, and lowliness of Mind. Since our Salvation is
secured by thy goodness, and in our holiest Operations there is no Merit to
Redeem us from Sin, or to entail thy Graces on us, upon thee alone we must
ground our hopes; from thee only springs our Happiness, by thy good pleasure
Eternity is consigned to us.

He that sets his Heart on Riches, what does he, but rear up Pinacles, whereon
his Soul may be tempted, and his Life endangered? Gold is said to be Devoted to
Pluto, because he that trusts therein can promise himself nothing at the last
but the lowermost Pit. Honors, are rather the Gifts of Fortune than of Merit,
and abandon, men usually at the approach of Calamities. Friends are gained by
interest, and lost by Death, if not by some odd Casualty before. Health is
short and fleeting, made so by change of Diet, Air, and every motion of Soul or
Body. In fine,

All mortal Hopes and Joys are liable to the Tempests of innumerable Accidents.

Thou only, Almighty Lord! art He that changest not, and therefore art my safe
Anchor-hold, and the Rock of my Hope.

In thee Devout Souls pitch their absolute trust, because there is no time
wherein thou art not able, willing, and ready to accommodate them with Mercies,
and with thine infinite Beneficence. Amen.

The thirteenth Step on the thirteenth PSALM of Degrees, being the 132 PSALM.
Memento Domine, etc.
O Gracious Lord! Look with the Eyes of thine infinite compassion upon a
wretched Sinner, and remember that I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant, and the
Son of thy Handmaid; let me refuge my self now at thine Altars, though I have
been such an Idolater, as to worship most of the World's Naughtiness.

I have adored earthly pleasures, yet deny me not thy favorable protection,
look not upon me as on such an huge offender (who has warred against thy
Holiness, by heaps upon heaps of vain aspiring thoughts.) But,

Consider me as thy Creature, as a penitent and humble Convert, who may be a
fit Object for thy mighty Compassion, through the sense I have at present of my
Vileness. This is great, since I have been Impotent, Impious, nay Sacrilegious.

My Tongue has dared to profane thy sacred Attributes. My Hands have not
spared the Blood or Honor of others, my Heart has pitched its delight among
brutish and sensual pastimes, even such as have been repugnant to thy laws, and
to those of Humanity.

But now that by my Conversion thou may be glorified; Have thou not obliged
thy self by the truth of thy promises, to receive such guilty ones as are Weary
and heavy laden? because thou art a God of Mercy, and There is more joy in
Heaven for one Sinner that Repents, than for Ninety and nine such Righteous
persons, as think with the Pharisees, they need no Repentance.

I know mine Eyes have been treacherous Scouts to my Soul. I know mine Ears
have been like the Adder's, and deaf to thy Commands, and to every good
Exhortation, though open to the Whispers of a lying World. The motions of my
outward man, like those of my inward, have been but to hurry me to ruin. I
know my Heart has been most vain in its desires, blind in its appetites, mad
in that indulging of them: yet I rely upon thy Pity, and despair not of thy
Forgiveness.

As thou did comply with the Vehement struglings of Jacob for a Blessing,
when he had cause enough to fear his own weakness; so do thou afford me thy
Guidance and Protection, that I may not only begin well to turn toward Thee,
but that I may go on from Strength to Strength to meet Thee, and if thy Grace
so forward my Regeneneration, I shall not doubt of performing what I have
promised, (that is) to give Thee all which the devoutest Soul can offer.

My Heart would have no other place to recreate its affections in, but in the
Presence Chamber of thy Love.

What do the richest Marbles signify (though they have often sweat under the
Tools of Cunning Workmen, for the adorning of some Closet for me) if my Rocky
Heart be not broke by thy divine Precepts? The Battles wrought in Tapistry,
which hide the nakedness of my Walls, do silently upbraid my Vanity, Hypocrisy,
the Commotions, and Quarrels that engage my Soul by many differing Passions;
all which make spoil of my Reason, instead of serving her.

While the Eye Tries it self, through a long Prospect of Apartments, wherein
much skill might be likewise tired by its Observations of Ten thousand
Rarities: even there my Remembrance offers me an Inventory of my faults, which
seem desperate enough to snatch the Golden Scepter of thy goodness, even out of
thy Hand, and to cut me off from all hopes of Mercy.

Yet Lord! cast me out of doors, let me be only covered with the Canopy of
Heaven; take away, not only my Fineness and Superfluities, but my Ease and
Prosperity: nay, even my Houses and Lands, my other Comforts, and Health too,
from me, rather than deny me thy Grace, for what greater Blessing can I beg
than it?

The Favors of Princes are lightnings that blind us with their Splendour.
Riches and Beauty corrupt daily; They seemingly depend upon strange uncertain
accidents.

Power and Honors are no less dangerous than Elevating: But the possession of
thy Favor is a boundless Gulf of Happiness. What Golden Shours of ineffable
sweetness are poured into their breasts who enjoy the privilege thereof?

Wherefore although I should deny Sleep to mine Eyes, and Slumber to their
Lids, for thy sake, O God! yet even by such actions I should meet with the
greater Repose: nay, with that unspeakable Quiet, and serenity of thy beloved
and chosen People.

So that I desire not that any part of me should find Ease and Rest, without a
sensibility of thy Grace, and a respect to thy Will.

All my Bones shall say, Lord! Who is like thee? and as thou have obliged, so
do thou unite all my disorderly affections: Bind them with the Cords of Divine
Love unto thine Altars; that they may not be undone by the dissoluteness of
this Age; strengthen my Weakness, encourage my Resolutions to get the better of
my Frailties, and of my Inconstancy, least I fall into every Temptation of Sin,
or Snare of the Devil. I seek no farther security than thy Favor, no fairer
Boon than thy Grace, no fuller Bliss than thy Bosom affords.

But to obtain these, Lord! there is requisite a more entire Obedience to thy
Will, a continued Repentance of my Transgressions, and a resolution fixed
rather upon dying than offending Thee any more.

And is not this Disposition the Ephratah mentioned, wherein we may find Christ?

Surely he that can behave himself Righteously, Soberly, and Holily toward the
World, Himself, and Satan, need not doubt but that he may see God's Face, and
Live also.

For God is good, and does good to all such as keep his Testimonies, and walk
in his ways.

Where there is any goodness, he will not be a far off, Where there is any true
Piety there is God at hand: for he loves to Crown his own Gifts, and to Glorify
his own Graces, and to have his delights with the Sons of Men, when these are
willing to become the Sons of God, by coming to his only begotten Jesus
Christ.

This I have found by experience; and how great is my Obligation to thee, most
dear Redeemer! who would suffer thy self to be found in the sharp Covert of my
Breast, in that strong Wood, where Sin left none of the Cedars of God (which
are full of Sap) but only a few Shrubs of impotent affections, which are so
full of Briars, and Asperities, as that they opposed thy entrance into my Soul,
and presented Thee with nothing, but another Crown of Thorns.

Yet since I have not only heard of Thee with the Hearing of the Ear, but my
other Senses have been sufficient Witnesses of thy inestimable Kindness, and of
thy Addresses to me, that I might find thee. O that I may find such favor in
thy sight, as to have a sight still of thy Favor! Let my Worshipping of Thee
keep some measure with thy Working upon me, that I may be renewed day by day.

Undress my Soul of all such mean Garbs, and sinful Compliances, as will render
it uncomly or unfit for thy sight. This Soul, dear Lord! of which thou would
be the Maker and Redeemer also; does not more triumph in thy present bounty
than it is afraid to forfeit it. Therefore,

Come now, and take up thy abode therein: Shall my Sins keep Thee knocking at
the Door? No, dearest Lord! come in; my Lord come in while I am ready (as thy
Spouse should always be) to entertain Thee my beloved Bridegroom.

What Sinners need despair of Mercy, while a Savior Invites, Entreats, and
even pulls them by force out of the Sodom of their Sins and dangers, unto a
Repentance which may bring them to Salvation? And,

How easily is Heaven opened by the Tears of Contrition? How pleased is the
Divine Pity at such Tears?

These Showers return again upon the Earth with Peace to it, Good will to Men,
they bring God Glory, and his Glory to us, they cause Heaven's Jubilee, and the
Angels Triumph, because the Return of a Sinner is the most grateful Tribute
that the Creature can offer to its Creator, and God delights himself in the
Election of such Instruments as are changed from Vessels of dishonor, and
fitted for his service by Conversion: Since the procurement of his Grace and
Favor is not the Fruit of our Merit, but of his own Goodness.

For all we may Weep, Sigh, Pray, Fast, make Restitution, give Alms, resolve
against Sin, and mortify our Passions, and bridle our Affections, and our
corrupt Appetites, in some decent manner; yet our Nature has many Frailties,
and renders our best deeds so imperfect, as without the excess of thy
Compassion, without the Merits of Christ's sufferings we should still be found
such wicked and unprofitable Servants, as to have no more hope than worth in
our best performances.

On therefore, O my Soul! and (for all thy former demerits) endeavor by the
devoutest applications of God's Grace to be raised unto Mount Sion: and to be
made thy self a Temple, an Habitation for the God of Jacob, where thy Lord
himself may delight to dwell; thou can not aspire to more Happiness than to
be a Mansion for his Son, and Spirit.

Therefore know the way of truth, and walk in it, make right paths for thy
Feet, since they that wander through Ignorance, are lost or confounded by their
own darkness.

Let thy Knowledge, and thy Zeal prevent thy self, and other Sinners too, from
rejoicing in their own Errors; by due Austerities detourn them from their
Perverseness. By good Counsel assist others in their affairs, and succor them
in their affliction. With the Shield of Patience break through the thickest
Ranks of thine Adversaries, and overcome them by thy Charity. Receiving
Injuries without being galled by them, without retorting such venomed
Artillery, but rather pray for Enemies, do good to such as hate and persecute,
and then thou shall find (as the Hospitable King of Israel did) that God shall
be on thy side, 2 King. 6.16, 23.
and more for thee than against thee.

But woe to that Soul that by its dis-belief of God's Word has trespassed so
hainously, as to drive away God's Love that was unwilling to leave it. Woe to
that Soul which becomes blind by its profane Obstinacy, in such a manner as to
make it self an Object of God's Scorn and derision then, when it might be the
Object of his Love and Delight!

No Words, no Thought can exemplify the direful miseries of that State, which
becomes so infinitely wretched as not only to be left Sentenced by God, but
justly Punished and Condemned: Nay, Scorned and derided and instead of being
pitied by the unspeakable Bowels of an Heavenly Father, (for its perpetual loss
and torment) have the Furnace of Hell made seven times hotter, by the derision
of God and holy Angels, as if they rejoiced, and took pleasure in the Pains of
the Damned: while they adore and praise the Justice, and Holiness of God, in
giving to each one his due. And,

Thus it comes to pass, as there is Joy in Heaven for the conversion of a
Penitent; so there may be Joy too there, for the eternal Punishment, and
deserved Ruin of an un-repenting and obstinate Offender.

As we may infer from the words of Divine Wisdom spoken in the First Chapter of
Proverbs from the 24th Verse. to the end of that Chapter. Prove. 1.24.


So that of all those many Showers of Grace that God so plentifully and
continually sends down, in these days of our Visitation; there will not be one
drop left to cool the tongue of a Dives, when he may be sweltring in perpetual
Flames. All that which might have nourished and feasted the Soul; turns to its
Poison, and infects it more with the Disease and Nature of the Devils.

But on the other side, How blessed is the choice Spirit which laying hold on
the Promise, and obeying the Precepts of its God, thrives so wonderfully under
his gracious Blessing, Dan. 4.12, 13.
as to be fruitful notwithstanding its height, and out of danger of falling.

No evil Spirit shall have power to cast it down since it is watched by an
Angel, and an Holy one receiving the Birds of Paradise within its Arms.

O Lord! What Solace, and what Happiness may I not secure to my self, if I have
the favor of thy good Will and Protection? for thou do not baffle the hopes
of such as anchor themselves upon the Rock Christ Jesus; thou do not break
the Knees that are bowed down, or bruised in their frequent Devotion before
thee.

Thou do not weary our Expectations, neither do thou hate our Prayers or
our Persons: but thou love thy Creature, yet not his Sin, Thou hear his
requests by Christ's Intercessions.

Thy Promises (not blended with self-interest) are never subject to alteration,
as men's are too much. Thine immense bounty is the Parent of thy good Will to
Mankind; and is unchangeable, because exempt both from Jealousy and Fear. Thy
wisest Providence leads all our operations through several amazing Labyrinths
to most excellent ends, and many times far otherwise than we designed them.

Thy Mercy, that is so tender as to be wrought on by a Mortal's Sigh or Tear,
calls every Sinner, watches, and waits his leisure (as it were) accepts and
welcoms him almost at any time, after it has provided the Festival too for his
Cheer, without any Contribution, or Charges of the Guest.

Thy Wisdom is a depth past fathoming too, and therein like, (though
transcending our Demerits) it knows (though we do not) always who are thine,
and can work good and Glory out of the worst of man's Misery, and the Devils
Malice.

O that this fore-praised Wisdom, and Love of thine, may work these following
Effects.

First, Let the one subdue those Adversaries of thy Glory, and my Good, who
oppose themselves to my thorough Conversion, Tyrannizing over my Will, and
perverting the devout Affections that now and then warm my Heart.

Secondly, Let the other enrich my Soul with Grace. As David was blessed in thy
Love, and became an Illustrious Instrument for the advancing thy Glory: So I
may be installed for ever with the tokens of thy Favor, and with the ornaments
of thy meek and holy Spirit.

I see the World arrayed with Vanity, and dawbed over with excesses, its sweets
(like too hot perfumes) strongly assault the weakness of our senses, and the
softness of my Constitution discover the Rebellions of the Flesh against the
Spirit.

I fear my Levity, and inconsideration will lay me open to the inveiglements of
my subtilest Foes. And shall I not pray then against their wickedness? that
thou would frustrate their attempts against me, and confound their Devices.
Least I be confounded, who repair to thy holiest Sanctuary for Protection.

Save me then, O Lord! who Renouncing the Devil and his Works, and forsaking
the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the
Flesh, would be faithful unto death, and receive from thee alone a Crown of
Life, of Grace here, and Glory hereafter. Amen.

The fourteenth Step on the fourteenth PSALM of Degrees, being the 133 PSALM.
Ecce quam bonum, etc.
LIft up thy self, O my Soul! and be thou raised up from the burden of my
Sins, unto the Throne of the Most High: for though God be the absolute
dispenser of his own Grace, yet he loves to have it coveted, and looked after
by Mankind, since his delights are placed amongst us. Be sure not to leave his
presence; wander no more like a Cain from his sight: for although nothing be
covered from his inspection, yet as he that travels far Northward banishes
himself from the Sun's power, and will not be advantaged by his heat, so much
as if he stayed near the place where the Sun makes his Bed at Noon: So neither
can he receive the warmest influences of Gods Favor, who departs from it, like
an offending Adam.

Therefore, O my Soul! Renounce thy Worldly affections altogether, and know
that whosoever leaves his Heart to be entrapped by the fair semblances of
Earthly Toys, may lose his share in an Eternity of Glory, while he embraces
nothing but a Cloud, and catches unhappily at a Shadow.

Alas! all Sublunary things are too slight to be compared with the pleasures at
God's Right Hand. What is most complete here is ever assailed by its
contraries, and what appears most Gygantick, or mighty, is but the greater
Imposture, cheating our apprehension by the cast of a huge Shadow.

That which is sweetest to our Senses is encompassed with the most stings, as
our loveliest Roses have the sharpest prickles; here is no Honey but what is
scoured with Wormwood, and the whole course of our Lives is but a L'ambigue, a
strange Hotchpotch of Good and Evil. But in God, in God alone is found true
Good, and perfect Happiness.

Many things that are useful are not pleasant, and many pleasant things are
noxious. Fasting, Abstinence, and large Alms-deeds enrich the Mind, mortify the
Passions, while they seem to impair our Worldly Concernments.

On the contrary, the satisfaction of sensuality may caresse the Body, but they
torture the Soul. In God alone meets that Profit and pleasure which constitute
the chief Good. Therefore,

O my Soul! with fervent Devotion, sincere Conversion, and settled Resolution,
be fixed to thy Redeemer, and enjoy such bliss as is made over to those who are
acquainted with God's Mind, and obedient to his Commands.

How unhappy are the Scorners of such acquaintance, and Union with God; Sit not
thou in their place, if thou meanest to be happy: for they have took leave of
their Felicity, they have shook hands with Faith, and Charity; they are
Eclipsed from the Beams of the Sun of Righteousness.

Yet let those sottish Animals inform me (if they can) why the bright Planet of
the Day is so welcome to universal Nature? Why the sending forth its Light and
Heat draws up their Eyes, and the Faculties of the whole World, as it were, to
the admiration of it self? Why are the four Elements so needful, if they be not
Communicative and assistant to every Body? and is not the Maker of these much
more wonderful, as much more necessary to us all?

He that will lean to his own imaginations, makes them his Idols; and forfeits
the Inheritance, that might be had by Communion with God. But he that with a
right affection, and with Filial Reverence binds up all Cravings within the
good pleasure, and will of God, may receive all the Joys that can be handed to
him by a Deity, for such an Observance. Such Union of a Soul to Christ, is more
sweet and acceptable to Heaven, than was that holy Oil which the Highpriests
only were to make and use.

And as the Heavenly dew that falls upon the Hills of Hermon, and of Sion,
brings Fruitfullness to their Rocks, and Health to their Inhabitants, so the
Largesses of the Divine Bounty, many ways advantage all such as are united to a
Savior, and to one another by a copious Charity.

The Dew comes down silently from Heaven, and waters the Earth, being
nourishing, and medicinal: and such a Celestial thing is Love and Concord,
Curing all the Diseases of the Mind.

It softens the very Marbles of a proud Niobe, improves the sterile bottom of
Good-works; sweetens the Asperities of Contrition, and prevents the withering
of our Hopes.

Send down this precious Dew upon my Soul, O Lord! as thou did another on the
Fleece of Gideon, that being over-shadowed by thy Love, I may never Divorce my
self again from it, but value my affections (as thou do) even as Faculties
more considerable than are all those earthly Objects upon which they have been
too often cast away: but since Mundanities are so imperfect Comforts, and so
vanishing; they should be despicable. And I would devote my Heart altogether to
those Joys of thine, which are Eternal.

Guard it therefore with a generous Fortitude to resist all the assaults of the
Devil, to disarm all my Senses, to defeat all my Corruptions, from ever having
any more Power to make me rebel against thy Goodness. And, Lord! command all
the Forces of my Soul to concur in the desires of thy Mercy, in the doing thy
Will, in the magnifying thy Greatness; so shall I be secure of thy Grace here,
and of thy Glory hereafter. Amen.

The fifteenth Step on the fifteenth PSALM of Degrees, being the 134 PSALM.
Ecce nunc benedicite.
O My Soul! how art thou engaged by the Mercies of thy Creator to reinforce thy
Powers for the setting forth his Praise; Now lay the Top-stone of thy Happiness
in the blessing of thy dear Redeemer; who has suffered thee to get up thus
near unto him, and to free thee from Sin, has showed the mighty skill of his
Mercy in diverse manners.

First, In the delivering thee from the perils of Infidelity and Profaneness:

Secondly, In giving thee the due confidence thou ought to have in his
Goodness.

Thirdly, In letting thee see how all true pleasures flow from him, who is all
Love and Kindness.

Has he enriched thee with the Ornaments of Hope? Has he built thee upon the
Groundwork of Charity, with the strength of a right Faith? Has he taught thee
the fear of the Lord, and the respect due to his Command? Has he showed thee
the Consequence of Holy Sorrow, Meekness, and Exinanition? and at last invited
thee to all Happiness, by a perfect union to Himself? And,

Art thou not inaugurated with a Crown of Privileges? Art thou not wholly
subdued to God, and overcome by such powerful Reasons to confess, that Religion
must needs be thy greatest advantage, and highest advancement also?

Then forget not thy self so much as not to exalt his Merits, and bless his
Mercy, and declare what he has done for thee, as Loudly, as Plainly, as
Continually, as it is possible for thee to do.

If thou slipp the time for these requisite performances, (and which is thy
time but the present?) It will look like an Act of Ingratitude, and an effect
of Obduration.

To the wicked, says God, What have thou to do to take my Name in thy Mouth,
since thou hate to be reformed. O Lord! thou will have none of their
Commendations, who indeed are unworthy to utter thy holiest Name, being thy
professed Enemies, their Addresses are but like the gnashings of the Damned,
mere Profanations, and no Worship of Thee.

But thy Servants are the Ecchoing Trumpets of thy Goodness; Thou love their
Eulogies, whom thou have adorned with thy Favors, and Redeemed from the
Tyranny of their Accuser.

Consider then again and again, O my Soul! how Great! how Incomprehensible! is
the Goodness of thy God! since he would Create thee after his likeness, and
give thee Understanding, and Dominion over and above thy Fellow Creatures?
Since he would place thee at first but little lower than the Angels, and
hereafter will promote thee even above those blessed Spirits; since he would
save thee with no less a Price than his Son's Blood; and make thee the chief
Magazine, or Storehouse of all the Treasures of his Grace: since he would
Manumitt thee by his Service, from the Tyranny of thy Sensualities, and from
the Slavery of great Transgressions (which bind up Lucifer himself in Chains of
Darkness.) O! do not fall (like him) again into the Hell of Ingratitude, since
thou art raised thus into the Favor of the Most High: Employ thy faculties to
his Honor, else thou art such another unworthy Monster as deserves to be
entombed in the bottom of that Gulf which burns for Ever and Ever.

Show at least how thou savourest the things of God, by acknowledging of them;
It Is true, thou can never render unto him according as thou have received,
yet return thy improved Talents, and thy utmost abilities, or else thy cheerful
readiness, for the owning thy self Obliged, and not unkind, to the Donor.

Suffer no Excuse or Accident to put thee off from thinking of his Goodness, or
from thanking of it.

Thy Prosperity is the Issue of his Providence, not of thy Merit. God (says
the Wise man) enables us to get Wealth, and all good Fortune. Thy Adversaries
celebrate his Wisdom, for by them art thou taught how he knows thy desert, and
would try thy Patience, and deals not so hardly by thee as he is provoked.

Therefore in all Conditions set forth his most worthy Praise; with clean
Hands, and a pure Heart lifted up by devout Expressions. Let us lead on our
Desires, and endeavors to set the Crown upon his Head, and to put the Scepter
into his Hand, whose right it is.

I mean let our Church (with that which is Triumphant) ascribe All Honor,
Power, Dominion, and Glory unto him who sits upon the Throne, and unto the
Lamb, for evermore: blessing God every manner of way, whereby the Creature may
be said to Glorify his maker. As,

First, By speaking of God with that Reverence which the Majesty of his Person
does require.

Secondly, By living according to the Rules of Probity, that by our good
actions, both our selves and others may think well of his Service.

Thirdly, By rendering unto God the Honor due to his Name, in whatsoever
condition may we be, that whether he gives or takes away, there may be no
shipwreck of a good Conscience, or of a cheerful Spirit, because we own our
dependence not upon our selves but Him.

Fourthly, By Giving Thanks always for all things unto God, Ephesians. 5.20.
(as says the Apostle) while we entertain a grateful Taste and Remembrance of
the most ordinary Mercy, for there is none to be looked upon as little, if we
justly regard either God or our selves.

NOW, most Gracious Lord! since thou have called up my Soul to this exalted
Throne of Felicity, to this highest Round of Heavenly Comfort, (to wit) to the
resounding of thy Praises, for the efficacy of thy Favors toward a penitent
Sinner: I beseech thee, dearest Lord! shower down continual thy Gifts and
Graces upon my humbled Soul, that it may be fruitful in every good Work, and
show no wretched marks of its former Sterility, though it Merits not the
smallest Dew of thy Blessing, nor the least warmth of thy Love; (having scarce
put out the fire of extravagant Lust.) Yet since thou have founded the vast
Machine of the Universe upon the empty place; Thine outstretched arm can amend
and sanctify whatever is amiss about me.

Thou art both our Lord, and our God; a Maker, and Redeemer too; whose
Operations are beyond all impossibilities, and thy Benefits above our Desires,
espcially in Heavenly things, no less than above our Deserts.

However, give me leave, here at last, to beseech thee so to fit me for thine
Eternal Entertainments, by a thankful Sense, and constant relish of thy Love
and Goodness to me here, as that I may pass along safely and contentedly
through the many disquiets of this mortal Life, to the continual Praising, and
endless Fruition of thee in Heaven.

our Father which art, etc.

A COROLLARY.
HAving got up thus far by the help of others, (with aching Knees, and sobbing
Respirations) my Soul craves leave to pause and look about her, lest these
Ascents become to her condition, like the Scalae Gemoniae to condemned
Wretches, Degrees of Punishment, and sad occasions of more certain Ruin. These
lofty Mounts afford me a fair prospect of the good Way my Thoughts should take
toward Heaven: But, alas! I find at the same time how I am grovelling upon
Earth, and the feet of my Affections would rather step down, than go up so high
a Hill, as that of God's House.

Therefore have I need of Jacob's Staff to lean upon in my infirmest State,
Heb. 11.21. Genesis 47.9. Ephesians. 3.18. Heb. 10.39, 36.
and to point out how few and evil the days of the years of my Pilgrimage have
been, and to fathom better both God's Love and mine, that I may get up still
nearer the point of Life, (even in Death it self) and be keeping on my Journey
here, for here is not my Rest.

And as I want a Jacob's Staff, (such a help and Monitor, and Vision, as that
holy Traveller had at Bethel) so I desire likewise that Jacob's Ladder, which
according to St. Basil, (in his Homilies on the Psalms) is the Exercise of a
devout Soul, so employing it self, as that God may come down to it, and the
Soul be raised up to Heaven, by these five several Degrees or Ascents.

The first is a generous neglect of all outward and temporal Advantages, Mark
1.18.
for the attendance on the Lord Jesus; and not only renouneing (with St. Paul)
such things as we counted Gain, but,

Secondly, Contemning,

Because, in the third place, Christ, if we would be love by him: Mat. 10.37.
Cant. 5.10.
If we esteem him not most amiable, we are not warmed with a right, or kindly
flame of Devotion, (which implies a transcendent value for the adored Object of
our Worship.) We are but Samaritans in our pretended Religion, and shall hardly
arrive at the fourth Step,

Which is a readiness not only to be bound, but to dye for his Name: Acts 20.24.
is a good Token or part of the noblest Mortification, which prefers God and
his Sanctity before Life, nay, before Salvation, and will secure us from
finding Death in the Errors of our Lives.

Nay, Psalm. 73.25.
even to the uniting our Souls by the divinest Charity unto God himself, who is
Love and the Man that can get thither (says St. John) dwells in Gods, 1 John
4.16.
and God in him.

These Five Ascents are to be often mounted, and if in honor to the holiest
Trinity, they are thrice gone over in our youthfullest, in our strongest, and
in our oldest Age, we shall be perfect in our Duty by such Repetitions of it,
and not think the Fifteen Ascents to God's House at all too many, or too steep,
or tiresom.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the Epistle to the Reader, Page 1. Line 28. for quote, read Court. p. 3. l.
48. read Sketch. p. 4. l. 19. for ones, read ends. l. 49. read Ite.

In the next Epistle of the Author, at l. 12. insert its. p. 2. l. 12. read to
Heaven. p. 3. l. 8. read perfect ones.

In the Book, p. 8. l. 7. read thee. p. 9. l. 2. read it natural, and born with
us. l. 32. read or recover it.

THE Eucharist at Easter, 1657, ON THE Happy Recovery Of my Most Dear and
Honored LUCINDA.
ANGELS, come tune my Joys, since they require
Notes pure and high, like those which ye inspire;
Blessed Saints of Heaven! could ye impart your Mirth,
Then might I learn to sing of one on Earth,
One, who has not your Glory, yet your Grace;
One equals you in Piety, not Place,
Because she lives: Nor can I more express
To tell, what it is the World calls Happiness;
And since she lives, I pray for nothing more,
But how to praise that help I did implore.
O God (who art most powerful) do thou please
To give me thankfulness, who gav'st her ease;
Give strength (as to her Body) to my Brain,
That with her health, may Harmonize my strain,
And breath still vigorously, like my past Fears,
In Lines more numerous than were erst my Tears;
While every gladsome Verse records at once
My Gods and Mothers Resurrections:
Within the Spheres of which, two Blisses move,
All I enjoy below, hope for above:
But all my Words and Actions needs must be
Lame Offerings, fit for Vulcan, not for Thee.
I cannot sing like David, nor can I
Be even like Saul, when Saul did prophecy;
Yet by that Harp which was his cure, I find
A Tongue to ease my overjoyed Mind:
Therefore my Song shall fill the thankful Quire,
My Voice shall consort with the Hebrew Lyre,
To drown its Hoarsness in those sweeter Lays,
So hiding my Defects, but not thy Praise.
The CXVI. PSALM.

Who to my Praise gav'st ear;

For thou my Cry did hear.

Death's Snares beset me round;
'Till to thy Name I sought for aid,
Nothing but Woes I found.

O Lord! save thou my Soul;

Making his Patient whole.

Shiclding the lowly'st Head;
And raising mine, whom Grief had laid
Down low, even near the Dead.

To lose thy sought-for Rest:
Thou see Love fills the Heart of God;
O make that Love thy Host!

Thy Foot from falls, thine Eye

This spent in Piety.

'Till Troubles shook my Trust;

Of Falsehood, as of Dust.

The Cup of Blessing, Lord;

Our Duty our Reward.

Whose Lives most holy are;

(As its own sight) most dear.

Thy Servant, Lord, am I!
Bound faster to thee by the Cord,
Which thou art pleased t'unty.

My Life, my Praise, my Prayer;

Whose Lives most holy are.
To God the Father, God the Son,
And God the Holy Ghost,
Be Glory; and let every one
Strive who shall praise God most.
HALLELUJAH.

The XXVII. PSALM.
LUCE tua fruamur LUCE.

What should I fear but him?
God is my Life's chief Health and Might,
What else should dreadful seem?

Approach me to devour,
They shall fall down, for they that rose
Have fallen into my Power.

None shall my Heart dismay;
Though Men against me Battle pitch,
God's strength shall be my stay.

Of God I now desire;
That in his House I may have room
To pray in, and retire.

I have his shelter there;
There on a Rock I shall be placed
In times of Grief and Care.

When God their Siege has raised;
Around his Courts with joyful sound,
God shall be greatly praised.

When I rejoice or cry!
Comfort or Mercy still afford,
And to my Call reply.

my Heart to thee could speak;
O Lord, thou said, Seek ye my Face!
Thy Face, Lord, will I seek.

Nor turn it once away!
O Leave me not, my God, my Guide,
Whose strenth is all my stay!

Thou did for me provide;
Nay, when my Parents me forsook,
Thou laid'st me not aside.

To shun each crooked Path;
Because my Foes would have me stray,

See how the Faithless rise
Against me, and their Breath
Would first ensnare by Calumnies,
Then cut me off by Death.

Had I not hoped to see
Thy Goodness in this Life, to light
My Soul to Eternity.

Take Courage, kiss his Rod;
For he shall make thee strong, and whole,
Wait then I say on God.
Glory and Praise allow
To God in Trinity,
As at the first he was, is now,
And evermore shall be.
The XXIII. PSALM Paraphrased.
THE King of Heaven, the God of Love,
Takes up a Shepherd's Crook;
(As David did) his Son above,
To his few Sheep will look:
Then, though in Deserts they are left, 1 Samuel 17.20.

How safe are those few Sheep!
How safe am I from wolvish Theft,
Where Christ the Fold does keep.
For while I wake, he lets me feed
By the Sunshine of his Eye;
When I want Rest, (if ought I need)
His Arm's my Canopy:
So that I shall not fear Death's Night;
Nay, when Time's Bell has gone,
Darkness (that harbors many a Sp'rite)
Shall let my Soul alone.
My Soul, Return.
arrayed then in its Light,
Such Glories shall put on,
As they that make my Shepherd white,
Who is my Shield, and Sun.
He from a howling Wilderness,
(Of Savages the Abode)
Has brought me by his right Address
Into fair Canaan's Road.
There up and down meek Lambs he leads,
While Tides of Joy flow by;
Can his Flock want, who kindly feeds
Young Ravens, when they cry?
Like Israel's Leader by the Flood, Exodus 14.2.

He bids his Army stay;
Then (as he gave Elijah Food) 1 King. 19.8.

He cheers them in their way.
The power and goodness of our God Return.

Are our advance and stay; Exodus 14.16.

Elisha's Staff, and Moses's Rod; 2 King. 4.29.

Do Wonders less than they:
They save the Poor, support the Weak;
Heal sick Folks, help the Blind:
Soft Hearts they bead, hard ones they break;
Thus nurturing the Unking.
For all Readiness envy, Doeg's hate,
My Head and Beard is crowned;
In spite of Foes I fit in state,
With Ease and Plenty round.
My Bowl's with Wine swelled to the brim,
With Oil my Temples shine;
God is with me, e're I with him;
His Goodness it is, not mine.
His Grace (and not their own) anoints Return.

Kings, to the sway they bear;
His Spirit Royal Feasts appoints,
His Son is our best Cheer.
O that toward God my days could move
Fast, as to Death they tend!
My Thanks should keep pace with his Love,
And (like it) never
END.

