THE LORD BALTEMORE'S CASE, Concerning the Province of Maryland, adjoining to
Virginia in AMERICA. With full and clear Answers to all material Objections,
touching his Rights, Jurisdiction, and Proceedings there. And certain Reasons
of State, why the Parliament should not impeach the same. Unto which is also
annexed, a true Copy of a Commission from the late King's Eldest Son, to Mr.
William Davenant, to dispossess the Lord Baltemore of the said Province,
because of his adherence to this Commonwealth.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1653.

THE LORD BALTEMORE'S CASE, Concerning the Province of Maryland joining to
Virginia in America, etc.
IN 1632. the Lord Baltemore had a Patent granted to him and his heirs, of the
said Province of Maryland, with diverse privileges and jurisdictions for the
Government thereof, the better to encourage him to settle a Colony of English
there, whereby to prevent the Dutch and Swedes from incroaching any nearer to
Virginia, Maryland being between Virginia, and the Dutch and Swedes Plantation
on that Continent, and New England beyond them, to the Northward.

The Lord Baltemore hereupon in 1633. sent two of his own brothers with above
200 people to begin and seat a Plantation there; wherein, and in the
prosecution of the said Plantation, ever since, he and his friends have
disbursed above 40000 l. whereof 20000 l. at least, was out of his own purse,
and his said two brothers died there in the prosecution thereof.

In Septem. 1651. when the Council of State sent Commissioners from hence, to
wit, Captain Dennis, Captain Steg, and Captain Curtes, to reduce Virginia to
the obedience of the Parliament, Maryland was at first inserted in their
Instructions to be reduced as well as Virginia, but the Council being afterward
satisfied that that Plantation was never in opposition to the Parliament, that
Captain Stone, the Lord Baltemore's Deputy there, was generally known to have
been always zealously affected to the Parliament, and that diverse of the
Parliaments friends were, by the Lord Baltemore's special direction, received
into Maryland, and well treated there, when they were fain (...) ^^^ve Virginia
for their good affection to the Parliament; then the Council thought it not
fit at all to disturb that Plantation, and therefore caused Maryland to be
struck out of the said Instructions, which was twice done, it being by some
mistake or other put in a second time.

In this expedition to Virginia, Captain Dennis and Captain Stegg, the two
chief Commissioners, were cast away, outward bound in the Admiral of that
Fleet, which was sent from hence upon that service, and with them the Original
Commission for that service was lost.

But Cap. Curtes having a copy of the said Commission and Instructions with him
in another ship, arrived safe in Virginia, and there being also nominated in
the said Commission two other persons resident in Virginia, to wit, Cap.
Bennet, and Cap. Cleyborn (known and declared enemies of the L. Baltemore's)
they, together with Cap. Curtes, proceeded to the reducement of Virginia, which
was effected accordingly upon Articles, among which one was; That the
Virginians should enjoy the ancient bounds and limits of Virginia, and that
they should seek a Charter from the Parliament to that purpose.

In the reducement of Virginia, Captain Stone (the L. Baltemore's Deputy of
Maryland) sent to the Commissioners at the first arrival of the Fleet in
Virginia, to offer them all the assistance he could, and did actually assist
them therein, with provision of victual, and other necessaries, as will be
testified (if need be) by Mr. Edward Gibbons Major-Generall of New England, and
diverse others who were then there, and eyewitnesses of it, and are now here.

Notwithstanding which, the said Commissioners, after Virginia was reduced,
went to Maryland, and upon pretense of a certain clause (which it seems was by
some means or other, put into their Instructions, after Maryland was struck
out as aforesaid) to wit, that they should reduce all the Plantations* in the
Bay of Cheseapeack to the obedience of the Parliament, and some part of
Maryland, where the L. Baltemore's chief Colony there is seated, being within
that Bay, as well as most of the Plantations of Virginia are; they required
Captain Stone, and the rest of the Lord Baltemore's Officers there, first to
take the Engagement, which they all readily subscribed, and declared, that they
did in all humility submit themselves to the Government of the Commonwealth of
England in chief under God; then the Commissioners required them to issue out
Writs and Process out of the L. Baltemore's Courts there in the name of the
Keepers of the Liberty of England, and not in the name of the Lord Proprietary,
as they were wont to do, wherein they desired to be excused; because they did
not conceive the Parliament intended to divest the Lord Baltemore of his right
there, and that they understood out of England that the Council of State
intended not that any alteration should be made in Maryland. That the Kings
name was never used heertofore in the said Writs, but that they had always
been in the name of the Lord Proprietary, according to the Privileges of his
Patent, ever since the beginning of that Plantation; that the late Act in
England for changing of the forms of Writts declared only, that in such Writs
and Process wherein the Kings name was formerly used, the Keepers of the Liberty
of England, should for the future be put in stead thereof: that the continuing
of the Writs in the Lord Proprietaries name, was essential (...) his Interest
there, and that therefore they could not without breach of trust, concur to any
such alteration; whereupon the Commissioners demanded of Captain Stone the Lord
Baltemore's Commission to him, which he delivered, and then without any other
cause at all, they removed the said Captain Stone, and the Lord Baltemore's
other Officers out of their Employment there under him, and appointed others to
manage the government of that Plantation, till the pleasure of the Council of
State and Parliament should be further known therein; seized upon all the
Records of the Place, and sent diverse of them hither into England, all which
they did without any opposition at all from Cap. Stone, or any other of the
Lord Baltemore's Officers, in regard of their respect and reverence to the
Commissioners of the Parliament.

The Colony of Virginia, not long after, sent one Colonel Mathews hither into
England to get their Articles confirmed by the Parliament, which were read in
the House on the 31. August 1652. Upon the reading whereof a Petition of the
Lord Baltimores, and of about twenty more considerable Protestant Adventurers
and Planters to and in Maryland, who are known by diverse Members of the House
to have been well affected always to the Parliament, and who signed the said
Petition, was also read; whereby it was humbly desired that before the House
passe^ that Article concerning the old limits of Virginia, the said Petitioners
might be heard by their Council, in regard Maryland was long since esteemed
part of Virginia, and therefore they were concerned in that Article; and they
further humbly desired in the said Petition, that the Lord Baltemore's Officers
might be restored to their places in Maryland under him, and that the
Petitioners might quietly enjoy the Privileges of the said Patent of Maryland,
upon confidence whereof, they had Adventured so much of their fortunes thither
as aforesaid.

Whereupon diverse Parchments under the Lord Baltemore's hand and seal, which
were sent out of Maryland, by the said Capt. Bennet, and Capt. Cleyborn, were
at that time produced to the House by a Member thereof, who it seems conceived
that there would appear something in them, whereby the Lord Baltemore had
forfeited his said Patent, or at least that his Authority in Maryland was not
fit to be allowed of by the Parliament.

The House on the 31. August 1652. referred the said Article concerning the old
Limits of Virginia, to the Committee of the Navy to consider what Patent was
fit to be granted to the Inhabitants of Virginia, and to hear all Parties, and
consider of their particular Claims, and report the same, with their Opinions
to the Parliament, and the said Parchments delivered in concerning Maryland,
were also referred to the same Committee.

The Lord Baltemore accordingly made his claim before the said Committee, unto
whom he delivered a true Copy of his said Patent, and desired therefore that
the Patent which the Virginians were Suitors for, might not extend to any part
of Maryland, it being made appear to the said Co^mittee, that that Province had
not been for these 20 years last past accounted any part of Virginia, and that
the Virginians had neither possession of any part thereof, at the time of the
making of the said Articles, nor for 20 years before, nor that the present
Inhabitants of Virginia had ever at all any right unto it.

Then, upon the suggestion of a Member of that Committee, certain Exceptions
against the Lord Baltimores Patent, and his Proceedings thereupon in Maryland,
were shortly after presented in writing to the said Committee, unto which the
Lord Baltemore put in his Answer also in writing, which was read, and the
Committee upon debate thereof (it seems) thought not fit to deliver any Opinion
in the business, but Ordered, that the whole matter of fact should be stated by
a Sub-Committee, and reported first to the said Grand Committee, and afterward
to the House.

The Exceptions aforesaid were many, but the substance of them are reduceable
to these heads following, which are set down by way of Objections, with Answers
to them.

1. Object. A pretended injury done to the Virginians by the said Patent, in
regard Maryland was heretofore part of Virginia.

Answ. The present Inhabitants of Virginia had never any right to Maryland, no
more then to New England, which was part of that Country heretofore called
Virginia, as well as Maryland, but distinguished and separated afterward from
it by a Patent as Maryland was. There was indeed a Patent heretofore granted by
King James in the 7. year of his reign of a great part of that northern
Continent of America, which was then called Virginia, to diverse Lords and
Gentlemen here in England, who were by that Patent erected into a Corporation,
by the name of the Virginia Company, in which tract of land granted to the said
Company, that Country which is now called Maryland, was included, but that
Patent was Legally evicted by a Quoranto in the then Kings Bench, in 21. year
of the said King James, 8. or 9. years before the Patent of Maryland was
granted to the L. Baltemore; which Company or Corporation the Inhabitants of
Virginia desire not now to revive, by virtue of their Articles abovementioned,
but abhor the memory of it, in regard of the great oppression and slavery they
lived in under it, when it was on foot, so as they never having had any Patent,
right, or possession of the said Province of Maryland, there could be no injury
done to them by the Lord Baltemore's said Patent, after the eviction of the
said Virginia Companies Patent thereof. For it was as free in the late Kings
power to grant any part of that Continent not possessed before by any Legal
grant then in force from the Crown of England (which Maryland was not, at the
time of the Lord Baltemore's Patent thereof) as it was for King James to grant
the aforesaid Country to the said Virginia Company.

2. Object. A pretended wrong done by the Lord Baltemore to the above mentioned
Capt. Cleyborn, in dispossessing him of an Island in the said Province, called
the Isle of Kent.

2. Answer. It was a business above 14. years since, upon a full hearing of
both parties, then prefent, decided by the then Lords Commissioners for
Foreign Plantations, against the said Capr. Cleyborn and his Partners, Mr.
Maurice Thomson and others, and the said Capt. Cleyborn has himself also by
diverse Letters of his to the Lord Baltemore, acknowledged the great wrong he
did him therein; which Letters were proved at the Committee of the Navy, and are
now remaining with that Committee: wherefore the Lord Baltemore humbly
conceives, that against the said Capt. Cleyborns own acknowledgement, and a
Determination so long since of that business, and above 14 years quiet
possession in the Lord Baltemore of the said Island, the Parliament will not
think fit upon a private Controversy of meum and tuum, between him and the
said Cleyborne, to impeach his Patent of the said Province, or his right to the
said Island, but leave both parties to their legal remedy.

3. Object. That the said Patent constitutes an hereditary Monarchy in
Maryland, which is supposed, by some, to be inconsistent with this
Commonwealth.

3. Answ. The Jurisdiction and style which the Lord Baltemore uses in
Maryland, is no other then what is warranted by his Patent (as may appear by
his answer at the Commitee of the Navy to the Exceptions above mentioned, and
by perusal of the said Patent) and that is only in the nature of a County
Palatine, subordinate, and dependent on the Supreme Authority of England; for
by the Patent, the sovereign Dominion, Allegiance, the fifth part of all Gold
and Silver Oar, which shall happen to be found there, and several other
Duties are reserved to the late King, his Heirs, and Successors, who are now
the Parliament of this Commonwealth: and although it be true, that a
Monarchical Government here which should have any power over this
Commonwealth, would not be consistent with it, yet certainly any Monarchical
Government in foreign parts which is subordinate to, and dependent on, this
Commonwealth, may be consistent with it, as well as diverse Kings under that
famous Commonwealth of the Romans heretofore were, insomuch as they thought it
convenient and fit to constitute diverse Kings under them. All Lords of Manors
or Liberties here in England may, in some kind, be as well accounted Monarchs
within their several Manors and Liberties as the Lord Baltemore in Maryland;
for Writs issue, at this day, in their names out of their Courts within their
respective Manors and Liberties, and not in the name of the Keepers of the
Liberty of England; Oaths of Fealty are taken to them by their Tenants, and
they have great Royalties and Jurisdictions, some more then others, and some as
great in proportion, within their said Manors and Liberties, as the Lord
Baltemore has in Maryland, except the power of making Laws touching life and
Estate, power of pardoning, and some few others of lesser concernment, which
although they may not be convenient for any one man to have in England, yet are
they necessary for any (whether one man or a Company) that undertakes a
Plantation, in so remote and wild a place as Mariland, to have them there;
especially with such limitations as are in the Lord Baltemore's Patent; to wit,
that the Laws be made with the consent of the Freemen of the said Province, or
the major part of them, or their Deputies, and that they be consonant to
reason, and be not repugnant or contrary, but, as near as conveniently may
be, agreeable to the Laws of England; which limitations the Lord Baltemore
has not exceeded, as may appear by his Answer to the Committee of the Navy to
the Exceptions above mentioned: and although it be not fit that any one Person
should have a negative Voice here in the making of Laws, yet certainly, as no
Company, so no single man, that is well in his wits, will be so indiscreet, as
to undertake a Plantation at so vast an expense as the Lord Baltemore has, if
after all his charge, pains, and hazards, which are infinite in such a
business, such necessitous factious people as usually new Plantations consist
of, for the most part, and went thither at his charge, or by contract or
agreement with him, should have power to make Laws to dispose of him, and all
his estate there, without his consent, and he be left without remedy: for
before the Supreme Authority here, upon any appeal to it, will probably be at
leisure from business of greater consequence, or perhaps have convenient means
to relieve him, he may be ruined and destroyed: such chargeable and hazardous
things as Plantations are, will not be undertaken by any, whether it be a
Company or a single man, without as great encouragements of privileges as are
in the Lo. Baltemore's Patent of Maryland; and if it be not any prejudice, as
certainly it is not, but advantageous to the interest and honor of this
Commonwealth, that an English man (although a Recusant, for the Lord Baltemore
knows of no Laws here against Recusants which reach into America) should
possess some part of that great Continent of America with the privileges and
jurisdictions aforesaid dependent on, and subordinate to it, then the Indian
Kings or Foreigners (as the Dutch and Swedes before mentioned) who have no
dependency on it, as certainly it is, then he hopes the Parliament will not
think it inconsistent with this Commonwealth, but just that he should enjoy
the Rights and Privileges of his Patent, upon confidence whereof, he and his
friends have adventured the greatest part of their fortunes for the honor of
this Nation, as well as their own particular advantage; especially seeing no
other person has any wrong done him therein, for none are compelled to go to
Maryland, or to stay there, but know beforehand upon what terms they are to be
in that place; and the English Inhabitants of that Province are so well pleased
with the Government constituted there by the said Patent, as that, by general
consent of the Protestants, as well as Roman Catholics, it is established by a
Law there, as well as freedom of Conscience and exercise of Religion within
that Province is, to all that profess to believe in Jesus Christ, as appears by
the Laws of that Province now in the hands of the said Committee of the Navy,
which makes it evident that a Petition lately read at that Committee, with ten
unknown hands to it, in the name of the Inhabitants of Maryland, against the
Lord Baltemore's said Patent, is either wholly fictitious, or else signed by
some few obscure factious fellows, which is easy to be procured by any ill
affected person, against any Government whatsoever.

4. Object. That the Lord Baltemore gave his assent to certain Laws for
Maryland in 1650. in one of which Laws the late King Charles is styled the
late high and mighty Prince Charles the first of that name K. of England, etc.
And in another of the said Laws it is Enacted, That the L. Baltemore shall
have 10s. a hogs-head for all Tobacco's ship't from Maryland in any Dutch
Vessel, and bound for any other Port then his Majesty's, whereby some would
infer, that he did acknowledge a Charles the second to be King, etc. for that
the word first, in one Law inferred a second, and by the word Majesty, in the
other Law, the Lord Baltemore must mean the late Kings eldest son, for the late
King Charles was dead, when the Lord Baltemore assented to that Law, to wit, in
August 1650.

4 Answ. To this is answered, that although those Laws were assented unto by
the Lord Baltemore in August 1650. yet it appears by his said Declaration of
assent, that some of them were enacted in Maryland by the Assembly there, in
April 1649. whereof that Law was one, wherein those words, to wit, any other
Ports then his Majesty's, are inserted (as was proved to the said Committee of
the Navy) at which time, the people in Maryland could not know of the late
Kings death, which was but in January then next before; for in February, March,
and April, ships usually return from those parts, and in September, October,
and November, go thither; so as the Assembly in Maryland could mean no body by
that word Majesty, but the late King, and the L. Baltemore could have no other
meaning but what the Assembly had, for he did but assent to what they had done,
and was before enacted, as aforesaid: as to the other law, wherein those other
words are inserted, to wit, the late high and mighty Prince Charles, the first
of that name, etc. it was one of those Laws which were passed by the Assembly
in Maryland, in April 1650. when the people there knew of the late Kings death;
to wit, a year after the other law abovementioned, with diverse others, which
were enacted in April, 1649. as aforesaid, though in the ingrossement of them
all here, (when the Lord Baltemore gave his assent to them altogether in
August, 1650.) it is written before it, because they were transposed here in
such order, as the Lord Baltemore thought fit, according to the nature, and
more or less importance of them, placing the Act concerning Religion first,
etc. And as to those words, the first of that name, etc. the word first, does
not necessarily imply a second, as some infer upon it, no more then when the
first born of thy sons were commanded to be given to God, did imply a second,
which was performed, though there were never a second; the word first, has
relation to the time past, and not to the time to come; King James is styled in
History, James the first of that name, King, etc. though there were never a
second of that name King of England, etc. and it is usually written and said,
that a King died in the first year of his Reign, when he lived not to enter
into a second, the like whereof may be made out by many other instances; and as
the L. Baltemore is confident the Assembly in Maryland had no intention by
those words, Charles the first, etc. to infer a second King of that name, no
more had he, in his assent to that Law, any such thought or meaning; and the
comportment of him and his Officers in Maryland abovementioned, toward the
Parliament, and their friends, does sufficiently confirm it.

Among other privileges granted to the L. Baltemor e, and the Inhabitants of
Maryland, by his said Patent, one is, (by an express clause therein inserted)
that the said Province should not from thence forward be, or be reputed any
part of Virginia, or be dependent or subject to their Government in any thing,
(although the Government of Virginia was then immediately in the Kings hands)
but was, by the said Patent, (in express words) separated from it, and so it
has been ever since, which was one of the chiefest encouragements, upon
confidence whereof, the L. Baltemore, and others, adventured so great a part of
their estates thither as aforesaid; for it was the privileges and immunities,
and not the land only, granted by the said Patent, which did chiefly induce the
Lord Baltemore to make so great an Adventure, without which he would not
certainly, upon the conditions of a common Planter, have disbursed any thing
upon a Plantation in America: Wherefore he hopes the Parliament will not think
it just, or fit, to deprive him, and the Inhabitants of Maryland of so
important a privilege, (which is their inheritance, and dearly purchased by
them) by putting them now under the Government of Virginia, upon color of any
Articles agreed on, when the Virginians were declared enemies of this
Commonwealth, and the rather, because even in point of policy also, (as is
humbly conceived) for certain Reasons of State heerunto annexed, it will be
more advantageous to the honor and interest of this Commonwealth, to keep
those two Governments still divided, and to preserve and protect the Lord
Baltemore's rights and privileges aforesaid in Maryland, then to destroy
either of them.

Reasons of State, concerning Maryland in America.
1. FIrst, It is much better to keep that Government still divided from
Virginia (as it has been for these twenty years last past,) then to unite
them; for, by that means, this Commonwealth will have the more power over
both, by making one an Instrument (as occasion shall require) to keep the other
in its due obedience to this Commonwealth.

2. Secondly, in case any defection should happen in either Colony (as lately
was in Virginia) the other may be a place of refuge for such as shall continue
faithful to this Commonwealth, as Maryland lately was, upon that occasion,
which it could not have been, in case the Government of that place had been,
at that time, united unto, or had had any dependence on Virginia.

3. Thirdly, it will cause an emulation in both, which of them shall give the
better account of their proceedings to the Supreme Authority of this
Commonwealth, on which they both depend, and also which of them shall give
better satisfaction to the Planters and Adventurers of both.

4. Fourthly, the Lord Baltemore having an estate, and his residence in
England, this Commonwealth will have a better assurance of the due obedience of
that Plantation, and the Planters and Adventurers thither, of having right done
unto them, in case the Government thereof have still a dependence on him, and
he upon this Commonwealth, (as he had before on the late King) then if the
Government of that place at so remote a distance, should be disposed of into
other hands who had little or nothing here to be responsible for it, and whose
interest and residence were wholly there.

5. Fifthly, by the continuance of his Interest in the Government thereof, this
Commonwealth and the people there, are eased of the charge of a Deputy
Governor; which he, at his own charges, maintains, the Inhabitants there being
yet so poor, (and so like to be for many years) as they are not able to
contribute any thing toward it.

6. Sixthly, if the L. Baltemore should, by this Commonwealth, be prejudiced in
any of the rights or privileges of his Patent of that Province, it would be a
great discouragement to others in foreign Plantations* upon any exigency, to
adhere to the interest of this Commonwealth, because it is notoriously known,
that, by his express direction, his Officers and the people there, did adhere
to the interest of this Commonwealth, when all other English Plantations
(except New England) declared against the Parliament, and at that time received
their friends in time of distress, for which he was like diverse times to be
deprived of his Interest there, by the Colony of Virginia, and others, who had
Commission from the late Kings eldest Son for that purpose, as appears by a
Commission granted by him to Sir William Davenant, the Original whereof
remains with the Council of State, and a true Copy thereof is hereunto
annexed.

A true Copy of a Commission, from the late Kings eldest Son, to Mr. William
Davenant, concerning Maryland, the Original whereof remains with the Council
of State.
CHARLES R.

CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To Our Trusty and Well-beloved Sir William Davenant, Knight, and to all
others, to whom these presents shall come, greeting:
whereas the Lord Baltemore, Proprietary of the Province and Plantations of
Maryland in America, does visibly adhere to the Rebels of England, and admit
all kind of Schismatics, and Sectaries, and other ill-affected persons, into
the said Plantations of Maryland, so that we have cause to apprehend very great
prejudice to Our Service thereby, and very great danger to Our Plantations in
Virginia, who have carried themselves with so much Loyalty and Fidelity, to the
King Our Father, of blessed memory, and to Us; Know ye therefore, That We,
reposing special trust and confidence in the courage, conduct, loyalty, and
good affection to Us, of you Sir William Davenant, and for prevention of the
danger and inconveniences abovementioned, do by these presents, nominate,
constitute, and appoint you Our Lieutenant Governor of the said Province, or
Plantations of Maryland, with all Forts, Castles, Plantations, Ports, and other
Strengths thereunto belonging; to have, hold, exercise, and enjoy the said
place and command of Our Lieutenant Governor of Maryland, during Our pleasure,
with all Rights, Priveledges, Profits, and Allowances any ways appertaining,
or belonging to the same: And although We intend not hereby to prejudice the
right of the Proprietary in the Soil, but have, for Our Security, thought fit
to entrust you, during these troubles; This clause includes Soil and all.
We notwithstanding give you full Power and Authority to do all things in the
said Plantations, which shall be necessary for Our Service, and for securing
them in their Loyalty, and Obedience to Us, and prevention of all dangers that
may arise from thence to Our Loyal Plantations of Virginia: Further, requiring
and commanding you to hold due correspondence with Our Trusty and Well-beloved
Sir* William Berkley, Knight, Our Governor of the said Plantations of
Virginia, and to comply with him in all things necessary for Our Service, and
the mutual good of both Plantations, requiring and commanding hereby all
Officers, and Ministers, and all other Our Subjects whatsoever of the said
plantations of Maryland, to admit and seceive you Our said Lieutenant
Governor, according to this Our Commission, and to obey and pursue your Order
in all things, according to the Authority We have given you; and likewise
requiring and commanding Our Governor and Counsel of Virginia, and likewise
all other Our*loving Subjects of Virginia, to be aiding and assisting to you,
not only to the settling and establishing of your Authority, as Our Lieutenant
Governor of Maryland, but also in all such helps and assistances, as may be
necessary for your preservation there, and for the mutual good of both
Plantations, as aforesaid.

Given at Our Court in Jersey, the 16/^^ day of February, 1650/49 in the second
Year of Our Reign.

