A SERMON AGAINST Murmuring: PREACHED in the Cathedral Church Of St. PETER
EXON, On the XXIXth of May, 1680.

By THOMAS LONG, D.D. One of the Prebendaries of that Church.

Exodus xvi. 8. Your murmurings are not against us, but against the Lord.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston, Bookseller to His most, Sacred Majesty,
MDCLXXX.

TO THE Right Reverend FATHER in GOD THOMAS LORD Bishop of EXETER.
THIS Sermon not reaching the ears of those for whom it was chiefly intended, I
have by your Lordships direction offered it to their hands, that it may be as a
Glass not only to show them their distorted faces but infectious breaths, which
may fix some spots on the glass it self, but such as (I doubt not) will be
easily wiped off. I have attempted a very difficult work, The governing of an
unruly evil, for as St. James says, every kind of beasts and serpents have
been tamed by man, Chap. 3.7.
except the Serpent that is within him, the Tongue, which no man can tame. It
was made to be our Glory, but we generally turn it to our shame, especially
while therewith we seem to bless God, but curse and speak evil of those who
bear most of his Image, his Magistrates and Ministers, v. 9. It is full of
deadly poison, such as never hurts less than three at once, the person
slandered in his good name, by Calumny; the person that listeneth to him, in
his Charity, by Prejudice and evil surmises; and himself most of all, by doing
the Devils work in slandering his brethren, v. 8. It is a Fire, says St.
James, v. 6. and the worst of fires, for it is, set on, fire of hell; (i.e.)
the Devil the father of lies; He is that god of Contention who imploys these
Boutefeaus as Mars did his Priests to scatter coals of fire in the Temple and
inflame the whole course of Nature. Other evils may be seen and avoided, but
this shoots out arrows that fly as invisibly in the day as in the dark; it is
of such a Versatile and Proteus-like nature, that no knot can hold it, but it
defies the Laws of God and man. Our tongues, are our own, we ought to speak,
who is Lord over us? Psalm. 12.

I should not have enlarged this discourse but that I perceive Calumny is
become the malus genius of the Nation, which seems to be possessed not with a
dumb but a talkative spirit, that has turned Religion into lying and
slandering. And such men's Religion, St. James assures us, is vain, chapter 1.26.
It Is like that wherewith the Votaries of Mercury did worship him by casting
stones at his Image and murdering their brethren in Effigy.Our Apostle
discovers the root of this evil to be a bitter zeal, or envying and strife in
the heart: Chap. 3.14.
the blistering of the tongue is caused by an ulcerous heart; and it is from
within out of the heart that all these impurities do proceed. Wherefore
according to our Saviors method, I have endeavored to cleanse first that
which is within, and to suppress the first motions of murmuring and discontent,
by applying the lenitives of Right reason and Christian Religion which teaches
us to be of a meek and calm, a cool and quiet Spirit, to do our own business,
and be content with such things as we have, and not to quarrel at the
providence of God and the Administration of public affairs.

But now men are grown presumptuous, self-willed, they are not afraid to speak
evil of dignities and things which they understand not, 2 Pet. 2.10. They are
not afraid to insinuate as if the King favored the Plot, which has been
declared to be against His Majesty's person, and the Established Religion. They
quarrel the Succession, and would put by the true and undoubted Heir. They
insinuate that His Majesty is no friend to Parliaments, and would Rule us by an
Arbitrary power. And as to the Church of England, they accuse it for declining
apace to Popery, and approving Popish, Socinian and Pelagian Doctrines, as
Jews du Moulin, and the Author of the Celeusma; when it is confessed by
foreign Divines, that it is the greatest fence against those pernicious errors.
They talk as if the Church Governors were mere Thorns, and the instruments of
the Devil, exercising Tyranny and Oppression, whereas the terms of Conformity
as to the people, are confessed to be much more facile, than ever they were
since the first Reformation. And in truth the Indulgence granted to such men
has destroyed more by 1000 to one, than that which they call persecution
(i.e.) the execution of good laws. They tell the people of an utter
impossibility of Conforming to the Church of England, because of many heinous
sins in that Conformity, ( Baxter's Plea for peace,) and that the Conformists
are generally guilty of Perjury. And these baits are dispersed through the
Nation, and greedily swallowed by the Credulous people who consider not what
deadly hooks are under them. And how great a matter a little of such wild fire
kindles! Against these false suggestions and dangerous murmurings, the ensuing
discourse is intended.

The Persians were wont to observe an Anniversary Festival which they called
the death of Vices; and as an Emblem thereof, they destroyed as many Serpents
as they found in the Land. I could not devise how to celebrate this happy
Festival better than by endeavoring the mortification of those murmuring and
discontented vices which were the cause of our former troubles, and reduced us
to so low a condition, that none but Gods own hand could deliver us, as with
all thankfulness we acknowledge. But as Ezra says, chapter 9.13. If after all that
is come upon us for our evil deeds, for which God has punished us less than we
deserve, and hath-given us such deliverance as this, we should again break his
Commandments, and neither fear him for his Judgments, nor obey him for his
Clemency, but continue to be as our Fathers were, a murmuring and rebellious
generation, may not our God be justly angry with us, till he have consumned us
so that there be no remnant nor escaping? May we not fear that he will deal
with us as he did with the murmuring Israelites, who for forty years together
under the various and miraculous dispensations of mercies and judgments so
grieved his Holy Spirit that he Swore in his wrath they should never enter into
his rest? Psalm. 95. Our sins have really brought us to that brink of
destruction which our guilty fears make us to apprehend with horror, and yet we
strive with all our might to cast each other into that gulf which like an open
Sepulcher is prepared to swallow us all. Archimedes is said to have invented
such an Engine, as if he could have found where to six it, he would have
undertaken by it to remove the Globe of the Earth out of its place. This Engine
some Mathematicians suppose to have been a Screw; which lost invention, some of
our Age have recovered. And if male-contented spirits be permitted to insinuate
to the hearts of the credulous people, their fears and jealousies, their lies
and slanders, their murmurings and discontent, they would in a short time
remove the well Established Foundations of Church and State. The God of Peace,
Unity and Concord who stilleth the raging of the Sea, allay the madness of such
people. "And give us all that peace which the world cannot give; that our
hearts may be set to obey his Commandments, and also that by him we being
defended from the fear of our enemies, may pass our time in rest and quietness,
through the merits of Jesus Christ our Savior.

So daily prays Your Lordships most Humble and Obliged Servant, THO. LONG.

A SERMON AGAINST Murmuring. Ecclesiastes vii. 10. Say not thou, what is the
cause that the former days were better than these? For thou do not inquire
wisely concerning this.


THERE is nothing wanting to complete the Solemnity of this Day, or indeed the
happiness of the Whole Nation, besides Thankful and Obedient hearts to God and
the King, for the many incomparable blessings which under them we now enjoy.
That character which the Royal Prophet gives, Psalm. 144. of a blessed people,
agrees well with us: for first, (which is the foundation of all) we have the
Lord to be our God, v. last. And our God has given Salvation to our King, ver.
10. He has delivered David his Servant from the peril of the Sword. And again,
he has delivered him from the hand of strange children, whose mouth speaks
of vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of falsehood. And now our Sons
grow up as young plants, and our daughters are as the polished corners of the
Temple, our Garners are full, affording all manner of store; our Sheep bring
forth thousands and ten thousands in our streets. There is no decay (of Trade)
no leading into Captivity. Only we cannot say, there is no complaining in our
streets. This sin lies as an indeleble reproach upon our Nation. We
Englishmen never know when we are well. But what shall we say? when the most
prosperous reign of Peaceable Solomon was disturbed with the Murmurings of
Malcontents, it is no wonder if it be so with us. Every ear is filled with
the hissing of such Serpents, and the noise which they make among the Thickets
of the people; but it will require the wisdom of Solomon to charm them; and he
did it so effectually, that though they did some time hiss at him, yet they
could never hurt him, for there was peace all the days of Solomon. And that it
may be so with us, I shall follow the method prescribed in the Text, where,
First, We have a Royal Prohibition, Ne dicas, say not thou. Secondly, We have
the sin described against which the Prohibition lies, which by consent of the
best Expositors is a murmuring and repining at the present Dispensations of
God, and the Administration of Public affairs by our Governors. Thirdly, We
have the secret and subtle pretenses by which it insinuates it self to the
hearts of the people, What is the cause? and a false and odious comparison
between the former and the present times, The former times were better than
these. And Fourthly, The folly and impiety of such secret and mischievous Arts,
Thou do not inquire wisely concerning this.


First, Of the Royal Prohibition, Say not thou, that is, Though you question
the King's Prerogative, yet quarrel not with the Prerogative of God by whom
Kings Reign and Princes decree judgment; as if he did not set fit Governors
over us, or did not still retain a power over them, who has the hearts of all
Kings in his hands, and disposes of them to his own wise and gracious ends
either for the punishment or prosperity of a Nation: If the former days were
better, it was God's will to have them so; and the present are not so bad, but
we by our ingratitude deserve to have them worse: If we will not submit to
Solomon's rod, God may send a Rehoboam to chastise us with Scorpions. Know
therefore that this sin does not terminate in the persons or government of our
Princes, but invades the Throne of God; as Moses told the Israelites, your
murmuring is not against us, but against the Lord. Ex. 16.8.
And therefore Solomon strikes a blow at the root of this sin, the ne dicas is
ne dicas cord, admit not a discontented thought: for as where the Serpent gets
in his head, he easily skrews in his whole body, so where the heart is sowred
with a little of this Leaven, it ferments and envenometh the whole man, infects
the neighborhood and troubles the whole Nation. Solomon expounds the ne dicas
in the Text, by ne maledicas, chapter 10.20. for to murmur is secreto maledicere;
and we are not to speak evil of the Rulers of the people ne in Conscientia, not
under a pretense of Conscience; because we must submit for Conscience Sake; we
may not do it in scientia, not speak the evil we know by them. It is not fit to
say to a King Thou art wicked. Job 34.18.
Much less may thou do it in conclavibus among thy Confidents, in private
meetings. It is probably conjectured that Solomon had respect to Jeroboam and
his confederates, 1 Kings. 12.26. Dixit cord, He said in his heart, now shall
the kingdom return to the house of David. He had learnt by Shimei's punishment
not to rail or conspire openly against the King, but contrived secretly; for
though it be said that he lift up his hand against the King, it was not in open
rebellion, for there was no war in Solomon's days; but the phrase signifies,
juramento se obligavit, he and his confederates entered into a Covenant against
the King, the mischievous effects whereof though they were suppressed by the
wisdom of Solomon all his days, yet they brake out in the days of his
Successor, and they complain even of Solomon himself, Thy Father made our yoke
grievous, 1 Kings 12.4. Now therefore make thou the grievous service of thy
father, and his heavy yoke which he put upon us, lighter; And yet we read not
of any contribution except for the building of Gods house, or the necessary
support of his own, to both which the people for the most part offered
willingly. Nevertheless this gracious and peaceable Prince had many enemies who
hated him, as David's enemies did without a cause. 1 Kings. 2.15.
They acknowledged that God as well as his father designed him for the Crown,
and settled it on his head against all opposition, for Adonijah usurped the
kingdom, Abiathar, Joab and Shimei abetted the Usurpation, and were all
defeated. God appearing for Solomon not once or twice for the preservation of
him from such enemies, was a daily miracle. But Jeroboam, Solomon's servant whom
he had preferred and greatly honored, was his most dangerous and implacable
enemy who filled the peoples hearts with fears and jealousies, and their mouths
with complaints of his Government; and very industrious he was to find out some
real cause for his complaints, but finding none, he could only keep the people
alarmed with the seditious Queries in the Text, what is the cause?

This being the Sin forbidden in the Text I shall aggravate it, 1. From the
Causes, 2. From the Effects of it.

1. The Cause in general is the lusts of men. Ex vitio malignitatis humanae
vetera laudantur, praesentia fastidio habentur. Tacitus.
So S. Jude describes Murmurers to be such as walk after their own lusts, ver.
16. For when men are resolved to enjoy their lusts, they will endure no
restraint from God: or man, be their laws never so easy or equal: every one of
them has the mind of an Emperor, to live above the Laws themselves, and to
make their will a Law to others. And hence it is that they would heap up
Governors to themselves as they heap up Teachers, or rather usurp both those
Offices to themselves, that it might be with them as when there was no King in
Israel, every one might do what seems good in his own eyes. S. Jude v. 16.
calls them (...), complainers of their present condition, as too narrow and
uneasy for their great Souls, which they think fit and able Intelligences to
inform the highest orbs of Magistracy and Ministry.

2. Aristotle says it proceeds from self-love, and a fond conceit of our own
parts and merits, for no man thinks too highly of himself but he thinks too
meanly of others. I am not as other men, says the Pharisee, nor as this
Publican. Some respect such a person is content to allow the Worthies of former
ages, who are removed out of his his way, and cannot rival him in his designs.
Sed nisi quae terris semota suisque
Temporibus defuncta videt, fastidit and odit.
If virtue it self were incarnate among such, they would look on her with an
evil eye. The Pharisees seemed much affected with the Sufferings of the ancient
Prophets, when at the same time they persecuted the Son of God by whom they
were all inspired. So the Poetasters in Virgils age, publicly read the harsh
Poems of Ennius, despising him whom all ages since have deservedly admired. And
on this account Jeroboam and the Malcontents in his days magnified themselves
as if they were those Lilies of the field, to one of which Solomon in all his
glory was not to be compared. There is scarce a Potsherd though newly taken
from the earth, though empty and crazy, but if it be not presently gilded over
and made a vessel of honor, is ready to expostulate with the Potter, why have
thou made me thus?

3. This humor proceeds not only from a man's supposed worth, but from his real
weakness. It is impotentia spiritus, the want of power to govern our own
spirits that makes us impatient of the government of others. The shallowest
rivers run with the greatest noise. And in all nature the weakest things are
most querulous and ungovernable. Children will be froward, as well full as
fasting; the weakness of their reason and judgment makes their desires and
passions so extravagant and impetuous. The Olive and the Vine can content
themselves with their own fatness, and the good man is satisfied from himself.
As Cincinnatus and the worthies of old Rome, who could command as Generals in
the Camp, and advise as Oracles in the Senate; and when their Country was
safe, return again to their little Cottages and the Plough. It is the spiny
bramble that is always aspiring and in perpetual motion until it kindle a fire
to consume it self and the Cedars in Lebanon, Judges 9.15.

4. Another ingredient is guiltiness, which always makes men jealous and
suspicious, especially of such as are in Authority. And as guilt causes fear,
so fear produces hatred of those whom they have offended (i.e.) the
Legislators, whom not being able to oppose by force, they seek to undermine by
fraud and secret practices: As some malefactors that are pursued join
themselves to the pursuers, and by false suggestions and subtle insinuations
raise suspicion on others to clear themselves. The most guilty are most
clamorous and complain first, and feign themselves most diligent against the
evils of the times, which they themselves have caused and continued. What is
the Cause, say they, of the present troubles? when they and their fathers house
are those that trouble our Israel. Which brings us to a second Aggravation of
this Sin:

2. The mischievous Effects of it; for 1. as S. Paul tells us, 2 Timothy 3.1. when
men are lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, disobedient to
parents, unthankful, etc. then perilous times shall come. Nothing does more
portend the displeasure of God against a Nation, than when he permits popular
clamours and tumults to invade the public authority, and the contumacy of
those that break the laws, to outbrave the courage of those that should execute
them.

2. St. Paul tells us of another effect, Phil. 2.14. where he joins murmurings
and disputings. Such men are ever more ready to censure and control than to
obey the laws of their Superiors. They are starting of scruples and queries
not so much to satisfy themselves, being resolved never to be satisfied, as to
distract others: And as Pliny observes of the Scorpion, that he does (meditari
vulnera) dart forth his sting on every motion of his body, lest any occasion of
doing mischief should be omitted; Et si non aliqua nocuisset mortuus esset: In
all companies, upon every occasion some men show their discontent by sour
looks and sullen behaviors, their envyous grudgings and vindictive groans.
Their Fasting when they should feast, and rejoicing when they should mourn,
Condemning the Laws which they should obey, do manifest that the spirit by
which they live and breath is a spirit of Contradiction. "The rude people (says
the Royal Martyr in his chapter of Tumults) are taught first to Petition, then to
Protest, then to Dictate, then to Command. This was the method used in 43, as
it is left on record in the Preface to the Covenant. -- "After other means of
Supplications, Remonstrances, Protestations, etc. Now at last we enter into a
Solemn League and Covenant. And by this method the late Tumults in Scotland
commenced into a Rebellion. They sow the Seeds of Sedition in private meetings,
thence issue Petitions, Remonstrances, and at last the Conventiclers appear in
armed companies and declare for the Covenant against the Oath of Supremacy, and
the Kings usurped power in Ecclesiastical affairs, and condemn the observation
of the 29th of May as Superstitious. And too many in England were on Tiptoe to
have danced after this Scotch Pipe. And so we come,

3. To the last effect of these murmurings, which Moses has observed, numb.
17.10. where he expressly calls them Rebels. And we all know that murmurings
were those winds which blew up and scattered those coals of jealousy which
kept the whole Nation in a flame twenty years together, and now threaten a new
Conflagration. For as the Learned Verulam observes, there is only this
difference between seditious murmurings and seditious tumults, that the one is
the Brother and the other the Sister; Tumults and Seditions are more masculine,
but Murmurings as malicious. Which the Ancients have ingeniously described in
the Fable of the Giants which the earth brought forth, who for warring against
the gods were smitten with Thunderbolts, and to revenge their death, the Earth
labored again, and brought forth Fame. The Moral is this: The Common people
are that Earth who opposing their Governors were subdued by force of Arms; but
to be avenged of them they brought forth Fame, (i.e.) Seditious reports and
slanders, which had such secret motions and subtle evasions that the gods
themselves (i.e.) their Governors could not silence them. Which is the third
thing proposed, the subtle pretenses by which this lust insinuates it self,
what is the cause, etc.

As if they had said: The present times are much degenerated from the former,
and are still growing worse. Atheisin is increased and Godliness discouraged,
vile persons are exalted and such as are truly honorable despised, and there
are few or none that are valiant for the truth, or show their zeal for the Lord
of Hosts. In former times men were more active for Reformation of abuses both
in Church and State, there wanted not some that would tell King David his
faults to his face, and accuse him for a man of blood; and if he seemed not to
hear the Curses of Shimei, there was a Sheba to blow a Trumpet and proclaim,
Every man to his tents, O Israel. 1 Kings 12.16.
Nay there was an Achitophel whose Counsel was esteemed as an Oracle of God,
that prevailed with Absalom to undertake to redress the Grievances of the
people, 2 Samuel 16.15.
and these made their party strong enough to drive the King out of all his
strong holds, and chase him not only from one mountain to another, but from one
Kingdom to another, and at last to bind the King himself in chains, and his
Nobles in fetters of Iron. And this honor had those ancient Saints.

And as for Church Reformation we have the Examples of those Godly zealots that
publicly protested against those Superstitious vanities and heathenish customs
which David would have joined to the Worship of God, such as his bowing and
dancing before the Ark, his appointing several Orders of Priests and Levites
with Vocal and Instrumenral music for the Service of the Temple, who were to
praise God with the Psaltery and Harp, and to stand every morning and evening
to praise God, for his mercy endures for every, 1 Chronicles. 23.30. 1 Kings 12.28.
And as for the costly ornaments, the vessels of Gold and Silver, the Painted
and Carved works, there were those that brake them down with Axes and Hammers,
and took to themselves the Houses of God in possession, yea they propagated a
more simple and purer Worship, such as that of Jeroboam who brought their
houshold-gods to their doors, and set up Calves at Dan and Bethel, making
Priests of the meanest of the people, who were contented with the free will
Offerings of their Brethren.

But now though this liberty of Conscience be denied us, and King Solomon has
established by a Law all that David intended; though he have built and
beautified the Temple, and obliges us to that public place of Worship, and
enjoins us to Worship and fall down and kneel as if God were there present: Ps.
95.6.
Though he requires an Uniformity to all those Forms of Prayer and Thanksgiving
which were composed by David and Asaph, 2 Chronicles. 29.30. and to join with the
Levites which were the Singers, being arrayed in white linen, having Cymbals,
Psalteries and Harps, to make one sound in Praising and Thanking the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 5.12. Yea though Solomon do stint the Spirit of prayer in Gods
Ministers, and forbids them to be rash with their mouths, Eccles. 5.2.
and to let their tongues be hasty to utter any thing before the Lord, as if
our extemporary prayers were the Sacrifices of fools: yet may we not complain
or so much as Petition against these grievous impositions. Nay what is yet
worse, we are required to renounce the Vow at Hebron, and the Solemn League
which Jeroboam and his godly party took with hands lifted up to heaven, and
instead of the Vow to God, we are told we must keep the Kings command and that
in regard of the oath of God, chapter 8.2. And we must also declare that against
the King there is no rising up, Pro. 30.3.
upon any pretense whatsoever, nor against such as are commissioned by him; but
if the spirit of subordinate Rulers rise up against us, we may not go out of
our places, Eccl. 10.4.
nor stir beyond our private callings and capacities, but fear God and the
King, and not meddle with them that are given to change, Pro. 24.21
though it be for a through Reformation. And in a word, Solomon would put such a
gag in our mouths that we may not so much as demand, What is the cause that the
former days were better than these?

But I have saved these men the labor in summing up all the Causes of the
pretended evils of their-times; and how frivolous they are, appears evidently
by this, that David appointed nothing for the public Worship of God but what
he graciously accepted. And all that Solomon enjoined was immediately directed
by the Spirit of God, and stands recorded in the Holy Scriptures as general
rules to be observed in the public Worship of God to all succeeding ages.

Solomon well knew that the evils in his days were caused by the Complaints of
those malicious men who were enemies to his Fathers Government as well as his
own, that they intended to bring his Person and Government into contempt, and
minded not the redress of public grievances as much as of their private
fortunes: and if the times were evil, they took a direct course to make them
worse, by endeavoring to overthrow all those Constitutions which both Solomon
and his father David had well established. He knew that if these Malcontents
were permitted to sow these seeds of Rebellion, they would like the Dragons
teeth sowed by Gadmus spring up into Armed men that would destroy their
Brethren.

God forbid that we should be insensible of our own sins, or of the tokens of
Gods wrath that are upon us. That our Religion should be as Sion of old whom no
man cared for, or that we should suffer our selves to be led into Captivity as
we were brought out of it, as men in a dream. It is our Interest as well as our
duty to mourn for other men's sins as well as our own, but we should do that in
secret, and take heed that under a pretense of reproving their sins we do not
pour out reproach on their persons and government, and by such art so spread
abroad their infirmities as to make a cloak for our own iniquities. We may also
be instrumental in a reformation, but we should begin it at the right end, our
own wicked hearts and lives, and not at the Heads of our Superiors; to complain
that the days are evil, with a design by such complaints to make them worse; to
search after remote and secret causes, and overlook those that are so near and
obvious in our own bosoms, and with the Harlot in Solomon having overlayed her
own child to accuse a tender mother, 1 Kings 3.20.
and seek to deprive her of her living child, is a subtle design, but such as
could not stand the Test of Solomon; and a greater than Solomon will judge such
men.

It was observed by the Royal Martyr, that whoever intended to bring forth
confusion in a Church or State, have used the Midwifry of complaints and
tumults. By this Artifice Absalom stole the hearts of the people from his
Father David, See thy cause is right, but there is no man deputed of the King
to do thee justice, 2 Samuel 13.3. when the design was, O that I were judge in
Israel. And to facilitate his design he remembers his Vow at Hebron, that
under pretense of Piety to God he might strengthen his party and the more
impunely cast off his obedience to his Father. By the like art Jeroboam had
stolen the hearts of Solomon's Subjects, and made a great part of Israel to sin
with him. For though the foundations of Solomon's Government were such as might
have made all Israel as firm as Mount Sion which could not be moved, though in
his days there was a confluence of all those blessings whereof one or two might
have made another Nation happy; yet by their whining murmurings and restless
complaints of heavy yoaks, and approaching Idolatry, of the heinous sins and
imminent dangers of the Nation, they did (tantum non) fail but a little of
subverting the whole frame of the best established Government in the world.

But Solomon had a jealous ear which heard all these things, and was assisted
with more than humane prudence and power to suppress them. He crusheth this
Cockatrice in the Egg, and discovers the folly and impiety of it. Thou do not
inquire wisely, etc. which brings us to the last part of the Text, non ex
sapientia. Witty men there might be among such (ingeniosi in malum publicum)
but they were neither wise nor good men in the sense of Solomon. For whether by
wisdom we understand moral prudence, or (as most Expositors) true piety and the
fear of God, they who thus causlesly murmured against the King had neither,
they acted both against Reason and Religion.

First against Reason. For what is more irrational than solicitously to enquire
after the causes of those things that are not? They might as well ask why the
Sun had lost its light, or the foundations of the earth were removed, which
were as true as that the former days were better than those of Solomon; which
will appear by a short view of the Church and State of Israel in the days of
Solomon. For 1. In riches and wisdom Solomon exceeded all the Kings of the
earth that were before him, 1 Kings 10.27. The Vessels and Utensils of Gods
House as well as the Kings were of beaten Gold, for Gold was as common as
silver, and silver as the stones in the streets of Jerusalem, 1 Kings 9.28. And
his Royal Navy commanded the Trade of the world, and kept his Exchequer always
full and running over, bringing home 666 Talents of Gold at a time, besides the
rich merchandise from Tire and Egypt. There was also a general peace to enjoy
this great plenty, for Solomon was in this a Type of Christ, there was neither
adversary nor evil occurrence, 1 Kings 4. but all Judah and Israel which made a
prey of each other in the days of David, were united and dwelt safely every man
under his own Vine, and under his own fig tree from Dan to Beersheba, there was
a general and perpetual peace all the days of Solomon, ver. 25. Which peace
was the more admirable because that though Adonijah had usurped the Kingdom and
strengthened himself by the heads of diverse factions, Joab among the soldiers,
and Abiathar among the Priests, and Shimei chief of the Benjamites; yet was he
settled on his Fathers Throne without shedding of blood or any opposition. His
League also with Hiram deserves a remark, being a friend to the True Religion,
and the most potent and skilful in Sea-affairs. But what is especially to be
noted is, that all these blessings were confirmed to him by a promise from God
for his father David's sake. 1 Kings 11.12.


2. His clemency did adorn his peace, for he pardoned such offenders as could
obtain pardon from themselves: Adonijah that had usurped the Kingdom, and Joab
that had barbarously slain Abner and Amasa Captains of his Fathers Host, and
Abiathar a revolted Priest that had strengthened the hands of the Usurper, and
Shimei also who having got the upper ground of David spit his venom in his
Royal face, reviling him (maledictione forti) with all the virulence he could,
2 Samuel 16.7.

Yet 3. His clemency was seasoned with justice which was inflicted on
incorrigible offenders without respect of persons, high and low, natives and
strangers, particularly on Shimei for that horrid fact on the person of his
father whom he commanded to be slain by the hand of Benaiah, and the kingdom
was thereby established in the hand of Solomon.

4. His Maxims of Government were of infallible and eternal verity, such as
these: Mercy and truth preserve the King, and by righteousness shall his throne
be established. Pro. 20.28
It is the honor of a King to search out a matter. Pro. 25.2.
In the multitude of Counselors there is peace: But where no counsel is, the
people fall. 11.14.
Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a reproach to any people, Pro.
14.34.

And his men were suited to his Maxims, men of gravity and experience, of
prudence, piety and moderation, such as would have secured the Crown to
Rehoboam, had he not rejected them and inclined to greener heads that were
brought up with him. All these blessings he dispensed with great wisdom, having
a heart as capacious as the sand on the Seashore. Which wisdom he acquired
partly by giving his heart to it, but it was perfected by the gift of God. This
made his face to shine so as he attracted the admiration of all the Kings of
the Earth, and the Queen of the South came from far to be an Ear witness of it,
and envyed the happiness of his Subjects. This wisdom he demonstrated to be
better than strength by suppressing strife and contention in the first rise of
it. He carefully observed all the motions of the people, and neglected not in
times of peace to make provision for war. He had many fortified Cities, and
40000 stalls for the horses of his Chariots, and 40000 horse, and his people
were as the sand as for number. Notwithstanding all this preparation of
Chariots and horses Solomon knew that Salvation was of the Lord. And that he
might obtain the Lord of hosts to fight for him, he established the public
Worship of God throughout all his Dominions. This made the Crown on Solomon's
head more splendid than that wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his
Espousals. How could he strengthen himself more than by making the building of
Gods house the foundation of his own? Now whereas the Ark of God in the days of
David was in a wandering condition, sometime drawn with Oxen and sometime with
Kine, Solomon built it a house, and directed the use of that house to be a
house of Prayer, which God so graciously accepted that he promised, 2 Chronicles.
7.14,15. That his eyes should be open and his ears attent unto the prayers that
were made in that place. How irrational was it then for any to complain that
the former days were better than these? A King thus settled on his Throne might
scatter away all evil with his eye, and turn their low murmurings into loud
Acclamations: but what shall we say? the warm Sun breeds these Vipers and
animates them as well as the fire of Contention. These murmurings abounded not
only in the wilderness, but in Canaan, a land that flowed with milk and honey,
which they turned to gall and bitterness by their discontent; they despised
that holy land. Yea this sin prevailed against our first Parents in Paradise,
and tempted them by forbidden means to aspire to greater happiness and more
knowledge than God thought fit for them, and thereby turned Paradise it self
into a Wilderness. Yea this restless lust mounted up into heaven, and made some
of the Angels of God Apostates and Devils. And no wonder then that it
possesses those who only by a flash of zeal transform themselves into Angels
of light, and makes them act as incarnate Devils. It was a greater wonder how
Solomon could shake off these Vipers that so fastened on his hands, and charmed
them so as they could not hurt him. For no sooner was Solomon removed but they
spit their venom in the face of Rehoboam his Son, though for three years
together he walked in the ways of David and Solomon; but Jeroboam in the head
of a Covenanted party upbraids the Son with the tyranny of his Father, 1 Kings
12.4. Thy father made our yoke grievous, and would impose conditions on him,
make thou our yoke lighter and we will serve thee, otherwise they were ready to
serve him as they served his father David; for because he did not presently
gratify them, they second their bold remonstrance with open defiance, v. 16.
What portion have we in David, etc. And why in David? but to show that they
hated him the more for his sake for whom God loved him, even his father David.

2. Such complaints are irrational because by them men create troubles to
themselves and others. Their indiscreet fears and precipitate actions betray
them to those dangers they seek to avoid, as children in a boat which they
fancy ready to sink, on one side, fly all to the other and overturn it on
themselves, (...), it is not so much the things we fear or suffer as our false
opinions of them, whereby we torment our selves before our time, yea too many
vex and disquiet themselves for those things for which they should rather
rejoice and be thankful. Thus was Cain troubled that his brothers sacrifice was
better accepted. And Joseph's brethren repined at his preferment. We call evil
good and good evil; and as children cry and grudge, if we be denied those
things which would prove our ruin.

It is our duty therefore to rectify our opinions concerning the true worth
and usefulness of things according to the word of God and right reason, and
think that best which God sees to be fittest for us; and when he gives us
bread, not to turn it into gravel and stones by our discontent.

3. It is irrational, because by a causless reflection on former, or jealousy
of future times, we deprive our selves of present blessings, and catching at
shadows lose the substance. Therefore Solomon often commends a cheerful
enjoyment of the fruit of our labors, and the portion God has given us,
Eccles. 9.7. Eat thy bread with cheerfulness, and drink thy wine with a merry
heart, for God now accepts thy works. And our Savior forbids us to be
solicitous for what is to come, as Solomon does for what is past, Matthew. 6.34.
And the Apostle advises us to be content with such things as we have, and so
does the Philosopher, (...) to accommode our selves to our present condition,
and if our estates will not stretch to our-minds, to stoop our minds to our
estates. Dona praesentis cape laetus horae, linque futura.

4. It is irrational, because if our condition be bad, this is a certain mean
to make it worse. It is like the casting out Devils by Peelzebub, a conjuring
up such evil spirits as we have not power to confine or put down again. When
men grow weary of the long continued mercies of God, and loath Manna, it is
just with God while the meat is yet in our mouths, to pour his wrath upon our
heads, and teach us to know the worth of his blessings by the want of them. God
has exemplarily punished unthankful murmurers with extraordinary judgments,
that all may hear and fear and do no more so wickedly. The murmuring Israelites
that brought up an evil report upon the land, dyed by the plague before the
Lord, Numb. 14.37. Others of them perished by the destroyer, 1 Cor. 10.10. And
those in Numb. 11.18. who having Manna enough to eat, murmured and wept in the
ears of the Lord, saying, Who shall give us flesh to eat? for it was well with
us in Egypt. The Lord gave them flesh to eat till it came forth at their
nostrils, v. 20. because they despised the Lord that was among them, and wept
before him saying, Why came we out of Egypt? And for the punishment of Corah,
and such as murmured against Moses and Aaron, the Lord created a new judgment,
for the earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up. Numb. 16.32.
And that people were not purged from that sin till they were utterly
destroyed, as it was threatened, Deuteronomy. 28.47,48. Because thou servedst not the
Lord thy God with joyfulness and gladness of heart for the abundance of all
things: therefore thou shall serve thy enemies which the Lord shall send
against thee, in hunger and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all
things, and he shall put a yoke of iron on thy neck until he have destroyed
thee.

5. It is irrational, because they complain first and most who have least
reason. Many a good man who in David's days had suffered the loss of all, and
came off only with their lives and some marks of their Loyalty in their bodies
and estates, were abundantly satisfied to see the King returned in Peace, and
the Ark of God settled in the beauty of holiness, could say with Mephibosheth,
Let them take all for as much as my Lord the King is come to his house in
peace, 2 Samuel 19.30.
and were found faithful and peaceable in the Land. They were the murmurers who
as Ziba, Saul's servant, had made themselves great with the spoils of the Crown
and Church lands, but were made to refund a part of it. Though they still
enjoyed not only the public blessings of peace and plenty, and a rich trade,
and were received not only to mercy but into favor, and did partake of the
Wealthy and Honorable Offices of the Nation, equally, if not beyond those that
had better deserved them, did yet think themselves not duly rewarded, (as in
truth they were not) and on all occasions reproached the footsteps of Gods
anointed, and did not only turn their backs on the Ordinances of the King, but
lift up their heels against the Ordinances of God also.

6. It is unreasonable to murmur and repine at those things in others which
they practiced and allowed in themselves. They complained that Solomon
chastised them with Rods, when they wounded him with Scorpions. They accused
him for endeavoring to rule by an Arbitrary power, though he governed himself
according to the known Laws of God and the Nation, and often relaxed the
severity and suspended the execution of them, while they lived in a bold
contempt and violation of them all. Great cries were raised against the Oath of
God, and the King, and against Uniformity to the Temple Worship; when they
thought they were all engaged by Jeroboams Covenant, to bring all within the
Kings Dominions to an Uniformity according to his Directory for Worship. A
Toleration was thought intolerable, when Jeroboam had set up his Calves, and he
himself burnt Incense and made Priests of the lowest of the people, lest the
Kingdom should return to the house of David (for the true worship of God would
reduce them to obedience to their lawful King.) 1 Kings 12.26.
2 Kings 12.28.
But under the Temple service a Toleration is pleaded for as necessary for the
ease and liberty of the people, and if it be denied, they complain of Tyranny
and Persecution, when by this means Jeroboam and a few dissenters under him
deluded the people, and making them believe that he and his Calves were the
Gods that brought them out of Fgypt, ver. 28.
led them directly thither, and betrayed them to that abominable Idolatry. So
that in truth the Indulgence which was granted them did produce more mischief
than all the punishments inflicted by Solomon, which they causlesly called
persecution. Wherefore thou art inexcusable O man whoever thou art that
judge, for wherein thou judge another thou condemnest thy self, seeing thou
do the same (or worse) things: And (though thou escape the judgment of man,
yet) think not that thou shall escape the judgment of God, Romans 2.1, and 3.

7. What is more unreasonable than for men to take occasion to grow more
troublesome from those things which should quiet them as discontented spirits
are wont to do? Let favor be showed to the wicked, and he is the more bold and
presumptuous. They turn the grace of God and the King too into wantonness.
Every indulgence (as to froward children) makes them more pettish and insolent,
every concession and yielding is used as a step for them to ascend higher and
press forward until they get uppermost. The craving humor increases by being
fed, and with Solomon's horse-leech thy cry Give, Give, though they have
swallowed so much that they are ready to burst. Never was any thing in the
world so well established, but there were some envious men that found fault
with it.

Lastly, It is irrational, because it is an incurable evil. It is opprobrium
medicorum, such a plague of the heart as the best State Physicians have not
been able to cure. It will not admit a plaster or a medicine to be applied to
it. This evil spirit though it be not dumb, yet is it so deaf, that it will not
hear the voice of any Charmer though he charm never so wisely. Neither the
mercies nor judgments of God, nor the meekness nor miracles of Moses could
convince the murmuring Israelites. And when some of them saw Corah and his
company swallowed up of the earth, yet as if there had been a transmigration of
their Souls into their Survivors, the next morning they murmur again, saying,
Ye have slain the people of the Lord. The worst sort of Spirits that we read
of, might be cast out by Prayer and Fasting; but this kind can fast and pray,
and seemingly reform and sweep and garnish the house, and then admit seven
worse than it self, and at the end is worse than in the beginning. The
Scripture compares this murmuring and rebellious spirit to the sin of
Witchcraft which is seldom reclaimed to a pious or sober temper, for like men
in a Consumption they seem pleased with the disease, and as Jonah they think
they do well to be angry with God himself, which is the next particular, it is
not only irrational but irreligious.

First, because these men make lies their refuge, and seek to hide their sin
under false pretenses; for it were easy to prove, that no times before Solomon
were so prosperous as his. Though David his Father was a man after Gods own
heart, yet neither he nor the Ark of God could find a resting place. It was yet
worse in the days of Saul, between whom and the house of David there was
continual war; and before that in the days of Samuel when God himself was their
King, we find that they rejected not Samuel only, but God himself. And in the
times of Anarchy when there was no King in Israel, there was no peace to him
that went out, or to him that came in, but every man did what seemed good in
his own eyes. Before this how long did God bear with the murmuring Israelites,
not in the wilderness only under Moses the meekest man upon Earth, and Aaron
the Saint of the Lord, but in Canaan against God himself. And from the
beginning Cain slew Abel, and so it will be to the end of the world. So that it
was a false pretense that the former days were better than Solomon's.

2. It was irreligious, because Religion teaches us with all thankfulness to
acknowledge the blessings of God and to say with Jacob, I am less than the
least of all thy mercies, and not to undervalue them, and expostulate with God
why am I thus? and what is the cause? as if the Almighty had not rewarded us
according to our deserts, or ought to do nothing but what our reason approves
of. They ought to have considered how happy they might have been under such a
King, the Son of such a Father, upon whom God had set such Signatures of his
own wisdom, Clemency and justice, whom God made his Jedidiah from his birth,
and appeared more than once or twice in many wonderful deliverances of him
against the Conspiracies of Jeroboam, the discontents of Joab, Abiathar and
Shimei who went to Gath to confer with fugitives and imbroil the kingdom again.
If we read of Solomon's faults we read of his repentance also, this Book of
Eccles. being a record of his Penitentials. So that indeed the greatest cause
of Evil in his later days was the libertinism of some who like sons of Belial
would endure no yoke nor were satisfied till they had got an Indulgence, and
were more unsatisfied after they had it. How much better had it been for them
while the true Religion and public peace were in safety, to have been humble
and thankful to God and the King, to reform their own iniquities and to mourn
in secret for the Vanities of the Court?

3. If Solomon's days had been as bad as the sins of these men deserved, yet
were it a point of piety to submit to the mighty hand of God and bear his
indignation. This was Solomon's prescript approved by God himself, 2 Chronicles.
6.24, etc. If the people flee before their enemies, if there be famine or
pestilence. What is to be done? surely not as they did in the Prophet, Jer.
8.20. who did fret themselves and curse God and the King, and look upward, as
if they would be revenged on all that were above them, but every man should
search out the plague of his own heart and repent, and make his supplication in
Gods house saying, I have sinned and done perversely, and committed iniquity,
and then God promised to hear their prayers, to forgive their sins and heal
their land. Thus did King David in his distress, he saw the hand of God in it,
and opened not his mouth because it was the Lords doing; Ps. 9.39.
and with this God quieted the men of Judah and Benjamin in the case of
Jeroboam: This thing is from me. 1 Kings 12.24.
And though they did not think so of King Solomon, yet they ought to think that
God was wise enough to dispose of all things for the good of his Church and
people.

God and his Vicegerents have their Arcana imperii not to be rashly censured or
curiously inquired into. We should do our duty and leave the conduct of public
affairs to God whose Providence overrules all, and it is much better that
things should be as God would have them than as we would, for he acts all
toward wise and gracious ends, to which though humane actions like the lower
Spheres have a contrary tendency of their own, yet the first mover makes them
all tend to his decrees who brings order out of Confusion, and all whose ways
are mercy and truth to them that keep his Covenant. Non est judicandum de
operibus Dei ante quintum actum, we are short-sighted and cannot see to the end
of Gods works which are begun in secret, and sometime carried on by contrary
means, by weak and diverse agents, but he knows how to bring light out of
darkness and harmonyout of discord, and all his providence shall end in
Holiness and beauty too. This is that which Solomon observed, Eccles. 3.11. God
has made every thing beautiful in its season, when it comes to its perfection.
Some may think there is no necessity of Thunder and Lightning, Storms and
Tempests, Frosts and Cold, yet these contribute to the cleansing of the Air,
the health of our bodies and the fruitfulness of the year, as much as calm and
Sunshine days. In checker-work the variety of black and white adds to the
beauty; and some works of Providence like the China vessels, are wrought and
perfected in the bowels of the earth and require an age for their Perfection,
but then they come forth so transparent that every one that considers them may
say, This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

4. It is irreligious, as being the ready way to destroy Religion, and if that
be ruined, we may write Ichabod on all things else. And this is not more easily
destroyed than by our murmurings and contentions about it; this Dove cannot
fall but by a dart feathered from her own wing. The little Foxes within that
undermine the Hedge of Discipline, make way for the wild Boar to break in and
root up our pleasant Vines. It Is our crumbling into little factions under
pretense of Religion, that exposes us to the enemies of it. If the dangers we
fear could but make us unite, our Union would make us safe against all the
attempts of our common adversaries.

5. It is a tempting and provoking of God in a high degree to complain of those
evils, whose causes and remedies are in our own power. But while we complain of
them with our lips, we draw them down with both our hands. This is to do as the
Jews who cried out Venient Romani, while they were Crucifying the Prince of
Peace, and so made way for those Roman Armies that brought a perpetual
desolation on them. If we only make an outcry against Popery, and instead of
making up the breaches still enlarge them by quarrelling with such as are more
ready and skilful to do it than our selves, that Roman Eagle may make a prey of
us all. But if, as God has founded us upon a rock, and compassed us about with
his Salvation as with Walls and Bulworks, we would be as Jerusalem, a people at
unity among our selves; if as St. Paul advises, we would do our duties to God
and the King without murmurings and disputings, those proud Waves that oppose
themselves would be dashed in pieces as hitherto they have been, and neither the
gates of Rome nor of Hell prevail against us.

Lastly, It is irreligious, because it destroys the whole Analogy of Christian
Faith, it reflects on Gods Providence, as if he wanted Wisdom or Goodness to
Govern the world, and sets their mouths against Heaven, as that proud Alfonsus
who said of the Creation, that if he had been present he could have disposed of
things in a better method. It undermines the foundation of all Government in
Church and State and Families, if Inferiors should be allowed to question the
Commands and Actions of their Superiors; it makes those Christian graces of
meekness, patience and obedience, which are enjoined toward evil Governors,
impossible. It robs the Soul of that tranquillity and peace which it might have
by resigning it self to God in well-doing. The spirit of grace and peace will
not enter into a discontented spirit. God was not in the earthquake or the
whirlwind, but in the still voice, 1 Kings 19.11.
in the sedate and cheerful Soul. And therefore Moses calls the murmuring
Israelites, sinners against their own Souls, ( i.e. against their peace and
comforts of their life.) Numb. 36.38.
The Serpent will devour the Dove, and these meager thoughts, like Pharaohs
lean kine, eat up better thoughts and affections. To a murmuring Soul wisdom
will not enter. And in a word, it would make the Christian Religion to stink
among the heathen: and therefore thou do not wisely to inquire after such
things.

I have now finished my Discourse on the Text, and if my hearers will but apply
the things spoken of Solomon's Kingdom to our own, as every ordinary capacity
may do, there needs no other Application. I shall end therefore as I begun, Ne
dicas, Say not thou a confederacy to them that say a confederacy to thee, be
not allured by their promises, nor affrighted by their threats, for their feet
are swift to shed blood, destruction and misery are in their ways, the way of
peace they have not known, and there is no fear of God before their eyes. Learn
we of the men of Isachar in David's days, who had under standing of the times,
to know what Israel ought to do. 1 Chronicles. 12.32.
Penes vos. est rcrum Arbitrium, nobis relicta est obsequii Gloria,
Fear God and Honor the King, and meddle not with them that are given to
change: but leave the Administration of public affairs, and the care of
Succession of Crowns and Kingdoms to God and our Superiors, who are more
concerned in them and will provide better for them than we can do. Let us set
bounds to our Passions by Reason, to our Fears and jealousies by Religion, to
our Errors by Truth, to our Schism by Charity and an unanimous consent in the
Worship of God, and to our Murmurings by a cheerful improvement of the
blessings we enjoy: that the voice of the Turtle may be heard in our Land, even
Praises to our God for the wonderful mercies of This day, and for the
continuance of them, Prayers for our King in the words of Solomon's Subjects, 1
Kings 8.66. The Lord make the name of Solomon better than the name of David,
and his Throne greater than the throne of David; and they went to their tents
joyful and glad of heart for all the goodness that God had done for Solomon his
servant, and for Israel his people, Amen.

THE END.

