A SPEECH Made by The Lord Lowden To the LORDS in the upper House of PARLIAMENT
in Scotland, the 20 of September. Anno 1641. Concerning, The Restoration of the
Electoriall Family.

compass rose W

E

S



London Printed 1641.

A SPEECH Made by The Lord Lovvden.
My Lords,
THe great difference between the two Kingdoms England and Scotland, through
the great Mercies of God being now appeased, and an act of oblivion past of all
bygone deeds since the last troubles, we may with cheerfulness and
thankfulness, not only settle all things here at home, which by reason of the
want of the benefit of ordinary Judicature, are now out of order, with all duty
and affection, but likewise to consider of, and assist his Majesty in such
matters and enterprises, as he shall be pleased to propound unto us. Now first
for the difference, give me leave to say somewhat of them; and (indeed) in
speaking somewhat of them, I may hold my peace, and say nothing at all, for the
truth is, there was no difference between the two Kingdoms, there were
troubles, and fears on either side, but consider, it was not through the
default of the two Kingdoms, that were like to have produced such miserable
effects, and calamities, as were threatened, but it was the fault of malignant
men, who by their wicked actions, and improvident Counsels, strived (in what in
them lay) to sow the seeds of discord and dissension betwixt his Royal
Majesty, and his good subjects of both Kingdoms: If then these calamities,
threatened and feared, were by ill instruments wrought and caused, and that now
by the goodness of the Almighty wisdom of his Royal Majesty, and prudent
endeavors of the Honorable Assemblies of both Kingdoms, both the cause and
the causers are removed and averted, what cause is there, or can there be
imagined to be, that either Kingdom or any particular member of either, can be
otherwise then really united in more tender and hearty affection one toward
another then ever they were? For our Kingdom of Scotland, however the great
Impostures of these troubles scattered false rumors and reports both in the
ears of his Majesty, and many of his loyal and good subjects, that we should
aim altogether at our own ends, and that all our pretenses were to insinuate
both into the hearts and estates of the subjects of England, yet I hope it has
now fully appeared to his Majesty, and the Honorable Assembly of that
Kingdom, and all other his loving subjects that will not be wilfully or
maliciously blind, that we sought only our own peace both in Church and State
at home, and not the least prejudice (much less the ruin) of our brethren of
England. For the truth of this I dare boldly say, I may call the Northern
Counties to witness where our Army lay, that they cannot say that our
soldiers used them as enemies, but as friends; and that where such an Army
lay so long time, there was never so little harm done to a Country, and that
little which was done (I hope) satisfaction is or shall be suddenly made. And
I hope none of his Majesty's good Subjects in England, will take it to be any
dishonor in granting us that sum of money the Parliament did toward our great
losses and charges, which have appeared to be more then double the sum granted,
but a friendly demonstration of one Nation to another, we are brethren not
enemies, and by ill instruments were forced both into the field, having no
cause of malice one toward another, let mischief then fall on neither
Nations, but on those instruments; let them be made exemplary, that were the
caufers of such calamities, and great let the honor be to his Majesty, and the
wise prudent assembly of both Kingdoms that have applied themselves to fair
things, and composed the quarrel without shedding of blood, and even from a
state gasping, have restored both Kingdoms to their former unity, peace, and
concord, and disbanded the Armies upon reasonable conditions. Since then there
is such and unity between both Kingdoms, and that the Armies are both united
in true hearty affection one toward another, how considerable may these Armies
make us abroad? If God shall bless us, then certainly those Armies that were
lately ready to offend one another, may show a capabilities with unity of
hearts, and well designed may effect great matters, and may by unity of
counsel raise both Kingdoms to as good estimation, and as great honor in the
world as ever. And how can they be better designed then to restore the
Electorical Families to their former inheritance? can there be a better cause
then the truth of God? can there be a cause wherein we can be more intressed,
then to assist his Royal Majesty's dearest and only Sister, and her royal
issue, to obtain their lawful and rightful Inheritance, out of which they
have been so long time unjustly divested? doubtless there cannot. Now to the
intrest of the cause, let us add his Royal Majesty's proposition, which make
all complete. Let us therefore proceed to the perfecting of so religious so
lawfully, and so laudable a work as this, and no doubt but our brethren of
England will be as forward as we being intressed alike in the cause as we are,
I shall here not unfitly make mention of a homely Story. I have read of an
Emperor in Turkey, that hearing there was civil wars in England, had a design
to taken the advantage of the same, and invaded that Kingdom, but an English
man being in some favor and estimation with the Emperor, and wishing well to
his native Country, caused a cupple of mastiffe Dogs to be set together by the
ears before the Emperor; and as they were fighting, caused a bear to be put
to them, which the Dogs perceiving, left fighting, and fell both upon the
Bear, which the Empetour taking notice of the English man, told him he had
caused that to be done, to show him the condition of his Countrymen, who
though they would fall out among themselves, yet they would take part each with
other against an enemy. And therefore though they were at variance amongst
themselves, yet it would be little advantage to his his intended
undertaking-upon, which the Emperor changed his resolution touching that
design.

If then this were the nature of Englishmen, unto whom we now by the Almighties
Providence are united, under one King, one Nation, and one Island, I doubt not
but the same remains, and that though we were lately ready to offend each
other, yet being now united in more tender and hearty affection one toward
another, then ever we were, we shall hold and maintain such a good
correspondencie amongst our selves, that shall nor only bring both Nations to
a condition of prosperity at home, but make us formidable to our enemies abroad.

FINIS.

