A TREATISE OF THE LOFTINESS OR ELEGANCY OF SPEECH.

Written Originally in Greek by LONGIN; And now Translated out of French by Mr.
J. P.

Praeclarum mihi quiddam videtur adeptus is qui qua re homines bestiis
praestent ea in re hominibus ipsis antecellat.

Cic. de Juven, Rhet. London, Printed by N. T. for John Holford, Bookseller in
the Pall Mall, over against St. Albans-street. 1680.

To William Pulteney Esquire
A Dedication, accorcording to the mode, is nothing but a mere Panegyric; you
must not therefore look for a modish one from me; for, besides that 'twere a
needless, if not almost impossible thing to recount all those Excellency which
Fame has already reported, and which ye^ remain to be said of you^ it is not
consistent with that modesty wherewith we ought to speak of any Relation, lest
while we are transported with his Commendations, we seem implicitly to arrogate
some to our selves. All that I can or do propose to my self in this Epistle, is
to recommend to your protection the following Treatise, which is a Translation
out of French into English, two Languages (if the latter may be properly so
called) wherein you have atain'd so great perfection, by being Educated for
some time at the French Court, and now since at this in England, (which are the
two Fountains from whence the Purity of either Language does naturally flow)
that (laying aside all other Obligations and Motives, which might induce me to
offer this Piece to you) I do not know any one Person, under whose wing I could
better shadow it than yours, whose very Name, if stamped upon the basest
Metal, is sufficient to make it pass for current Coin. I shall say nothing of
that Loftiness of Fancy, Solidness o^ Judgment, Elegancy o^ Speech, or those
other Faculties of the Mind, which are the Subject Matter of this Treatise, and
which I have always observed in you, but leave it to an impartial Judge, and
one who is not biased with that strong and natural Affection, which obliges me
to subscribe my self,

Your, etc. J. P.

THE PREFACE.
A Preface, with those who by Translation, or any other means, do expose an
Author to public view, ought to be like that usual Ceremony, which, when we
are to introduce any one into a strange company, obliges us to give some
account of the Party introduced: Wherefore I thought it convenient to say
something in this place concerning the Author and Original of this following
Treatise; but seeing the French Translator (whom I have all along copied) has
already done it so incomparably well, I need only make use of his words, thus
rendered into English.

This small Treatise (the Translation whereof I have here published) is a
Relick of those most excellent Books which the famous Longin has composed: yet
alas! though but small, it is not come to our hands very complete, but is
deficient in many places; and we have utterly lost that Treatise of the
Passions which our Author had wrote by it self, and which is a natural
continuation of this. However, this piece is not so mangled and defaced, but
that there still remains enough to give us a very great Idea of its Author, and
a true sense of our misfortune in the loss of his other Works, the number
whereof were very considerable; Suidas reckons up Nine, of of all which, there
ts scarce any one thing left but the bare Titles: They were all pieces of
Criticism, and doubtless we cannot sufficiently deplore the loss of those
incomparable Originals, which (to judge of 'em by this one) ought to be looked
upon as so many Patterns of true sense, Learning, and Eloquence; I say of
Eloquence, for that Longin does not, like Aristotle and Hermogenes, lay down
his Precepts in a plain ordinary way, but takes care to avoid that fault which
he found in Cecilius, when he said of him, That he had wrote of Loftiness in a
mean style. He writes of Eloquence with all the Excellencies of Eloquence, many
times, when he teaches us any Figure, he himself uses that Figure which he
teaches, and treating of Loftiness, is himself very Lofty; all which he does
with so much Accurateness and Art, that throughout his whole style there is no
one place, wherein he is not himself an Example to his own Rules. Hence is it,
that this Book has been of so great esteem amongst the Learned, who have always
looked upon it as the best piece of Rhetoric that Antiquity can boast of.
Causabon calls it A Golden Book, intimating thereby how weighty it is, which
notwithstanding it is but of a little bulk, may very well be put in the scale
with the biggest Volume. Nor do I find, but that Longin was accounted one of
the most famous men of his time. Porphyrius the Philosopher, (who had been his
Scholar) speaks of him as of a Prodigy; for (as he tells us) his judgment was
the Probate of true sense, his Verdict was in all Writings a final Decree, and
nothing was bad or good till Longin had either approved or censured it. Nay,
Eunapius goes yet farther, and, to express how much he values Longin, suffers
himself to be carried away with extravagant Hyperboles, thinking it altogether
improper to speak of the extraordinary deserts of so great an Author in a
common and familiar style. Yet after all, Longin was not only a great Critic,
but a considerable Minister of State; and it is a sufficient Encomium for him to
say, That he was in great favor with Zenobia that famous Queen of Palmyra,
who, after the death of her Husband Odenatus, declared her self Queen of the
East She at first made use of him to teach her the Greek Tongue, but soon
preferred him to be one of her principal Ministers; 'twas he that encouraged
her to maintain the Title of Queen of the East, 'twas he that buoyed her up in
all her adversities, and supplied her with those expressions which she made use
of in her Letter to Aurelian the Emperor, when by him she was required to
yield her self up; which very thing was the occasion of our Authors death, a
death as equally glorious to him, as inglorious to Aurelian, and which has
quite eclipsed the brightness of all his former actions. Now then, since the
death of this person is one of the most remarkable passages in the History of
those times, it will not perhaps be amiss to let you see what Flavius Vopiscus
has written thereupon. The Army of Zenobia and the Confederater (says he) being
routed near the Town of Emaus, Aurelian laid Siege to Palmyra, a City to which
this Princess was fled, but finding a stronger resistance than he looked for,
or could possibly be expected from a Woman, and being almost tired out with the
Siege, he endeavored to win it by Capitulation, and in order thereunto wrote a
Letter to Zenobia, wherein he offered to save her life, and allow her a place
of retirement, provided she would surrender her self within a certain time.
Zenobia (says Vopiscus) answered this Letter with a greater haughtiness, than
was consistent with the juncture of her present affairs, whereby she thought to
frighten Aurelian. This was her answer.

Zenobia Queen of the East, to the Emperor Aurelian. No one ever made so
insolent a demand as thou. Know, Aurelian, that it is valor does all in War.
Thou command me to yield my self up, as if you had forgot that Cleopatra
chose rather to die a Queen, than live in any other condition. We expect aid
from the Persians, the Sarasens will take up Arms for us, the Armenians will
succor us. A company of Highway-men in Syria has defeated your Army, think
then what you must necessarily expect when all these Forces are united; then
you will abate of that pride, wherewith, as if you were Master of the Universe,
you command me to surrender.

This Letter (continues Vopiscus) did rather incense than terrify Aurelian;
for some few days after the Town of Palmyra was taken, and with it Zenobia, as
she was flying to the Persians. The whole Army would have had her put to death,
but Aurelian was unwilling to stain his Victory with the blood of a Woman;
therefore he reserved her to grace his Triumph, and put such (...) to the sword
as were of (...) Co^^^^^^ amongst whom (says our Historian) was Longin the
Philosopher, who taught the Queen Greek, and was adjudged to die for having
indicted the forementioned Letter; for though it was in the Syriack Tongue, yet
was he suspected to be the Author thereof. Zosimus the Historian is of opinion,
that Zenobia her self impeached him. Zenobia (says he) being taken Prisoner,
laid all the blame upon her Ministers, who (says she) taking advantage of the
weakness of my Sex, have been the instruments of that crime with which I am now
charged. Amongst others, she named Longin, whom accordingly Aurelian caused to
be put to death. This Noble Person (says Zosimus) died with so much resolution
and unconcern, that even those who were most grieved for him, were in some
measure comforted. Whereby we may see, that Longin was not only an able
Rhetoritian as Quintilian and Hermogenes, but a Philosopher worthy to be
compared to the Socrates's and Cato's. There is not one thing in all his Book
which does not agree with what I have said, and throughout the whole, we may
read the Character of a brave Person. To conclude therefore, I am of opinion
with the French Translator, (of whom I shall say nothing, he being already
sufficiently known) that those few hours cannot be misspent, which are employed
in the perusal and Translation of a Piece, which (if we are not wholly taken up
with Novels) may be both profitable and delightful to us; but that I leave to
the judicious Reader.

A TREATISE OF THE LOFTINESS OR Elegancy of Speech.
CHAP. I. A Preface to the whole, etc.
YOu are not ignorant (dear Terentianus) that when we read together the small
Treatise of Loftiness, which Cecilius wrote, we found, that the meanness of his
Style did not at all suit with the greatness of his Subject; that he had
omitted the most material Branches thereof; and that, in a word, it was not a
work any ways useful to the Reader, which ought to be the chiefest aim and
endeavors of those who write. Besides, he that will treat of any Art, must
carefully consider two things: the First of which is, so to handle his Subject,
that it be clearly understood. The Second (and, as I take it, the most material
which we now drive at) is, to show, how and by what means the same may be
attained. In the first of these, Cecilius has been extremely careful; for in
many words he tells us what this loftiness is, as if it were a thing altogether
unknown; but is not so kind, as to instruct us what way we must take to acquire
it, that he passes by, yet wherefore, I know not, unless that he look upon it
as useless, and not worth his while. However, to give him his due, this Author
is not so much to be discommended for the faults he has committed, as worthy of
praise for his well-meant design, and the great pains he has taken. Now then,
since your earnest entreaties have prevailed with me to say something upon this
Toppick, I have made a few reasonable observations thereupon, which perhaps may
prove advantageous to many of our Rhetoricians. But upon this condition, that
we shall peruse them together, and that you will freely speak your opinion. For
as a certain Pythagoras.
wise man has very well observed, If there is any thing that can liken us to
the Gods, it is to be courteous, and speak the truth. Lastly, it being to you, a
man of profound Learning and Knowledge, that I direct this Discourse, I shall
not dwell long upon several points, very necessary to be laid down and
understood, before I proceed to the principal matter; nor use many words to
tell you, that Loftiness is the thing which gives a Sovereign perfection to
well-speaking, and that by which, not only Poets, but other Writers of all
Ages have grown famous to Posterity; for it does not so much persuade, as
transport us to a certain admiration and astonishment, which is a clear
different thing from bare pleasing or persuading. It may be said of Persuasion,
that for the most part it has no more power over us, than we our selves will
allow; but it is not so of Loftiness, that gives life and vigor to Speech,
which works irresistably upon the very Souls of those who have it. Nor is any
thing sufficient to the recommendation of a piece, or the setting off the
fineness of the invention, and beauty of the Economy or disposition thereof,
unless there be a just Height and Loftiness, whereby the whole strength and
finews of Oratory are firmly united and contracted together. But all I shall or
can say herein, will be of little use to you, who already know these things by
experience, and are able to be my Instructor.

CHAP. II. If Loftiness be a peculiar Art, etc.
FIrst, let us see whether Loftiness be a peculiar Art; for there are those
that will not allow that it ought to be so reckoned, or that it may be reduced
to a certain method by Rules and Precepts. Loftiness, say they, is not
artificially to be learned, but the only way to have it, is to be born to it.
In this, as in many other things, they will admit of no other Mistress than
Nature her self, confidently and ignorantly affirming, that from the constraint
of Rules, nothing can be expected but weak and barren thoughts. Yet I doubt not
manifestly to prove the contrary. True it is, that Nature never appears more
liberal than in sublime and pathetical Speech; yet not so, as altogether to
exclude Art: I grant, that in all things she is the principal Foundation and
Basis; but certain it is, that we ought to have some method, which may teach us
what may be said, and in what place; and this is that that contributes to a
perfect habit of Loftiness. For as a Ship that is set a drift, and not duly
balanced, is in great danger of perishing; so is it of Loftiness, if it be
suffered to be carried away with the impetuous stream of a rash ignorant
Nature. Our Fancy has oftentimes as much need of a Curb as a Spur. And
Demosthenes tells us, that the greatest good which can befall us in this life,
is to be happy; but that there is yet another, without which, the former cannot
subsist, (viz.) To know how to carry our selves discreetly. The same may be
said of the Elegancy of Speech, Nature is that which must lead the way to it,
but without the conduct of Art, she becomes blind, and leads us astray. Note,
Note, the Author had spoken of a Romantic Style, and to that purpose cited
some fooleries of a Tragic Poet.
These are his thoughts, The torrent of twisted flames, to vomit against
Heaven, to make Borcas his Flutinist. And many more such like expressions is
this piece stuffed with, which are not lofty and great, but extravagantly
Bombastick, and if closely examined, so confounded with vain and intricate
thoughts; that they rather seem troublesome and ridicilous, then Delightful or
Magnificent; if then it be a fault in Tragedy, (which naturally is Lofty and
Great) to be crammed with impertinent Raptures; how much more is it to be
dissalow'd in common Speech; hence is it, that Georgius is censured for calling
Xertes, the Jupiter of the Persians: and Vultures, living Sepulchers. The same
Fate has Calisthenes found, who in many places of his Writings, not observing
a due Pitch has soared quite out of sight. Yet do I not find any one so guilty
of this folly as Clytarcus, Who affects such Haughtiness in all his
expressions, that (so speak in Sophocles's terms) he looks like one who opens
his Mouth wide to breath into a small Pipe: The same may be said of
Amphicartes, Hegesias, and Matris, all so full of Enthusiasme, and Divine
Ecstasy, that when they think to Thunder, they do but make noise, and play the
Fool like little Children; and without doubt in Eloquence, there is nothing so
hard to be avoided, as Excess of Fancy: for while we aim naturally at something
that is extraordinary out of fear of being thought too lowly, for the most part
we are subject to this Error, upon this persuasion that.

The fall is brave, that is in a Noble Cause. But most certain it is, that a
Tumor in any part of the Body is not more dangerous then in Speech; which,
however it appears outwardly, is within a mere Vacuum and Timpany: as it is
observed, that there is no disease so juceless, or that renders the Patient so
thirsty, as the Dropsy. In fine, the fault of a two Haughty Style, is, that it
transgresses the very bounds of greatness; contrary to this, is a Childish and
Foolish Style, than which nothing can be more averse to the delicacy and
grandeur of Speech. Let us then see what it is, and we shall find, it is nothing
but a School-boyes thought, which by a too nice examination becomes cold and
insipid. This is the fault of those, who striving to say something extremely
fine, and affecting altogether Tropes and Figures, produce nothing but dull
affectation. There is another Enemy to true Elocution, which relates to the
patheticall part; Theodorus calls it, an unseasonable Madness; when one rages
too high where he ought to be calm, or grows too hot, where he should be but
lukewarm; so that some men drunk with this fury, do not express themselves with
a becoming Air, but fall into the extravagant Fit, of a declaiming Schoolboy;
and thereby become insupportably odious to their audience; which necesarily
must happen, when they rise where they should fall, and fall where they ought
to rise, but of this in annother place.

CHAP. III. Of a Faint Style.
OF this faint childish style, whereof we have just before spoken, Timeus is
very full; not but that here and there he has a touch of greatness; and to say
truth, his fancy is good, and well enough expressed. yet is he naturally inclined
to censure other men's faults, tho blinded with his own; and so curious in
searching after new unheard of thoughts, that he cannot in the end avoid this
Childishness. To this purpose I shall quote only two or three examples; seeing
Cecilius has already afforded us so many in his commendation of Alexander the
great, he has (says he) Conquered Asia in less time, then Isocrates spent in
Writing his Panegyric. Here is an excellent comparison of Alexander the great
with a Rhetorician, by the same reason (if I mistake not good Timeus) should
the Lacedaemonians yield to Isocrates; seeing they spenth thirty years in
beseiging Messina, whereas he composed his Panegyric in ten. Again, when
several Athenians were taken Prisoners in Scicilie, what think you was the
exclamation he made, you shall hear. It is (said he) a punishment from Heaven
by reason of their Impiety toward the God Hermes, Hermes in Greek Sngnifies
Mercury.
otherwise called Mercury, in Demollishing his statues; and the rather for that
one of the chief Officers in the Enemies Army was called Hermocrates the Son of
Hermes says Terrentianus. I wonder why he did not as well say, that the Gods
permitted Dionysius the Tyrant to be drove out of his Kingdom by Dyon and
Herclydes by reason of his irreverence to Dyon and Heracles, (...), Jupiter
(...) Herculis.
(that is) Jupiter and Hercules, but what need I trouble my self, any longer
with Timeus, Xenophon and Plato those ancient worthies, and Scholars of
Socrates, did sometimes forget themselves, and fall into such mean silly
expresions; for example, the former of these two in the Book which he wrought
of the Government of the Lacedaemonians has these words. You shall no more hear
them Speak (says he) then Stones; they stir their Eyes no more then if they
were made of Brass. Lastly they have more modesty then is in those parts of the
Eye which in Greek we call Virgins. 'Twere more proper for Ampicartes then
Zenophon to say the Eye Balls were Virgins full of modesty. Good God! what a
thought was there, because Core, which in Greek signifies the Apple of the Eye;
does also signify a Virgin, to say that all Eye Balls generally are Virgins
full of modesty; when as there is no place, wherein Impudence does sooner
appear than in the Eye; which makes Homer, when he would give the Character of
an Impudent Fellow say, Thou Drunkard with thy Dogs Eyes. Tymeus could not see
this poor and weak thought in Zenophon, but as if it had only belonged to him,
takes it, from that Author; and thus applies it in his life of Agathocles It is
not strange that he should Ravish his own Cosen who was just Married to
another, is it not I say strange that he should Ravish her the very next day
after her Wedding; for who could have done such a thing that had Virgins in his
Eyes, and not immodest Women; But enough of such trash; now what think you of
Plato, who (otherwise a most Divine Author) Speaking of the Tables of
Cypress-Wood, whereon the Laws were Written; said, When they had wrought all
these things, they placed the Monuments of Cypress in the Temples. And in
another place he says, as touching the Walls (Megillas. The Spartans had then
no Wall.
) I am of Opinion with the Spartans, to let them sleep and not raise 'em, so
long as they are layne down to rest. There is a very ridicilous passage in
Herodotus, when he calls beautiful Women, the disease of the Eyes: but this is
the more tolerable, in respect it is supposed to be spoken by a company of
Barbarians in the heat of their Debaucheries; yet for that these sort of People
are of no great credit, it is not wisely done by the using an undecent
expression, to run the hazard of displeasing future Ages.

CHAP. IV. Of the cause of a Faint Style.
ALl these mean Childish affections proceed from a too great fondness of new
thoughts, a very Epidemicall disease amongst the Writers of the present times;
Certain it is, that good and bad do often come from the same source; therefore
we see that the self same thing, which sometimes serves to adorn a piece, that
I say the self same thing which often gives the grace and beauty to Elocution,
does at other times work clear contrary effects, as plainly may appear by
Hyperboles, and other Figures called Pluralls, but how dangerous it is to use
them, shall be shown elsewhere. Now then let us see, how we may avoid those
Errors which seem slightly to pass for loftiness; and without doubt we shall
arive at our intended purpose if we can obtain a clear and distinct knowledge,
and learn to judge rightly thereof, which is no very easy thing; since that a
true Judgment of distinguishing between the Elegancy and Weakness of Speech,
must be the Product of a long practice, and consummated Study. But to proceed,
I will now Chalk out a way, which perhaps may serve to lead thither.

CHAP. V. The means in general how to know loftiness.
WE cannot say, (dear Terentianus) that the things of this life are great, when
there is a manifest greatness in the very undervaluing and despising the same;
such are riches, power, honor, Empire, and other like seeming blessings,
glorious it is true in appearance, but such as can never pass with a discreet
man for real and substantial good. Hence is it that we admire not so much those
who do, as others who may, but out of a nobleness of mind will not enjoy them.
The same may be said of the works of Poets and Orators; and we ought to be very
cautious, not to take a hideous noise, and jingling of words shuffled together,
for Sublime Eloquence. For that which is truly Sublime, has this inseparable
quality, that it affects the Soul of him who hears it, and makes her conceive a
better Opinion of her self, filling her with an unusual Joy, and a kind of a (I
know not what) pride, as if she her self had been the Author of what she does
but barely hear. When therefore, any thing is recyted to a Judicious and
understanding man, if after hearing it repeated several times, he does not find
himself edifyed, or any impression left upon his mind; but if on the other
hand, after listening to it attentively, he still remains unmoved, or is rather
dejected, we must believe, there is nothing in it that is weighty or sublime,
but that it is an empty sound, which strikes the ear, and reaches not the mind.
It Is an infallible sign of a lofty Speech, when it sets our thoughts a working,
and has that effect over us, which it is difficult, if not impossible to
withstand, leaving behind a strong remembrance and Idea of the things we have
heard. In a word, you may conclude a piece to be Sublime, and Elegant, when
there is a pleasing Symmetrie throughout. For when a great Assembly of men, of
as different humors and inclinations, as age or profession, are equally touched
with a Speech, that concurrence of opinions and joint approbation, is an
undoubted proof of the force and greatness thereof.

CHAP. VI. Of the five Sources or Heads of Loftiness.
THere are five principal Heads of Loftiness, but they all presuppose a good
faculty of speaking, as a common foundation, without which they cannot stand.
That therefore being supposed the first and most considerable is, a regular
elevation of thought. As is already shown in our remarks upon Xenophon. The
second consists in being pathetical; by which is meant that Enthusiasm and
Natural vehemence which touches and affects us. These two first, we owe chiefly
to Nature, and have from our Cradles; whereas the two latter do partly depend
upon Art. The third is nothing but figures diversely fashioned. And those are of
two sorts, figures in thoughts, and figures in words. The fourth shall be a
staetliness of Expression. Which may be subdivided into two parts, (viz.) the
choice of words and elegant figurative Phrases. The fifth and last (whence,
properly speaking, all greatness is derived, and which includes the other four)
is the ordering and well placing of sentences according to their magnificence
and dignity. Now then as to every one in particular; but by the way let me mind
you, that Cecilius has forgot some of these, and amongst the rest, that of
being Pathetical; which if he has done out of an Opinion, that it always goes
hand in hand with loftiness, and that both make but one, he is mightily
deceived: Since there are some passions which are void of all greatness, as
trouble, fear, and sorrow, and again many Sublime and lofty things, without any
passion at all. As is that which Homer says of the These were the Giants,
Odyss. l. 11.
Aloydes; By them vast Pelion was on Ossa thrown,
To storm the skies, and snatch the Heavenly Crown.
Nay he goes yet further, Sure they had done it too, etc. And in prose
Panegyricks, and such sort of Speeches, made only for Ostentation, may be full
of greatness and sublimity, though there be no passion. So that amongst Orators
themselves, that which is most pathetical, is least fit for Panegyric; and on
the other hand, that which is most proper for Panegyric, is least able to
affect the Passions. But if Celicius believes that the being Pathetical, does
no ways contribute to loftiness, and therefore not worth mentioning, he is as
grossly mistaken: for I dare be bold to say, there is nothing sets off speech,
more than a genteel movement, and a passion well carried on. To be short, it is
a kind of Enthusiasm, or divine rapture, which is the life and vigor of speech.

CHAP. VII. Of loftiness of Thought.
THough of the five things whereof we have spoken, the first and most material
(viz. the Elevation of the fancy) be rather a gift of Heavens, than a
qualification altogether to be acquired; yet ought we, as much as possible we
can, to employ it daily about something that is great. And because it may be
asked how this can be done? I have already showed, That the Elevation of the
fancy, is a perfect representation of the greatness of the soul. Which makes us
sometimes admire the very thoughts of a man, though he says not a word: because
of that presence of mind, which we discover in him. For Example, the silence of
Ajax in Hell, in the Odysses; That silence declared something more noble and
glorious, Lib 11.
than all be could have said. The first good quality therefore requisite to a
complete Orator is, that his thoughts be not mean and humble: for is it
possible that a man, whose thoughts are employed about base and servile
matters, should ever be Author of any thing worthy to be committed to
Posterity? No sure, that can only be expected from the exalted and lofty
fancies of High-Spirited men. See for example, the Answer which Alexander made,
when Darius proffered him half Asia in marriage with his Daughter. Were I
Alexander (said Parmenio) I would accept the offer, and so would I (replied the
Prince) If I were Parmenio. Could any one but an Alexander have made such a
reply it is in this that Homer is so excellent, whose thoughts are always
sublime, as appears in his description of Eris, or the Goddess of strife, when
he says, Her head's in Heaven, and on Earth her feet.

It may justly be said, that this large extent, is not so much the measure of
that Goddess, as of the Capacity and height of Homer's fancy: far different
from this, is that verse of Hesiod's, in his Poem Entitled the Buckler (if it
be true that he Wrote it) where speaking of the Goddess of Darkness, he says,
A nasty Humor from her Nose Distilled. Here instead of rendering this Goddess,
as he ought to do, terrible, he makes her odious and loathsome: but observe what
Majesty Homer gives to all his Gods, Iliad l. 5.

-- as far as Humane Eye,
Into the Sea, can from a Hill Descry,
So far, Heaven's Fiery Steeds at once can Leap.
He measures the length of their leapes by the Universe, who then, at this
strong Hyperbole, will not naturally cry out; that if the Horses of the Gods
would take a Second jump, they could not find room enough in the World, no less
excellent are those Descriptions, which he makes of the Fight of the Gods.
(viz.) Il. l. 21.

The Heavens echoed, and Olympus shook. And in another place, Hell was in
Arms, and the infernal King
Leapt from his Throne, Cried out, least over him, Iliad l. 20.
Neptune should cleave the earth, and so the dim,
Loathed, filthy Mansion of the howling Fiends,
Should open both to Gods and men, etc.
Behold (dear Terentianus) the Earth opened to its Center Hell ready to appear,
and all the Machine of the world unhinged: to show that in this Combat,
Heaven, Hell, and all things, as well mortal, as immortal, were engaged; and
that nature her self was in danger. But all these thoughts, are to be taken in
an Allegorical sense, otherwise are they Atheistical, and unbecoming the
Majesty of the Gods. And, for my part, when I read in Homer, of the wounds,
Punishments, Tears, and Imprisonment of Gods, with such like accidents which
continually befall them; I cannot but think, that he endeavored nothing more
than to make his men at the Seige of Troy Gods, and the Gods themselves, men;
Nay he has made their Condition the worst of the two; for when we are unhappy,
Death, at least, will put an end to our afflictions; but as for the Gods, he
makes them not so much immortal, as eternally miserable, much better success
has he, when he describes a God in his full brightness and Majesty, and not
sullied with earthly concerns: as may apear, in that most remarkable place,
where speaking of Neptune, he says, Il. l. 13.

Great Neptune marched, and at each step he took,
Under his Feet the woods and mountains shook.
And he goes on, -- then to the Sea he drove,
Whilst Whales from Whirlepits round his Chariot throng,
To see their Monarch as he passed along.
The Sea for joy opened its liquid arms,
Whilst he flew swiftly on, etc.
So that incomparable Lawgiver of the Jews, having a strong notion of the
greatness and power of God, has, in the beginning of his Book, these words; God
said, let there be light, and there was light, etc. let there be a firmament,
and there was a firmament, etc. It may not perhaps be unpleasant to you (dear
Terentianus) if I should quote another passage out of the same Poet; whereby
you may judge how Heroic he himself appears, in writing the Character of a
Hero. A general darkness was spread over all the Grecian Camp, which prevented
'em from engaging: at this Ajax being at a stand cries out in a rage, Il. l. 17.

Drive, O ye Gods, these duskie Clouds away,
And fight us fairly in the open day.
This is like such a blunt Warrier as Ajax was, he does not beg for life, that
were a thing too mean for a Hero; But wanting an opportunity to signalize his
valor by reason of the Darkness, which hindered him from fighting: He calls
out, in a passion, for Daylight, that he might fall, like himself, in grapling
with Jupiter. Here our Author enforces his thoughts with such a vehement fury,
as if he himself were enraged. Il. l. 15.

Like angry Mars amidst the thickest troops,
Or as a raging flame, that in the night
Runs through the woods, and spreads its dismal light,
He foaming at the mouth appeared, etc.
But I must desire you, for several reasons, to observe how flat he grows in
his Odysses. Whereby you will find. that when a great genius begins to decline,
it becomes delighted with fables and stories. For to prove that his Odysses
were composed after his Iliads, I can bring many instances. And first, how many
thoughts are there in the Odysses; which, without doubt, are but the
continuation of several misfortunes mentioned in the Iliads, and set down in
this last piece as so many effects of the Trojan war. And besides many
accidents in the Iliads are bewayl'd by the Heroes of the Odysses, as disasters
well known and of a long date. The Odysses ought therefore properly to be
called the Epilogue to the Iliads These are the words of Nestor in the Odysses.
There the great Ajax lies, Achilles there,
There fell his Godlike and much valued friend,
There my dear Son Antilochus took end.
Now then I am of opinion, that the Iliads, which Homer wrote when his fancy
was at the highest, are full of life and action: Whereas for the most part, the
Odysses consist of tedious speeches and relations, the certain symptoms of a
feeble and decayed fancy. So that in respect of this last, I can only compare
him to the seting Sun, which still retains the same splendour, but abates of its
heat. To be short, It has not that Harmony or loftiness which is so delicately
spread throughout the whole Iliads; it wants that variety of passionate and
fine thoughts, so curiously heaped one upon another. You will not find the same
force, and (if I may so say) fluency of language, and livelyness of
description. It may be called the ebb of his sancy, which, like the unconstant
Ocean, sometimes shrinks up and forsakes its Banks. At every turn he deviats
into fictions, and most incredible fables. Not but that his descriptions of
Tempests, Vlysses's adventures with Polyphemus, and some few more, are very
excellent. Yet after all, though this weakness be in Homer, it is still Homer's
weakness. I have been the longer upon this matter to let you see, (as I have
already said) That a lofty and manly Genius, when once the heat of natural
parts abates, does now and then dwindle into mere dotage, and fooleries:
amongst which may be reckoned that of Aeolus's shutting up the Winds; and
Ulysses Companions Metamorphos'd into Swine. Whom Zoilus pleasantly calls
little weeping Piggs. Such another is that of Doves feeding Jupiter like a
young Pigeon, or Vlysses's Poverty, Who lived ten days after his Shipwreck
without eating: and those absurd fictions of the murder of Penelope's wooers.
For the most that can be said in the commendation of such Chimeras is, that
they are witty and pleasant inventions. Or if you will, you may call them the
dreams of Jupiter. That which made me speak of the Odysses, was to show you,
that great Poets, and other famous writers, wanting strength and vigor to be
pathetical, grow dull and insipid. Hence is it, that when Homer describes how
Penelope's suitors lived in Vlisses's house, the whole description is a sort of
Comedy, wherein the characters of so many different persons are drawn.

CHAP. VIII. Of Loftiness drawn from Circumstances.
NOw let us consider what other means may be found out to advance Loftiness.
Certain it is, that nothing happpens in this World, which is not attended by
some certain Circumstances; a choice therefore of the most considerble, drawn
together into a well-proportion'd body, will be of no little advantage; which
is the reason, that when Sapho would express the disorders of Love, she calls
to mind all the accidents which are either inherent, or consequential to this
Passion, but singles out such chiefly, as declare the excessive violence
thereof Blessed is the man, thrice blessed who sits by thee,
Enjoys thy Tongue's soft melting harmony,
Sees silent joys sit smiling on thy brow;
The Gods themselves do not such pleasure know.
When thou appear'st, straight at my heaving heart
My blood boils up, and runs through every part.
Into such Ecstasies of Joy I Am thrown,
My voice forsakes me, and I Am speechless grown;
A heavy darkness hovers o'r my eyes,
From my pale cheeks the coward color flies:
Intranc'd I lie, panting for want of breath,
And shake, as in the Agony of death.
Yet since I Am wretched, I must dare, etc.


Don't you wonder how she brings together all these different things, the Soul,
Body, Speech, Looks, etc. as if they had been so many distinct persons just
expiring? Observe how strangely she is tossed too and fro; now she freezes,
then she burns; now is out of her wits, then again grows sober; now at the very
point of death: In a word, her Soul does not so much seem the seat of one
single Passion, as the general Rendezvouze of all; and so is it with all those
who love. By this it may appear, how much a fit application of choice
Circumstances tends to the ornament of Speech. Thus Homer, when he would
describe a Storm, takes care not to omit any one frightful accident. The Author
of the Poem concerning the A People of Scythia.
Arimaspians thought to be wonderful lofty, when he said, Unheard of madness,
and strange prodigy
Of giddy men! whom tottering Vessels please;
They quit the Shore to float upon the Seas:
Through trackless ways and unknown paths they go,
Repose and gentle rest they never know,
But take much pains how to increase their woe.
Their eyes on Heaven, their thoughts on Ships are fixed:
To deaf and unregarded Gods they pray, etc.


What man cannot perceive, that this is rather the flourishing of a weak
Pencil, than the true paint of an Artist? Let Us see then what Homer says, and
particularly in this place.

So angry Billows rise with all their force,
To dash against the Barque that stops their course;
Amidst the tattered Sails Winds loudly roar,
The Sea with hoary froth is covered over;
The fearful Pilot, now his Art is gone,
Sees with each wave his Fate come rolling on.
Aratus has endeavored to inhance this last Verse, in saying, A little slender
Plank has saved their lives. But instead of improving the thought, he has made
it flat and little, which was before very terrible, and thinking to sum up all
that can be said to express danger in these words, (A little slender Plank has
saved their lives) he has rather impaired than added to the thought. Homer does
not make the Sailors once only in danger of being drowned, but draws 'em
subject to the rage of every threatening wave. And I see, methinks, in his
expressions the very Picture of a Tempest. Archilocus took the same measures in
his description of a Shipwreck, as likewise did Demosthenes, where he speaks of
the confusion the Athenians were in at the newi of Helice's being taken: these
are his words, This Speech is so long, that our Author has thought ^^^o omit it.
It was now very late, etc. Both these have been very diligent to make choice
of the best and most pertinent circumstances, and avoid nothing more, than the
inserting superfluous and pedantick particulars, which must necessarily spoil
all, and are like Mortar and Rubbish any way heaped together to raise a
Foundation.

CHAP. IX. Of Amplification.
AMongst those things that conduce to the Loftiness and Excellency of Speech,
we may very well reckon Amplification. For when the nature of the Subject we
treat of, or any other matter we debate, requires large and full Periods,
consisting of many Sentences, we may so draw 'em out, that they shall enforce
one another, and mount gradually to a just height of Greatness; and this
serves either to spin out a Speech, to explain and strengthen any Action, or to
carry on and methodize a Passion. So that Amplification may be divided into
many parts, but it is to be premised, that no one of 'em can be complete
without Loftiness. Unless when we would undervalue and speak slightingly of any
thing, or endeavor to move pity. In all other cases, if we strip Amplification
of what ever is great and lofty, we take away its very essence; and, in a word,
when once it wants that prop to lean upon, it grows weak and tottering. Now
then, for better distinction, we will show the difference between this, and
that which we, have lately mentioned in the precedent Chapter, and which (as I
have already observed) is nothing but a Collection of choice Circumstances, to
the end we may see whether Amplification in general differs from Loftiness.

CHAP. X. What Amplification is.
I Cannot by any means hearken to some men, who define Amplification to be, A
certain Speech which greatens and enlarges the Subject matter. This Definition
may as well agree with the being Lofty, Pathetical, or Figurative; all which
give the stamp of Greatness to what ever they treat of: Yet are they very much
unlike. And first, Loftiness consists in the Nobleness, but Amplification in
the Plenty of Words. The first may oftentimes be found in a single thought,
whereas the latter depends wholly upon the abundancy of expression, and thus
therefore to be defined. Amplification is a multiplying of Words, drawn from
the particular Circumstances and Heads of the matter in hand, to enlarge the
Speech, and confirm what we have before said. And herein Argument and
Amplification differ; that the one is made use of to prove that point, which
the other does but stretch out and augment. In this place our Author is very
defective, etc.
The same difference of Loftiness in my mind is there between Demosthenes and
Cicero, as far as we Greeks are able to judge of a Latin Author; for
Demosthenes's excellence lies in being concise and pithy; Cicero's, on the
other hand, in being very copious. The Grecian, by reason of that violence and
fierceness, wherewith he rages throughout, may be liken'd to a Whirlwind or
Thunderbolt, and the Roman to a Confiagration, that shoots its head up into
the air, and disperses its flames round about, which work different effects
according to the diversity of Places, yet prey upon, and feed themselves with
all manner of things they can reach. But of this, you are best able to judge. I
confess, Demosthenes his Loftiness, and vehemence of expression, is much the
fittest to surprise and storm; but a variety, doubtless, (if I may so say) is
that which casts a dew over the minds of the Audience, and is proper in Common
Places, Digressions, Perorations, and whatever is in genere demonstrativo,
(that is) demonstrative; as likewise in History, Treatises of Natural
Philosophy, and many more such like pieces.

CHAP. XI. Of Imitation.
TO return to the matter in hand, Plato's style, tho soft and easy, is never
the less Majestical; which, if you have ever read his Politiques, you must
needs acknowledge. These unhappy men (says he) who know not what it is to be
Wise, or Virtuous, but spend their time in Revelling and Feasting, grow daily
worse and worse, and are out of the way all their life time; Virtue has no
attractive Charms over them, they never open their Eyes to look after her, nor
indeed do they ever taste of any true and sollid pleasure; but like Beasts with
their looks fixed always on the Earth; they think of nothing else, then eating,
drinking, and satisfying their brutall appetites, and in the heat of their
riotting, they quarrel and fight with one another, till in the end they perish
by their insatiable gluttony. This Philosopher has pointed out another way (if
we will follow it) which leads to loftiness, and what is it? it is the imitation
and emulation of famous Poets and other Writters, who have gone before us; and
this is the mark we ought daily to level at: for some there are, who seem to be
carried away with a Divine Inspiration, as it is said Pythia Apollo's Preistess
was, when placed upon the Tripo^s, or Golden Table in the Temple; under which
(they tell us) there is a certain Gap in the Earth, through which is breathed a
Vaporous and Celestial air, filling her with Divine instinct, whereby she
declares the Oracles. So the most remarkable excellencies in the writings of
ancient Authors, are as so many Sources, whence a Divine greatness arises, and
overflows the Souls of all their imitators; animating them with a more then
natural heat; till they become transported with the extacie of others.
Therefore we see, how much Herodotus, and (before him) Stefichorus and
Arthilocus strove to imitate Homer, but none of them comes so near as Plato,
for he has drained whole Rivulets out of that Fountain, and turned them into
his own Channel. Whereof I could give many instances, had not Amonias afforded
enough already; yet after all, we ought not to look upon this as a Theft, but a
delicate form, which he himself has molded out of the Substance of another
inventions. And in my opinion, throughout his whole Body of Philosophy, he
never says so fine things, as when he digresses into Poetical expressions; and
like a daring Rival, disputes the Prize with Homer himself, who has from all
ages been the allowed Champion of the World. And though perhaps he may seem to
do it with too much heat; and, as we say fire and Sword, yet that hurts not,
since according to Hesiod, A noble envy does avail Mankind. And is it not a
commendable thing, and worthy of a generous Soul, to contend for Honor and
Victory with our Predecessors? especially when to be vanquished is no discredit.

CHAP. XII. Of the way of imitation.
WHen ever we undertake any thing that ought to be great and lofty, it is very
necessary we should reflect and consider with our selves, what Homer would have
said on the like occasion. Or if it be History, what way Plato, Demosthenes, or
Thucydides would have taken, that we may follow the same; for such great men
being set before our eyes to be coppied, do often raise our fancies to as great
a height, as the Idea which we conceive of their Genius: But above all, we
ought thus to argue with our selves, how would Homer or Demosthenes approve of
this, if they heard it; or what would they say of me? 'Twill certainly be very
advantageous to us, if we seriously fancy to our selves that we are giving an
Account of our writings, at the high Tribunal, or on the public Theater,
where we have such Learned Judges for our audience. But there is yet a stronger
motive to excite us to this self-examination, and that is, to consider what
after ages will say of our writings. For if a man grows so jealous of himself,
as to think his works will not survive him, his fancy can produce nothing but
what is shapeless and abortive; nor will he take pains in that, which he he
never expects should be long lived.

CHAP. XIII. Of Fancies.
FAncies (and as others call 'em) Conceits or Fictions, do very much contribute
to the magnificence or vigor of speech. This word Fancy, in general is taken
for any notion or conception, any how representing a thing to the mind, able to
beget expression; but in a more particular and strict sense, for that which we
say, when by an Euthusiasm or other such like extraordinary notion, we seem to
see the things we speak of, and set 'em before the eyes of those who hear us. I
need not tell you that Fancies in Rhetoric, are different from those in
Poetry. For that in verse they are used to astonish and surprise, but in prose
to manifest and convince. Yet in this they agree, that both are moving.

These are the words of Orestes in Euripides
Hold cruel mother, hence with the Fiends of night;
Remove the dismal object from my sight:
They come, they come, my punishment draws near,
Fierce hissing Serpents, on their heads appear.
And in another place; Where shall I go, she comes, she is there, I die: Here
the Poet did not see the Furies, but he gives so lively a representation of
them, that he almost makes his Auditors believe they do: and though I cannot
well say how good his Tallent is in expressing the other passions, yet in those
two of Love and Fury (which are his Masterpiece) he is very excellent; not but
that he has a bold stroke in many other things. For notwithstanding his fancy
is not naturally high, yet in weighty subjects, he scrues it up to a Tragical
greatness; not unjustly therefore, may we say that of him, which the Poet does
of the Lion.

When threatening dangers and the foe he spies,
He calls forth all his rage into his eyes,
And with his Tail lashes his foaming Sides, etc.
Now for a proof of what we have said, let us have recourse to that place,
where the Sun being about to deliver the reins of his Horses into Phaeton's
hand, gives the young Charioteer these directions.

-- take care,
They force you not through the scorched Libian-Air.
There in the tracks no moystning showers lay,
To cool the Chariot in its fiery way.
And going on, Keep to the right, and through the road that leads
To the seven Plyades, direct the Steeds.
This said, the raw and new made Coachman took
The Reyns, and the high mettl'd Horses struck.
Forth then they spring, and when their guide they knew,
Swifter then Lightning through the Skies they flew.
Mean while his Father, full of fear and pain,
Sees 'em run headlong over the Heavenly plain.
Then he pursues, then teaches him the way,
Go here he cries, come back, turn hither, stay.
Who would not say, that the very soul of the Poet, mounted in the Coach-box
with Phaeton, partook of all his dangers, and flew in the Air with the Horses;
for how otherwise is it possible he could have described it so lively. Not
unlike to this is that of Cassandra, But O brave Trojans, etc. Aeschylus too,
has for the most part a Noble and Heroical fancy, as may appear in his Tragedy,
entitled the Seven before Thebes. When a Courier bringing Eteocles the news of
those seven Captains, that made a joint and solemn Oath to kill themselves,
does thus deliver his Message.

Seven brave and warlike Captains of the field,
When they had slain a Bullock on a shield,
And had imbrued their hands in the reeking gore,
By Fear, Bellona, and by Mars they swore, etc.
But when this Poet, does too much force himself to rise, he often falls into
harsh and uncouth expressions, as also does Euripides. For example in
Aeschylus, the Palace of Lychurgus falls into a rage at the sight of Bacchus.

The Palace bellowed at the sight of him. Euripides has made use of this very
thought, though in another way, and somewhat softened.

The bellowing Mountains echoed to their shouts. How excellent Sophocles is in
his descriptions, let that wittness which he has given us of Oedipus's dying,
and burying himself in a most prodigious Tempest. As likewise that other of
Achilles's apparition on his Tomb, when the Grecians were weighing Anchor. Yet
as to this last, I question whether any one has out done Symonides. But 'twere
an endless, and almost impossible thing, to instance in every particular
example that is to this purpose, To return therefore to what we were saying;
Fancies in Poetry are generally full of fabulous and incredible accidents:
whereas in Rhetoric, they are then most commendable, when they represent a
thing as in it self it is; and make the truth thereof most perspicuous. For a
Poetical and fabulous invention in prose, causes impertinent digressions, and
consequently becomes very absurd. Yet nevertheless it is that which the Orators
of these present times are passionately enamoured with. Who thinking thereby to
be accounted great, talk of the furies with as much heat as any Tragedian of
'em all. Not considering, that when Orestes says in Euripides.

Thou that would plunge me into Hell, give over
Thy cruel plagues, and torture me no more.
It Is his madness that makes him imagine all this. What then is the effect of
fancies in Rhetoric? it is that (besides several other properties) they
beautify and enliven: so that being artificially interwoven with arguments,
they do not persuade only, but overcome and command the audience.

If (says a certain Orator) there should be a great noise at the Sessions
house, and strait one coms and says the Prisoners have broak Goal; there is no
one old man, though never so decripid, or young man, though never so careless,
but what will endeavor to apprehend 'em again; and if at that Juncture of
time, they should be showed the Author of that disturbance, alas poor wretch!
he must expect to have his brains beat out by the rabble, before he can be
heard to make any defense.

Hyperides in that Speech, wherein he gave an account of the order he had
caused to be made, after the defeat at Chironea, for the delivery of the
Prisoners; took this way. It Is not (says he) an Orator which enacted this Law,
but the Battle and defeat at Chironea. At the same time that he gave reasons
for what he said, he made use of a delicate fancy, wherewith he did more then
persuade: for it being natural to us to mind that most which makes the greatest
show; our thoughts are taken up with a pleasing fancy, which coming in at the
middle of the Argument, does divert us from a serious examination of the force
and weight thereof. Nor ought we to wonder at it, since experience teaches us,
that when two things are mixed together, that which is of the greatest, draws to
it self the force and virtue of the other. But enough of this sort of loftiness
which consists in the thoughts, and (as I have already said) proceeds either
from the greatness of the Soul, Imitation, or Fancy.

CHAP. XIV. Of Figures, and chiefly that called Apostrophe.
NOw according to our Method, we come to speak of Figures, for (as I have
already said) they are no small constituent part of loftiness, if rightly
managed. But 'twill require a long, if not infinite deal of time, to take an
exact view of every Figure that is proper in Speech. Wherefore it shall be
sufficient for us, to touch upon the most principle, and most immediately
requisite to the perfection of Loftiness. Demosthenes would justify his
conduct, and prove to the Athenians, that they did not amiss in giving Battle
to Philip. What in that case had been the direct way? You have not done amiss,
Sirs, (he might have said) in hazarding your lives for the liberty and safety
of Greece, and of this we have Domestical, and undeniable examples, for we
cannot say those men have been too blame, who fought for the same cause, upon
the plains of Marathon, at Sallamis, or before Plateae. This he might have
said, but he has taken a clear different way; and of a sudden (as if inspired
by some God, or possessed with the Soul of Apollo himself) he swears by those
valliant Defenders of Greece, no Sirs no! You have not done amiss; I swear by
all the Ghosts of those brave Men, who dyed Fighting for the same Cause upon
the Plains of Marathon, etc.

Thus by this Oath, (which I here call Apostrophe) he deisies those ancients;
and consequently shows, that all who die in the like Cause, are to be esteemed
as so many Gods, by whom we ought to Swear. Here instead of a natural way of
arguing, making use of this strong, and pathetical manner of affirming by
Oaths, so extraordinary, new, and withal credible; he infuses into his
Judges, the very minds of those Illustrious Men that died, as an Antidote to
expel all the venom of their own; here, by his commendations, he persuades them
to think, they ought to be as proud of the Battle they lost against Philip, as
those Victories which they got at Marathon and Sallamis; and by all these
different means, drawn into one single Figure, he prevails with them to be of
his Opinion. Yet some perhaps will pretend; that Eupolis is the first who
taught this way, when he says, Their joy no more, shall fill my breast with
care,
By my great Fight, at Marrathon I swear.
But to swear downright, is not to be commended, or accounted great; we ought
to consider how, where, upon what occasion, and to what purpose we do it. So
then, that of this Poet, who spoke to the Athenians, at that time happy, and
not needing to be comforted, is nothing but a bare Oath: besides, he does not
swear by such great and Immortal men as Demosthenes does, nor endeavor with
him to kindle in the breasts of the Athenians, thoughts worthy the bravery of
their Ancestors; seeing that instead of Swearing by the names of those who
Fought, he Swears by the Fight it self; a thing altogether inanimate. On the
contrary, the Oath in Demosthenes, was to Encourage the Athenians, who were
just before beaten, that from henceforward, they should not look upon the loss
of the Battle at Chironea, to be any misfortune. So that (as is already said)
he proves to them by reason that they have not done ill, he gives them an
example, confirms them by Oaths, commends them, excites them to a War against
Phillip, and all this with one single Figure. But for that it might be thus
objected to our Orator; you speak of a Battle lost against Phillip, while you
managed the Affairs of the Common Wealth, and at the same time, Swear by the
Victory our Ancestors have won. He has therefore taken great care to regulate
his Expressions, and make use of such only as are most necessary for his
purpose; to show, that upon all occasions, though never so transporting we
ought to carry our selves with equal sobriety and deliberation. Wherefore when
he Speaks of the Fight their Ancestors had by Land at Marathon, by Sea at
Salamis, and those other near Artemis and Plateae, he forbears to say, how
Victorious they were; passing by the happy events of those Battles, as well as
the unhappy success of that at Chironea; and to prevent all Objections, he
says, those O Aeschynes whom we have lost in this Engagement are as much to be
called the Defenders of their Country, as those whom fortune has made
Victorious.

CHAP. XV. That Figures ought necessarily to be lofty.
WE must not forget, that as Figures do naturally contribute to the perfection
of Loftiness, so on the other hand does Loftiness to that of Figures; but how,
and wherein, that we are now to show. In the first place, most certain it is,
that the use of Figures apart, and by themselves, creates a jealousy in the
audience, of some trick or fallacy, especially when we are to speak before any
Chief Magistrate; and above all, an Emperor, a King, or a Great General of an
Army; for such an one is immediately incensed, and will not suffer himself,
like a little Child, to be put upon by the gross cheats of a pedantick and
crafty Rhetorician; but looking upon the whole Speech to be a mere subtilty,
(though now and then he listens to, and is perhaps pleased with the quaintness
thereof) he retains a firm resolution to give no credit to what is said.
Wherefore that is the most excellent which is so disguised, as not to be known
to be a Figure; and there is nothing can effect this better, than the being
Lofty and Pathetical; because, when wrapped in something that is great and
wonderful, it has what was before wanting, and is no longer suspected of
deceit. An example whereof is that which I have lately mentioned, I swear by
the Ghosts of those great Men, etc. How has our Author concealed this Figure?
Do not we plainly see, it is by the very brightness of his thoughts? For as all
lesser Lights disappear when the Sun shines out, so do the Subtilties in
Rhetoric when surrounded by a dazzling Greatness; and as when parallel Lines
are drawn upon a Plain, with the same Colors and Shade, a reflection of Light
(caused by that Shadow which the Piece casts) is that which first appears to
the Eye: So the being Pathetical and Lofty by a natural sympathy which they
have with the Affections of the Soul, or by reason of their Luster, move us
much more than those Figures which appear naked, and without any Art.

CHAP. XVI. Of Interrogations.
WHat shall I say of Questions and Interrogations; for who can deny, but that
they add much to the grace and vigor of Speech? Will you never do any thing
else (says Demosthenes to the Athenians) then ramble all over the Town, to
enquire after one another? What news is there? Why, what greater news can
there be, then that a Macedonian makes himself Master of Athens, and gives Laws
to all Greece? Is Phillip Dead, says one? No, says another, he is only Sick.
What I Would fain know, is it to you, whether he be Sick or Dead? When Heaven has
set you at liberty, you will soon find another Phillip. And in another place,
Let us Embarque for Macedonia; where shall we Land says one? the War it self,
Sirs, will show where Phillip is weakest and easiest to be Conquered. If this
had been spoken in an ordinary way, it would not have answered the weight of his
Subject. Whereas by asking the question, and answering it himself, as if 'twere
some other person, he does not only make that which he says stronger and more
considerable, but at the same time probable; for the being pathetical never
suceeds better, then when the Orator seems not to hunt after it, but that it is
naturally incident to the thing it self; and nothing resembles this more then
such kind of Questions and Answers* for they that are asked a question of any
thing, whereof they know the truth, find a sudden motion within themseives
which makes them eager to answer; so that by this Figure the audience is
cunningly wheedled to believe, that which is most meditated, to be ex tempore
and spoken in a heat. Here our Author is very defective.
There is nothing that gives a greater quickness to Speech then to remove the
Copulatives, for when the sentences do not hang one upon another, they run
swiftly on of themselves; nay without great care, swifter then the very
thoughts of the Orator. Having clinch't Bucklers (says Xenophon) they gave
back, Fought, slew, and dyed together. So it is of that, which Euryllochus
says to Ulysses in Homer.

-- At your command we went,
Through those thick woods you saw, a vast descent
Showed us a stately house in lightsom ground,
Where Circe dwelt, etc.
These Periods cut off and pronounced in haste, are the true signs of a lively
grief, which choking up the passage, hinders the smoothness of the utterance.
Thus Homer knew how and when to take away connection.

CHAP. XVII. Of the uniting of Figures.
YEt after all, there is nothing of greater force in Eloquence, then a well
uniting and contracting of many figures together. For thereby they become
sociable, and partake of each others strength and Ornament, as may be seen by
this passage, in the speech which Demosthenes made against Midas. Where,
without any connection at all, he has made use of these two figures, Anaphora,
and Diatiposis, (that is) a Repitition, and description. For every man (says
he] that injures another, does many things, by the behavior, eyes, or voice,
which he who has been injured, cannot well remember. And least in the end his
speech should slacken, knowing that Order, and Method, is most suitable to a
settled and deliberate mind; And on the contrary, that disorder and confusion,
is the best Argument of Passion, Which is it self nothing but a disorder and
confusion of the soul; he goes on as before; One while he beats him like an
Enemy, another while insults over him, now with his fist, then with his looks.
By such violent expressions, so heapt one upon another, our Orator makes his
Judges as much concerned as if they should see the man striking in their
presence. He rallies up again, and taking breath, pours in like a Tempest.
These affronts provoke, these affronts are insupportable to a stout man not
used to bear them, it is not to be imagined how heinous an offense it is. By
this continual change, he carries on throughout the Character of these
blustering figures. So that there is a disorder in his method, and a method in
his disorder. Now then let us put Conjunctions to this passage, as Isocrates's
Scholars do. And certainly it must not be forgott, that he who injures another,
does many things, first by the behavior, afterward by the Eyes, and lastly by
the voice it self, etc. Here in making all these of an equal force and
proportion, while we cement 'em to each other, we make that which before had a
pathetical strength and violence, to become a slight and flashy niceness of
language, which is of no substance, but presently goes out of it self. And as
if the Body of a man who is to run be bound, be loses his speed; So if we bind
the passion with useless Copulatives, we take away that swiftness and violence,
which otherwise it would have.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Hyperbat's.
AMongst other things we must not forget Hyperbat's. An Hyperbate is nothing
but a Transposition of thoughts or words from the Grammatical order.

This figure gives a true character of a violent and strong passion. Thus we
see those who are extremely moved with anger, fear, indignation, jealousy, or
any other of the passions, (too many to be reckoned up) are in a continual
distraction: no sooner have they thought of one thing, but another does
immediately succeed it; and e're they have half finished the first, they run
headlong to the second; till finding that does not please 'em, they again
return to the first. This passion of theirs, like a fickle wind, hurries 'em
now one way, then another; and by reason of this perpetual Ebb and flow of
contrarieties, they stagger in their thoughts every moment, and neglect all
manner of form and method. The ablest writers, in intimation of these sudden
motions of nature, make use of Hyperbat's and to say true, the perfection of
Art is to resemble, and pass for Nature her self; as on the other hand, nature
never succeeds better, then when she conceals art in her bosom. An example of
this, is that in Herodotus, which Dionysius Phocensis says to the Ionians. In
fine, our affairs are come to the last push Sirs, so that we must necessarily
either be free men or slaves, I and miserable slaves: To prevent therefore, the
thick storm which hangs threatening over your heads, you must instantly bestir
your selves, and purchase your liberty with the defeat of your Enemies. Now, to
have followed the natural way, he should have said, Sirs, it is high time we
should now think of be stiring our selves, when our afairs are come to the last
push, etc. First then he transposes this word, Sirs, and does not insert it
till he had given 'em a hint of his fearful apprehension; as if the greatness
of the danger, had made him forget that usual ceremony, wherewith we ought to
address our selves to those before whom we are speaking. Afterward he inverts
the order of his conceptions; for before he comes to the main point (which is
to exhort 'em to bestir themselves) he gives the reason which ought to induce
'em thereunto: In fine, our affairs are brought to the last extremity. And this
he does that they may think what he says is not studied, but proceeding from
the very force of his great concern for them. Thucydides is very remarkable in
his Hyperbat's, for he does most admirably transpose those things which seem to
have a natural dependence one upon another, and altogether inseparable. As for
Demosthenes, though in all other points he is more reserved then Thucydides, yet
in this he is not, for no one ever took greater delight in Hyperbat's than he,
who out of a desire to have whatever he says, seem as if spoken upon the nick
of time, leads his audience through the dangerous labyrinths of long
transpositions. Many times therefore, breaking off abruptly in the middle of
his Speech, as if he affected disorder and confusion, and interposing several
things no ways material to the matter in hand, he startles his Auditors; who
supposing the strength of his Arguments to be just spent, are themselves
concerned at the danger they fancy him in; when of a sudden, and unexpectedly,
wheeling about, and falling upon that which was so long suspended, by this
transposition as equaly useful as dangerous, he prevails more then if he had
observed an exact method throughout, but of this there are so many many
exampels, that I shall forbear to instance in any.

CHAP. XIX. Of the alteration of the number.
WHatsoever has been said of the foregoing Figures, as much may be said of
Polyptotes, or diversities of Cases, Collections, alterations, Gradations, and
such like, which being strong and vehement, are consequently very useful to
the Ornament of Speech; and more especially to that of being Lofty and
patheticall. What shall I say of the alteration of Cases, Tenses, Persons,
Number, and Genders? For who does not plainly see: how necessary they are to
vary and revive an expression. Now then, for an expression of the alteration of
the number, let us take those Singulars, which have the Termination of
Singulars, but when rightly examined, the force and Virtue of Plurals;
Straitwayes a multitude of People running to the Port, made the shore echo to
their shouts. These singulars are the more remarkable, for that sometimes there
is nothing so stately as plurals; that multitude and number which they contain,
giving them a delicate sound and Emphasis. Such are these Plurals in Sophocles
concerning Oedipus Hymen! cursed Hymen! 'twas thou gav^st me life,
But back into the Womb from whence I came,
Thou'st made that blood return by which I am;
And by that single Act have made Brothers,
Fathers, and Sons, Husbands, Wives, and Mothers,
And all that is horrid to mankind, etc.


All these different names denot only one individual person, that is Oedipus
on one part, and his Mother Jocasta on the other, but this number so divided
and multiplied into different plurals, does seem insome measure to multiply the
misfortune of Oedipus. It Is by a such like plecnasm, that a certain Poet said.

See the Sarpedons, and the Hectors come, etc. The same may be said of the
passage in Plato to the Athenians, which I have elsewhere taken notice of,
There are no Polips's, no (admus's, no Aegyptus's, no Danaus's, or other
Barbarians that live amongst us. We are Greeks far from the Traffic and
conversation of Foreign Nations, etc. Now then all these plurals, so pil'd one
upon another, give us a much greater Idea of the things they represent. Yet
must we be very cautious not to use them in all Cases, but then only when we
are to amplify, multiply, or be Patheticall; that is in short, when the
Subject is capable of any one or more of these, for always to be tinckling
these Cymbals, savours too much of Sophistry.

CHAP. XX. Of Plurals reduced into Singulars.
PLurals on the other hand may be reduced into Singulars, and then they carry
something in them which is great and lofty. All Peloponesus (says Demosthenes)
was divided into factions, and so of that passage in Herodotus, Phrynacus's
Tragedy of the taking of Miletus, being acted, all the Theater wept. For when
many things are contracted into one, they render the Expression more
substantial and sinewey. Yet the effects of both these distinct Figures, do
proceed generally from one and the same cause. So that whether Singulars
divided into Plurals, do make many things of one, or Plurals contracted into
Singulars, one of many, they are no small ingredient to the being pathetical.

CHAP. XXI. Of the alteration of the Tense.
THe same may be said of the alteration of the Tense, which is, when we speak
of a thing past, as if 'twere now present, whereby that which we say, is not so
much a Narration, as representation of a thing in being. A Soldier (says
Xenephon) falling under Cyrus his Horse, and being trampled upon, runs the
Horse through the Belly with his Sword, the Horse at the smart of the Wound
grows restie and throws his Rider; Cyrus falls.

You Will meet with this Figure very often in Thucydides.

CHAP. XXII. Of the alteration of the Persons:
OF the same efficacy is the alteration of the Persons: for it oftentimes makes
the audience fancy themselves engaged in the middle of the danger they hear of.

Had you but seen with what a rage they fought,
You Would swear each blow had a new rage begot;
That the long combat would have never bin done.
Still as they fought, you would think 'twas just begun.
And in Aratus, Forbear to trust the Seas this dangerous Month. So in
Herodotus, when you are out of Elephantine (says this Histoiran) at the upper
end of the Town, you will come to a Hill, etc. From thence you will descend into a
Plain; when you have crossed that, you may embarque again, and in twelve days you
will come to a great city called Meroe. See here (dear Terentianus) how he
takes your mind along with him, and leads it through all these several
countries, which you rather see than hear of. This if judiciously done, obliges
the audience to listen earnestly to the present business; especially if the
address be made to one particular person, and not many in general.

So close the parties met, you could not know
On which Tydides fought, etc.
For one that is alarmed with such Apostraphes, which seem to be directed to
him in particular, fancies himself more immediately concerned, and is
consequently the more attentive.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Sudden Transitions.
IT often happens, that a Poet, or any other writer, speaking of any one, does
unexpectedly slip in himself, and personate the party he is speaking of. And
this figure shows the vehemence of Passion.

But Hector loudly roaring on the shore,
Commands his Troops to give the plunder over,
And rush upon the fleet. --
For by the Gods! if any one denies
To do what I command, the traitor dies.
With my own hand, to wash away the guilt,
I Will shed his blood, etc.
Here the Poet reserves the narration as a thing most proper for himself, but
of a sudden puts the threatening oath into the mouth of the hot boisterous
Warrior: for had he inserted this, or the like clause, Hector then said so or
so. The whole speech had fainted, whereas by this quick transition, he
anticipates the Reader, who finds it made before he is aware. The use therefore
of this figure, is never so good, as when the urgency of the time and
opportunity given, will not admit of a Demur, but hurries the writer away from
one person to another: As it is in Hecataeus. The Herald, having thoroughly
considered the consequence of all things, commands the family of the Heraclidae
to depart: it is not in my power to help you any further, you are lost, and will
shortly force me to betake my self to some other Country. Demosthenes in his
speech against Aristogiton, uses this figure in a different way, but withal,
extremely pathetical. There is not one amongst you (says he) that is concerned
to see an impudent, scandalous fellow, violate the most sacred laws; a Villain,
I say, who, -- Oh! thou worst of men, nothing can withstand thy unbridl'd
boldness; I say nothing of breaking open doors, or grates, others may do that
as well as you, etc. Here, just upon the point of one word, his anger distracts
him between two different persons, and makes him leave his thoughts imperfect.
Who -- Oh! thou worst of men. Then turning unawares that part of the speech,
which he seemed to have done with, upon Aristogiton; he made a much greater
impression upon the minds of the audience. So is it of Penelope's behavior in
Homer, when she saw an Herald coming to her from her wooers.

Now Herald speak, what would the wooers have?
Is it to tell the Maids, they must forbear
To do my work, and their feasts prepare?
Would to the Gods they would leave off wooing me,
And that at length, this feast their last may be.
When e're they meet, it is with design to spoil,
And reap the profits of another Toil.
Have not your fathers told you heretofore
Who this Ulysses was? etc.
CHAP. XXIV. Of Paraphrase.
I Do not believe any body can doubt, whether Paraphrase be of great use in
loftiness. For as in Music all Harmony is made by the agreement of different
Notes; so Paraphrase by a circumlocution, wherein every part is consonant to
the whole, does beget a delicate Harmony in speech; especially if there be no
Bombaste nor jarring, but a pleasing Symmetrie throughout. Of this Plato has
given us a most excellent example, in the beginning of his Funeral Oration. In
fine (says he) we have performed the last rites which are due to them: and
those being past, they immediately arrive at the end of this fatal Journey;
gloriously set out by those high solemnities wherewith the whole Town, and more
particularly their own Relations, have conducted 'em out of this world. First
he calls death a fatal Journey: And afterward interprets the funeral Obsequies
to be a solemn Pomp made purposely to attend 'em at their departure out of this
life. Shall we then say, that all this served but to enlarge upon, or raise the
thought? no; let us rather affirm, that by this curious Paraphrase, he has out
of one single word made a most Harmonious Consort. So Xenophon, You look upon
labor as the only path that leads to a happy and pleasant life; and you have
attained to that which is most necessary, and commendable in warlike men which
is to be delighted with nothing so much as renown. instead of saying you are
very laborious, he uses this circumlocution, you look upon labor as the path
that leads to a happy and pleasant life. So that by stretching out, and
enlarging upon every clause, he adds at once both to the excess of his own
thoughts, and their commendation. This Paraphrase in Herodotus is in my mind
most incomparable. The Goddess Venus to punish the insolence of the Scythians,
who had pillaged her Temple, sent amongst 'em the Female Hemorrhoides
disease. Now then there is nothing of greater use than Paraphrase, provided it
spread not beyond the bounds of reason and modesty; for then it grows dull and
childishly troublesome. And therefore Plato, who is always figurative in his
Expressions, (and many times improperly) was (as some give out) jeered for
saying in his Commonwealth, Riches whether of gold, or silver, must not be
suffered to take footing, or dwell in a City. Suppose (say they) he would have
forbid the having of Cattle in the same reason he should have said the riches
of Sheep and Oxen. But what we have already said in general, will suffice to
let you see how useful figures are to the perfection of loftiness, in that they
are the Nerves and Sinews of speech and tend to the being patheticall; which
participates as much of loftiness, as loftiness it self does of what is
delicate and delightful.

CHAP. XXV. Of the choice of Words.
SInce thoughts and expressions are so reciprocal, that by the one we come to
the knowledge of the other: let us see what remains to be said in this part of
the Treatise concerning expression; but, for that every one must needs be
sensible, what a great power there is in select and proper words, 'twill be
altogether needless to insist long upon this point. In short therefore,
Orators, or any other Writers, who endeavor to be Sublime and Lofty, have not
any one thing, that affords them so much greatness, Elegancy, Neatness, Weight,
or Vigor for their Works, as does a careful choice of Words; it is they that
dress out Speech in all its splendour, it is they give it the beauty, nay the
very life and Soul which it has; in a word, they are the proper, and most
natural light of our thoughts. Yet must we take heed, how and upon what
occasion we use them, for to express a mean Subject in Great and Lofty Words,
is like putting a little Child to act a Tragical or Heroical part. Our Author
after he had showed how Impertinent great Words, are in an ordinary style, does
let us see, that sometimes little words may be made use of in a noble Style.
A further proof hereof is that passage in Theopompus which Cecilius censures,
but upon what ground, I know not; for in my mind, it is much to be commended as
being both correct and very expressive. Philip (says he) Swallowed patiently
those affronts, which the necessity of his affairs obliged him to endure. Now,
that plain and familiar terms, do many times express a thing better than all
the high-flown Eloquence whatever, the daily experience which we have from the
transactions of this life, can sufficiently testify. Besides that which is
spoken in plain and familiar words, is more fully and distinctly understood,
and therefore so much the sooner believed. Therefore (when spoken of a man, who
consulting his Interest, does easily, nay, willingly bear with Injuries) this
Phrase, to swallow Affronts, seems to me to have a very strong signification.
So is it of that expression in Herodotus. Cleomenes being Mad, with a Knife
Minced his own flesh, and after having so mangled himself, dyed. And in another
place, Pythes stood Fighting on the Deck till he was Hacked in pieces. Such
plain expressions as these, show that the Author of them, does not so much aim
at Elegancy, as naked truth; and yet are they far from being dull, or trivial.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Metaphors.
AS for the number of Metaphors, Cecilius is one of those, who will not allow
above two or three at the most to the expressing of one single thing: but let
us follow Demosthenes, he shows us, that there are several cases wherein we may
make use of many at one and the same time. As when the passions, like a rapid
stream, necessarily suck 'em in one upon another. These wretched men (says he)
these base Sycophants, these furies of the Republic, have inhumanly torn in
pieces their own Country. These are they who heretofore, in their
debaucheries, sold our liberties to King Philip, as at this day they do to
Alexander. These are they, who, measuring all their happiness by the brutish
pleasures of eating, and scandalous rioting, have thrown down all the bounds of
reputation, and destroyed that fundamental, and wholesome Law of levelling,
wherein consisted the felicity of the ancient Greeks. With this band of
Metaphors our Orator falls furiously upon those Traitors. Yet Aristotle and
Theophrastes are of opinion, that to alleviate the boldness of these figures,
it is convenient to use some such expression; as, If I may so say, as it were,
to go yet further. For (say they very well) the previous excuse is an
Atonement for their boldness. But I still stick to my first position, that
there is no excuse so natural, or allowable for the abundance, or boldness,
either of Metaphors, or any other Figures, as the using 'em to a fit purpose,
that is, the being pathetical and lofty; both which, requiring strong and
weighty expressions, have a natural force and violence, wherewith they hurry
every thing after them, and will not give the audience time to criticize upon
the number of the Metaphors; being at that instant possessed with the same fury
as he that says them. And many times in common places, and descriptions, there
is nothing so advantageous as a chain of Metaphors well linkt together. It Is
with the Assistance thereof, that Xenophon has so delicately anatomized man's
body, though not altogether so well as Plato. This calls the Head of a Man a
Citadel, the Neck an Isthmus placed between it and the body, the Joints are as
Hinges upon which it turns. Pleasure is the bait for all misfortunes that
happen to mankind: the Tongue is the Judge of Taste; The Heart is the Root of
the veins; the fountain of blood; which flows from thence through all the other
parts, and is in a place every way fortified. He calls the Pores narrow
streets. The Gods (says he) willing to preserve the Heart from Batteries which
are made by a sudden surprise of frightfull objects, or from the violent
flames of choler, have placed underneath it, the Liver, which is of a soft
bloudless substance, but full of little holes like a sponge, which serve for
conveyances to the Heart, that it be not choked up, and disturbed from doing
its office, when the choler is too much enflamed. He calls the seat of the
affections, the Women's Nursery; and the seat of the Passions, the Men's
Apartment; The spleen, he says, is the Kitchen of the Entralls, which being
full of the excrements of the Liver, swells and boyls up. afterward (continues
he) the Gods covered all these parts with flesh, as a Bulwark and defense
against the assaults of heat and Cold, or any other accident; and is (says he)
like soft wool, which encompasses the body, and yields to any impression. The
Blood he calls the food of the flesh, and to the end (says he) that every part
should be nourished, there are several Pipes like Conduit Pipes in a Garden,
through which the little streams of blood, flowing from the heart, as the
Springhead, run into every part of the Body. And when death comes (he says)
that the Organs are untied, like the Ropes of the Ship, and so let the soul go
a drift. There are many more no less pleasant and admirable, but these shall
suffice to show the natural loftiness of such figures, to show, I say, how
material they are, not only to the being lofty and pathetical, but excellent in
description. Now that these figures, as well as all other elegancies of speech,
are apt to transport a thing to excess, is a most undeniable truth, and not to
be learned of me. Hence is it, that divine Plato has been much found fault
with, for suffering himself to be sometimes hurried away by extravagant and
harsh Metaphors, to a vain allegorical Ostentation. 'Twill not easily be
conceived (says he) that it is with a City as with a Vessel, wherein if Wine be
powered which is never so strong and heady, yet of a sudden entering into the
Society, of another sober divinity which corrects it, it becomes mild, and fit
to be drunk; To call Water a sober Divinity, to use the word correct, in stead
of Temperate; and to affect such odd conceits savours too much, say they, of a
Poet, who himself is not very sober. And this perhaps was it, that gave
occasion to Cecilius, in his Commentaries upon Lycias, to conclude that in the
whole Lycias was a better Orator then Plato; induced thereunto by two distinct
motives, both equally unreasonable; for though he loved Lycias dearer than
himself, yet he hated Plato more than he loved Lycias; being therefore byas'd
by a strong inclination for the one, and as strong an aversion for the other,
he has not passed that true, and impartial Judgment upon several points in
these Authors, as probably he may imagine. For he accuses Plato of growing flat
in many places, but speaks of the other as a most correct and unquestionable
writer; which is so far from being true, that there is not the least glimpse of
reason for what he says: and where shall we meet with an Author that does not
now and then forget himself, and let slip something justly to be carp'd at?

CHAP. XXVII. Whether that which is plain and profitable, is to be preferred to
Loftiness, which is defective.
IT may not perhaps be unseasonable to examine in this place, whether is most
to be preferred, be it in Prose or Poetry, that which is Lofty and Defective,
or that which is Plain; but withal very complete: and again, whether a piece
is most to be valued, according to the number or quality of the good things
contained therein? For these Questions, being naturally incident to the present
Subject, must inevitably be resolved. First then, that which is extoarrdinary
Great and Lofty, cannot have that natural purity, that which is plain and
easy, for that a too great care of being Polite and Elegant, does oftentimes
degenerate into lowliness; and as those who have vast Estates, must though
unwillingly, neglect some one part or other; so, those who aim at an
extroardinary Loftiness, cannot possibly but be careless in some few
particulars. On the contrary, it is very hard, if not impossible, to find any
faults in a style that is plain and indifferent, for the fancy not venturing to
mount too high, but observing a just Medium, remains secure, whereas in
Loftiness, it soars to so great a pitch, that it is apt to grow Giddy, and so
be in continual danger of falling. Nor am I ignorant of what may be Objected,
that it is natural to judge of men's Writing according to what is worst in them,
and that the faults which are observed, leave a strong impression upon the
mind, when that which is exact and smooth passes currantly off; and though I
have taken notice of several faults in Homer and the most remarkable Authors,
and am perhaps one who will as little countenance them as any body, yet give me
leave to say, that I look upon them to be very slight, and not so much to be
accounted faults, as insignificant mistakes, which while their thoughts were
wholly intended upon great things, they have carelessly let slip. In a word, I
hold that a Lofty Style, though in some places deficient, (seeing that
deficiency proceeds from the very being Lofty) is to be preferred before that
which is complete and indifferent. True it is, Apollonius who wrote the Poem of
the Argonantes, does never slacken. Theocritus (baiting some few things which
are none of his own) has in all his Works nothing but what is very delightful.
Yet after all, had you rather be Apollonius or Theoeritus, then Homer
Eratosthenes? Erigo is a piece not to be censured, but will you therefore
reckon him a greater Poet then Archillicus? who I confess is confused and wants
order and Economy in many parts of his Writings, but it is then only when that
Divine Enthusiasme, with which he is hurried on, will not permit him to follow
the Dictates of his own Judgment; and so for Lyrick Poesy; had you rather be
Bachillides, then Pindar; or for Tragedy, Ion, then Sophocles? notwithstanding
these two (viz) Pachillides, and Ion, never stumble, but have a great deal of
Elegancy, and Analogy, in whatsoever they write: which cannot be said of Pindar
and Sophocles; for in the height of their greatest raptures, while they are
Thundering and Lightning (as I may so say) when they should not, they most
unfortunately smother their own fancies. Yet is there any sober, and Judicious
man, who will vouchsafe to compare all that Ion ever wrote, to that single Play
of Sophocles's Oedipus.

CHAP. XXVIII. A Comparison betwixt Hyperide and Demosthenes.
NOw then, if we esteem a piece according to the number and quality of the good
things which are contained therein; 'twill follow that Hyperides is clearly to
be preferred before Demosthenes: for besides that he is more Musical, he has
more accomplishments requisite to an Orator; in most of which he is very
eminent, like the Olympic Gamesters, who perform five several sorts of
exercises, and though in any one they come short of the chief Professors; yet
in the whole, they surpass the common rank. Demosthenes has not any one
excellence, which he has not imitated, unless it be that of Composition or
placing the sentences: he has the smoothness of Lycias, he knows how and where
to be soft and tender; and does not express all things with one and the same
tone as Demosthenes does; he is very pleasant in his Ethics: the liveliness of
his style is tempered with a certain agreeable and blooming sweetness: There is
in his works abundance of very facetious things, his way of deriding is very
genteel and handsome, he is wonderfully expert in handling an Irony, his
raileries are not dry or forced (like theirs who Ape the Attick style) but
lively and touching; he is very quick at answering all objections by turning
'em into ridicule; he has several delightful and Comical humors, which always
take where he aims, and are most incomparably enameled with short witty
sentences; he has a natural Genius to stir up, and beget pity, he is very
copious in his fabulous relations, he is extremely easy in his digressions, he
turns about, and takes breath where he pleases, as may be seen in those
fictions which he relates of Latona; Lastly, he has made a Funeral oration,
which is so curiously penned, that I question very much whether it can be
matched: on the other hand, Domosthenes is not very good at Ethics, his style
is not full or luxuriant, but somewhat harsh. In a word, he wants almost all
those qualities just before mentioned; if he strives to be pleasant rather then
not divert, he makes himself ridiculous. And the more he endeavors at being
delightful, he is the further off. Yet after all, for that in my mind all these
excellencies, which are thus crowded in Hyperides, have nothing in 'em that is
great and lofty: they discover him to be at best, but a weak and sober orator,
who does not rouse the mind, and therefore no one was ever much transported at
the reading his works. Whereas Demosthenes contriving in himself all the
qualities of an Orator truly born to loftiness, and perfectly accomplished by
study (viz) That stately and Majestical accent, those lively movements, that
fullness, sharpness, readiness, and what is most to be valued in him; that
vehemence of expression, which no man else could ever attain, or come near to;
with the Assistance of all these divine qualities, which I look upon as so many
extraordinary gifts from Heaven, and which I may not presume to call humane
endowments; he has supplanted all the most famous Orators that ever were, and
(if I may so say) has violently thrown down, and ecclipsed their glories by his
Thunder and Lightning. For in those things, wherein his excellency lies, he
does so much exceed all others; that he makes sufficient amends for those
wherein he is deficient, and without doubt it is much easier to look steadfastly,
and with open eyes upon the Thunderbolts which shoot from Heaven, then not to
be moved at those violent and passionate expressions, with which his writings
are very full.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Plato and Lysias, etc.
AS for Plato there is yet another difference, for he out-do's Lysias, not only
in the nature, but number of his Excellencies. Nay more, those defects which
Lysias has, render him less inferior to Plato, then those faults, with which
he does mightily abound. What therefore is the reason, that these Divine
Authors have neglected an exact delicacy and correctness, to look after
nothing, but Loftiness in their Writings? It Is, that nature has not formed Man
like a heavy sordid Animal, but sent him into the World, as into a Spacious
Theater to be a Spectator of all that is Acted therein. That she has, I say,
brought him into the List, as a noble Combatant, that is, to aim at nothing but
Glory. And therefore has she created in the Soul a fervent desire after every
thing that apears most transcendently great and magnificent. And do we not see,
that the Circumference of the whole World, is not large enough to contain the
thoughts of Man, but that they oftentimes Mount above the Heavens, and over
leap the bounds of Nature herself. And without doubt, if we do but cast our
Eyes upon any one, who throughout the whole course of his life, has no one
action that is not great and ilustrious, 'twill easily be understood, to what
end and purpose we were first created; hence it is, that we admire not little
Brooks, though the water be never so clear and useful for us, but are extremely
delighted with, and surpised at the sight of the Danube, the Nile, the Rhine,
and above all the main Ocean. We are not at all concerned to see a little
Flame, which we our selves have kindled, retain its brightness, but are
startled at those which come from Heaven, though they are consumed e're scarce
they can appear, and there is nothing so wonderful in nature as those Furnaces
in Mount Aetna, which from its Abyss does sometimes throw out. Pint. Pyth. 1.

Stones, Rocks, and Streams of Flame, etc. From what has been said we may
conclude, that whatever is profitable and necessary, is not to be wondered at,
as being easily attained, but that all which is extroardinary, and beyond
common expectation, is very admirable and surprising.

CHAP. XXX. That the faults in Loftiness are excusable.
ANd now, as to the great Masters of Oratory in whom both what is Lofty and
useful do concur, we must needs allow, that in those justs before mentioned,
(though not altogether faultless) there is something Supernatural and Divine,
two qualities which almost equal us to the Gods themselves, whilst a never so
great excellency in all the rest, bespeaks us no more then men. All the benefit
we have in committing no faults, is that we avoid being censured; but in being
Lofty we become admirable. What shall I then say, that any one of those stately
and sublime thoughts, which are in the works of those most incomparable
Authors, may thoroughly reconcile us to the Errors, or rather mistakes, they
have been guilty of? Nay further, I will maintain, that if all the faults
which are in Homer, Demosthenes, Plato, and those other famous Writers, were
summed up, they would not amount to a Moiety, Nay not the thousand part of the
good things they have said. Wherefore the most envious in all Ages have yielded
the Trophy to 'em, and no body, as yet, being able to dispute it with 'em, they
have bore it away hitherto, and will in all probabillity keep it.

As long as Streams do in the Meadows run,
Or Trees at Spring, put their Green Livry's on.
It may be objected, that a Colossus which has some faults, is no better then a
small statue that is complete. As for example, Polycletus's Soldier.
Odorysphorus a small statue of Polycletus's
To this I answer, That in artificial matters, the Workmanship and pains is
most regarded, whereas in the work of nature, that is most to be valued, which
is most prodigious and magnificent, seeing it is the property of man to reason:
besides, in a Statue, we examine how like it is to the thing it represents; but
in Speech (as I have already said) we look for something that is Supernatural
and Divine. Now (to keep close to what we have already laid down) since it is
impossible, that the fancy should continue long at a high pitch, without being
subject to totter; and that Art is the only thing which can buoy it up. It Is
very necessary to a Sovereign perfection of Loftiness, that there be a mutual
concurrence and assistance of Art and Nature. Thus much I have thought fit to
say upon these occurrent questions; not but that every man is freely left to
his own private opinion.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Similes, Comparisons, and Hyperboles.
SImiles, and Comparisons, have a great resemblance with Metaphors, and in this
only they differ This place is very deficient, and all that our Author had said
of these figures is wanting.
Such another is this Hyperbole, although your brains are in your head, and you
do not trample them under your heels. Wherefore we ought carefully to consider,
how far a figure may be stretched, least, like a string that is screwed too
high, it breaks, and produces an effect clear contrary to what we expected. As
Isocrates in his Panegyric, affecting to put a strong Emphasis upon every
thing he said, is fallen I know not how into the Errors of a mere Schoolboy.
The design of the Panegyric is to manifest, that the Athenians have been more
servicable to Greece then the Lacedaemonians, you shall see what measure he has
taken. Since Speech has a natural Power to make great things seem small, and
small great: since it knows how to make that which is Old appear New; and
again, that which is New to pass for Old. How (says one) is it so Isocrates, do
you intend to invert the nature of those things which relate to the Athenians,
and Lacedaemonians. See how this unseasonable commendation of Speech, turns to
an Exodium, to persuade the audience, nor to gave credit to what he says. That
therefore which has been said of all Figures in general, may be applied in
particular to Hyperboles (viz.) That they never succed better then when they
are so distinguished, as not to be taken for Hyperboles, which constantly
happen;, when they are powered out in a passion amidst some great circumstance.
As is that of Thucydides in his account of those who died in Sicilie. The
Sicilians going thither made a great Slaughter of those who were thrown into
the River, immediately the Water was colored with the blood of those wretches,
nevertheless as muddy and thick with blood as 'twas, they drank it, nay and
some fought about it. It Is not very credible that men should drink Dirt and
blood, nay and fight for it, but the violence of the passion, in the middle of
that strange circumstance, would not suffer a reason to be given for what was
said. So is it of that which Heroditus has concerning those Lacedaemonians, who
fought in the straits of Thermopylae. They defended themselves for some time in
that place, with what weapons they had, and with their Hands and Teeth, till
the Barbarians by continual shooting at them, had buried them under their
Arrows. What will you say of this Hyperbole? what likely hood is there, that
these men should defend themselves with their Hands and Teeth against whole
Troops that were Armed, till they were buried under the enemies Arrows? Yet is
this probable, for that the thing seems not to be sought after to express but
that the Hyperbole does naturally proceed from the very essence of the thing.
So that (as I have already observed) there is no such remedy against the too
great boldness of such Figures, as not to make use of 'em, but to a fit
purpose, that is, the being pathetical and lofty. This is so infallible a
truth, that we say several commical things, which in themselves are absurd, yet
pass for probabilities, because they excite passion, that is laughter, which is
a passion of the Soul caused by something that is delightful. There is this
passage in a commical Poet, The Land he has in the Country, is no larger then a
Lacedemonian Epistle. Lastly, Hyperboles may serve as well to diminish any
thing, as to add to it, for Exageration is proper to both these different
effects, and Dyasirmus, (which is a kind of Hyperbole) is nothing but an
Exageration of a thing that is mean and ridiculous.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Composition or placing of Sentences.
OF those five branches of Loftiness, which we reekoned up in the beginning of
this Treatise, there yet remains the fifth to be examined, which is, The
composition or placing of Sentences. But since we have already handled this
Topic in two entire volumes, wherein we have been as copious, as the long
observation we have made would permit. It shall suffice in this place to say no
more, than what is absolutely necessary to the present subject, (viz.) That
Harmony which has a power of persuading, or delighting, is not naturally given
to man only, but that even Instruments, altogether inanimate, have a strange
influence over our affections. For do not we find, that the sound of a Flute
does move the very souls of those who hear it, and transport 'em beyond
themselves? that it charms their Ears with the soft movement of its cadence,
and forces 'em to bear a part in that Heavenly Music, with a proportionable
motion of their Bodies. Nor is it so of Flutes only, but all other tunable
Instruments. For though of themselves the Notes signify nothing, yet by being
often interchanged, and shuffl'd one with another, they beget so delicate an
Air, that it transports, and ravishes, all those who hear it; Yet after all,
they want the power of persuasion, and are but the Echoes, or (if I may so
say) Bastards of a voice, and not effects of the nature of man. What then may
we not say of composition? which is the Harmony of Speech, the use whereof is
natural to man; which does not only strike the ear, but penetrate the mind,
which musters up such different words, thoughts, things, and Elegancies
suitable to the affections of the Soul, which by a mixture and variety of
pleasing sounds, crept into the mind, does create in him who hears 'em, the
same passions, that the Author himself has; and which upon this stately pile of
words raises that noble Structure of loftiness. Can we deny, but that it
contributes much to the Greatness, Majesty, Stateliness, and all other
excellencies of Speech; and that having an absolute command over the mind, it
can at all times Elevate and ravish the same. This certainly is a truth so
approved, and generally received, that to dispute it must needs argue a great
ignorance and madness. Here our Author for an example of the placing of
Sentences, brings a passage out of Demosthenes. But because that which he says,
depends clearly upon the Greek Tongue, and because I find it not in the French
I have omitted it.
It Is with Speech as with the Body, which owes its chiefest perfection to the
well setting together, and just proportion of the Members: for though any one
part disjoynted from the rest has nothing in it that is temarkable, yet all
together make a perfect Body. So if the parts of Loftiness be taken asunder,
Loftiness it self is destroyed; but when they are drawn into a Body, and firmly
joynted by Harmony, the turn of every Period gives them an Emphasis. Not
unfitly therefore may Loftiness in respect of periods, be compared to a Feast,
for which many persons club: And hence is it, that several Poets, and other
writers have succeeded so well, notwithstanding they had no natural Genius to
Loftiness, and that their expressions are for the most part mean and ordinary,
since by the delicate connection and ordering of the Sentences, they have put a
gloss upon the courseness of their expressions; Philestus is one of these, and
so is Aristophanes in some places, and Euripides in many: as is already
sufficiently showed. For example, Hercules in the last of these three Authors,
after he had killed his Children, says, So many Plagues have crowded up my Breast,
There is no room for any other Guest.
This thought is very trivial, yet in the whole there is something that is
Musical and pleasant, which gives weight and vigor to it; and without doubt if
we invert the method of this Period, we shall apparently find, how much happier
Euripides is in the composition and placing of his Sentences, then the
substance of his thoughts. Again, in his Tragedy entitled Dirce carried away
by a Bull, there is this passage.

Round then he turned and running to and fro,
Where e're his rage, and madness made him go
He drew the Woman, Tree, and Craggy-Rock.
True it is, this thought is great and noble, but withal it must needs be
confessed that it becoms yet greater, by that gentle and easy Harmony wherewith
the Sentences are not huddl'd together like a heap of rubbish by its own
weight, but linck'd to each other with distinct and proportionable stops, which
are as so many foundations, whereon the superstructure of the whole Speech is
raised.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the measure of Periods.
ON the other hand. There is nothing that depresses and abates Loftiness more
then those numbers which are broaken and pronounced in haste, such as are
Pyrreckei, Trochaei, and Dichoraei, Fit only for the nimble movements of a
dance, for that all these kind of Feet and measures, have no more then a
certain quaintness and agreement of meeter, which is always the same, and
therefore very unable to produce any effects in the Soul. Yet what I look upon
to be worst of all, is, that, as when any thing is sung to us, we do not mind
the sense of the words, but are altogether taken up with the pleasantness of
the Tune; so whatsoever is composed of these numbers, does not move the
Passions of the mind which ought to be the product of Speech, but fills the Ear
with the movement of the Cadence, or proportion of time; and thereby the
Audience fore-knowing what must necessarily follow next, anticipates him that
is Speaking, and (as in a Dance) takes notice of the Cadence before it happens.
Another thing which does very much weaken Speech, is when the Periods, are
nicely ordered, when the members thereof are too concise, and and have too many
short Syllables tackt together in those places where they ought to be divided.
Cautiously therefore must we avoid too short periods; for there is nothing that
stifles Loftiness more then the endeavoring to comprehend it in a small space.
Now when I speak of short Periods, I mean not those which have their due extent
and proportion, but such only as are too little, and as 'twere maym'd or
imperfect, which latter serve only to confound the understanding, whereas the
former do direct and enlighten it. Not but that Periods which are too long, and
all Sentences inserted for no other reason then the Impertinent lengthning of
Speech, are altogether as bad, and perfectly Excrementitious.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the meanness of Words
AMongst those things, which tend so much to the Embasening of Speech, we may
very well reckon that of Meanness of Words. Therefore do we find in Herodotus,
a description of a Tempest, most excellent, I confess, as to the Sense, but
crampt in many places with very Bald Words. As when he says the Sea began to
The Greek has it (...), which signifies Boil up, but because in our Language
that word sounds well. I have rather followed the French and rendr'd it rumble.
Rumble. The ill sound of this word Rumble, takes from the Greatness of his
thought. The Wind (said he in another place) tossed 'em very much, and those who
were scatterd by the Tempest made a disagreeable end. This word tos'd is very
mean, and the Epethite, disagreeable, is improper to express an accident of
that nature. So likewise Theopompus the Historian, has made a Description of
the King of Persia's expedition into Egypt, which would be very admirable, were
it not spoiled by the baseness of many of the words. Is there a City or Nation
(says this Historian) throughout all Asia, that has not sent Ambassadors to
the King? Is there any rarity or precious thing either of the Growth, or
Manufacture of any of these Countries, which has not been presented to him?
What a quantity of Arras, and rich Carpets, some red, some white, and some
party-collour? How many Embroidered Tents, furnished with all things necessary?
How many costly Robes, and Beads, How many Gold and Silver Vessels, some set
with Diamonds, others most curiously engraved, besides all this a vast deal of
Armor, after the Barbarian and Grecian Fashion, an innumerable head of Cattle
for carriages, and Beasts fitted for Sacrifice, how many Bushels full of
dilicious provision, how many Chests, and Sacks full of Books, and other
Vtensils, together with so great a quantity of high seasoned meat, and all
sorts of Fowl, that whosoever sees 'em at a distance would take them for little
Hills rising out of the Earth. Here, from the highest pitch of Loftiness he
tumbles down to the lowest degree of flatness, and in that place too where she
should rise highest. For when speaking of the Glorious provision, he makes
mention of Bushels, Ragous, and Sacks, he seems to design nothing more then the
description of a Kitchen; and, as if any one, who is to set out Furniture,
should amidst Embroydered Tents and Silver and Gold Cups, place Sacks and
Bushels, it must necessarily make a very bad appearance; so if amidst the
Ornament of Speech, we make use of mean and ordinary words, they are as so many
Clouds or Mists, which obscure the luster of Expression. He needed only to
have made some little alteration, and as to those Hills of seasoned meat, and
the rest of the Provisions, to have said in general that they sent the King
Cammels, and many Carriage Horses laden with all manner of dainties, or heaps
of the most savoury, and delicious Food imaginable; or (if you will) all the
delicate and choice Dishes that the Purveyors themselves could possibly expect
should please their Masters curious Pallat. For we must not descend from what
is great and Lofty, to mean and inconsiderable things, unless there be a very
urgent necessity. The words must be answerable to the stateliness of the
Subject, and therein it is good to imitate nature, which has so framed man's Body
as not to expose the undecent and filthy part to outward view -- But, (to use
Xenophons own words) She has concealed and removed the loathsome parts as far as
may be, lest they should spoil the beauty of the Creature. Yet after all, we
need not be too nice and critical, in examining what words are lowly in
Speech. And, to conclude, since we have set down, what it is that Elevates and
gives a vigor to Speech, it is easy to infer, that for the most part, the
contrary is that which degrades and weakens it.

CHAP. XXXV. The Causes of the decay of Fancy.
NOw (dear Terentianus) there remains but one thing more to be considered,
which is the question that was put to me sometime since by a Philosopher, very
material to be explained, and therefore more particularly for your further
Instruction; I have thought fit to annex it to this Treatise. Amongst several
other things, I cannot but admire (said he) how it comes to pass, that in the
present age, there are so many very able and eloquent Orators, that there are,
I say so many, who have a lively and clean way of expressing themselves, and
yet few or none who can attain to Loftiness. Is it not (continued he) as is
commonly supposed, that Democracie is the best Nurse for great Genius 's; since
what ever is famous in Oratory, flourished with, and is now extinct with that
sort of Government. And doubtless, there is nothing that elevates the mind of
men more then Liberty, or that excites and stirs them up to an Emulation, and
strong ambition of over topping all others. Besides the encouragements and
rewards which are found in a Commonwealth, do give an Edge to, and (if I may so
say) polish the minds of Orators, making them take great care to improve their
natural Talent. In so much that their very works do manifest the liberty of
their Country. But we (said he going on) who from our Childhood have felt the
Tyranny of an absolute Government, and have been perplexed with the Laws and
Customs of Monarchy, when we were young, and capable of any impression. In a
word, we who have never tasted of this lively and plentiful spring of
Eloquence, I would say, liberty, can only expect to become great and remarkable
flatterers. Wherefore it is allowed (said he) that one born to Slavery may be
capable of other Sciences, but no Slave can ever attain to that of Oratory. For
the mind (continued he) being kept under, and subject to control, dares not
attempt any thing that is bold or noble. But all the Spirit and vigor it ever
had, does sensibly decay. And it always remains fettered as in a Prison. In a
word, (to use Homers expression) The day which makes a Freeman be Slave
Robs him of half his worth. --
If therefore it be true (which is so frequently reported) that those Boxes
wherein Pygmies or Dwarfs are bred, do not only hinder 'em from growing to a
full Stature, but make even those little Animalls, less, according to the Band
which goes round about; So slavery (to give it a Definition) is a kind of
Prison, wherein the Soul famishes and pines away, I am not ignorant that it is
very easy, and natural for man to find fault with the present times, but take
heed that There is much wanting in this place, and here our Author takes up the
question himself.
And certainly (said I taking up the question) If the ease of a too long Peace,
is able to rust the brightest Souls, a Fortiori, this endless War, which has so
long infested these parts, is a strong obstacle to our present desires: Besides
those inseparable passions, which attend this life, throw us daily into some
confusion and disorder: So that it is the Epidemical disease of Covetousness,
and immoderate Love of Pleasure, which (to say true) has brought us into
slavery, or rather a Gulf in which all our thoughts and affections are
swallowed up. There is no passion so mean and sordid as Avarice, and no Vice so
foul as Sensuality. I do not see therefore how it is possible, that those who
set so great a value upon Riches, as even to Idolize them, can be infected with
that disease, without being liable to all the ill symptoms with which it is
naturally attended. And doubtless, Prodigality, Rioting, and such like
Debaucheries, are the inseparable Companions of immoderate Riches; by whose
assistance, they open the Gates of Cities, and Houses, and entering thereinto,
take possession. But scarce have they resided there for any time, when they
begin to build their Nests, and (according to the opinion of the Wise) strive
to increase and multiply. Observe then what their Progeny is, they beget Pride
and Luxury, the true offsprings of such Parents; which if once suffered to
brood in us, will hatch Insolence, Unruliness, Impudence, and all those other
inexorable Tyrants of the Soul. As soon therefore as any one, laying aside all
the thoughts of Virtue, gives himself over to such frivolous and transitory
things; he must necessarily expect all these fatal consequences before
mentioned. He cannot look beyond himself, and therefore be the Author of
nothing but what is very mean and ordinary. And if he ever had any thing that
was great or Lofty, in a little time, it withers and dries up, till a general
contagion and corruption spread it self all over the Soul. And as it is
impossible that a Judge who is bribed, should give a true or impartial
judgment, for that he who suffers himself to be corrupted by any reward, is so
blinded therewith, that he looks upon that only to be Just, and Honest, which
is most advantageous and useful to himself. How then is it possible, that in
these times, when men's minds and manners are so strangely corrupted; when we
make it our business to defraud this man of his Inheritance, to lay snares for,
and wheedle another man to make us his Heir, to force unreasonable gain out of
every thing, and to expose even our own selves to sale; How is it possible, I
say, that in this universal infection we should find a man of sound Judgment,
and free from Passion? who not being blinded or misled by the insatiable lust
of Riches, can distinguish what is truly great and worthy to be recorded to all
Posterity. Now then, since it is thus with us, were it not better we should be
subject to the Authority of another, then remain under our own jurisdiction;
least the insatiable lust of Avarice (like a Madman, who having broak his
Chains, flies upon all those who are about him) should set the whole World on
Fire. In a word, I told him 'twas an excessive Luxury which had caused this
Lethargy of mind, which (excepting some few) was the fatal distemper of man
kind; so that if there be any one who does now and then study, it is I fear,
with as great faintness as those do, who are lately recovered of a Fit of
Sickness; and that for pleasure, or vain glory, and not out of emulation, or
any thirst after solid and commendable profit. But enough of this, Now let us
proceed to the passions, whereof we have promised a distinct Treatise, for in
my opinion they are none of the least Ornaments of Speech, especially such as
is Great and Lofty.

FINIS.

