EXTRACT of the Royal Privilege.
BY the grace and Privilege of the King, bearing date the 20th of January,
1643. and signed CONRAT, it is permitted unto the Sicur de la Mothe le Vayer
substitut du Procurer General of His Majesty, to cause to be printed a book
of his Composition, entitled, OF LIBERTY, AND SERVITVDE; for, and during the
space of ten years. And defenses unto all Printers or Booksellers, either to
imprint or sell it, without consent of the said Sieur de la Mothe, or those
unto whom he shall give leave, under pain of two thousand livers of Amend, as
in the same Privilege more at large it is contained.

OF LIBERTY AND SERVITUDE. Translated out of the French into the English
Tongue. And Dedicated to Geo: Evelyn, Esquire.

VIRG. Eclog. 1. Melib. Et quae tanta fuit Roman^ tibi causa videndi?

Tit. Libertas: quae sera, tamen respexit Inertem.

London, Printed for M. Meighen, and G. Bedell, and are to be sold at their
shop at the middle Templegate. 1649.

The Authors EPISTLE.
To my Lord, the most eminent Cardinal MAZARIN.
My Lord,
ALthough I know sufficiently, that your goodness moves you to accept
favorably, even the least Productions of Wit, which are presented unto you:
yet am I justly so diffident of mine own, that it has suffered an
extraordinary reductancy, before it could resolve to offer unto you this little
Treatise, without the Consideration of it is subject; and (as I must say)
without the necessity of dedicating the same unto you: For, if one cannot but
with sacrilege make use elsewhere of that which an holy Place did receive from
our offerings; nothing but your sacred Purple ought to gather that, which
another, who is no more, had deigned to receive into his Protection. Perhaps,
your Eminency may call to mind to have seen what I now dedicate unto you in
the hands of the great Cardinal de Richelieu: I resign it now into yours; the
most worthy (that I know) to handle all which those have touched: and if it
has need of any other reco^mendation to render it acceptable unto you, it is
Philosophy, that, so much in your esteem, which has dictated it, unto me. I
am confident, MY LORD, that you will not disavow an affection which retains
nothing in it, but what is altogether worthy of you. Philosophy is one of the
most rich Presents, that ever man received from Heaven; it is that which
elevates us unto the Contemplation of eternal things, and the Science which of
all others affords to Princes, as well as to private men, the most agreeable
Divertisement. Your Eminency therefore, if it please, accept favourablie that
which is derived from so noble a place, and which an heart repleate with Zeal
to your service (as mine is) offers, with so much obligation; This grace I
promise to my self out of your ordinary goodness, and shall eternally remain,

My Lord, Your must humble and most obedient Servant, De la Mothe le Vayer.

The Translators Epistle, to George Evelyn of Wotton in the County of Surrey Esquire
SIR,
I Make bold to present you here with a little Enchiridion, or Treatise of
Liberty and Servitude: Which (in pursuit of otber Books, to entertain the
time withal) it was my chance to encounter amongst the Stationers at Paris.
And, because it handles a Subject, which this Age, (I know not by what destiny
waited upon) does every where seem to pretend unto; I thought most proper to
nuncupate it unto you, whose real merits, and known Integrity so justly
challenge a part in the management of those important affairs of this Kingdom.

Sir, Here is not any thing that I dare call mine own, save only the
Translation, which imports nothing but the hazard of every man's Censure who
understands French; and my good inclinations toward you. The matter is
another, and entertained by Persons of that Eminency, that I dare presume no
man will appear so hardy, as rashly, either to condemn, or prejudice it. This
is the first time (as you well know) of mine appearing upon the Theater, which
I shall prove to frequent but as Gentlemen who sometimes write Plays, not
often; But lest our little City run out at the Gates, I will here shut up
this Epistle, desiring only the Liberty to remain, as I am,

SIR, Your most affectionate Friend, and inviolable Servitor. PHILELEUTHEROS.
Paris, March 25. 1647.
To Him that reads.
THis free subject, coming abroad in these Licentious times may happily cause
the World to mistake both the Author, and the Translator; neither of whom by
LIBERTY do unders and that impious Impostoria pila, so frequently of late
exhibited, and held forth to the People, whilst (in the mean time) indeed, it
is thrown into the hands of a few private Persons. By FREEDOM is here intended
that which the Philosopher teaches us: Nulli rei servire, nulli necessitati,
nullis Casibus, fortunam in aequum deducere, etc. not that Platonique Chimaera
of a State, no where existant save in VTOPIA.

Verily, there is no such thing in rerum natura as we pretend unto; seeing,
that whilst we bear about us those spoils of Mortality, and are subject to
our Passions, there can be no absolute Perfection acquired in this life: And of
this truth we have now had the experience of more then five thousand years,
during all which tract (to this present Epoch of time) never was there either
heard, or read of a more equal and excelent form of Government than that under
which we our selves have lived, during the Reign of our most gracious Sovereigns
Halcion days; The sole contemplation of which makes me sometimes with the
sweet Italian to sing; -- Memoria solatu
Conrammentarm' (...)
Spesso, spesso vien a rapi^mi,
E qualch' istant ancor, ringiouanirmi.
Of which the memory
No sooner strikes my brain
But ah! transported, I
Methinkes wax young again.


If therefore we were once the most happy of Subjects, why do we thus attempt
to render our selves the most miserable of Slaves? God is One, and better it is
to obey One, then Many. Neque enim Libertas tutior ulla est, Mat. 26. 24.
Claudian.
quam DOMINO servire bo^^. That is, --

In Nobilissimi, Doctissimique D. Translationem Alexandri Rosaei hexastichon.
Quid sit Libertas, quid sit servire Tyrannis
Iustruis Angligenas hic Evelyne tuos.
Quas pridem Authori debebat Gallia grates,
Has debet linguae terra Britanna tuae.
Ipse Author debet quem vestibus induis Anglis,
Ornateque doces Anglic^ verba loqui.
The TABLE of the CHAPTERS.
THe Proem. CHAP. I.Of Liberty and Servitude in general. page 1 CHAP. II.In
what our Liberty and Servitude consists. p. 10 CHAP. III.That no man can truly
affirm himself to be free. p. 22 CHAP. IV.Of the Liberty Philosophique. p. 39
CHAP. V.Of the Servitude of the Court. p. 87 The Conclusion. p. 128
Lemata si quaeris cui sint adscripta? docebo,
Ut si malueris, lemata sola legas.
Martial. Enquire you why this Table's put before?
I Will tell; if you disgust it, read no more.
The Proem.
YOU did wonder Melpoclitus, to hear me say, that th^re were but very few men
Free; and that those who were so esteemed to be, lived for the most part in
Servitude; that albeit the whole World apparently breathed after Liberty, yet
was she known but to very few people; and, that many men contended for her,
without ever obtaining the least Possession thereof; as did the Trojans for the
beautiful Hellen, when she was in Egypt. Dion. Chrysostom. or. ult.
This is that obliges me to make you participate of some Meditations, which I
have heretofore framed upon this Subject, discovering you the greatest secret
of my soul, and communicating unto you all, which the Moral that I exercise
does furnish me withal together of most delectable, and most free thereupon.
Let us therefore begin by some Considerations general of Liberty and Servitude.

OF LIBERTY AND SERVITUDE in general. CHAP. 1.
LIberty seems to be a Present of Nature, wherewith she does even gratify all
sorts of living Creatures: And therefore we see very few who conserve it not as
carefully as they do their own lives; yea many, who often expose themselves,
even unto death it self, to the end they may not lose the Possession of so
great a good. L 1. c. 23. and l. 2. c. 5.
Philostratus (who writes on this subject) relates that Apollonius refused to
go a hunting with the King of Persia because he would not be a spectatour of
the Captivity of beasts, which they took contrary to the right of nature. And
in another place he tells us, that although the Elephant be of all other
Creatures the most docile and obedient to mankind; yet he cannot forbear in the
night time, to deplore his servitude. Sundry Philosophers, and principally
those of the sect of Pythagoras, are pleased to give them their Liberty: and
many good Anchorits have in that imitated them. Mendes, Pint. c. 98.
Yea there are yet some Chinese who purchase Birds, and Fishes, out of mere
Devotion, to exercise upon them the same act of charity.

No man can deny but we have oftentimes beheld living Creatures perish out of
anguish, and despair, after the loss of this precious Liberty. And certainly
it is no wonder, that they should all be so passionate to retain it, seeing the
very elements themselves, whereof they are composed, cannot, but with great
difficulty, suffer the least Constraint. In vain does any man oppose himself
to their inclinations: For as Air and fire cannot be hindered from aspiring,
the Earth always searches the Center, and the Course of the Waters will be so
free, that there is no resistance, which to obtain it does not surmount. By
this it is evident how essential a thing Liberty is to our animal part. Now
if we consider the superior that informs us, and by which we term our
selves reasonable, we shall then no longer wonder at this common aversion of
all men living against servitude. For without so much as touching the
Prerogatives of our free will, and of that which is one of the most frequent
Conceptions of our humanity, to wit, that the spirit cannot be compelled
farther then (as after a sort) it does consent unto; we know by the example of
the Angels, that the immateriall substances are those which do most of all
research the Independency. Was it not that which moved the most haughty of them
all to covet an elation even above the Clouds, that he might thereby render
himself like to the Almighty? in effect, Sum. par. 1. qu. 63. ar. 3.
(as says Aquinas) there was no appearance to believe, that Lucifer, and those
of his Party had ever any intention to render themselves entirely like unto
God; the most inferior of men, informed with common sense, would never imagine
a thought so extravagant: how then should we attribute it unto Intelligencies,
so pure, so illuminated as those were (of whom we speak) before their
disgrace? doubtless it proceeded, from having affected to possess from their
own selves, and independently, the Beatitude which they only enjoyed from the
hands of God. And hence it is that the Devil is named in holy-Writt Belial, D.
Hier. s. c. 4 ad Ephesians.
as who should say, one that desired to shake off the Yoke, and depend no more
upon any. Now since we thus naturally seek to be Free, and so by consequence
fly Servitude, not only like the rest of Animalls, but much more in respect of
that whereby we are distinguished from them; and for that which we communicate
with the Superior Intelligencies, it implies that man ought to be the most
free of all sublunary Creatures. And yet, notwithstanding all this, it is
possible, that there is generally, and in all respects, no greater slave than
man himself. But of this we shall better inform our selves if in the first
place we a little Consider in what Liberty does Consist

In what our Liberty and our Servitude does consist. CHAP. II.
THere is a double liberty, to wit, that of the Body, and that of the mind;
whereof there is a third composed, which is mixed of these two; the Doctrine of
Contraries would have us constitute so many different species of Servitude. As
touching the corporal liberty, it is lost by the law of nations at what time
any have been superior in war, and who instead of putting all their enemies
to the Sword, reserved some unto whom life has been given. This Reservation
made the first Servants, or Captives, if we credit the Latin Grammar: and the
Greeks, Plato l. 6. de leg.
have affirmed that Jupiter took from them one half of their Spirit, at the
very same instant that he condemned them to so miserable a servitude.
Notwithstanding, whether it were so or not, their Condition is contrary to that
ancient Privilege of nature, whereof we have have newly spoken; and it is very
likely it was this which obliged the first Indian Philosophers,.2. Hist.
of whom Diodorus speaks, to prohibit by a law express, the use of Servants. I
know very well that St Augustine makes sin to be the Author of this kind of
servitude;.19. de Civit. dei. c. 15
observing, that there was no such thing in the world before the crime of Cham,
what time he derided his Father, Genesis c. 9.
who threw so great a malediction upon all his Posterity. But since Wars, and
discords have no other Origin, than only Sin it self, there is nothing in the
Latin Original (of which we speak) which does not very well accommodate with
the Text in Genesis: We are only to observe, that Christianity has extirpated
it out of most Places, where the Corporal Servitude has been well known,
retaining very few slaves within all her extent; besides those, whom the
inormity of their Crimes have rendered such. Thus has corporal liberty been
reestablished, which Consists in being absolute master of ones Proper Person,
as being that which the most miserable amongst us may in some sort attribute
unto himself, if their misfortures have not engaged them into the hands of
Infidells.

The Liberty of the mind consists in the understanding, or in the will: if
these two faculties do not jointly possess it according as the most Part of
scholastiques affirm. It Is by her, that the demy-Gods of Antiquity have vaunted
themselves of being free, even in the midst of Irons, and chains; Fortune
having no dominion over the Operations of our Souls; and all the Puissances of
the Earth find themselves too impotent, to make it suffer the least violence.
For although it appears that this Liberty consists in being, or not being
able to apply these two parts of the spirit indifferently upon all things; yet
that is not absolutely true: for certain it is, that our understanding cannot
always impedite it self, that it should not Acquiesce at the Conclusion of a
demonstrative Syllogism, having before comprehended the first and second
Propositions. Our Volunty cannot (after some sort) embrace the evil,
considering it as evil, but does it always, when it happens to be masked
under some appearance of Good. And yet for all this, Reason obliges us to
maintain, that our Spirit does no way hinder us, but that we may possess a
complete and entire freedom; because, should these instances import in them
any exception, this impious absurdity would ensue, that God himself should not
be perfectly free, who knows, and loves himself, necessarily, and by the
universal consent of all divines. Furthermore, this is a Maxim stated in
Philosophy, that the natural Powers never exceed the Limits of their formal
object, always cohibiting themselves within those Bounds, which God has
prescribed unto them: Now we must know that our intellect has no other object
certain, nor formal, than the Conception of that which is true; from whence
it comes to pass, that they named verity, the sweet food and refection of our
Soul; nor has our will any other certain, and fixed butt, then to unite it
self with that which is good, naturaly abandoning what soever repugnant unto
it. It follows then (without reversing the order of nature) that our Spirit
cannot otherwise act, then as we have already spoken; and which indeed does no
way ruin it is Libertic, as by a moral reason we shall suddenly explicate,
according to which we shall find, that to serve God is to reign, and to obey
the just laws of nature, passes for a Species and kind of Liberty. Certainly,
we do not imagine, that a Bird should be less free to fly, where he lists,
for not having power to do it under the waters; nor that a terrestrial
animal, should be less free (in order to his walking up and down according to
his fancy) because he cannot mount up into the heavens, supposing him capable
of a desire so irregular. The same reason ought we to frame, touching our
spiritual freedom, which is wholly uninteressed, seeing the will cannot be
joined to evil, nor the intellect be satisfied with that which is false, if
neither of these two parts be deluded by the appearance of good and true, for
as much as it is wholly repugnant to their nature.

These exceptions decided, it is very evident, that humane liberty cannot
consist in any other thing, than the independency of our Actions, as well those
of the body, as those of the mind; since we ought not to render an account to
any, but unto God, and our own Selves, that is to say, to this eternal
reason, from which we all derive a beam of illumination, at the very instant of
our Production into this of the world; it was therefore very necessary to know
(that so we might the better be able to examine that which follows) whether
there be any one who can vaunt himself of being truly free.

That there is none can truly affirm himself to be free. CHAP. III.
WE cannot deny but that Liberty is one of the most precious, and agreeable
things of life, and therefore it is they have affirmed, That all the Riches of
the Earth are not equivalent to its true estimate, Non been pro toto Liber^as
venditur auro.
should it be exposed to sale; and that the Pythagoreans detested servitude by
this my sterious precept (to wit) that none should wear a Ring, lest perhaps
it might press, or seem to constrain the singer; passing it for a rule
indubitable, that no man should submit himself unto any other, Alterius non
sit qui suus esse potest.
so long as he had opportunity to depend solely of himself. The Philosophers
ground themselves likewise upon the value and sweetness of this Liberty, when
they affirm that the soul of a Lover is better pleased, and is in effect,
more in the Object where she loves, then where she informs and animates; for
that there is nothing besides mere necessity which retains her in this last
habitation, being altogether conveyed by inclination, and a certain
voluntary movement, toward the person where she has placed her affections.
But if Liberty deserve that we thus esteem of her, is it not a thing most
strange, that we find so few men who are free? or (to say better) that the
whole Universe should be so desperately plunged in Servitude, that (to take it
well) there is no difference between us who believe our selves to be exempted
from it, and the very slaves themselves, than according to the proportion of
more and less? For let us now be but as attentive here, as indeed the subject
does justly merit, and diligently weigh this moral point but as equitably as
Philosophy requires we should do, in all that which concerns her; where
shall we find any kind of Life, which does not assubject those that are
addicted unto it? what profession shall we find, which has not her chains, and
ties whereby thee does even captivat those whom she imployes? One would think
that the most vile estate of life were the most exposed to the miseries of
Servitude; because there she appears as it were all naked and with a very
little qualification: should we yet farther examine other qualities of life,
and but a little lift up the deceiptfull mask which disguises them, we should
then easily discern, that there were indeed no condition of life whatsoever,
which did not oblige us to a so much the greater subjection, by how much the
more it is elevated above others, and which has not its fetters in this, more
rude and full of affliction, by how much the more precious they appear. The
manacles of Astyages were not therefore the less weighty, and paynable, for
being composed of gold or silver; Reniego de grillos aunque sean de oro, says
the Spanish proverb; and in effect, there is no kind of great constraint more
insupportable, then that which attends upon great authorities, and which is
found mixed as it were with the most absolute power, by reason of the
opposition of contraries, which renders their qualities the more active. Thence
it is, that they very properly call dignities charges, their weight augmenting,
with the prize of their exaltation; and may be said to be, (admit them more
estimable than indeed they are, to examine them rightly) but honorable
Captivities. Let Monarchs attribute to themselves whilst they please the power
of disposing, according to their own santasie, the lives, and goods of their
Subjects; the Crown is a fillet which presses the temples so hard, that an
Ancient did not believe any man ought to take it up from the ground, if he
rightly understood it; And the reciprocal obligation of Kings to their people
is so strait, that (in good Philosophy) if the Republique appertains to
Caesar, Caesar belongs much more to the Republique. Let us therefore consider a
little how many there are who precipitate themselves, without any obligation
thereunto, into a voluntary servitude. Infinite is the number of those who sell
their Liberty, to acquire oftentimes so inconsiderable a matter, that they
would not afterward have purchased it with their very Counters. They thirst
after a slight reward, or some other trivial favor, and for which we should
be sorry that we had given the least parts of our goods, causes us absolutely
renounce all our own wills to follow that of others. Nay, we are so stupid,
Epist. 42.
says Seneca, that it should seem we do not perceive, how in so doing,
there remains nothing more sordid and vile than ourselves, even by our own
confession; seeing we value our selves of less esteem, than our monyes, and
the rest of that which we possess.

But beyond all these servitudes which perpetually hold us under subjection
from without, there are likewise servitudes interior, from which happily there
is no man living can affirm himself to be truly exempt.

Who is he that is not a slave to his passions? and where is the man that does
not at some time or other, experience the tyrann yof these rude Masters of whom
Diogenes reproached Alexander? One serves loosly to his Ambition, another is
importuned with Avarice; This man dresses altars to Fortune, That permits
Gluttony to dominier over him; and there is, who suffers himself to be
transported by the rage, and violence of Love. Certainly there is no servitude
so difficult, as that which we are constrained to endure under such merciless
Tyrants, nor is there any man who can boast of being free whilst he shall be
compelled to live under their domination. What if we should here introduce the
Arguments of the Stoics, who prove that vice is such an enemy to freedom,
that they are two things altogether incompatible: it will then be easy to
discern how far we are deviated from this liberty; seeing the most perfect
amongst us is so deeply engaged into it. Arr. l. 2. c. 1. and 26. and l. 4 c. 1.
There is not a man (say they) who deserves to be reputed free, but he only
that lives according to his own pleasure: now it is very certain that no man
would live in Vice, or that (at the least) desires the world should take notice
of him for a vicious person, it being a thing the most unfortunate, and
shameful in the World. It follows then, that in good reason we ought not to
call any man free but such only as have utterly abandoned Vice, and then we
shall easily perceive whether there be any who of right may attribute to
themselves the quality of free men. Epictetus very pleasantly derided the
Nicopolitans, who used to swear by the fortune of Caesar that they were in
full possession of their Liberty; seeing the very naked term of their Oath,
did evidently demostrate that they acknowledged the absolute power of the
Emperor. But there is a great deal more reason to laugh at those who would
pass for the most free of the World, because they do indifferently prosecute,
and obey their depraved apetites, and for that they deny nothing, even not to
one of their affections; it being from thence whence one may most evidently
dently derive an absolute argument of their miserable slavery; there being no
servitude more base, and dangerous, than that wherein Vice does engage us.
Therefore be it that we discourse of the liberty of the body, perhaps those who
are in Chains are not yet the most abject; or regard we the freedom of the
mind, there is no person which does not experience some species, and kind of
constraint. Is there any man that can deny but that all such as are found
living in an erroneous belief, and without the light of our true Religion, be
not as so many Captivated souls that are daily forced to admit of false
principles, or believe a thousand absurdit yes? But if the humane liberty be a
composition of those of the body, and of the mind together, there will not be
found a man who ought to esteem himself free, which does not equally possess
both the one and the other. Thus it is they justify by so many considerations,
that there is likely no man who can truly affirm himself to be free. And
because if this proposition received the least exception, it cannot otherwise
proceed than from those who profess to live within a Liberty Phylosophique.
Let us therefore endea vour to know what it is.

Of the Liberty Phylosophique. CHAP. IV.
ALthough it appears by our precedent discourse, that one might well affirm of
all men, as heretofore of the Romans, to wit, that they are as so many Animals
borne to servitude; some Philosophers themselves having taken their infant
swathbonds for certain presages of the captivity wherein we are to live the
rest of our days; yet there were some amongst them who attributed unto
themselves a prerogative (like so many Spartans) solely to possess an entire,
and absolute liberty. It is in order to this opinion, that Philo the Jew has
composed a treatise expressly, to show that every honest, and virtuous man is
undoubtedly free; and this it was which caused the Stoickes to affirm, that
besides their Sage there was none who was truly a King; as indeed according to
their mode, he was the only man that might (with reason) be called rich,
fair, happy, loyal, and magnanimous; The rest of men not retaining for their
share, other than shadows and deceivable appearances of al these attributes;
this wise man living in all so far above other men, that he might justly glory
of being equal to the greatest of the Gods; In that Dion was nothing inferior
to him, Plutar. des com. conc. contra les Stoiq.
according to the Paradox of Chrysippus. Nay, and when it so pleased these
proud Philosophers, they have even had the boldness to assert, that there wise
man was more considerable here than love himself; because Jupiter was neither
free nor happy, but by the excellence and privilege of his nature; whereas
their Sage (such as they imagined him to be) enjoyed his liberty as well as his
felicity, by the virtue of his mind, and might have yet bin otherwise than he
was, had he not elevated himself to a degree so eminent. Seneca (as a Stoicke)
has in many places repeated this maxim; adding that Jupiter himself never
exceeded his wise man, but in this sole point (to wit) that the first was free,
and happy by a longer duration of time, than the other; which thing (says he)
renders it not a whit the more perfection, seeing (on the conrrary) it is
always to be esteemed a great artifice, to comprehend much in a narrow
compass. Now to the end it should not be imagined that it was only the
Stoickes which had declared themselves with so much presumption, touching the
Philosophers liberty; you may perceive in Iamblychus (who has written the life
of Pythagoras) c. 35. de vita Pyth.
how he and his disciples persuaded themselves that they were as so many Gods
upon earth, where they had right to exercise an absolute empire over the rest
of mankind; and therefore it is well known they have affected the sovereign
command in all places, where they have been able to establish themselves; and
that they might execute this power with the more freedom, they held by
tradition, and by a cabal confirmed amongst them, that all such as were not
admitted or (according as they then used to speak) initiated into their
mysteries, ought to be respected and used but as mere beasts; to which purpose
they had so frequently in their mouths that verse of Homer, where Agamemnon is
called a Pastor of the people; to intimate (according to their words) that they
ought to treat them like the rest of Animals; and that he which commanded
them, might dispose of them, as best him seemed good. In fine we gather both
from the Greek and Roman histories, that to speak of Philosophers in general,
they would live so freely, and so far extend the liberty of their profession,
that Athens (the most free City of all Greece) could not endure them; and that
the Republique of Rome was oftentimes constrained to banish them out of her
Territories. For I will say nothing of the Lacedaemonians, nor of K. Antiochus,
and Lisimachus; who entertained them not a whit more favorably; because one may
perhaps presuppose, that the martial humor of the first, and the small
inclination which these Princes had to the Sciences, importuned them (without
any other consideration) to despise, and neglect men of a life purely
conte^plative. The History of those who retired themselves into Persia, under
the reign of Cosroes, is very remarkable to this purpose: behold what I
recollect from thence. In the time of Justinian, the greatest Philosophers
within all the extent of his dominions, highly disgusted the corrupt manners of
their age; but especially (as Agathias observes) L. 2. hist.
the opinions at that time received in the Roman Empire, touch touching the
Divinity. To the end they might be more at Liberty, and have nothing which
might importune them in their fashion of living, and especially in point of
their Religion, they took their refuge into Persia. A very short time after
made them acknowledge how much they had mistaken themselves; finding there,
neither that innocence of life, no^ yet that repose which they so fully expected
to meet withal. And altough Cosroes received them with all possible humanity,
and courtesy, endeavoring by all means to retain them; yet they esteemed it
for the greatest favor he could do them, that he would grant them license to
return back again to the place from whence they were fled; nevertheless
(according as this Historian observes) their journey was not altogether
inutill; for Cosroes calling them to mind a little after their Departure, in a
treaty of peace which he contracted with the Romans, stipulated by express
article (of which he had very great care) that none of those Philosophers
should in the least manner be violated, nor constrained to abjure the opinions
unto which they adhered, and embraced as the best. This story puts me in mind of
the insolent demand which once, a most impious Portuguese made at Lions unto
Henry the third: to wit, that it might be permited him, not to adore any other
Divinity in his dominions, save that only of the Sun: for without doubt, there
may be both an excess, and a sin too, in desiring a liberty so extremely
unconcerned, as that should neither submit it self to the laws of heaven, nor
to those of reason. The transcendent indulgence of so great a freedom (to use
Plato's own expressions) is the source, 8. de Rep and ibi. Fic.
and fountain of an extreme servitude; because it renders us slaves unto our
own selves, and proper passions: and the greatest libertine of all the
Philosophers, Epicurus himself, has accknowledged, that to return truly to
on's self, and be perfectly free, a man should submit to the ordinances of
Philosophy. And in truth, Paulus 2. ad cor. c. 3. v. 17
we learn out of a much better passage; that wheresoever the spirit of God is
found, Paulus 2. ad Cor. c. 3. v. 17
there it is where we find an absolute freedom indeed. But that's to be
understood of a filial liberty, which always goes accompanied with an
extreme reverence and respect, and such as is known by its opposition unto
that servile fear, which never quits, nor forsakes the Ungodly. For we know in
another place, from a text which was dictated by the self same spirit of God;
Job c. 11. v. 12.
that there remains only man alone, whom vanity has so far deprived of
judgment, that he glories of being borne so free, as that he imagines he has a
right to live according to his own fancy; and who believes that it were an
offer of violence toward his person to prescribe him Laws or make him submit
unto any sovereign what soever. Thereupon he is compared to those young foales
which endeavor to shake off their yoke, not having as yet bin accustomed unto
it; and his brutality is admirally well represented to us by that of the wild
Ass, whom we behold running through the deserts without bit or bridle. And
albeit we receive from Seneca all these lofty sayings of the Stoiques which we
have already produced; yet has he in a thousand places confessed that there
was no true Liberty, which did not acknowledge the empire of Reason. If thou
would submit all things unto thy self Ep. 37.
(says he in one of his Epistles) make it thy profession to obey this Daughter
of Heaven: Thou shall command all the rest, if thou render thy self pliable to
her injunctious. And in another place he adds; that the most difficult of all
other servitudes is, Praes. ad l. ^. not. qu.
that which subjects us to our own selves, and makes us to render obedience to
all our depraved appetites; for that (as so many merciless Tyrants) they
persecute us night and day, without permiting us the fruition of the least
repose; so that there is no man can pretend to liberty, unless he do first
absent himself from a subjection so cruel, and insupportable. And in his
Treatise of an happy life, wherein he advises us that we should never take any
thing in ill part, or with the least alteration of spirit, of all that which it
pleases God, or Nature to ordain; he enters into this goodly Consideration,
that we are all of us in this world as in an estate Monarchical, where we
ought to make it our glory to obey our Sovereigns commands; and believe, that
the most essential part of all our freedom consists, in willing that which is
the good pleasure of his divine Majesty. And seeing the Liberty which the same
Philosopher uses, (to pass sometimes out of one extreme into another) makes
him affirm elsewhere, Ep. 17. and 29.
that Philosophy is so free, she neither fears the Gods nor Men; let us
expound a little those bold words, as we have already done those of the
Apostle, and assure our selves, that Seneca has not condemned but the base,
and criminal fear, which is ever inseparable from vice, and so (by consequent)
mortal enemy to those who make it their profession to love wisdom, and follow
virtue. Having thus regulated what appertains to the Philosophique liberty;
taking it for resolved, that she never ought to extend her self to those
things which are any way repugnant to Religion, Policy and good manners; it
remains that we consider whether it be very likely there should any men be,
who in all the rest do enjoy a true Philosophique liberty; and who (not having
more disirregular passions) despise Honors, Pleasures, Riches, and whatsoever
other goods are not acquired or conserved but by the loss of our Liberty. For
if the saying of one of the Antonines be true, Iul. Capitol. in Ant. Pio.
that neither Philosophy, nor the Empire could ever have the power to take away
our affections, we ought not then adhere to the affirmative opinion, which
imports nothing more in this argument, than specious, and lofty swelling words,
more proper to pusfe and swell us up unto vanity (on the subject whereon we
treat) than afford us the least veritable and solid satisfaction of mind. I
know very well that the Philosophique contemplatio^s imprint a certain
audacity and confidence in the soul; which hinders us from being afraid of any
thing, making us despise, and undervalue the greatest part of those things that
are most esteemed of in the World. Aristippus did hereupon vaunt himself, that
he had gathered this excellent fruit from philosophy, to be able to speak with
resolution and confidence, without apprehension of any person whatsoever.
Aristotle pronounced before Alexander, that it was not less lawful to men,
who comprehended thoughts worthy, and veritable, such as we might have of
things divine, to possess an heart elevated, and a courage invincible; than to
those who swayed the government of the whole universe, and commanded the most
absolutely here on earth. Diogenes is represented us (in the conference which
he had with this great Monarch) discoursing with him as with his inferior.
Being once a slave, he requested his Master who was to sell him (unto him that
offered most) to demand whether in stead of a servant any body had need of a
Master: boasting himself to be no more a Captive at that time, than an
enchained Lion; who always makes his Keepers more afraid of him, than he
apprehends his Keepers. For all this it is possible that we may on the one
side be free, and and yet in slavery on the other: Thus one thinks himself
free from ambition who is basely enthralled to the passion of Love, or Avarice;
and the importance is, to find out whether our humanity be capable to enjoy by
the virtue of Philosophy, a liberty so free and independent, as they are used
ordinarily to decipher us out in the Schools. But to speak soberly concerning
this matter; it appears this free man, which She represents us under the name
of Sage, to be rather an Idea of that which may be the scope of our desires,
than any thing in good earnest: our Jmagination for the most part forms unto
her self a subject which she takes pleasure to embelish with such an equipage
of rare qualities, to render it accomplished, that its beyond the ordinary
power of Nature to render it a true existence. And there is much reason to
believe, that this wise man, or this free person (of whom the Philosophers
speak) is not less difficult to find out, than the Orator of Cicero, the
Arckitect of Vetruvius, the Pyramid of the Egyptians, Herod. l. 2.
and the (...) of the Grecians; Notwithstanding all this I believe verily, that
there are some men to be found in all ages, who extremely approach this merit;
and I am persuaded that we have known some, even in these our times; although
they make it for the most part their chiefest care to keep themselves hidden,
and incognite; yea methinkes there have bin some beams, which have even darted
forth to us of certain Virtues so transcendent, that in mine opinion, they
might well pass for perfect copyes finished from those Originals, which the
ages past would have presented unto us. But these are productions of Nature, so
rare, that we may well number them amongst the most prodigious, and stupendous
miracles: or (to say better) these are effects so particular of the Divine
munificence (whenever it pleases him to communicate himself here beneath)
that there is far more reason to adore the bounty of God; than to imagine it
the least merit of the Creature. In effect, what is more strange than these
great Genius's, who being perfectly acquainted with the necessitudes of our
life (which we may happily reduce to a very few) equally despise goods, konours,
and whatsoever elevates the Empire of Fortune? The rest of men are her slaves,
and consecrate Altars to her, as unto some great Divinity. These are they who
make it their glory to provoke her, and oppose their Courage against her
puissances. Doubtless, behold the most strange, and most considerable
spectacle that may possibly be; Ecce res magna habere imbecilitatem hominis,
securitatem Dci. Sen. Ep. 54.
to see the powers, the independency, the assurance of a God (as the Heathen
speaks) united to the imbecility, and frailty of our humane nature. So it is,
that if there be found any entire, and absolute liberty amongst us, doubtless
it is residing in these heroique souls, of whom I will ^ender you here, two or
Three of Antiquity for Examples: Expressly abstayning to speak of so many holy
personages wherewith Christianity does daily furnish us, because in this
chapter, we pretend to consider this Philosophique only which appeared in the
world a great while before it could be irradiated by the beams of the Gospel.
The Christian School retaynes its reasons, and its discourse apart. There we
learn, that the greatest glory of our Intellect, is not to know, but to
believe; as the glory of our will is not to command, but to obey. As touching
Philosophy, she is not always so austere; for oftentimes she descends to the
satisfaction of an Infidel, as well as of a true believer.

Epictetus shall be the first whom I will produce, to show that many of those
of whom we treat, have pretended to be free men, even amidst chains; and to
possess this independency of spirit, which truly no fetters are able to
captivate; but withal, making only a part of this humane liberty, according to
our precedent considerations. This great man was a Stoique, as you may perceive
by his Enchiridion or Manuell compiled by Arrien his disciple, being a summary
of the Morallity which those of their Sect made profession of. His most
memorable discourses have bin communicated unto us by the same Arrien, who has
composed four books of them, and so couched them in writing, as an excellent
Painter uses to draw his lineaments, to represent us the figure of a Soul, by
so much the more free, and heightened, as his adverse fortune endeavored (it
should seem) to suppress it. This was a Ball which rebounded toward heaven,
proportionably to the force whereby it was cast against the earth. In effect,
although he saw himself reduced to the hard condition of Servitude, and to be
one of the slaves of Epaphroditus, Captain of Nero's guards; yet he always
appeared incomparably more free than his Master. One day that Epaphroditus gave
him a certain rude blow on the Leg. Epictetus told him, dryly, that he should
have a care he did not break it; This unmercifull hangman having at that
instant redoubled the stroke, with such violence as he br^ke the bone:
Epictetus added, (with a smile worthy of all Ages to be admired) Did not I tell
you, that you would fool and break my Leg? L. 7. Contra celsum.
I know well that Origin has censured the impiety of Celsus, for daring to
prefer the above named Epictetus unto JESUS CHRIST: but this does not hinder
that the virtue of the first, should not deserve to be very much esteemed,
although (truly) there be no proportion of God to us, and of the Creature to
the Creator. Let us also observe that St Augustine was not restrained by this
consideration, to hope, or (at the least) ardently to desire that God had mercy
upon Epictetus soul, being not able to leave off admiring the extraordinary
mortification of his senses: and I have seen in the work of a Doctor of the
Ambrosian College of Milan, that Saint Carlo Borhomeo heard no lecture which
more pleased him, than those which discoursed of this Philosopher collected by
Arrien. It is very certain, that the generosity and liberty of the Soul, which
Epictetus made always to appear notwithstanding his corporal servitude, and
of which he has left us so many important precepts in writing, acquired him
such a repute, that the very lamp of earth, wherewithal he used to illuminate
his lucubrations, was sold for three thousand drams, after his decease; at
so high a value, was all which appertained to him esteemed: and truly, it may
well be said, that for the constancy, liberty, and freedom of the superior
part, there was never any person which exceeded him.

A very little time before Epictetus, Rome had seen another excellent
Philosopher called Demetrius; this is he of whom Seneca speaks these goodly
words, that (in his opinion) nature had produced him to show the age wherein he
lived, that a greater genius might protect himself from being perverted by the
multitude; L. 7. de benes. c. 8. and 13.
although he were not able to redress it; so incorrigible always it is. And
because he had acquired a very high reputation by that open profession which he
made of Philosophique liberty, the Emperor Calligula would have always had
him about his person, supposing it a thing very easy to have gained him by a
present of moneys. Demetrius laughing at the thoughts of this Prince, and
rejecting with disdain that which was proffered him: if the Emperor (says
he) would tempt me; if he have any design to corrupt me, he needs not trouble
himself twice; let him at once send me his diadem, and then see; Toto fui illi
experiendus Imperio.
if the price of an Empire were capable to shake my liberty: Certainly, behold
terms which well deserve to be collected by Seneca, and consecrated by him even
unto Eternity it self, with all the recommendation which he has bestowed upon
them. For my part, I do not believe that its possible to produce an Example
more express to make us comprehend with what generosity a Philosophique soul
does undervalue treasures, honors, and generally whatsoever others have in
esteem, to preserve themselves the inestimable good of liberty.

One Action of Socrates is so patt for this purpose, that I should esteem it
criminal not to allege it, albeit he were not the common father of
Philosophers, and he, out of whose brain (as out of some high mountain) all
their different sects are derived, like so many separated rivulets. This man of
a life irreproachable (to speak morally, Apo. 1. and 2.
whom Iustine Martyr affirms to have bin a Christian long before Christianity
it self; and whom many of our Doctors have not as yet dared absolutely to
exclude Paradise) was desired by the King of Macedon, Archelaiis, that he would
come unto him: he dwelt not long on the resolution which he was to take
hereupon; and his answer was, that he was not so inconsiderate as to apply
himself to a man whose benefits he knew not how to recompense. However Seneca
(who believed he could penetrat even into the very interior of Socrates) L. 5.
de be^^f. c. 6.
assures us, that the fear of prejudicing his liberty, and delivering himself
over unto an inevitable servitude, was the only ground of his refusal.
Whosoever will be free ought to imitate Socrates in that. He that cannot
despise the Court of Princes, etc all that which the Court can promise of
goods, pleasures and dignities, can never enjoy a pure and Philosophique
Liberty: and he it is only who ( Philosopher like) values liberty according to
her due estimate, that voluntarily abandons all things to the end he may enjoy
her. This is that Diogenes had very well learned, when of all the favors which
Alexander offered him, he accepted none but that of rendering him the beams of
the Sun, which the person of this Monarch hindered him from enjoying, by
interposing of himself. And when he replied to those who called the
Philosopher Callisthenus happy, (because of the many favors which the same
Prince conferred upon him at the beginning) that for his part, he esteemed him
most unfortunate, in that he could not dine, or supp, but at the pleasure of
Alexander.

I could yet let you see by sundry other examples, that which these already
prove touching the Philosophique liberty. Anaxagoras to the intent he might
procure this freedom, absolutely quitted his Patrimony to him that would
accept thereof. Liberty caused Heraclitus, as likewise Prometheus, to resign
their Scepters into the hands of their brothers. And Empedocles renounced the
government of a Monarchy (which was presented him) for the love he bare unto
her. I might add that Pythagoras made almost the same reply to Hiero; Diogenes
to Antipater; Zeno to Antigonus; Stilpon to Ptolomy; Xenocrates, Ephorus, and
Monedemus, to Alexander, which Socrates did unto Archelaus: but I suppose to
have sufficiently cleared two things; the one, that this liberty is not
absolutely entire; because she is oftentimes only intellectual; the other,
that she is so rare, because of her solutive faculty from whatsoever most
strictly obliges, and restrains our affections; so as we may very well indulge
those who doubt of her real Existency. For if the least imaginable constraint,
or trivial engagement, be capable to dispossess us the fruition of so great a
good; and if this Spanish sentence, Quien me at a, me mata; he which binds me,
kills me, be (as I take it to be) the most proper d^vise, that a man may assume
who pretends to be in the Philosophique liberty; who is it, I pray (following
our precedent conjecture) that has the face to attribute it unto himself?
Truly, I do very much doubt whether there be any man can do it with
conscience, which being so, we shall not make it any difficulty to repeat in
this place; That perhaps there is none at all, who can truly affirm himself
to be free. The Examples of Demetrius and of Socrates advertiseme (in that
which remains) to refflect upon the servitude of the Court, as it stands in
opposition to the greatest Liberty which is the Philosophique, by the greatest
servitude which we presume to be that of the Court.

Of the Servitude of the Court. CHAP. V.
SEeing the end (as the first in our intention) is that which regulates all our
actions; it is no wonder at all that where the greatest recompenses are
proposed, there should also be found the most laborious, and difficult
travailes; and that the Pretentions of the Court being so eminent, and (as it
were) almost infinite, obliges those that attain them, unto extreme
servitude. There is nothing to which a Courtier does not submit himself that
he may comply with this sweet hope which never lets him be at rest, and which
the Italians have very aptly termed, the bread of the miserable. The Flies
cannot be hindered from following the honey, although one Ant travails more way
in a few hours (according to the proportion of his body) in searching some
grains of Corn, then does the Sun in all his quotidan revolutions. It is the
Prey which makes the most solitary and cruel of wild beasts to quit the
forest: and a fairer bait obliges the poor fish to precipitat himself into
the net, or at least to swallow the hook; but the passion which all these
silly Creatures have for that which they most affect, is not comparable to the
desires of Courtiers, who bequeath the fairest days of their life, and
voluntarily renounce their liberty, upon the empty belief which they have to
be one day able to satisfy the uttermost of their desires: For albeit
experience has taught the world, that the service of great men is like unto
long voyages, from whence indeed some there be which return rich; but where
the most part also miserable perich: and although it be easy to observe that
few of those who plunge themselves into this vast Ocean of the Court, ever
arrive at their desires, and can boast themselves of having transported Pearls
from thence; yet will no body (for all this) take warning, and gain by the sad
example of others. Every one promises unto himself fortune more propitious
than any of his companions found her; and as one Vessel happily arrived from
the Indies, is the cause why an hundred others undertake the voyage, (without
considering that a thousand have bin Shipwracked) so the good fortune of one
sole Courtier is the cause that there be innumerable who imbarke themselves to
steer the same course which the other has gone before, notwithstanding all the
hazards of a sea so full of Pirates, as is the Court, and so obnoxious to all
sorts of weather. But to leave Allegories, and as it were with the finger point
out that which we have already spoken touching servitude, and which in it is
almost impossible to evade; we shall consider it in the one, and the other part
of the body and of the mind, according to our divisions already established;
and shall make it clear, that if there be no slaves more miserable, then those
who are daily in chains, Courtiers may in that sense pass for the most unhappy
amongst men.

I should be very sorry that any man should take this which I am about to
deliver for a satyr, and that which I have read in books for a description of
those things which I might have observed in the Court of Princes: in effect, I
reflect on nothing here save the ancient Courts, those of Barbarians, and
Tyrants, from whence I gather all the proofs of my discourse. The liberty
which I assume to alledg, what the Philosophers of that time have declared
against them, is a sure testimony of the steeme which I make of the Courts of
Christians; and above all, that of Ours, which would never permit me to speak
in this manner were it guilty of the same defects: besides, it would be both
impertinent, and unjust, that I should be blamed for that, which so many others
have done before me; and since a Pope (such a one as was Pius the second) durs^
before his Pontificat, and during the time he was yet called Aeneas Sylvius, L.
de miser Curialium.
describe all the miseries of Courtiers, protesting that he did i^ without
design to offend either the Emperor Fredrick his Prince, or his Court; why
should any man take in ill part these Philosophique reflections which I propose
upon the same subject; and that which has nothing of the asperity which this
Author, and infinite others, have mixed in their writings treating upon this
matter? And if I have bin (as it were) compelled to observe certain vices in
general of the Court, occasion may offer it self (another time) to proclaim
the virtue thereof, and to speak particularly of its merit.

For my part, I do not believe that any (except such as have never seen the
Court, or so much as heard speak of the air, and fashion of living there) can
be ignorant of the extreme personal subjection which he is obliged to render
day and night, unto those men whose favor he desires to obtain. There is no
body in that Country but ought to be even ready to mutilate, and dismember
himself like Zophyrus, that by so doing he might insinuate, and serve to the
advance of what he there searches; Not, that where the service of ones Prince
is concerned, a man should not be obliged even to expose both his life, and
fortune for a subject so worthy: all Nations have unanimosly consented to this
politic principle ( to wit) that there is no death more glorious, more
meritorious, than that which is received for the affection to his Souveraign
and love of his Country: Notwithstanding, there is a great deal of difference
betwixt the actions which have so noble an object, albeit they cannot otherwise
than testify a necessary servitude, and such, whereof we shall here produce
Examples, which have for their foundation nothing but an infamous flattery, and
a servill baseness of spirit. Philip of Macedon having been constrained to
wear a fillet, by reason of a wound which he had received on the head; the
greater part of those of his Court come abroad with the like, as if they had
all of them had the same occasion. His son Alexander contracted this ill
habitude to carry his head awry, which was the cause that there appeared not a
man in all his equipage, but such as inclined their necks likewise to the same
side. The Young Dionysius was naturally pur-blind, and the wine which he loved
excessively did much shorten his sight; by and by, all his followers feigned
themselves blind, every man jossling his fellow, and stumbling at every foot:
1. ^ and 10
and Atheneus observes, that being at the table, they counterfeited, and made
semblance not to find the dishes, affecting also to sit in the place where the
King used to spit upon them, with other the like sordidityes, which it were a
shame to report. This kind of voluntary blindness puts me in mind of that
which one writ of the Emperor Hadrian: the extraordinary love which he had for
Antinous (whether because of his exquisite beauty; or for that he offered
himself a Victime at the sacrifice which was celebrated for the prolongation
of the Emperors life) gave him a passionate desire to have this young boy
placed amongst the number of the Gods; Hadrian had no sooner declared himself
thereupon, but immediately those of his Court protested (contending who should
first bring the tidings) that they had seen the soul of the Fair Antinous
ascend on high, and take his place as a new star, in that part of the heavens,
where we do at this day observe the constellation which bears h^s name. And
indeed one ought never approach greater powers (according to the saying of
Xenophanes) unless we be resolved to practice all kind of complaisance. (...)
The agreeableness of dissimulation does almost every day surmount the homely
simplicity of truth; nay, and some would have it pass for a rule of Court,
Gul. ^^.
to confess that he perceived the stars, if another would maintain it to be
night at high noone; or, being become a little better versed in the Court; to
excuse our selves, for that we have mistaken the Moon for the sun. So it is,
that besides this shameful captivity of all the senses, we are basely obliged
to submit unto those of other men's. The person of a Courtier is so little in
his own power, that (to take it rightly) he enjoys it not but as a thing
merely borrowed, and as having engaged the propriety which he possessed there.
For (without speaking at all of ordinary duties which consume even almost all
the precious movements, and actions of this life; and without touching an
infinity of perils wherein it is necessary he should expose himself almost
every moment) the sole complaisance does sometimes cause him as it were out of
frailty to deprive himself even of a part of his body. Lucian tells us that the
Eunuch Combabus, favorite of Seleucus and passionatly beloved by the Queen
Stratonica his wife, had no sooner declared to the Assyrian Court (to the end
he might thereby avoyde all calumny, and suspicion) that he had dismembered
himself of the parts which he wanted; but suddenly those whose hopes (...) did
the same, and volunt arily deprived themselves of that, which only rendered
them men, to the end they might not lose their expectations, and continue
themselves in the good graces of Combabus. This shall suffice to demonstrate
how great the servitude of the Body is.

It will be needless to insist much upon that of the mind; seeing this is the
most common of all other Maxims of the Court; never to have other will, than
that of great men's; nor to judge of any thing whatsoever (if there be any
means to avoyde it, until they have first passed there opinion; that so
nothing may be spoken which may be obnoxious to the least exception. There is
perhaps no religious vow whatsoever, that exacts of us any so entire a
renuntiation of all the actions of our proper will, as does the interest of the
Court, and the design of making a fortune there. From thence is it results
this great conformity to the inclinations of Princes, and that if Francis the
first testified his affection to letters, all the world will be learned; not
esteeming him a good Courtier who bred not his children Scholars: On the
contrary, does any Prince despise the Sciences, every one affects barbarism?
Lux, and superfluity was established through the dissoluteness of Henry the
third, as was Piety when he assumed the weed of a Penitentiary. In fine this is
a thing universally acknowledged of the world that the Court is a place of
perpetual dissimulation, where one always walks with the visage in
Mascarado, where one seignes to desire that which he most abhoreth, and where
there is no one act produced of free will, unless it be that by which we
embrace a voluntary servitude.

But as touching the operations of the Intellect, they are in Court so much the
more subject, as the prostitution of this part is effected without much
violence, in those who make all other considerations whatsoever, to give place
to those of profit; such is the most frequent custom of the Court, after that
a man is never so little engaged in the enchantments of this Circes; and
verily, I less wonder at some men, who indulge themselves this liberty, to
represent the terrestrial Gods rather such as they ought to be, than such as
really they are. These (I say) are not the most culp^ble (although sufficiently
blame worthy) who content themselves in styling their vices, imperfect Virtues,
and discover every day goodly names which serve for coverture unto all their
defaults. But this is a thing altogether deplorable, having respect to the
liberty whereof we speak, when we submit even unto the basenesses of the mind,
and to flatterings so enormous and ridiculous, that one even appears to have
made bankrupt all manner of judgment. Alexander the great was constrained to
hear one of those infamous cajolleries, L. ib. 6.
when one of his court (whom Atheneus names Nicesius) protested to him that
the very flies which sucked his blood, became more valiant, and gave stings
more courageously than other flies did. The Philosopher Anaxander
(notwithstanding his profession) treated this Monarch after the same manner,
when upon a clap of thunder (which was very terrible) be desired that he would
say whether it were not he, who (as fonne of love) did but even now thunder so
loud. Constantine was compelled to stop the mouth of a Priest, Eusebius. l. 4. de
vit. Constable. c. 4.
who told him that his Virtues merited not only to command (as he did) during
this life; but likewise to reign in the other also, with the Son of God.
Procopius (or to say better he that has made the Anecdots under his name)
represents the great Civillian Tribonius, not ashamed to use these terms
unto Instinian: P. 61.
I swear to your Imperial Majestic, that this great Piety which you always
exercise, gives me extraordinary apprehensions, that I shall behold you
suddenly assumed into heaven, when we least expect it. To this likewise are
conformable those words of Hesychius, touching the impiety of Tribonius in his
life; And we know also, that at an entry of Demetrius into Athens, one told
him, there was none other God save himself; or that, if any, they were busy
in sleeping, and taking their repose, during the time he acted. After this
sort it is, that crimes so easily immingle themselves, and that in an extreme
impiety we may observe a wonderful strange dissoluteness of mind, which is
for the most part attended with a fear, which never abandons even the very
slaves themselves. Harpagus being asked by Aslyages, if he had well relished
the flesh of his son, of which he now but newly had eaten with a prodigious
inhumanity; answered, that at the table of his sovereign, there was nothing
ill, and that whatsoever was don by his command was to him most agreeable. Lib.
1. and 3.
Herodotus (whorelateth us this story) does yet furnish us with another upon
the same subject: Cambyses having placed for his butt or mark, the heart of a
young boy which he transfixed with a dart in the presence of his Father,
demanded of him, what his opinion was of the shot, to whom the father answered,
that he did not believe even Apollo himself could have levelled more exactly.
Truly I am of Seneca's judgment, that although the cruelty of the Tyrant was
very notorious; yet was the reply of the Father far more impious. Sceleratius
telum illud laudatum est, L. 3. de ira c. 14.
quam emissum. At the least no man can deny, that these are not examples
sufficiently pregnant, to show what may be expected from the liberty of the
judgments of the Court; where we ought to resist even the most just, and
sensible movements of nature, to the end we may say nothing which may displease
such as are feared, and adored there. If Alexander will be taken for one of the
Gods, the Priests of Jove are the first who attribute unto him the rays of the
deity, and acknowledge him for the real son of Hammon.

But happly these mental captivities would appear less strange to us,
suffered we them only to comply with those unto whom otherwise we cannot render
too many respects. It would be no wonder to see that Favorinus betrayed the
honor of his knowledge, and reason, in favor of an Emperor who commanded
thirty Legions. And in effect, c. 7.
when the Ecclesiastique has delivesed us the Precept never to make show of
over great abilities before ones Sovereign: It seems that he would incite us
to this flexibility of mind, which we ought ever to have in presence of him,
and those principal Ministers who do represent the Person of the King; and to
whom he communicates a beam of his luster, and authority. But the mischief
is, that we must oftentimes exercise this our obedience toward persons which
do least merit it of their Sovereign. We bear more respect to a favorite of
Pompeys, than unto Cato of Vtica. And the whole world has observed the
insolent authority of the Eunuchs in most of the Lev^ntine Courts; of
Libertines, in that of the Ancient Italy; and of a number of the same state who
have (in sundry places) abused the favor of their Masters. For Princes
sometimes please themselves in imitating those great Architects, who remove
huge Machines, with very small engines. They extremely delight to have power
to act as causes universal, in changing (according as they seem good) the
destinies of their subjects. And to represent him the better whose lively Image
they are here on Earth, exalt some one from the Dunghill, even to the sublimest
dignityes and most important charges of their Palace. Men are their Counters,
which signify in value more, or less, according to the Position which they
are pleased to assign them. And after the same manner as every man may when he
writes, make such, or such a letter of the Alphabet precede, which best him
pleases; Kings are in possession to bestow the principal places of honor,
and authority within their states, unto those whom some particular inclination
causes them to be preferred before others. In the mean time, whatsoever may
be (for History makes it evident that the election is not always equal) we
ought not less to submit our discourse, and reason to all their pleasures,
than to the will of the Sovereign himself; for that many times the Prince is
not accessible, but through their mediation. The most inferior of his Petty
Officers who has the honor to approach his sacred person at the hours of his
retyrement, and private divertisments, may easily enough make, or mar,
advance, or retarde the most important affairs. And therefore it is, we see in
the Acts of the Apostles, that those of Tire, c. 12.
and Sidon, desirous to be reingratiated with King Herod (who was offended at
them) addressed themselves unto Blastus, Prime Groom of the Privy Chamber, by
his means to make their peace. And I well remember upon that, of a Persian
tale, which perhaps is no jot inferior in subtilty to any one of those which
the Ancients have attributed unto Aesop. A King (says the fable) having made
proclamation that they should assemble all the beasts of burden which could
possibly be found, to serve in the War that he undertook; the Fox was no
sooner advertised thereof, but immediately he flies; that he might avoid the
peril of so unprofitable an employment; by and by he meets the Wolf, who
(instead of imitation) derides him, that he did not conceive that the ordinance
only respected those beasts, who were proper for burden, from which they were
altogether exempt; Do not you rely upon that, replies the Fox, for (I tell
thee) that if those which be about the King once take the caprice, that we may
serve as well as the rest, we shall likewise be compelled to go, or, at least,
infinitely suffer, before his Majesty can be rightly informed of our reasons
to the contrary. It is no difficult matter to extract the sense of this
ingenious story, and so judge of what importance the favor and Authority of
those (we speak of) does concern us. This is it which does infinitely
multiply the servitude of the Court, which renders the subjection much more
insupportable, and that which makes it be numbered (as I conceive) amongst those
felicities which the Ecclesiastique reckons up; c. 25.
even the happiness, not to have our liberty engaged unto those Persons who
deserve not the least subjection unto them.

The goodness of that government under which we live, gives me the hardiness
to explain my self with a liberty worthy the reign of Lewis the Just; As he
is one of the greatest Monarchs on Earth, and the most worthy to be admired; he
is likewise the best of all, and such a Prince, that there is no imaginary
liberty, which can possibly be so sweet, and advantageous unto us, as the
obedience which we render him. After his example, the greatest of his Court,
exercise an authority so well moderated, that I do verily believe to be able
without danger (as well as without fear) to report the defects of others, and
say in general, that which was almost continually blamed in the Palaces of
other Princes. The theme which has hitherto adduced me has too far absented
me from flattery, to add any thing which does so much as approach it. And I
know the genious of his Majesty, and of those who have the most power about
him, to be so averse from those adulterate, and false praise (of which we have
but newly spoken) as by that only, I should fear to become odious, and blame
worthy, were I but so inconsiderate as to make use of them. Truly there is
nothing which the most glorious Potentates ought so much to detest, as a
flatterer, which ascribes to them such extravagant, borrowed Encomions, when
as they merit nothing but such as are proper, and veritable. And therefore it
was that Lysippus boldly affirmed, he had more honored Alexander, representing
him holding a spear in his hand; than Apelles who had painted him brandishing
and fulminating the lightning, like Jove himself. And indeed we read in the
History of this great Conqueror, that he laughed at a certain Artist, who had
the vanity, to undertake of the Mountain Athos, to carve our the figure of
Alexander, if he would but have given him commission; as also, how on a time
he cast the book of Aristotle into the river, which he passed, as unworthy,
because of some ridiculous, and incredible exploits, Lucian de scrib. hist.
which he writ that Alexander had performed in a duel against King Porus,
wherein he was never yet engaged. Attila was touched with the like resentment,
when he condemned to the fire, in Pavia, the verses of a certain Poet; for
that to render the Pedigree of this Scourge of God the more illustrious, he had
derived it from so far, till he extracted his descent even from the immortal
Essences themselves. And verily they had (in my opinion) good reason so to
treat them. For my part, I esteem modesty to be one of the most essential
parts of Praise; nor should I believe I had yet rendered all the honor and
respect, which I owe unto these Heroes, and to our great Le^is, were it not
that the silence wherewithal I reverence them, and which I do voluntarily
impose on my self, composed the better part of their Praise.

The Conclusion.
BEhold here, Melpoclitus, what has so often traversed my thoughts, and of
which I verily persuade my self, the meditation will not be altogether
fruitless, in the necessity which sometimes engages us to accommodate with
the nevitable subjections of life: For, if it be true, that to affirm ones
self free we ought to be exempt from all kind of eorporall, and Mentallc
servitude; if there be no man who may challenge a right of attributing that
liberty solely to himself; since very Kings themselves be not enfranchised from
certain duties which do most strickly oblige them to their people: If those
Philosophers who would be esteemed (in this respect) Paramount all Crowns, and
Diademes, have rendered themselves slaves to vanity, as well as other men are of
their Passions; If (I say) the servitude of the Court, diametricaly opposite to
the Philosophique liberty, captivate such a world of people (accordingly as we
are compelled to demonstrate) may we not then well conclude that there is not
any Person, who is absolutely free? which thing being so, every one ought to
satisfy himself in that condition of life, to the which he finds himself
engaged, or (it may be) attached unto; although (happily he therein find
likewise some species of subjection, since (that in fine) we are all obliged
quietly to acquiesce, upon that which the Divine Providence has determine^ on
this point of our LIBERTY.

FINIS.
Reader, The absence of the Translator (whilst the Book was in Press) and
many errors of the Amanuensis, request thee either to pardon these Errata
following, or else correct them thus.

Page 6. line 13. for elation, read elevation, p. 12. l. 4. dele have, p. 18.
l. 10. r. is repugnant. p. 27. l. 16, dele great. p. 30. l. 9. for They, r.
The. Ib. l. 15. r. to renounce. p. 32. l. 4. for those rude Masters, r. those.
etc. p. 45. l. 8. dele a. p. 47. l. 1. for importaned, r. imported. p. 58. l.
14. for disirrregular, r. disregular. p. 65. l. 5. for incognite, r. incognite.
p. 66. l. 14. for Genius's, r. Geniuses.


