ACCADEMICAL Discourses.

Upon several Choice and Pleasant Subjects.

Written Originally in Italian, by the Learned and Famous LOREDANO.

ENGLISHED, By J. B. Gent.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Mabb, for John Playfere at the White Bear in the Upper
Walk of the New-Exchange, and Margaret Shears at the Blew Bible in Bedford
Street. 1664.

Imprimatur

October. 22. 1663. Roger L' Estrang.

THE Preface.
I Think it will be no small obligation, Friendly Reader, to present these
following Discourses of the Illustrious Loredano to thee. Who having composed
them occasionally for the Academy, intended not they should appear in this
slight dress before such as take the confidence to (ensure the Sun of spots,
and can find a Mole in the fair Face of Venus. He knows that praise is the
reward and result of Merit, and that the applause of the Learned is not to be
obtained without a more then ordinary Endeavor.

He has often affirmed that in framing them, he used no greater study or
application, than what proceeded from a flowing Vein, summoned by necessity for
quick dispatch; nor expected other approbation then what is due for his blind
obedience to the Laws of the Accademy: acknowledging that things done by chance
rarely succeed with praise: That the Painters Temerity and Fortune, who
accidentally dashed his Pencil, so happily on his imperfect Picture as to
finish it, was above Hope or Expectation succesful: That the operations of the
mind are of too great importance to be left to the unsteady conduct of Fortune:
and that although he ever was desirous to plead excuse for the imbecilities of
his works, yet he never pretended to so much confidence for his Negligence.

But I, who am acquainted with the perfections of his Genius, which makes his
modesty become an Addition to his other glories; and who knew that even what he
produces without study cannot be ascribed to chance, because Fortune alone
cannot guide that quil which not wearied with its happy flights through Italy,
has soared higher and passed into remoter Regions, being by all Virtuosoes
esteemed as a Mineral, that can produce nothing of meaner Value then Gold, have
courted him with so many repeated Persuasions and Entreaties, as have at length
overcome his Nicety, and made him condescend to allow me the disposal of them
as I thought fittest.

Indeed he engaged me to advertise thee to consider on what occasions they were
composed, that you might not expect such solid pieces, as some others he has
and may set forth, this being but the Sport, the other the Labor of the Brain
and Pen.

The Illustrious Loredano, not satisfied with these Writings, but knowing he
can do better, supposes he shall be judged of others, as he judges of himself.
Whereas I am confident, these Discourses will not want applause, and the care I
have taken, that they should not die in obscurity, will be gratefully accepted.

The Errors of the Press which like other corruptions of this Age, are very
rife and spreading, are left to thy Civility for Pardon. Bear with them,
Judicious Reader, and remembering what thou art, consider how much humanity is
subject to mistake.

THE Translator TO THE READER.
THese Ingenious Discourses have been entertained with so great esteem and
applause in most other Countries of Europe, that it would stick as a blemish
either of Ignorance or Envy upon us, if undervalued here. Which I have little
cause to fear, in this curious Age, since they are as rare as new to us, there
being nothing of this kind, that I know extant in our Language. These are,
indeed, but the least part of them, which if accepted, may be followed by a
greater Number hereafter; And this celebrated author made better acquainted to
our Nation, by his choicer and more solid writings, some whereof are ready for
the Press.

VALE. J. B.

A TABLE OF THE Several Discourses.
I. What Color is most convenient in a Lovers Face? 1 II. That silence is the
true Father of Love. 7 III. What thing does most prejudice the beauty of the
Face. 16 IV. What is the greatest favor a Lover can receive from his chaste
Mistress. 23 V. Whether the Rose does presage Felicity or Infelicity to a Lover.
28 VI. Wherefore in C^prus they protray'd Venus with a Beard. 35 VII. What the
manner of the Florentine Kiss is, and whence its Original. 36 VIII. Wherefore
Physicians affect to Wear great Beards. 42 IX. That Woman is more faithful to
Man, than he to Woman. 47 X. Whether blushing be a sign of Virtue. 54 XI.
Whether one can Kiss their beloved without Lasciviousness or Sensuality. 58
XII. Wherefore it is said, That Achiless's Lance did both wound and heal. 64
XIII. Wherefore Old people Sleep ordinarily less then young ones. 71 XIV.
Whether Gifts or Stealth's do most Felicitate Lovers. 76 XV. Wherefore
Pythagoras Prohibited the use of Beans. 80 XVI. In dispraise of Women. 85 XVII.
What Natural defect is the most Excuseable. 91 XVIII. Wherefore great Men do
not ordinarily favor Virtuous persons reduced to necessity. 96 XIX. Whether is
most potent to beget Affection Weeping, or Singing. 99
ACADEMICAL Discourses.
I. What Color is most proper and convenient for a Lovers Face.
I Do believe that black is the only proper Color for a Lovers Face, and those
which think otherwise, either do not love, or else deceive themselves.

He that loves is noble; because love will not cast away his shafts upon
ignoble breasts.

Nobilitas sub amore jacet. Sings Ovid Ep. 1.
and Dante Nel. 5. dell in f.


Amor ch'en cor gentil ratto s'apprende. Now black is the noblest Color,
because it is the most ancient Genesis cap. 1:


Tenebrae super universam terram, and because it preserves the sight; and
because also it contains, or comprehends all other Colors in it, therefore as
the most noble, it is the most proper for a Lovers face.

The Lover is dead, as 'twere, hear Plaut.

Ubi sum, ibi non sum, ubi non sum, ibi est animus. The amorous poison issuing
from a fair woman's Eyes, deprives the lover of his life, and would not we have
that lovers complexion black, that is thus killed by poison? Should not the
signs of his death be imprinted on his face.

Again, Love is an amorous fever, which corrupting the noblest blood, causes
his death. Therefore he that loves, dying through the infection of that
pestilential fever, cannot properly have any other color on his face but
Black.

The lover is obliged to improve his Ladies honor, but what greater honor, can
the lover do his Lady, then to serve as a shadow or foyl to set forth her
beauty with the greater luster? The charms of beauty are never discerned so
well, as by the inequality of such oppositions: the snow never seems so pure
and rarely white, as when it falls upon the blackest soil.

The affections of the heart are charactred, and copied in the face: therefore
if the heart be in a flame, the face must needs bear the signs of it, and what
greater tokens can a lover give, that he nourishes a fire within his breast,
then by showing the coals and sooty smoke upon his face.

The face can never express its grief for the sick heart, so well as by
clothing it self in such a mourning habit; Nor can the beloved give any credit
to his affection, unless she see him cloud his face with sorrow, grieving for
his lost heart, and liberty.

Who can deny, but such a face must needs become an Ethiope, which is
continually exposed so near the rays of two most ardent suns.

Arist. de Col.
Omnia combusta nigrescunt. That lover which does not cloth his face with
black, detracts from the merits of his Mistress, as if the beams that da^ted
from her eyes, had not the power to draw a veil of darkness over his face.

The lovers face ought to appear in such a manner, as is most likely to move
his Ladies Eye to pity; and what color is more likely to obtain that pity,
than black and mourning weeds, which death it self does mingle with its
horrors?

The lover ought to wear upon his face, the signs of what he ever most desires:
and what should a lover more desire, either to receive, or steal his amorous
enjoyments, than a dark midmight, whereof this black is a good Simbol on his
face.

The lovers face ought to be black, thereby to show his Lady the secrecy of his
affections, as having hid them from the Eyes, and knowledge of the world amid'st
that darkness; or else to demonstrate his constancy, which like the black
receives no alteration, nor cannot mask it self under any new appearance, as
other colors do.

The lover ought to seek all advantages for his beloved, and therefore having a
black face, it will preserve her sight: Nor does the black dissipate or
segregate those purer Atoms and lively spirits issuing from her eyes.

Arist. loc. cit.
Nigrum vim obtinet congregandi. Black is a sign of an indefatigable and robust
strength, ever much desired by the beloved, because they presuppose a great
heat in that breast, which has even cann'd, and scorched the very face.

And then it is likewise a sign of a great humility; that even the very beauty of
the face, is retreated from thence into the heart, in honor and reverence of
her presence.

By the Frontispiece we come to a great knowledge of the work, by this Porch we
may give a guess of the whole Fabric: and how can we then describe the amorous
Hell in a heart, but by the funest horrors of a black face?

Paleness in a face, is not always a sign of love. Those that betray and they
that are betrayed; such as fear, or hope, or hate, or envy, have ordinarily a
constant paleness dwelling on their Cheeks. A lover cannot merit any thing by
such a Color, which may proceed from so may different causes, hardly known by
the lover himself.

Other more brisk and lively colors cannot signify love, a lovers soul is too
much oppressed to leave such signs of joy upon the face. The face does first of
all declare the passions of the soul, and is the truest Index of the heart:
therefore to conclude, I do believe, there is no color that can so well befit
a lovers face, as black alone.

II. That Silence is the true Father of Love.
SO great is the love, that is bred in me, toward your selves, most virtuous
Academ? When I observe your favorable silence, and attention to what I say,
that I find my self obliged to affirm that silence is the true Parent, or
Father of love.

I shall not at this time go to distinguish of the sorts of love, because I
would not confound them. But I will treat of love in general, because the
practice of one single love, shows either a want of affection, or of deserts.

Silence, Illusters Academs, is very ancient, it being indeed brother to that
darkness out of which the first light was extracted. Nay, if it were possible
for any thing to have had being, before the eternal being of God himself,
certainly it must have been Silence. Now on the other hand, Love Passim amorem
ex antiquissimis dis esse concedetur, (...) (...) convivi^.
according to Plato's, and Cae^. Rho. lib. 8. cap. 25.
Hesiods testimony was the first deity, which the veneration of antiquity
brought forth: and therefore it could not possibly have any other Parent then
Silence.

But suppose we, that Love is the child of Venus (which nevertheless I dare not
believe, because true love cannot have its Original in an impure breast) how
ever Silence was the Father of it. For, says, Claud Minoe. sop. l'alicate emb.
106.
Epicharis, Silence inspires women with good thoughts and Nicostrates delivers
that it is the reward, and wages of chastity; Democritus, that it serves for a
rare Ornament; and Sophocles that it adds much honor and reputation to them. In
a word, all the spoils which the pride and Luxury of Asia or the novelties
that Africa produces Silentium mulieri prestat ornamentum; Arist. 1. Po^et.
could not so much beautify and adorn a woman as Silence alone does Inhumanis
silentia nihil optubilius (...). oalcay.
it being the most desirable thing that can be in them,

And should we then believe, that Venus the most haughty and ambitious of all
the Goddesses, who to heighten and add luster to her beauty, and Majesty, sent
poor Psyche Luc. Apul. Meth. lib. 3.
even to the bottom of the lowest Hell, has not had to do with Silence, and
made use of her amorous Soveraignity, first of all on him, who has so much
amability? and Phi^lias surely for the same reason placed the Tortoyse which is
the H^ero-glyphiek of silence, at the feet of that Goddess, as 'twere to put
her in remembrance of her dearest and first lover. Nor ought this truth to be
doubted at all: since adulterers above all other things, do love Silence.

But it may be objected that it does not conclude that Silence is the true
Father of Love, because Venus has had some amorous league and interest with it;
since unchaste women at all times, abandoning themselves to the wanton embraces
of any one, cannot themselves easily know the right Father of their Issues,
unless sometimes it may be guessed by the resemblance which it bears with the
true Parent.

Let us therefore examine what resemblance there is betwixt this love, and
Silence by the Piero vader, Giero. lib. 12.
Greeks was figured very young and handsome, and so littlewise is love
described to be pretty, and youthful.

Silence is represented holding one finger upon its mouth, to show (...) cannot
speak; and love being but a baby, or child cannot surely pronounce one word,
which is experimented in lovers; Cart. p. 136.
who grow dumb at the very p^esence of the beloved object, and wherefore did
antiquity portray Silence with two wings as they did Love, unless to
demonstrate the Image of the Father and the Son? Who then can doubt, Silence
having been beloved by Venus, and love bearing the same shape and Image with
silence, but that it must needs be the true Son of Silence.

But will you also see how a like they are in their manners, and customs, Love
always rewards those, that Love.

Marins.
Love the reward of Love. dante.
In like manner the rewards of Silence do never fail Tutta Silentii praemia.

Silence makes the most foolish become wise, for it is wisdom to hold their
peace, call. (...), di silent.
Quisque Tacen^ sapit. and Love makes the most ignorant to become witty, for he
teaches them the wit to love.

Marini Idie Past.
Love a great Master, sure must be
Who can so soon teach Clowns Philosophy.
So sings Marini and Tasso.

Torqua, Taste.
In lov's school, what cannot be learned?

I wonder that Lovers should desire, and long for nothing more than the dark
night, as a reward for their services) or an earnest of their enjoyments; as if
not deserving the amorous delights, they wai^e for night to have the
opportunity to steal them, do not the eyes, Plut. lib. 3. quest. conu. q. 6.
infinitely increase the enjo^ments of a beauty? and does not the sight,
according to Plato inflame the affections of the body in a moment, and being
assisted by the objects seen, renews with mighty power and creats fresh desires
in our hearts and souls? This is truth, and wherefore then is darkness so much
longed for, whose black veil can only hide the charm's of beauty from the
eyes? Wherefore is that black night so much wished for, which only Eclipses the
beloved Sun? Most understanding, most divine lovers, They know love is not
begot, or b^ed but by Silence, being therefore willing to beget affection in
their Mistresses hearts, they first seek out the deepest silence, which
ordinarily makes its residence in the solitary Palace of the night.

Nimia facilitate linguae amicittiis odia suve dear.
Hatred is the of spring of the Tongue, which commonly affronts and wounds the
calmest, and most patient spirits, which makes its venom the more incureable
and insupportable and therefore all those that have much Tongue are naturally
odious and hated? For this cause Scilla (...). (...). 5.
according to the testimony of Plutar, hated the Athenians, more for their
words than actions. Now then if the Tongue be so great an enemy unto love; by
the reason of contraries, love is the only child, and issue of Silence.

And from whence proceeds the love of Princes toward their favorites, but from
their Silence, should not the favorites be faithful Privado's, to conceal the
secrets, and vices of their Princes, they could never bear such sway, and so
Tyrannize over their affections as they do Nullum garrulum qui non odiosis sil.
cael. calea, descrip. silentii.
The Athenians were once invited by the Ambassadors, of King (...), and these
to trace a path to the love and favor of the King knowing that all they said
would come to his ear, they all in a vain oftentation, bragged and van^ed
either of their Births, Valors, or other high deserts: only, Zenon alone, more
(c) Plut. de Garru^.
(d) Plut. loc. cit. Garrul.
wise than all the rest, kept himself silent. For which cause one of the
Ambassadors asked him: Zeno and what shall we tell the King of thee? Tell him
replied Zenon that in Athens there is an old man that can hold his Tongue, a
most prudent answer, and worthy of so great a Philosopher, since the love of
Princes cannot be obtained but by Silence.

Women do not love men so entirely as they would, because they are not more
secret, could they but hope, or be assured of Silence in them, they would love
them all, most infinitely, and conform themselves readily to any of their
desires. And women expecting love from Men to them again, cannot believe there
is any true love, where there is not an inviolable Silence Boccac. Decameron.
(...) da Lamporecohlo, says, that only by being verily thought to have no
Tongue, it bred and inspired love, and lasciviousness in the very bosoms of
those Nunns, that had made vows of Chastity, and virginity; and therefore
Marino when he would persuade his Lady to love, bragged that he had Silence in
possession.

Maria. Nella. Lera. p. 3.
And our excellent Master Cowley,

Cowleys Mistress the enjoyment.
^en out of Wisdom, women out of pride
The pleasant theses of love do hide.
That may secure thee; but thou have yet from me a more infalliable security.

For there is no danger I shall tell
The joys which are to me unspeakable.
What thing, Sirs, is more hideous, and fearful then the stormy Sea, unruly,
implacable, unmerciful, which though it contain the worlds greatest riches in
its own empire already, does yet every day swallow up the Merchants wares and
treasures. Those that do not dread, and hate its deafning roarings, must either
be ignorant of its power and danger, or lodge a heart of brass within them, when
it murmurs softly it is treacherous and deceitful; and if it loudly roar then
it is infinitely perilous. But yet if with an absolute gentle calm it smoothes
its self into a Looking-glass; or so far imitate the even vault of Heaven, as
to wear the perfect Image of the Sun with all its beauty, in its warry bosom,
which any curious Eye may safely look upon without offending the sight. Then
who does not delight in it, and love it, who does not praise and admire it? By
this therefore appears, that love is the child of Silence.

Wherefore is the Music and Harmocy of the Sphear's so much celebrated and
loved, but because it is so silent to our ears; which Silence alone does create
and beget, our venerations and love toward it.

Nay the very Heavens it self becomes fearful and hateful to us, when with a
thundering mouth, and a fiery Tongue, it blasts or threatens poor Mortals; and
on the contrary, how much it is beloved, when with a clear and serene
Countenance it smiles upon us; and by its Silence seems to study new blessings
for us.

And wherefore is Silence so strictly commaded to all religious people, but
because Silence begets love, and therefore they by a sacred and Religious
Silence, should strive to get the love of God in their hearts, and learn what
veneration is due to such a Majesty.

But whilst I make Love to be the offspring of Silence, I would not have my
much talk beget your hatred toward me. Nor would I have it said to me

Aut sile, aut meliora quovis afferos silentio. I shall therefore, now hold my
peace, hoping that my silence will beget your Love toward me.

III. What thing does most prejudice the Beauty of the Face.
BEauty is natures Formosa facies nula commendatio est. Pub. Sir, apud stob.
silent Letter of recommendation, written in divine Characters, which
flatteringly insnares the Soul to its most sweet Tyranny; whose empire by how
much it is the more excellent, so much the shorter is it is duration; for the
greater the beauty the shorter lived it is; and the more tempting, and grateful
to our Eyes, the sooner does Scias nec gratius quidquam decore, nec brevitus,
Sueton, lib. 11. cap. 18.
it fly away: It Is but a flash of Lightning which vanishes as soon almost as it
appears and cannot be fixed even by the possessors of it themselves. Poor
Beauty sometimes transformed by Age into a grave where it lies Lunanus senem
vocal animatum quod dam, sepuletirum, Ovid, 6. Inf.
buried) alive in the deep wrincles of its own ruined face, and sighs for ever
after for its own frailty; sometimes tormented with the passions of the Soul,
or the various accidents of Fortune, sometimes fowly blasted by envious
Tongues, or an unhandsome disease; and most commonly hurried to the Chambers of
death, in the midst of its florid spring, or maturer summer by the inexorable
cruelty of fate. Briefly it is the decree of Heaven that all things should
Tyrannize over that beauty, which can alone Tyrannize over the Souls of those,
that in all other things do command the whole universe. How ever there is
nothing, in my opinion, which does so much prejudice the Beauty of a Face, as
Chastity. I hope I shall need no excuse for my confidence in this belief. Nor
do I fear the anger of that Goddess since indeed there is no such Deity as
Chastity, but only in the credulous opinions of Men.

Beauty being a ray Pulchritudo est radius divina bonitatis. Plut. de Pla.
Philo.
and Pulchri est splendour divini luminis. Plat.
splendour of the brightness and bounty of God, ought to be communicable to all.
The Sun it self would loose its worth if with an interrested partiality it
should deny its light and splendour, to any creature.

Pastor Fido.
What Is Beauty (tell me) if not viewd? or viewed, if not pursued? or if
pursued, pursued by one alone. But where Tam insignis erat apud Priscos
Virgicum and uxoris, etc. Claud. Minoe, sopra gli Embl. d' alciato. lib. 47. p.
238.
chastity takes footing, it kicks out all pretense of curiosity and will not
suffer the least look, or glance. Chastity will have no other associate then it
self, it is a Melancholy Devil that still bolts up it self from all others in a
solitary retiredness; and fears the very whispering of the winds, and the
mutinies of its own thoughts. Thus Beauty is prejudiced by it, making it loose
the attributes of divine, and good by not communicating its glory, and
sweetness unto others. Strickt Chastity will not permit a Lady to consult with
her own Looking-glass, nor to adorn her self so as to be able to contend for
the precedence of Beauty with others; It will not suffer her to curle her Locks
into a winding Labyrinth to catch her lovers; Nor add sometimes a graceful
blush to her paler Cheeks, to please and tempt fond gazers with that borrowed
sweetness; they must not hide any little defects, or be so bold as to help
natures mistakes with a skillfull curiosity; much less may they cloth the
whole Face with a false (though fair) vizard of youthful spring, in their
declining Autumn, or robb the Graves of their rich treasures of hair, to weave
a Crown for their own Heads, and Majesty; and does not this chastity therefore
extramly wrong, and spoil a beauty of its charms and advantages, by denying
those lawful Ornaments, which only can preserve, or advance its reputation?

The greatest glory of a beauty, is to be the object and delight of all Eyes,
and as 'twere the soul of all hearts. That beauty is poor in power and merits,
which has not the applause of every Tongue, and like a supreme Intelligence,
gives motion to all men's hearts and affections. But if they be chaste, they
leese so much of their value and esteem as they want services and obedience; so
much must they abate of their deserts, as they are destitute of obsequious
servants. Thus again, does chastity appear to be a prejudice to beauty; robbing
them of so many vota^ies, so great applauses, and daily adorations. It being
only a Placonical fancy to think, that lovers can be satisfied and pleased with
their Mistrisses chastity; and not have any further aim in their Services.

The eyes are the perfection of the faces beauty, and that with reason, because
they are composed all of light, and for no other cause were they seated under
the brows; but to demonstrate, that they ought to wear those arches in triumph
of their beauty. Now chastity makes them bend, and cast down their sight and
looks, having, according to Philostratus no other nest, or residence to shelter
it self under, but the Eyelids. See then how chastity deprives beauty of its
chiefest Ornament hiding its most illustrious perfections, and with some reason
we may think that beauty but a dead one, which has already lost its Eyes and
sight.

Fame, which is the Echo of all voices proclaiming the glories of a beauteous
Face, renders it venerable to all hearts, and desirable to every Eye. But the
chaste Parum puduum haberetur, de quarumor quam vis viri potuit, sed ea demum
summa marovalis pudicitriae laus haberetur si mulier adeo conclusa viveret ut
nullus esset, qui de ea, vel been, vel male loqui posset, Mino^. loc. cit.
beauty is obliged to conceal^ her self even from the Eye of Heaven, and the
Tongue of Fame it self. She must not be contaminated by the sound of that
trumpet, which may be profaned by a thousand falsities, and so beauty must
suffer for its reservedness, and loose that general approbation, and applause,
which would be published by the mouth of Fame, to its most infinite advantage.

Laqueos unde tendit amor.
Love spreads his Nets, and lays his ambushes in every place, and others
strengths and resistance, se^ves only to make his victories the more glorious.

If a chaste beauty, then will secure it self from such a puissant enemy, she
must of necessity put on Armor. Therefore Alicato teaching how Virgins should
guard themselves, represents Pallas armed with a weighty shield in one hand,
and a strong Sphere in the other. Now consider what a prejudice and trouble
this must be to delicate beauties. They must be constrained to sink under the
weight of heavy Armor and bury the sweetness of their lovely beauty, within an
Iron prison: Unhappy beauty, which for its chastity, must ever stand upon a
watchful guard, and enjoy no other content, or receive any other reward, then
its own fear, and toil.

Therefore all Authors conclude that Loc. Cit. Juvenal Latis. X. Ovid Lib. 8.
Amor. Ele. 4. vi 41.
beauty and charity are incompatible, and cannot possibly dwell together, that
a chaste Argumentum est difformis pudicitia. Sent. 8. de Benf. Cap. Ep. 15. ver.
289.
breast is an argument of a deformed Face, and therefore Ovid, makes Paris
write to Helena, (c) that if she will be chaste, she must first cease to be
beautiful, for no other reason certainly, but because chastity does so much
wrong and prejudice to beauty, that it is almost impossible a chaste Lady should
either be, or believe her self to be beautiful.

And therefore wise antiquity, will have Venus, who is the fairest of all the
Goddesses, to be the most wanton and unchaste, to demonstrate, that beauty can
receive no greater prejudice than what proceeds from Chastity.

But I forget, whilst I discourse of beauty; how much I discover the deformity
of my own Genius. I beseech you pardon me, and except of it, because I knowing
beauty to be the mother of love, pretended by speaking of beauty to obtain the
love of you all toward me.

IV. What is the greatest Favor that a Lover can receive from a Lady of Honor.
Woman is an abstract of all Natures glory, and riches: she is an amorous
Heaven, casting down most gracious influences, and therefore innumerable are the
favors which a lover from her liberal goodness may receive. But I my self (who
never had so much merit, or confidence as to aspire to the head) have always
through humility prostrated and planted my greatest hopes beneath their feet,
and thought my ambition fairly satisfi^d, when a Lady of Honor has vouchsafed
to trample on me, I mean to tread on my foot, and this I thought to be the
greatest favor she could bestow, to selicitate the vows, and wishes of my
heart, esteeming it a happy Omen of the progress my love did make, whilst her
fe^t were in that motion, and an assurance I should be one day entirely
possessed of her heart, since our effections had already taken such good
footing.

And truly, what greater favor can a lover receive, since the foot is a guide
to the head, the instrument of motion, an argument of the affections of the
soul, and of the defects of the body, the supporter and base of a little world.

The Egyptians Pet. valor, lib* 35.
Hieroglyphiok of inconstancy, was a foot not sustained at all by any thing,
and therefore when by an excessive savor my Mistress would demonstrate how
constant she ever resolved to be toward me, she set her foot upon mine,
because a foot thus placed with stability did amongst the same Loc. cit.
Egyptians signify a fixed constancy and duration.

Some others by the foot did use to represent a slave, or Servant, and indeed
the feet may with reason be called the slaves and servants of the body, because
they are ever employed to support, and carry up and down, like slavish Potters,
the whole burden of all other members. My Mistress therefore being willing to
entertain me for her servant, vouchsafed to tread on my foot, it being the
custom of the ancient Conquerors to tread on the feet of their Prisoners, to
show them their subjection.

The foot according to Loc. Cit.
Valerius, is the Symbol of a work quite perfected and finished. Therefore we
proverbially say, ad calcem, when we mean to declare the perfect termination of
any thing. What greater favor then would I receive from a Lady; who by
trampling on my foot did advertize me, that the work was finished, that is,
that my affection and faith had found a gracious acceptance, and lodging in her
Soul and Heart?

The foot as Aristotle Probl. Sest, 2 quest. 26.
says is the coldest of all the members, and therefore Physi^ians above all
things, Counsel their sick patients to keep their feet warm, because by their
natural coldness, they are most apt to receive hurt from the evil qualities the
air does produce in them. Therefore such a Lady could not favor me more
eminently then to show by treading on my foot, that my affection had inflamed
her, even the coldest parts, and farthest extremities from the heart, which by
consequence, are most frozen.

The ancients were wont to make signs with their feet, when they adherr'd to
any man's desires, or opinions, and from thence comes that Proverb. Pedibus in
Sententia discedere. Now what greater honor could I receive or desire, then to
be ascertained of the Ladies affection, Since by her foot she gave a sign of
her compliance with my affection, and testified her approbation of my service.

The refusal of any one to let us touch their feet, is an argument of pride.

Therefore says Boccace, Boceace Labyrinth.
L'havereste Levata in tanta superbia, che le piante de piedi non le si
sarrebbone potute tocare. Now my Mistress to show that such a vice as
haughtiness, or pride, had no Jurisdiction over her soul, by this humility and
excess of honor to me, caused me to touch the sole of her Foot.

Achilles, a Hero so glorious as to merit that Homer. Illi.
Homer should become the trumpet of his never dying fame, who was envied by
Alexander the great himself, could not be wounded in any part but the heel;
have not I cause then to glory in this immortal favor vouchsafed by such a
Lady, who though she had a thousand other ways to wound me, yet that I might
be paralelled to Achilles, she would only stick me in the foot.

In fine, I cannot but be proud of the honor my Lady did me, showing she so
much esteemed me by treading on my foot, that doubting least I should have
quitted her affection, she by that means seemed to constrain me to abide here
for ever, and who would not think it was a great honor to me, that she should
let me feel her weight.

But least I should make this discourse too long by a foot, except of this my
imbecilities which I sacrifice to our Prince as a tribute of my obedience,
Alex, ab. Alex, lib. 7. cap. 9.
as anciently the feet were Consecrated unto Mercury.

And I believe that he (to conclude.)

Who sets out at the Foot, come to the place
Sooner then he, that sets out at the Face.
V. Whether the Rose do presage Felicity, or Infelicity to a Lover.
I Should now (clothing the sentiments of my Soul, with the beauty and
ornaments of handsome words) bless and thank that hand, which being Prodigal of
its favors, has vouchsafed to bestow a Rose on me, the Queen of Flowers;
(though its purple did not claim that just pre-eminence) such gifts are
common, which oblige us but to common expressions. My tongue has not so much
sweetness, or sufficiency as to satisfy these obligations which my heart is
bound to acknowledge; and I am the less capable to do it, because the late
learned discourser of dreams, has so possessed, and charmed my intellects,
that I can only wonder at the height of his inimitable Elequence that made it.

And then if I should say, it has the precedence above all Flowers and for that
cause perhaps it wears the Regal Ornaments: that if Gardens were Heavens, the
Rose would be the Sun in those Heavens that it shuts it self up with the day;
because it fears to be in the obscurity, or blasted by the malignity, and
treachery of the night: that it is the Image and perfect mirror of Princes
bearing in its self, both the rewards, and punishment, that to beautify it
self, it robbed Venus of her blood, and the Gods of their Nector; that it is the
glory of the spring, a miracle of Nature: and an excess of the benignity, and
bounty of heaven; all these notwithstanding would be but poor conceits of a
mendicated Eloquence either blazed already a thousand times, by the common
breath of Fame, or infinitely beneath the just encommiums it deserves and the
grandeur of its merits.

The Rose it self, is a praise to its own self, and for no other reason does
its leaves sproute forth in the forms of tongues, but to declare that it self
is only worthy to proclaim and publish its own just praises: and having not
the benefit of speech, though the Proverb says, that Roses speaks, yet it
expresses it self sufficiently by its perfumed breath.

But how much the more worthy the Rose is amongst all other Flowers, so much
the more incertainty does it breed in this question, whether it can presage
happiness, or infelicity to Lovers.

The Etymology of the name Rose coming from Riso, promises joy to my
affections; but as it may possibly come from the verb Roderam it threatens me
with the continual knowings, and languishing of my Soul by concupiscence.

The sanguine Color in the Rose prognosticates the blushes of my Cheeks, if I
should give my soul the liberty to doat and admire too much the beauties of
any Face. But it may also presage, that I shall love a beauty so singular and
excellent, that it shall force each one to blush, that shall but dare to
contend with her for the priority of beauty.

I might fear least the bloody color of the Rose should predict my Martyrdom
for Love. But on the other hand, I am assured that it is a sign of felicity,
and grandeur, it being the color which most great Monarchs use for their chief
Ornament.

The Multiplicity of the Roses leaves, may seem to point out her avarice, whom
I shall love as if she would pretend to have many rich gifts, and but yet I
know she cannot so much covet gifts and rich presents, who like the Rose shall
have already a Crown of Gold in her own bosom.

The many Rose leaves, which resemble tongues, does tell me, that a thousand
several tongues, shall proclaim my happy love; Nevertheless I remember, that
the Rose is the Hieroglyphick of silence, and was therefore by the Grecians
consecrated unto Harpocrates.

The prickle joined to the Rose, do menace me with many sharp troubles, which
may accrue from my affections: yet this again secures me, that as the Rose does
flourish and tryomph amidst those many thorns; so I in despite of all
opposition and difficulty, shall yet attain the fruition of my desires.

The prickles also may portend danger, and mortal wounds. But the leaves on the
other part do promise a perfect cure, being very effectual to stanch the blood,
and heal the wound.

Again the Prickles may intimate, that I shall be assaulted, by many Rivals;
but Homer tells us, that Venus anointed the body of Hector with Oil of Roses, to
preserve him from the bytings of madd Dogs.

The green at the extremities of the Rose leaves, are called Nails of Fingers
by Dioscorides, which seem to declare, that if I will enjoy my desires, I must
steal that happiness; but on the contrary I am promised the free gift of it.
The Rose being the Simbole of kindness freely imparting its ravishing odours to
every one.

The Rose receives its nourishment and perfume from the Rain, and morning dews,
which makes me fear it prophesies that my affection, and amors must be fed
with the daily aliment of my tears: on the other side, my hopes are flattered
by this consideration, that as water does easily make the Rose to spring and
bloom, so my tears shall soon make me obtain the sweets of my desires.

I fear some infelicity in my Love, because I know the Rose yields poison to
the Spider; but then the pretty Be does comfort me again, who from the self
same Rose extracts the sweetest Honey.

From the frail beauty of the Rose, which begins to wither, and decay as soon
as it is born; I might raise a doubt of the frailty, and inconstancy of my
love; but that I know they do no truly Love, who do not continue to Love even
after death, as the Rose though dead, and dry preserves a pleasing sweetness,
and was perhaps for this cause, by the Ancients strewed upon their kindreds
Graves.

It might be guessed, that my Love should not be true, and faithful to me
alone; because the Rose is a flower, that is, common to all; did not I know on
the contrary, that a Rose if handled or touched by many, presently leeses its
luster, and native sweetness, and that its beauty and glory is its virginity.

To extract the water from a Rose, it must be done either by pressure and
stamping, or by the violence and heat of the fire; from whence it may be
conceived, that my choicest affections shall not obtain their wished end, but
by much trouble and labor; and yet we know the Rose ever comunicates its odours
and fragrancy, with freedom and liberality.

The Rose delights, attracts, and sweetly courts every one that beholds or
approaches it, which may infer that she may have but little honesty, whom I
shall adore; that treasure being unsecure, which lies within the reach of every
covetous hand, as seeming to invite and tempt any fond Passenger; but this is
my comfort, when I consider, how it is armed, and surrounded with a strong
guard of prickles, for the defense of its own honor, and chastity, wherewith it
bears off, and destroys all those little envious infects which come to soil
its beauty, and innocent sweetness*

In fine, for all those other many contrarieties, yet nevertheless, since the
Rose, if well considered, appears to be a little paradise to the Eye, honey to
the taste, and a Cordial to the he^rt, I think I may safely conclude, that it
does really presage future happiness and felicity to Lovers.

But whilst I have so long discoursed of the Rose, I seem to have forgot, that
I make you feel the prickles, and sit on thorns, by my too Prolix harangue,
which yet your noble sweetness, with an abundant benignity and favor, have
vouchsafed to applaude, and approve by your silence, and attention, though
uttered with much weakness.

VI. Wherefore in Cyprus they Portrayed Venus with a Beard.
MAerobius in his Saturnalius In his 3. Book.
affirms, that in Cyprus, they portray'd and adored Venus with a Beard.

Perhaps, that men, seeing, that a Beard on a woman's Face is monstrous, might
learn, that if they suffered their Venerea^ affections to grow old, and beard
their senses, they would be monstrous, and deformed, and therefore Ariosto
sings Orlando Eurioso. Canto. 24. Stan. 2.
In whom fond Love shall carry long the sway.

I wish for due rewards. Those monstrous dolts
And wilful Prisners, store of Iron bolts.
Perhaps to hide the Blushings of their Faces, who are ashamed of their own
weak submission to the Commands of a woman; the Beard being a sign of virility.

Perhaps they would let us thereby understand, that Venus was not a new Deity,
but Ancient and had been worshipped by the first men that ever were in the
world.

Or else the beard being a token of prudence they meant to signify that Venus
or Venery, without the curb of prudence, is a Fury not a Deity, and therefore
they assigned the goddess Venus, a beard to distinguish her from Venus the
fury; But thus Max. Tyr* speaks of Venus: Max. Tyrius Dissert.
Praesertim si furiis quibusdam agitata, quam proxime ad furorem accedat.

These were all the observations of my excellent friend the noble S. G. D. a
man of exquisite ingenuity, and singular erudition, to which I should make no
addition of my own, were it not natural, for such great lights, to be attended
on by shaddows.

I suppose therefore also, that the Cypriots Pictured Venus with a beard, to
demonstrate the power and virility which is in a beautiful woman's face, and
therefore Socrates calls beauty a Short Tyranny.

Or else to let us know that the gravest, oldest and wisest men, were not
thereby exempted, or freed from amorous affections, since Venus did make use
even of their beards, (though sage Philosophers) to adorn her own face, or else
to teach us, that such as daily frequented the Temple, or use of Venus, did
suddenly become old, and decrepid.

The beard begets respect and veneration. Barbaepilli says, Clement
Alexandrinus, non sunt vexandi; ut qui vultui gravitatem, and quendum patternum
terrorem incutiata. And therefore perhaps those of Cyprus, to add the greater
veneration to their goddess, portray'd her with a beard.

The Beard signifies, Sorrow, Repentance, and Dolor, according to Pliny, Lib.
7. Epi. 27.
Romany says he Mox. fuit in merore (...) bam, and capillum submittere. So
that it may be to advertize, what trouble and repentance accompanied the
pleasures of Venus Plant. Cistel. Act. 1. Sc. 1.


(Namque castor amor, and melle, and fell est foecundissimus
Gustus dat dulce, amarum ad satietatem, usque oggerit)
They Portray'd Venus with a Beard,

Women that have beards are, as Tassonius will have it, In his tenth Book of
Pensieri.
Witches, or Sorceresses, therefore perhaps to this purpose, the Cypriots
painted Venus with a Beard, to show that beauteous women have the power to
bewitch and enchant the Souls of Lovers.

Venus is more potent, then any thing in the world, in efficacy and persuasion.
Nehil ego, says Aristenetus, esse venere efficacius, aut persuadere, potentius
censeo. Therefore it may be, they would for this reason make her with a Beard,
as belonging chiefly to great Orators, or being the badg of a Philosopher.

Suidas nevertheless affirms, that the Romans adored Venus with a beard,
because that goddess might have the Marks both of a Male and Female, as one
that had the Super-intendence, of the generation of all Creatures. The rather
because the Ancients gave to each of their Deities, the name of Male and Female.

VII. What is the manner of the Florentine Kiss, and from whence came its
Original?
THat Kiss which we call the Florentine, is to take hold of the parties e^res,
with ones h^nds, and then join Lips to Lips, So Giraldus affirms Giraldus, Dia.
9.
Florentinum osculum, Quo Osculo appraehendebat utrinque mihi^ures, and
os^lahantur*

This nevertheless appears to have been an ancient Custom amongst the Greeks
and Romans* Plut^ makes particular mention thereof, and this according to
Julius Pollucia; is written in a very old Comedy.

Prehendens per aures da mihi Phytre Osculum* And in Plautus Act. 3. Asia.


Prehende auriculis, compara labella, cum labellis. And the same Author in
another place Act. 5. sce* 2.


Sine te exorem, Sine te prehendam auriculis, sine te them Suavium.

And in Theoe. Idie. 5.


Non Amo ego Alcippem, nam non prius oscula porsit.
Auribus Arripiens, tribui quam dona palumbi.
And in Tibull Lib. 2. Ele. 5.


Gnatusque parenti oscula compressis auribus eripiet. Statius writes thus in
his Commentary upon Catullus. R^mae apud Episcopum Caprani eensem in veteri
monumento. Dis Manibus Zosime sacro, Cupido alatus, comprensis auribus, Zosimen
ipsam deosculatur.

This manner of kissing Giraldus, thinks had its Original from the Custom of
drinking in two eared pots, or Jugs, because when any one drinks in those kind
of Vessels he seems indeed to be Kissing.

This kind of Kissing may have been invented, to hinder the party kissed, from
withdrawing too soon at their own pleasure; for so when they desired a long
Kiss they would be sure to take good hold, as people usually do, when they
mean to drink a very deep uninterrupted draught, in those two eared potts. Or
else they meant thereby not only to please the Lips with a melting soft touch,
but also to advertise the ears, of the sweet sound and smack thereof.

The privation of one sense augments and increases the perfection of another.
The blind do super-abound in excellency of memory, and the dumb excel in
subtility, and ^ngenuity. Therefore who knows but they found out this mode of
Kissing, that by hindering the ears of their function of hearing, the delight of
tasting, and feeling might be increased.

Perhaps it might be to signify, that they can have no ear to hear, or attend
the voice of reason, who are Kissing two Rosied tempting Lips, whose sweetest
Nectar hides a Poisonous charm within them.

But yet in my opinion, this way of Kissing was first used, because the Ears,
are consecrated to Memory, and they would by this Invention, advertize the Ears
not to loose the Memory of so delicious a pleasure as was Kissing.

The name of the Florentine Kiss, proceeded only from this, because it was more
used in Florence, than any where else. Those of Florence, nevertheless (as
Baptista Yorretti, affi^ms) do always, or most commonly, call it the French
Kiss.

VIII. Wherefore Physicians affect to wear great Beards.
THe beard is an Ornament to the Face, which adds handsomeness, and veneration
to the person, as Aristotle will have it. So that he is almost unworthy the
name of a man, that has no beard; there being no greater sign, than that of
his Virility. Vir sum says Arianus H^ist. Lib. 1.
sic me convenias, sic mecum loquere, aliudne quaeras inspice signa. And Clem.
Alex. Lib. 2. Ped.
speaking of the beard. Hoc viri signum, per quod vir apparet. And Muson
Stobeus, Mar^, Fi.
Barbum signum esse viri. From hence it is, that Physicians to be verily
believed they are men (it being possible their many Homicides may make them be
thought otherwi^e of) do take an especial care to have great beards.

Physicians vaunt, that their science, has much divinity in it, wresting men,
by their supernatural medicaments, ordinarily out of the hands of death.

Ars medica, says Ficinius, and divinitus accepta est, and divinitus exercetur.

Arcem aliam Deus, and rerum natura repertrix.
Instituere, sacram, qua languida corpora morbo.
Eriperunt quovis propriae rediturae saluti.
Sings a worthy Poet. Physicians therefore willing to make ostentation of their
divinity, procure great beards, to teach us, that they are given them by the
Duities; Conveniens, says Arianus, speaking of the beard, Insignia*
deorumtueri, and ea non abjicere.

Loc. Cit.
Physicians, would feign make others believe, that they have the ^kil and art,
to bestow health, and to prolong the thread of life in despite of Fate, and
therefore fearing least the reproach of Medice cura te ipsum should be cast in
their teeth, there is a kind of necessity they should maintain themselves in
perfect sanity, and a robust agedness, to which purpose, I do verily believe,
they are induced to nourish great beards, which in outward appearance makes
them seem much older then they indeed are. Or else the knowledge of their Art,
requiring a long and laborious study, they by a long beard would fain be
thought more ancient, and by consequence more experienced in their Art, then
otherwise would appear.

Physic if we well believe Fieinius Aler. Ti.
had its Original from South sayers. Medicina omnis exordium a vaticiniis
habuit, Amongst which number the Sorcerers and Necromancers are included. All
which kind of people ever used very great beards: Nay Aristotle says, that some
Prophetesses of Caria had such beards. So that it is no wonder if Physicians,
following the examples of those, that gave the first precepts to their Art, are
so curious of having great beards.

Physic is called the Sister of Philosophy, Medicina says Isidorus Isid.
Secunda Phylosophia Dicitur; Philosophers get respect and a kind of veneration
by their beards.

Thus writes Pliny the younger Lib. 1. Epist. 10.
Ad haec pro^eritas corporis docera facies, demissus, capillus, ingens and
cana. Barba. Quae licet fortuita, and inania putentur, illi tamen plurimum
venerationes acquirunt: Socrates was by Persius called Sat. 4.
Bearded-master.

Barbatum hoc creed Magistrum dicere. And therefore, Juven. Sat. 14.


Barbatus licet admove as mill inde magistros And Mart. Lib. 7. Epist. 27.


Democritus, Zenones, inexplicitosque Platonas,
Quidquid, and hirsutes squalet imaginibus,
Sic quasi Pytagorae loqueris successor, and haeres,
Perpendet mento, nec tibi barba minor.
So that Physicians imitating Philosophers do nourish great Beards.

Lib. 5. Cap. 67.
Amongst the Romans, according to the testimony of Pliny, the beard was a sign
of sorrow or grief, Julius Caesar says Suetonius, Sue. Lib. 2.
audita clade Tituriana barbam capillumque summissit, In bat. minor.
Octavius, Augustus did the same when he heard of the loss of his Legions,
which followed the Commands of Varro. Cato likewise as Plutarch mentions
hearing of the coming of Caesar against his Country, suffered his beard to grow
long in sign of his grief and sorrow. And therefore Lucan thus sings of him.

In the 2. de Bell. Pun.
Ut primum tolli feralia, vederat arma.
Intonsos rigida in front discendere canos.
Passus erat, mestamque genis incresere barbam.
Therefore who knows, but that Physicians, willing to show themselves deeply
interressed in their patients sickness, and pain; do wear those long beards in
token of sorrow,

All those Physicians who for their great knowledge and skill, have deserved
divine attributes were expressed so by long beards. The Grecians restored
Esculapius his beard again, which Dionisius had robed him off, Apolin. barbatum
colebant Hieropolitani, Mercurius, according to Lucan is called Labro, malisque
barbatus, with great reason therefore Physicians do the same, imitating the
best Masters of their science.

The beard signifies, or betokens, (nay adds) confidence and courage, So thinks
Elian Hist. An. Lib. 7.
Hircus gregem, and ipsas capras antegreditur, barbae fiducia. No wonder
therefore that they are so much worn by Physicians, who are every hour forced
to combat and struggle with desperate Diseases, nay with death it self.

IX. That Woman is more faithful to Man; then Man to Woman.
Women are without doubt, more faithful to Men, then Men to Women, because
there are greater rewards attending her fidelity, and greater punishments
following her infidelity then to Man's. If a man be constant and faithful to a
Woman, most Nations and people in the world, will but suspect, or judge him to
want wit, or worth enough to obtain another M stris. If he be faithless few
nations have any Law to chastise him. But on the contrary, a constant, faithful
woman is admired, esteemed and reverenced highly, but if light she is vilified,
censured and put down in the lift of infamous persons by every one.

What virtue, or what worth can there be left.
In Woman, that is of Chastity bereft.
Says Ariosto. Orl. Furioso.
and Petrarch Sonnet 212.


And she who of her honor is deprived.
No Woman is, Nor living, etc
The Woman is often necessitated, to be faithful, Guarini says Pastor Iside.


Faith in a Woman's heart
Is lov's sad penance to be pleased with one
Whereas man, having no such necessary obligation, is without doubtless careful
of keeping his faith toward a Woman.

There is more means and strength required to subdue a Woman's faith; than a
Man's. If a Woman do but prostitute, or proffer her self to a Man, he presently
yields and is overcome; whereas a Woman cannot be tempted without prayers,
persuasions, or rich presents. Hear what Ariost. says Orl. Furcoso. Canto. 28.


Inconstant Men.

Who still to take an unknown piece had rather,
Although their own were better far to choose.
But if themselves were woed, I surely gather.
Such courtesies they never would refuse.
But rather strain: themselves beyond their might,
Such kindness, with more kindness to requite.
Whereas to obtain a Womon.

In humble sort they sue, they seek, they serve,
They like, they Love, they honor, they obey,
They wait, they watch, their favors to deserve. (b) Canto. 10. 5.

Some often complain, and some as often pray.
For love of Women, they do pine and starve.
And sadly mourn.
Again, Women Love more ardently then Men; therefore they must be more
faithful. Thus Honnius, Omnis mulier amat magis viro. Forasmuch as men
ordinarily love only for their own ends, which being obtained, causes either
repentance, or satiety, so says, Ariosto.

Orlando.
For Men, their loved Ladies wills to gain,
Do promise, vow and swear without regard.
But when they once the wished ends obtain,
Break vows and oaths, and promise afterward.
And in another place,

But when at last their wished prey is taken,
Men seek new game, the old is quite forsaken.
Wherefore he advises Women,

But least on youths you should your Love bestow,
That never in one fancy tarry long.
But having got what erst they sought before,
They turn themselves unto another shore.
Women are said to be better then Men, and they glory in it, and therefore they
must be more faithful. Vobis (says the Chorus of Women in Aristophanes) Sumus
multo meliores experimentumque ad est, ut videatur. And a little further: Ita
nos multo meliores. viris. gloriamur esse. Therefore Plato was constrained to
assert this truth, saying, Mulieres multae multis viris ad multa praestantiores.

Let us come to examples, which will best clear this doubt. What Man have
ventured or lost their lives to save or preserve their Faith to their Ladies?
Our very Romancers cannot feign such a fable without a blush, or if there be
any one produced, it is only some imaginary Hero.

Whereas whole Nations of Women, do sacrifice themselves at the death of their
Husbands, and bury themselves voluntarily with them, or expose themselves to
the merciless flames, where they make up one heap of Ashes with their beloved
Spouse; yea, how many Lucretia's, Brasilia's, Pompeia, Paulinas, Camnas, etc.
have rather suffered voluntary deaths than live after their husbands, or break
their holy Faiths and Vows.

For which reason it should seem, the Ancients represented Faith under a Woman's
name, to demonstrate that only Women could be faithful.

Wherefore the Jonians, according to the testimony of Alex. ab Alex. would have
the purest and perfectest Victimes to be female.

In fine, they that think women are not so faithful to Men, as Men to Women let
them once more hear what Ariosto. sings.

Orland^,
Tell me a little if any one of you,
That married are have not awry yet stepped?
And with some other Woman have not slept?
Nay what is more, they woe, they seek, they sue,
They tempt, they try, those that be safest kept
Yet women seek not after Men.
I shall therefore conclude with Dr. Speranzi, who in his Poems speaks thus,

Thou do believe a man, and know not he
Has neither Faith, nor Love, nor Constancy:
But thou art blind with Love, simple (though fair)
And can not think how treacherous all men are,
False thou will find him, when thou art b^tter skild,
Thy heart and breast with pain and sorrow filled.
She, she that to men's flatteries gives belief,
Ruins herself, and dies without relief.
This plea, I must confess, I have made rather in obedience to the Laws of
Civility than of Conscience, If I have not performed it sufficiently, that
cannot be esteemed a crime, or make me deserve their hate, since he acquits
himself fully that performs what he is able, and is not defective to his power
in serving them.

X. Whether blushing be a sign of Virtue.
THose that believes that blushing is a sign of Virtues, ought only know how to
Blush. But I who have by experience found the prejudice of blushing, can
affirm with reason, that it is rather an argument of vice, than of virtue, An
accident that flows from many unhandsome causes and imperfections, cannot be a
sign of merit, since no man can be thought praise worthy for what he does
accidently, and therefore what esteem can he deserve for that, which is not his
but accidently.

They that blush do fear. So Arist. will have it. In 4. Politi.
Rubescunt qui timore officiuntur. He that fears is pusillanimous and base.

In his Eneids.
Degeneres animos timor arguit.

Sings Virg. Therefore who can affirm, that fear the Offspring and Issue of
baseness, can be a testimony of virtue.

Blushing be tokens shame for our errors. Rubescunt says Alex. ab Alex. qui
pudent. He that is ashamed has erred, and shall we then believe, that, to be a
good effect, which proceeds from so bad a cause? That the Plants of Virtue
should spring from roots of Vice?

They that have such flames in their faces, must needs have a fire in their
bosoms; and who can affirm, that soul is not black, that is ever exposed to
so much heat? or that heart not suffocated, which is buried amidst so many
Coals and Cinders?

Blushing is a reproof for some guilt, as if the blood were sent from the heart
into the face, to correct or restrain, the errors of the hand, or tongue.

He that blushes cannot merit, because that act is violent, not voluntary; and
even, as we cannot sin without the assent of the will, so neither can one merit
without the consent of the Soul, or mind.

Blushing is an affect of the Ambition of the heart, which perhaps would
express its sentiments beyond the volibility of the tongue, but wanting the
power of speech, imprints those Characters on the Cheeks to be the better
understood.

The accidental signs and appearances, in the face of Heaven, can be token
nothing but malignant effects. (...) do ever presage some evils. The face of
man is the Heaven of tha^ Microcosme, being marked therefore with those signs
of blushes, it cannot betoken any Virtue.

Blushing is nothing else, but a concourse of blood. Rubor says, Simplicius In
Prae.
fit cum sanguis recurrit a cord ad faciem, Wrath, Ambition, Lust, and a
thousand other vices are occasioned by the concourse of blood, and therefore
cannot deserve praise, or signify virtue.

Blushing is an imperfection, and therefore Women, who are more imperfect and
more inclined to commit errors than men, are more subject to blush.

Lovers wax pale, because knowing that blushing betokens no virtue or goodness,
it cannot help them to attain the affections or esteem of their beloved, and
indeed, who would not suspect that heart of cruelty, that wears those bloody
Colors on the Face.

Wiser in this, then any other thing, are many Women who to conceal this sign
of shame, paint themselves to hide their blushing that so the most curious eye
may not be able to find them guilty of the least crime, or error.

Wherefore do you think, wise nature ordaines men, old men especially, to
become bloodless, pale and wan, and their faces to be covered with overgrowing
hair, but only to hinder, or hide their blushing; it being convenient only for
Women and Children, as most subject to failings, and guilty errors.

I have chosen to speak this whilst every one was drouzy, that I might not be
seen to Blush. And I have blamed it, that I might not be thought to praise my
self, being so subject to this imbecility.

And I would have said more, did I not fear, I should be forced to blush at my
Prolixity.

XI. Whether one can Kiss, their beloved without Lasciviousness or Sensuality.
SOme verily esteem Kissing, to be a thing of small moment,

Rem ajunt esse oscula inanem. Says Theoc.

Plut.
And this is so approved by Pi^istratus, a Tyrant of Athens; a man otherwise
odious for his enormous cruelty, who being instigated by his wife, to chastize
a youth, that had Kissed her daughter openly in the street, he smiling said,
what would thou have done to thy enemies, since thou desire I should
punish him, who by kissing thy daughter shows he is her friend? Guarini,
likewise makes but small reckoning of it, since he writes.

Madri. 75.
One Kiss for so much pain and trouble? Cruel,
One Kiss for so much Faith? (my hearts dear Jewel)
The great reward you vowed and promised me,
Cannot with empty Kisses paid be.
But that one can Kiss the beloved person, without Lasciviousness or
Sensuality, I believe it an impossible supposition, and a conceit of such an
imagination, as knows, or has no other ground of truth, than in their souls,
that know not the power of Kisses.

It Is true that a Kiss, as Plato says, is a conjunction of the Soul, more than
the Lips, transmitting sweet and lively spirits into eithers heart.

Dum semibulco suavio,
Meum puellum suavior
Dulcemque florem spiritus*
Duco ex aperto tramite;
Anima tune aegra, and saucia
Cucurrit ad labiae mihi, etc.
Now this Conjunction withal, being made with these humane and corporial
organes, it is impossible, but they must impart some Lascivious sensuality
thereby, and affect the senses with it.

Which Plato also affirms, saying, that love is begotten by some certain
invisible spirits, which subtly are transmitted from the beloved Eyes, into
the Lovers heart.

Qui videtis peccat; qui non te viderit ergo
Non cupiet: facti crimina lumen habit.
If therefore it be true, that the Eyes by virtue of their looks only, have so
much power to inchant a soul, what cannot the Lips do, which are so full of
those Amorous Philters, and can so easily call forth the Soul unto them?

There Is none shall either Hands or Lips control,
I Will Kiss thee through, I Will Kiss thy very Soul.
Quid enim aliud faciunt, says Favorinus Propert. Eleg. 21. Lib. ^.
qui ora mutus tangunt, quam animas conjungunt! and Rufinus the Poet S^rm. 63.
(c) In his Greek Epig. Lib. 7.


Tangit autem non in summis laboris sed trahens,
Os animam etiam ex unguibus extrahit:
A Kiss violated Claudius Caesar to the incestuous match with Agrippina Sueton,
in his C^st.


Kisses are Lovers rewards, to which they aspire with Myriads of Prayers and
sighs, and services.

And therefore if Kissing were without sensuality, Lovers would never show so
much greedy desire and avidity for them, nor would the beloved be so niggardly
and sparing of them.

Petrarch, who understood, perhaps more than any other, what were the effects
of Love, speaking of his Laura's Kisses says.

A Kiss it is, makes every one rejoice. Now if the sight, or beholding others
only Kiss, have power to stir up our affections, how shall that person contain
himself that Kisses actually. Socrates says, that seeing others Kiss, and
hearing the smacks of those united Lips, is able to move, and tempt the coldest
heart. An nescis hoc viro says one, Nec quidem tangens si modo spectetur
infigat etiam Longo ex int^rvallo aliquid ejusmodi, quod insanire faciat!

Hor. Lib. 1. Ode^ 13.
Horace, in an Ode, will needs have it thought, that Venus sweetens her Kisses
with Nectar.

Dulcia barbare.
Laedentem oscula, quae Venus,
Quinta parta sui Nectoeris imbuit.
And Lucan affirms; Ganimedes osculationem nectare sibi esse dulciorem. Now who
can Kiss them without temptation, or without sensuality, relish such heavenly
sweetness? Hear Myrtillo discoursing of his Ladies Kisses.

Pastor Fide.
O my Ergast that I could tell the pleasure,
Of those sweet Kisses. But do thou hence guess it,
Those Lips that tasted it cannot express it.
Extract then all the sweetness that remains,
In Hybla-comes, in Cyprian, Sugarcanes,
It will be nothing to that world of blisses.
I sucked from hence.
So a modern Poet, being by his Mistress conjured, he should not declare that
she had vouchsafed him a Kiss, replies

There is no fear, or danger I should tell,
This Joy, which is to me unspeakable.
Some Nations deprive that Woman of her dowry, yea proclaim her an Adulteress,
that is, convicted of bestowing, or receiving a Kiss from any stranger. This is
therefore an argument, that none can give a Kiss without Lasciviousness or
sensuality.

Amongst Lovers, the question is propounded, whether he that gives, or receives
a Kiss, from the beloved is most favored? The generality conclude, it is better
to receive then give one, because they think it impossible that a Mistress can
Kiss, without she have an extraordinary affection and sensuality.

Briefly Kisses are the greatest incentives to Love. Nihil est, says Socrates,
A^ amorem incendendum acrius os^ulo.

Oscula si dederis fiam manifestus amator. We read in Cicero. That who ever
will keep himself chaste, must above all things avoid Kissing. Of the same mind
is Socrates. Quamobrem ait equidem abstineudum esse a formosorum osculis illi,
qui pudice, ut vivere possit, expetit, because it is not possible to Kiss without
Lasciviousness or Sensuality.

Inest etiam inanibus osculis suavis Voluptas. Says Theoc. I conclude
therefore with Austin, that, Osculari, nihil sit aliud quam adulterari.

XII. Wherefore it is said, that Achillis Sphere, did both wound and heal.
IT might be said that Achilles sphere (or lance) did both wound and heal:
because being managed by his strong Arm, it did at the same time both wound
and kill. And who knows not that death, is the cure of all things. Our humanity
is circumscribed with such infelicities, that death alone can put an end to our
troubles; and begin our real happiness.

In Prometh. verse. 727.
Mors est malorum liberatrix. It Is observable that two D^ities employed
themselves, for the making of Achille^'s Lance. Minerva fitted the stock, and
Uulcan the head or spear. Minerva is the Hieroglyphick of Peace to whom the
Olive is therefore dedicated. Vulcan may be taken to signify War, since he
provides weapons for all the other gods, and arms the very hands of Jove with
Thunderbolts. Therefore it is not unlikely that the Ancients by Achilles Lance
did signify both War and Peace, War which wounds men in their Estates; Peace,
etc, which heales all the breaches and disorders caused by War.

Achilles was a Physician being taught that art by Chiron, who gave the name to
Chyrurgery. Therefore who kn^w but he having learned by his study of Physic
and Surgery the art to Cure the wound, by dresing the Weapon (a thing
ordinarily practiced in our days, though not without some superstition) from
thence this spear might be thought, both to wound and heal; or it might be from
this consideration, that Chyrurgery must hurt before it can heal.

Liber. 6. cap. 4.
Achilles was adored by the Spearmen, or Lanciers, as Alex. ab Alex. asserts.
In Epirus, as Plutarch says, In Pyrro,
In Pontus according to Pliny Lib. 10. cap. 29.
In Arcadia. De Rep. Atti. Lib. 3.
by Pausanias testimony.

In fine, his name was venerated in two and twenty Temples, where they burned
incense and offered victimes to his Fame and Glory. His Lance also merited
attributes of Divinity. Primos Lib. 6. Rep. 26.
says Alex. ab Alex. Qui antiquissimi ^uerunt Hastos coluere caepisse, and
therefore it might be, that the Ancients, to make us understand, that the
Chastizements of the gods were the means to correct and make us good, said,
that Achilles Lance did both wound and heal. It Is beyond the reach of doubt,
that there is no surer or more infallible ^emedy to heal the sickness and
disease of the Soul, than the wholesome Physic of affections, when the hand of
God applies, the wounding Corrosive, which he after heals with balmes of Mercy
and Peace.

It was a custom amongst the Ancients Pe. Valor. lib. 42.
to ingarlondize and crown their Lances, who knows therefore, but Achilles
adorned his, and that perhaps with some herb which he knew by his experience,
to be most effectual to heal wounds, from whence this saying might have its
Original, and the people afterward seeing the Iron which wounded, and the
herb that healed, might therefore say, it did both wound and heal. Here what
Apuleus says of this herb In Hist. de Herb. Vert.
Hanc herbam Achilles invenit, unde vulnere far facta sanat, and ob id
Achilleos vocatur: Therefore Claudian perhaps conformable to my opinion.

Claudianus.
San^s Achilleis, remeavit Thelephus herbis
Cujus pertuler at viris, and sensit in imo.
Lethalem, placidamque manum. medicina per bassam,
Contigit, and populit quos fecerat ipse dolores.
But to what purpose do I heap up so many fancies, and imaginations of my own?
since the ascersion, that Achilles's Lance, did both wound and heal, is no
Poetical fiction, or curiosity of the Ancients; but an Historical truth
authenticated by the Arcany of nature. You may read in Higinius Higinius.
and Chain, De Var. Hist. Lib. 12.
how the King of Missia, being wounded by Achilles, and the wound proving
incurable, he addressed himself to the Oracle: Where answer was returned, that
to cure his wound, he must make use of the same Weapon that hurt him. Telephus
goes to the Grecia^ Camp, and there being joyfully received, because the Oracle
had foretold, that without the assistance of Telephus, Troy could not be taken,
he was healed by Achilles, who scraping the rust of the head of the Lance, and
applying it to the wound cured him, and therefore thus in Ovid.

Lib. 13. Metham.
Ego Telephom Hasta
Pugnantem domui; vinctum, orantemque refeci.
Wherefore Pliny affirms Mat. History.
rust to ^e a remedy for wounds, figuring Achilles in the posture of scraping
the rust from his Spear, and from hence therefore comes the saying that
Achilles Spear did both wound and heal. Nor shall we need to doube this, since
besides the forecited, there are many other Authors which affirm it.

Hear Ovid,

De Romans Amor. lib. 1.
Vulnus Achilleo quod quondam (...) host
Vulneris auxiliur Polios hasta tulit.
And else where,

Trest. lib. 2. Eleg. 1.
Forsitan, ut quondam Leuthran^ia regnatenenti,
Sic mihi res ^adem vulnus opemque feret.
And in a third place,

Lib. 5. El. 27.
Telephus ^terna, consumptus tabe perisset.
Si non qu^ nocuit, dextra tulisset open.
And propertius,

Lib. 2. Eleg. 1.
Myrus and Hemonia juvenis qua cuspide vulnus,
Senserat, hac ipsa cuspede sensit opem.
Lib. 19. cap. 10.
And Caelius Rhodiginus. A^re cuspide sive etiam serrea Telephum, sanasse
Achilles perhibetur. Unde natum Adagium. Quodque vulnus intulit, ille diem
persanabit. And Lucian Lucianus in negrim.
Ergo Telephi illud necesse erit facere; ut ad cum a quo vulnerati sumus,
redeamus, and ab illo medicinam petamus. Et Phil. Beroldus Prop 2.
Notum est quemadmodum Telephus ab Achille vulneratus, ab Achille sanatus fuit
eodem telo.

The Germans C. Tacitus 2. Annal.
according as Tacitus relates, by holding their Lances at too great a length,
which made them mis^ their strokes, were overcome by the Romans, and were so
many Trophies of their Victory. I fear the same fate, having held so long a
Discourse of the Lance, and been so wide from the mark, that who ^ver shall o^
pose me, or discourse on the same subject, will overcome my weak argument, and
subdue me by their more potent Eloquence.

XIII. Wherefore Old people sleep ordinarily less than young ones.
NO doubt but in all appearance, sleep seems to be more proper to old folks,
than to young. The nature of ancient people is to be cold. Thus Aristotle will
have it. 5. de Ge. Anim.
Senectus fregida est, and commonly those Animals sleep most, that are of the
coldest constitution. Dormiunt diutius, says Albertus De Son. et. Vig. li. 2.
Animalia illa, quae sunt frigida, and therefore is sleep more likely to be
proper for old people, then young; yet experience teaches us the Contrary, and
so says Aristotle (e) Senes vigiles sunt. Whereupon Corn: Gall. Sings Cor. Gall.
(c) Ser. 3. Pro. 33.


Ipsa etiam cunctis gratissima somnus,
Avolat and sera viae mihi nocte redit:
Cogor per mediam turbatus surgere Nocte
Multaque ne patiar, deteriora pati.
I believe the reasons may be many, therefore the old ones sleep less then
young people.

Sleep, though it come of cold, yet has its Original from heat, the vapors
conveyed through the Veins to the head, are cooled by the Frigidity of the
Brain. Somnus, says Aristotle Loc. Cit.
est infrigidatio, and si causa sint calidae, quia vaporis per Venas ad caput
elevati infrigidentur in capite. Wherefore the more Vapors are sent to the
Brain, the more are they incited to sleep.

Now who doubts but young people are filled with more Vapors than old, and
therefore sleep more. Therefore Aristotle Loc. Cit.
Dormuint, say he, vehementur pu^ri, quia nutrimentum sursum serter omne.

The food of ancient people, besides that it is ordinarily much less in
quantity, than what young ones cat, turns most to Excrements and does not
generate those superabundant spirits it produces in the young, which ascending
to the brain, occasion muth sleep. Therefore Aristole Loc. Cit.
Senies excrementis abundant, and vigiles sunt.

Old Folks by reason of their weakness, and frigidity, are less able to concoct
their nourishment, than young ones. Senes, says therefore Aristotle, Loc. Cit.
quia frigidiores sunt and debiliores, and ad concoquendum imeptiores longi
temporis spaciam reddidit. Whence any one may gather that so much the less are
they invaded by sleep, by how much the less they digest their food, food being
the primary and most natural cause of sleep. Dormire says the same Aristotle 1.
de Pl.
contingit animal, qui^, dum aliter ascendit vapor ab alimento ad caput and ubi
absumptus suerit, quia ad cerebrum ascenderat vapor, redit Vigilia.

Age is an incurable infirmity, accompanied with Myriads of thoughts and
thousands of unhappy accidents. Hear Boethius.

Lib. 1. de Cons. Phylos.
Venit enim properata malis inopina senectus,
Et Dolor aetatemjussit inesse suam.
And Sophocles In Ed.


Infirma difficilis

Senectus, amicis invisa, cui universa,

Mala super mala cohabitant.

It is no wonder then, if ancient people oppressed with the load of so much
evil, sleepless than young ones.

Anciant people as Aristotle affirms In Rh^t.
are timorous, standing ever in fear of being betrayed. Wherefore Cor. Gallus
sings Corn. Gall.


Stat dubious tremulusque senex, semperque malorum,
Cred^lus, and stultus, quae facit ipse timet.
Which may be a great reason why they sleep less than young folks, there being
nothing more an enemy to sleep than fear,

Orl. Fur.
Fear which all sleep does chase away. Sings the Prince of Romancers, and
Marina in his Ariana Idil. Fa.


Soon does our fear drive all sweet sleep away. There is nothing that old
people fear so much as death: They know by their wrincles and gray hairs, the
ruins of age and the footsteps of death, that the time of horror and darkness
approaches, which makes them desire to sleep the less, because sleep is the
Image or brother of that death, they so much dread. Therefore Plato, De Leg.
Dia. 7.
Dormiens nemo ullius pretii est multo magis, quam qui non vivit, and Cicero De
Offi. 12.
Nihil morti tam simili, quam somnus.

The nearer things approach to their Center, the more forcibly do they move*
The stone the nigher it comes to the earth with the more have does it press
downwards in its fall. Sleep is nothing but an idleness or rest of the soul, if
we believe Aristotle 1 Eth. c. 13.
Somnus, says he, est otium animae. Now the Soul without doubt will be less
idle, at the time of its approach near its Center. The Soul of an aged person
is certainly nearer its center, than young ones, and by consequence less idle.
Hence it proceeds that Ancient people sleep less than youthful ones.

XIV. Whether Gifts or Stealth's do most felicitate Lovers.
THat the felicity of Lovers consists in receiving Gifts, or obtaining by
stealth's the fruits and enjoyment of Love. I think none will deny. Illustrious
Prince, virtuous and noble Academians. Because the desires of Lovers being
fixed, as in their Sphere, in the possession of the beloved object, they are
equally satisfied either by Gifts or stealth's, the one betokening a free
Principality, the other an amorous Tyranny; Stealth's and Gifts fl^ttering our
complaisance, do truly recreate our Eyes with Beauty, rejoice our hearts
through hope, and comfort our souls with the pleasing remembrance of our future
delights. But whether these stealth's or gifts should bring most felicity
toward a Lovers full content, I know not Illustrious Princes, amidst the
uncertain opinions of these Gentlemen, what valuable decision to make.

Those things being most grateful, which depend most upon the will of the
beloved object, makes me decide the Question in favor of gifts; yet this
Consideration suspends the sentence, because those things do most delight our
Genius, which are gained with most toil and sweat.

As those delights are but ordinary, which are offered to us with a Prodigal
hand, so on the other side those favors, cannot be so hugely pleasing, that
must be procured by the danger of stealth.

The sadness makes gifts the more welcome, and the impatience of our desires
sweetens stealth's.

Those ordinarily receive gifts only that have great merits, and stealth's are
not gained but by daring souls.

That which is given may be thought to be but common to others, so likewise
every common Lover may ravish.

They that suffer themselves to be robbed, are not thought to be very wise or
circumspect. They that proffer themselves cannot avoid the suspicion of being
dishonest.

Such as grant ere they are requested, undervalue themselves, those that force
their Lovers to steal, are too haughty.

There is nothing so sweet, as what we steal or gather our selves, yet those
fruits are grately which a fair hand bestows.

Love is feigned to be a Child, to teach us that gifts best please him: but he
is likewise blind to show that he will give us leave to steal.

But this is the truth, however, O virtuous assembly, than such a Lover is more
happy that ravishes, that he that receives the fruits of Love as a gift. He is
more noble, more deserving, more happy, without doubt that loves, than he that
is beloved: Aristotle, affirm it, because he obliges the party beloved, etc.
Cognosci enim says Aristotle, In his Mor. Chap. 9.
and amari etiam in carentibus anima existit ut cognoscere, and amare rebus
animatis. But who doubts, but he loves much more, who through an amorous
impatience ravishes, then he that waits to have the favors of his Love
bestowed upon him?

He that steals must necessarily love, he that has it bestowed is beloved;
wherefore it is but reason we should sacrifice this affirmation to truth, that
he that steal^s is happier, than he that obtains by consent.

He either loves not or cannot love, that expects and waits for the favors of
Ladies who affect a kind of violence even in voluntary and delightful actions.
Love is a spirit of impatience. I believe he has wings to teach Lovers what
celerity is required, to fly to their stealth's. Himself is composed of
stealth. Guarini decides it in my favor? In his Medri.


Do, be a Thief still, Love I pardon thee,
Stolen things are sweeter far then gifts can be.
There is nothing so contrary to Love a^ Modesty. He that cannot attempt his
own happiness, looses, and turns the favors of fortune into enmity. Hear the
same Guarini Pastor Fid. Act. 2. Sc. 1.


O modesty the Rock and Remora!
Which ever lies in a true Lovers way!
And Tasco in his Amint^. Act. 2. Sce. 2.


Despised a respectful Lover is. To wait for the gifts and favors of Lovers,
is an effect of fear and modesty, to make a rape is an Act of animosity, and
courage, so that by how much this is better then that in a Lover, so much more
happy is the Lover that steals, than he that receives the gifts of Love.

But let your Clemency excuse me, if my too much confidence have abused the
excess of your goodness, which with so favorable a silence has suffered and
honored my imperfections. Treating of stealth's. I could not choose, but rob you
of some favors.

XV. Wherefore Pythagoras prohibited the use of Beans.
With much prudence the learned Pythagoras left this written in his Symbols, A
Fabis abstineto. Wherefore some certain Priests in Rome thought it a great
excess either to touch or name a Bean. In his 2. de ^el. Puni.
Fabam tangere, aut nominare, says Alex ab Alex. Diali flamini non licet. And
Pausanias speaks of some people of Arcadia, who Fabbam immundam, and impurum
existimarunt Hist. An. lib. 7.


The Reasons may be many: First, because the Bean is a gross food, humid,
noxius, which causes evil dreams. This Antiochus does affirm In Dieb. Genesis
Fabas malum succum far in somnia surbulenta facere, emaque ob rem Pytagoram
Fabis abstinuisse, and Volateron. A Pytagora quoque prob^etur, quod haec maxim
ua^ra inflet ae sensus habetat De Reb. Attic.


Moreover Pythagoras seeing that beans were made use of in the choosing of
Magistrates, the Athenians being the first, as Lu^ian affirms, that made use of
them, thereby to advertize men that they should avoid ambition by a Metaphor,
con manded them to abstain from Beans. This is Plutarches opinion.

In Emb* Alciat.
Nothing more resembles the Genitals of a man then Beans. Si viridem fabam,
says Lu^ian De Educat. liber.
folliculo exuas apparere vi^ilibus Genitalibus similem, so that some (f) Minoe
Loc. Cit.
will have it, that those being macerated, and set in the Sun for some time;
Seminis humani odorem contrabat. Therefore who doubts but Pythagoras would
hereby warn us to fly from the tempting pleasures of Venery? The same
Pythagoras having to one that asked him: Quo tempore veneri opera dando esset?
Replied, cum te ipso fieri debiliorem and imbecilliorem voles.

The Ancients from a Bean prognosticated felicities, a superstition haereditary
to many simple ones. Plutarch affirms Plant. in Pericl.
and Alex- ab Alex. tells us, that white Beans denoted happy things, who knows
therefore but Pythagoras, by prohibiting of Beans, means to exhort us to
abstain from prosperity, which cannot but accelerate our ruin? Plut Apot.
Philip of Macedon receiving three several Messages of happy tidings in one
day, implored the Gods to mingle it with some little sinister accident. Thus
therefore Tasso speaks of those, that had fortune favorable In his Jerus.
The Bean makes plants to become barren, and Hens likewise therefore perhaps,
for this reason, as being Noxius to humane generation they were prohibited by
the Pythagorea^s, an opinion of Apollonius Apoll. Hist. Mirab.
Putamini says he, Fabarum steriles plantus efficere si radicibus earum
apponatur, and Gallinas si enebro eas edant. Hanc ob causam fortassi Pytagorei
fabae usu interdixerunt.

And who knows but Pythagoras, by that understanding which led him to the
knowledge of future things did hereby Prognosticate to the Romans the ruin of
the Fabius, who fell by the arms of the Vejentines? Wherefore Ovid 2. Taste.


Haec fuit illae dies in qua vejentibus armis,
Ter centum Faby ter cecidere duo;
Vna domus vires, and onus susoeperat urbis
Sumunt Gentilis arma professa manus.
And for this cause exhorted them to abstain, and not hazard themselves all to
the death, and since, either by times or in advertency of the transcribers,
instead of Fabis, they have put Fabis. Pli. Hist. Not. lib. 18.
Beans if we believe Pliny were used at the sacrifices of the dead, a custom
practiced in our days also, and in the flowers of the Beans there appears sad
and mournful characters. Wherefore it may be Pythagoras to keep men from the
apprehension of sadness and troubles, which makes men unhappy, but the sooner
persuaded them to abstain from Beans, and for this reason was the use of them
forbidden to the Priests. So Varro thinks Loc. Cit.
Varro, and of haec Flaminem eam non vesci tradit, quoniam, and in florae ejus
Literae Lugulres reperiantur.

Perhaps it was Religion persuaded Pythagoras to prohibit the use of Beans,
because he believed, that the souls of the dead, abided in the beans; and
because the Ancients were ever particularly Religious toward beans. This is
Pliny's sentiment. Loc. Cit.
Faba ab hoc Pytagorica sententia damnata, quoniam mortuorum animae sunt in ea,
ut alii tradidere. In eadem peculiaris Religio.

For my part, I should believe, that piercing Genius, who from antiquity
deserved the attribute of divine, intended by somewhat that was very remote
from the cognizance of those times to instruct posterity, and in particular
those that should have the fortune, and virtune to interpret the hidden
Mysteries of his Symbols. Whence I persuade, my self that he meant that men
should abstain not from Fabis, but Facbis. That is, from doing ill things
twice; since for the first time we may meet with all the favors of compassion,
but at the repitition we deserve no less, than the severest castigation.

XVI. In Dispraise of Women.
Woman is the fairest and most amiable object in the world, the greatest and
most precious gift God has bestowed upon humanity. Because by means of her, the
spirit of man is raised to contemplation, and contemplation carries our desires
to the knowledge of things divine, we may say with reason therefore, that woman
was bestowed upon us, for an earnest, and an essay of the blessings of heaven,
and for this perhaps the Flamins loosing their wives were deprived of their
sacred office, to demonstrate that the woman's perfection added merit to the
sacrifices, and who does not see, for a woman, man forgets himself: nay becomes
his own enemy, and if at any time, he fix his eyes upon a beauteous face, his
body trembles, and at the same instant burns and freezes, and like those who
unexpectedly beholds some divine object, is agitated, and moved with a
celestial fury. Finally being recovered, and having recollected their spirits,
again they reverence women in their thoughts, Love them with their souls, and
acknowledging all that is due to a Deity, offer themselves upon the alter of a
Ladies heart their victime and sacrifice.

Consider therefore, in what trouble I am involved, since I must blame the
noblest work of God, and the greatest Miracle on Earth.

But here. I now am against women, who may justly glory in their fortune, that
the meanest of all men is chosen to single out, and muster up their defects.

Woman is an imperfect Animal, an error of nature, and a Monster of our
species. If difformed she is a torment to the Eye, if beauteous, a plague to
the heart. If beloved, she becomes a Tyrant, if hated, an inveterate enemy, she
knows no mean, distinguishes with no reason, and knows not that Justice has a
being. In her thoughts, she is inconstant, in her desires inordinate, and
implacable in her anger. Her Love proceeds from interest, her faith from
necessity, and her Chastity from fear; If she speak, she lies, when she smiles,
she deceives, and if she weep betrays. Her mouth is ordinarily filled with the
honey of flattery; but her breast with the poison of envy, with her Eyes, she
affascinates, with her arms inchaines, with Kisses stupifies, and with the
other delights robs the intellect and reason, and transforms men into beasts.
Dira quidem vis est marinorum fluctum. Et vehemens fluvii ferventis, and
impetus ignis est dira pa^pertas; and alia inumeras, sed nullum immanius est
malum muliere. Neque, hujusmodi malum, aut scribi possit. Aut verbis exprimi.
In a word, the tempests of the Sea; the fury of a Torrent, the greediness of
fire; the Miseries of poverty, and all other evils are small in Comparison of a
woman, who is so great an evil, as cannot be expressed.

Eur, apud, Stob Sermon. 7.
Homer introducing Agamemnon for speaker makes him say, that with all the power
and liberty of Imagination, there cannot be conceived or found a more envious,
and wicked thing than a women. The saurus est malorum mala mulier, vide
sententia Ignatii Alb. page 22
It Is the opinion likewise of Menander, who asserts the woman to be a
compendium, a center, and a treasury of all Evils, because where Women be,
there wickedness abounds like the sands in the Sea.

And therefore St. Jerome Hieron. in Epist.
writes that to find a woman enriched with goodness, is as rare as a Phaenix.

And the Lawgivers ( d) to demonstrate, that it is not at all necessary, to have
Laws for things, which rarely or never happen, bring for example, that there is
no need of having any Laws for good women as being things, which in my opinion,
are seen hardly in any age.

Because goodness in a woman is a wonderful accident, and against nature, with
reason therefore did Plato, Plato de Leg.
doubt whether he should assign a place for women among beasts, or rational
creatures, in (c) Ea. his F. de Leg.
regard of the imbecilli^ty, imperfection, and malice of their sex.

The Poets representing Pallas for the Goddess of Wisdom, say she was born
without a mother only of Jove's brain; to teach us, that wisdom never
proceeds from women, who are totally deprived of Counsel and prudence.

And wherefore Sirs, do the most enormous vices, and the greatest sins pass
under feminine names, but because women are the Compendium, and center of all
that is most wicked, and execrable in the world, and therefore no wonder, if
they have merited titles equal to their deserts from the most renowned authors.
Horace calls then Mulier si forte dolosa. Lib. 1. Sermon.
deceitful; Apulcius Quantas Latebras nequissime mulieres.
wicked; Catull, Quantum praecique multivola est mulier.
variable; Plut, Si quid sevendum est mulier mala atque malitiosae. In Mil.
naught and malicious; Sil. Ital. Parrietibusque domus inbellis femina servet.
Lib. 1.
Imbellis; Callida sed. Medie veneris mihi vindices artem femina.
Ausonius cunning; Prodigia non sentit pereuntem femina censum. Sat. 6.
Juvenal Prodigal; Euripede a grand Evil, Faeminae omnes urimus Libidince
Lisistrata apud Aristoph.
Aristophanes, Libidinous. (h) Nullum imanius est malum muliere apud stob. sat.
71


Iliad. Lib. 20. verse. 25.
Homer contentious, Maledicta sunt arma muliebria lib. 4. Man. Comm^m:
Nicetas accursed, Dux malorum faemina, and scelarum artifex.
Seneca the teachers and fomenters of all baseness.

In a word,

Cicero apud Petron.
Femina nulla bona est, and si bona contigit ulla,
Nescio quo satto mala facto bona est*
Plaut. Aul. Act. 2. Sc. 1. v. 1. 19.
Optum a nulla potest eligi, alia, alia, pejor est.
Hear Ariosto, I beseech you, thus he praises the Woman,

Ariosto's Orlando.
Importunate, proud, and disrespectful,
Without, or Love, or Faith, or any Counsel,
Temerary, Cruel, Unjust, Ungrateful,
Born to the Worlds Eternal plague most hateful.
And now ^irs, I think I have performed my obligation. I hope the women will
pardon me, if they have taken any offense at my words, (because I was bound to
obey herein) speaking evil of a Sex, which Sexus r. Sanctus est Ambros. Luc.
is holy and from whom I have received my being.

But he has said nothing, that has spoken ill; nor does the Sun loose any of
its brightness, though it be cursed by the Ethiopians.

XVII. What natural defect is the most Excusable.
It Is the Conclusion of the most wise, that excessive or over much sleep, is a
Servile vice Labor, and somnus disciplinis adversi sunt: Plato de Rep. Lib. 7.
an enemy to the most worthy discipline Somnus enim multus nec corporibus nec
animis, neque rebus pere^dis Not. conduci. Plat. 7. de Legib.
prejudicial, as Plato asserts, both to body, soul and action.

I nevertheless, who always have a sleepy, and drowsy spirit, do easily
flatter my self with this persuasion, that amongst all natural deffects it is
the most excuseable.

That deffect sirs, is most excusable, which is most natural, whilst nature
operates in us; But what thing is more natural, than sleep, if we will believe
Aristotle, which is a gift of God given us to restore strength, and refresh our
wearied Limbs after hard labor.

The Contemplation of death is one of the first Lessons, by which wise men
undertake, and pretend to teach us to live well. Murder, Avarice, sensuality,
and other such like kinds of Vices will hardly ever find a harbor on that soul,
which is ever considering and beholding its own ruin, in the sud Looking-glass
of death, and every moment in his thoughts builds its own Sepulcher. He that
sleeps much associate and acquaints himself with death contemplates, and
converses with him; sleeping is no other according to Cicero, than an Image of
death or an interrupted death, and can we then blame those that sleep much?
Dreams, if we believe Reveluntur and honores and ingenia per quietem
prestantus, at medela produntur and furta, conferunt, and thesauri de any.
Tertullian, reveal honors, bestow sciences, teach sanctity, discover treasons,
and tell us where hid treasures are. How then shall that Man not be worthy of
encomiums who sleeps much.

It Is the opinion of Aristotle, confirmed by the whole worlds experience Felices
dimidia part vita amiseris nibil distare. Arist. Eth. cap. 13.
that there is no equality for half the time of our lives between Kings and
Slaves, since sleep makes them all equal, and renders them a like so long as
they are under its drowsy Empire. And shall we blame such a one, who sleeps
much, thereby to enjoy the more that equality with the greatest, and most happy
persons that are on Earth? Who though he be poor when awake, yet then thinks
himself as rich as Cresus himself; and if miserable, yet thereby becomes equal
to those whom the world styles the darlings of Fortune?

He that watches, or is awake says Vigilantibus vivium communem esse mundum,
fopilos in suum quamque discedere. Plut. in Mor.
Heracli^us, enjoys only one world common to all other mortals. On the contrary
he that sleeps and sleeps much, makes himself Master alone, and can behold and
enjoy an infinite Number. The Heaven, Earth, Paradise and Hell it self becomes
Theaters to make shows of their wonders, and Marvels, to his thoughts, and
shall we not therefore excuse him that sleeps much.

The world is a valley of Miseries, and tears. The disordinate affections of
humanity have made it become odious to the most understanding souls, and the
most ingenious spirit. The Philosopher Heraclitus said, he found on every side
continual subjects for his weeping. Wherefore then should we blame him that
shall sleep much, since the more he sleeps, the more he flies from this
miserable life, and removes himself the further from the infelioities of the
world?

And though it were a defect to sleep much, yet he might well deserve an excuse
that were such a sleeper, since his very life pays for the usury of that
pleasure, of sleeping, because its certain that every sleep, is so much time
cut of from our life.

And then what sin, what vice can be more excuseable then that, which is
committed sleeping?

Sleep is a thing that is necessary, and good, because it proceeds from nature;
and because it is the quieter and calmer of the senses. Somno quies verum,
placidissim^ somni deorum. Pare animi, quam cura fugit, quo corpore ducis Fessa
ministeriis mulces, reparasque labori. Ovid 11. metam.
It subdues the passions, refreshes weariness, cures our troubles, and
nourishes life. Those therefore that sleep most, do most enjoy this good, and
appropriate, and participate most of this utility, and can we then put their
praise in doubt, who sleep much, since they enjoy so great a good, and benefit
above all others?

Fear Virg. Semper. Vigil. Metus. Plun. de^super.
frights and chaces away sleep, and therefore fearing least I should trouble,
and cloy you with too Prolix a Discourse. I shall cease and wave all further
Discourse of sleep. If I have ill defended the many reasons for it. I hope you
will bear with it, because treating of sleep, my senses became dull and drow^ie.

You perhaps mean to imitate the Ancient, Convito morale del. Rossi.
who joined the graces to sleep, having heard me with so much patience and
sweetness.

Pardon me if I have discoursed too largely, because enjoying beyond deserts,
so grateful an intention and silence I thought I had dreamed.

XVIII. Wherefore great Men ordinarily do not favor virtuous Persons reduced
to necessity.
WE are necessitated to have the protection of great Men, because Jove ever
has his thunderbolts in hand.

And great Men do not succor the Miseries of the virtuous, because they cannot
be persuaded, that a virtuous person can be reduced to Poverty. He only is poor
that is ignorant. Virtue has dominion over all, nothing is placed so high,
either by the hands of power, or fortune, which virtue cannot reach Salut. in
Call.
Quae homines arant, navigant, aedificant, virtute omnia Parent. He is
sufficiently rich that desires nothing; poverty consisting not in the want of
money, but in the poorness of the mind, and desires. He therefore that is
virtuous cannot be poor, because he desires nothing; that saying of Cicero
being indubitable: Vertus se ipsa contenta.

Poverty is not believed to be with any virtuous person, and therefore not
assisted by great men. Nor do they act without reason in this, because Poverty
and Virtue are incompatible.

Ut vera dicat Pauperi non creditur. Says, Menander (b) and else where,

Inest aegeno, quod fidem, non invenit,
Licet Sapiens sit.
Virtue which pays the tribute of Obsequiousness to none but its own self, is
not subject to any necessity. It has no need but of it self, because it enjoys
all the things which is possesses, and desires not those things which it has
not.

No new acquired thing can alter* its gusto, because it bends its desires only
toward the contemplation of its own beauty. Quaeris quare virtus nullo egeat.
Praesentibus gaudet, non concupiscit absentia: nihil illi magnum est, quia
satis. Therefore it is with reason that great Men do (a) Stob Sermo. Ga.
not succor virtuous persons, when they are poor, because being such, they
cannot believe them to be virtuous.

Admire the wisdom of great Men, with reason do they believe themselves to be
the Images of God on Earth. They do not relieve the virtuous, because if the
virtuous were not poor, they would not be virtuous: Poverty being the school
and teacher of all things, whereby the souls of Men, are instructed in all
manner of virtue. Necessitas says Plutarch, omnia docuit, and Arcesila^s,
paupertas est virtatis gymnasium, He that has wealth is employed to keep and
secure it, and all that time it Robs him from himself and virtue; Divites
propter divitias magnis occupationibus detimetur. How many are hindered from
study more by Riches than by Poverty, said one: Quod enim putas, propter
abundantiam potius, quam in opiam prohibere a studio litterarum! Do you not
see, added the same Man, that Poverty makes men virtuous, since only the poor,
for the most part do become Philosophers. An non videas pauperrimos ut plurimum
Philosophari.

And who knows not that the rich obliged to their employments, which always
respects their wealth, cannot dedicate and addict the powers of their souls to
virtue? Whereas the poor having no other faculties but those of the soul, rest
only upon those. Non vides, says the forecited Thaletes, (a) Quod multis
nego^iis occupati divites studiis sapientiae vacare nequeant; pauper vero nihil
habet, quot agat ad Philosophia se convertit.

But whilst I discourse of Poverty. I bethought not my self how I displaid the
Poverty of my own understanding. I implore your excuse, because treating of
Poverty, which is a nothing, being a privation, I believed I said nothing, and
he indeed has said nothing, who has spoken ill.

XIX Which is most potent to beget affection.
Either a fair Face Weeping?
Or a fair one Singing?
The Plea for Weeping.
THat fair God, who for his being the most beneficial to the world, might above
all others excuse the Idolatry of blind Gentilisme becoming inamoured of a
young Maiden, descended from the Throne of the Gods, to try whether that
divinity, which had been able to obtain the adoration of the Universe, could
gain an amorous affection in the heart of a Virgin. He pursued, implored,
tempted; but she conspiring with nature, was transmuted into a Laurel, either
to triumph over his power, or to show that the resolutions of women many times
do not participiate of the instability of the female Sex.

Miserable Apollo truly thou might rather have thought to have found, even
amongst the Rocks, a heart that should have been molified at thy requests, then
amongst hearts, a stone that would not relent for all thy prayers. How much he
was astonished, every one may guess. A certain Poet writes that imediately that
God was seen to weep, who otherwhile was ever wont to sing: And who knows?
Perhaps he would t^y, since his Cruel Daphne already as woman, did not accept
his singing, whether as a Tree she would Love his tears, which he poured on
her, from those two weeping Fountains of his Eyes.

This Fable Illusterous Academs gives an occasion to doubt, whether singing or
weeping, are the most potent instruments in a fair face to captivate a heart,
and from hence arises matter of contention betwixt these two: The fair (...)
(...), and the fair singer. Nor would the decision of their discord be so
facile to end, had they not equally agred to refer it to your sentence, in whom
they are confident to find together, both the judgment of Paris and the
integrity of Aristides.

The tears va^nt to be the more powerful, as having even Apollo's decision
already in their favor, since after he saw his dearest converted into a Tree,
he laid aside his Music, and makes trial of his tears, as if he thought them
even so potent, as to move the very trees therewith.

Consider Sirs, that thee tears are the offspring of the Eyes, the pretty
sisters of the sight, taught and instructed, in those Schools of animated
brightness, where they profess no other Doctrine but to inamour. Let singing
therefore yield its pretenses, which proceeding from the Mouth, is as much
inferior to weeping, both in power and efficacy, as the tears are superior in
the sublimity of their birth and nobleness of their Progenitors.

Nature has consigned our tears to no others Custody but the heart, nor would
she have their pomp and glory appear in any other place but in the Eyes, as if
she esteemed them worthy to have those Kings of the Members for their
Guardians, and the fairest part of the body to be the Throne of their Majesty:
The Eyes were created to be the Miracles of beauty, and the tears to be the
Miracles of the Eyes; and who is not astonished to behold them powering forth
such floods of water from their Spears, or Element of Fire? These in our
sorrows serve us for funeral pomps and mournings, and in our joys they
solemnize our excessive Contentment^, Dearest tears, which in all occasions
deserve to be the Ornaments of the Face, Perhaps 'twas for this reason, that a
Philosopher fell so in Love with tears, that he spent all his time constantly
in weeping; you will never find any man, Sirs, so in Love with singing as to
judge it worthy of his continual and virtuous employment. Consider therefore
the efficaey of tears, which even makes Philosophers enamoured with them.

They that call them by the simple name of Pearls, do not fully express their
dignity, and worth. Those are generated by the influence of the Sun, but at a
far distance from the Sun; and these by the influence of two Suns, and within
the very Sphere of those Suns themselves. Those are nourished in the water,
and these in the midst of flames. Those are made fit by art to adorn the
purity of a whiter neck, and these are reserved by nature to enrich the
beauties of a Rosy cheek Then let us call them precious, and if they be soft
they may inform us thus much, that if one of those being dissolved by
Cleopatra, had power to force Mark Anthony to confess his heart was overcome,
one of these liquified even by the hands of Nature her self, with greater power
shall constrain us to acknowledge that our affections are vanquished.

Love the great God of War, does still invent new and various Stratagems to
conquer and subdue our hearts and Souls. Sometimes he attempts to overthrow us,
only with the sounds of precions metals, sometimes erects his bridge upon the
base of our most instable hopes; sometimes assaults us with the sweetness of an
enchanting voice; and othertimes endeavors the Scalado upon the Cords of a
well-tuned Instrument.

But in fine, all these potent and flattering stratagems, are nothing if
compared to a fair weeping face. Many times there are such, who being stored
with principles and resolutions of chastity, will repel all those assaults and
trials, though seconded and assisted with many tempting caresses and other
provoking Artifices; but when he beseiges us with a sea of tears, there is no
humanity can resist him, none but such as glory in their Inhumanity; and we may
well believe he will expugne that obdure soul of its strongest fortress when he
comes rolling and shouring in with such torrents of overflowing tears.

Smith's do use to besprinkle their Coals with water, which being after blown
upon, do burn with the greater ardour: And Love, being a smith's son, does
often use his Fathers policy: For when he is resolved to inflame a heart most,
he first lets fall a soft shower of tears to moysten it, and after with deep
sighs blows it into a most consuming flame.

Even the Sun, to make his Beams become more hot and scorching, does seem to
unite them together, and dart them through a Cloud, which is no other than
rarefied water, which being condensed, desolves and drops in tears from Heaven
again.

There is nothing which communicates more vigor and nourishment to plants than
heat conjoined with moisture. If then it be true, what some have said, that
Love is a plant, (...) may truly believe that nothing else is a^le to advance
its growth so much, as the Sunshines of two fair Eyes, mixed with the soft
showers of their dist^lling tears.

The Globes of those (...) Suns, being environed with floods of tears, can be
esteemed no other, than artificial (...) which burn under the water, and are
the more ardent by reason of the Antiperistasis.

Excuse me, Sirs, if this conceit seem strange to you, that I should say, tears
are the Milk, of the Eyes, and why must that be esteemed so unlikely, that
those Eyes should flow with milk, which do so often bring forth Love? And if
you do grant this Caprichio, give me leave to conclude, that there is nothing
more proper to nourish affection than tears, since they are milk, and Love is
still a Child.

If any one should ask a Lover, they would return this answer, that the tears
are no other, than the quintescence of the soul distilled through those Eyes,
which pretend to teach us thereby, how liberal we should be of our Love to
them, who do so prodigally wast their souls for us.

Others have said, that tears are extracted from the purest blood in the heart,
which may serve us for an argument, that if the blood of Caesar dead, had power
to move the souls of the Romans to a Mutiny, much more will these living drops
of the fair weepers Eyes, be able to stir up our Affections to Mutinies and
Tumults. And if you say, that this might be tumultuous, because a Tyrants,
remember that beauty likewise is no other, than a Tyrant.

But to know, whether the power of tears be greater, than of singing, consider
that these move by nature only, and singing all by Art.

I know you will not deny, but that a spring, which casts forth pure and
murmuring streams out of its Rocky bosom, naturally, does flatter and delight
our senses more then those magnificent and stately Roman fountains, though
those artificial structures have no stone in them, which is not worth a
treasure.

A pure and unsophisticated beauty, how much more it does charm and captivate
our hearts, than such as are made handsome only by art; your selves may judge,
who have so often yielded to their commanding swetness. The Poets seigned Cupid
always naked, to show us that a natural beauty naked of all false clothing
artifice does soonest tempt, insna^e, and wound the soul, but if you reflect
upon singing, you shall not find one note which is not artificial, nor hear one
sigh but what is seign'd, sometimes it seems to languish in a whyning passion,
and tell sad tales, then straight turns into joyful strains again. Dissembling
all its passions, and cunningly changing it self into an hundred several
humors of mirth and sadness: and if it have any thing pleasing in it, it must
be something only natural, and how can the soul possibly Love that singing,
which glories in its bewitching fraud and vaunts that it obtains respect, and
reverence only, by a sweet nothingness.

To express the power of singing, says one, it is an enchantment; but sirs, if
you will know, how much weeping prevails above it, remember that that Armida,
who otherwhile triumphed over the Marrial Squadrons by power of her
enchantments, was forced to make use of her tears, to add more Vigor to those
very enchantments. So that the spirits and furies themselves are too weak to
resist the charms of a beauteous weeper. Nor need we wonder at it, for theirs
at most is but an infernal power, and the tears dropping from a handsome Face,
are no less than the showers even of a clouded heaven.

Musicians themselves confess that to add more vigor to their singing, they
are necessitated to make use of frequent sighs, trembling, quavers, and soft
languishing strains: and what else are these, but parts of sorrow, and weeping?
These they make use of, because otherwise that musi^k would seem to have no
life, or spirit in it that could not humor its passion with a deep sadness and
sighing affection.

Consider therefore the power of weeping, from which even singing it self does
borrow so much help.

That Ambi^ious Musician gloried, that he had redeemed his dear Euridice from
Hell, by the powerful sweetness of his voice; But let me rather say, that if he
did obtain her, because he sung so excellently well, perhaps he lost her so
suddenly again, because he did not weep, sufficiently?

And what can you imagine, the heavens desires or expects from us, unless it be
Love. When it so often poures down shours of tears: Pythagoras believed that
the Spears were ever making a sweet harmony; But I see that we often return
thanks to heaven for its weeping, but never for its imaginary music.

Poets have sometimes commended a beauty, hid under a mourning Cypress veil,
as if the resplendant Beams of such a beauty, being concentred together, should
through that obscurity, thus united, have the more power to make a speedy
conquest over the Soul. Now observe, Sirs, that a weeping beauty, is a beauty
clad in its morning weeds, which should merit our affections the sooner,
because it seems to put on that sad habit, to perform the obsequies for your
expired liberty.

By the Law of Nature we should give credit to their affections, which can
bring good witness that they Love. Now what are such tears else but testimonies
of a heart, that Loves sincerely, which come to Natures tribunal attending on
the Soul, to demand a Reciprocal Correspondence.

Aristotle says, that our tears are a kind of sweat, and if we justly merit
wages for sweat and labor, who can deny the reward of Love to those fair Eyes,
which perhaps sweat and pant, lying under the burden of an amorous affection.

Tears have such efficacy to Enamour, that I believe, the offerings of Myrrh,
and Incense are grateful and pleasing to the gods, for no other Reason, but
because they are Tears, though shed by senceless trees. Those lighted Candles
which often shine upon a sacred Altar, where we implore the grace of Heaven; if
you but mark it, do never burn without letting fall some drops like tears,
perhaps to teach fair Eyes, that if the tears, even of inanimate lights, have
power to move the heavens, the drops of two such bright, and living torches,
must needs have as much influence on Men.

We do not ordinarily ascribe any other Epithets to music, than those of
melody and sweetness. But when we treat of tears, we use to call them by a more
Viril name, women's arms or Weapons. Now do you guess Sirs, whether they be not
potent, since they have obtained even the name of Weapons. And I believe it was
for no other reason that the gods blinded Cupids Eyes; but only because if he
could have added tears to the power, he has already, there were no means left
for any to resist his power and might.

Our infant age does most require the Love and tender affection of others, by
reason of our own insufficiency: And yet natures Care, has provided us with
nothing else, in that age, but only our tears.

And are they so potent in our infancy, that even a child, though bound by
Nature and reason to be under the Fathers Tuition, and Jurisdiction. Yet
weeping tenderly does seem to claim, and often over swayes the parents will.
Who will say then, that tears are not most powerful instruments, since they
have so much strength though managed by a weak unskilful Child.

Tears are the Language of the Soul, and passions, taught us by natures self,
that it might be the better understood by every one. Tears are the Souls
Ambassadors, which being sent to declare the state of its own affections, does
often lie in wait, and catch the liberty of others. They require no other
Audience but our Eyes, knowing those requests are most potent, which pass
through them into the heart. They express their Message without a Tongue, and
are silent with wonderful efficacy. Consider then the power of those tears,
which being dumb can yet persuade, so sweetly. Nature it self, seems in this
contest to yield the palm of Victory to tears, since she has framed the Arches
of the Eyebrows, over their Cisterns to declare that they are triumphant.

Such are the Prerogatives of Tears, that they may be thought injured, when but
compared to singing. Consider Sirs, that if at any time a disdainful passion,
turns Gyant-like a rebel against that Heaven of beauty, they opening their
Flood gates can quickly drowned them in the precious Deluge. Or if at any time
a stubborn soul resolve to be reconciled again to the offended Diety of Love,
these Advocates present the humble Petitions, which never are rejected. If
sometimes the thoughts reflect upon a wished for happiness, these officious
associates, do strait way wait upon the grateful memory. If sometimes one do
absent themselves from their dear Country, or from their dear beloved object,
these alone are wont to be left behind. I know not if I should say, together as
Companions with the soul, or as pledges for it. If sometimes the affection be
Gasping, and dying; nay quite dead, in the breast of disdainful Lovers, nothing
but these can bring it to life again, an extinguished affection being often
raised into a flame again, by being only deplorated. Now what can be compared
or paralelled with these tears, which have the power and virtue even to revive
the dead?

But Sirs, if you please briefly in one argument to comprehend the power of
tears, consider that they have not been afraid to appear and fall, in this
House of Music, and even contest with that music it The Academy being held
that week in a Musicians House.
self for the Pre-eminence.

FINIS.

