Apostolical Communion IN THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.

Asserted and Applied. For the Cure of Divisions:

In a SERMON Preached in the Cathedral-Church of St. Peter, Exon: And since
Enlarged.

By Tho. Long, B. D. and one of the Prebendaries.

(...). Ignatius ad Magnes. Hinc moneamur, cum specie studii perfectionis,
imperfectionem nullam tolerare possumus, aut in corpore, aut in membris
Ecclesia; tunc diabolum nos tumefacere superbia, and hypocrisi seducere ad
deserendum Christ! gregem nos instiget; certo sciens se victoriam obtinere, cum
nos inde abduxit. Cum enim nusquam alibi sit, aut remissio peccatorum, aut
salus, tametsi vitse plusquam Angelicae speciem prae nobis feramus, tamen si
tali audacia nos separemus a Christiano coetu, simus diaboli. Calv. adv. Anab.
LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1673.

To the Right Worshipful Henry Gandy Esquire Mayor of the City of Exeter; and the
Aldermen of the same.
THE Society whereof you are Members, (if it be fit to compare lesser things
with greater), may acquaint you with the necessity of Government, Laws, and
Order in the Church of God: First, You hold your Authority from the King, and
his Laws; So does the Church from Christ and his Gospel: You have Superior and
Inferior Officers; So has the Church: You have power to Enact certain
Municipal Laws as occasion shall require, for the peace and welfare of the
City; So has the Church, by virtue of the general Precepts of Christ and his
Apostles: You have certain Forms and Rites in the A^ministration of Justice* to
make it more solemn* So has the Church, to procure the greater Reverence in
the Administration of Public Worship: ^^u have many lesser Societies of
Artificers, who have their dependence on you; So has the Church, many
Parochial Congregations depending on the Bishop of the Diocese. Now, if
discontented and pragmatical persons should arise among your selves, and make
it their business, to defame your Government, as if it were tyrannical and
arbitrary burthensom and oppressing, because of a f^^ ^r^^^nt Forms and
Customs; if they should quarrel ^t some antiqu^ted w^^s in your Legal
proceeding* and take offense at the (...) and (...) Ma^e^ as (...) Ceremonies,
(and you know (...) the same (...) Magistrates, a^ other (...) Minister). If
these (...) p^^nt and plead (...) Reformation of all your Laws, and Government;
if they should forge and pretend new Charters, and Commissions for the
subversion of the old; and erect mock-Courts of Justice, censuring, hating, and
(as much as in them lies) condemning all that will not be of their Rabble: If
they should advance a Dozen of Burgo-Masters into the Office of the Mayor, and
make every man one of the Council; if they should abolish all the ancient Laws
and Customs; lay aside all Rites and Formalities; and bring in new Ordinances,
such as were never known in yours, or in the Government of any other
Corporation? Were such practices tolerable? Or if not speedily remedied, would
they not bring the whole City to Confusion? And is it not the duty of every
good Magistrate, to prevent such tumults? Now such is the present condition of
our Church; Schism and Separation in the Church, being of the same nature with
Sedition and Tumult in the State* And God forbid it should always be said of
Zion, as Jer. 3^.17. This is Zion whom no man seeks after. Tum tua res,
agitur, is one Argument to engage you all (as you are Magistrates) in the
defense of the Church; for seldom does Faction prevail in the Church, but it
proceeds also to the alteration of the State. But you are engaged on more noble
Principles, as Members of that Church which I plead for; and your Examples (as
things now stand) may be more instrumental for the peace of the Church, than
your power; and when you meet with rational Dissenters, your Arguments may not
be altogether ineffectual. I have presumed, to put a few such Arguments into
your hands, which I doubt not, may be instrumental to the confirming them that
are yet in the Communion of the Church of England, though perhaps not effectual
to recall those that are departed; and yet I doubt not, but here is enough to
convince them; their Conversion is the work of God.

It will be needless to give an account of my publishing this Sermon, or the
presenting it to you. I should be wanting to my duty as a Minister of the
Church, if I should omit to serve her Interest, as far as I am able. And the
desires of diverse of this City, which was the place of my Nativity, and in
whose welfare, that of my self and a numerous family are wrapped up, did easily
prevail with me, to give this testimony of my real affection, as well to your
persons, as to your Government. I shall only trouble you with an account of my
Subject, which is a persuasion to unity in the public Worship of God, as it is
professed in the Church of England. If any ask, What that Church is? I answer,
it is, The whole Nation, professing the Gospel of Christ, visibly uniting
themselves by joint-consent, of King, Pastors, and people, and agreeing in
certain Laws and Rules conformable to the Apostolical and Primitive Precepts
and Patterns, for the Preaching of the Word, and the Administration of the
Sacraments with decency and order, in the public Worship of God. If this
description agree in every particular to our National Church, then the raising
of Divisions in it, and making Separation from it, is the sin of Schism, and
that sin extremely dangerous; and therefore it is every man's duty, that lives
within the pale of the Church, to keep himself in the Communion of the same:
which is the endeavor and constant prayer of,

Your devoted Servant in all Good Offices, THO: LONG.

1 John 1.3. That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye
also may have fellowship with us; And truly, our fellowship is with the Father,
and with his Son Jesus Christ.


THere are (says Solomon) threescore Queens, and fourscore Concubins, but the
(...). Epiph. Haer. 35.
undefiled is but one. There are many Factions besides that at Rome, Cant. 6.8.
that pretend to be the Spouse of Christ; but his beloved is but one, and that
one is only beloved. Thus the Nicene Creed teaches us, There is one Catholic
and Apostolic Church, in which is the Communion of Saints, and Remission of
Sins. It concerns us therefore, to be well assured, as well in respect of our
present comfort, as of our future happiness, of the truth and purity of that
part of the Church of Christ to which we join our selves in Communion; that our
hope of Salvation, may be laid on the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets,
Ephesians. 2.10
Jesus Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone. And if we are ambitious of
any honor, let it be of this, not to be the Head or Prop of any petty Faction,
but to be a Member of Christ, which the good Emperor Theodosius preferred above
his being Head of the Empire.

For if there be a Heaven upon Earth, it must needs consist, as our eternal
happiness hereafter, in a Communion with God and his Son Jesus Christ; and to
this the Text guides even to Mount Sion, Heb: 12.22.
and to the City of the Living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem and to an
innumerable company of Angels, to the General Assembly and Church of the
Firstborn, which are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the
Spirits of Just Men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New
Covenant. To confirm you in this Society, is the end of all our preaching, and
your hearing; for when our Savior ascended up on high, he gave some Apostles,
Ephesians. 4.11. and 14.
some Prophets, some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, (that we
should be no more Children tossed to and fro with every wind of Doctrine, but)
for the perfecting of the Saints for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying
of the Body of Christ: This our Apostle intimates to be the end of all the
Scriptures, but more especially of the Text: That which we have seen and heard,
declare we unto you, that ye may have fellowship with us, etc.

Church Communion is my present Subject, concerning which I observe these three
parts in the Text.

I. The ground and foundation of Apostolical Communion: That which we have seen
and heard.

II. Wherein this Communion consists; from the diverse notions of the word
(...), in the Scripture: That ye may have fellowship with us, (i.e.), the
Apostles.

III. The excellency of this Communion: And truly our fellowship is with the
Father, etc.

That I may the better fix your meditations on my discourse, and that upon the
Text, I shall give you the Substance of both, in this short Argument.

That Church, which holds Communion with Christ and his Apostles, in Doctrine,
Omnis Doctrina quae cum Ecclesiis Apostolicis Matricibus and Originalibus fidei
conspirat veritati deputanda. Tertul. de praescript.
Government, and Worship, is a true Member of Christ's Church, in which
Salvation may be had: But the Church of England holds Communion with Christ and
his Apostles, in Doctrine, Government, and Worship: Therefore the Church of
England is is a true Member of Christ's Church, in which salvation may be had.

My first Proposition, I shall prove from Act. 2.42. where it is recorded of
the Primitive Christians, That they continued steadfastly in the Apostles
Doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayers: and it
follows, v. 47. The Lord added daily to the Church such as should be saved:
whence I observe,

1. That by reason of this Communion, they are expressly denominated the Church,
Plebs sacerdoti adunata, as Saint Cyprian.

2. And, that to this Church Salvation is appropriated: God daily added to the
Church such as should be saved.

The Proposition being sufficiently proved, I shall, for the greater
perspicuity, prove the Assumption gradually, according to the parts into which
I divided the Text, And show,

1. That the Church of England holds Communion with Christ and his Apostles in
Doctrine.

Anno 1660.
Those dissenting Ministers, that presented to the Parliament their Reasons for
Reformation of the public Doctrine, etc. did assure us in the first words,
that it was far from their thoughts, to oppose or disparage, orthodox Doctrine;
a well composed Liturgy; Rites for decency and order; Ordination of Ministers;
Apostolical Episcopacy; and due Rules of Discipline. I wish, that as we have
heard the voice of Jacob, so we had not felt the hands of Esau; for, though the
truth of all that they desired, has been proved by many Worthies in our
Israel; yet as St. Chrysostom says, though we bring the Sunbeams in our
hands, men will not be persuaded; there does not want light to convince, but
they resist the Spirit of Truth that should convert them. Pray we therefore,
That he who promised the holy Spirit to them that ask it, Luke 11.13.
would pour down such plentiful measures and operations of it, into the hearts
of this people, that as we all profess his holy Name, so we may agree together,
in the truth of his holy Word, and live in unity and godly love.

And so I begin with the first part of the Text, viz. The ground and foundation
of Apostolical Communion, (which is), the Doctrine delivered in the Scriptures
of the New Testament, wherein the Church of England does hold Communion with
Christ and his Apostles.

The things of which the Apostles were eye and ear-witnesses from the beginning
of the Gospel, that word of life, 1 John 1.1.
that was spoken by the wisdom of God, attested by a voice from Heaven,
accompanied by the power of God in such variety of Miracles, is the only
infallible foundation of our Faith and Communion; beside which, we in vain
expect any other either guide or ground, Luke 16.31. Non opus est revelatione,
post Evangelium. Tort.
of equal certainty; for as our Savior determined concerning Moses and the
Prophets, the same may be said of Christ and his Apostles, If we believe not
them, neither will we be persuaded, thought one should come from the dead.

Yet is it no disparagement to our preaching, or your hearing, that we cannot
preface our Sermons, as the Apostles did, That which we have seen and heard,
declare we unto you: seeing our Savior has pronounced them blessed, Joh.
20.29.
(with an Emphasis), that have not seen, and yet have believed. The spirit of
perverseness did not dye with Pharaoh, and the Jews of old: There have been
little less than Miracles wrought in our generation, but if, as our Savior
intimates there should be Miracles indeed, done in the midst of us, there are a
sort of Pharisaical persons, that would oppose still.

I shall therefore take it as granted, that we do believe those things which
Christ and his Apostles have declared unto us in the books of the New
Testament, In iis quae aperte in SS. posita sunt inveniuntur omnia quae
continent fidem moresque vivendi S. August. de Doct. Christ. 2.9. 2 Pet. 3.16.
(...). St. Chrysostom. in 2 These. Hom. 3.
and that in them we have the will of God declared unto us, concerning all such
things as are necessary to our Salvation; that they are a most certain and safe
rule of Faith, able to make the man of God perfect, thoroughly furnished to
every good work, 2 Timothy 2.13. And whereas it may be objected from St. Peter,
that in them are some things hard to be understood; I answer, that the things
that are necessary to be known, are but few, and those are obvious to ordinary
capacities; and such as are obscure and difficult, are not necessary; or if
there be some difficulties that may be thought necessary to be explained, then
as Diamonds are best formed by Diamonds, so the Scriptures is best expounded by
Scripture. It Is St. Paul's rule, To. 12.6. (...).
Let him that prophesies (i.e. interprets) the Scripture, prophecy
according to the proportion of Faith. Now the Analogy of Faith is observed,
when those truths, which are evident and undoubted, like the first Principles
in other Sciences, be made the rule for resolving of what is less evident,
Institution of a Christian man. Bishop Jewels Apology.
and the Scripture is what is less evident, and the Scripture is ^^st seen, as
the Sun, by its own light.

Yet because there is no truth so clear, but some unhappy men may perplex, and
controvert it, in case the wisdom of God in the Scripture be not thought
sufficient, to put to silence the ignorance of foolish men* the Church of
England declared at the beginning of the Reformation, her readiness to submit
to the decrees of the four first Council of Nice consisting of 318 Bishops. Of
Constinople 150. Of Ephesus 200. Of Calcedon 630. The universal practice of the
primitive Church is the most authentic interpreter of Scripture. K.C. his
Papers to Hender.
General Councels, and the judgment of the Fathers of the four first Centuries.
And doubtless, they who were nearest to the lights of the world, could best
discern their Doctrines; many of whom, could say of the Apostle, as they of
Christ, That which we have seen and heard, (from their own mouths and
writings), declare we unto you. Nevertheless, we give not the Councils a power
to make new Articles of Faith, but only to explain and enforce the Doctrine of
the Holy Scriptures; which is all that those primitive Councels did pretend to;
which power is indeed very requisite for the unity of the Church; because there
never was Heretic, or Schismatic, but did alledg the Scriptures in defense of
his opinions.

Artic. 6.
O^^ Church therefore declares: First, Concerning the holy Scriptures, viz. All
the Books of the Old and New Testament, which are now commonly received by us,
that they contain all things necessary to Salvation; so that, whatsoever is not
read in them, nor can be proved out of them, is not required of any one to be
believed, as an Article of Faith, or to be thought necessary to Salvation.

Artic. 20
Secondly, Concerning the Authority of the Church, That it may not institute
any thing that is contrary to the written Word of God, nor may so expound one
place of Scripture, that it be made to contradict another; and that it obtrude
nothing else to be believed as necessary to Salvation.

Artic. 21
Thirdly, As to the Authority of Councils, it declares, That whatever they
decree as necessary to Salvation, has neither strength nor authority, unless
it may be shown, that it is taken out of the Word of God. Thus far, I make no
doubt, but we are agreed.

There is yet another Summary of Christian Faith, wherein we hold Communion
with the Apostles, viz. The Apostles Creed, of the Original whereof, I think
fit to give you this brief account.

Our Savior injoined his Apostles to go and disciple all Nations, baptizing
them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, Mat. 28.19, 20.
and of the Holy Ghost; and to teach them to observe all things that he should
command them. Now the Apostles baptizing for the most part, such as were of
years of discretion, did teach them also, i.e. did catechize and instruct them,
in the mysteries of that Faith into which they were baptized; Thus we find them
teaching, that Jesus was the Christ, that he was God manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16.
that he died for our Sins, and rose again for our Justification, that he
ascended to Heaven, and that he shall come again to judge both the quick and
dead; 2 Timothy 4.1. 1 John 5.7.
so likewise the Trinity of Persons in the unity of the Godhead. Of this Faith
it was required, that they which were of discretion, should make profession,
before their admission to Baptism.

This was that good Profession which Timothy made before many witnesses; yea, 1 Timothy 6.12.
and Titus, whom St. Paul calls his own Son, according to the common Faith, is
supposed by Bishop Davenant to have made the like Profession. See Bishop
Davenant's Opinion. p. 16.
And Calvin on Heb. 6.2. asks the question, what is Baptismal Doctrine, but
that of Faith in God, of Repentance, and of Judgment?

So that the Apostles, having planted many Churches before the Scriptures were
written, and being (shortly after the day of Pentecost) according to their
commission, to depart into several Countries, they did then, Tradun^ major^
nostri, etc. Ruffirius in Sy^bol.
as the Ancients affirm, sum up the Articles of Christian Faith, and left them
as a depositum in all the Churches which they had planted, to be the standard
of incorrupt Doctrine, by which young and old should be instructed. Of this we
have memorials in most of their Epistles, which (all know) were not written
till after the plantation of those Churches to whom they were written. Thus St.
Paul mentions, Romans 6.17. (...). 1 Cor. 3.10, 11.
the Form of Doctrine delivered to the Church at Rome. The Foundation laid by
him in the Church of Corinth. The (...) the measure of the Rule, which he used
in preaching of the Gospel, which by an Emphasis he calls, Gal. 6.16. Ephesians. 2.20
1 Timothy 6.20. 2 Timothy 1.13. Tit. 1.4. 2 Pet. 2.21. Jude v. 3.
the Canon, commended to the Galatians. And to the Ephesians, the Foundation.
And to the Philippians, the same Rule, i.e, the one immutable Rule, as
Tertullian calls the Creed; the Depositum or Form of sound words; the common
Faith; which places, with others like them, many ancient and modern Divines, do
understand of the Apostles Creed. And it is observed, that the most primitive
Fathers, mentioning the Rule of Faith, do mean generally, the Apostles Creed;
for if they had a Rule of Faith before the Canon of the Scriptures was sealed,
(which was not till St. John's death), what can we suppose to have been that
Rule, beside the Apostles Creed. St. Ignatius gives us the Substance of it, in
three of his Epistles, commending the constancy of those Churches in the
unalterable Faith. Irenaeus says, Ad Smyrn. Philip. Thrall.
The Church that is planted throughout the whole World, did receive from the
Apostles and their Disciples, that Faith which is in One God the Father
Almighty. Tertullian tells us, De velandis Virg. and contra Prax.
of ^^tres tractatores, that had commented on it before himself. The very use
of Catechizing, which is from the Apostles days, does evince, that there were
grounds of Christian Religion, by which they were to be instructed. And in one
word, whereas the Niceue and Athanasian Creeds, are but expositions of the
Apostles, in those Articles that were opposed in their days, we may conclude,
that it was more ancient than they.

I have enlarged my discourse in this particular, because the use of it is
generally omitted by diverse Persons, in their gathered Congregations, to whom I
commend the opinion of Calvin, Inst. l. 2. c. 16. 18.
viz. that by great consent of the Fathers, it was attributed to the Apostles,
and made the pulick confession of the Churches from the Apostles age. And so
Beza, On Romans 12.6.
That from the first preaching of the Gospel, it was received as an Epitome
thereof. I conclude this, with the resolution of our late martyred Sovereign,
In his Papers to Henders.
I shall believe, that the Apostles Creed was made by them, (such reverence do
I bear to the traditions of the Church), until more certain Authors can be
found. Now that the Church of England has Communion with the Apostles in this
part of their Doctrine, appears first, In requiring the profession thereof, at
Baptism* viva voce, from them that are of competent age; and from the Sureties
of Infants, in their behalf, who are charged to teach it them as soon as they
are able to learn; and it is plainly expounded in the Church-Catechism, and to
be said both by Minister and People in the daily service of God; and that this
Creed, together with that of the Council of Nice, and that of Athanasius,
Artic. 8.
are to be received and believed, for they may be proved from most certain
testimonies of Scripture.

You see now, how the Church of England does hold Communion with the Apostles
in Doctrine, viz. in all, and nothing else, (not in Fathers, Councils, or
Creeds, but what is included in, or by good consequence is concluded from the
Scriptures, agreeable to the Analogy of Faith, Jewels Apol. Proemium. Dr.
Hammond contra Blond.
and Judgment of the primitive Fathers and Councils* to whose Institutions our
Church directed as nigh as possibly she could, not only he^ Doctrine, but
public Prayers, and administration of Sacraments.

We do not reject the Scriptures, as the Enthusiasts do; nor confront their
Authority by Traditions, as the Papists; nor by Private Reason, as the
Socinians; nor by pretended Revelations, as the Anabaptists we do not keep
those Treasures from the people, under the Lock of a strange Language, as if
the Key of Knowledge were given us, rather to shut them up from the people than
open them unto them; or as if we were of the opinion of Cardinal * Ho^us* that
it would be better with the Church, Tilenus contra Bell. De Verbo Dei, l. 2. c.
14. Laicis sufficit pictura pro Doctrina. Gratian Decret.
if the Scriptures had never been extant; nor are we of Bellarmine's judgment,
That if the Pope should command Vice and forbid Virtue, we ought to obey;
contrary to what the Apostle says, If I or an Angel from heaven preach any
other doctrine, etc. ^or does our Church take authority, to ^mpose new Articles
of Faith, as the Council of Trent did, a whole dozen at once, teaching for
Doctrines the commandments of men, such as the Supremacy and Infallibility of
the Pope, of worshipping Angels and Images, Prayers for the dead, Invocation of
Saints and Angels; the Doctrines of Merits; Purgatory and Pardons; Col. 2.19
these ^old not the Head, as the Apostle says. And we equally abhor the
Doctrine of the Socinians, against the Godhead of our Savior, and of the Holy
Ghost. The Doctrine of the Anabaptists, against Magistrates and Ministers, such
as the Doctrine of Resistance, which John Goodwin said was reserved to be made
known in this last generation; Sic amplecti oportet, ut nobis in sacris literis
generaliter propositae sunt.
All these, and whatever else are contrary to the Analogy of Faith, the Wisdom,
Justice, Goodness, and Holiness of God, his Precepts or Promises, such as
represent him less Merciful or Holy than he has revealed of himself; Artic. 8.
all these we reject, because the Apostles heard them not from Christ, nor any
Primitive persons from the Apostles. we declare them not unto you.

And after all this, to object the Sentiments of private Doctors, contrary to
the public Edicts of the Church, is but a vexatious and impertinent quarrel,
of such as have nothing else to object, as indeed they have not: for it is
generally acknowledged, That the Articles of our Church as to matters of Faith,
are agreeable to the Scriptures; instead therefore of heaping up concessions, I
shall make this one observation, that after our late Reformers had covenanted
to reform our Church in Doctrine, the House of Lords, who had then the power of
admitting all Incumbents to their Benefices, permitted none to be legally
invested, who had not first read and subscribed the Book of Articles, which the
Church does declare, were set forth for avoiding of diversity of Opinions, and
establishing of Consent, touching true Religion; they were never intended to
contain all Points of Doctrine; as neither does the Confession of any other
Church; and yet this is made the only objection against them; for, as to that
pretense, of the doubtfulness of them, because some words may have diverse
significations, it may as well be objected against the Scriptures, in which are
some things hard to be understood. 2 Pet. 3.16.


And here it is very seasonable to mind the people also, to continue their
communion with the Church in her Apostolical Doctrine, in that sense which some
learned Expositors give of it, on Act. 4.42. viz. in the exercise of that
Doctrine, Sanctius in locum.
or in hearing the Apostles preach; for, if it be the Churches Precept, and the
Preachers Practice, not to teach any thing, Dr. Hammond.
but what is agreeable to the Doctrine of the Old and New Testament, and what
the ancient Fathers and Bishops have gathered from that Catholic Doctrine; and
if the Ministers of our Church do frequently, plainly, and solidly dispense
that food of our Souls; and I may confidently say, it is not done better in any
part of the Catholic Church, Artic. Rel. Anno. 1571. Clerus Anglicanus stupor
mundi. Joh. 6.68
I may well demand, as St. Peter did, Master, whither shall we go? thou have
the words of eternal life. Did we not prefer the advantages of this life,
beyond the means of a better; and make religious duties, an engine to promote
temporal designs, having men's petsons in admiration (...), Jude 16.
for lucres sake; could we be content with Manna; and not long for the rank
Onions and Fleshpots of Egypt; and with the Prodigal, leave our Fathers
house, where is Bread enough, to feed with Swine, in exotic and strange Modes
of Worship; we need not move out of our Tents to have all our necessities
supplied to our comfort and salvation; 2 Cor. 2.17. (...).
for as the Apostles says, we are not as many that corrupt the word of God,
mixing the waters of Siloam that run softly, with the waters of Marah, strife
and bitterness; nor as those Sophisters in 2 Cor. 4.2. (...), that walk in
craftiness, and can make (quidlibet ex quolibet) our inventions a rack whereon
to wrest and torture the Scripture, until it speak our own sense; but as of
sincerity, as of God, as in the sight of God, speak we in Christ.

It is nothing but a soul stomach, and a vitiated palate, that makes some men
to disrelish wholesome food; could we lay aside all filthiness, and superfluity
of naughtiness, all wrath and bitterness, ^am. 1.21.
all hypocrisy and prejudice, all pride and vainglory, and receive with
meekness the sincere Milk of the Word, we might have it from the Breasts of our
Mother, that has born and nourished us hitherto, more plentifully than from
all those pretenders, who, like the Harlot in the history of Solomon, seek to
divide and Murder the Children that are not their own. ^ King. 3.25.


What can the Leaders of a people, that cause them to err, and separate from a
true Church, where all things necessary to Salvation may be had, plead in their
excuse? If they say, Animus Schismaticus in Ecclesia Catholica.
they preach the same Doctrine as we; St. Cprian answers, that men may be
guilty of Schism and Division that remain in the same Faith.

Nobiscum estis in Baptismo in Symbolo, in Spiritu autem unitatis, in vinculo
pacis, in ipsa Ecclesia Catholica, non estis: The mark of Schism, is not set on
them that oppose the Doctrine of the Church, but that make divisions in, and
cause separation from the Church. Romans 16.17. 1 Cor. 3.4, 5.
How severely does St. Paul chide the Corinthians, not for following false
Teachers, but for making factions for true ones, I am of Paul, and I of
Apollos, and I of Christ. Christ himself must not be pleaded in opposition to
the Ordinances and Unity of the Church; Phil. 1.16
this were to preach Christ out of envy. When men begin to blow the Trumpet to
Division, and cry, Every to his Tents, they do, ipso facto, proclaim, We have
no Portion or Communion with the Church. Dum conventicula sibi constituunt,
teritatis caput atque originem reliquerunt. S. Cyprian.


Which is the second particular wherein the Communion of our Church with Christ
and his Apostles is maintained, i.e. in Government, for so (...) signifies, a
Society, or Assembly, (Civil or Ecclesiastical) (...) Body corporate, in which
is superiority and subordination, and which is governed by certain Laws and
Customs, Penalties and Privileges, proper to it self; and when this order is
observed in all Societies, it is strange, if that which makes up the Body of
Christ should be a Monster; the Apostle assures us to the contrary, God is not
the Author of Confusion, 1 Cor. 14.33.
but of Peace; as in all the Churches of the Saints, which the Apostle
alleges especially to prove, that there is superiority and subordination,
even among the Prophets, i.e. the Ministers of the New Testament, v. 33.
The spirit of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets; when therefore we read
of fellowship with the Apostles, we may not understand it of a confused parity,
either between the Ministers of Christ and his people, as the Socinians and
Anabaptists; or of the Ministers of Christ among themselves, as the
Presbyterians imagine, for we may both see and hear that the contrary has been
from the beginning. Our Savior appointed other seventy, Luke 20.1. Ephesians. 4.10.
which were not of the same rank with the Apostles. And, when he ascended, he
gave diverse offices to continue in his Church; and therefore Christ did not
only commission his Disciples, To feed and govern his Church in their own
persons, Joh. 20.21.
but by their Successors. As the Father sent me, so send I you, that you may
send others. And l^, I am with you to the end of the world, Mat. 28.28.
not in their persons, but in their successors. And it will be a very difficult
work, for some Pastors to prove such a succession. But not to digress: We read,
that while the Church of Christ was yet a little Flock* Act. 15.6. 1 Timothy 3.10.
there were Apostles, Elders, and Deacons; when that Flock increased, and the
planting and confirming of Churches abroad, called them from their immediate
superintendency, they found out fit persons to whom they derived their own
ordinary authority, viz. For Ordination and Jurisdiction.
for the government of such Churches as they had planted; St. James had his
successors at Jerusalem, St. Mark at Alexandria; St. Peter and St. Paul, the
one being the Apostle of the Jews that believed, the other of the Gentiles,
Eusebius l. 3. c. 23.
had their successors at Rome; St. Paul being to go into Macedonia, left
Timothy at Ephesus, and Titus at Crete, to succeed him in the Government of
those Churches. The Apostle had labored about the space of three years to
settle the Church of Ephesus, Act. 20.17.28.
for he had planted Elders there, he visited them, and gave them a charge, to
take heed to themselves, and to their flocks, over which the Holy Ghost had
made them Overseers; Episcopi gregis.
these were thought sufficient, as long as the Apostle could be near them; but
when the Flock multiplied, and the Apostle knew he should see these Elders no
more, Episcopus Presbyterorum and gregis.
he devolved his charge to Timothy. Surely he did not make two supreme officers
in that Church; nor if the government of the Elders had been according to his
mind, would he have given Timothy so large a Commission, Charge some, 1 Timothy
1.2.
that they preach no other Doctrine. 1. Here is an inspection into the Doctrine
of the Elders, Par in parem non habet imperium.
who were their present Teachers; and what were his charge worth, if he had not
a Jurisdiction over them.

2. Timothy was to direct and order the public Prayers of the Church, chapter 2.
1. for in v. 18. of chapter 1. This charge I commit unto thee: What is that charge?
(...), first of all, That Prayers be made; How made? By the ex-tempore
conceptions of every private Presbyter? That is no making of Prayers in the
Apostles sense; for then Timothy could have no hand in the making of them;
whereas he was to provide, that the Prayers that were used in the Church, might
be such, as might stand with the public necessities of all men, with the
welfare of their Governors, and their own reputation and peace, when none of
their adversaries should find any just cause to accuse their solemn Devotions.

Again, 3. Timothy is directed, how to receive accusations against an Elder; 1 Timothy 5.19
and the power of receiving accusations, implies a power to judge and determine
of them. Herein, says Epiphanius, the Apostles shows, Quis sit Presbyter,
Haer. 75.
quis Episcopus, cum dicit Timotheo, Presbyterum ne objurges.

And, 4. v. 20. He has the power of Ordination committed to him.

Tit. 1.5.
Titus had the same power in Crete; To set in order the things that were
wanting, and to ordain Elders in every City; for many Cities were under his
inspection, and many Teachers in those Cities, but none of them had such a
power as is committed to Titus.

These things are so evident, that the Power of Bishops is not denied them;
only it is said, They were extraordinary persons, and it did belong to them, as
Evangelists.

But first, It cannot be proved, that Titus was such a one; and it is a very
weak proof, to say, that Timothy was such, because he is bid to do the work of
an Evangelist: But it is acknowledged, that the power and authority which
Timothy had, he was to commit to others, 2 Timothy 2.2. Jus Divinum. p. 160.
that there might be a perpetual succession of government; and the London
Divines do there add, That Apostolical Examples for the good of the Church, and
which have a perpetual reason and equity in them, have the force of a Rule; and
by force of this Rule, we infer, that as St. Paul saw it necessary, to derive a
power from himself to Timothy over the Presbyters at Ephesus; Timothy might and
did propagate it to others successively, for the well-governing the Church of
God.

The truth of all this is acknowledged, That there was a chief Governor
appointed by the Apostles, (we will not contend for the name, whether
Evangelist, or Prime Presbyter, or Superintendent, but Bishop is the name which
the Church has always used), to have authority over the Presbyters, and that
this authority was to be continued in the Church by succession: So Calvin, Vnus
aliquis authoritate and consilio praefuit, On Tit. 1.5.
and he doubts not to call such an one a Bishop. Instit. l. 4. c. 3. Jus
Divinum. Oct. 3. p. 11.
Archippus says, he was Bishop of the Colossians. Then our Assembly grants,
that the Primus Presbyter had authority during his life. And Videlius assures
us, of the name as well as the power, for (says he) in the days of Clemens
Romanus, the distinction of Bishop and Presbyter was in use. The Presbyterians
in their Papers to the King in the Isle of Wight, grant, that not long after
the Apostles times, Bishops in superiority to Presbyters, are reported to be in
the Church of God, by Writers of those times; and the Writers of those times
knew what others had said before them. None of the Ancients ever mentioning any
other Government, nor complaining of alteration of that which was established
by the Apostles; which had it been any other but that of Episc^pacy, those
Martyrs that laid down their lives for the truth, would not so tamely have
parted with the Government of the Church, as not to open their mouths in behalf
of that, which was the chief Instrument of its peace. Can any man conceive,
That the world was framed by the casual Concourse of Atoms is as probable.
That all the Governors of the Church, should conspire to alter that Form
which they received immediately from the Apostles, and that presently after
their decease? Vincentius Lyrinensis tells us, this was the practice of those
primitive times, that by how much any one was reputed more religious than
another, by so much the more readily he did oppose all Innovations. To
conclude, we may suppose the dignity and power of the Bishop was not determined
by the Apostles in every particular, yet the Apostles determining that
Government in general, as most conducing to the unity and peace of the Church;
other particular circumstances, which the exigence of aftertimes should
require, were under the power of the Church to appoint them; for the unity of
the Church being the end for which government was appointed; the means that are
conducing thereunto, being agreed on by the rulers of the Church, are as
necessary in their kinds, as the Laws appointed by Magistrates for the good of
the Commonwealth. And on this ground it was, that Schismatics have been so
severely punished in all ages, and their sin compared to the most abominable
vices, even to Idolatry, Sacriledg, Parricide; Dr. Hammond of Schism.
for indeed it produces all these. Avoid divisions, says Ignatius, as the
beginning of all evils. All this is Calvin's own sense. Whereas it pleased not
God, to prescribe particularly what we ought to follow as to his outward
Worship and Ceremonies, by reason, that he foresaw, such things would depend on
the condition of the times and that the same Form would not agree with all
ages; therefore we ought to consult the general rules which he gave us, for the
settling of such things as belong to decency and order, as the exigency of the
Church shall require; and in such cases, he pronounces them Schismatics,
which raise factions and tumults to the dividing of the Church, which (says
he) cannot subsist, but by the rules of its Governors.

These concessions are good arguments (ad homines): But the universal practice
of the Church, by all its members, in every age, and in all the parts of the
world, is an argument beyond all contradiction. All the doubt is, what was
practiced by the Church immediately after the Apostles age, for of aftertimes
there is no doubt; and as little of the first age after the Apostles; if we
will be convinced by as clear evidences as can be produced for the proof of any
History, Quod ubique quod semper, quod ab omnibus id ver^ Catholicum.
or matter of fact. Ignatius was contemporary with St. John, conversant with
some of the Apostles, one that saw Christ after his Resurrection: he wrote
seven Epistles, which are mentioned by Polycarpe his contemporary, by Irenaeus,
Origin, Eusebius, and others; and he crowned all his works with Martyrdom for
Christ: The Copies of his Epistles, which were set forth by Vossius, from the
Library of Laurentius Medices, are by Biondel congratulated as a great treasury
to the Church: Now nothing is more clear throughout his Writings, than the
Superiority of Bishops to Presbyters; this made the Presbyterians so
industrious to prove, that they were spurious Epistles, knowing that their
cause would stand or fall with them, (and is nothing yet, how sacred soever,
could stand in their way), they deal as barbarously with his works, as the
Romans did wi^h his person, accuse him for a deceiver, and then condemn him to
the beasts. But God, who in all ages of the Church has taken advantage by the
venting of errors to vindicate the truth more clearly, has by the labors of
the learned Vossius, and Dr. Hammond, and Dr. Pearson, Epist. ad Magn. Epist.
ad Trall.
put a gag into the mouths of all gainsayers; he says, Nothing ought to be done
in the Church without the Bishop, And they are men of an ill Conscience that
assemble without him.

Clemens Romanus is another Apostolical person, he was St. Paul's
fellow laborer; Phil. 4.3.
his Epistle to the Corinthians was read in diverse Churches, in Eusebius's
time; he was Bishop of Rome, and died a Martyr for Christ; this man tells us,
Epist. ad Cor. p. 57.
That the Apostles foreseeing that divisions would arise, as Christ had
foretold, did in their life time establish Bishops; Can. Apo. 32.
And if any Presbyter shall make Conventions without his Bishop, let him be
deposed.

The third witness, is Polycarp, a Scholar of St. John's, made Bishop of Smyrna
by the Apostles, that Angel of the Church to whom the Epistle is directed, Rev.
2.8, 9. where he is commended for his patience, piety, and constancy; he was
well known to the Heathen, as the Father of the Christians, and dyed a Martyr
under M. Aurelius and Lucius Verus. He begins his Epistle with this very
distinction, Polycarpe, and the Elders that are with him. Ad Philip.
It is not needful after such evidence, to tell you, that the Bishops in the
Council of Galcedon pronounced it, Act. 5. and 29.
a degree of Sacriledg to reduce the Bishops to the degree of Presbyters; that
Aerius was proclaimed an Heretic, for denying the distinction; for, if such a
threefold Cord be broken, whatever can be alleged after them will be accounted
but as a Rope of Sand. And a man may with as much modesty deny, that ever there
was an Emperor at Rome, sixteen hundred years since, against all the
Historians, and public Records of that Empire, as deny, that there were
Bishops shortly after that time in the Christian Church, and all the Christian
Doctrine, which in some ages has not been so generally acknowledged as its
government, may be exploded on the same terms. But, as in finding the Head of a
River, we cannot be more infallibly guided, than by the streams which flow from
it; so the constant succession of this order of Governors in the Church, will
infallibly lead us to the Apostles, as the rise of them; for we cannot find in
any age since the Apostles, that they were instituted by any Council or
Authority, Civil or Ecclesiastic, nor opposed by any party until this later
age; and therefore we may presume them to be of Apostolical Institution.

And if this be true, We ought to yield them that reverence and obedience which
is due to the Ambassadors of Christ, our spiritual Guides and Fathers, as the
word of God requires. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your
selves, Heb 13.17.
for they watch for your souls. St. Ignatius is greatly suspected, because he
exacts such strict obedience to the Bishops: he answers for himself, with great
satisfaction to all sober men: Epist. ad Philadelp. p. 101.
Though some men have suspected me to have spoken these things, as fore-knowing
the divisions of, diverse persons; yet He is my witness for whom I am a
prisoner, that I have not been taught them by man, but the Spirit preached it,
saying these things; Do nothing without the Bishop, keep your flesh as the
Temple of God, love unity, fly divisions; would you know where the Spirit
preaches this? you may read it from the mouth of our Savior, Luke 10.16.
He that hears you, hears me; he that despises you, despises me; and he
that despises me, despises him that sent me. More than this Ignatius could
not say. De verbis Domini. Sermon. 24.
St. Augustines note on these words is very observable, If Christ did say it to
the Apostles only, (he that despises you, despises me), then, despise us as
you please; but if that word of Christ does respect us, if he have called us,
and caused us to succeed in their office, then take heed how you do despise us.

I am not about to plead for the supremacy of Bishops over Princes, and
Magistrates; nor for their infallibility, to capacitate them for coining a new
Creed; but only, for that meek and peaceable submission, which all Christians,
in all the ages of the world until our unhappy generation, have yielded unto
them, as necessary for preservation both of Faith and Love. It was ordained
under the Law, That the man that would do presumptuously, Deuteronomy. 17.12.
and would not hearken to the Priest that stands to minister before the Lord,
should be cut off. Did God take care for the Priests of the Law only? No
doubtless, our Savior has said as much for the Ministers of his Gospel, in
his Dic Ecclesiae; Mat. 18.17.
If he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as a Heathen, or a
Publican; and what is the condition of such? they are without God and Christ,
delivered over to Satan. A sad condition this, if it be true, and most true it
is, Verily, I say unto you, (says Truth it self) whatsoever ye shall bind on
earth, shall be bound in heaven. And this is no Brutum fulmen; such a binding
as this may be a prologue to the casting into utter darkness. These then we
must hear, not with the hearing of the ear only, but of the heart, yiedling
obedience to all their good Institutions. He that knows God (says our
Apostle) i.e. the will and command of God, hears us. Christ's sheep will not
run after a stranger, Mal. 2.7. Quia Angelus Domini Exercituum.
from those Pastors that are set over them by the great Shepherd and Bishop of
their Souls. It was Gods promise of old, That the Priests lips should preserve
knowledge, and the people should seek it at their mouths. Where he has placed
his Ordinance, there he has fixed his Blessing.

The miseries that our Nation have endured, in respect both of our temporal and
spiritual welfare, may convince us of our guilt and madness, in kicking against
this divine Ordinance. An Ordinance established by God the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost; 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.21 Act. 20.28.
to which the divine assistance and blessing is promised; and which by a
miracle of mercy has been restored to us, after our long and great confusions.
Whatever may be in the persons of some Bishops, (as there will be passions and
failings in the best) certainly there is nothing grievous in the Government,
And yet I may say, we owe our best possession to them and their predecessors:
may they not argue with us, 1 Cor. 9 6
as St. Paul with his Corinthians, Though I be not an Apostle to others, yet
doubtless I am to you, for the Seal of my Apostleship are ye in the Lord? By
whose Ministry were we delivered from the darkness and bondage of our spiritual
Egypt? Who sealed the reformed Doctrine and Worship with their blood? Who have
been the Bulwarks against the impetuous attempts of Popery? We owe the
planting, and watering, and fencing of Gods Vineyard among us, to the Labors
and Learning of our Bishops; who like so many Guardian-Angels take care, not
only of the Churches peace in general, but of the safety of every individual
person, from his Cradle to his Grave. At his birth, they receive him into
Christ's Church by Baptism, and solemnly engage him to renounce the Devil, etc.
to believe in Christ and serve him. As soon as he comes to discretion, he is
catechized, and instructed in the grounds of Religion, and thereupon confirmed
in the Faith which he was baptized into, by the prayers and imposition of the
hands of the Bishop, according to the Apostolical practice; Heb. 6.1.2
then is care taken, that he frequent the public Service of God, and sanctify
the Lords day, and other festivals, in places consecrate for that end, that he
behave himself with due reverence in those Assemblies (which are the most
venerable in the whole world there is Gods word distinctly read, deliberately
expounded, and he is guided in his devotions, by such prayers as the Church of
God in all ages, as to the matter, have h^ld Communion in. If any doubt trouble
his mind, he is entreated to repair to his own, or some other able Minister,
for resolution. He is instructed, how to be a fit partaker of the Communion of
Christ's body and blood, and with great earnestness invited to come frequently;
if he live in any scandalous sin, he is admonished, shamed, or censured, as the
offense requires, to reform him, and forewarn others; if he be sick, it is the
Ministers office to visit him, to examine, instruct, confess, comfort, and
pronounce his absolution, and to strengthen him against the fear of Death, by
the administration of the Lords Supper; to commend his departing Soul to God in
the public prayers of the Church; and after death, to see that his body be
decently buried; and that his last Will and Testament be duly performed: This
is the Bishops work: And whatever it be to him, it cannot be a grievous burden
to any, but impious and ungovernable persons, who neither love themselves, nor
their Neighbors, nor the Worship of God: Which is

The third particular wherein we hold Communion with the Apostles, viz. in
Worship. Now our public Worship consists, (...).
in the Administration of the Sacraments, and Prayer: As for the reading and
expounding of the holy Scriptures, which makes up the greatest part of our
Liturgy, we have spoken already.

First therefore, Of Baptism; which is undoubtedly Christ's own Institution, and
was by the Apostles administered to whole Families. 1 Cor. 1.16.
But whether it belong to Infants, as our Church does hold; and whether it be
effectual for the salvation of all such Infants as being baptized die before
they come to the use of Reason, be according to the Doctrine and Practice of
the Apostles; must be considered.

To both which, first, we apply the words of our Savior, Mar. 10.13
concerning Infants brought to him for his blessing, which he freely gave them;
Of these, says he (not only of such as these are) is the Kingdom of Heaven;
and that he meant it of their persons, Doctrina quae Infautes a Sacramento
re^ene rationis prohibet veritati omnium Ecclesiarum Apostolicarum adversatur
Cassander p. 700. Irenaus l. 3. c. 30.
is demonstrated by his blessing of them; and if they have right to the
blessing of Christ, (which is the thing signified), who can forbid them the
Baptism of Water, which is the outward sign. And being baptized, who can deny,
that the grace of God through the blood of Christ, applied unto them in that
Sacrament, should be as effectual for their regeneration and salvation, as the
transgression of Adam, for their pollution and condemnation. This opinion of
our Church is consonant to the Apostles Doctrine, Romans 5.15, 16, etc. the sense
whereof Irenaeus gives, That which we lost in Adam, we have received in Christ.
This was the sense of the Fathers in the Nicene Council, I believe one Baptism,
for the remission of sins; and of the Council of Milevis, Infants are therefore
baptized for the remission of sins, that what they contracted by generation,
may be cleansed by regeneration. Sound Faith and Doctrine (says St. Augustine)
will never judge any, that come to Christ by Baptism, to to be excepted from the
grace of remission of sins: Fulgentius says the same: De fide ad Petrum. Opusc.
Quast. and Respons.
and Beza as expressly as our Rubric does, That Baptism does seal to them their
interest in the Covenant, and in the remission of that sinning-Sin, (as he
calls Original sin), dying before they have actual Faith. This has been the
judgment of our Church ever since the Reformation. In a Book called, The
Institution of a Christian man, in the Chapter of Confirmation. In the Homily
of the Salvation of Mankind, Anno 1537. 1547. 1552. Vindiciae Gratiae
Sacramentalis, on Mat. 19.
in the Common Prayer book, the 5th of Edward the 6th, and so to our own days.
The great objection, of falling from Grace, is clearly answered by Bishop
Davenant, in his Epistle to Mr. Bedfords Book. I conclude this with that of
Bucer, No age affords more Subjects of the Kingdom of Heaven, than that of
Infants does.

2. That Baptism belongs to Infants, the practice of the universal Church
shows, what was Apostolical practice. Epist. ad Fidentium l. 3. ep. 8.
Unto Infants, Christ became an Infant, says Irenaeus, that he might sanctify
Infants. The Church says Origin, received this tradition from the Apostles, to
administer Baptism even to Infants, l. 5. St. Ambrose gives this reason of it.
Because every age is obnoxious to sin, every age is capable of the Sacrament.

See Rubric of private Baptism, and Canon 30. An. 1604 De obligatione Crucis,
etc. non ect magnopere laborandum. Beza. Ep. 12* ad Angl. Fratres.
As for the Ceremony of the Cross, seeing our Church declares, that the Children
baptized without it, are lawfully and sufficiently baptized, if any man be
contentious about that, I only say as St. Paul. We have no such cu^tom, neither
the Churches of God.

And so we come to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; another part of our (...)
with the Apostles; who required, that we should frequently assemble, (that did
daily, to commemorate the death and sufferings of our Savior, to eat and drink
his body and blood in a real and spiritual manner, to strengthen our Faith in
Christ, and our Love and Charity to one another. A duty, of so much sweetness
and spiritual delight, of such advantage to our spiritual comfort and eternal
salvation, such a (...) of the joys of Heaven, that our Savior expresses it,
Luke 14.15.
by eating bread in the Kingdom of God. A duty, so sensibly cond^cing to the
peace of the Church, 1 Cor. 10, 17.
uniting all Christians into one body, by eating that Bread; that it is
infinitely unaccountable, how any man should be so great an enemy to himself,
as to forsake such mercies and blessings, and make that an occasion of
Division, which Christ has appointed as a means of reconciliation and
brotherly affection; being hereby made one with Christ our Head by Faith, and
with our Brethren, as members of the same body, by love. For, from this
frequent Communicating it was, that the primitive Christians thought all their
sufferings too little for Christ, who was almost daily in this Sacrament hold
forth crucified before their eyes for them. From this it was, St. Cyprian.
Nescio an magis laudem eorum stabilem fidem individuam Charitatem. Ecce quam
parati sunt pro se invicem mori. Tert. Apol.
that they loved one another to the amazement of the Gentiles; being as ready
to lay down their lives for the Brethren, as we are to adventure our lives
against them. Sermon before K. James.
Bishop Usher calls this Sacrament. Ignem Probationis, because it congregates
what is of a like, and separates what is of a different nature; the effects of
it make good the comparison. The Papists and Separatists would both come to our
Prayers and Sermons, but keep at a distance from our Communion in this
Sacraments they went out from us, because they were not of us, and (to follow
the Meaphor) they are gone in such heat, that, like the Priests of Mars, In Qu.
Elizabeth's days.
whose work it was to scatter fire in his Temple, their bitter zeal has blown
up the coals of contention to so great a flame, as has seized on all the
Houses of God in the Land, and it is still driven up and down by diverse
boutefeu's, (as by so many contrary winds ^, which meet in nothing, but as
Sampsons Foxes in the firebrandss at their tails, as that they threaten nothing
less than the desolation of Sion. But what fuel has this blessed Sacrament
given to this wildfire. We maintain, neither connor-transubstantiation; we
make it not a half-Communion, by withholding the Cup of Blessing; we are
secured from any pretense of Idolatrous worshipping the Host, for it is
declared, That no adoration is intended, Rubric at the end of the Communion.
either to the Sacramental Bread and Wine, or to any corporal presence of
Christ's natural flesh and blood; only, we are repaired, to receive it kneeling,
as an expression of our humble and grateful acknowledgment of the benefits of
Christ's death, thereby given to all worthy receivers, and for avoiding such
profanation and disorder, as might otherwise ensue. Besides, it is that posture
which Christ himself taught ^s to use in prayer; Luke 22.41.
and when the Minister prays, that the Body and Blood of Christ, may preserve
our Bodies and Souls to eternal life; let us not separate what Christ has
joined; but what the Majesty of Heaven offers so bountifully to such unworthy
guests, let us receive, as the Church requires, merely, kneeling upon our knees.

As for the scruple of Communicating with wicked men, I know not to what
Congregation we may go, to remove that; and I suppose, there are few of the
Communion of our Church, scandalously wicked, unless (as formerly) their
loyalty to the King, and conformity to the Church, make them so; as in the most
select Congregations. If any among us be more profane than others, they turn
Separatists too, by a voluntary neglect of this Sacrament; they dare not
approach it, being forewarned of the danger, and fearing the shame of being
rejected by the Minister, Rubick for the Communion. De occultis non judicat
Ecclesia.
and having his crime signified to the Bishop. But if their offenses be not
discovered; as no Law can take hold of them, so no Christian ought to censure
or avoid them. Every man that diligently examines his own heart and life, may
find himself guilty of more evil than he knows by most of his despised
Brethren; but if they appear worse than our selves, our humility and serious
preparation will be an amulet against infection; sure I am, Another man's
immorality, will be no excuse for my irreligion. Charity is that wedding
Garment, without which we cannot communicate with God, in this, or in any other
Ordinance, in any Congregation whatsoever; and one part of Charity is, Not to
think evil of our Brethren. (...). Luke 18.11.
Instead therefore, of separating from our Brethren, and praying apart as the
Pharisee, thinking too well of himself; it will better become us, to smite on
our Breasts, and say, God be merciful to me a sinner, and as S. Paul, Of all
sinners the chief. 1 Timothy 1.15. Epist. ad Ephesians.


Make haste, said holy Ignatius, to meet more frequently at the Eucharist of
God, for when ye often come together for this end, the powers of Satan are made
frustrate.

Sure I am Satan has gotten great power over us, by our neglect and contempt
of it, and the house that is so divided cannot stand long: We should learn of
our enemies, Davenantii Sententia.
says Bishop Davenant, though we differ in some Controversies, to live in the
same Communion, the Thomists and Scotists, the Dominicans and Jesuits differ in
far greater points of Doctrine than we do, yet keep the Communion of the same
Church. It is a sad consideration, that not only the Children of this World are
wiser in their Generation than the Children of Light, The things wherein we
agree being many and weighty, should be of greater force to unite us, than the
trifles whe^ein we differ, to divide us; it is not as bad with ours, a^ it was
with the Church of Corinth, there were many carnal Christians, many grossly
ignorant, 1 Cor. 33.11.29. Some that denied the Resurrection, some that for
love of their Bellies frequented Idolatrous Feasts. Drunkenness was visible at
the Lords Table, Fornication common, and we read of an incestuous person too,
yet he calls them, The Church of God at Corinth sanctified in Christ, called to
be Saints; he does not unchurch them, and persuade separation, but to reform
abuses, to cast out the unclean person, and purify themselves that God might
dwell among them, and accept their prayers, which is the last part.
but Satan's Kingdom is less divided than that which we all call the Kingdom of
Christ.

God and our Savior, as well in the New, as in the Old Testament, have taught
us, that Prayer is a special part of his Worship, when he calls his Temple
and our Oratories, Isa. 56.7. Mat. 21.13. Ecclesia preces splendidis eulogiis
Deus ornavit ubi Templum vocavit domum Oraticuis. Calv. Inst. l. 3. c. 20. S.
29.
The house of Prayer. And indeed the Glory of God cannot be more highly
exalted, nor our necessities more certainly relieved by any means, than by
humble and devout Prayers.

It concerns us therefore, when we approach the Throne of Grace, to consider,
how in this duty we may serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear;
which we may do, if we hold Communion with Christ and his Apostles in this part
of the Divine Worship.

And what their practice was, will appear, first from Christ's own institution,
who prescribed a form of Prayer to be used by his Disciples, and accordingly
they did use it, if we believe the Ancients^ on all solemn occasions. The
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper being constantly celebrated with it. Mr.
Thorndike tells us that when St. Paul asks, 1 Cor. 14.16.
How shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned, (...), (at the
Ministers consecrating the Eucharist) at thy giving of thanks, say, Amen; this
Amen is to be understood of the Conclusion of our Lords-Prayer, then used at
this Sacrament; to the truth of this notion, many of the Ancients bare witness,
So among the Latins, Gratiarum actio significat, (...); says Rhenanus on
Tertullian de Corona Militis.
showing that the word (...) is generally taken in this sense, and that our
Lords-Prayer was constantly used at the Celebration of it.

Apol. 2.
This is the sense of Justine Martyr, (...). The food which was Eucharistically
consecrated by the Prayer of that word which came from him which our Lord
appointed the Eucharist to be consecrated with. De Oratione Dominica.
St. Cyprian more plainly. So Christ taught his Apostles, that they should
daily in the Sacrifice of his body dare to say, Our Father. See Cassander p. 39.
So St. Hierome. Which Prayer Christ taught his Apostles, that they should
daily use it in the Sacrifice of his Body. It was the custom of the Apostles,
says St. Gregory, to consecrate the Sacrament with the use of the Lords-Prayer
only; he means as I suppose (what Honorius does express) Super vinum and panem,
In Gem. Animae. l. 1, c. 86.
etc. They saved over the Bread and Wine, the words which our Lord said, and
the Lords-Prayer: Certain it is, that we have Records of many ancient Liturgi^s
used in several Churches, in all of which this Prayer is inserted in this very
Office; which may argue it was so from the Apostles practice, how else could it
prevail in the universal Church. It is also highly probable, that our Savior
in Mat. 18. did enjoin his Apostles the use of public Liturgies, Mat. 18.19.
Again, I say unto you, etc. the Dico is more than a bare affirmation, it has
the force of an Institution, See Cameron in loc.
(as when it is spoken of Governors, Dixi, dii estis) This is said to the
Governors of the Church, as in the former verse viz. to the Apostles then, and
to their Successors for the future. What is it that ^^r Savior decrees
concerning them? That where two of them, any small company, (according to the
Proverbial speech among the Jews), where two or three did meet to confer about
the Law, there the ^^ecinah, that is, Numerus certus pro incerto.
the Divine Presence was ^^ the midst of them), where these chief Rulers of the
Church do agree, (...), shall consent with heart and voice upon ma^^re
deliberation (for so that word (...) is ^^vice translated by the Septuagint,
Genesis 14.3 Hos. 6.9.
and both signify an Assembly met about public ^^fairs) concerning any thing
that they shall ^^k in their united Prayers, it shall be done unto them; on
which place Calvin observes, (...) when the faithful do meet, they are ^^ght to
join in Devotion, and pray in ^^mmon, not only for the testifying the ^nity of
their faith, (for our public Liturgy is part of our faith, and their faith is
very uncertain that have no Liturgy, but that God may hear what is asked by the
consent of all; and says Calvin, Christ does here honor public Prayers, with
a special promise, that he may incite us to the exercise of them; and because
it is an inestimable blessing to have Christ President to bless our Counsels,
and the events of them, this promise should be a great encouragement, to
assemble in a holy and godly manners for whoever either neglects the holy
Assemblies, or separateth himself from his Brethren, and behaveth himself
remissly, in preserving unity, does hereby show that he has no esteem of
Christ's Presence. This speaks fair for a set order of public Prayer in
Calvin's opinion. In this sense it is evident St. Chrys^^tom understood this
place to which he has reference in that short Prayer of his, constantly used
in our Litergy, Almighty God, who have given us grace at this time, So
Ignatius, If the prayer of one or two prevail for Christ's Presence, how much
more the prayer of the Bishop and the whole Church. Epist. ad Ephesians.
with ^ne accord, to make our common Prayers and Supplications unto thee, and
ha^^ promised, that where two or three are gathered together in thy name, thou will grant their requests, etc.

St. Paul exhorts Timothy that (...), he make it his chief care (as Bishop that
Church of Ephesus) to provide that the public Prayers be rightly ordered, that
they be such as may answer the necessities of all mankind, that they may be
acceptable to our Rulers, that some of them be, for the obtaining of good
things, The Prayer for the Emperor in Tertull. Vitam prolixam imperium securum
exercitus fortes senatum fidelem, were grounded on this.
others for aversion of evil, that we extend our petitions, for the benefit of
others; and that we have also forms of Thanksgiving to God, for his mercies
received: And every ordinary Minister is not sufficient to guide the people in
such a solemn Office, nor though they were of great abilities, would it consist
with that harmony of desires, and affections, wherein all Christian
Congregations ought to join. And in this sense the Primitive Christians ^id
understand the Apostles Injunction. Ignatius enjoins the same thing, Meet ye
all together in the same place, Ad Magness. p. 58.
let there be one common Prayer, and one mind among you all. And Scaliger tells
us, he had feen an ancient Liturgy of this pious Martyr. De Emendatione
Temporum l. 7. Apol. 2.
Justine Martyr tells us the practice of the Christians in the second Century,
(...), We all stand up and pray together.

St. Ambrose, and St. Augustine do both ter^ifie that the prayer for all
estates of men used in the most Primitive times, especially at the Sacrament of
the Lord's Supper had its rise from this injunctioh of St. Paul to Tim^thy.

Besides, the Hymn which our Savior (...) Mat. 26.30. was a known Hymn, in
which the Apostles did bear a part. The Prayer which he used on the Cross, was
a prayer of David, Psalm. 22.
to show that he did approve of such prayers wherein we may all join. The
Milevitan Council, did therefore ordain that no other prayers should be used in
the Church but such as had been perused by the most prudent of the Church, lest
any thing should be composed, either through ignorance, or want of heed,
contrary to the faith; in this part of Gods Worship especially, they thought it
fit, 1 Cor. 14.32. Valde probo. Epist. 87.
that the spirit of the Prophets should be subject to the Prophets. Calvin does
greatly approve of a Liturgy for the same Reasons.

The Magdeburgenses say, that (in the third Century, See Gennadius de Dogm.
Ecclesia. c. 30.
Formulas quadam precationum, etc.) without doubt the Christians had certain
forms of Prayers. It is evident therefore, that we are conformable to the
Apostles in the use of solemn forms of Prayers; but whether the matter of our
Prayers be agreeable to theirs, is another Inquiry. Doubtless whatever their
Prayers were, they were consonant to their Doctrine; and in that our Liturgy is
conformable: there is nothing in them contrary to our Doctrine; and nothing in
our Doctrine contrary to that of the Apostles, as has been proved; and it were
an easy matter to fill the Margent of our Liturgy with such Q^otations of
Scripture, as do in express words contain, or by clear consequence confirm, all
the Prayers, Hymns, and Thanksgivings in that Book. The Apostles did publicly
use our Lords-Prayer, the Creed, the Psalms of David, the words enjoined by our
Savior at the Administration of both Sacraments, and so do we: they read the
Scriptures, and expounded them; they Catechized the younger sort in the
Principles of Religion; so (...) we. They had Prayers, Supplications,
Intercessions and giving of thanks for Kings, and their subordinate Officers,
and for all ^^rts and degrees of Men; so have we: they sung Hymns and Praises
to God in their Congregations, and so do we. They had Comminations and
threatenings, Censures and Excommunication of impenitent and cont^macious
offenders; so have we. In a word, ^^ we should collect all the ancient
Litur^ies in the Greek, Latin, Armenian, and Aethiopick Churches, and extract
the most ^^lid, pious parts of Devotion out of them (...) it would appear, that
as we have omitted in ^^rs all that was vain and superstitious; so we want
nothing that is pious, or profitable; ^any of the reformed Churches do come
^^ar ours, but none are yet equal.

We do not m^tter out our Prayers in an unknown Tongue, or persuade our people,
That ignorance is the mother of Devotion; (...) which is as unprofitable,
tumble out a ^^ltitude of words which have none, or no ^^od signification; as
if we were fallen to ^^at age which Hippolytus an ancient Bishop and Martyr
spoke of, viz. the days of Antichrist, wherein Liturgy should be extinct, we do
not sill our Prayer Book with Ave-Maries, A Ladies Psalter, Dirges, and Prayers
for the Dead. Invocations of Angels and Saints, that never had a being; we r^^d
not Legends and ridiculous stories* such as may rather excite laughter or
disdain, than Devotion. In a word we have not their forms for exorcising of
Devils, Baptising of Bells and Garments, their Crucifixes, Beads* and Agnus
Dei's. Ours is a reasonable and Apostolical Service, wherein the most learned
of the Protestant Churches abroad, Rivet, Grotius, and Bochartus, Cranmer, Arch
B. Goodrick, Bishop of Ely. Skip of Hereford Thirl. by of West Day of
Chechester. Holbick of Lincoln. ^idley of Rochester. Dr. Cox, Almoner. Tarler,
Dean of Lincoln. Haynes of Exeter. Redman of Westmin^ter Robinson, Arch De^con
of Leicester.
have manifested their readiness to hold Comm^nion with us. Some respect we
should s^^w in for the sake of its first Authors, those Bishops and Confessors
that were the Compilers of it; some of which died in defense of it, as others
since in opposition to it. The world may judge which deserved b^^ of the
Protestant Religion. A work, which in that age, most men called a work of G^^,
as Mr. F^x reports. When it was com^iled, the Archbishop turns it into I (...)
and sends it to Martin Bu^er, who (...) this approbation of it, that it was
generally contained in the word of God, (...) repugnant to it, if rightly under
(...): After this, it was amended; Bishop Ridley. P. Martyr. Bucer. So did the
University of Oxford since.
so as Archbishop Cranmer undertook, by the leave of Q^^^n Mary, that he and
some others would defend it against all the Papists in England. The
Protestants, that fled to Geneva and Franckfort in those days, kept their own
Liturgy, rather then Calvin's, until Knox began to oppose it; of which when Mr.
C^^^dal told Bishop Ridley, the day before his martyrdom, I wonder, says the
Bishop, Mr. K^^x should at this time, set himself against the poor Protestants
of England, and ^^nd fault with their Service Book, wherein though his wit may
find something to cavil at, he shall never be able to and matter of just
exception; as if any thing were therein contained, contrary to the word of God.
But Mr. Calvin, who had commended the use of a Form to the Lord Protector, when
he saw this, though he had offered to assist, Tolerabiles ineptias.
yet not being one of the Composers, conf^res it, to contain some trifles which
yet were tolerable; and in truth, there (...) the^^ such things in it, as
Prayers for (...) Extreme Uncti^n, (...) In (...) this Reign, it is (...) again
(...) inquiry to the objections, the (...) so differ, The Parliament suppressed
the Admonions, and imprisoned the Authors.
some (...) against, and (...) former allowed, (...) of altering (...) to be
not for the (...) the Liturgy. But this which was have often attempted was
effected at last, it was plucked up root and branch, not so much as our Lords
Prayer spared. And this is no new thing, there ever have been, and will be,
unquiet spirits, to disturb the servants of God, in nothing more than their
public devotions. St. Augustine complained of this in the Milevitane Council,
where were two hundred Bishops, Can. 12. Tom. 8. p. 32. Ep. 93, 94. De bono
Persev.
how, That not only the Prayers of the Church, but the Lords Prayer was
despised by the Donatists* of whom he says, (Tunc desinent dici frafres nostri,
cum desierint dicere Pater noster), he would no longer own them for his
Brethren, that would not join with him, to say, Our Father, etc. Upon which,
that Council decrees, that no Prayers should be publicly used, but such as
were approved by the Synod. But St. Augustine meekly entreats them, not only to
hear the Sermons, but to consider and ponder the public Prayers, which says
he, the Church had, and will always have, to the end of the world.

Bonasus Vapulans.
We may the less wonder therefore, that the Prayers of our Church are despised,
when the same persons cannot be reconciciled to the Lords Prayer; we might have
hoped, that after so many severe corrections, men would have grown sober, and
repented of their former hard and ungodly speeches: But we see a late Apologist
for the Non-conformists, in a Book written against Mr. Durel steps forth, like
another Goliath, to defye, not only the host, but in a manner the God of Israel;
what else mean these horrid expressions against the Lords Prayer; I would not
have them censured (says this tenderhearted man) that cannot get leave of
themselves, to use it as a Prayer, especially when they have prayed largely
before, for themselves and others.

Do ye not perceive, That it is the long Prayers of these Pharisees, that like
Pharaohs lean Kine, devour all the fat Sacrifices of the Church? Did not these
men suppose their own prayers, as much better as they are longer than that of
our Savior, they could not have the impudence to lay it aside as impertinent
and useless, in comparison of their own.

The primitive Church had frequent prayers five times in a day, S. Cyprian
Kul^^ tolerantiam insolentius negant veritati, quam qui erroribus suis saepe
pestilentis. simis postularunt obnixissimi. Capel. Th^s. 41. cont. Belg.
yet the Lords Prayer was always added. Tertulian calls it, legitimam
Orationem, as if all other prayers without it were not duly performed. But
these men must by no means be censured, much less restrained; they may by their
importunity, as the Sons of Zerviah, be too strong for David, and get a
toleration for such practices, as themselves have formerly condemned for
intolerable; yet will not they grant a toleration to our Lords Prayer, although
Christ's command, and the practice of the Apostles, and Apostolical men, and the
joint-agreement of the universal Church do urge it, these good men cannot get
leave of themselves, i. e. of the spirit of pride and opposition which
possesses them; methinks, they should not deal more barbarously with it than
the Turks, who afford it a respectful remembrance in their Alcaron. But I am
injoined, not to censure them. Let them be still reputed, Champions of the Good
Old Cause, Sworn Enemies to Episcopacy and Liturgy; but for humble and sound
Christians. I shall not esteem them, until they can get leave of themselves, To
use the Lords Prayer as a Prayer. He adds another affront -- Most plain it is,
that our Savior made this Prayer for his Disciples, while they were Members of
the Jewish Church, and before he had sent the Spirit of Truth to lead them into
all truth; let it therefore be considered, whether we be not ordinarily to
express our selves, in a dialect more suitable to the New Testament
dispensation, than is used in the Lords-Prayer. To what desperate opinions and
practices does the spirit of pride and faction hurry those that are once
possessed with it! Nescio quomodo nil tam absurd dici potest quod non dicatur
ab aliquo. P. Cic. de Divinat. l. 2.
We have heard of one, that would correct the Magnificat; and Ir^naeus tells of
some, that called themselves, Emendatures Apostolarum, but this man atttempts
more than ever Alphonsus imagined; to amend the Lords Prayer. He must certainly
be a man of extraordinary gifts, that can pray ordinarily, in a more
Evangelical dialect, than our Savior could. How went the Spirit of our Lord
from him, when he dictated this Form, that it should so visibly differ from the
rest of the New Testament; and what cloven tongues, and fiery inspiration have
they, that can so far exceed this despicable prayer: St. Cyprian says, Quae
potest esse magis spiritualis Oration, quem quae vere a Christo data, a quo
etiam Spiritus Sanctus misus; and I am of his mind, that there can be no prayer
more spiritual than that which was made by him from whom the Holy Spirit is
sent. And the learned Grotius tells us, Ad hunc Spiritum impetrandum, praecipue
directa est ista precandi formula, it is that Dove, in whose Form the Holy
Spirit does frequently descend. But as Dr. Hammond observed, Paranesis p. 15.
All the Topics of Hell have been raked, to find Arguments against it, but
there can be found none, to warrant the disuse of this prayer, besides the
indisposition of such men as these to use it, their want of humility and
charity, would turn it into an imprecation against themselves, and therefore it
is too big for their mouths. But I wonder, by what Spirit of Divination it was
revealed, that this prayer was made for the Disciples, whilst Members of the
Jewish Church; of St. John it is said, that he was fibula utriusque Legis, a
middle person between both Churches, yet were his Disciples distinguished from
the Jewish, and when Christ's Disciples asked this prayer of their Master, it was
to distinguish them from the Disciples of John. And if the time be observed in
Saint Luke, (for it was twice prescribed), you shall find the use of it,
peremptorily in^oined by our Savior, a good while after that he had taken upon
him the public Ministry of the Gospel; and it is unlikely, that he would now
build up the Jewish Synagogue, Luke 4.18.
which he came to destroy. It is true indeed, that our Savior, being the chief
Cornerstone, that should join Jews and Gentiles in one Church, did make use of
such expression in his Doctrine, and some such Rites in his Institutions, as
were at that time familiarly known and practiced among the Jews. And so Grotius
observes, that in this prayer is collected whatever was commendable in the
prayers of the Jews. In Mat. 6.
As also in our Saviors admonitions, he makes use of Proverbial sentences then
in use: So far was the Lord of the Christian Church, from affecting any
unnecessary novelty. However, if we consider the sense of it there is no
petition, A most comprehensive Form of Prayer, so the Directory.

And Calvin, l. 3. c. 20. 34. Quicquid expetere licet, quicquid in rem n^stram
conducit, quicquid postulare necesse est. and (...).


that any Christian needs to make, but it is included in one of those heads, as
the Analysis and Comments of learned men upon it do abundantly evince.

To conclude this part: You see the ancient Disciples were so humble, as to
desire their Lord to teach them to pray: Our new Apostles can teach their Lord
to pray; not only in a dialect more suitable to the Gospel, but in the matter
less Legal and Jewish. No wonder if they scorn our Communion; they are fit for
the Communion of Hacket, and him that gave God thanks, that he had forgotten
the Lords Prayer: As for me, I will yet pray against such impieties, as old
Jacob did for Simeon and Levi, O my soul, Genesis 49.6.
come not thou into their secret, unto their Assembly mine Honor, be not thou
united, for in their anger, they not only slaughter men, but even crucify
afresh the Lord of Life, and put him to open shame; and in their self-will,
they do not dig down walls, and super-structures, but dig up the very
foundations of the Church of God.

And now it is high time, to betake our selves to a better Communion, which
readily offers it self, in the last part of the Text.

3. The excellency of this fellowship: And truly, our fellowship is with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.

But having met with so much boldness lately, it cannot be impertinent, to
caution you here, that when you hear of fellowship, you do not presently think,
of an irreverent familiarity with your heavenly Father. For if I am a Father,
says he, where is mine honor? Mal. 1.6.
That is, express and manifest it in your humble behavior. Gods gracious
condescension to us, will not excuse our unmannerly contempt of him. He takes
away the greatest ornament from Religious Worship that takes away reverence
from it. Maximum ex amicitia tollit ornamen tum qui tollit verecundiam. Cicero.
Earthly parents expect to have their blessing asked by their Children on their
knees, and Christ did so address himself to his Father. That Commandment that
forbids us to bow down and worship false Gods, enjoins us to bow down in the
Worship of the true God. David requires it more expressly, Ps 59.6.
O come let us worship and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker. As
it is our privilege to walk with God, so it is our duty to walk humbly with him.

And being thus prepared we may have fellowship with the Father, etc. For thus
says the high and lofty One that inhabiteth Eternity, Isa. 57.15.
whose name is holy; I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is
of a humble and contrite spirit. This God promised, when he first gave the Law
by Moses, and was served at an earthen Altar. In all places, where I shall
record my name, Ex. 20.24
I will come unto thee, 2 Chronicles. 7.15.
and I will bless thee. And when S^lomon had with great magnificence built a
House for God, and dedicated it to his Worship; Now says God) mine eyes shall
be open, and my heart attend unto the prayer that is made in this place; and my
eyes and my heart shall be there perpetually. Said God these things for the
sake of the Altar of earth, or of Solomon's Temple? No, but God had recorded his
Name there, and there he was publicly invocated, by the united Prayers of his
People. And therefore Christ renews the same promise* Where two or three are
gathered together in my Name, Mat. 18 20.
there am I. And there he has promised his perpetual Presence, Lo, I am with
you always to the end of the world. Mat. 28.
And is not the world well altered with sinful men, since the time of Gods
appearing upon Sinai, Where was blackness and darkness, and tempest, and the
sound of a trumpet, and the voice of words, which words they that heard,
entreated that the word should not be spoken to them any more; A sight so
terrible, that it made Moses exceedingly fear and quake. But we are come to
Mount Sion, etc. and to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the
blood of sprinkling that speaks better things than that of Abel. It is said
of Israel, What Nation is so great, who has God so nigh! Deuteronomy. 4.7.
(this makes a Nation truly great to have God nigh them) as the Lord our God is
near unto us, in all that we call upon him for. A great privilege this is; yet
not so great as that which we have by Christ, in whom as the Apostle says,
(...), Ephesians. 1.6
God has made us his chief favorites, and encourages us by the mediation of
our great high Priest, to come boldly unto the Throne of Grace; Heb. 4.14
and has promised that we shall obtain mercy, and find grace to help at a time
of need. And what surer pledge can we have, of Gods constant favor, than that
which the Apostle mentions. He that spared not his own Son, Romans 8.32.
but delivered him up for us all, how should he not with him, freely give us
all things. We may say therefore with a filial confidence, Isa. 63.16
Doubtless thou art our Father, a Father that knows all our wants and
weaknesses, and spares us as a Father spares the Son that serves him. Nemo
tam Pater, Inter Deum and bonos homines auncitia quaedam est Amicitiam dico?
imo recessitudo. Sen. Luke 11.13.
tam pius nemo. Our Savior would have us guess at Gods compassions toward us,
by ours to our own Children: If ye that are evil, know how to give good things
to your Children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit
to them that ask him? What nearer Communion can there be? He has already given
us his Son; he is daily pouring down his spirit, and only reserves himself for
our everlasting reward.

2. And of this we may be the better assured by the communion that we have with
his Son Jesus Christ. With whom our (...) is a (...), 2 Cor. 6.14.
a mutual communication and participation. He assumed our nature, and
infirmities, and so knows our weaknesses and imperfections, and will not suffer
us to be tempted above what we are able. Yea, he has taken on him all our
sins, and made full satisfaction for them: He is of God, made unto us wisdom,
righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30.
sanctification, and redemption; not by way of imputation only, as a Cloak to
cover our iniquities, but of real efficacy, purging our Consciences from dead
works, delivering us from the power of Satan, renewing his own Image upon us,
that we may be partakers of the Divine Nature, and out of his fullness receive
Grace for Grace. And thus will Christ be the Savior of his body, sanctifying
and conforming it to himself, Ephesians. 5.23
protecting it by his special providence, guiding and comforting it by his
Spirit, and at last glorifying it with himself eternally.

To apply this:

1. May we have Communion with the Father, and with his Son: Let us not then be
solicitous, for the mediation of Saints and Angels. and bestow more devotion
and honor on them, than on the immediate service of God and our Savior. Those
holy Spirits will be all of our Communion; they join with us in praising God,
and will in their capacities, be ministering Spirits to our necessities: For
worshipping them we have no Apostolical Precept or Example; but many to the
contrary, and therefore, See thou do it not, Rev. 19.10.
I am thy fellow servants -- worship thou God.

2. Let us walk worthy of so holy Communion; if we say, we have fellowship with
him, and walk in darkness, we lie and do not the truth. Our not doing according
to the truth we profess, is a giving the lie to it, a disgracing of our
Religion, as if it did allow us in wickedness. Wash you, Isa. 2.
make you clean, etc. Come now, and let us reason together: A holy man may talk
with God, as a man talks with his friend. But, What Communion has light with
darkness? 2 Cor. 6.14, 15.
what concord has Christ with Belial? None but Virtuoso's can be of this Royal
Society; wherefore, Let every one that names the Name of Christ depart from
iniquity. In this only, separation is to be justified, in having no fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness: Our Communion with their persons will
not defile us, if we avoid their sins. The Disciples were not polluted, by
having a Judas among them.

Nor was Judas his sin less, because he lived in the Communion of Christ and
his Apostles, it will be an aggravation of our disobedience, that we who
pretend to be his most familiar Friends, and are admitted to feed at Christ's
Table, should lift up the heel against him. Our care, not to offend him, should
bear proportion with the measure of his friendship to us, and that abundant
Charity, which we have received from Christ our head, should be mutually
conveyed to his members, and not like those who write themselves, e Societate
Jesu, but are enemies to all but their own Fraternity: Joh 13.35. and 15.14.
Then will our Savior own us for his Disciples, when we love one another; and
for his Friends, when we do whatsoever he commands us.

3. Let us bless God, that has called us to Himself, his Son, and his
Apostles; here let us fix as the primitive Christians did, who though they saw
the cloud of persecution ready to pour down Cataracts of blood upon them, yet
(...), they were resolved to weather it out. Act. 2.42.
Our Savior foretold his Apostles, and they have informed us, that we must
resist even to blood, that we may not startle at any opposition, as at a
strange thing. And when we see, how active and patient too, every Sectary is
for the promoting of any faction; they that are members of the Catholic Body,
should show, that they have still the blood and spirits of the primitive
Christians, animating them with courage and resolution answerable to their high
Calling. Consider therefore, him that endured such contradiction of sinners
against himself: Heb. 12.
he suffered both from Herod, and from Pontius Pilate, and so did the Apostles,
from false Brethren, as well as from open enemies. If we suffer by the Papists,
as Sectaries; and by the Sectaries as Papists; even in this also we are made
conformable to the Son of God, and may say -- Truly our fellowship is with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ: It is begun in the Church Militant, and
shall be perfected in the Church Triumphant: And the light afflictions we
endure here, shall add weight to the Crown of Glory hereafter.

If then our Church Communion be as Jacobs Ladder, which had God at the Top of
it, Genesis 28.12, 13.
though the Foot be on the Earth. (for it was God sent his Son, and the Son of
God sent his Apostles, and the Apostles took care for a succession in the
Church of God till Christ's second Coming), they are great despisers of the
Ordinance of God, and the blessings annexed to them, that turn their backs on
them, and wilfully forsake their own mercies; for when our Savior promised a
succession of Pastors to his Church, he appropriated his blessing to them, Lo,
I am with you; with them in a special manner, more than with others, else the
promise would signify nothing.

If therefore we run after them, that run before they are sent, as they go not
on Gods message, Heb. 5.4.
so they cannot effect Gods end upon us. No man takes this Honor to himself
but he dishonours God, as if God could not provide for his Church; or as if
humane inventions were more effectual instruments of Piety than Gods
Ordinances. It was said by some that God in those times had raised up
extraordinary Ministers. Many indeed have pretended to be such; and Christ
foretold of their coming. There shall arise false Christ's, and false Pro^eets,
men of no ordinary dignity; Mat. 24.24, 26.
and ^^y shall show great signs and wonders; draw great multitudes, and not of
the ordinary ^^rt; they shall (if it were possible) deceive the very elect,
they shall captivate the Consciences of men, and cause great alterations (...)
Church and State; ( But behold, says our Savior I have told you before;
therefore if they shall say, Behold he is in the de^ert, go not forth, Behold
he is in the secret Chambers, believe it not. He is neither in the Cells of
Hermits, nor in the Chambers of Sectaries; his presence and blessing is with
his Church, which he redeemeth with his Blood, to which he promised his Spirit;
and in which he has from the beginning preserved a succession of Pastors, and
will (...) it to the end, against all the powers of Hell. God loves the Gates
of Sion (says David) more than all the dwellings of Jacob. Here will I dwell,
says God, Ps. 87.2. Ps. 132.13 133.3.
for I have a delight in it, from Sion he will command (...) blessings.

They that will enjoy the privileges of a Society, must live under the
Government, and be obedient to the Laws of it; and if we expect to partake of
the blessings promised to the Church of Christ, we must live in its Communion:
As for intruders and hirelings, Quisquis ab Ecclesia separatus, adulterae
jungitur, a promissis Ecclesiae separatur. S. Cypr. Jer. 23.32
My Sheep will not hear their voice, nor follow them, says Christ; or if they
should, they will be led through briars and thorns. I sent them not, nor
commanded them. (says God of such Prophets); therefore they shall not profit
this people at all. Not profit them you will say? there are none like them, for
knowledge and discourse of heavenly things; none make longer prayers, or
manifest greater zeal; this may be, and yet they are not profited.

1 Cor. 13.
1. Let St. Paul demonstrate how this may be; He supposes they be men of
excellent gifts, and have the tongues of Men and Angels, as eloquent as
Apollo's; but wanting Charity, they are as sounding-brass, make a great noise,
but profit nothing.

2. They are men of great knowledge can expound the most mysterious parts of
the Revelation; and they have such a plerophory of Faith as carries them on
against (...) opposition; they can remove mountains, yet wanting Charity, they
profit nothing.

3. Yea, but they have Charity also: they bestow all their goods on the poor,
and give their bodies to be burnt, yet they may want true Charity; that Charity
that is long-suffering, and kind, that does not envy, nor vaunt it self, is not
puffed up, or behaveth it self unseemly; that does not seek her own, is not
easily provoked, thinks no evil, etc. If they do not practice these things
themselves, and preach them to their Disciples they cannot profit them, Rev.
16.18.
they may please them by their (...) and (...), complementing them as the
Saints and Elect of God, they may be a means of profiting them too, in respect
of Temporal advantages; but though they lead them to a warmer Sun, they carry
them farther from Gods blessing. If they sow the seeds of division, and improve
them to separation, to unchristian censuring, Jam. 3.15. Hortari ad Ecclesiae
reformationem and subtrahere unitatem Hereticae institutionis est. Cypr. Jer.
7.9.
irreconcilable malice, and invincible prejudices against their Fathers and
Brethren; they do edificare in Gehennam. This wisdom is not from above, but is
earthly, sensual, devilish: How should they build the Church that use nothing
but Axes and Hammers, to destroy the unity and beauty of it? they that renounce
that Society, to which they had solemnly sworn fidelity, and afterward conspire
against it, and raise Altar against Altar; and as the Samaritans set up Mount
Gerizim against Mount Sion, and affront the Catholic Church, with
Chimney-Conventicles; let them proclaim themselves for The Temple of the Lord,
(as the Jews did) with never so much clamor and confidence, if they are guilty
of stealing, murdering, committing adultery and swearing falsely, and turn the
House of God into a den of Thieves; they trust in lying words that will not
profit them. And who but a person that God has given up to a spirit of
Delusion, would believe a few revolted and disagreeing Ministers in this later
age of the Church, against the constant and unanimous testimonies of Martyrs
and Confessors, the Bishops and Pillars of the universal Church. Therefore, say
ye not a confederacy to them, to whom this people shall say a confederacy,
neither fear ye their fear, Isa. 8.22. 1 Pet. 3.14.
(...), worship not their worship*) nor be afraid, but sanctify the Lord of
Hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and your dread, and be shall be for a
Sanctuary to you; but a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense, to the
enemies of his Worship. Remember to what destruction Corah Dathan and Abiram,
brought themselves and the Congregations that followed them. Numb 16 31.
Brethren be not ^^^eived, (says Ignatius) if any one follow him that makes a
Schism, Ad ^hilad.
he shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: Gal. 5.20.
The Apostle says the same, when he reckons, Hatred, variance, emulation,
wrath, strife, seditions, and heresies, among the works of the flesh; which
whosoever does, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. And this is indeed the
judgment of every Schismatic; who are as the Apostle notes, self-condemned.
Tit. 3.11.
For while every petty faction does not only rival, but reprobate every other
that dissenteth from it, as if that Congregation alone, were the (...), the
beloved Spouse; they exclude all others; and so subscribe to that common Maxim,
That out of the Church, there is no Salvation.

We may only then be well assured, that God is our Father, when we own the true
Church of God for our Mother. We are bid by Solomon, Prove. 1.8.
not only to hear the Instructions of our Father, but also, not to forsake the
Law of our Mother. And Solomon Jarchi tells us, God is our Father, and the
Congregation of Israel is our Mother. And a greater than both these Solomon's
has said, He that will not hear the Church, Mat. 18.17.
let him be to thee as a Heathen and a Publican.

Our Savior will doubtless maintain the honor, and continue the benediction,
which from the beginning he endowed his Church and Ordinances with. He never
did nor will own, or prosper, those that pretend to an extraordinary Ministry,
or greater purity of Ordinances than those which he has instituted, when they
may h^^^ Communion with them. Though he called St. Paul to the Apostleship by a
Miracle, yet is he mindful of his (...) Institution, and sends him to A^^ias
for Bapti^m, Act. 9 18. Act. 1^.1. 1 Timothy 4.14.
and to the Church of A^^^^^^ (...) Ordination. The office to which Timothy was
consecrated, was give^ him by Prophecy, i. e. says Theodoret, by Di^^^^
Revelation: The Holy Ghost command^ it, says Theophyl^^, and so whatever it
was, it was Jure Divino^, yet was it not thought sufficient without the Hands
of the Presbytery. And St. Paul tells us as much, (...). pro officis. Romans
10.15 Bonum non (...) ex caus^^ integri^.
and plainly, as is needful in this Argument: That where there is not a
Minister rightly commissioned for his (...) to the Institution of (...) his
Apostles, and to that succession, which is always to continue in the (...) at
l^ast, where such Ordination may be had, but is despised, there are neither
Prayers, nor Preaching, nor Faith, nor Sacraments neither, (...).
though the people may be persuaded, that they have all these in their greatest
purity. Was he a Christian who fancied, St. Cyprian of Novation, Qui contempta
Ecclesiae traditione s^ipsum ordinavit.
that God had no Church in the World for a long time, and therefore baptized
himself, as the Founder of a new Church? They are not altogether unlike him,
who disliking all the ancient Forms of Government and Worship, continued in the
Church from the Apostles days, do invent Modes of their own, and worship their
own Delusions; which either were never heard of in the Church, or as soon
condemned and confuted, as they were published.

It may be, unwary men may be so misguided, as to think, Joh. 16.2.
they do God good service in all their prophanations: but so did they who did
kill the Disciples of Christ, whose good intentions could not justify their
ungodly actions.

And what if these seduced people, should by degrees, be persuaded to act over
again all those sad Scenes of Rapine, and Murder, and Confusion, which by
persons of like Principles, have been executed on the best of Kings, and his
incomparable Nobility, and Gentry, as well as on a most pious and prudent
Clergy?

May they not think, still they are doing God service, when their Leaders are
so far from calling them to repentance for what is past, as that they rather
set them in a way that tends directly to the same Confusions again.

Mat. 23.29.
In vain did the Jews build the Tombs of the ancient Prophets, and honored the
Memories of the Righteous that were of old; when they actually persecuted those
Prophets and wise Men that Christ had sent to them. What respect have they for
those Martyrs and Confessors in the Marian days, that separate from, and expose
to contempt and ruin, those that are their undoubted Successors, in the same,
if not a more reformed Doctrine and Worship. It is dreadful to think what the
effects of this Separation may be to others; Aut in Vite, aut in Igne. Qui
extra Ecclesiam Catholicam vitam finiunt in ignem eternum ituri. St. August. de
fide ad P. D.
it cannot be otherwise than destructive to its Authors and Abettors.

I end with that most serious Exhortation of the Apostle, Heb. 10.24. Let us
consider one another, (not rashly to censure and condemn our Brethren, but), to
provoke one another to good works, not forsaking the ass^mbling of our selves
together, as the manner of some is. -- For if we sin wilfully (by our Apostasy
from the true Church) after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there
remains no more sacrifice for sin, But a certain fearful looking for of
vengeance, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries. From
which Si^ and Judgment, Good Lord deliver us.

All men will walk, every one in the name of his God: And we will walk in the
Name of the Lord our God, for ever and ever, Mic. 4.5. FINIS.

