THE MOST CHRISTIAN KINGS DECLARATION OF WAR Against the STATES GENERAL of the
United Provinces.
Done out of French, according to the Copy Printed at Paris.
Published by Authority.



THe dissatisfaction his Majesty has in the carriage of the States General of
(...) United Provinces of the Low Countries, toward him for some years past,
be^^^ come to that point, that his Majesty cannot longer, without diminution to
h^^ own Glory, dissemble the indignation raised in him, by a Treatment so
unsuitabl^ to the great obligations which his Majesty and the Kings his
Predecessors have so liberally heaped upon them; his Majesty has Declared, and
by these pr^sents, Signed with his Hand, does Declare, That he has Determined
and Resolved to make War against the said States General of the United
Provinces of the Low Countries, as well by Sea as (...) Land, and accordingly
does command all his Subjects, Vassals, and Servants, to fall upon the
Hollanders; straightly Charging and Requiring them, and every of them, That
upon Pain of death, they do not henceforth presume to hold any Communication,
Commerce, or Intelligence with them: To which end his Majesty has likewise
Revoked and from henceforth does Revoke, all Licenses, Passes, Safeguards, or
Protections, that man have been granted by himself, his Lieuten^nt-Generals,
and other his Officers, contrary to the ^resents, and the same does Declare,
null and of no force, forbidding whomsoever it may concern, to take any notice,
o^ have any regard to them.

And his Majesty does hereby Charge and Require the Comte de Verm^ndois Grand
Maistr^ Chef and Surin^^ndant-General of the Navigation and Commerce ^ his
Kingdom, the Mareshals of France, Governors, and Lieutenant Generals for his
M^^^sty in his Provinc^ and Armies; all Mareshals de Camp, Colonels, Mestres de
Camp, Captains, Leaders and Commanders of his Forces, whether Horse or Foot,
French or Foreign, and all and singular his Officers whom it may concern, That
they, and every of them respectively, do execute, and cause to be put in
execution, the Contents of these Presents, within the extent of their several
Powers and Jurisdictions: For such is his Majesty's Pleasure.

And his Majesty does farther Will and Require, That these Presents be
Published and se^ up in all his Cities and Towns, as well Maritime as others,
as also in all Ports, Havens, and other Places of his Kingdom, where it shall
be requisite, to the end, none may pretend cause of ignorance of the same.

Done at the Castle of Versailles, April 6. 1672. Signed LOUIS,
And underneath, Le TELLER.
THese are to require Charles Cantro, the Kings sworn Crier in Ordinary, to
Publish and cause to be affixed and set up in all Places of (...) City,
Suburbs, Prevoste and Vicomte of Paris, where it shall be requisite, the Kings
Ordonnance of the Sixth of this present Month and Year, That none may pretend
cause of ignorance of the same.

Done the Sixth day of April, 1672. Signed De la REYNIE.


REad and Published with sound of Trumpet and public Proclamation, and set up
in all the Carrefours ordinary and extraordinary, of ^his City and Suburbs of
Paris, by me Charles Canto, sworn Crier in Ordinary to the King in the said
City, Prevoste and Vicomte o^ Paris. In the making of which Proclamation, I was
accompanied by five Trumpets, viz. Jerosme Tr^^ss^n Stephen du Bos, (...)
Trumpets to the King, and three other Trumpets, Thursday the 7th of April, 1672.

Signed CANTO.



EDINBURGH, Reprinted by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1672.


