The Most Christian Kings DECLARATION OF WAR Against the STATES GENERAL OF THE
United Provinces.

Done out of French, According to the Copy Printed at PARIS.

Published by Authority.

In the SAVOY, Printed by Thomas Newcomb, and Reprinted at DVBLIN by Benjamin
Took, Printer to the KING's Most Excellent Majesty; And are to be Sold by
Joseph Wild Bookseller in Castle-street. 1672.

An Ordonnance Of the KING: Whereby His Majesty having Resolved to make War
against the States of Holland, straightly forbids his Subjects to hold any
Communication or Commerce thither.
Of the Sixth of April, 1672.
By the King:
THe Dissatisfaction His Majesty has in the carriage of the States General of
the United Provinces of the Low Countries, toward him for some years past,
being come to that point, that His Majesty cannot longer, without diminution to
his own Glory, dissemble the Indignation raised in him by a Treatment so
unsuitable to the great Obligations which his Majesty and the Kings his
Predecessors have so liberally heaped upon them; his Majesty has Declared, and
by these Presents, Signed with his Hand, does Declare, That he has Determined
and Resolved to make War against the said States General of the United
Provinces of the Low Countries, as well by Sea as Land, and accordingly does
Command all his Subjects, Vassals, and Servants to fall upon the Hollanders;
straightly Charging and Requiring them, and every of them, That upon pain of
death, they do not henceforth presume to hold any Communication, Commerce, or
Intelligence with them: To which end his Majesty has likewise Revoked, and
from henceforth does Revoke, all Licenses, Passes, Safeguards, or Protections,
that may have been Granted by himself, his Lieutenant-Generals, and other his
Officers, contrary to these Presents, and the same does Declare, Null and of no
force, forbidding whomsoever it may concern, to take any notice, or have any
Regard to them.

And his Majesty does hereby Charge and Require the Com^e de Vermandois Grand
Maistre, Chef and Surintendant-Gene^al of the Navigation and Commerce of this
Kingdom, the Mareshals of France, Governors, and Lieutenant-Generals for his
Majesty in his Provinces and Armies; all Mareshals de Camp, Colonels, Mesters
de Camp, Captains, Leade^s and Commanders of his Forces, whether Horse or Foot,
French or Foreign, and all and singular his Officers whom it may concern, That
they, and every of them respectively, do execute, and cause to be put in
execution, the Contents of these Presents, within the extent of their several
Powers and Jurisdictions, For such is his Majesty's Pleasure.

And his Majesty does farther Will and Require, That these Presents be
Published and set up in all his Cities and Towns, as well Maritime as others,
as also in all Ports, Havens, and other Places of his Kingdom, where it shall
be requisite, to the end, none may pretend cause of ignorance of the same.

Done At the Castle of Versailles, April 6. 1672. Signed. LOUIS. And
underneath, LE TELLIER.
THese are to require Charles Canto, the Kings sworn Crier in Ordinary, to
Publish and cause to be affixed and set up in all Places of this City, Suburbs,
Prevoste and Vicomte of Paris, where it shall be requisite, the Kings
Ordonnance of the Sixth of this present month and Year, That none may pretend
cause of ignorance of the same.

Done the Sixth day of April, 1672. Signed De la REYNIE.


REad and Published with sound of Trumpet, and public Proclamation, and set up
in all the Carrefours ordinary and extraordinary of this City and Suburbs of
Paris, by me Charles Canto, sworn Crier in Ordinary to the King in the said
City, Prevoste and Vicomte of Paris. In the making of which Proclamation, I was
accompanied by five Trumpets, viz. Jerosme Tronsson, Stephen du Bos, Sworn
Trumpeters to the King, and three other Trumpets.

Thursday the 7th of April, 1672. Signed CANTO.



FINIS.

