

The Natural Man's Case stated: OR; An EXACT MAP OF THE LITTLE WORLD MAN,
Considered in both his Capacities, Either in the state of NATURE, or GRACE. As
is laid down in XVII SERMONS, By that late truly Orthodox Divine Mr.
CHRISTOPHER LOVE, Pastor of Lawrence Jury, London.

WHEREUNTO IS ANNEXED The Saints Triumph over Death; Being his FUNERAL SERMON,
By that painful Labourer in the Lords Vineyard, Mr. THO. MANTON, Minister of
the Gospel at Stoak-Newington near London.

Imprimatur

EDMUND CALAMIE.



The second Edition, corrected and amended.

London, Printed by E. Cotes, for George Eversden, at the Golden Ball in
Aldersgate street, 1652.

To the Reader.
THe exuberant spawns of illiterate Books proceeding from the polluted wombs of
the overloaded, and bejaded adulterate presses, which are all painted with fair
titles, I can compare to nothing so fitly as a cheating Lottery; which when the
greedy invader comes with hopes for a little money laid down, to carry away a
great deal of wit with him, it is nineteen at least to one when he opens it, but
he finds to his shame, that he has drawn a blank, perhaps a blasphemy; and yet
couched under the title of glorious truth, heavenly discoveries, beams of
light, new Jerusalem, Gods mind clearly revealed, with multitudes of such
paints upon their strumpets faces.

The sacred Bible which indeed is an Alablaster-box full of sweet perfumes and
precious ointments, is made (alas!) like Pandora's box (in the humane story)
which (Epimetheus presumptuously opening) filled the world with evils, diseases
and calamities of all kinds. The sacred Bible is made now the patron of
Profane men's practices; never were gross sins at such an impudent height as
now they are; what horrid impudence is that of hell to take heaven by the hand?
Sins that were wont to hide themselves in the holes and clefts of obscurity,
not daring to be hold the light, but Serpent-like, to creep under the low
shrubs of deceitful shifts, how do they Eagle-like sit pearching on the goodly
Cedars (I mean Pulpits and Thrones) the Cedars of God, and dare to cast up
their eyes toward the Sun? who would think it! yet what this day more common
then to meet the devil with his eyes toward heaven, and a Bible under his
arm, clothing all his words and actions cap a pea in Scripture phrases;
Murderers, traitors, rebels, blasphemers, soothsayers, adulterers,
sabbath breakers, perjurers, oppressors, and almost all notorious villains
have marshalled themselves (like the Roman Clergy) into so many several Sects
of religion, all impudently assuming to themselves the usurped title of eminent
Saints, and quoting Scripture for their actions, and scot-free pass the press
into the world to make more proselytes: so that he that in this Soul-frozen age
shall go to gather Books to warm his Soul, (as Paul did sticks to warm his
fingers) will be sure, if he be not wary, to gather vipers into his bosom: And
how am I stung with pain and horror, whiles I meditate on the thousands of
poor souls that are gnawed to death by these speckled vipers! Sure it cannot
but sit sad one day upon the spirits of those licentious Licencers, that are as
the midwives of such monsters.

For thy comfort therefore and encouragement (Reader) I do assure thee this
Book is free from all such venomous beasts, no toad of malice, nor serpent of
deceit lurks either in the matter or the phrase hereof. In plain English, it is
a pleasant, heavenly, self-searching, soul-convincing, sin-condemning,
heart-humbling, spirit-raising, grace-quickning, Christ-exalting book. I need
say no more, they are the Sermons of Mr. Christopher Love, Master of Arts, and
Minister of the Gospel of Christ, whose actions, life and death, will eternize
his name; I may truly say of his elegant style, and pleasant way of expressing
himself, as he of Gregory Nazianzen,

Viribus eloquii valuit, linguaque diserta: P^ss^lli epigram. in vita Gregor.
Nazianzeni.

Mellisluos dulei protulitore sonos.
The subject of these Sermons is of general use to all sorts of people, much
like in that, to that text of Chrysostomes in Psalm. 4. 2. which (as he says)
if he had a voice like thunder, and a mighty mountain for his pulpit, and all
the men and women in the world for his auditory, he would choose this text to
preach on: O ye sons of men, how long will ye turn my glory into shame? how
long will ye love vanity, and seek after leasing? Had this been really
effected, and I been there in Mr. Loves spirit, would Chrysostom have lent me
his voice, and allowed me the use of his monarchical pulpit, when he had done
in the morning with his text, I would have come up in the evening with this
text, Ephesians. 2. 12. That at that time ye were without Christ, being aliens from
the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenant of Promise, having
no hope, and without God in the World: but this need not, for it is in a manner
effected already: this worthy Minister has ascended that pulpit from whence
he has thundered into the world, he is now one of those blessed ones, that
dyed in and for the Lord, he is at rest from all his labors, and now behold
his works do follow him; some are already gone before, and these do follow
after. These Sermons were preached at St. Anne's Aldersgate, where this holy
young man was Pastor: I pray God they may prove as the great trumpet of God, to
cause a spiritual resurrection amongst those people before they go down to the
house of rottenness; it cannot but much rejoice those people to hear their
Pastors voice again, those sheep cannot but know their shepherds voice; which
that they may do, the Lord of heaven bless these his worthy labors to their,
and thy spiritual advantage; so as that the distressed Churches loss in his
sad and unexpected absence, may be made up in the blessing of God, upon these
and the rest of his pious and painful labors. So prays,

Thine, E. C.

SERMON, I.
EPHESIANS. 2. 12. That at that time ye were without Christ, being Aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenants of promise; having no
hope, and without God in the world.
THis Chapter out of which my Text is taken, is like a little Map, containing
in it a description of the little world Man, and that in a double capacity;
considering man either in the state of Grace, or in the state of Nature; If you
consider Man in the first capacity, in the state of Grace, this chapter lays
down a five fold description of bringing Man into the state of Grace.

efficient cause of bringing Man out of the state of Nature, into the state of
Grace, and that is God, in the 4. verse.

impulsive cause, and that is the riches of Gods mercy in the same verse, But
God who is rich in mercy for the great love wherewith he loved us, etc.

meritorious cause of it, which is Christ in his sufferings, in the 7. verse,
that in the ages to come, he might show the exceeding riches of his grace in
his kindness toward us, through Jesus Christ.

final cause of it in the same verse also, that in Ages to come, he might show
the exceeding riches of his grace. And,

isntrumental cause of bringing man out of the state of Nature into the state
of Grace, and that is Faith, in the 8. verse: For by grace are you saved
through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God.

Now the other part of the Map describes man in the second capacity, in the
state of Nature, and herein it gives a twofold description of Man's condition;

1. Positively, what he is. 2. Privatively, what he wants.
1. It describes Man in the state of Nature positively what he is, and that in
five particulars;

described to be dead in trespasses and sins.

walk according to the course of this world, as Pagans and Heathens do.

According to the Prince of the power of the air, that is, the Devil; now the
Devil is called the Prince of the air, either because he does reside in the
air, or else, because he has the power of the wind and of the air.

4. They are called Children of disobe dience; that is, bor

they fulfill the lusts of the flesh and of the mind, and are by nature
children of wrath.

Thus far you have the positive description of Man in the state of Nature.

Jesus Christ, and the most miserable: That at that time you were without
Christ; that is the first: Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel; that is the
second: strangers to the Covenants of promise; that is the third: without hope;
that is the fourth: without God in the world; that is the fifth.

Now these comprehensive expressions, contain in them the whole misery of Man,
and that in these five particulars here named; 2. here is described the time
how long, a man is in this condition, that at that time, that is, the time
during your unconverted estate; as long as you are unconverted, so long you are
without Christ, and an Alien from the Common wealth of Israel, and a stranger
to the Covenants of promise, without hope and without God in the world.

And now what a dismal Text have I here to handle, and what a doleful tragedy
am I now to act? but yet out of every one of these, there is a great deal of
comfort which may flow forth; I shall only at present make entrance into the
words, and speak more fully to them afterward; that at that time you were
without Christ; That at that time: Beloved here wants something to supply the
sense of the words, and therefore read the foregoing words, and you will find
what must be brought in; the verse before runs thus, Wherefore remember, that
you being in times past Gentiles in the flesh, etc. wherefore remember, these
words must be prefixed; Wherefore remember, that at that time you were without
Christ, and aliens to the Commonwealth of Israel, etc. I shall here by the way
only draw out this one doctrine from the coherence of the words, Wherefore
remember that at that time; the Apostle would have these converted Ephesians to
remember, that they were men without Christ, and aliens to the Commonwealth of
Israel, and strangers to the covenants of promise, without hope, and without
God in the world: now from hence I would commend this observation to you.

it is the will of God that men in a converted estate should often call to
mind the sinfulness and misery they were guilty of before their conversion.

Beloved, this is a subject I could never have occasion to speak to you of
before, and yet it is a point of admirable use, especially in these times,
wherein people think that when once they are brought into a state of Grace,
they must live in divine raptures, and revelations, and spiritual joys, above
duties and ordinances, and never look back into their former sinfulness and
wickedness they were guilty of before their conversion: Why, here the
Ephesians were converted men, and had extraordinary privileges, they were
brought to sit in heavenly places in Christ Jesus; and yet the Apostle bids
them remember their former sinfulness and misery, Remember O you Ephesians
that ye were once without Christ, and you were Aliens to the Commonwealth of
Israel, etc. therefore you must take heed of this, to think that when you are
converted, you must be only rapt up into the third heavens, and never look back
into your former condition; you see here the Apostle bids you remember what you
were at that time during your unconverted estate, that you were then without
Christ, and strangers to the Covenants of promise, etc. So that you see it is
the will of God, that men in a converted estate should often call to mind the
sins and misery they were in before conversion.

Now before I come to give you the Reasons of the point, give me leave to
premise these three Cautions; when I tell you, that after your co^version, you
should call to mind your sin and misery before conversion, you must not do it
1. with complacency of spirit; nor 2. with stupidity of heart; nor 3. with
despondency of mind.

mind your former sinfulness not with complacency, but with bitterness of
spirit, with grief, sorrow, and perplexity of heart: Many men will tell you
large stories of the wickedness, that they have committed; but they do it with
delight, and if they had strength and abilities, they would be guilty of the
same sins and wickednesses still; which is a most ungodly practice, and that
which the Scripture condemns men for, as in the 23. of Ezekiel. 23. 19, 21. Yet
she multiplied her whoredoms, Ezekiel. 23. 19, 21.
in calling to remembrance the days of her youth, wherein she had played the
harlot in the land of Egypt; Thus thou calledst to remembrance the lewdness of
thy youth: the meaning of this is, she called her sins to remembrance, but it
was so as to play the whore still, and to be unclean still, she did it with
delight and complacency, with content and joy; now I say you should call your
sins to remembrance with a great deal of grief and sorrow, and bitterness of
spirit: and therefore when young gallants will boast of their sins, and tell how
often they have been drunk, and have made others to be so; and how often they
have played the whoremaster, and have drawn others to do so; this is a most
Diabolical remembrance.

heart neither: Beloved, there are many men can remember what lewd courses they
have taken, and what wicked lives they have lived; how often they have been
drunk and unclean, and the like; and yet are never troubled at the remembrance
of it; their hearts do not smite them with remorse and sorrow, but are like a
rock; the sense of sin never troubles them: this is no way of calling sin to
remembrance, with a blockish and stupid heart, this is not thanks worthy; but
it must be done with a broken, and a bleeding, and a contrite heart: And,



These are the Cautions necessary to be premised; I come now to give you the
Reasons of the point, why it is the will of God, that people in a converted
estate, should often call to mind the sin and misery they were in before
conversion, and Tim. 1. 13. the Apostle Paul when he 1 Timothy 1. 13.
would magnify the free grace of God to him, says he, I was a blasphemer, and
a persecutor, and injurious; and yet through the abundance of Gods free grace
and mercy, I have obtained mercy: the consideration of his former sinfulness
did elevate and scrue up his heart, to make him admire the free grace of God to
his soul; that man can never prize liberty as he should do, that never was in
prison: But,

it so is, because this will be as a spur to quicken and engage men to be more
eminent in grace, after their conversion: when a man does frequently and
seriously consider how bad and sinful he was before conversion, it cannot but
provoke him now to be more humble and holy, after his conversion. It is very
observable in Paul, that all those sins and wickednesses he was guilty of
before conversion, he did most of all strive against, and labor to excel in
the contrary graces after conversion: as first before conversion he did labor
to hale others to prison, for worshipping of Christ; but after his conversion,
he did labor to draw others to Christ: Act. 26. 10, 11. Many of the Saints
Act. 26. 10, 11.
did I shut up in prison, and gave my voice against them, and punished them often
in every City, and I was exceeding mad against them, and banished them into
other Cities: and now you shall see that after conversion, Paul did labor to
outvie in grace, that evil course he was in before; as before conversion, he
did imprison those that did belong to Christ, so after conversion, he was shut
up himself in prison, for the cause of Christ; before conversion, he gave his
voice against the people of God, but after conversion, he did pray to God for
them; before conversion, he did punish them often, but afterward he did preach
to them often; before conversion, he did compel men to blaspheme Christ, but
after conversion, he was very earnest to persuade people to believe in Christ;
he was exceeding mad against them before conversion, but afterward he was so
exceeding zealous for the people of God, that every one thought he had been
mad: and lastly, before conversion he did persecute Saints to strange Cities,
but afterward he did go preaching of the Gospel to strange Cities: Oh my
Beloved, let Paul's pattern be your task, call to mind your sin and wickedness
in your unconverted condition, but so that it may provoke you, that now you are
converted, you may labor to abound in grace, as formerly you have abounded in
sin.

Tit. 3. 2, 3. Speak evil of no man, says he, be no brawler, Tit. 3. 2, 3.
but gentle, Showing all meekness unto all men, for we our selves also were
sometime foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures,
living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another; as if the Apostle
should have said, I Paul, and thou Titus, we were sinful as well as they, and
did serve diverse lusts as well as they once, let us therefore be pitiful, and
merciful, and compassionate toward them, this consideration will greatly
provoke us to commiserate poor sinful souls; the great reason why we pity them
no more then we do, is because we do not call to mind our own sinfulness, and
what we were before conversion.

Ezekiel. 16. 3, 4, 5. compared with the last Ezekiel. 16. 3, 4, 5.
verse of that chapter. Says God there to Jerusalem, Thy Birth and thy
Nativity is of the land of Canaan; thy Father was an Amorite, and thy mother an
Hittite; and as for thy Nativity, in the day that thou wast born, thy Navill
was not cut, neither were thou washed in water to supple thee, no eye pitied
thee to do any of these unto thee, but thou were cast out into the open field,
to the loathing of thy person in the day that thou wast born; that thou may
remember, and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more, because of thy
shame, when I am pacified toward thee for all that thou have done, says the
Lord: They must remember their guilt and their shame when God is pacified
toward them, and when God is reconciled to them; and so you have another place
for the same purpose, in Ezekiel. 20. 43. And there shall you remember your ways,
and your doings, wherein you have Ezekiel. 20. 43.
been defiled, and you shall loath your selves in your sight, for all the evil
that you have committed. I remember what Plutarch relates of one Agathocles,
who was advanced from a potters son, a low, mean, and contemptible condition,
to be King of Sicilie, this man when he might have been served every day in
golden dishes, yet he would still have his provisions brought in earthen dishes,
because says he, I may remember what I was, and what I am, a potters son, that
so I may not be too much lifted up and exalted: why, so do you remember what
you were, your Father a potter, and you a poor miserable sinful creature, and
this will abate the pride of your hearts.

Ephesians. 5. 8. You were sometimes Ephesians. 5. 8.
darkness (says he) but now are you light in the Lord, walk therefore as
children of the light; we should now hate and abhor those sins that formerly
we have delighted in.

either in their judgment, or practice.

Paul's precept be warrantable, then this opinion is unwarrantable, for he tells
us that we must remember what we were in our unconverted estate, that we were
at that time without Christ, and without hope, and without God in the World. 2.
Paul tells the Ephesians, that were an elected people, who were elected before
the beginning of the world, that they must remember that they were dead in
trespasses and sins heretofore, though now they were quickened: and if Paul
bids them call to mind their former sinfulness, then why should not we do it?

but yet cannot call to mind what sins you have committed 20. years ago, it
may be some of you have been cheaters and swearers, adulterers and prophaners,
and yet now you never think of it, but imagine all is well: I do not know how
to express what sad, dismal and deplorable condition thy poor soul is in,
thou that do never call to mind thy former sins: But thus much shall suffice
for this first Doctrine.

SERMON, II.
EPHESIANS. 2. 12. That at that time ye were without Christ, --
WE come now to the body and bulk of the words, That at that time ye were
without Christ, from whence note,

That every man during the time of his unregeneracy, is in a condition without
Jesus Christ.

My Beloved, if I should tell you now that when you come home, you should have
never a bit of bread to put in your mouths, that all your subsistence and
livelihood should be taken away, that you should be heirs of never a foot of
Land, and that you should have nothing at all to live upon, you would count
this a hard case, but I tell you my Brethren, that to be without Jesus Christ is
a far worse case, it is the saddest and miserablest thing in the world to be
without Jesus Christ: when I tell you, that you are without Christ, I tell you
the saddest News in the World; but before I can bring home this Doctrine to
you, there is one Objection and one Question, that I must spend a little time
in answering, the Objection is this:

Object. How can it be said of these Ephesians here that were elected, that
before their conversion they were without Jesus Christ, for they were chosen of
God in Christ Ephesians. 1. 4.
before the world was made, and therefore how can the Apostle say that when
they were born they were without Jesus Christ, seeing they were chosen in
Christ before the beginning of the world?

Christ and out of Christ; it is true the Apostle says in the first, that they
were chosen in Christ before the world was.

Christ, for God did purpose to make Jesus Christ a Mediator between God and
man, by whose blood they should be saved.

none of his, though they were in Christ in regard of the eternal decree of
God, yet they were without Christ in regard of the actual application of the
love of God to them; for they could not apply to their own souls that Christ
did love them and own them as his children, till they were brought into a
converted estate.

I come now to the question which I promised to resolve, which is this:

Christ.



Now if you ask me which of these is chiefly here meant, that these Ephesians
were without; I answer the two former, for they were both without the true
knowledge of Christ; and also without any actual interest in Christ.

to be without the knowledge of Christ in these 5 particulars.

common knowledge of Christ, and yet be without a spiritual knowledge of
Christ, he may have a natural knowledge by the works of God, by hearing,
reading, or the like, and yet be without a spiritual knowledge, to know Christ
in a spiritual manner.

notionall, and yet be without an experimental knowledge of Christ; and hence
it is that the Scripture expresses the difference between the knowledge of the
righteous and of the wicked man; the Lord plants wisdom in the secret parts of
his children, but in the outward parts, in the head and in the brain of wicked
men, God makes his Children to know Christ in the inward parts.

contemplative, and yet be without an affective knowledge of Jesus Christ;
wicked men may have a speculative knowledge of Christ, they may know Christ as
a man knows his neighbor, but now a believer knows Christ as a wife knows
her Husband, a believer knows Christ and he loves Christ too, an unregenerate
man he may have much light, but he has but little heat in his knowledge, he may
grow much in a contemplative, but not in an affective knowledge, he knows what
he should do, but he will not do what he knows. A wicked man's knowledge is
like the Moon, it has light with it but no heat, but a godly man's knowledge is
like the Sun, that has heat as well as light, a Believer loves Christ as well
as he knows him.

appropriating knowledge of Christ, he does not know Christ to be his Christ,
there are none that do know Christ to be theirs but those that do belong to
Christ, now in this sense, a man may be a great knowing man, and yet not know
Jesus Christ.

practical knowledge of Jesus Christ; they know much but do but little, as in
Tit. 1 16. In their words they Tit. 1. 16.
profess to know him, but in their works they deny him, though they know God,
yet they glorify him not as God, they know many things, but will do nothing:
Now put all these together, wherein an unregenerate man is without the
knowledge of Christ, he is without a spiritual, and experimental knowledge,
without an affective, and apprehensive knowledge, and without an appropriating
and practical knowledge of Christ.

actual interest in Christ, that at that time you were without Christ, that
is, during the time of your unconverted estate, you were without any real
actual interest in Christ; from whence observe,

That every man during the time of his unregeneracy, is without any actual
interest in Christ.

In the handling of this point, I shall only do these three things.

1 I shall show you the propertles of a man without Christ;

2 I shall show you the characters of a man without Christ; And

3 I shall show you the misery of a man without Christ: and then come to the
Uses.

Eight properties of a man without Christ.
this subject, I wish from my soul that if I cannot allure you, yet that I
might affright you, and thoroughly awaken you, to see the indispensable need
that you have of getting an interest in Jesus Christ; and here I shall discover
to you eight particular properties of a man without Christ.

1 Every man without Jesus Christ he is a base man. 2 He is a bondsman: 3 He is
a beggarly man: 4 He is a blind man: 5 He is a deformed man: 6 He is a
disconsolate man: 7 He is a dead man; and 8 He is a damned man.
These are the eight properties of a man without Jesus Christ: Jesus Christ is
a base man; though thou art born of the blood of Nobles, and though thou art of
the offspring of Princes, yet if thou have not the Royal blood of Jesus
Christ running in thy veins, thou art a base man. In Dan. 11. 21. and in Psalm.
15. 4. in both those places you read of vile persons; such is every man without
Christ: and he must needs be so, because it is only Christ that can take off
that baseness wherein every one is by nature; as in Esa. 43. 4. says God,
Since thou were precious in mine eyes, thou becamest honorable, and in 1 Pet.
2. 7. Unto you which believe Christ is precious, it is Jesus Christ, that puts
a Diamond of honor and glory upon men, they are all base men that are out of
Jesus Christ, and that in these three respects:

1 They come from a base original; 2 They commit base actions; And 3 They aim
at base ends.
Christ he comes from a base original, he has not his origination from the
Spirit, but from the Flesh, he proceeds not from God who is the Father of
Lights, but from the Devil who is the Prince of Darkness.

Christlesse man, at the best are but as filthy Isa. 64. 6.
rags, and dead works. A man in his unconverted estate, he is the slave and
drudge of the Devil, a worker of wickedness, still fulfilling the desires of
the flesh and of the mind, being given over to vile affections.

Christ, because he aims at base ends in whatsoever he does; and that two
ways, 1 In this world he aims at base ends in his hearing, reading, praying,
and profession of Religion, he minds himself and his own ends in all: And 2
all his actions tend to base ends in another world; as the actions of a man in
Christ tend to Salvation, so the actions of a Christlesse man tend to damnation.

Christ is not only a base man, but a bondsman; this Christ tells us of in John
8. 36. If the Son make you free, Joh. 8. 36.
then are you free indeed, intimating, that if you have an interest in Christ
to free you from the slavery of sin and Satan, you are slaves indeed: this
bondage and slavery likewise consists in three particulars: 1 they are slaves
to sin; 2 to the Devil; and 3 to the Law.

1 Every Christlesse man he is a slave 1. Joh. 8. 34.
to sin; in Joh. 8. 34. says Christ there, Verily I say unto you, whosoever
commits sin, is the servant of sin, and in 2 Pet. 2. 19. 2 Pet. 2. 19.
While they promise them liberty, the themselves are servants of corruption,
for of whom a man is overcome, of the same he is brought in bondage. Every man
by nature is a slave to his lusts, and a slave to sin, and to the creatures;
God made man Lord over all the creatures, but man has made himself servant to
all the creatures.

Tim. 2. the two last verses, says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.
in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure
will give them repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth, that they may
recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil, who are taken captive by him
at his will.

Rev. 18. 13. Saint John tells Rev. 18. 13.
there that all those that did worship the Beast, shall cry woe and alas, for
Babylon is fallen, and shall cry for the slaves and souls of men: all wicked
men are slaves to Antichrist, to sin and to the Law, and this is the great
misery of an unregenerate man.

beggarly man too without Jesus Christ; for all the treasures of grace and
mercy are hid and locked up in Christ as in a common Magazine or Storehouse:
Col. 2. 3. In him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; if you
are out of Christ you have nothing, as Rev. 4. 17. Thou say Rev. 4. 17.
thou art rich and increast in goods, and have need of nothing, and know not
that thou art poor, and wretched, and miserable, and blind, and naked; you will
grant that he is a poor and beggarly man, that wants these four things, meat
for his belly, clothes for his back, money for his purse, and a house to put
his head in, why in all these respects every man that is out of Christ is a
beggarly man.

Jesus Christ are beggarly, in this regard, because you do not feed upon that
bread of life, nor drink of that water of life, the Lord Christ, whose flesh is
meat indeed, and whose blood is drink Joh. 6. 55.
indeed, without which your souls will starve for hunger.

Christ is not only poor but naked; Rev. 3. 17. Thou knew not that thou
were poor and miserable, and blind and naked, that man that is not clothed
with the long Robes of Cerists righteousness, he is a naked man and exposed to
the wrath and vengeance of Almighty God, those men have only a cloak to cover
their sinful nakedness and shame, that are clothed with the robes of Christ's
righteousness. It is said of Jacob, that he Genesis 27.
obtained the blessing from his Father by being clad in the garments of his
eldest brother, and so are we only blessed by God our Father, as we are
clothed with the robes of our elder brother Jesus Christ.

Luk 16. 11. Grace is only the true riches; all the durable riches are bound up
in Christ.

be received into everlasting habitations, you cannot say (...) Christ is gone
before to prepare a place for thee in heaven: So that in these four particulars
you see, that a Christlesse man is a very beggarly man, having neither food for
his body, nor clothes for his back, nor money in his purse, nor a house to put
his head in, unless it be in a dungeon of darkness, with Devils and damned
spirits.

4. Another property of a man without 4. Rev. 3. 17.
Christ is, that he is a blind man: Rev. 3. 17. and knew not that thou art
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked and hence it is, that
wicked men during their unregeneracy are called darkness, in Ephesians. 5. 8. You
were sometime darkness, but Ephesians. 5. 8.
now are you like in the Lord, walk as children of the light: So light is come
into the world, Joh. 3. 19.
and yet men love larknesse rather then light, because their deeds are evil.
Jesus Christ is to the soul that which the son is to the earth, take away the
Sun from the earth, and it is nothing but a dungeon of darkness: so take away
Christ from the Soul and it is nothing but a dungeon of the Devil; though
there be a Christ in the world, yet if the heart be shut, and Jesus Christ be
not in thee, thou art in a state of darkness and blindness.

Ezekiel. 16. 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 11, and 14. verses, Thus Ezekiel. 16. 3, 4, etc.
says the Lord God, thy Nativity is in the land of Canaan, thy Father was an
Amorite, etc. and in the 6. verse. When I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted
in thine own blood, I said unto thee (when thou wast in thy blood) Live, yea I
said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live; when a poor child lies
weltring it its blood, not swadled, nor washed, nor looked after, what a sad
condition is it in? and thus were you says God; but then read on in the 7.
verse, I have caused thee to multiply as the bud of the Field, and thou have
increased and waxen great, etc. and so again in the 14. verse, Thy renown went
forth among the heathen for thy beauty; for it was perfect through my
comeliness that I had put upon thee, says the Lord, Intimating that before
Christ looks upon a soul, he lies weltring in his own blood, and not able to
help himself, but when he becoms comely through Christ's comeliness that is cast
upon him; if you want Christ, you want your best ornament: a man without Christ
is like a body full of sores and botches, he is like a dark house without
light, and like a body without a head, and such a man must needs be a deformed
man.

Christlesse man is that he is a disconsolate man, Christ is the only spring of
comfort, and the fountain of all joy and consolation, take away Christ from the
Soul, and it is all one, as if you did take away the Sun from the firmament; if
a man has all the blessings in the world, yet if he want Christ, he wants that
which should sweeten all the rest of his comforts. In Exodus 15. 23. 25. you
read there of the waters of Marah, they were so bitter, that none could drink
of them, but then the Lord showed Moses a tree, which when he had cast into the
waters, the waters were made sweet; why Jesus Christ he is this tree, that
sweetens the bitterness of any outward affliction, and he can make all thy
sorrows to flee away; there is nothing in the world that sweetens the
comforts, and gives us joy, in the possession of the things of this world, more
then the having an interest in Jesus Christ: it is not (Beloved) the having of
much of the creature in your house; but the having of Christ in your hearts,
that makes you live comfortably; all the bread you eat will be but bread of
sorrow, if you do not feed upon the body of Jesus Christ, and all your drink
will be but wine of astonishment, if you do not drink of the blood of Jesus
Christ; without an interest in Christ, al your comforts are but crosses, and al
your mercies are but miseries, as in Job 20. Job 20 22
22. In the fullness of his sufficiency he shall be in straits, though you have
abundance of the things of this life, though you have more then enough, yet if
you have not an interest in Christ, you have nothing.

Christ is, that he is a dead man. You know that common place in 1 John 5. 12.
He that Ioh. 5. 12.
has the Son he has life, and he that has not the Son he has not life,
hence we read in Ephesians. 2. 1. that unregenerate men are dead in Ephesians. 2. 1.
trespasses and sins, and the reason is, because that Christ is a Believers
life: Col. 3. 3. Col. 3. 3.
Our life is hid with Christ in God, take away Christ from a man and you take
away his life, and take away life from a man and he is a dead lump of flesh;
unregenerate men are termed strangers to the life of godliness, and therefore
must needs be dead in their sins; though they do enjoy the life of a man, yet
if the life that he lives be not by the Faith of the Son of God, he is
spiritually dead:

here in this life, though he were never so rich, yet he loses his title to
all, and his riches goes from him to another; why so, being spiritually dead,
you can lay claim to nothing, neither to grace, nor mercy, heaven or happiness
by Jesus Christ.



Christlesse man is, that he is a damned man, if he live and dye without Christ
he is a damned man. So Joh. 3. 18. He that believes Ioh. 3. 18.
not, he is condemned already, he is as surely damned as if he were in hell
already, he that is without Jesus Christ, must needs go without Heaven, for
Heaven and Glory and happiness are entailed upon him; Heaven is given to none,
but those that are heirs together with Christ, and therefore you that are
without Christ must needs be without heaven, and consequently without
happiness and salvation, and therefore must needs be damned. So that you see
in these eight particular properties, in what a sad and miserable condition
every Christlesse man is in, and oh! that what has been now declared concerning
the wretchedness of a Christlesse man, might provoke every soul of you to a
holy eagerness and earnestness of spirit, above all your gettings to labor
to get Jesus Christ.

SERMON, III.
EPHESIANS. 2. 12. That at that time ye were without Christ, --


Quest. What are the Characters of a Man without Jesus Christ.

This Query is very necessary, because hereby we may know, whether we are the
men that are without Jesus Christ Seven Characters of a man without Christ
or no; now I shall reduce these characters of a Christlesse man into these
seven heads, and go over them very briefly.

Romans 8. 9. If any man has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his: Christ
and Rom 8. 9
the Spirit are inseparable companions; have the one, and you enjoy the other;
want the ione, and you are without the other; And here (Beloved) to apply this
more particularly, you are without any interest in Christ, if you are without
the Spirit of Christ in the threefold operation of it.

enlightening work of the Spirit, to teach your minds to know Christ.

inclining work of the Spirit, to draw your hearts to love Christ; And

constraniing work of the Spirit, to empower your wills to obey Christ.

If you are thus without the Spirit of Christ, in these three particulers, you
can lay no just claim, to any interest in Jesus Christ. With what face
therefore can any of you lay claim to Christ's person, that are not guided by
his Spirit, but are led by the corrupt dictates of your own hearts, and follow
the desires of the flesh and of the mind? you that are thus, can lay no claim
to Jesus Christ, for whosoever has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his: this is the first character.

Gal. 5. 24. the Apostle tells us there, that they that Gal. 5 24.
are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts, thereby
intimating, that they that have not crucified the flesh with the affections and
lusts thereof, have no interest in the Lord Jesus Christ: when Christ came in
the flesh, we crucified him, but if ever Christ comes into thy soul, he will
crucify thee; they that are Christ's, they do crucify the flesh: Christ will
be avenged on thy sins, and crucify thy lusts, and kill thy corruptions, when
he comes into thy soul. But here (beloved) I do not mean a total subduing of
sin, as if every lust and corruption should be quite subdued; but only thus
far, to give a deadly blow to sin, that sin shall not reign nor bear sway in
thy soul as it has done formerly: sin in the heart of one that is in Christ,
shall be like those Monarchs spoken of in Dan. 7. 12. it is said Dan. 7. 12.
their Dominions shall be taken away, but their lives shall be prolonged for a
little season; just so it is with sin in the heart of a believer, the dominion
of sin is taken away, but the life and being of it is preserved for a little
season: there shall be some remainders of sin still, in the best of Gods
servants, but sin shall not reign in their mortal bodies, and therefore you
that never had any power to mortify your sins, that never had any bridle of
restraint to any of your lusts, lay no claim to Jesus Christ, for they Gal. 5.
24.
that are his have crucified the flesh with the lusts thereof. I might here
make use of a story (that I have often told you of) in the History of Scotland,
there is mention made of an Island, situate in the midst of the Sea, between
Scotland, and Ireland, and there was a great controversy between the two
Nations, to which of the Kingdoms this Island did belong, and a great
Politician to decide the controversy, commands a great company of Toads and
Frogs to be gathered together, and put into the Island, and if those venomous
and unclean beasts should live there, then the Island belonged to Scotland, but
if they died, then it belonged to Ireland, for no unclean creature does inhabit
there: just so it is with us; there is a great controversy between Christ and
the Devil, to which thy soul does belong, why now if poisonsome lusts, and
venomous sins, can live and thrive in thy soul, then you belong to the Devil;
but if these lusts and sins die in your soul, then you belong to Jesus Christ.

Cor. 16. 2. If any man loves not the Lord Christ, let him be accursed, he that
does not love Christ, has no interest in Christ, and shall be accursed when
Christ shall come to judgment.

Object. But some will be ready to say, If this be so, that the not loving of
Christ, be an argument of the not having of Christ, wby then I think I am well
enough, for I do love Christ with all my heart.

Answ. I will tell thee in the very words of Christ, who it is that loves him:
Joh. 14. 24. He that loves me not keeps not Ioh. 14. 24.
my sayings; does not thy conscience tell thee O man, that thou do not care
for any command of Jesus Christ? let him command what he will, you will do what
you list; you see here Christ tells thee plainly, that he that loves him not,
keeps not his sayings; I beseech you therefore in the fear of God, take heed
of deceiving your own souls, in thinking you love Christ, when there is no such
matter, but labor to love him in truth, and evidence your love to him, by
keeping of his Commandemants.

may have Christ, and yet not know of it, for the present; but this I say, he
that has an interest in Christ, whosoever he be, he must know Christ in part,
Joh. 8. 54, Ioh. 8. 54, 55.
55. You say that God is your God, and yet you have not known him, it is a very
strange place, you say that God and salvation by him, and all is yours, and yet
you have not known him. (Oh my Beloved) you say you have Christ, and yet you
have not known Christ, he himself will convince you at the last day, of laying
a false claim to him, read Joh. 1. 12. compared with the 24. and 26. verses.

Now when I tell you that a man without the knowledge of Christ, is without any
interest in Christ, I do not say, that those are without Christ, that have not
so great a measure of knowledge as other men have; but when you are without the
knowledge of Christ, accompanied with these two circumstances, then I can
safely pronounce you to be a Christlesse man:

Pet. 3. 5. For this they 2 Pet. 3. 5.
are willingly ignorant of, that by the word of God, the heavens were of old,
and the earth standing out of the water, and in the water: or like those in Job
2. 14. that say unto God; Job 21. 14.
Depart from us; for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: if you are such
as these, I can safely pronounce you to be Christlesse men.

Psalm. 82. 5. They know not, neither will Psalm. 82. 5.
they understand, he does not say, they know not, neither do they, but neither
will they understand; a godly man may have the former of these: although you be
very ignorant, yet if you desire to know, you may have an interest in Christ;
but I am bold to say (in case you are ignorant and yet sit down contentedly and
do not care to know more, and obstinately and will not learn more) that you
have no interest in Christ, and therefore keep off your hands from Christ, lay
no claim to him, for you have nothing to do with him, he is none of yours.

mands of Christ, that man has no interest in Christ: I shall give you two
plain texts of Scripture to prove this, one is in Joh. 8. 47. He that is of God
hears Gods Joh. 8 47.
word; you therefore hear them not, because you are not of God; they that are
of God, hear his Word; those that belong to Christ, and have an interest in
him, hear his Word, not only with the ear, but with the heart, and so in 1 John
1. 6. says the Apostle, We are of God, he that is of God, hears us; he that
is not of God, hears not us; hereby know we the spirit of truth and the
spirit of error: and therefore thou obstinate and stout hearted wretch, that
can lie like a flint under the Word of God, and suffer no command to make
impression upon thy spirit; verily thou can lay no just claim to Jesus Christ.

Joh. 3. 8. 10. He that commits sin, is of the Devil, he does not say, he
that does sin, is of the Devil, but he that commits sin with delight, that
makes a trade of sin, he is of the Devil, and so on in the 10. ver. In this
the children of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil; whosoever
does not righteousness, is not of God, he does not belong to God, he that does
not righteousness with delight, and complacency, with joy and industry: as he
that does commit sin, that is, act it with delight, and makes a trade of it, is
of the Devil, so he that does not do righteousness, that is, with delight,
and joy, and cheerfulness, that man is not of Christ: you then that can sin
with delight, but perform holy duties with a flat, and dead, and dull spirit,
you that never took so much delight to sanctify the Sabbath, as you have done
in profaning of it, you that never took so much delight, in the performing of
duties to God, as you have done in sinning against God, lay off hands from
Jesus Christ if your hearts be full of sin, you can have no interest in him; In
Joh. 9. 16. some of the Pharisees said, this Ioh. 9. 16.
man is not of God, because he keeps not the Sabbath: This had been a very
good argument, had it been well applied, had Christ indeed not kept the
Sabbath: if it may be truly said of you, that thou do not make conscience of
keeping of the Sabbath, or of performing any holy duties, I can truly say of
you, that you are not of God: now then examine your selves by this argument,
whether you are of God or no; if you do profane the Sabbath day, and make no
conscience of performing holy duties, nor of sinning against God; this shows
that you are not of God; that man that acts sin with more delight then he
performs holy duties, has no interest in Christ, as in 1 John 5. 18. He that
is born of God sins 1 Ioh. 5. 18.
not, that is, he does not commit it with that delight and complacency as
wicked men do; but he that belongs to God, he keeps himself pure, and that
wicked one touches him not; that is, not so, as to make him commit sin in the
former sense, but he keeps himself, he will not give himself to commit sin
with that cheerfulness as wicked men do; and therefore says the Apostle, we
know that we are of God, and the 1 John 5. 19
whole world lies in wickedness.

Joh. v. 9. Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine of 2 Ioh.
v. 9.
Christ has not God, but he that abides in the Doctrine of Christ, he has
both the Father and the Son; that man that sins both in judgment and in
practice, he is not of God; but he that abides in the truth of God both in
judgment and in practice, he has both the Father and the Son.

Oh therefore I beseech you in the fear of God, look about you, to see whether
you are the men that have a real actual interest in Christ or no. Are you
such men as are without the spirit of Christ? or are you without a saving power
derived from Christ, enabling you to mortify your bosom lusts? Are you
without an unfeigned love to the person of Christ, or without a true and saving
knowledge of Christ? Are you contentedly ignorant of Christ, and care not to
know more? or are you obstinately ignorant, and will not learn more? Are you
without a hearing ear, and an obedient heart to the Word of Christ? Do you take
greater industry, and complacency in the committing of sin, then ever you did
in the performance of any holy duty? Or do you backslide from the ways of
Christ both in judgment, and in practice? If there be a concurrence of these
seven Characters in you, then conclude that you have no interest at all in
Christ, conclude then that at this time you are without Jesus Christ. Thus now
I have done with the second question which I promised you to answer I shall now
spend a little time in winding up what I have said in a practical Use, and
then come to the third Question.

And in the application of this I shall direct my speech to two sorts of
people: 1. To those that are plunged into a spiritual delusion, to say they
have an interest in Christ when they have not. 2. To those that say they have
not an interest in Christ when they have.



his son to give him to those that never ask him.



Cor. 5. 17. If any man 2 Cor. 5. 17.
be in Christ, he is a new creature, old things are passed away, and all things
are become new; are you new creatures? are all your old sins passed away? the
Apostle tells you, that they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts: why now, have thou killed any lust in thy heart, or
rather do not every lust reign in thee, with as much power as ever they did? If
it be so, then surely you have no interest in Christ at all.

interest in Christ when they have; those which say they are without Christ,
when indeed they are not, as there are many such people in the world: now to
such as these I have two or three words of consolation. David when he said, The
Lord had forsaken him, and cast him off for ever: godly men are very apt to
pass very harsh censures upon their own souls.

Mary Magdalen when she was talking to Christ face to face, yet says she, they
have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him; so you Joh.
20. 13
may have an interest in Christ, and yet not know of it; in Joh. 14. 4. Christ
told his Joh. 14. 4.
Disciples there, says he, Whither I go you know, and the way you know, Thomas
says unto him, Lord we know not whither thou go, therefore how can we know
the way? Now the reason why they did not know, as Augustine well observes, was
because they did not know their own thoughts, they thought they did not know,
but yet Christ he knew that they did know. It is with a believer sometimes as
it was with Benjamin, the cup was in his sack, and yet he did not know of it:
now Benjamin was the beloved of Joseph, so you may be the beloved ones of
Christ, and yet not know of it.



you are his father, so long as you know that he is your child; so it is no
great matter though you do not know, that Christ is yours, so long as Christ
knows that you are his, for the foundation of the 2 Timothy 2. 19.
Lord stands sure, the Lord knows who are his. Thus now beloved I have done
with this use that belongs to this examination, both for those that say they
have Christ, when they have not; and also for those that say they have not
Christ when they have.

SERMON, IV.
EPHESIANS. 2. 12. That at that time ye were without Christ, --






outward, all the creatures are armed against thee; and hence it is so often
expressed in Scripture, that the Beast shall be at war with the wicked, but at
peace with the godly: all the creatures are against thee to avenge their
Masters quarrel.

within thee, and there you shall find a galling, an accusing, and a
condemning conscience, haling thee to the judgment seat, and witnessing
against thee, thy conscience shall be like a thousand witnesses, to witness
against thee, and to register and enroll all thy sins till the day of judgment.

upwards into the heavens, and there is nothing but an angry God, a severe
Judge; that has a flame of fire, a furbished sword, and a sharp arrow, and all
against thee, as in Romans 1. 18. The wrath of God is revealed from heaven,
against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men; that hold the truth in
unrighteousness.

downwards, there is death ready to receive you, which is but as a backdoor to
let you into hell, and if you look lower, there is nothing but a dungeon of
darkness, where infernal spirits are reserved in chains of darkness, to the
judgment of the great day. Which way soever a Christlesse man looks there are
nothing but miseries accompany him; if he looks outward, there the creatures
are against him; if he looks inward, there is a galled, and accusing conscience
ready to accuse him; if he look above him, there is an angry God against him;
if he look below him, there is the Devil ready to receive him: a Christlesse
man is in a most sad and doleful condition, as I might exemplify by this
familiar similitude; Suppose a man were falling into a great and dark dungeon,
wherein there were nothing but Toads and Serpents, and all manner of venomous
beasts, and as he were falling in, should catch hold of a twig of a tree that
might grow over the mouth of the dungeon; and then suppose a lean beast should
come and begin to gnaw and bite off that twig, what a miserable case will that
poor man be in? why just so it is with thee oh Christlesse man, thy life in
this twig, and death is the lean beast that is biting off this twig of life,
and then thou failest down into a dungeon of darkness, there is nothing but
the twig of life between thee and hell.

before you, there is nothing but misery likewise approaching thee; and these
are the snares and temptations the Devil lays in thy way to ensnare thee, and
entice thee to sin; there is not a step thou treadest, nor any company thou
go into, but the Devil lays a trap to ensnare thee.

behind you, there is nothing but a huge heap of past sins unrepented of
unsatisfied for, and unpardoned, that are able to sink thee into the
bottomless pit of hell, how then can thou think of thy past sins but with a
sad heart? how dreadful is it to consider how many thousands of sins thou have
been guilty of and yet never have been humbled for them, nor never shed one
penitential tear for them; the guilt of the least of them, being enough to
plunge thee into hell for ever.

right hand, and there are all the blessings of God, all thy fulness and
prosperity; thy riches, and great estate, are all made a curse to thee: God
gives a wicked man riches for his hurt, Eccles. 5. 13. Prosperity shall kill
the soul of the wicked: Oh Christlesse man thy riches and prosperity, are all
instruments and means to further thy everlasting ruin and destruction.

left hand, and there are all the miseries, and afflictions, and sufferings,
and reproaches, and diseases, and sad accidents that you meet with, as so many
forerunners of those unutterable, and untolerable, and unsupportable
sufferings, which a Christlesse man shall undergo to all eternity.

Oh then unhappy man that thou art, that have not an interest in Jesus Christ!
without thee, and within thee; above thee, and below thee; before thee, and
behind thee; on thy right hand, and on thy left, there are nothing but
miseries accompany thee on every side. Thus much for the first positive part,
of the misery of a Christlesse man; it is a very sad point that I am now upon,
and therefore I shall sweeten all in the close, with two or three words of
consolation.

and an universal good in Christ, yet out of Christ, this great God that is so
good and rich in mercy, and free in grace, is clothed with red, and Scarlet;
you that are out of Christ, cannot look upon God, but with dreadful
apprehensions of him: you cannot look upon God, as a God of mercy to pardon
you, but as an angry Judge ready to condemn you, not as a friend that seeks
your welfare, but as an enemy that sets himself in battle array against you to
ruin you: you cannot look upon him as the Rock of Ages, in the clifts whereof
you may find safety, but as a burdensome stone, the weight whereof will beat
you down and grind you to powder: you cannot look upon God as a Refiners fire
to purge away your dross, but as a consuming fire and everlasting burning to
consume you to ashes; these, these are the awakening, and soul-affrightning
apprehensions, which every poor soul that has not an interest in Christ, must
see, the apprehensions of God will be very dreadful to you.

show you your misery in this particular, under these five heads.

Deuteronomy. 28. 17, 18. Cursed shall thou be in the City and cursed shall thou be in
the field; cursed shall thou be in thy basket, and in thy store; cursed shall
thou be in the fruit of thy body, and of thy land, in the increase of thy kine,
and in the flocks of thy sheep; cursed shall thou be when thou go forth, and
cursed when thou come in: and so in Job 20. 15. He shall swallow down riches,
but he shall vomit them up again: and in Eccles. 5. 13 says Solomon, There is
a sore evil which I have seen under the Sun, namely riches kept for the owners
thereof to their hurt.

Job 28. 15. The terrors of God shall dwell in the taberuacles of the wicked,
and brimstone shall be scattered throughout his habitation: and so in that
place I quoted before, Deuteronomy. 28. 19.

Prove. 16. 7. The name of the wicked shall not.

Prove. 21. 4. The ploughing, of the wicked is sin, and in Deuteronomy. 28. 20. The
Lord shall send upon thee cursing, vexation, and rebuke, in all thou set
thy hand unto, for to do.

Job. 20. 23. When he is about to fill his belly, God shall cast the fury of his
wrath upon him, and shall rain it upon him when he is eating; so in Psalm. 38.
30, 31. While the meat was yet intheir months, the wrath of the Lord came upon
them.

1. Joh. 25 5.
then you are without strength, as in Joh. 25. 5. Without me you can de
nothing, says Christ; nay Paul goes further in 2 Cor. 3. 2 Cor. 3. 5.
5. We are of our selves as of our selves, says he, not able to think a good
thought, but all our sufficiency is from God: herein lies the misery of a man
out of Christ, he is able to do nothing, he is like Sampson without his hair,
he that before could break Iron bands like so many straws, now his strength was
no more then another man's: (Beloved) you are very weak indeed, if you want
Christ; in Esai. 45. 54. it is said there, that Christ is made unto a believer,
righteousness and strength; now if you want Christ, you want righteousness by
way of acceptance, and you want strength by way of assistance. But here to
branch out this more particularly, I shall show you in five particulars,
wherein a man without Jesus Christ wants strength.

1. Every man out of Christ, wants 1. Romans 8. 26.
strength to perform any duty, as in Romans 8. 26. We know not what to pray for,
as we ought, we are able to do nothing that is spiritually good of our
selves, all our duties and services, without the righteousness of Christ added
to them, are but like so many ciphers, now you know put 1000. ciphers together,
and they make no sum, but if one figure be prefixed to them, they make an
innumerable number; why so all our duties of themselves are worth nothing, but
then Christ being added to them, that puts an estimate upon them, and makes
them of a considerable value and worth.

able to step one step heavenward; if God should say, I will save thy soul and
give thee heaven, could thou but perform one duty, or exercise one Grace,
thou could not do it, and therefore Christ tells us in Joh. 15. Unless you be
in me, you can bring forth no fruit.

Gal. Gal. 2. 20.
2. 20. says Paul, I have crucified sin, yet not I, but Christ that lives in
me: the messenger of Satan, that was sent to buffet Paul, had prevailed over
him, if Christ had not helped him; you are not able to subdue any lust without
Christ.

4. You are without strength to resist 4. Ephesians. 6. 10.
any temptation; in Ephesians. 6. 10. Paul exhorts them there, to be strong in the
Lord and in the power of his might, not in the power of their own might, for
they were not able to stand of themselves by their own strength, but be strong
in the Lord, and in the power of his might; so David when he came to fight
against great Goliath, had he gone out to meet him in his own strength, he had
been overcome and devoured, but he went against him in the name, and in the
strength of the Lord of hosts.

strength, to bear or undergo any afflictions, every affliction that is but
like a feather, to one that is in Christ, will be like a lump of lead upon
thee; a godly man if he has any way withdrawn himself from Christ's aid and
assistance, a little affliction will sinck him, for, it is given us of God, not
only Phil. 2. 21.
to do but to suffer for his sake, Phil. 2. 21. Intimating, that unless God
does enable us to suffer, we are not able to bear up our spirits under any
affliction. Thus then you see, that if you want an interest in Christ, you want
strength in these five particulars, to perform any duty, to exercise any grace,
to subdue any lust, to resist any temptation, or to bear any affliction; but

Sun of righteousness, take away Christ from a man, and there will no blossoms
of grace bud forth in that man's heart: Adams stock is a barren root, upon which
no branch of grace will spring forth; you can never bring forth any fruit unto
God, unless you be graffed not upon Adams Stock, but upon the Stock of the
root of Jesse; a man during his unconverted estate, he is the Devils slave, and
he never brings forth fruit, till he come to be in Christ; only in and through
Christ, we are enabled to bring forth acceptable fruit unto God.

per annum, yet without Christ thou art poor, and wretched, and miserable, and
blind, and naked, Rev. 3. 17. For it Rev. 3. 17.
is Christ alone that is the repository and storehouse of all wisdom and
knowledge, and all the treasures of it are bound up in him.



If the son make you free, then are you free indeed, Joh. 8. 36. And unless
the Son make you free, you are slaves indeed, slaves to sin, slaves to your
lusts, slaves to the creatures, and slaves to the devil by whom you are taken
captive at his will, you are never free men and women till the Son make you
free.

Ezekiel. Ezekiel. 16. 14.
16. 14. And thy renown went forth among the heathen for thy beauty, for it was
perfect through my comeliness that I had put upon thee, says the Lord God; if
we have not the comeliness of Christ put upon us, we are not comely; you have
a pretty passage in Luke 2. 32. Christ is there called the glory of the
children of Israel, Christ is the glory of the children of Israel that do
believe in him: there is no glory, but a body full of sores and botches, in all
those that are out of Christ.

And thus now (Beloved) I have done with the Doctrinall part of this point,
that every man, during the state of his unregeneracy, is without any actual
interest in Christ: we come now to the application, and here I might say to you
as a learned Author was wont to say, when he had been handling any terrible
subject, and treating upon Doctrines of terror, he would always say in the
close, Oh godly man, this belongs not to thee: so may I say to you, thou godly
soul, this appertains not to thee, the misery and sad condition of a man out of
Christ, belongs not to thee, thou do not now hear the sentence which shall
be passed upon thee, but thou do now hear the misery, that thou art freed
from, and redeemed from: it is Christ's blood only that quenches the fire of
Gods anger. So that now you may look upon God under all these apprehensions of
love and mercy, peace, pardon, and reconciliation, etc. if you have an interest
in Jesus Christ.

Paul said of himself, 2 Cor. 6. 10. As having nothing, 2 Cor. 6. 10.
and yet possessing all things; though thou want many things here below, yet
if thou have an interest in Christ, thou have all things. It may be thou may
eat of the bread of affliction, and drink of the water of adversity, yet happy
art thou, if withal thou can but drink draughts of Christ's blood, if Christ
bids thee eat of his body, and drink of his blood, as in Cant. 5. 8. Eat oh
friends, drink, yea drink abundantly Cant. 5. 1.
oh my beloved. Happy are you that are clothed with the long white robes of
Christ's righteousness: though you have nothing here below, yet you have all
things, in having Christ that has all things, 1 Cor. 3. 22. All is yours, and
you are 1 Cor. 3. 22.
Christ.

Object. But here some may object and say, how can this be, how can it be said
that a believer has all things, when many times he has the least of the
things of this world.

Answ. I answer, a believer may be said to have all things, these four ways:

1. He has all things equivalently. 2. All things conditionally. 3. All things
finally: And, 4. All things inheritively.
equivalently, that is, in having Christ, he has as good as if he had all
things, he has that which is of more worth, then if he had all the World;
that man is not accounted a rich man that has much lumber and household stuff
in his house, but he that has many Jewels in his cabinet: why now Christ he
is the pearl of great price, the jewel of all jewels, in having Christ you
have all things, in regard you have that which is more worth then all things.

conditionally: if such a thing be for thy good that thou desire, thou shall
have it, be it what it will be, as in Psalm. 84. 11. Psalm. 84. 11.
The Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold from
those that live uprightly, he has all things conditionally.

finally, that is, the Lord intended that every creature that he made, might be
for his use, the sun, moon, and stars, and all the other creatures were made
for them, nay and all the Angels in heaven were made to be ministering spirits
to the heirs of salvation.

inheritively, by way of right and inheritance: though he may not have all
things in possession, yet he has all things by way of reversion, he has a
right and claim to every thing, Psalm. 37. 11. The meek shall inherit the earth.
But now it may be I speak to many a poor godly man or woman, and tell them all
is theirs, when it may be they have not a penny to buy bread to put in their
bellies: why yet beloved let me tell you, though you have nothing, yet you have
Christ that is worth all things, though you want other things, yet you do not
want Christ: Beloved, you may want outward blessings, and yet not want Jesus
Christ; you may want food to put in your mouths, and yet not want the bread of
life, the Lord Jesus Christ to feed upon; you may want clothes to cover your
nakedness, and yet not want the long robes of Christ's righteousness to cover
your sinful nakedness; you may want friends to comfort, help, and relieve
you, and yet not want Christ to be your friend.

There is some thing yet behind, by way of Consolation, but I must defer that
till another opportunity.

SERMON, V.
EPHESIANS. 2. 12. That at that time ye were without Christ, --
WE come now to lay down some other things by way of comfort, to those that
have an interest in Christ: and oh that you that are Citizens of Heaven would
read over your large Charter of Mercies, that is sealed to you in the blood of
Christ, read over those many benefits, and comforts that you have by Christ,
that none in the world enjoy, but you only that have an interest in him: I
shall reduce all that I have to say concerning this particular under these 7
heads; you that lay an Seven benefits which the faithful have by Christ.
undoubted claim to Christ, you may lay claim to this sevenfold benefit by him.

as having nothing, yet possessing all things, though you may be without wealth
and riches and Olive yards, yet herein lies your comfort, you are not without
Christ, and in having him you have al things though you have nothing, for all
things are given you, in and through Christ by way of entaile, as in 1 Cor. 3.
22. All things are yours, and ye are 1 Cor. 3. 22.
Christ's.

I shall a little explain this place to you; says the Apostle, Whether Paul or
Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or
things to come, all is yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods: Paul, or
Apollos, or Cephas, (that is) all the Ministers of Christ, if you have an
interest in Christ, Christ has given gifts to his Ministers for your sakes: so
that you may lay claim to all the Ministers of Christ, Paul is yours, and
Apollos is yours, they are yours, because they are your lights, to guide you in
the way to heaven, through the dark wilderness of this world; they are your
Pastors, to feed you with knowledge and understanding, in the Mysteries of
Salvation; they are your Shepherds, to gather you into the fold of Jesus
Christ; they are your builders to hew and square and make you fit for Christ's
spiritual building; they are your con^^ctors or the friends of the
Bridegroom, to make up a complete match between Christ and you; (I speak only
in Scripture phrase) they are your Vine-dressers to prune you, and make you fit
to bring forth fruit unto God: Thus all the gifts of all the Ministers in the
world are intended by Christ for the good of his children; if there were no
godly men in the World, there would be no Ministers in the World, and therefore
these people that will hear only one kind of Ministers, such as they affect,
and slight all else, they straighten their own privileges, for all the
Ministers in the World are given by Christ for the benefit of his children.

Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the World, all is yours: you have a
right to all the World, not only a civil right, but a religious right, The meek
shall inherit the earth. So that if you could go to the top of an exceeding
high Mountain, and look over all the whole World, you may say, Behold, I see
all this is my Fathers ground, and he has given it to Christ, even the heathen
for his inheritance, and Psalm. 2. 8.
the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession, and I having an Interest
in Christ, am thereby a coheire and joint heir with him.

Life is yours likewise; God has given you your lives that in that little
space of time, you might provide for eternity, and labor to know God and
worship him aright.

Death is yours likewise, death is but as it were a lanching of you forth into
an Ocean of endless joys and pleasures, but as a trap-doore to let you into
heaven; if you should never dye you would be but miserable creatures; but God
has appointed death to be a means to let you into Heaven. Whether we live, we
live unto the Romans 14 8.
Lord, or whether we dye, we dye unto the Lord, so that living or dying, we are
the Lords.

Things present are yours, which includes in it, either present mercies, or
present afflictions; 1. present mercies are yours, as having a right to them,
and beholding the goodness of God in them, and praising God for them, and as
serving God with them, and as doing good to others by them. 2. Present
afflictions are yours likewise, to humble your hearts, to wean you from the
world, to quicken your desires after heaven, to purge out your corruptions, and
exercise your graces, and the like; whatsoever present condition thou art in,
that present condition be it what it will be, shall work for thy good.

Things to come are yours too; if afflictions come, or temptations come, or
trouble, or want, or famine, or pestilence, or imprisonments, or any thing
come, they are all yours, they are ordered by Christ to be for your good; and
so if mercy comes, and the blessings of another world, they are all yours,
Heaven and Happiness, and Glory, Life and Salvation are all yours. Here then
(Beloved) you see the first branch of a man's happiness, that has an interest
in Christ, in having Christ he has all things, though he has nothing,
because he has him that has all things: this is the first.



1. If you have an interest in Christ, then Christ's Father is your Father. 2.
Christ's Spirit is your Spirit. 3. Christ's Righteousness is your
Righteousness. 4. Christ's Graces are your Graces. 5. Christ's Peace is your
Peace; And 6. Chr. Sufferings are your Sufferings.
Joh. 20. 17. says Christ, Behold I ascend to my Father and your Father, to my
God and your God; Christ's Father is a Believers Father.

John 14. 8. says Christ, I will pray to my Joh. 14. 8.
Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, which shall abide with you
for ever, even the Spirit of truth, whom the World cannot receive, because it
sees him not, but you see him and know him, for he dwells with you and shall
be in you.

Jer. 23. 6. And this is the name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our
righteousness; So in 1 Cor. 1. 30. Christ is made of 1 Cor. 1. 30.
God unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption.

Joh. 1. Ioh. 1. 14.
14. Christ is full of grace and truth, Why? That out of his fullness we might
all receive grace for grace, that is, for every Grace that is in Jesus Christ,
according to our proportion and capacity we shall receive from him.

Joh. 14. 27. Ioh. 14. 27.
My peace, says Christ, I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, the peace
that we enjoy is from Christ.

more, for our sufferings could not have done it. Thus having an interest in
Christ, all that Christ has is yours.



1. Your sins are Christ's to pardon them, and satisfy Gods justice for them.

2. Your sufferings are Christ's to sanctify them; And

3. Your bodies and souls are Christ's to save them.

Esaias 53. 6. The Lord has laid on him the Iniquity of us Esa. 53. 6.
all, the chastisements of our peace were laid upon him, and by his stripes we
are healed, he bore our sins in his own body on the tree, and to this purpose
the Apostle has an expression in 2 Cor. 5. 21. He was made sin for us, that we
might be the righteousness of God 2 Cor. 5. 21.
in him; Christ was no sinner, but he was made a sinner for us, he bore our
sins upon him, our sins are Christ's to pardon them.

Act. 9. Christ Act. 9. 4.
says to Saul; Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? he looks upon the
injuries and wrongs, that are done to his people, as if they were done to him.

Cor. 6. 15. says the Apostle, shall I take the Members of Christ, and make
them Members of an harlot? God forbid: thy body is Christ's, and thy soul is
Christ's, the Apostle has it in so many express terms, in 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20.
What know you 1 Cor 6. 19, 20.
not (says the Apostle) that your bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost,
which is in you, which you have of God, and you are not your own; for you are
bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your bodies and souls which are
his. Thus you see what a large field of mercy al you that have an interest in
Christ, have here to walk in, you have all things, though you have nothing, all
things equivalently, all things conditionally, all things finally, and all
things inheritively: all the Ministers of Christ are yours, the whole world is
yours, life and death is yours, things present are yours, whether present
afflictions, or present mercies, things to come are yours, whether afflictions,
or temptations, or trouble, or want, or any things; and mercy to come is
yours, as life and Salvation, Heaven and Happiness, all is yours; all that
Christ has is yours, Christ's Father is your Father, his Spirit is your Spirit,
his righteousness is your righteousness, his graces are your graces, his
peace is your peace, and his sufferings are your sufferings; and all that you
have is Christ's, your sins are Christ's to pardon them, and your sufferings
Christ's to sanctify them, and your souls and bodies Christ's to save them: I
might here add one head more, that all your duties and services are Christ's
too, he persumes them with the sweet odor of his merits, and so presents them,
and makes them acceptable to God, hence it is that you read in the Revelation,
that Christ adds his incense to the prayers of all his Saints; and this is a
very great consolation.

Marah, that Christ will be to every sad and dejected soul in every troublesome
condition, the waters of Marah were so exceeding Ex. 15. 25.
bitter none could drink of them, but when the tree was cast into the waters
then they became sweet: Why so it may be thy condition here in this world is as
the waters of Marah, full of bitterness and sorrow, and trouble and affliction,
but now do but cast this tree of life, the Lord Jesus, into these waters, and
then this will convert them from waters of Marah, bitter and troublesome, to be
rivers of joy and streams of comfort. Christ will be to thy soul as the honey
in the Lions belly was to Samson, it became good for food to feed upon; it may
be afflictions and Judge. 14.
troubles may come in upon thee like a roaring Lion, but Christ is as the honey
in this Lion, that sweetens all thy sorrows and makes them advantageous and
comfortable for thee. I might apply to this purpose what an Author observes
concerning the water of the Sea, it is very salt in its self, but when it comes
to run through the bowels of the earth, it then loses its saltness and
becomes pleasant; why so though thy condition here in the world be full of
sharp and sore afflictions, yet when these come to run through Christ, he
sweetens them all unto thee. Great is your comfort in having an interest in
Christ, for this is that which sweetens all the crosses and troubles you meet
withal here in the world: and (Beloved) do but seriously consider of it, and
let me a little reason the case with you, What though thou may feed upon the
bread of sorrow, yet how can thou be uncomfortable, when withal thou feedest
upon the bread of life the Lord Jesus Christ? What though thou may drink the
water of affliction and wine of astonishment, yet how can thou be
uncomfortable, so long as thou do drink drops of Christ's blood? What though
you have not a house to put your head in, yet let this be your comfort, that
you have a house preserved for you, a building not made with hands, eternal in
the heavens: What though you have nothing but a stone for your pillow to lay
your head upon, when every night you lay your head in the bosom of Jesus
Christ? Thus much concerning the fourth consolation.

thee, you are not to look upon God clothed with dread and terror, but with
mercy and compassion; that God that will frown upon thee out of Christ, yet
bring but a Christ in thy arms, and present him to God the Father, and then
he will turn away his anger from thee, and behold thee with a smiling
countenance, thou being in Christ and Christ in thee, and God being well
pleased with his Son, must needs be well pleased with thee too; great is
your benefit by having an interest in Christ; I may say in this case what
Elisha the Prophet said to King Jeroboam, 2 King. 3. 14. Verily, says he,
were it 2 King. 3. 14.
not that I regard the person of Jehosaphat King of Judah, I would not look
toward thee nor see thee; just so does God say to us, were it not for my Son
Jesus Christ, you should never see my face, nor have a good look from me.

Christ, then this is another part of thy comfort, that God the Father does as
truly accept of thee in his Son, as if thou had in thine own person done
and suffered what Christ did, this is a great benefit, God accepts of what
Christ has done for us, as if we had none it our selves, as in Ephesians. 1. 6.
He has made us Ephesians. 1. 6.
accepted in the beloved, that is, in Christ. God looks upon thee in Christ,
and accepts of all thy duties and performances, as well as if thou had prayed
as well as ever Christ prayed, and done and suffered as much as ever Christ did.

Romans 8. 10. (says the Romans 8. 10
Apostle) if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the
Spirit is life because of righteousness. What is the meaning of this, the body
is dead because of sin? the meaning is not, that the body does mortify sin,
but the body is dead because of sin, that is, sin shall bring your bodies to
the grave, but your spirits shall live because of righteousness, (that is) the
righteousness of Jesus Christ; through the righteousness of Christ your souls
shall live for ever in glory with Christ, though your bodies die, and sin bring
them to the grave, yet the killing of your bodies shall but make way for the
living of your spirits; being in Christ here, you shall for ever live with
Christ in glory hereafter, the death of your bodies shall but give you an
entrance into Glory, and therefore why should death be grievous to those that
are in Christ Jesus; for death is but as it were the marriage day wherein
Christ and their souls shall be united together; if Christ be in you, your
bodies shall die because of sin, but your spirits shall live because of
righteousness: You have another pertinent place to prove this in Joh. 17. 23,
24. Ioh. 17. 23, 24.
says Christ there, I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect
in one, and that the world may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them
as thou have loved me; and Father I will, that they also whom thou have given
me be with me where I am, that they may behold my Glory which thou have given
me. Some conceive that this prayer of Christ was made only for the Apostles,
that they might be where Christ was in heaven* but if you mark the precedent
words, you Verse. 20.
shall find that it was for all Believers, for says Christ himself, neither
pray I for these alone, but for all those that shall believe in my Name to the
end of the world. Great is your comfort in having an interest in Christ here,
you shall one day reign with him for ever in Glory.

Thus I have done with these seven consolations to those that have a real and
well grounded interest in Christ, I have only now a word or two, by way of Use
to apply and set home what I have said concerning this particular. what
unspeakable comforts redound to you that have an interest in Christ, you have
all things though you have nothing, Christ is yours, and all that Christ has
is yours, and all that you have is Christ's, Christ sweetens all afflictions and
crosses to you, and the having of Christ represents God the Father to you, not
with terror and dread, but with goodness, and meekness, and
loving-kindnesse, and mercy, and long-suffering, and through Christ God does as
freely accept of you, and of what you do, as if it were done as well as ever
Christ did it, and being in Christ here, you shall for ever live with Christ in
glory hereafter: Oh how should all these mercies and privileges, stir up all
those that have yet no part in Christ, never to give rest to their eyes, nor
slumber to their eyelids till they have gotten an interest in him!

SERMON, VI.
EPHESIANS. 2. 12. That at that time ye were without Christ, --
LEst any of you that hear me this day should lie under a spirit of delusion
and think that all that I have said touching the happiness of those that have
an interest in Christ belongs to them when it does not; I shall therefore spend
this hour in showing you some characters whereby you may know whether you have
a real interest in Christ or no: this is the needfullest point that ever in my
life I pressed upon you, and the Lord give you grace to lay these characters
close to your own hearts, and by them seriously to examine your own souls
whether you have a real interest in Christ or no: but before I give you these
characters, give me leave by the way to premise these three or four Cautions or
cautelary conclusions, which will the better make way to the handling the point
in hand.

Cor. 10. 7. Do you look on things after the outward appearance? (says the
Apostle) 2 Cor. 10. 7.
if any man trust to himself, that he is Christ's, let him of himself think
this again, that as he is Christ's, even so are we Christ's: This is a very
notable place; there were some among the Corinthians that were strongly
conceited they did belong to Christ, when they did not; and had an ill opinion
of the Apostles, and thought they did not belong to Christ; and to such as
these the Apostle Paul here speaks: men may be strongly conceited they have an
interest in Christ, when there is no such matter, as it was with the Church of
Laodioea, in Rev. 3. 17. Thou say I am rich and increased in goods, and have
need of nothing: and know Rev. 3. 17.
not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked.

interest in Christ, for if you have but one of them in you, in truth and
sincerity, it is an evidence that you have an interest in Christ: I give you
this caution for fear of casting down any poor dejected soul; if you have but
one link of this golden chain, you have as sure hold, as if you had all of it.



though not in exercise and practice, it is sufficient to evidence your
interest in Christ. For a poor soul may have many graces of Gods Spirit in
truth in him, though he does not feel, and exercise, and apprehend them in
himself, as I told you it was with Mary Magdalen; she talked to Christ face to
face, and says she, they have Joh. 12.
taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him. And thus I have
done with the cautions, or cautelary conclusions, wherein I have only made way
for my better proceeding, in giving you the several Characters of a man that
has a real interest in Christ, and I wish to God they may be all engraven
upon every one Twelve Characters of a man's interest in Christ.
of your hearts, that you may be unquestionably assured in your own souls, of
your interest in him; I shall reduce all I have to say concerning this
particular under these 12. heads.

Phil. 3. 8, 9. Yea doubtless, Phil. 3. 8. 9.
(says he) I count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of
Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do
count them but dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having on
my own righteousness: Here Paul having won Christ, would not be found, having
on his own righteousness; the Apostle does not mean his own righteousness in
point of being, but in point of dependence, not having on his own
righteousness to be justified by it; in that regard he would not be found
having it on. So in 1 Cor. 4. 4. says the Apostle there, 1 Cor. 4. 4.
I know nothing by my self, now one would think this man were a very holy and
exact man; for says he, I know nothing by my self, that is, I know no sin upon
my soul, that I perform wittingly or willingly: but mark the next words, yet
says he, am I not hereby justified; he was quite out of conceit of all the
good works that ever he did: every man that is in Christ, he is out of himself;
he sees his own in sufficiency, and Christ's all sufficiency; he sees his
emptiness of grace, and Christ's fullness of grace; he sees himself to be
nothing, and Christ to be all in all. Luke 16. 15. Luke 16. 15.
says Christ there to the Pharisees, Ye are they which justify your selves
before men, but God knows your hearts; as if he should have said, you think
well of your selves and of your graces, but God knows your hearts, that you
are not such as you seem to be; and therefore (Beloved) consider seriously of
it, if God has wrought this grace in your hearts, that you are cast out of
your selves to see your own emptiness, and vileness, and insufficiency and
want of Christ, if there be this work of grace wrought in you, then you may
know you have a real part and portion in Jesus Christ.

Joh. 1 John 2. 5.
2. 5. Whosoever keeps his word, in him verily is the love of God perfected,
hereby know we that we are in him: hereby we know that we are in Christ, if we
keep every known command of Christ, and therefore you that can appeal to
heaven, that there is no one known command of Christ, but bears sway in your
heart, and carries an authority over your conscience, that you can subject your
selves to it, although you have many weaknesses and failings, yet this is an
undoubted character that you are in Christ: as in 1 John 3. 22. If that
therefore (says the Apostle) that you have heard from the beginning, shall
remain in the you, you also shall continue in the Son and in Father. You that
keep every known command of Christ, have an interest in him, and he in you; and
therefore (beloved) all you that do make conscience of keeping the known and
revealed will of God, that there is no known sin but you labor to avoid, and no
known grace but you labor to exercise, and no known duty, but you labor to
perform; if it be thus with you, you may comfort your selves in this, that you
have a real interest in Christ.

Gal. 5. 24. They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections
and lusts; when Christ came in the flesh amongst us we crucified him, but if
ever Christ come in thy heart, he will crucify thee; the crucifying of the
flesh with the affections and lusts that the Apostle here speaks of, is not the
killing and total extirpation of sin, but the giving a deadly blow to sin,
that sin shall never reign in us, nor have dominion over us any more; if you be
in Christ, sin will be like those beasts spoken of in Daniel, their dominion
was taken away, but their lives were preserved for a little season; so the
dominion of sin will be taken away, that sin shall not reign in you, yet the life
and being of sin will remain in you for a little season: but still as the house
of Saul grew weaker 2 Samuel 3. 1.
and weaker, when the house of David grew stronger and stronger, so if Christ
dwell in thy heart, sin in thy soul will every day grow weaker and weaker, and
grace in thy heart will grow stronger and stronger; and therefore Beloved, all
you whose hearts can bear you witness, that you have had the power of
mortifying grace upon your souls, that you can bridle your beloved lusts, and
subdue your bosom sins, and curb the pride of your hearts; you may then lay an
undoubted claim to Jesus Christ.

We know that 1 Ioh. 5. 18, 19, 20.
whosoever is born of God sins not, but he that is begotten of God keeps
himself, and that wicked one touches him not; He that is begotten of God
keeps himself, he does not keep himself from all sin, but he does as much as
in him lies resist every sin, and temptation; he keeps himself from every
known sin: so in 1 John 3. 6. Whosoever 1 Ioh. 3. 6
abides in God sins not: this is not spoken absolutely, but comparatively,
he sins not in comparison of those great sins that wicked men do commit, for
they are slaves to their lusts: and secondly he sins not, that is
deliberately, neither with a delightful complacency, nor with a total
obduracy, nor in a way of final impenitency: in these regards a man in Christ
sins not. And now beloved, you whose hearts and consciences can bear you
witness that you do keep a strict watch over your own souls, and that you
have a care of committing the least sin against God, whereby you might dishonor
him; if it be thus with you, you have an infallible evidence of your interest
in Christ: that man that keeps sin out of his heart, may be confidently
assured, he has Christ in his heart.

Cor. 5. 17. says the Apostle, If any man be 2 Cor. 5. 17.
in Christ, he is a new creature, old things are past away, and all things are
become new: why now (beloved) take this text and lay it close to your hearts;
has God made you new creatures, and wrought a saving change in your heart? can
you evidence it to your own souls, that ever since you were first born, you
were new born? if it be so, you may lay a confident claim to Jesus Christ; if
any man be in Christ, he is a new creature.

Christ, and increasing in Christ with the increase of God. Jesus Christ is the
root of Jesse, in whom whosoever is rooted and ingraffed, he will bring forth
fruit unto God: whosoever is ingraffed into Christ, he will bring forth the
fruits of righteousness to the praise and glory of God. Joh. 15. 5. I am the
Joh. 15. 5.
vine (says Christ) and you are the branches, he that abides in me and I in
him, the same brings forth much fruit; for without me you can do nothing: why
now beloved, you that make it out to your own souls, that you do grow in grace,
and knowledge, and understanding, and in the duties of sanctification,
humiliation, and mortification, this is a sure argument that you are planted
into that root of Jesse, that makes you to bring forth fruit unto God.

Paul's description of a man in Christ, 2 Cor. 12. 2. I knew a man in Christ
(says he) above 14. years ago, whether in the body, or out of the body, I
cannot tell, God knows, such a man caught up into Paradise, and heard
unspeakable things, which is not lawful for a man to utter, of such a one will
I glory, yet of my self I will not glory, but in my infirmities. Here Paul
speaking of himself, would not boast of what good either he had or did, or of
what glory he beheld, left men should think of him above that which is meet;
this is the badge of a man in Christ, he is most humble in his own eyes As
those vessels that are fullest, sound the least, whereas those that are empty,
make the greatest noise; why so, those Christians that are full of grace, and
have Christ dwelling in them, walk the humblest, and make the least noise; when
those that are out of Christ, and empty of all grace and goodness, keep the
greatest boasting of all; As the shallow rivers make the greatest noise, in
running over the peble-stones, when the deeper streams glide away silently; so
shallow brains, that know very little or nothing as they ought to know, make
the greatest show, of what they seem to have, when others that know more and
are deeper learned are silent. It is very remarkable, what one observes
concerning the Prophet Ezekiel, a very holy man, and much conversant with
visions, and revelations, yet this man that was full of so many admirable
parts, and gifts, and graces, the holy Ghost does no less then 93. times in
that Prophecy, call by the name of the Son of man, which was (says he) to
keep him humble, and abate pride in his heart, and to show that where there is
most of Christ and grace in the heart, that man should be most humble and vile
in his own eyes.

Col. 2. 6. As you have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk you
in him, rooted and built up in him, that is, according to those beginnings you
have made, and those Gospel-discoveries, God has given you, and that
entertainment you have already given to Christ Jesus the Lord, so now it
becomes you to make a suitable progress, as truly, and really, and purely, as
you have received him; so let it be your every days work to be making
progress in him, and to walk worthy of him, so in the 1. Epistle of 1 Ioh. 2.
6.
Joh. He that says he abides in him, ought himself so also to walk, even as
he walked: Hence it is that you find in Scripture, that being in Christ, and
living a godly life, are both joined together; as 2 Timothy 3. 12. All that will
live godly in Christ Jesus: that man whose person is in Christ, will labor
that his ways may be in Christ too; many a one would gladly have his person in
Christ, though his life be not in Christ, but those whose persons and ways are
both in Christ, they may lay a comfortable claim to him; the difference between
a man that has an interest in Christ, and one that has none, I shall
demonstrate to you by this familiar example: you know, a man that by experience
knows what it is to make clean a room, he will be careful that he does not
upon every slight occasion, dirt it again, because he knows, what a deal of
pains and labor is taking in cleansing of it; but now a dog or a spaniell he
comes in and never cares for dirting of it, because he does not know what it is
to make it clean; why so a godly man, he will be careful of walking worthy of
his interest in Christ, because he knows how much it cost him, how many tears,
and sighs, and groans, and prayers, before he got an interest in Christ, and an
assurance of his love; but now a wicked man, he makes no conscience of sinning
against Christ, and displeasing of him, because he never knew what it was to
get an interest in him. In Gal. 3. 21. says the Apostle there, as many as have
Christ, they have put on Christ; and a very learned interpreter has an
exceeding good note upon this text; he says that this speech of the Apostle
here, is spoken in an allusion to an ancient custom among the heathens, that
when they came to the profession of the Faith, they were wont always between
Easter and Whitsuntide to put off their old garments, and put on white
rayments; the end of it was to typifie and note, that when once they were in
Christ, they must leave off their old courses and conversations, and now labor
to walk after a more holy, and blameless, and innocent life, in their
carriages toward God: thus (beloved) if you have an interest in Christ, you
have put on Christ, walking worthy of him, in a holy, pure, spotless, and
unblameable life and conversation.

Pet. 2. 7. the Apostle after he had told them, of their being built upon
Christ, as lively stones upon the foundation; he concludes, to you therefore
which believe Christ is precious; intimating, that whosoever is founded and
bottomed upon Christ, Christ is very precious to that soul, and therefore you
(beloved) that have a sure testimony in your own consciences, that you do set
a high price and value, and esteem upon Christ, above all things in the world,
and that you count all other things as dross and dung, in comparison of an
interest in Christ, this is a very good and undoubted evidence that you have an
interest in him. It was an excellent speech of one concerning his interest in
Christ; says he, if all the stones in my house were Diamonds, and all the dust
in my house shavings of gold, and every peble stone, an orient pearl, yet would
I not prize nor value these in comparison of my interest in Christ.

Joh. 4. 13. Hereby we know 1 Ioh. 4. 13.
that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit, he
conveyes his Spirit through the golden conduit-pipes of his ordinances, into
thy heart; this is a sure evidence to thee of thy interest in Christ, if thou
have the Spirit of Christ dwelling in thee, in this threefold operation of it:
1. If thou have the inlightning work of the Spirit to inlighten thy mind to
know Christ: 2. If you have the inclining work of the Spirit to incline thy
heart to love Christ: and 3. If you have the enforcing operation of the Spirit
to empower your wills to obey Christ; if you enjoy the spirit of God in these 3
operations of it, then you may certainly know, that you have an interest in
Christ.

Paul before he was in Christ, did labor to drive men from Christ, but
afterward, when he was converted, then he did labor to draw men to Christ
more abundantly then all the rest of the Apostles; Oh (beloved) you that can
compassionate poor souls in their natural condition; and can heartily wish all
men to be in Christ, as well as your selves; you that can bemoan the
Christlesse condition of your friends and neighbors, this is a very evident
discovery of your interest in Christ.

Thus I have done with these several characters of a man that is in Christ; if
thou art cast out of thy self, and out of an opinion of thy own goodness and
righteousness; if thou make conscience of keeping every known command of
Christ, and have a power derived from Christ enabling thee to mortify thy
bosom and inward lusts; if you have a care to avoid every sin whereby you
might dishonor Christ; if there be a real change wrought in you both in heart
and life, from nature to grace; if you grow up in Christ to be fruitful in
every good work, and are humble and base, and vile In your own eyes; if you
labor to walk worthy of your interest in Christ, prizing him, and valuing him
above all the desirable things in the world; if the spirit of Christ dwells in
you, inlightning your minds to know him, inclining your hearts to love him,
and empowering your wills to obey him: and lastly, if you have in you ardent
desires, and earnest endeavors to win others to Christ, as well as your
selves; if you can find any one of these in truth and sincerity in your
hearts, it will be a very good evidence to you of your interest in Christ.

I have only a word or two more, to those that upon examination do really
find themselves to be in a condition without Jesus Christ; let me leave with
you these two or three discoveries of your sad condition, to quicken you the
more earnestly in your pursuits after him.

Solomon says is verified in you, that your eye shall not be satisfied Eccles.
1. 8.
with seeing, nor your ear with hearing, nothing without Jesus Christ, can give
satisfaction to the demands of an immortal soul, the world being round, and
your hearts triangular, and you know it is impossible that a round thing should
fill that which is three square: so neither is it possible that the world or
any thing in it should satisfy the desires of your hearts.

Joseph did to his brethren, if you bring Genesis 43. 5.
not up you brother Benjamin with you, look me not in the face: so will God say
to you, if you bring not Jesus Christ, your elder brother with you, do not
look me in the face; here is the misery of a Christlesse man, he can have no
acceptance with God.

Joh. 17. 12. Those that thou Joh. 17. 12.
have given me, I have kept and none of them is lost: if you are without
Christ, your condition is like those that were in the old world before the
flood; all that were in the Arc were saved and preserved, but all that were
out of the Arc were drowned; so Jesus Christ is the Arc whereinto every soul
that can procure admittance shall be saved, but all that are not in Christ,
shall be drowned in a river of brimstone, which the breath of the Lord shall
kindle, you shall be condemned and destroyed for ever, if you are without
Christ, you are without satisfaction from the creature, without acceptance
with God, and without salvation by Christ.

And thus in these six Sermons I have showed you the happiness of a man in
Christ; and the Characters of a man in Christ; and the misery of a man without
Christ; and so I have done with this first part of man's misery by nature, and
of the first branch of the Text, That at that time you were without Christ.

SERMON, VII.
EPHESIANS. 2. 12. -- Being aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel --
Being Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, but before I fall opon this
second branch of the Text, I shall speak something to you, concerning the order
of the words, why their being without Christ, is put in the first place: I
answer, it is put in the first place to show that as the having of Christ is
the foundation; and inlet of all happiness and blessedness; so the want of an
interest in Christ is the Spring and Fountain from whence all the miseries and
calamities that are incident to the children of men do flow, and therefore
this deservedly is put in the first place, for if you are without Christ, you
must needs be Aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to the
Covenant of Promise, without hope, and without God in the World.

But then again why is their being aliens to the commonwealth of Israel put in
the second place? Answ. Because he that is without Christ the head, must needs
be without the church the body, for by the commonwealth of Israel, is meant the
whole body of the Church, they were aliens from the commonwealth of Israel,
that is, this was the misery of the Ephesians, while they were in a state of
Gentilism, not converted to the Faith of Christ, by the Gospel, they had no
interest in the benefits and privileges that the people of God enjoyed that
were in the Church of Israel, they had none of those spiritual and special
privileges and blessings, which God did bestow upon all those that were in
Covenant with him, they were aliens to the commonwealth of Israel, that is,
they were aliens to the Ordinances of God, that were then in use in the Jewish
Church, they were without all the Ordinances of Jesus Christ. All the
privileges of the people of God, did the Gentiles want, before they were in
Christ. Here then you see the complete misery of those that were in a state of
Gentilism, they were aliens to the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to the
Divine Worship of God, which he did institute and appoint in his Church, and to
all the privileges and prerogatives which the people of God do enjoy.

In the words there are two parts observable: Commonwealth, the Church of God
is called the Commonwealth of Israel.

Ephesians, before conversion, from this Church, from this Commonwealth.

Now (Beloved) from hence I shall only note to you, these two observations,
which I intend to finish this Sermon.

Doctr. 1. That the Church of God is a spiritual commonwealth.

Doctr. 2. That it is a great part of a man's misery to be a stranger to the
true Church of God.





and qualities, some are rich, some poor, some high, some low, some masters,
some servants, and the like; now in this regard, the Church may be compared to
a Commonwealth, for in the Church of God some are high, some low, some rich,
some poor, some men grown up to a full stature in Christ, others are but new
beginners and babes in Christ; some men are rich in gifts, when others are but
poor and mean; some are strong in grace, like the Oak, when others are but
like a broken reed. As in a Commonwealth, so in the Church of God, there are
men of several ranks, degrees, callings, qualities, and conditions, as in 1
Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10. All men have 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10.
not the same manner of gifts, for to one is given the word of wisdom, to
another the word of knowledge, to another Faith, to another the gifts of
healing, to another the works of miracles, to another prophecy, to another
discerning of spirits, and to another the interpretation of tongues, but all
these works that one and the same spirit, dividing to every man severally as
he will: as it is in the natural body, so it is in the spiritual body, that
body would be a monstrous body, if the thumb were as big as the arm, and the
arm as big as the body, and every part as big as the whole; just so it is in
the Church, it is the beauty of it, to have a variety of condition.

there be multitudes of people, yet they are all governed by one and the same
Laws, and are all subjects to one and the same Rulers: so it is in the Church
of God, though there be many people in it, yet they are all subject to the same
Laws, and are all to walk by the same rule; and in this regard it may be
compared to a Commonwealth, for there is but one rule, the word of God, that
swayes the whole Church.

Revel. 22. 18, 19.
from the Word, God will blot his name out of the Book of life.

the Church of God is distinguished from all other parts, and people of the
World, Commonwealths are different one from another in four things. 1. in Laws;
2. in habit; 3. in language; 4. in Government; and so is the Church of God.



Canaan, but all the World besides speaks a broken and corrupt language.









the Law is spiritual, but Romans 7. 14
I am carnal.



law grievous or burdensome to the Kingdom, they may alter it, or take it
away, and add a new Law in the room of it, but this the Church of God cannot
do, the law that the Church has now, it must have to the end of the world,
God himself gave the Law to his Church, and he cannot give a prejudicial or
burdensome law, whereas Rulers of Commonwealths, they are but men, and cannot
look into the events of things; and therefore are ignorant whether this or that
law may be good or no, and therefore do change them at their pleasure when
they see a necessity; but the rule of the Word of God is an unerring and
unalterable rule, which all must follow and practice to the end of the World.

likewise that do cry out against Church Government, as tyrannical, do very
much mistake, for the Church of God their censure is not corporeal but
spiritual. But though the Church may not censure any man that is an offender,
yet she may complain to the Commonwealth, and they may restrain and quell them
and keep them under, and inflict punishments upon them.

Thus then you see both wherein a Church and a Commonwealth do agree, and
wherein they difler, and if this be so that the Church of God is a spiritual
Commonwealth, then give me leave to draw these three Inferences from hence.

Psalm. 11. 3. If the Psalm. 11. 3.
foundations be destroyed, what shall the righteous do? If the Laws and
foundations of a Commonwealth be subverted and destroyed, there will be nothing
but ruin. If the Church be a spiritual Commonwealth, then there is an
absolute necessity of a Government in it; and therefore those that would either
rob the Church of their Government, and would have none at all, or else would
introduce a false Government upon the Church, and do as much as in them lies
to overthrow the Government of the Church, such as these are to be reproved.
Government to a commonwealth is like a hedge to a garden, now suppose you had a
very fair garden, and a great many curious flowers and fine slips in it, and
one should come to you and tell you, Sir, I see many dainty flowers and slips
in your garden, but I see none to grow upon your hedge, therefore pull it down,
let it grow there no longer; you would say to such a man, no by no means, for
though nothing grows upon the hedge, yet the hedge does preserve the flowers,
that grow in the garden, and keep them from the violences of wild beasts: So
though a Government in the Church does not make us holy, a man may go to
heaven without a Government, yet is it exceeding necessary to preserve the
Church of God.

are the sinews and ligaments of a commonwealth, if men be disunited, and
disjointed, that commonwealth cannot subsist, A Kingdom divided against it
self cannot Mat. 12. 25
stand, and the Church of God being a spiritual commonwealth, this argues the
great necessity of unity in the Church, and the great danger of division, the
Church of God cannot be safe without union. I must tell you (to the grief of
our hearts be it spoken) there were never less unity in the Church of God,
since the very first plantation of it, by the Apostles in the Primitive times,
then there is at this day, wherein every man almost is set one against another;
truly I look upon it, as a very sad Omen and prediction, that God is bringing
in upon us the most dismal persecution that ever yet our eyes beheld. I have
read in the book of Martyrs, that the coming in of the eighth persecution, was
occasioned by the division and falling out of Christians one with another; I
wish it may not be so with us (Beloved) it is ordinary amongst a great many men
to cry out and exclaim against the Ministers of the Gospel, as if they were the
great incendiaries and causers of divisions and dissensions amongst you, but I
would have you know that those that preach against division, are not dividers,
but those that make divisions they are dividers, as the Apostle says, Mark
them that cause divisions among you, and avoid them, those men that have caused
divisions, and brought in strange opinions, and Sects, and schisms into the
land, they are the make-bates of the Nation; the staff of Union and the staff
of Beauty, when one is broken, the other is broken. I have read a story of a
man that had fourscore children, and lying upon his death bed, he caused his
children to come before him, and desired that a bundle of small rods might be
brought to him, his children began to wonder amongst themselves, what should be
his design and purpose in doing it, but when they had brought them, their
Father commands every one of his sons beginning from the youngest to the
eldest, to take the bundle, and try which of them could break it, but none of
them was found able to do it: at last taking the bundle himself he unbound it,
breaking the sticks one by one, til he had broken them all, and now my children
says he, this I do to teach you, that if you do combine and keep close
together in unity like a bundle of sticks, there is none will be able to break
you, or do you any harm, but if you divide and fall off one from another, you
will soon be ruined, and broken in pieces: why, so now if the members of the
Church of God would unite together and partake of public Ordinances together,
hear, pray, and perform holy duties together, and still remain conjoined in
one, we need not fear the power or policy of any, to do us any harm.



That it is a great misery for a man to be a stranger to the true Churches of
God. You may be in the true Church, and yet not of the true Church; as ill
humors in a man's body, they are in the body, though none of the constituent
parts of the body: so you may be in the Church, and of the Church visible too,
and yet none of the Members of the Church invisible, of the Church of the first
borne, you may not partake of the special and spiritual privileges of the
Church of God.

Pet. 2. 1 Pet. 2.
You (says the Apostle) are called with a holy calling, which wicked men are
without.







England, and yet notwithstanding unable to give any ground of his Salvation by
Christ, thou may have the Church of England to be thy Mother, and yet never
have God to be thy Father. I do not speak this to the disparagement of the
Church of England, for Christ and Salvation by him is to be had in England as
well as elsewhere, I would not have you think that England is no true Church,
for it is a Church of Jesus Christ, but I say you may be of this Church and
borne and bred in this Church and partake of all the Ordinances and outward
privileges in this Church, and yet never come to heaven, for (as the Apostlt
says) all are not Israel that are of Israel.

wenne, a botch, or blaine is in the body, you are a blemish to the Church of
God, wicked men are spots and blemishes in the Church, as in 2 Pet. 2. 13.
though they are in 2 Pet. 2. 13
the Church, yet they are a burden to the Church, and I wish that godly men did
count it a greater burden to them then they do, that they have so many wicked
men in their Church; A wicked man in the Church, is like a wooden leg to the
body of a man, a natural leg that carries the body, but if a man has a
wooden leg, the body must carry it; so wicked men are a great burden and
trouble to the Church, as Paul says (speaking of wicked men) I wish (says he)
they were even cut off that trouble you, such men as are loose in practice, and
loose in opinion, truly both these have been great burdens and troublers to the
Church of God; they are to the Church, as Jonah was to the ship, what a storm
have they raised in this kingdom! which God knows, whether you or I shall
ever live to see it blown over. Thus much for the second part of Man's misery by
Nature, That at that time ye were aliens to the Common wealth of Israel.

SERMON, VIII.
EPHESIANS. 2. 12. -- And strangers to the Covenants of Promise --
And strangers to the Covenant of Promise, but before I shall draw out any
Doctrines from these words, I shall resolve these five questions which are very
needful to be discussed.

Covenants and the Promise? For many look upon them to be both one and the same
thing.

Covenants of Promise.

the Covenants of Promise.

the Covenants of Promise.

a stranger to the Covenants of Promise.

Quest. What is the difference between a covenant and a promise?

Answ. In answer to this, you must know, that though every Covenant is a
promise, yet every promise is not a Covenant, a Covenant is a more
comprehensive thing then a promise, for a Covenant is nothing but a bundle of
promises, all the promises in the Gospel bound up together in a bundle, so
that herein you see the difference between a Covenant and a Promise.

the Covenants of Promise?

Adam after the fall, and with the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and
all the faithful, wherein he promised them Salvation and eternal life,
through Christ, which was to come, this is the Covenant of Promise, even the
promise which God made with his children, before the coming of Christ, wherein
he did covenant to give them life and salvation, through Christ which was
promised to come.

the covenants of promise?

Answ. It is called so, because Christ the matter of this Covenant was not
actually come, but only promised that he should come, that is the reason of
this phrase here [the covenant of Promise].

the Covenants of Promise, seeing there was but one Covenant of Grace, the
Covevenant of Works was made to Adam before the fall, and the Covenant of Grace
after the fall?

Answ. It is called the Covenants of Promise, not as if there were several
kinds of Covenants, and of Salvation by Christ, but because there were diverse
exhibitions and administrations of this one Covenant; not as if this Covenant
were many in kind and substance, for it is the same now that it was at the
beginning, but only it was diversely administered, explained and enlarged;
sometime it is called a new Covenant, that is, new in regard of the urging, and
exhibition of it: the like phrase you have touching Love, Behold, a new command
1 John
I give unto you, that you love one another, it was called new, because it was
then newly enforced upon the people: The Covenant of Grace, the tenor of which
is, that we shall have life and salvation through the blood of Christ, it is
called Covenants, because it was so often renewed and administered, first it was
made to Adam after his fall, The seed Genesis 3. 15.
of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head, and then it was renewed to
Abraham, Paul explains it in Heb. 3. and after him, to Heb. 3.
Isaac, and then to Jacob, and David, and Solomon, and all the faithful, but
the Covenant was still for substance the same, though it was many times
renewed, and so it continues the same to this very day, thus you have a brief
account of these four Queries.

a stranger to the Covenants of Promise?

Answ. Did you but dive and look into the bottom of it, you would find it to
be the final upshot of the misery of an unconverted man; to be a stranger to
the Covenants of Promise, is to be in such a dismal and lamentable and
deplorable condition, as that none of all the promises of God, for Grace, and
life, and Salvation by Christ, does appertain to him: and is not this a very
miserable and sad condition, that the Lord looks upon a man in an unregenerate
estate, as incapable of any mercy, life or salvation by Christ? A Covenant (as
I told you) is a bundle of promises, it contains all the promises of Grace,
life, and salvation, now if you be without the Covenant, you must needs be
destitute of all the promises by Christ.

Thus having by way of premise opened these five particulars, I shall now draw
out this one Observation from the words.

That all men during the time of their unregenoracy, are strangers to the
Covenants of Grace, so that they can lay no just claim to any promise of having
life and Salvation by Christ; you are strangers to the Covenants of promise;
and (Beloved) when I tell you, that you have no title to any one promise of
life or Salvation by Christ, it is the saddest news that ever you can open your
ears to hear; if you are a stranger to the Covenant you are without all the
promises, for the covenant is a bundle of promises, all the promises of God
bound up together; In the handling of this point I shall only show you two
things, and then apply it.

1. I shall show you what the Covenant of Grace is.

2. How you may know whether you are men without the Covenant of Grace, yea or
no, and can lay no just claim to any promise of life and Salvation by Christ.

3. I shall wind up all in a practical use, both for consolation to those,
that are in the Covenant, and for terror to those that have no right to the
Covenant.

Adam after the fall, promising him pardon of sin and eternal life, through
the righteousness of Jesus Christ. This is the sum and substance of the
Covenant of grace, it is the promise of God first made to Adam, and then
renewed to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, David and Solomon, and all the faithful,
it is the solemn promise that God made to the Elect of their obtaining
Salvation through the righteousness of Jesus Christ: Now here you must be very
careful lest you run into a mistake, for there are two sorts of people that run
into very dangerous errors concerning this particular: As

Socinians, that are of an opinion, that all the Patriarchs and good men in the
old Testament did none of them go to heaven, till Christ came in the flesh; a
very uncharitable and ungodly opinion; And

Moses, is to tie the people to the Covenant of Works, to be justified by it,
they hold the Jews did not live under a Covenant of Grace till Christ came, but
if it were so, none of them could possibly be saved, for by the works of Law
shall no flesh living be justified, no man in the World can ever go to heaven
by the Covenant of Works. This I do only mention by the way, that you may see
and understand, that since the fall of Adam, al men are saved by the Covenant of
Grace, the Covenant of Works was no longer in force then while Adam lived and
continued in Innocence, but as soon as ever he fell, the Gospel was presently
preached unto them, as well as it is to us now, only it was preached unto them
more darkly, and to us more clearly; Christ was preached unto them as to come,
but he is preached unto us as come already.



and you will be so still, you have no interest in the Covenant of Grace.

2. You that think to be saved by a Covenant of works, cannot be under a
covenant of grace, You that hope to be justified by Works, Gal. 5. 4.
are fallen from Grace, as the Apostle says in Gal. 5 4. you are fallen from Grace,
that is, not that you are fallen from the habit of Grace, you are fallen from the
Doctrine of Grace, that holds out justification by Christ, that man shall never
be saved by Christ that thinks he cannot be saved by Christ; and therefore a
Papist, living and dying in this very opinion that he must be saved by a
Covenant of works, cannot be saved; if you be not cast out of your selves, so
as to rely wholly and only upon Christ for life and Salvation, you can lay no
just claim of being under the Covenant of Grace.

worse then ever you were, this argues, that you have no interest at all in the
Covenant of Grace.

Thus I have done with the second Query, the discoveries of those that are not
in the Covenant of Grace; I have only now the Application of the point to
speak to, and the Use that I shall make of it shall be

The great happiness in being under a Covenant of Grace.
lend me your thoughts a little, while I show you in fourteen particulars, the
great happiness you are now in, being in Covenant with God under a Covenant of
Grace, from the misery you had lain under, in being only under a Covenant of
Works, Do this and live, I shall but only name them to you, and run over them
very briefly.

Covenant of Works was given by God to Adam, as a Creator, but the Covenant of
Grace is given by God to a Believer, as a Father; God had not this term of a
Father before the fall, but only of a God and Creator, but being under a
covenant of Grace, you may look upon that God that was only a Creator to Adam,
as a Father to you.

perfect obedience, and does punish the offendour in case of disobedience: but
being under a Covenant of Grace, the Lord accepts through Christ of sincere
obedience, though it be not perfect.

personal; it must not be perfect, done for thee by another, but done by thy
self in thy own person; but now the Conant of Grace, accepts of perfect
obedience, though it be not done by thy self, but in the person of Jesus
Christ; God the Father does as fully accept of Christ obeying and fulfilling
his will in doing and suffering in our behalf, as if we had done and suffered
what he did in our own persons, and herein lies the great happiness of a man
under the Covenant of Grace.

by God to Adam without a Mediator, there was no third person between God and
Adam, but the covenant of Grace was made by God with us, in the hand of a
Mediator Jesus Christ. You may conceive it thus, suppose two men should be at
discord and variance one with another, and a third person a friend to both
these that are fallen out, should come and endeavor to decide the difference,
first going to one and desiring him to be reconciled to the other; and then
going to the second, and entreating him to be pacified toward the first, till
he has united and reconciled them both together; so it is here, Christ is a
friend both to God and man, he is the Son of God, and he is husband of his
Church, and being the Mediator of the new covenant, he comes first to his
Father, and says, Father I know, that all mankind has broken that first
covenant which they made with thee, and are thereby justly liable to all that
wrath and punishment due to the breach of it, and I know thy anger and
displeasure against them, but I pray thee oh Father, be reconciled and well
pleased with thy people, give them the sanctification of their Natures, while
they live here, and give them heaven and happiness when they dye; and then
Christ comes to Believers, and tells them; Sirs, I have procured peace, and
pardon, and reconciliation for you, the sanctification of your Natures here,
and heaven when you dye, and therefore lift up your heads with joy; Christ
first goes to his Father, and sues to him for pardon, and then comes to us, and
begs of us to be comforted.

Adam under the Covenant of Works he had nothing but Works to save him, and he
was to keep this Covenant of Works only by his own strength, he had no strength
but his own, to perform any duty, he had no bottom, no foundation, but
himself to stand on; but under the Covenant of Grace we are kept by the mighty
power of God through Faith unto Salvation; we are under a far better condition
under the Covenant of Grace, then Adam was at first, in the State of innocence,
for though he was perfectly holy, yet he was not immutably holy, but now the
foundation of God stands sure, we are kept by the mighty power of God unto
Salvation.

admit of no repentance; had Adam and Eve after the fall, wept their eyes out,
or prayed their hearts out, all would have done them no good; repentance will
no way avail the Covenant of Works; as it is in the civil Law, if a man has
committed murder, the Law does not enquire whether the man does repent, or is
sorry for what he has done, no, but the Law takes notice whether he has done
the fact, or no, if he has, he must dye, no repentance will avail; but in the
Covenant of Grace it is far otherwise, for though you have done the fact, and
broken Gods Commandemants, yet if you repent, and mourn, and grieve for the
sins you have committed against God, the Lord will pardon and forgive them, as
if they had never been committed, so that this is another great happiness you
enjoy in being under the Covenant of Grace.

Adam being under the Covenant of Works, God took the very first forfeiture of
breaking of this Covenant, and one sin made God to disanul that covenant,
whereas the Covenant of Grace is not made void nor disanul'd although you
commit many sins: as you may see in To. 5. 16, 17. says the Apostle there, Not
as it was by one that sinned so is the gift, for the judgment was by one to
condemnation, but the free gift is of many offenses unto justification, that
is, under the Covenant of Works, there one sin did condemn all the world, but
being under the Covenant of Grace there the free gift is of many offenses unto
justification, many sins are pardoned and many offenses are passed over, the
Covenant of Grace pardons many sins and over looks many weaknesses and
failings, though you break your Covenant often, time after time, yet the
Covenant of Grace shall not be broken, the first Covenant was disanuld for one
sin, but the second Covenant shall not be disanuld for many sins, as you may
see in Psalm. 89. 31, 32, 33. says God there, If they break my statutes, Psalm.
89. 31, 32, 33.
and keep not my Commandments, then will I visit their transgressions with the
rod, and their iniquity with stripes, nevertheless my loving kindness will I
not uttery take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail, my Covenant will
I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips, and so in Psalm.
11. 5. The Lord will ever be Psalm. 11. 5.
mindful of his Covenant: so that this is another part of your happiness.

Adam continued still under the Covenant of Works, and kept the Covenant,
performing exact and perfect obedience to it, yet he could never have come to
heaven, he should have had only an ever lasting continuance in Paradise, he
should never have enjoyed heaven, but being under the Covenant of Grace, that
entitles you to everlasting Salvation and happiness in heaven, by Jesus Christ.

life to Adam, upon the performing of the Covenant, yet God did not promise
pardon to Adam upon the breach of the Covenant; God promised him thus, Do this
and thou shall live, but God did not promise him, that though he should break
his commands and sin against him, yet he should be saved notwithstanding: in
the Covenant of works, there is no promise at all of pardon, but only of life;
but under the Covenant of Grace you have a double promise. 1. You shall obtain
life eternal, and Salvation by Christ: And 2. you shall have all your sins
pardoned and washed away in the blood of Christ, that you do commit against
him, you shall have pardon and remission of sins by Christ, so that no sin
shall be charged upon you.

person for the workesake, but under the Covenant of Grace, he does accept of
the Work for the persons sake: and herein lies our happiness, under the
Covenant of Works God did accept of Adams person merely because his works were
altogether righteous and good, and he accepted his person no longer then his
works were good, for as soon as ever he broke the command, God was displeased
with him, but under the Covenant of Grace God does accept of the works for the
person sake; as you see in Abel, he was first accepted, and then the sacrifice,
first his person was well pleasing to God, and then the sacrifice for the
persons sake: so God accepts of our praying, reading, hearing, and all that we
do through Jesus Christ, he being well pleased with our persons in Christ, he
is delighted and well pleased with all our services in him.

all men generally and universally without exception, but the covenant of grace
was made only to a select and chosen people: all mankind were in Adam under a
Covenant of Works, if Adam had kept the Law, all mankind had lived by him;
but herein lies your happiness, in being under the Covenant of grace, when it
is made only to a few, to a peculiar and chosen number of men.

servant of God, not a child of God, but under the Covenant of Grace, we do
not only become servants, but adopted sons, we are the children of promise by
Faith in Christ, the Covenant of Grace puts us into a state of Sonship: Adam
was the son of God by creation, but not by grace and adoption, till the
Covenant of Grace was made.

Creation was the foundation of the Covenant of Works, but it is Redemption
that is the foundation of the Covenant of Grace, the foundation of this is,
because Christ has died for us, and shed his blood for us.

14. In the Covenant of Works God did only manifest the attributes of his
greatness, and power, and wisdom, and justice; but in the covenant of grace
he does demonstrate the attributes of his grace and mercy, goodness and
patience, etc. God in the covenant of works was only a just God, Do this and
live, so long as thou keep my Commandments thou shall live and no longer;
but in the covenant of grace, he is a merciful God too, the Lord did make the
attributes of his mercy and goodness to shine forth in this covenant; should
God say to us, so long as you do well it shall be well with you, but if even
you break one command or commit one sin, you shall be damned, if God should say
thus to us, we were in a most miserable and undone condition, and could not
escape damnation; but we being under the covenant of grace, by his Son Jesus
Christ, he tells us that although we do break his commands, and sin against
him, yet in his Son he will pardon us, and pass by all our transgressions, as
if they had never been committed.

SERMON, IX.
EPHESIANS. 2. 12. -- And strangers to the Covenants of Promise --
HAving shown you in 14. particulars, your great happiness in being under the
covenant of grace, from the misery you would have lain under, had you been
under the covenant of works: I come now to the second Use, happiness in being
under the covenant of grace, and therefore now I shall spend the like time in
declaring the misery The misery of being strangers to the Covenant of Grace.
of all those that are strangers to the covenant, which I shall comprise under
these six heads.

bound to keep the whole Law of God, and that in your persons, else you can
never be saved: and oh how impossible is this for any man to do! he that is
under the covenant of grace, God the Father accepts of Christ's keeping and
fulfilling of the Law for him, as if it were done by him in his own person; but
to such as are not in this covenant of grace, God says to them, if you do not
keep the whole Law, and that personally, you shall be damned eternally, as in
Gal. 5. 3. says the Apostle there, I testify again ^o every man that is
circumcised, that he is bound to keep the whole Law; if you will not accept of
Christ, and accept of Salvation by his blood alone, but run to circumcision; I
tell you says the Apostle, that you are debtors to keep the whole Law of God,
and he will cast you into hell, upon the least breach of the Law. Oh thou
unhappy man, upon how hard terms can thou hope for salvation, even upon
impossible terms; thou can as well keep the sea in thy fist, as keep the
whole Law of God in thy own person; God says to thee, if thou do break but
one command, though thou should keep all the rest, yet thou shall die and be
damned eternally; but if you be under the covenant of grace, though you break
the Law again, and again, yet Christ does redeem you from the curse of the Law,
he being made a curse for you.

no strength but thy own to help thee in the discharge of all thy duties; but
now a man that is under the covenant of grace, God does command him a duty, and
does with the command give him a power to perform the duty; God bids him act
grace, and powers upon him a spirit of Grace; he bids him pray, and gives him a
spirit of prayer; God commands him a duty, and gives him a flexible, willing,
and an obedient heart, and abilities to perform the duty: when in Scripture God
does command a duty, he does likewise promise to assist and enable us to the
performance of the duty; as for example, the Lord bids us, to wash us and make
us Isa. 1. 16.
clean, and put away the evil of our doings, and a poor soul says, Oh Lord I
am not able to wash my heart, nor cleanse my ways, nor to do any thing that is
good of my self, and therefore says God again, I will wash you and make you
whiter then snow; so God Ezekiel. 36. 25,
bids us to get new hearts, and then again he promises, to create in us new
hearts, and renew rights spirits within us: I might instance in sundry other
particulars; but now this is thy unhappiness oh man that art a stranger to the
covenant of grace; God bids thee keep his commands, but he gives thee no power
to fulfill his commands; he bids thee act grace, and never gives thee a spirit
of grace; he bids thee pray, and yet never powers out upon thee a spirit of
prayer; and if Adam in his innocence, when he was perfect, was not able to keep
Gods commands; how much more unable art thou to do any thing that may please
God? thou by thy own strength art as well able to make a world, as to make one
prayer, or perform any duty in a holy and spiritual manner; thou can as well
destroy the whole world with thy own hands, as subdue any lust by thy own
strength; but under the covenant of Grace, God tells us, that though we cannot
keep the Law, yet he will accept of his Sons keeping it for us; and he has
promised to help and assist us in the performance of every thing, that he
commands us.

Advocate to plead for you, nor Mediator to stand between God and you; you have
an angry God frowning upon you, and a galled conscience ready to accuse you,
and every thing else in the World against you, but no friend either in heaven
or in earth to plead or speak for you; Christ is a mediator to those only that
are under a covenant of grace; now what can thou say for thy self oh man, why
thou should not be condemned, and damned in hell for ever, for thy
drunkenness, adultery, sabbathbreaking, profaneness, swearing, lying, and
thy ungodly practices? thou can have nothing to plead for thy self, but must
needs be cast out into hell fire irrecoverably; but now a godly man that is
under the covenant of grace, he can say, Lord here is Christ my mediator, that
pleads with thee for the pardon of all my sins, and for the obtaining of
heaven, and happiness, and glory for me, through his obedience and merits; but
thou that art under the covenant of works, thou can not say, I have Christ to
plead for me, and to be an Advocate with the Father, to beg for pardon of sin,
and life and salvation for thee, thou can not say so, for without the
covenant of grace, there is no Mediator, Christ is the Mediator only of the
new covenant; therefore what sad condition art thou in, seeing as verily as
thou stand here now, so thou must one day stand before 2 Cor. 5. 10.
Gods tribunal to answer and be judged for every thing thou have done in thy
body, whether it be good or evil, and then thou will have no body to plead for
thee, but must inevitably be cast into everlasting burnings.

exactness and rigor of justice proceed against you for your sins, without
any mixture of mercy at all. (Beloved) God has no mercy without his covenant,
but in the covenant of grace, he is a God gracious and merciful, slow to
anger, Exodus 34. 6, 7.
and of great kindness, abundant in mercy and truth, pardoning iniquity,
transgressions, and sins, but he is clothed with justice and rigor to all
that are without this covenant. As it is in courts of judicature in point of
life and death, the Judge will take no notice whether the man be a sorrowful
man or no, the Law is not to show mercy, but to punish the offense, the Law
does not enquire whether the man be penitent and sorry for what he has done,
but whether the fact be done or no, if it be, he must dye for it, there is no
remedy: just so it is here, God does not enquire under a covenant of works,
whether you are sorrowful for breaking of his Law, but he enquires whether you
have broken it, or no; and if you have, he will condemn thee, and cast thee
into hell fire, and then the poor soul cries out, Oh Lord be merciful to me
this once, it shall be a warning to me, I will never sin against thee, nor
displease thee more, but will from henceforth walk more humbly, and holily, and
circumspectly before thee, and yet all this that thou have promised, if thou
were able to perform it, will not avail thee, for God will hear none out of
Christ, and out of the covenant of grace.

the blessings of the covenant of grace, in that very chapter he promises the
blessings of this life, as you may see in the 36. of Ezekiel. says God there, I
will power clean water Ezekiel. 36. v. 25, 26. 27, 28.
upon you, and you shall be clean, yea from all your filthinesses, and from all
your Idols, will I cleanse you: a new heart will I also give you and a new
spirit will I put within you, and will take away the stony heart from you, and
will give you a heart of flesh, and will put my spirit within you, and cause
you to walk in my statutes, and you shall keep my judgments and do them, and
you shall dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers, and you shall be my
people, and I will be your God; all these are the meroies of the covenant of
grace: now mark the next words (says God) I will call for ver. 29, 30.
corn, and will incerease it, and lay no famine upon you, but I will multiply
the fruit of the trees, and the increase of the field, and so in the 10, v. 10,
11.
11 ver. of that chap. And I will multiply men upon you, and the cities shall
be inhabited, and the wastes shall be builded, and I will multiply upon man and
beast, and they shall increase, and bring fruit, and I will do better to you
then at your beginnings, and ye shall know that I am the Lord: Here the Lord
entails earthly blessings to the covenant of grace, intimating, that all that
are under the covenant of grace they have a title not only to all spiritual,
but to temporal blessings likewise; but no wicked man out of the covenant of
grace, has any true title to any outward blessings; they that are of the
faithful, are blessed with faithful Abraham, and enjoy outward blessings, as
a blessing; but wicked men, it is true they have something allowed them, but it
it as to prisoners, in a prison they have something to keep them alive until
their execution; and so wicked men they have prison allowances till the
execution day.

yet not be accepted, when the others shall, as you may see in Genesis 4. 4, 5.
Cain and Abel they both of them brought sacrifices to God, one of his flock,
and the other, of his grounds; and the Apostle speaking of this, says, that by
faith Abel offered a more Heb. 11. 4.
excellent offering then Cain; it was not more excellent in regard of the
matter of it, for in all probability and likelihood, Cains sacrifice was of
more value then Abels, for his was but a few young lambs, the firstlings of his
flock, but Cains was of the first fruits of his ground; and yet Abels sacrifice
was accepted, and the others rejected, because Abel was a godly man, under the
Covenant of Grace, by which God did accept of what he did, though it were less
then Cains: and so Solomon, The sacrifices of the Prove. 15. 8.
wicked are an abomination to the Lord, but the prayer of the upright is his
delight: a sacrifice you know is a great deal more costly then a prayer, for
that costs a man nothing but his breath, when the other will cost a great deal
of money, and yet a costly sacrifice is hated by God coming from a wicked man,
when a pennilesse prayer coming from a godly man is accepted: so that under a
covenant of grace, though you do less for the matter of the duty then wicked
men do, yet yours shall be accepted, when theirs shall be rejected.

Thus I have done with the use of terror in laying down to you this sixfold
misery of those men that are strangers to the covenant of grace; and here
because I would not have any poor soul, that is under the covenant of grace,
and partaker of all the great privileges of it, to go away with a sad heart,
I shall only leave with you two or three words of comfort to them; You
children of the covenant, that are under the covenant of grace, let not your
hearts be troubled, at what has been said this day, concerning the misery of
those men that are strangers to this covenant, and to bear: up and support your
spirits, I shall give you two or three comfortable considerations.

common blessing, but you see the love of a Father, and of a husband, and of a
friend, and the love of God in that blessing; and therefore as I told you
before in that very chapter, where God promises the blessings of the covenant
of grace, he promises the blessings of this life too, as an intail to the
covenant; wicked men may have blessings but not by virtue of a promise, not by
virtue of the covenant of grace. But now if you ask me how you may know,
whether the blessings you enjoy come unto you by virtue of the Covenant of
Grace: I answer, you may know it by these two things:

Abraham did, as you may see in Genesis 17. 1, 2, 8, 12. his using the blessings
of God to promote the service of God, did demonstrate that those blessings came
to him from God, in a covenant way, but those that are strangers to this
Covenant, the mercies they enjoy are given them for their hurt.

cords to draw you nearer to God, and as bands to tie you fast to God, then
they come to you in a Covenant way: as in Jer. 31. 11, 12. For the Jer 31. 11,
12.
Lord has redeemed Jacob, and ransomed him from the hand of him that is
stronger then he, therefore they shall come and rejoice in the height of Sion,
and shall run to the bountifulness of the Lord, even for the wheat, and for
the wine, and for the oil, and for the increase of sheep and bullocks, etc.
That is, all the mercies of God, shall make them to come nearer and nearer, and
cleave closer to God; you then that do enjoy your share of the blessings of
God, and they do not endeer you and draw you nearer to God, you cannot look
upon them as flowing in upon you in a Covenant way.

few turtle doves of you, when he will not accept of 1000 Rams, or 10000 rivers
of oil of the wicked, he will accept of a cup of cold water given to a
righteous man, in the name of a righteous man, when he will not accept of the
costliest sacrifice from the wicked: Oh what a happy condition art thou in,
that art under the covenant of grace, wicked men may hear more Sermons, and
perform more duties, and say more prayers to God then you, and yet in all
their duties be rejected, when thou art accepted.

Mediator to stand between God and you; though you are guilty, yet you have an
Advocate to plead your cause for you; you that are under the covenant of grace,
you may say to Christ your Mediator, as the Israelites said to Moses, when they
had offended God, go thou and speak unto God for us; so may you say when you
have nothing, but thundering and lightning and tempests in your souls, and the
flashings of hell fire in your consciences, then you may say to Christ, go now
to God and speak for me, mediate with thy Father for the pardon of all my sins;
I have offended God, o^ intercede with him in my behalf, I have committed a
great offense, oh plead with thy Father, and beg a pardon for me; thus thou
may say to Christ, being under the covenant of grace.

But here lest any one should lie under a spiritual delusion, and think
himself under the covenant of grace, when he is a stranger to it, lest the Dogs
should snatch at the Childrens meat, I shall lay down to you some
distinguishing Characters, whereby you may know whether you are under the
covenant of grace or no; and before I make entrance upon this, I will only
premise four sad and dismal conclusions, which will make way the better for
what I have to handle in the examination.

Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, Deuteronomy. 29 10, 11, 12.
12. says Moses there, You stand this day all of you before the Lord your God,
your Captains of Tribes, your Elders, and your Officers, with all the men of
Israel, your little ones, your wives, and the stranger that is in thy camp,
from the hewer of thy wood, unto the drawer of thy water, that thou should
enter into covenant with the Lord thy God: Now here you see, were all from the
rich to the poor, to enter into covevenant with God, and yet it is not
imaginable that all these did partake of the inward privileges of the Covenant
of grace, they did all partake of circumcision, which was the seal of the
covenant, of the outward privileges of it, but not all did partake of the
inward and special mercies of the covenant of grace, as pardon of sin, peace
of conscience, joy in believing, God to be their God, and Christ to be their
Savior; and so in Romans 9. 4, 5. says the Romans 9. 4, 5.
Apostle, They are the Israelites to whom pertains the adoption, and the
glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God,
and the promises, of whom are the Fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh
Christ came, these were very great privileges, and yet says the text in verse.
8. These are Verse. 8.
not all the children of God, though they had the external blessings of the
Covenant, yet they were not all the children of God; so that you see, you may
be within the Church of God, and partake of the outward blessings of the
Covenant, and yet want the inward and spiritual blessings of it.

Judaisme, Turcisme, and Paganism, and these being without the outward
privileges of the Church, they can hope for no salvation. If you should divide
the world into one and thirty parts, there is but a fifth part of them are
Christians, there is nineteen parts of the world that are Jews, and Turks, and
seven parts that are Pagans; so that there is but five parts that are
Christians; the most of men in the world are without the outward and common
blessings of the Covenant of grace, and therefore can obtain no salvation by
Christ.

Mat. 2. Many are called, but few are chosen, there are but a few chosen to
life and happiness, amongst those that are partakers of the external mercies
of the covenant of grace, as in Zach. 13. 8, 9. And Zach. 13. 8, 9.
it shall come to pass, that in all the land, says the Lord, two parts
therein shall be cut off and die, but the third shall be left therein, and I
will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine them, as silver is
refined, and will try them as gold is tried, they shall call on my name and I
will hear them; I will say it is my people, and they shall say, the Lord is my
God: there was but one part of three that were godly, and as it was then, so it
is now; but one part of three that can say truly, they have an interest in the
covenant of grace, and therefore (Beloved) this may be some of your lot, there
are many of you that have a share in the outward blessings of the covenant,
that have the Ordinances and means of grace, and make profession of Christ,
and yet few of you that have any special and peculiar blessing from Christ. As
when Christ was thronged in the multitude, there were a great many that touched
him, but one only that got any virtue from him, so there are a very few that
enjoy the special and peculiar blessings of the covenant, to have sin
pardoned, and their corruptions subdued and their duties and services accepted,
God to be their God, and Christ to be their Savior.

the inward and spiritual blessings of the covenant of grace, as you shall
find the Jews did in Joh. 8. 33, 39, 41. in verse. 33. Joh. 8. 33.
say they, we are the seed of Abraham: and verse. 39. we have Abraham to be our
Father; 30.
and from hence they conclude in verse. 41. that God was their Father too,
though 41.
Christ told them plainly they were of their father the Devil: wicked men are
very apt to deceive themselves, and think they have an interest in the
spiritual blessings of the covenant of grace, because they partake of the
Sacraments, and outward ordinances; whereas in Baptism you may have your face
sprinkled with water, and yet never have your hearts sprinkled with the blood
of Christ, you may be born in the Church, and yet never be of the Church of the
first born in heaven; you may have the Church to be your Mother, and yet never
have God to be your Father; there is but a remnant according to the election of
grace, the main body is cast away, there is but a remnant saved, and yet the
Jews did boast of themselves, that because they had the Adoption, and the
Glory, and the Covenant, and the Promise, etc. therefore God was theirs too,
and heaven and happiness, and all theirs, when there was no such matter.

SERMON, X.
EPHESIANS. 2. 12. -- And strangers to the Covenants of Promise --
HAving formerly premised four conclusions that you might not harbor any
secret conjectures and imaginations that you do belong to the covenant of
grace, when you do not; I come now to give you some Three characters of a man's
interest in the Covenant of Grace.
trials and discoveries whereby you may know, whether you are the persons that
can lay a just claim to life and salvation from God through his Son Jesus
Christ, by virtue of his promise, and I shall comprise them under these three
heads:

1. You may know whether you do belong to the covenant of grace or no, in case
you do partake of the spiritual blessings of the covenant:

2. In case you have the inseparable concomitants of the Covenant: And

3. In case you do perform the conditions of the covenant of grace, which is
faith; believe and be saved: if you have these three, you may lay an undoubted
claim to the covenant of grace.

Jer. 31. 33. I will be their God, and they shall my people. I shall a little
open this blessing to you, for God to be our God, it notes these three things:
1. It notes a special propriety in God, which none have but the elect. 2. It
notes an all sufficiency in God for their good. 3. It notes an absolute
authority, that God has over them.

God to be our God, it notes that God is yours in a special way of propriety,
which none but those that are the children of God can have, wicked men cannot
lay claim to God as their God; as Pharaoh, when he desired Moses to pray for
him, says he I have sinned against the Lord your God, he could not say against
the Lord my God, you that can upon Scripture grounds, lay claim to God as your
God, as having a special propriety in him, you have an interest in the
covenant of grace.

God to be your God, it notes an all sufficiency in God, put out for your good,
as in Genesis 17. 1. says God there to Abraham, I am thy God all-sufficient walk
before me, and be thou perfect; you that can look upon God as having an
interest and propriety in God; and you find by experience, that God is
exceeding good to your souls in every thing, if you see the emptiness of all
things in the world, and that they are but particular helps to thee, as food
against hunger, drink against thirst, clothes against nakedness, etc. but you
find God to be an all-sufficient help and remedy, the chiefest good,
sufficing, and satisfying, and filling thy heart, thou that can look upon
God, as thy all-sufficient good, as having thy portion and interest in him and
in none else; this is an undoubted evidence, that you do belong to the
Covenant of Grace.

God to be your God, it notes Gods sovereignty and power over you, for your
benefit, the Lord will reign over you, and subdue corruptions in you, and quell
your pride, and humble your heart, and give you a meek and quiet spirit. If you
find that God is yours in these three particulars, you may comfort your heart
in an unquestionable interest in the Covenant of Grace, if God be your God, and
you his people, that you have given up, and devoted your selves wholly to the
service of God in every thing that you do.

Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. says God there, A new heart Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27.
also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and will take
away the stony hearts out of your bosoms, and will give you hearts of flesh,
and I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and
you shall keep my judgments and do them: God will not only give us life for
our happiness, but grace for our holiness; he will not only give us imputed
righteousness for our justification, but also inherent righteousness for our
sanctification; now therefore examine your selves, have your natures ever been
sanctified, and regenerated? have you been ever washed with clean water, and
those stains of sin and corruption wiped away from you? has the beasom of
sanctification ever swept your inward man, and made it not a cave for every
unclean bird to lie in, but a habitation fit for the holy Ghost to dwell in? if
it be so, you have a real right to, and interest in the covenant of grace, for
no man can have the blessings of the covenant, but he must have a being in the
covenant of grace. It is very observable, that God is not only, as the covenant
represents him, a God gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and full of
compassion, etc. but he is a holy God as well as a merciful God; and therefore
he will work holiness in us and expect holiness from us, if ever we expect to
have mercy and happiness from him; never lay claim to God, nor expect life and
happiness from him, as he is a merciful God, unless you resolve to be
conformable to him as he is a holy God.

Heb. 10. 29. And they shall count the blood of the covenant, wherewith they
were sanctified, an unholy thing.



Jer. 3. 34. They shall all know me from the Ier. 31. 34.
least of them to the greatest, says the Lord, for I will forgive their
iniquity, and will remember their sins no more: now (beloved) can you say that
God has pardoned your sins, and done away your offenses, if so, then you are
under the Covenant of Grace.



Amos 5. 12, 15. I know Amos 5. 12, 15.
(says God) your manifold transgressions, and your mighty sins: here you see
are manifold and mighty sins, and yet says God, hate evil, and love good; it
may be the Lord will be gracious to you, nay the Lord he will be gracious to
you; though thou have manifold and mighty sins, yet it is not the greatness
nor mightiness of them, but thy stubbornness of heart, in not coming in, and
closing with Jesus Christ, that undoes thee.

Jer. 31. 33. I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, I will be their God, and they shall be my people; that is, God will put
into our hearts a suitable frame and disposition answerable to every command of
God in his Law, that we shall be able to obey, observe, and keep it, and say
that it is good; and then says God, you shall never depart from me; now
examine your selves, has this effect been wrought by the spirit of God in
your hearts? has God written the Sermons you have heard, not in your books,
but in your hearts? if so, these are good evidences of your interest in the
covenant of grace.



Act. 3. 25, 26. says the Apostle, Act. 3. 25, 26.
You are the children of the Prophets, and of the covenant, which God has made
with our Fathers; saying to Abraham, even in thy seed shall all the kindreds of
the earth be blessed: First unto you has God raised up his Son Jesus Christ,
and him he has sent to bless you, in turning every one of you from your
iniquities; so that if you are children of the covenant, the Lord will turn
every one of you from your wicked ways, and therefore you that are not turned
from the evil of your courses, that have not broken that league you have made
with death and hell, you can lay no claim to the covenant of grace, as in Psalm.
50. 16. says God there to the Psalm. 50. 16.
wicked, What have thou to do, to take my covenant into thy mouth, seeing thou
hate to be reformed, and castest my words behind thee? thou will not forsake
thy lusts, nor leave thy sins, and therefore what have thou to do to meddle
with my covenant of grace? you can lay no claim to the Covenant, till you have
cast off the old man, and subdued and overcome your sins and corruptions.

Jer. 31. I will be your God and you shall be my people, the covenant of grace
is called an holy covenant, Luke 1. 72. not so much because it was made by a
holy God, as because it was made for the holy creature, it will make them holy
that do enter into it, and therefore those that are in Covenant with God, are
called a holy people, and they must be a holy people, as in 1 Cor. 6. 20. 1
Cor. 6. 20.
says the Apostle, You are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your
bodies and souls, which are Gods, and in 2 Cor. 7. 1. Seeing 2 Cor. 7. 1.
therefore we have these promises, (dearly beloved) Let us cleanse our selves
from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear
of God: those that are in covenant with God, they are a holy and crucified
people.

Esai. 55. says Esai. 55. 3.
God, Incline your ears and come unto me and hear, hearken, and your souls
shall live: and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure
mercies of David: the covenant of grace is a sure and everlasting covenant, but
says God, you shall come unto me first, and then I will make with you an
everlasting covenant: God will have you to obey him, if ever you think to have
any share in the covenant of grace; those that, let God command what he will,
will do what they please; this argues, that they do not belong to the
covenant of grace; but if the blessings of the covenant of grace are given by
God to you, and the concomitants of it found with you: and lastly, the
conditions of it found in you: which is faith, the only condition of the
covenant of grace, believe and be saved; if God has brought thee into a
believing estate, that there is not one promise in the Gospel, but you do
beartily assent unto, and close with: if it be thus, then you may conclude,
that you do belong to the covenant of grace; And thus I have done with these
charactars by way of trial.

you are wholly devoted and given up to the service of God, and do make
conscience to walk in the ways of the Covenant; and if the conditions of the
Covenant of Faith in Christ be found in you; if you are brought into a
believing condition; if all these things be wrought in you, then hearken to the
great happiness and benefit you enjoy, by being under the Covenant of Grace.

Esther by King Ahasuerus, to the half of his Kingdom; you have more then the
Devil promised to Christ, when he carried him to the top of the mountain, and
showed him all the Kingdoms of the world and the glory of them; thou have more
then the whole world, for thou have God to be thy God, and thou have an
interest in the Covenant of Grace, which is a bundle of promises, and includes
in it all the promises of the Gospel, which are all yours, and you may go and
apply them to your own souls in whatsoever condition you are in.

have read of some Authors that have more wondered, and stood amazed at this,
then at any thing else in the World, that God that is the Sovereign Lord of all
the works of his hands, that he should not rule us and command us by a Law,
but deal with us by way of a Covenant, for God is not bound to give us a
reward, though we should serve him all the days of our lives; God might
command us as we are his creatures to serve and obey him, to pray, read, hear,
and walk holily and humbly before him, and when we have done all this, yet he
might say to us, I will never give you heaven nor happiness, nor any reward at
all; he might have said thus to us, but he has condescended so far, as to make
a bargain with us; that if we will believe in his Son Jesus Christ, and live
holily, and walk uprightly before him, then he will be our God, and we shall be
his people, he will write his Law in our hearts, and sanctify, and renew our
natures, and pardon and forgive all our sins, and give us heaven and hapninesse
when we dye; Oh what an infinite condescension is this in God, and what
unspeakable bounty and free grace; that when he might say to us, you are bound
to serve me, and obey me, and to love and fear me, but I am not bound to make a
Covenant with you, and promise you my Son, and life, and Salvation, through
him, but though I am not bound to it, yet I will give you my Son, and heaven,
and happiness, and I will be your God, and you shall be my people, and I will
regenerate and sanctify your natures; and create in you new hearts, and write
my Law in your inward parts, I will freely do all this for you, says God, Oh
what infinite condescension and free grace and mercy is this!

Prove. 15. 8. the place that I quoted before, The sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination to the Lord, but the prayer of the upright is his delight; a
sacrifice is a great deal more costly then a prayer, and yet the Lord will
accept of a poor pennilesse prayer coming from a godly man, when he will
reject a costly Sacrifice from a wicked man; God will accept of a cup of cold
water, from one in Covenant with him, when he will not accept of 10000 rivers
of oil from a wicked man; he will pardon your great sins, and accept of your
weak services: indeed, were you under a Covenant of works, that would require
perfect obedience, but being under a Covenant of grace, the Lord accepts of
sincere, though it be imperfect obedience: and thus I have done with the third
part of man's misery, being strangers to the Covenant of grace.

SERMON, XI.
EPHESIANS. 2. 12. -- Having no hope --
Ephesians were in a state of Gentilism, unconverted to the Faith of Christ,
they were without hope, and the reason of it was, because they were without
Christ, who is the way, the truth, and the life, there is no other way to
heaven but only by Jesus Christ, and seeing they were out of the way to
heaven, they must needs be without any hopes of coming to heaven; it was the
first branch of their misery, in being without Christ that exposed them, and
made them liable to all the rest, because they were without Christ, therefore
they were aliens to the Commonwealth of Israel, and therefore they were
strangers to the Covenant of Promise, and without hope, and without God in the
World.

Ob. But here some will be ready to say, How can this be that the Apostle
should say, they were without hope, when were it not for hope, the heart would
break; and therefore it is not possible, they should be without hope?

they had no hope, that is, no good nor well grounded hope for heaven, they had
only a presumptuous hope, such a hope as would make them ashamed in the latter
end, they had only the hope of the hypocrite that shall perish, and therefore
when the Apostle says, that these Ephesians during their unregeneracy, were
without hope, his meaning is, that they were without any well grounded hopes for
heaven, they had no Scripture grounds, to bottom or build any hopes upon, that
God would bring them to heaven; this is a very sad and dreadful point I am now
upon, in showing you this part of man's misery, without hope; the Observation I
shall draw out from hence shall be this;

That all men during the state of their unregeneracy, are without any true, or
well grounded hopes of heaven.

In the handling of this I shall first prove it in the general, and then
improve it; first to prove it, an unconverted man's condition, in reference to
his hopes for heaven, is just like Paul's, and those Mariners that were with him
in the ship sailing toward Rome, Act. 27. 20. when neither Sun Act. 27. 20.
nor Stars appeared, but the wind and waves did beat upon the ship, insomuch
that all the hopes they had of being saved were quite taken away; so it is just
your case that are without Jesus Christ, there is neither Sun nor Star does
shine upon you, if Christ does not shine upon you, you are like Paul and the
other Mariners in the ship, all hopes of your being saved, is quite taken away
from you. I shall confirm this truth to you by three or four demonstrations,
that a wicked man is without any hopes for heaven.

Christ who is the foundation of a christians hope, Wherefore remember, says
the Apostle, that at that time ye were without Christ, and therefore he tells
them afterward, that they were without hope, in Tit. 2. 2. Christ is there
called Tit. 2. 2.
our hope, Christ is that person in and upon whom we are to build all our hopes
for heaven, and therefore he is called our hope, and this is the meaning of
that expression, Christ in you the hope of glory, intimating that you cannot
hope for glory, but in and through Jesus Christ; that man that is a Christlesse
man, must needs be a hopeless man, that is the first demonstration.

Tit. 2. In hope of eternal 1 Tit. 2.
life, which God that cannot lie, promised before the World began, the promises
do ground that man that has interest in them, to a hope of eternal life, he
that is without the Lord Jesus Christ the foundation of hope, and without the
promises which is the pillar of hope, must needs be without all true hopes of
heaven.

Heb. 11. 1. Faith is Heb. 11. 1.
the ground of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen: where no true
Faith is there can be no hope, for Faith is the Mother, and Hope is the
Daughter, Hope is begotten by Faith; an unregenerate man must needs be without
hope, because he is without Christ the foundation of hope, and the promises the
pillar of hope, and Faith the ground of hope.



Thus you see I have only in the general confirmed the point to you. I come
now to speak of some more particular inquiries in the prosecution of this
Doctrine, (Beloved) will you lend me your thoughts a little, in the handling of
these five inquiries? As

1. I shall show you the nature of this hope that unconverted men are without.

2. I shall show you what are the characters of those men that are without any
well grounded hopes for heaven.

3. I shall show you the reason, why (seeing the Scripture says that a wicked
man has no hope) that of any men in the world, a wicked man does nourish in
his heart the greatest hopes for heaven.

4. I shall show wherein lies the difference between those that have only a
presumptuous hope for heaven, and those that have a true and well grounded hope
for heaven; And

Lastly, I shall show you the great misery of those men that have only
presumptuous hopes for heaven.



true hope which wicked men are without it is a well grounded and patient
expectation for the accomplishment of all those spiritual and eternal good
things, which God has promised through Jesus Christ, and which Faith believes.
I call it a well grounded expectation to distinguish true hope, from those
presumptuous hopes that wicked men have: I call it a patient hope to
distinguish it from a rash hope, in wicked men: and I say it is a patient
expectation and looking for the accomplishing those spiritual and eternal
good things, which God has promised in Christ, because that this is the ground
of hope, it is called the hope of glory and the hope of eternal life, and the
like; Thus you have the nature of this hope that wicked men are without, when
the Apostle says, they were without hope, his meaning is, that they were
without any hope of those spiritual and eternal good things, which God has
promised to believers through Christ.

Quest. 2. What are the Characters of those men, that have no hopes for heaven,
or if they have, it is only a deluding and a presumptuous hope, a hope no
better then no hope at all? (nay it were a great deal better to have no hope
then a presumptuous hope, but that I shall speak to afterward.)

Now before I shall lay down these characters by way of discovery, I will only
premise four or five particular conclusions, which are very necessary to
prevent wicked men from running into mistakes concerning their hopes for
heaven. 1. Take this conclusion, that this grace of hope may as well be
counterfeited as any other grace, there is a lively hope in a Believer, and a
dead hope in a wicked man, there is a feigned hope as well as a true hope, a
counterfeit hope as well as a good hope, and therefore it is said in Joh. 8.
13. The Joh 8. 13. Prove. 10. 20.
hope of the hypocrite shall perish; and in Prove. 10. 28. The hope of the
wicked shall perish.

2. Take this conclusion, that those men, that have least grounds to build
hopes of heaven upon, do yet nourish most confident hopes of heaven in their
hearts; I shall give you two notable places of Scripture to prove this, in
Prove. 14. 16. it is Prove. 14. 16.
said there that a wise man fears and departs from evil, a wise man is
jealous over his own heart, what follows? but says he, A fool, that is, a
wicked man, he rages, and yet is confident, he runs on in wicked ways and
practices without any remorse or sorrow, and yet he is a confident man, that
he shall go to heaven as well as the best; A wise man fears and departs
from evil but a wicked man rages, and yet is confident, those that have least
cause to hope, do yet harbor the greatest hopes for heaven in their hearts. A
like place to this you have in Psalm. 36. ^2. The transgression Psalm. 36. ^2.
of the wicked says in his heart, that there is no fear of God before his
eyes, and yet the next words are, he flatters himself in his own eyes, though
his iniquities are found worthy to be hated; wicked men are very apt to have
good conceits of themselves, and you shall find it ordinarily, that a poor
soul that walks conscionably before God, and neglects no known duty, and
mortifies every known lust, and walks humbly before God, this man is full of
fears and jealousies, and doubts that all things are not well between God and
his soul; and yet you shall find another ungodly wretch that gives way to all
manner of sin and uncleanness, and fulfills the lusts of his flesh and of his
mind, and this man is very confident of his going to heaven, and that all is
well with him when he is running headlong to hell. Here then you see the second
conclusion that those men that have least grounds to build hopes of heaven
upon, do yet nourish strongest hopes for heaven in their hearts.

3. Another conclusion is this, that a man may live and dye with very strong
hopes that he shall go to heaven, till he be thrown down into hell; he may
have no other thoughts but that he shall go to heaven till he be cast
headlong into hell. I shall give you some plain text to prove this, as Job 21.
23. Job 21. 23.
Job speaks there of a wicked man, says he, one dies in his full strength
being wholly at ease and quiet; A learned Divine says upon this place, that it
is the note of a wicked man, when he lies upon his death bead, if you come to
him and ask him if he has any hopes that he shall go to heaven, he will
answer, that he has very strong hopes of it; and if you ask him, whether my
sin troubles him, he will tell you no, blessed be God I have no sin troubles me
now, nor ever did all my life time; What, does nothing at all disquiet you? No,
I am wholly at ease and quiet; he has no sin troubles him, nor no misgiving
thoughts, but that he shall go to heaven: But when a wicked man dies, Prove
11. 7.
then his expectation shall perish, and not till then: Now Beloved me thinks
this conclusion should a little startle you, and make you look about you to
take heed lest you run hoodwinkt to hell, that you do not live and dye in
hopes of heaven, and never think otherwise till you drop down into hell.

4. To you that do lay claim to strong hopes for heaven, let me tell you thus
much, that you are not to hope for heaven, unless you can render a reason or
ground of your hopes. Beloved it is not natural for every man to hope for
heaven and to be saved, and you ought not to hope for heaven unless you can
give some grounds for it, as the Apostle says, But sanctify the 1 Pet. 3. 15.
Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to give an answer to every one
that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear;
Now examine your selves, what grounds can you give for your hopes of heaven,
have you a promise for it? or one Scripture ground for it? or the witness of
the Spirit for it? if not, then do not nourish any hopes of heaven in your
hearts. Thus I have laid down these four conclusions, I come now to handle the
query it self which is this.

Quest. What are the characters whereby it may be known whether you are such a
one that has no hopes for heaven, or a mere deluding, an ungrounded and
presumptuous hope, as good as no hope?

desperately wicked and deceitful above all things, man is a proud creature
and apt to have proud and high conceits of himself, and therefore I shall give
you five distinguishing characters, whereby you may know whether your hopes for
heaven be true, and well grounded hopes, or no.

Deuteronomy. 29. 15. And it Deuteronomy. 29. 15.
come to pass when he hears the words of this curse, if he shall bless
himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace though I walk after the
imaginations of my heart, to add drunkenness to thirst, etc. The Lord will not
spare such a man, but the anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke
against that man: and so in Esaias 57. 20. says the Prophet Esa. 57. 10.
there, Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy wicked ways, yet said thou
not, There is no hope, it is a very strange place, as if the Prophet should say
to them, you walk in a great course of sin and wickedness, and yet you flatter
you selves, you will not say there is no hope for you, you that do nourish
great sins and wickedness in your bosoms, and allow your selves in the
practice of great sins, you should say, there is no hope for you to go to
heaven, for God does here charge it upon you, that notwithstanding you walk on
in ways of sin, yet you say not, there is no hope; but are rather very
confident you shall go to heaven for all that; and so in Psalm. 36. 1, 2. The
transgression of the wicked says in his Psalm. 36. 1, 2.
heart, there is no fear of God before his eyes, and yet says the Psalmist, he
flatters himself, with vain hopes of heaven; wicked men have heaven and the
hopes thereof in their eyes, when they have sin in their hearts, and this
shows that their hope is only a deluding and a vain hope.

Baalam desire to dye the death of the righteous, but never care nor desire to
live the life of the righteous, that man's hope is but a vain hope, as the
Psalmist has it in Psalm. 119. 155. Salvation Psalm. 119. 155.
is far from the wicked, for they seek not thy statutes, and if salvation be
far, the hope of salvation is as far; but why is salvation far from the wicked?
because they seek not Gods statutes, those men that hope that salvation is
near them, when they are far from seeking after Gods statutes, and endeavoring
after holiness, as the way to happiness, these men are far from salvation,
and the hope of salvation too.

be ready to give to every man 1 Pet. 3. 15.
that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear;
now let me ask you what ground you can give for your hopes in heaven, have you
the testimony of Gods Spirit for it, or the testimony of a good conscience.
that in simplicity and godly sincerity, you have had your conversation here in
this world? have you a promise or any ground in scripture for your hopes? if
you have no ground for your hopes, and cannot endure to come to the trial or
touchstone, it is an argument that you are counterfeit metal that you have no
real hopes for salvation and happiness in another World.

sandy ground Christ speaks of in Matthew. 7. ult. To Mat. 7. ult.
build your hopes of heaven upon any services you do, or any duties you
perform, it is all one, as if you should go about to build a house upon the
sand; ask a wicked man whereon he grounds his hopes for heaven; he will tell
you that he does the works of charity, he gives every man his due, and he lives
honestly, and civilly amongst his neighbors, he hears and reads the Word, he
prays and receives the Sacrament, he does such and such good duties, and this
is that which they build hopes for heaven upon, they think that Christ is
espoused for them, because they are bidden to the Wedding Supper, for the
Ordinances of Christ are his marriage supper, they are ready to say with those
in Luke 13. 26. We have eaten and drunken in they presence, Lord, Lord open to
Luke 13. 26.
us. I do not deny but a man may have evidence from his graces, and from the
work of God upon his heart, but the great pillar of Marble, that must bear up
thy hope, must be the promise of God in Christ; he that builds his hopes for
heaven only upon his own performances and good duties, his hope is a vain and
deluding hope; I do not deny but the graces of Gods spirit are real evidences
of. Gods love to the Soul, as the Apostle says, By this we know that we are
translated from death to life, because 1 John 3. 14.
we love the Brethren, and again, By this we know that we are of God, because
of his spirit which he has given us; but I say this is not the main pillar and
ground of our hope: we should be so fervent in prayer, and diligent in the
performance of holy duties, as if we did expect to be saved by our duties, but
when we have done all that we can, we must lay down all at the feet of Christ,
and conclude that our best righteousness is but as filthy rags, and when we
have done all that we can do, we are unprofitable servants, and we must wholly
and only depend upon the merits and mercies of Christ for salvation and comfort.

Romans 15. 13. Romans 15. 13.
Now the God of hope fill you with all peace and joy in believing. 2. Those
that think there is no efficacy in keeping this grace of hope, those have no
true hope, for wheresoever true hope is, it has these properties with it.

purifying virtue with it, as in 1. Joh. 3. 3. Every man that has this hope in
him, purifieth himself even as God is pure.

2. Hope has a pacifying property with it, It is the Anchor of the Soul, both
sure and 2. Heb. 16. 19.
steadfast; though the World, and the Devil trouble and disquiet you, and
afflictions and temptations molest and disturb you, yet this grace of hope
will quiet and pacify you, those that hope in God shall be secure and at rest.

fallow ground of your hearts, and make you indefatigable in your labors after
heaven, so that you shall take a great deal of pains and use all your
endeavors for it.

SERMON, XII.
EPHESIANS. 2. 12. -- Having no hope --
WE come now to the third Queston, which is this (Que.) Quest. 3.
What is the reason (seeing the Scripture says that a wicked man has no hope)
that of all the men in the world, wicked men do nourish greatest hopes for
heaven in their hearts?

Answ. In resolving this Question, I shall Answ.
lay you down five false pillars or props, Five false props of a wicked man's
hope.
that do bear up and nourish the hopes of wicked men, and as I name them to
you, I shall show you the rottenness, and deceitfulness, and insufficiency of
them, for any man to build hopes of heaven upon.

1. The first prop that wicked men do build hopes of heaven upon is this,
because they have committed but small sins in their life time, and because they
have not run out into the commission of such gross and scandalous sins in the
world as other men have, therefore say they, surely we have some ground to hope
for heaven; it is true, we are sinners, but my sins are but ordinary small sins
and frailties, they are not sins of a double die, just as the Pharisee says,
Lord I thank thee that I am Luke 18. 11.
not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this
Publican, because he was not as bad as other men, therefore he thought he had
a right and title to heaven, because they are not as bad as the worst,
therefore they think themselves as good as the best; now I shall show you the
weakness and rottenness of this pillar for any man to build hopes of heaven
upon, and that in these five particulars.

Paul, in Phil. 3. 6. he tells us, That according to the Law he was Phil. 3. 6.
blameless, there was no command of God in the let t^ of it, that he was
guilty of the breach of, he was no swearer, nor liar, nor stealer, nor
drunkard, nor adulterer, etc. he was guilty of no great and gross (...), and
yet Paul he had nothing to plead for heaven for him, if he had not had the
righteousness of Jesus Christ to plead for him. Says the young man to Christ,
What Mat. 19. 18, 19, 20.
shall I do to inherit eternal life? Christ tells him that he should not do
any murder, nor commit adultery, nor steal, nor hear false witness, honor thy
Father and Mother, and love thy neighbor as thy self; the young man answered
and said, all these things have I kept from my youth up: and Jesus looked upon
him and loved him, and pitied him, that such an ingenuous and blameless man as
he was should yet go to hell; this man did not break the Law of God in the
letter of it, but yet he went away sorrowful, when Christ bad him go and sell
all that he had and give to the poor, the young man went away sorrowful, for
he had great possessions; then says Christ, How hardly shall a rich man enter
into the Kingdom of heaven! and so the proud Pharisee that boasted himself over
the poor Publican; yet this man went away justified and not the other.

figures, amount to a greater sum, then a few great figures do, four small
figures make a greater sum then three great figures, so many small sins will do
thee more harm then a few great sins? if what your sins do want in bulk and
magnitude, you make it up in their number and multitude, you are as liable to
damnation as if you had committed great and crying sins; though you have not
committed adultery in your life time, yet it may be you have had many sinful
and unclean thoughts in your heart; and though you have not been guilty of
murder, yet it may be you have had many revengefull thoughts in you, which is
as bad as murder and so of any other sins.



lays your souls upon more guilt when you commit the smallest sins with
delight and contentment, and satisfaction, then if you did commit great and
gross sins, if you labor to resist them, and strive against them.





sins are none of the greatest, let me tell you, that the smallest sins that
ever you committed in all your life time, without repentance on thy part, and
satisfaction on Christ's part, will forever keep thy soul out of heaven, if you
repent peradventure you shall be pardoned, the smallest sins cannot be
forgiven, without the blood of Christ to wash them away, for without the
shedding of blood there is no remission: and thus I have showed the
insufficiency and deceitfulness of the first prop that wicked men do build
their hopes for heaven upon, we come now to the second.

David that committed Adultery, and of Noah's drunkenness, and Paul's
persecuting Christ, and Peter's denying of him, and diverse others, and yet these
men are gone to heaven, and why may not I as well as they? Concerning this plea
of wicked men I shall give you these three things by way of answer.

his servants in Scripture, for God did not record them there, to be a
provocation to thee to go on presumptuously in sinning against him, but merely
to be a restraint and caveat to keep thee from falling into the same sins,
which they did; if Noah, and Lot, and David, and Peter, etc. such holy and
excellent men as these, had their failings, and did commit great and gross
sins, oh then let me take heed lest I am overtaken, and fall into the same
sins; this is the use that we should make of the failings of other man, as in 1
Cor. 10. 11. All 1 Cor. 10. 11.
things are written for our example, to admonish us upon whom the ends of the
world are come, 1. Tim. 1. 16.
and in 1 Timothy 1. 16. says the Apostle, Iobtained mercy, that I might be an
example to all that should hereafter believe in Jesus Christ.

Noah, or David, or Peter, do you repent with them too? it is true, Noah did
fall once into the sin of drunkenness, but yet the Scripture records this of
him, that he was an upright man in his generation: and so David, though he did
once defile his bed, yet afterward he repented of it, and made his couch to
swim with tears for it: so Peter after he had denied Christ, he went out and
wept bitterly for it; but I say, what is all this to thee, that do make a
trade of sin, and fall into gross sins every day, time after time, and yet
never mourn and grieve for them, as David did for his sin, nor weep bitterly
for them with Peter, what plea can this be for thee, to encourage thee to hope
for heaven?

matter of them, but not for the manner, now it is the manner of falling into
sin, and not the matter of it that dams a man; it is true, Noah did fall into
the sin of drunkenness, but I shall distinguish Noah from any wicked drunkard
in the world, and that in these five particular considerations, as

Noah was drunk, but it was before he did know that wine would make him drunk,
and if you read the story you shall find, that there was never any wine drunk
till that time, for Noah did then begin to be a husbandman, and did plant a
Vineyard; but now there is never a one of you but do very well know that wine
and strong beer and the like, will intoxicate you, and yet you will not refrain
from excess in drinking; there is a great deal of difference between you and
Noah.

Noah was drunk, but he did not proclaim his drunkenness, but the text says
he went into his tent and slept, he was ashamed Genesis 9.
of what he had done, but now you proclaim your sin, and swear, and stare, and
commit many other sins in your drunkenness.

Noah was drunk, but you never read that he was drunk any more then once, but
you are drunk again and again, one day after another.



Noah was an aged man, and in this regard his age might call for more wine and
strong liquor to cheer up his spirits, then young people do want; so that all
these considerations do little mitigate, and allay Noah's fault, though it be
not wholly excusable.

An so likewise David he committed the sin of adultery, he wallowed in an
unclean bed, but yet his sin likewise may admit of some extenuation and excuse,
as

David when he came up to the house top, he little dreamed to have seen a naked
woman there, which was a very great temptation to him, but it may be some of
you do seek occasion, and contrive and plot how you may commit such a sin.

David did fall into this sin neither but once, you shall commonly find that
godly men fall into great sins but once, they take warning by the first
transgression, and seldom fall into the same sin again, but now it may be
you live in unclean thoughts and actions all your life long, and therefore this
can be no prop for your hopes.

David did fall into this sin, yet he did not continue in it long, for it was
but nine months between Nathan the Prophets coming to David, and telling and
reproving him for his sin, and the time that he fell into it; but alas some of
you it may be are Adulterers of nine years standing, there are many amongst us
that are old adulterers, and yet never had a melting and sorrowful heart for
their sins, that never wept as David did, nor mourn as he mourned.

And so Peter he fell into a sin of denying his Lord and Master; but,

Peter conceiving it may be that they would have put him to death and crucified
him, as well as Christ, upon this sudden surprise (which was a very great
temptation to him,) he denied Christ, And

Simon Peter love thou me, he answered Christ three times, Lord thou know
that I love thee.

Peter denied Christ, but yet afterward he went out and wept bitterly for it,
and therefore his obtaining mercy can be no ground for your hopes, that never
yet repented of any of the sins you have committed, and thus you see that the
falling of these three godly men into great sins can be no prop to bear up
your hopes for heaven.

I shall now show you more particularly that though the godly do fall into
sin, yea even the same sins for the matter of them, as you do, yet they do
not fall into them in the same manner, As

Gal. 6. 1. says the Apostle, if any man be overtaken with a fault. A godly
man he runs away with all the speed he can from a sin and temptation, but
sometimes it overtakes him against his will, but now a wicked man he runs after
sin, and overtaketh it, he sins with set purpose of heart, He plots mischief
Psalm. 36. 4.
upon his bed, and sets himself in a way that is not good.

2. A godly man falls into sin sometimes, but it is with reluctance and
opposition, the Spirit striveth against the flesh; there is an opposing, and
striving against sin, they are not like cowards, but will fight as long as they
can hold their weapon in their hands, but now wicked men they commit sin with
greediness, with delight and complacency, without any reluctance at all.

David, Psalm. 38. the title of it, compared with Psalm. 39. 1. The Psalm. 38.
title of Psalm. 38. is called a Psalm of David to bring to remembrance, the
subject matter of this Psalm was to bring David's sin to his remembrance, and
having spent this, in remembering his sins, in the first words of the next
Psalm, says he, I have sinned, Psalm. 39.
but I will take heed to my ways, that I offend not with my tongue, after he
had called to remembrance his sins past, then he resolved with himself to
strive against them in time to come. A godly man never falls into a sin once,
but he fears to fall into the same sin ever after.

will overcome it at last, Grace will out grow sin, and get the victory over
it; and thus I have showed you the second prop that wicked men build their
hopes for heaven upon; we come now to a third and that is this;



1. The Devils and damned spirits may then hope as well as you.

2. The common and outward mercies of God can be no good prop, to build hopes
for heaven upon, unless you can lay claim to the saving and distinguishing
mercies of God; the common outward mercies of God wicked men may have, for God
is good to al, and his tender mercy is over all his Works, the Devils share in
the common mercies of God as well as others; but these general mercies of God
are no prop to build hopes for heaven upon, unless you can build upon the
saving and distinguishing mercies of God, as David prays, Show mercy unto me O
God, (says he) with the mercy which thou bear to thy own childeen; it must
be electing, redeeming, sanctifying, and saving mercies that you must build
your hopes for heaven upon.



1. The High Priest was not upon pain Lev. 13 4.
of death to come to the Mercy-seat, unless he brought incense with him; now
what does this signify to us? why, it represents the intercession of Christ,
that as Aaron was not to come to the Mercy-seat without incense, so neither can
we go to the Throne of Grace to beg mercy from God, with any hope of audience
or acceptance, unless we carry incense with us, which is the Lord Jesus Christ
to plead for us.

2. Aaron was to sprinkle the Mercy-seat with blood; which typifies to us, that
we are not to expect mercy from God, but as we have an interest in the blood of
Christ.

he will have mercy Luke 1. 50.
only on them that fear him; as for the wicked those that run on in their
sins, the Lord says himself, that though he has made them yet he will have no
mercy on them; the mercies of God in general are no sufficient props to build
hopes for heaven upon.

Ob. But here me thinks I hear some kind Object.
of people ready to object against me, and say, What, do you go about to beat
us off from our hopes of heaven? would you bereave us of our hopes and drive us
into despair?

1. To this I answer, that all you that Answ. 1.
have good and well grounded hopes for heaven, I would not for all the World,
stagger your hopes; but as the great winds do commonly root up, and blow down
the smaller shrubs, but do settle and root the stronger Oaks the faster into
the ground; so I would have all that I have said this day concerning the vain
and deceitful hopes of wicked men, to confirm and establish your hopes and
make them grow stronger and stronger.

desperation has split thousands, the rock of presumption has split its ten
thousands.



SERMON, XIII.
EPHESIANS. 2. 12. -- Having no hope --
WE come now to enquire further, what is the reason that wicked men do
nourish in their hearts most hopes for heaven, seeing the Scripture says they
have none: the last time I answered this Question, by naming three false props,
that they build hopes for heaven upon; I shall now give you three or four more.

in the last day they shall come to him and cry, Lord, Lord, open to us, for we
have prophesied in thy name, and eat and drunk in thy presence, we have heard
thy word, and done many miracles, and cast out Devils in thy name, and the
like; they shall boast of their hearing, and praying, and good works, and make
that a plea for heaven, when Christ shall say unto them, Depart from me, I know
you not. Now I shall show you the rottenness and in sufficiency of this prop
to build hopes for heaven upon; but I would not have you mistake me, as if I
went about to beat down good works, and make duties useless; for I would have
you so to perform duties, as if you were to be saved by duties, but when you
have done all that you can do, to lay them down at the feet of Christ, and
wholly depend upon him, as if we had done no duties at all; but if you make the
bare performance of duties, to be a prop for your hopes of heaven, it will be a
very rotten and deceitful prop, as I shall show you in these four particulars:
For,

and by mourning and lamenting for your sins, you should dry up all the
moisture of your body; were it possible you should spend all the days of your
life in hearing, reading, praying, and the performance of holy duties; yet if
you do not offer them up to God in the name and mediation of Jesus Christ,
they are all but like ciphers that amount to no sum at all, unless the
righteousness of Christ be added to them: it is Christ's righteousness that
makes our services acceptable to God; Christ adds his incense to the prayers
of all his Saints: now (beloved) though you make never so many prayers, yet if
you have no share in Christ, nor in his sufferings, and prayers, and
intercessions to God for thee, all thy prayers and holy duties are worth
nothing, they will never bring thee to heaven; our persons must be in Christ,
before our services can be accepted of God, and therefore the bare performance
of duties, can be no prop to thee for to build hopes for heaven upon.

Pharisees they did fast twice a week, and give alms, and perform holy duties,
and so those spoken of in Isa. 58. 2, 3.
the Prophet Esaias, They did delight to draw near to God, and to know his ways,
as a nation that did righteousness, and for sook not the Ordinances of God:
wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou see not? God did not accept of
any thing they did: and so those in Zac. they kept four fasting days in a year
for Zach. 8. 19.
seven years together, and yet they said he did not regard them: and so
likewise God does not regard the prayer of the wicked, as in Psalm. 105. 9. The
prayer of the wicked is Psalm. 105. 9
an abomination to the Lord; and so is their hearing too, for they come to hear
when their hearts are after their covetousness.

Cain and Abel: Abel he offered the firstlings of his sheep, and cattle and of
his flock, and Cain he offered Genesis 4.
the first-fruites of his ground; now by faith Abel offered a more excellent
offering then Cain, Heb. 11.
though Cains offering was of more value then Abels was yet Abels was accepted,
when the others was not; Abels sacrifice was accepted not in regard of the
quantity, and worth, and value of it, but because Abel was a believer, and a
justified man in the fight of God, and therefore he had respect first to his
person, and then to his sacrifice. Another instance is in 1 King. 18. 25.
between 1 King. 18. 25.
Elijah the Prophet, and the Prophets of Baal; Elijah the Prophet took two
Bullocks, and bid the Prophets of Baal to choose one, and you must think they
would not choose the worst of them, and he took the other, and yet the Lord
showed a token of acceptance to Elijah and his sacrifice, though it was the
worst of the Bullocks, and showed no acceptance to the Prophets of Baal, and
the reason of it was because Elijah was a justified man in the sight of God,
when the others were not. And so again in Prove. 15. 8. it is said Prove. 15. 8.
there, that the sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, but the
prayer of the wright is his delight: God does delight in a poor pennilesse
prayer coming from a godly man, when he will not accept of a costly sacrifice
coming from a wicked man.

matter of the duty what you do perform, as to the manner how, and the end why
you do perform them, though it may be the duty which you perform be the same
for the matter of them, as God requires and commands, yet if they be not done
in a right manner, God looks upon it as nothing; God will not own those duties
as done to him, that are not done in a right manner, and to a right end: as in
Joh. 16. 24. Hitherto (says Christ) you have asked nothing in my name, ask
and receive that your joy may be full; and yet they had put up many petitions
in his name, but because they did it not in a right manner, Christ looked upon
it as if they had asked nothing at all.



1. They make those promises to be props of hope which are not: or,

2. They do misapply those promises that are true grounds of hope.

At what time soever a Ezekiel. 18.
sinner does repent from the bottom of his heart, I will blot out all his sins
out of my remembrance (says the Lord). This very sentence has been a means to
delude a world of men, whereas indeed it is no ground at all to build hopes for
heaven upon: for,

1. There are no such words as these to be found in the whole Scripture: and,

2. The place where these words are found, it is only in the common Liturgy,
which Liturgy is but an abstract of the Popish Mass, for though all that is
in the Popish Mass be not in the Common Prayer, yet all that is in the
Common Prayer is in the Popish Mass; it may be you will scarce believe this,
but it is very true, as you may see, if you look into the second volume of the
Book of Martyrs the 667. page, where there is a Letter inserted of King Edward
the sixth, sent to the Papists in Cornwall, who were risen up in arms about
the translating of the Mass into Englsh, which they would by no means agree
to, but rose up to oppose it; King Edward to pacify them, wrote to them on
this manner, As for the Service-booke, the translating of it may seem to you to
be some new thing, but they are the very same words in English which were
before in Latin, and if the Mass book which is in Latin be good, then it is
as good now, though it be translated into English.

3. You will say the Lord himself said these words, At what time a sinner does
repent I will blot all his sins out of my remembrance, (says the Lord). I
answer, that it is not said so in the whole Book of God, and if you look into
that Text of Scripture which they ground these words upon, that the Lord did
say so, you shall find it otherwise; it is in Ezekiel. 18. 21. mark the words,
these are Gods words indeed; If a wicked man will turn from all the sins that
he has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and
right, he shall surely live, and not dye. They say if a wicked man does repent
of his sins; now repentance is a general work, Judas did repent, but his
repentance did him no good; but here you see it is said that if a wicked man
turn from all his evil ways, and do that which is lawful and right, then he
shall surely live.

the righteous man sins seven times a day; this is one of the greatest props
a wicked man has, says he, what do you tell me of my sins, the best men have
their failings, the righteous sin seven times a day, and why may not I go to
heaven as well as they? wicked men make this a great prop to their hopes, when
indeed there is no place of Scripture like this in the whole Bible; that which
comes nearest to it, is in Prove. 24. 16. A just man falls seven times and
rises Prove. 24. 16.
again, but the wicked fall into mischief: now here is no mention of falling
into sin in the text, nor no mention of a day; but only thus, a just man
falls seven times, and rises again: St. Austin gives this sense of the word;
a godly man falls seven times, that is often times, expounding this place
with that in Job 5. 19. The Lord Job 5. 19.
will be with thee in six troubles, and in seven there shall no evil touch
thee: A righteous man, says Augustine, falls seven times, not sins, seven
times, he does not fall into sin, but into affliction; the righteous falls
seven times, that is, the godly in this world are liable to fall seven times
into affliction, that is, very often into afflictions and troubles while he
lives here in this world; according to that of Job, In six troubles and in
seven the Lord shall deliver thee, meaning oftentimes: and therefore this place
carries no reference at all of falling into sin seven times a day.

2. Suppose it were so, that the righteous did sin seven times a day, yet the
text says in the next words, that as often as he falls he rises again; now
it may be, many of you that make this a prop for your hopes of heaven, do fall
into sin day after day, and never rise out of them again by repentance: you
leave out these words, and rises again, for many of you live your whole lives
long in an evil course, you wallow and lie down in sin, and therefore this can
be no prop for your hopes.

Christ died for all and for every man in the world; This comes within the
Arminian bounds, but this opinion is taken up by others too as well as them,
that hold universal Redemption; but because I have already preached two or
three Sermons upon this subject, I shall therefore only now speak so much as
is needful, to show you the rottenness and insufficiency of this prop; 1.
Suppose Christ did dye for all, yet those men that are of this opinion, that
Christ did dye for all, they do not hold that all men are saved by Christ, but
some men may fall off from Christ; and be damned, notwithstanding Christ dyed
for them.

2. Take this by way of answer, that it is not likely that they should have
benefit by Christ's blood, that have no benefit by this death.

3. To you that make this a plea for your hopes of heaven; observe this, that
where there are these general expressions, they are very ill understood: if
you say they speak of universal and general redemption, as in 2 Cor. 5. 14,
15. Because we thus judge, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15.
that if one died for all, then are all dead, and he died for all, that they
that live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him that died
for them and rose again; why, here none can lay claim to Christ's death, but
those that live to Christ that died for them: and so in Heb. 2. 9. But we see
Jesus that was made a little lower then the Angels, for the suffering of death,
clothed with glory and honor, that he by the grace of God should taste death
for every man; but mark the restraint in the next words; For it became him for
whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto
glory (here the Apostle restrains the words) to make the captain of their
salvation perfect through sufferings; for both he that sanctifies, and they
that are sanctified are all one, for which cause he is not ashamed to call them
brethren: the Apostle does here again restrain the words, and therefore this
can be no more prop for your hopes, that are not sanctified; but thus much may
suffice for the first branch, in showing you how wicked men do make those
places to be Scripture props for their hopes which are not.

Christ came into Mat. 18. 11.
the World to save sinners; now this is a Scripture promise, for Christ came to
seek and save them that were lost: but now Luke 19. 10.
(beloved) men do misapply this general pillar of hope; they take them in the
general notions of them, and this makes abundance of people to harbor great
hopes of heaven in their hearts: but now I shall show you, wherein they do
misapply them.



The promise is good and comfortable, but it cannot convey any comfort to thy
soul, unless thou art in Jesus Christ, no more then a dry pipe can convey
water to thee without the fountain: we are first made Christ's, and then we have
a right to all the promises of Christ: it is by our interest in Christ, that we
have a right and title to all the promises of God in Christ. If you have an
interest in Christ, you have all the promises as it were bound up in a bundle,
which you may have recourse to, and make use of when you will.



Answ. It is true, there are some promises that are absolute, so as to have no
condition, going before them, but every promise in the Gospel has some
condition or other annexed to it, if it has not a condition going before it as
meritorious; yet it has a condition that follows after it, ^^ in Genesis 17. 1.
I am thy God all sufficient, Genesis 17. 1.
(what then?) walk before me and be thou perfect. In 2 Cor. 6. 16, 18. I will
be their God, 2 Cor. 6. 16, 18.
and they shall be my people: and I will be a father unto you, and ye shall be
my sons and daughters, says the Lord God Almighty: what follows? why in the
1. verse of the next chapter, says the Apostle there, Having 2 Cor. 7. 1.
therefore these promises (dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness both of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of
God. So in Heb. 5. 9. Christ came into the Heb. 5. 9.
world to save sinners, but there is a condition goes after it, he that
sanctifies, and they that are sanctified, must be all one: There is no promise
in all the Gospel, but that a condition is prefixed, or annexed to it: in Mat.
11. 28. says Christ, Come unto me Mat. 11. 28.
all you that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest: there is a
foregoing condition, we must come unto Christ: and other promises have
conditions going after, as I could instance diverse, but these shall suffice.

There are two props more behind, they are but very short ones; I shall go
over one of them now, because I would not be hindreed in my afternoons work, in
showing you the difference between those that have a real and well grounded
hope, and those that have only a false and deluding hope.



Ans. Were this a sufficient ground for Answ. 1.
hope for heaven, there would more of the heathens go to heaven, then of you;
for they walk very exactly, and are just and upright in all their dealings. But
wicked and bad men may have very good meanings in them, as we may see in
Balaam, Numb. 23. 10. he desired to die the death of the righteous, and that
his last end might be like his: this was a good desire and meaning in him.

Scribes and Pharisees, they performed very good actions in themselves, but
they had self ends, and bad meanings that spoiled all their duties; good
meanings cannot justify bad actions. If thy actions be wicked, good meaning
can do thee no good: Romans 8. Those that say, Let us do evil that good may
come of it, their damnation is just.

Prove. 19. 2. The mind without knowledge cannot be good; as no man ever became
rich by meaning and purposing to be rich, but by laboring and endeavoring
after it, so no man ever went to heaven by good meanings without good actions
accompanying them.



Ans. 1. Though you pay every man his Answ. 1.
own, yet do you give God his own? or rather do you not wrong God, and do him
infinite indignities?

they were very exact in giving every man his due; the proud Pharisee could
boast in Luke 18. 11. I am no extortioner nor unjust man: you may mean well and
give every man his own, and yet be a wicked man.

SERMON, XIV.
EPHESIANS. 2. 12. -- Having no hope --
I shall show you the rottenness and insufficiency of it in these three or
four particulars.

Psalm. 37. 37. Mark the upright man, and behold the Psalm. 37. 37.
just, for the end of that man is peace; but there is no peace, says my God,
to the wicked, Esai. Esa. 57 41.
57. 41. There may be a fearednesse of conscience, and stupidity of heart, but
they cannot die peaceably and in hope.

did tell him his danger, and his doom, then thus to die in a stupid manner. In
Job 21. 23. it is said, that a wicked man dies in his full strength, being
wholly at ease and quiet: no sin troubles him, nor no danger makes him afraid:
so in Psalm. 73. 4, 5. they have no bands in their death, but their strength is
firm; they are not in trouble, as other men, neither are they plagued as other
men; they have no trouble in their life time, and no bands in their death: now
this is rather to be looked upon as a judgment upon them, and not as a mercy.

Esai. 29. 8. An hungry man dreameth, and behold, he eats: but he awaketh,
and his soul is empty: so a wicked man dreams he is going to heaven, when he is
falling down into hell.

Prove. 14. 23. In the midst of laughter, the heart is sorrowful. In the midst
of a wicked man's boasting, there is a fear of hell.

5. Though you have seen some men that have dyed with stupidity of heart,
depart quietly; yet there are other wicked men, whose consciences are awakened,
that die full of horror, and terror, and amazement. When their consciences tell
them, they have dyed swearers, or liars, or drunkards, or adulterers, etc. they
are filled with horror, and terror of conscience; that though he thought all
his life time he should go to heaven, yet he now fears he is going down into
hell.

And thus I have done with the third Question, in showing you the reasons why,
(seeing the Scripture says that a wicked man has no hope) that of all the men
in the world, wicked men do nourish greatest hopes for heaven in their hearts;
there are only two queries more to handle, and then come to the fifth branch of
man's misery.



Ans. I shall here give you six apparent differences between them.

the hope of the Gospel, because Col. 1. 23.
it is gotten by the Gospel as the means, and grounded upon the Gospel as the
end: that we (says the Apostle) through the comfort of the Scriptures might
have Romans 15. 4
hope: a godly man has his comforts from the Scriptures. Psalm. 119. 49. Good
is the Psalm. 119. 49.
word of the Lord, wherein thou have caused thy servant to hope. But now the
hopes of wicked men, as they are gotten they know not how, so neither do they
know upon what they are grounded, and this is the reason why they are called
presumptuous hopes; for this is presumption, when a man does believe a thing,
when he can have no visible nor likely means, to ground or bottom his hopes
upon.

our hope, because he is the 1 Timothy 1. 1.
foundation on whom believers do build all their hopes for heaven; so likewise
they build their hope on the mercies of God, in Psalm. 147. 11. The Lord takes
pleasure Psalm. 147. 11. Psalm 33. 18.
in those that fear him, in those that hope in his mercy: and again in Psalm.
33. 18. The eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them that trust in
his mercy: and so in Psalm. 52. 8. says David there, I trust in the mercies of
God for ever and ever. A godly man he is cast out of himself, and out of an
opinion of his own righteousness, and his hopes are only built upon the mercy
of God, and on the merits of Christ. But now the false and presumptuous hopes
that wicked men have, are not built so much upon Gods mercy as their own
duties, and not so much upon the merits of Christ, what he has done for them,
as upon their own duties what they have done for themselves.

David says, I had fainted under my afflictions, but Psalm. 119. 81.
that thy word is my hope: and hence it is that you have those two admirable
expressions put together, Romans 5. 2, 3. Rejoicing in hope, Romans 5. 2, 3.
and glorying in tribulation; these are put together to show, that when a man
can rejoice in hope, he can glory in all the tribulations, he meets with in the
world. But now presumptuous hopes, are like lead, and ponderous weights, that
will make you sink under every affliction. It is only a true and saving hope,
that will enable you to hold up your heads under all afflictions and troubles.

hope, that hopes for heaven as its end, but yet never acts holiness as its
way to heaven; true hope as it hopes for heaven, so it labors to work out its
salvation with fear and trembling; You have an admirable passage for this in
Psalm. 119. 166. Psalm. 119. 166.
says David there, Lord I have trusted in thy salvation, and I have done thy
commandments: here is both hoping and acting for heaven put both together,
wicked men they hope for heaven, but they do not do Gods commands, and so in
Psalm. 37. 3. Trust in the Lord Psalm. 37. 3.
and do good, says the Psalmist, here is trusting and doing put together, true
hope does act for heaven as well as hope for heaven; but false hope does hope
much and act little; wicked men will hope for salvation, but not work out their
salvation; hope for heaven, but not labor for heaven: this is the fourth
difference.

Joh. 3. 3. He that has this hope in him, purifieth 1 John 3. 3.
himself even as God is pure; he does labor and endeavor to keep his heart
upright, and pure, and free from sin. But now a false hope will hope for
heaven, though they walk on after the imaginations of their own hearts, as in
Esai. 51. 10. Thou have walked in the greatness of thy wicked Esai. 51. 10.
ways, yet said thou not, there is no hope: though they had great sins, yet
they had great hopes for heaven; if thou art such a one as is mentioned in
Deuteronomy. 59. 18. that say, Thou shall have peace, though thou walk Deuteronomy. 59.
18.
after the imaginations of thy own heart, to add drunkenness to thirst, if
thou art such a one, thy hope is only a presumptuous hope.

Romans 5. 4. Patience works experience, and experience hope: Romans 5. 4.
True hope flows from a long and well grounded experience in the ways of God;
and from an experience of the grace, and bounty, and love of God to his soul:
and from experiences of the goodness, and mercy, and promises of God: and
likewise from an experience of his own heart, in withstanding temptations,
subduing corruption, and performing holy duties. Such experiences as these are
inlets to a well grounded hope for heaven; but now the hopes of wicked men, are
only the results of ignorance, they that never had any experience of
themselves, nor of the ways of God; they have most hopes, but their hopes are
only deluding, and presumptuous hopes: wicked men that do so quickly get into a
state of hope, without any former experiences of the ways of God, it is a sign
that their hopes are only vain and empty hopes; they are but pithy hopes: just
like your pithy trees, as Elders, and Withies, and such like trees, they shoot
up fastest, and grow up soonest; whereas the more firm and stronger wood, as
Oaks, and Elm, and the like, are a great while longer in growing, before they
come to maturity; why, so it is a great while before a Godly man can get a well
grounded assurance of his hopes for heaven.



1. For consolation. 2. For terror: and, 3. For instruction.
has no hope, yet it says otherwise of you that are a people of God, the
Scripture tells you that your hope is laid up in heaven Col. 1. 5. Jer. 17. 17.
Psalm. 71. 5.
for you; and the Lord is your hope; though wicked men have no hopes for
heaven, yet you have grounded, and assured, and certain hopes for heaven: your
hope is laid up for you in another world; the wicked have only their hopes in
this life, and when they die, their hopes shall Job 8. 13.
perish, as in Prove. 11. 7. When a wicked man dies, his expectation shall
perish, and the hope of unjust men perishes; but it is not so with you, for
the godly hope in their death. And Prove. 14. 32.
this hope of a godly man, is not as the Papists hold, for though they grant a
believer has hope, yet they deny that any have assurance, they say that all a
believers evidence for heaven is only a hope, a p^^l adventure, (a most
uncomfortable tenent;) whereas the Scripture says, there is as full an
assurance of hope, as of faith, in Heb. Heb. 16. 11.
16. 11. says the Apostle, use all diligence to the full assurance of hope
unto the end, and so in Romans 15. 5. Your hope is such as will not make Romans 15.
5.
you ashamed; your hopes are not like the hopes of men that hope for dead (...)
shoes (as the proverb is), for they may go on barefoot before they die, but
Christ, who is our hope, he has dyed already, and risen again; he has made
his will and testament; and has left us legacies, and be queathed riches to
us: our hopes are well grounded hopes, not as other men's are, that will leave
them, when they have most need of them.

Use 2. The second Use shall be by way of terror, to show you the misery of
those men, that have only presumptuous hopes for heaven.

1. You are in a state of unlikelihood to be converted, more then any other men
in the world; and this is the reason why the Scripture tells us, that whores and
harlots shall go to heaven, before the Scribes and Pharisees, and yet they were
a very strict people, and did walk very outwardly holy; and the reason is,
because it is an easier matter to convince a harlot of her sins, then to
convince a proud Pharisee, that thinks himself as good as the best, and has
lived in peace all his life time.

Prove. 11. 7. the place before quoted; The hope of the wicked shall be cut off,
and when he dies, his expectations shall perish: he looks for heaven, but he
shall be disappointed; as in Job 8. 14. His confidence shall be cut off, and
his trust shall be sake a Spiders web, as the Spider wraps himself in his web,
and dwells there securely all the week long, but at the end of the week, when
the maid comes to sweep the windows, she sweeps down the web, and the Spider
both; just so the hopes of all wicked men shall come to nothing: and so in Job
11. 20. The eyes of the wicked shall fail, and they shall not escape; and their
hope shall be as the giving up of the ghost. As a dying man, a little before
his death, is pretty joyful and merry, and entertains some hopes of a longer
life, but when his eye-strings crack, and the tokens of death appear upon him,
then his heart fails him, and all his hopes are dashed in pieces, and taken from
him; just so it is with wicked men, they are full of hopes for heaven, till
they come to dye, but then their hopes leave them, and all their expectations
perish.



1. It produces frustration and disappointment of all your hopes: when you are
a dying, you hope that after death, you shall lanch forth into a sea of joy and
pleasure, when on the contrary you shall lanch forth into a river of brimstone,
which the breath of the Lord shall kindle: you hope it may be, that after
death, you shall be carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom, when you may be
carried by the Devils into Beelzebubs bosom: you it may be hope that death
shall be a door to let you into heaven; when it shall be only a back door to
let you fall down into hell.

2. It shall produce in you vexation. Now vexation arises either from
disappointment, or revenge: why, so wicked men shall not only have a privation
of happiness, but a vexation in the loss of happiness. And hence it is, that
some Divines give the reason why it is said in Mat. 8. 12. that in hell there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth; Some are of an opinion, that as our
fire burns hot, so the fire of hell shall burn cold, but that is but a fancy:
our Divines say, that there shall be gnashing of teeth in hell, in token of
that vexation of mind that shall be in wicked men, because all their hopes are
so frustrated and disappointed, they shall gnash their Luke 13. 28.
teeth for vexation of mind, when they shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and they themselves thrust
out.



then this may teach us these two or three lessons.







Heb. 6. 11. it is called the full assurance of hope.

Tit. 2. 13. it is called a blessed hope: and,

Act. 15. 9. it is said Act. 15. 9.
there, that Faith purifieth the heart, and so likewise does hope, 1 John 3. 3
Every man that 1 John 3. 3.
has this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as God is pure: And,

this is gotten by the word of God, Romans 10. 17. and so is hope too, Col. 1.
23. it is gotten by the ^^aching of the Word.

2. Faith is wrought in us by the power of God: Heb. 12. 2. Christ is the
author and finisher of our faith; and so is hope likewise wrought in us by the
power of the holy Ghost, Romans 15. 13 that ye may abound in hope through the
power of the Holy Ghost. So that hereby you see that you ought not to have such
low thoughts of this grace of hope, as if it were an easy matter for every man
to get it; for there is as much certainty, as much excellency, as much efficacy
in this grace, and as much difficulty in getting this grace of hope, as there
is in faith. And thus I have done with the 4. branch of an unconverted man's
misery, that he is without any well grounded hopes for heaven.

SERMON, XV.
EPHESIANS. 2. 12. -- And without God in the World.
without God in the World; and here first I shall give you something from the
order of the words, and then unfold them; and then draw out some Doctrines from
them.

without Christ put in the first place of the Text, and their being without God
put in the last place?

Answ. Their being without Christ, is put in the first place, because it was
the inlet of all their misery, and their being without God is put in the last
place, because it is the final upshot of man's misery; it is the inlet of a
man's misery to be without Christ, and it is his misery to be an alien to the
Commonwealth of Israel, and a stranger to the Covenant of Promise, and to be
without hope, and it is the upshot of all thy misery to be without God in the
World; and here I shall show you that there are multitudes of men and women in
the World, that are without God, though they do every day worship God, yet
they may live all their days without God; but before I speak to this, I must
unfold two or three things in the words, as

without God in the World, when the Apostle says in another place, that the
wicked Act. 17. 27.
cannot be without God, the Lord is not far from every one of us, for in him
we live and move and have our being, here the Apostle says that wicked men are
not far from God, and that they live in God; and therefore how can it be said
in the Text, that wicked men are without God in the World, whereas we are all
Gods offspring, and come from God, how can this be?

Answ. The answer is very easy; and that is this, that in some sense there is
no man nor creature in the World without God; and yet in another sense there
are multitudes of men that are without God in the World.

way of creation and preservation, etc. But how in another sense there are
multitudes of people without God; this is in a way of special interest in him,
without a reconciled God, without God as a Father to you in Jesus Christ,
without a God that you can lay claim to as yours, in this sense multitudes of
people are without God in the World.

2. Another thing that I shall explain to you is this, what it is to be
without God, and without God in the World.

I answer, that to be without God it includes in it in Scripture phrase these
four things.

1. To be without the knowledge of the true God. 2. To be without the true
worship of the true God. 3. To be without a true obedience to the true God; And
4. To be without a peculiar interest and propriety in God.
Jonah 1. 5, 6. when there was a great tempest upon the Sea, and the ship like
to be cast away that Jonah was in, it is said, that every man prayed to his
God, and Jonah be prayed to the Lord his God, and so in Micah 4. 5. For all
people will Mic. 4. 5.
walk every one in the name of his God, and we will walk in the name of our God
for ever and ever. Every man may have something to worship as a God, and yet be
without the true God, those are said to be without God, that are without the
knowledge of the true God, as you may see in 2 Chr. 15. 3. it is said there,
that for a long time Israel was without the true God; without God, how so? does
not God rule and govern and preserve the World? yes, but they are said to be
without God, because they were without the knowledge of God, for if you mark
the next words, it is said, they were without the teaching Priest, and without
the Law, so that all the while they lay in ignorance of the true God, they were
said to be without God.

Israel had the Ark among them which was the sign of Gods presence, all that
while God was among them, but when the Ark was taken God was gone too, the Lord
will be with you while you are with him, while you worship God sincerely and
uprightly according to his will, so long God will be with you.

true obedience to the true God, when men do so live as that the commands of
God bear no sway over them, it is a sign they are without God, as in Psalm. 81.
11. Psalm. 81. 11
My people, says God, would not hear my voice, and Israel would have none of
me; the not obeying of Gods commands is a not having of God; thou art without
God in the world oh man, unto whose conscience the sovereignty and authority of
a God cannot give a check, and a control to thy lusts, to bring thee into
obedience to him.



Now if you ask me in which of these four senses these Ephesians here in the
text, were without God, I answer, that they were without God in all of them,
for while they were in a state of Gentilism, they were without the knowledge of
the true God, and without the worship of the true God, and without any
obedience to the true God, and without any real interest and propriety in God,
but chiefly the two latter are included in this phrase; the general point of
Doctrine that I shall observe, from this last branch of man's misery shall be
this,

That every man during the state of his unregeneracy is without God in the
world; this only in the general.

But here some may enquire what is meant by this expression without God in the
World; The meaning is, that they were without any propriety or interest in God
in this world, and if they are without God in this world, they must of
necessity be without God in another world. And thus you have the words
explained to you, I shall now give you a more particular view of them; without
God in the World, the words as they are rendered in our translation, incline
this way, for a man to be without any peculiar interest and propriety in God,
but these words (without God in the World) in the Greek signifies Atheists in
the World; that is, they did so live as if there were no God in the World; so
then the words being thus opened, there are two things involved in this phrase
without God in the World.







Doctr. That every man in the state of unregeneracy, he is an Atheist in the
World; he is a man that lives as if there were no God in the World, every man
in the state of unregeneracy is a practical Atheist; now when I tell you that
every wicked man is an Atheist, do not mistake me, for there are two sorts of
Atheists, an Atheist in judgment, and an Atheist in practice; an atheist in
judgment is such a one, as Pagans and Heathens are, but an Atheist in practice
is such a one as lives, as if there were no God in the World; so that the
Doctrine is, that every unregenerate man is a practical Atheist, that is, he
so lives as if there were no God in the World, Psalm. 14. 1. The Fool has said
in his heart there is Psalm. 14. 1.
no God, that is, he so lives as if there were no God that takes notice of what
he does; thou art a practical Atheist oh man that so live in the World, as
if there were no God in the world: and here

1. I shall show you how it comes to pass that any man is so grossly wicked
to live as if there were no God in the World; And

2. I shall give you the characters of a man that does live after this manner.

1. How it comes to pass that men should be so grossly wicked, such
practical Atheists, to live as if there were no God in Four grounds of
Atheism.
the World, I shall give you four grounds of it.

forbearance toward them, Eccles. 8. 11. Because Eccles. 8. 11.
God does not speedily execute judgment upon wicked men when they commit a
finne, therefore they run into thoughts of Atheism, and sin with greediness,
as if there were no God in the World, as in Psalm. 50. 21. These things, says
God, thou Psalm. 50. 21
have done, and I held my tongue, therefore thou thoughtest that I was like
thee, but I will reprove thee, and set thy sins in order before thee, because
God held his tongue, and did not reprove them for their sins, therefore they
thought him to be such a one as themselves, that he was a sinner as well as
they; because sentence against an evil work is not speedily executed,
therefore the hearts of the sons of men are set in them to do evil, the for
bearance of God to wicked men makes them run on into practical atheism,
whereas this is no ground at all to encourage thee to run on in sin; for

The bountifulness Romans 2. 4.
and long suffering of God should lead us to repentance.



forbear a while from punishing of thee for thy sins, yet he does neither
forgive thee nor forget thee, as in Nahum. 1. 3. The Lord is slow to anger, but
he is great in power, and he will not surely clear the wicked; though God does
forbear thee, yet he will not forget thee: so in Eccles. 8. 12. Though a sinner
does Eccles. 8. 12.
evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged, yet it shall not be well
with him in the latter end.

Romans 2. 24. says the Apostle there, the name of God is blasphemed Romans 2. 24
among the Gentiles through you. I have read a hrange story of a woman here in
England, that called in question the Deity, whether there was a God or no, and
a Minister coming to her to convince her, and satisfy her conscience, and to
persuade her into a belief that there was a God, asked of her this question,
how she came to be an atheist, she answered the very first thing that caused
her to entertain thoughts of atheism, to believe there was no God, was the
seeing of him live so wickedly and profanely; for, says she, I know you to be
a learned and knowing man, and you preach good Sermons, and exhort people well,
and the very beholding you to live so wickedly, to be a swearer, a liar, a
drunkard, and a Sabbath breaker, etc. this made me to question, whether there
were a God in heaven or no, seeing he did let you run on still unpunished.

Moses that penned the beginning of it were a man of God or no; then he
questioned how Moses could write of those things that were done before he was
born, and then whether the Papists might not alter it in the translating of it;
and many others questions till by degrees he came to be a very atheist, and to
question whether there were a God or no: and so there are some errors now in
print, that tend very much to atheism; there are some that do affirm, that
that Book or volume of Books called the Bible is not the Word of God, and
such an opinion as this does very much work upon men's hearts and persuade
them, that there is no God, as in i Pet. 3. 4. says the Apostle, There shall 1
Pet. 3. 4.
come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, (there are
the Atheists, but how came they to be so? mark the next words) and saying,
Where is the promise of his coming? for since the Fathers fell asleep all
things continue as they were from the beginning, say they, we have heard that
all men must be judged, that after death they must appear before the
Judgment Seat of God, to give an account of all their actions; Now because
they did not see these things accomplished already, they cried out, Where is the
promise of his coming? they would not believe there was any such thing, the
questioning of the truths of God was that which brought them to be very
atheists.

Pharaoh in Exodus 5. 2. Who is the Lord (says he) that I Exodus 5. 2.
should obey his voice? and so Nebuchadnezzar, in Dan. 3. Who is that God
(says Dan. 3. 15.
he) that shall deliver you out of my hands? so Alexander said himself was
God. Atheists are ordinarily of the greatest and richest and highest people.

England, that we are without God in the world? you may say so to Pagans and
Heathens, but we hope you will not say so to us.

Thirteen Characters of an Atheist. Psalm. 14. 1.
them out of the Scripture, and ten more deduced from the Scripture: in Psalm.
14. 1. where it is said, The Fool has said in his heart there is no God, in
that very Psalm there are three discoveries of an atheist.

The Fool has said in his heart there is no God, what follows? they are
corrupt, they have done abominable works, there is none that does good, that
man that all his life time lives in a disorderly course of life, and adds
drunkenness to thirst, and commits one sin after another, that man is a
practical atheist, he lives as if there were no God in the World.

They eat up my people as they eat bread, and they call not upon the Lord, such
a man is a practical atheist.

Psalm. 14. 6. You have shamed the counsel of the poor, because the Lord is
his refuge.



2. Are they atheists that do neglect the duty of prayer? oh then with grief
of heart be it spoken, how many atheists are there in the World that do wholly
omit this duty, both in their families and in their closets? How many are there
that can say, they never go to God upon their knees in secret, to beg for
grace and mercy from God? and this neglect of secret duties, is a palpable
demonstration that you do live as if there were no God in the World, and in so
doing ye are very atheists.

3. Is hatred and contempt of the people of God, a badge of an atheist? then
likewise are there many Atheists in the world: how many are there that can love
a swearer and adulterer, a prophaner, etc. yea, love a dog and yet hate a
Christian? this proceed from a root of Atheism; that is in their hearts.

SERMON, XVI.
EPHESIANS. 2. 12. -- And without God in the world.
I Have delivered you in my last, three Scripture discoveries of an Atheist;
there are ten other Characters yet behind, that are drawn from the Scriptures:
As,

Perkins gives us this badge of an Atheist, that that very sin which he will
not dare to commit in the presence of a child, yet that sin will he venture
upon when no eye sees him; thou that can venture upon a sin, in hope of
secrefie, thinking to hide it from the All-seeing Eye of God, thou art a very
Atheist, thou that dare do that in the sight of God, that thou art afraid to
do in the presence of a man; this proceeds merely from a root of Atheism that
is in the heart, as in Job 22. 12, 13, 14. when a Job 22. 12, 13, 14.
wicked man has done wickedly, he is ready to say. How does God know? can he
judge through the thick clouds? thick clouds are a covering to him, that he
sees not; these are the expressions of an Atheistical heart. An Atheist if he
can but keep himself from the censure and reproach of men, he is well enough,
if men cannot say black to his eye, or there goes a drunkard, a swearer, an
adulterer, or the like, he is never troubled for his sins. Oh therefore thou
that would be accounted chaste, where thou dwell, and yet keep thy
Dalilah in thy lap: and oh thou debaucht liver, that can quietly and securely
walk on in ways of sin, so that thou can but keep them from the eyes of men;
know thus much, that this proceeds from thy Atheistical heart. When the hope
of secrefie imboldens any man to the practice of any sin, that man is a very
Atheist: you that can fear the eye of a mortal man, and yet not be afraid of
the All-seeing Eye of an immortal God, you that were never troubled for your
sins, when no body knew them but your selves; but now this is that which
troubles you, that your sins are known to others, if it be thus with thee, thou
art a practical Atheist: those that are troubled, not because God sees their
sins, but because man sees them, they are very Atheists, as in Job 24. 13. 15.
17. these are they, that abhor the light, that Job 24, 13, 15, 17.
know not the way thereof, nor continue in the path thereof, the eye also of
the Adulterer waits for the twilight, and says no eye shall see me, and
disguiseth his face, for the morning to them is as the shadow of death, and if
one know them, they are in the terrors of the shadew of death: such as these
are very Atheists, they were not troubled because God saw their sins, but
because man did see their sins, this is as the terror of death to them: they
would not have men see their sins, and yet they do not care what follies they
are guilty of in the sight of God; so that men cannot say black to their eyes,
they are well enough. Such men as indulge themselves in the practice of secret
sins, are practical Atheists. A godly man will fear to commit a secret sin, as
well as a known gross and open sin; as Joseph, How Genesis 39. 9.
shall I do this great wickedness, and so sin against God? if the
apprehensions of a God do lie near your hear, you will have a care to avoid
secret, as well as open ans.

is a practical Atheist, that does not make conscience of the performance of
secret duties: he that never prays in secret, harbors this Atheistical
thought in him, that God does not hear him; it is very observable of the
Scribes and Pharisees in Scripture, you shall never read of a secret fast they
kept, nor of a private prayer they made, but they had public fasts a great
many, they did fast twice a week, and pray in the corners of the streets, and
give Alms, etc. but you never read of any private and secret duties they did
perform; which did proceed merely from roots of Atheism in their hearts: and
so this is an evidence of the Atheistical heart, if thou do never make
conscience of going to God in secret, and beg for grace and mercy from him; he
is a very Atheist that lives in the neglect of secret duties; for those men
that retain in their hearts, an apprehension of a Deity, they know that there
is no time so well spent, as that which is employed in secret prayer to God.
Cant. 2. 14. Oh my Cant. 2. 14
dove (says Christ) that art in the clifts of the rocks, in the secret places
of the stairs: let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is
they voice, and thy countenance is comely; Oh thou poor soul (says Christ)
that do pray in secret, and weep in secret corners, let me see thy face, and
hear thy voice. A man that has the apprehensions of a God before him, he
knows, that the Lord sees and takes notice of the breathings of his heart
before him in secret: and therefore they are as much in the closet to pray in
secret, and to power out their souls before God in private, as they are in
public. It is very observable that there were very few actions of Christ that
were recorded by all the four Evangelists, and yet this of Christ's praying
alone, when no body was with him, is recorded by them all: Mat 26. 39. Luke 22.
41. Mar. 14. 35. Ioh. 17.
whereas other things, if they be recorded by one, they are left out by
another; but this is spoken of by all of them. Now the reason of it is this,
because Christ would be an example to us, to teach us to be frequent in the
performance of this duty: and therefore it is a sign of an Atheistical heart
in any one that does not make conscience of pouring out his heart in secret
prayer to God.

Psalm. 50. 21. These things have thou done (says God) and I held my tongue,
therefore thou thoughtst that I was such a one as thy self. (Beloved) if any of
you harbor such thoughts as those in your hearts, that because God does not
presently punish you for your sins, therefore you will go on still in sin: let
me tell you, that this is the practice of a very Atheist. Because the drunkard
is not taken away by God, while the wine is in his head; and because the
swearer is not destroyed by God, while the oath is in his mouth; and because
the liar is not cut off by God, while the lie is upon his tongue, therefore
they will run on with greediness, and willingness in the same sins, all this
flows from the very root of Atheism, that is in thy heart.

Pet. 3 4. And there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their
own lusts, saying, Where is the promise of his coming? Thou that do not
harbor in thy heart, a mindfulnesse of the day of Judgment, art a very
Atheist, for thou that do not believe God to be a Judge, do not believe
him to be a God; When Paul spoke to Felix of temperance, and of the judgment
to come, his Act. 24. 25.
heart trembled at the hearing of it. Eccles. 11. 9. Rejoice oh young man in
thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in
the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but know thou that for
all these things God will bring thee to judgment. Thou that live in the
world, and never so much as think of a day of judgment, thou art a very
Atheist; and oh (beloved) how many Atheists are there now in the world in this
regard, that do put far from them the evil day!

Saul discover himself to be an Atheist, 1 Samuel 28. 7, 8. when he was in
distress, he went to the Witch of Endor for help and succor. And what does
God say of such as run to Witches and Wizards; Is it not because there is not a
God in Israel, that you run to other Gods to inquire of them? It is mere
Atheism for any to distrust God, and run unto others for help, or any other
way to run into sinful courses in times of danger, to find relief, you do
hereby declare, that you think there is no God in the world.

world, that man makes gold his God, and therefore these two are joined
together, Ephesians. 15. 5. The covetous person, who also is an Ephesians. 15. 5.
Idolater, he makes an idol of his money: and this Job frees himself from, in
Job 31. Job 31. 24.
24. says he, I have not made gold my hope, nor (...) gold my confidence, for,
if I had done so, then I had denied the God above, says he in the 28. verse. 28.
verse: why now (beloved) there are many among us that love money better then
their own souls, that will sell their souls to gain a little wealth: many among
us love money better then we love heaven it self, that do not care what sins
they commit for it; and had rather part with their souls, then with their
riches. And so when you set your love upon your belly, you make your belly your
God; or if upon pleasures, then you make pleasures your God; and so of any
thing else. And therefore (beloved) I beseech you look to it, and examine your
selves; is not God undervalued sometimes, when your lusts are set in the
throne? is not God sometimes very low in your estimation, and other things set
above him? if it be so, it is mere Atheism in your hearts.

performing those covenants which he has made with God; in Josh. 24. 25, 26.
there Joshua made a covenant with the people; Josh. 24. 25, 26.
and set them a statute, and an ordinance in Shechem, and he wrote these words
in the book of the Law of God, and took a great stone, and set it up there
under an oak that was by the Sanctuary of the Lord: and Joshua said unto all
the people, Behold this stone shall be a witness unto us, for it has heard
all the words of the Lord which he spoke unto us, it shall be there for a
witness unto you, lest ye deny your God: and therefore those men that do call
the covenant that we have made, (with hands lifted up to the high God) an old
Almanac out of date, and do scorn and despise the oath they have taken, and
make no conscience of keeping the vows and covenants they have made with God,
the Scripture looks upon such men, as very Atheists: and (beloved) in this
regard, there are more Atheists now in England, then ever there were since the
world stood. But the Lord will manifest himself to be a just God, though wicked
men do despise his covenant, and count it as an unholy thing.

and commit one sin after another, and yet his conscience never give him any
control, that man is a very Atheist. Those that can live in the world, and
commit gross sins every day, and their consciences never check them for their
sins, it is a sad sign that such men are practical Atheists. If you have the
fear of God in you, and the thoughts of a God upon you, it will make you
reflect upon sins past, and be grieved for sins and miscarriages of twenty
years standing: thus did Joseph's brethren call to mind their former sins, Genesis
42. 21. And they said one to another, We Genesis 42. 21.
have verily sinned against our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his
soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear him, and therefore is this
evil come upon us; and so Job, Thou writest bitter Job 13. 26.
things against me, and make me to possess the iniquities of my youth: and so
David prays, that Psalm. 25. 7
God would not remember the sins of his youth. But now you that can be drunk
one day after another, and belch out one oath after another, and commit one
sin after another, and thy conscience never control thee, the Lord be
merciful to thee, for thou art plunged into a depth of Atheism. One compares
an Atheist to a duck in a pond, if a man throws a stone into the water, where
she is, she will presently dive under, but let it thunder or lighten never so
much in the heavens, she takes no notice of it; so an Atheist he cannot endure,
that men should take notice of him, or discover his wickedness, to reprove
him, or speak against him, but let God thunder upon him never so much, he will
not be troubled at it; did you live under the apprehensions of a Deity, it is
impossible your consciences should be so long and so frequently out of its
office.

King. 18. 21. says Elijah the Prophet to 1 King. 18. 21.
the people, How long will you halt between two opinions? if the Lord be God,
then follow him; but if Baal be God, then follow him: and the text says, the
people held their peace, and answered him not a word; they neither said they
would follow after God, neither did they say they would follow after Baal: if
God were too strong for Baal, they would be for God; but if Baal did prevail,
they would follow after him; which did manifest their Atheism, and that God
was not their God: that man that takes God to be his God, must follow him
through whatsoever troubles or afflictions he meets withal in the world; and
indifferency in matters of religion, does argue men to be very Atheists. And
therefore all time servers, that live according to the times, that are men of
indifferent tempers, any religion rather then fail, will serve their turns,
such men are practical Atheists.

Tit. 2. 16. that in their words do profess to know Christ, but in their works
they deny him. Those that do profess themselves to be Christians, and yet live
like heathens; that profess themselves to have an inheritance with the Saints
in light, and yet walk here as Children of darkness, such men are very
Atheists. And thus I have done with these 10. discoveries of a practical
Atheist, I have given you thirteen in all, three of them out of the Scripture,
and ten more deduced from the Scripture.

of secret sins? or do thou make no conscience of the performance of secret
duties? Do thou make impunity to be a provocation to impiety? and do thou
carry in thy mind a forgetfulness of the day of Judgment? or do thou
distrust the providence of God in times of trouble and distress? Do thou
place thy affections upon any thing in the world more then upon God? And do
thou make no conscience of performing the vows and covenants thou have made
with God? Does thy conscience never trouble thee after the commission of
sins? Art thou a luke warm and indifferent man in matters of Religion? Do
thou profess to know God, and in thy works deny him? Do thou any of these
ways entertain and harbor thoughts of Atheism in thy heart? Why, so far as
thou have done so, labor to bemoan and bewail it, and be humbled for it, and
to strive against and keep under this great sin of Atheism in time to come.

Use 2. This shall be by way of consolation, to comfort and support your
hearts: it may be there are some of you that hear me this day, that are the
precious servants of God, and yet in some kind or other have been tempted to
this sin of Atheism; well, for your comfort consider these two or three
things.

1. Art thou tempted to Atheism? why, yet consider that so was Jesus Christ
himself, he was tempted to Atheism and Blasphemy, when the Devil tempted him
to fall down and worship him: why so though thou have been tempted to Atheism,
and to forget Gods Alseeing Eye over thee, or the like, yet this may be for thy
comfort, that Christ himself was tempted as well as thee, as the Apostle says,
in Heb. 2. 18. in Heb. 2. 18.
that Christ suffered and was tempted, he is able to succor those that are
tempted; Christ was tempted to fall down and worship the very Devil, but
though Christ was tempted, yet the Devil could find no corrupt matter in
Christ to work upon. When the Devil shook Christ, he shook a pure
Crystall-glasse of clear water, his Nature was like a Crystall-glasse full of
clean water without any muddinesse or corruption at all, but if the Devil
should shake any of us, he would find abundance of dirty and muddy water in
the bottom, and corrupt matter enough in our natures to work upon.

2. Consider, that though you are tempted by the Devil to the sin of Atheism,
yet these temptations, if you do not approve of them, nor yield to them, shall
be charged upon the Devil as his sins, and not upon you. And thus you see I
have briefly dispatched this Doctine, that every man by nature is a practical
Atheist living in the world, as if there were no God in the world.

SERMON, XVII.
EPHESIANS. 2. 12. -- And without God in the World.
BEsides that Doctrine which I finished, the last sabbath, there is something
else in the Text; wicked men are without God in the World, that is, they are
without any special interest or propriety in God as their God, the words do
not only imply that they live, as if there were no God in the World, but they
live without any right, interest or propriety in God as their God, though they
are not without wisdom or wealth, or goods and estate, or honor and esteem
in the World, yet they are without any real interest or propriety in God as
their God, they are without God in the World: from whence I would note you this
Doctrine,

That every man by nature is without any real interest or propriety in God as
his God.

Now (Beloved) before I come to handle the point. I shall only premise three
conclusions by way of explanation, to delucidate the point, and show you what I
mean by this Doctrine: as

Creation, and preservation, so the worst Devil in hell may say that God is
his God: and

2. A wicked man may have God to be his God by way of profession, he may
profess to know God, and profess that God is his God; but now in another
sense a wicked man cannot be said to have God for his God, (that is) in a way
of relation and reconciliation for God to be a God in Covenant with him through
Jesus Christ.

Zach. 13. 8 9. the Lord there looks upon the Jewish Church under a threefold
consideration. And it shall come to pass that in all the land (says the Lord)
two parts therein shall be Zach. 13. 8, 9.
cut off and die, but the third shall be left therein, and I will bring the
third part through the fire, and will refine them as silver is refined, and
will try them as Gold is tried; they shall call on my name, and I will hear
them; I will say, it is my people, and they shall say, the Lord is my God:
though you all lay claim to God, yet there may be but one part in three, that
can truly say that God is their God in covenant with them.

Jer. 3. 4, 5. says God there, they shall cry unto me, My Father, thou act the
guide of my Jer. 3. 4, 5.
youth, and yet says God thou have done evil as much as thou could, so in
Psalm. 14. 1. The Psalm. 14. 1.
(...) has said in his heart there is no God, they have corrupted and done
abominable works, there is none that does good, those that have not God in
their hearts, nor in all their ways, yet they will lay claim to God as their
God, though they have committed abominable works and done evil as much as they
could.

Thus much for the conclusion, I come now to handle a practical question that
necessarily must be spoken to in the purfuance of this Doctrine, which is this.

Quest. What are the characters of those men that are without any real
interest and propriety in God as their God, in a way of Covenant and relation?

This question I do the rather resolve upon the consideration of the great
delusion and mistake that men's hearts are very apt to run into, to think that
God is their God when he is not, and therefore I shall lay down to you seven
distinguishing characters Seven Characters of those men that have no real
propriety in God.
of such men, and it may be I may come near the bosoms of many of you, though
the Lord knows I would not stagger the hope of the least of you that have a
real and well grounded interest in Jesus Christ: those men are without any
real interest in God as their God,

1. That are without any effectual knowledge of God as their God.

2. Those that live without making the Word of God to be their rule.

3. Those that live in the world, without making the ways of God to be their
pleasure.

4. Those that live in the World without making the glory of God to be their
aim.

5. Those that live in the World without making the day of the Lord to be their
delight.

6. Those that live in the World without making the people of God to be the
objects of their Love: and

Lastly, those that live in the world without making sin to be the object of
their hatred.

Chron. 15. 3. it is said there that for a 2 Chr. 15. 3.
long time, Israel was without the true God, and without the teaching Priest,
and without the Law, all that time (while they were without the Law, and the
Priest to teach them) it is said they were without God, those that live without
a saving knowledge of God, the Scripture looks upon them as having no real
interest in God. Joh. 8. 54, 55. Ioh. 8. 54, 55.
You say (says Christ) that he is your God, and yet you have not known him,
intimating that God was not their God because they were utterly ignorant of
him. Now (Beloved) every knowledge of God does not demonstrate your interest in
God, unless it be,

1. A practical knowledge of him, as in 1. Ioh. 8. 55.
Joh. 8. 55. says Christ there, I am of God, I know him, and I keep his
sayings: intimating that that man that does lay claim to God, as his God, must
know him, and this knowledge of him will make him yield obedience to him, and
keep his sayings; And,

David says in Psalm. 51. 6. Thou have made me to know wisdom in my inward
parts. If so be you were persons living without a practical and experimental
knowledge of God, you are without any interest in him as your God.

But before I can leave this particular, Object.
I must answer an Objection: Me thinks I hear a poor perplexed soul say, If
this be so that only those that know God aright have an interest in him, then
the Lord be merciful unto me, for I am a poor ignorant sinful wretch, that do
know nothing of God at all as I ought to know him; and therefore surely I have
no interest in God my God.

Ans. Now to such as you are, by way of Answ.
answer, I shall leave these two or three words for your comfort.

Prove. 30. 23. you read there of Agur, who was an excellent man in virtue and
knowledge, in the time of Solomon, and yet you shall not read of a man that
more complains of his ignorance then this man does: Surely (says he) I am
more brutish Prove. 30. 23.
then any man, and have not the understanding of a man: I have neither learned
wisdom, nor attained to the knowledge of the holy; and yet this man that so
much complains of his ignorance, did demonstrate such fruits of grace and
knowledge in his practice, as ever man did.

Psalm. 111. 10. A good understanding have all they Psalm. 111. 10.
that do thy commandments: God does not measure your knowledge by your
questions and disputes, but by your practice, as in Jer. 22. 16. He judged the
cause of the poor Ier. 22. 16.
and needy, then it was well with him; was not this to know me, says the Lord?



conceitedly ignorant, if thou art not a self-conceited man, that think thou
know much when thou know little, thou art well enough: if you are not
like those in Hos. 8. 2. Israel Hos. 8. 2.
shall say unto me, My God we know thee, and yet there is no fear, nor
knowledge of God in the land.

contentedly in thy ignorance, but do labor and endeavor after more
knowledge, then thy condition is good enough. But if thou say unto God,
Depart from me, for I desire Job 21. 14.
not the knowledge of thy ways, like those spoken of in Job: this is a sad
sign, that you have no interest in God at all.

obstinately ignorant, like those spoken of in Psalm. 82. 5. They know not,
neither will they understand When men are ignorant, and will be ignorant, this
is an evidence that they have no interest in God; in 2 Pet. 3. 5. says the
Apostle, these things they are willingly ignorant of; now if your ignorance be
accompanied with these three circumstances, that you are conceitedly, and
contentedly, and obstinately ignorant, if it be so, the Lord be merciful to
you; for these are apparent demonstrations, that you have yet no interest and
propriety in God, as your God. But though you have abundance of ignorance in
you, yet if you bewail your ignorance, and labor and desire after more
knowledge, if you follow on to know the Lord, and are not obstinately ignorant,
but would do more if you knew more, if it be thus with you, thy ignorance does
not evidence, that thou have no interest in God.

Joh. 8. 47. He that is of God, hears Ioh. 8. 47.
Gods Word; you therefore hear him not, because you are not of God: those that
will not make the Word of God to be their rule, and conform their practices in
obedience thereunto, Christ says the reason of it is because they are not of
God: and so in 1 John 1 Ioh. 4. 6.
4. 6. He that knows God, hears us, and he that is not of God, hears
not us; and therefore you that walk after the vain imaginations of your own
hearts, that are swayed and ruled by your lusts, and will not make Gods Word a
bridle to curb, and restrain your lusts and corruptions, but you will do what
you list, let God command what he will: all these are manifest arguments, that
you are not of God.

Joh. 3. 8. 10. In this the children of God are manifest and the children of
the Devil, whosoever does not righteousness is not of God: righteousness is
not to be taken here only for justice or civil righteousness, but for the whole
bulk of godliness and the body of christianity: he that does not
righteousness, is not of God: this not doing of righteousness is answerable
to the committing of sin, in 1 John 3. 8. the text says, He that commits
sin is of the Devil, now this is not to be taken simply, that he that falls
into sin is of the Devil, but he that commits sin, (that is) with complacency
and delight, and without any compulsion, such a man is of the Devil. And so
likewise he that cloth not do righteousness, is not of God, that is, he that
does not act and do it with delight, and alacrity, and complacency, such a one
is not of God: so in Joh. 3. 11. says the Apostle, (Beloved) follow not that
which is evil, but that which is good: he that does good, he is of God; but he
that does evil, has not seen God; (that is) he that does evil with delight
and satisfaction, and he that does not take delight in the ways of God, and
perform holy duties with cheerfulness and complacency, such a man is not of
God; and therefore you that take more delight in the committing of sin, then
you do in the performance of holy duties, you are but in a bad condition.

Samaritan, and bad a Devil, but did not come from God; he did convince them,
that this was a slander cast upon him, because he fought not his own honor but
the glory of God, Joh. 8. 49. 50. Jesus answered, I have Ioh. 8. 49. 50.
not a Devil, but I honor my Father, and ye do dishonor him, and I seek not
my own glory, there is one that seeks and judges.

Joh. 9. 26. It was the speech of the Pharisees to Christ, say they, This man
is not of God, because he keeps not the Sabbath Day: this had been a very
good argument, had it been rightly applied, the argument had been very strong,
if the application had been good, if Christ had not indeed kept the Sabbath,
but they were greatly mistaken, for Christ did keep the Sabbath. Why now
(beloved) these Pharisees, were they now alive, and should see you Christians
profaning the Sabbath day, spending and trifling it away in sports and
pleasures, in swearing and drunkenness, and dishonouring the name of God;
never employing one hour of it in prayer, reading, or hearing, or any holy and
religious exercise, they would presently conclude that you are not of God,
because you do not keep the Sabbath day.

Joh. 3. 10. He that does not righteousness is 1 John 3. 10.
not of God neither he that loves not his brother, and so in 1 John 4. 20. If
any man say, I love God and hates his brother, he is a liar, for he that
loves not his brother whom be has seen, how can he love God whom he has not
seen? He that does not love his brother, the children and people of God, he
cannot love God. You that carry in your hearts a secret malice and spleen
against those that are godly, and more holy and religious then your selves: you
that do tiger-like, hate the very pictures of godly men, you that hate the
people of God, and the Ministers of the Gospel, because they are so, that hate
godliness as godliness, these are evident arguments that the love of God is
not in you.

that have a true knowledge of God, and make his Word your rule, and his way
your pleasure, and his day your delight, and his glory your aim, and good men
the object of your love, and sin the object of your hatred; if these things be
in you, you may know undoubtedly, that you have an interest in God.

We come now to the application, which Use
may serve for unspeakable comfort to all you that are the people of God, that
can lay a well grounded and Scripture claim to God as your God.

Genesis 31. 29. when Laban spoke to Jacob, (says he) The God of your Fathers:
and so Pharaoh in Exodus 8. 25. 28. (says he) Go sacrifice to your God in the
land: and from hence Divines do observe, that the Scriptures do not suffer
wicked men to name God, as in a way of propriety to them, as their God: but now
those that are righteous and holy, that have indeed an interest in God, God is
not ashamed to be called their God. You that have an interest in God though
Heb. 11. 16.
you are a poor despicable people, yet be not afraid to own God as your God,
for the Lord is not ashamed, that you should call him your God; God is not
ashamed of us whose dwellings are in the dust, he will own us: and therefore
let this encourage you to go to God as your God, and apply him as your God,
and trust in him as your God, and pray to him and call upon him as your God,
for he is not ashamed of you. And here that I may speak a little further to
this particular, I would exhort you to two things.

1. To prove your interest in God: and, 2. To improve it.
Three discoveries of our interest in God.
a little help and further you in this examination, I shall here lay you down
three discoveries whereby you may know, and prove unquestionably that God is
your God.

Cor. 6. 18. and in the first verse of 2 Cor. 6. 18.
the next chapter; I will be your God and Father, and you shall be my sons and
daughters, says the Lord God Almighty: Having therefore these promises dearly
beloved (says the Apostle) let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness,
both of flesh and spirit: and therefore if you have a care to abstain from all
secret sins, whereby the inward man is defiled, it is a sign that you have a
real interest in God; because God will be our God, and will own and accept of
us to be his people; we must not only wash our legs and our outward man, but
our inward parts too, and if we do thus, we may be confidently assured that we
are a sacrifice well pleasing, and acceptable unto God through Jesus Christ:
but now you that make conscience of your ways, so far only, as that men may
not say black to your eye, if you do not labor to keep your inward man from
defilements as well as your outward man, you have no interest in God at all.

and conformity to Jesus Christ, as possibly you can. Do you labor to be holy
as he was holy? and humble, and meek, and lowly as he was? in 2 Cor. 7. 1.
says the Apostle there (dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness both of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.
Do you labor still to resemble God in holiness? thy relation and interest in
God will make thee labor to be like unto God, and to be still perfecting
holiness though you cannot be perfect in holiness, If you have an interest in
God, you will labor more and more to be holy as he is holy, and to come to the
nearest resemblance to him that may be.

he will be their God, and they shall be his people: that he will give them a
new heart taking away the heart of stone, and giving them a heart of flesh; and
that he will sanctify and renew their natures, and write his Law in their
inward parts, and work in their hearts a suitable disposition to his Law, and
put his fear into their hearts that they shall never depart from him: These are
the blessings of the Covenant of Grace. Now you that can give abundant and
evident testimonies in your own souls, that you have found God cleansing and
purifying your hearts, and sanctifying and renewing your natures, and writing
his Law in your inward parts, and putting his fear into your hearts, that you
do never depart from him; if you find these things in you, they are undoubted
evidences, that you have an interest in God.





David did in Psalm. 143. 10. Teach me to do thy will, (says he) for thou art
the Lord my God: here David did well improve his interest in God, so in Psalm.
119. 115. Depart from me ye evil doers, (says he) for I will keep the
commandments of my God. We should make our interest in God, an engagement upon
our souls, to keep the commands of God.

Jer. 3. 25. We have sinned against the Lord our God, we and our Fathers from
our Ier. 3 25.
youth even to this day, and have not obeyed the voice of the Lord our God:
here the children of Israel aggravate their sins against God as their God. And
so Daniel he makes his interest in God, a motive to stir him up to aggravate
sin against God, in Dan. 9. 5. says Dan. 9 5.
he there, We have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and done wickedly, and
have rebelled even by departing from thy precepts, and from thy judgments, and
then in verse. 7. Oh Lord, (says he) righteousness belongs unto thee, but
unto us confusion of face as at this day: so again in verse. 8. Oh Lord to us
belongs confusion of face, to our Kings, and to our Princes, and to our
Fathers, because we have sinned against thee: but to the Lord our God belongs
mercy and forgiveness, though we have rebelled against him: and so he goes
on all along, aggravating their sins against God: no less then ten times he
mentions their interest in God, and ten times he aggravates their sins
against God. It is the consideration of our interest in God, that does stir us
up to aggravate our sins against God, when we do consider that we have sinned
against our God, against our gracious and merciful Father, who has loved us,
and given us everlasting consolation and good hope through grace; who is
infinite in goodness, and abundant in mercy and truth; Such considerations as
these will exceedingly provoke us to aggravate our sins against him.

David encouraged himself in the Lord his God, in Psalm. 3. 7. I am thine (says
he) Lord save me: then you make a right improvement of your interest in God,
when you go to him, and trust, and rely, and depend upon him in all times of
danger and distress, for you have an interest in that God that is both able
and willing to relieve and succor you, a God that has helped you, and does
help you, and will never leave you, nor forsake you, and therefore be
encouraged to cast your care upon him.

FINIS.
THE SAINTS TRIUMPH OVER DEATH: OR, A SERMON Preached at the Funeral OF Mr.
CHRISTOPHER LOVE, IN Lawrence-Church, August. 25. 1651.

By THOMAS MANTON, Minister of the Gospel, at Stoak-Newington near London.

London, Printed by E. Cotes, for George Eversden, at the Golden-ball in
Aldersgate Street, 1652.

THE SAINTS TRIUMPH OVER DEATH: OR, A SERMON preached on a special occasion,
On 1 COR. 15. 57. But thanks be to God, who gives us the victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ.
THese words are a part of Paul's (...) or Triumphant Song: In the Song there
are two parts, and this is the last.

1. A confident Challenge. A view of the Context.
2. A solemn Thanksgiving.
The one is directed to the enemies, the other to the giver of victory.

1. A confident Challenge, in which he outbraveth Death, and all the powers of
the Grave, O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy victory? the
words allude to Ilos. 13. 14. where Christ is brought in speaking, I will
ransom them from the power of Death, and redeem them from the Grave: O Death,
I will be thy plagues; O Grave, I will be thy destruction; there is Christ's
engagement and undertaking for a full conquest of Death; Christ threatens
Death, and the Apostle insulteth over it: the form of the words is altered,
because the enemy was now fallen, and Paul proclaims the victory: hitherto
Death and the Grave had insulted over the misery and frailty of mankind, all
the tombs and charnels of the World were but so many Monuments of Deaths
conquests; Golgotha the place of skuls seemed to be designed on purpose, to
upbraid and discourage our Redeemer; so many skuls and rotten relics of
humane frailty, as there were in that place, so many Trophies and Monuments of
triumph did Death produce before the eyes of Christ, as if it were said to him,
Can thou, dare thou grapple and enter into the lists with such an enemy?
But our Lord was not discouraged, when he ascended upon the Cross; he did as
it were answer these bravings of Death thus, O Death I will be thy plagues, O
Grave, I will be thy destruction; and because he was as good as his word, and
every way performed his engagement, the Apostle as one of Christ's followers
comes and insulteth over this proud adversary that was now fallen, O Death,
where is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy victory?

This challenge is illustrated by a Prolepsis or an Anticipation of an
objection: some might ask, What is this sting of Death? What is this power of
the Grave? The Apostle answers, The sting of Death is sin, the strength of
sin is the Law; Death comes to have this power by sin, and sin to have this
power by the Law.

[The sting of Death] (...), The prick, it implies both the stroke of Death,
and the anguish of it; as in the sting of a Serpent, there is the deadly touch,
and the pain and torment of the wound: and so it notes the power of Death over
us, the prick or weapon by which it strikes is sin, Romans 5. 12. By one man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin; and the terrors and horrors of it,
which also do arise from sin; now by horrors I mean not only the natural
aversation, retirement or flight of the spirits, but the bondage, torment and
despair that is upon the conscience, as Death is a penal evil, inflicted by
the justice of God, guilt makes Death terrible, so that a sinner is all his
life time subject to bondage, Heb. 2. 14, 15. and kept under an awe of
judgment to come; it is not always felt, but soon awakened, especially in
sickness and approaches of Death; when we feel the cold hands of it ready to
pluck out our hearts, conscience is whipped with a scourge of six strings,
fear, horror, distrust, grief, rage, and shame.

The strength of sin is the Law] How is that to be understood? The Law gives
strength to sin, ratione, cognitionis, obligationis, and augmentationis; they
are the words of a Pareus in locum.
German Divine, and will yield us a fit method wherein to open the matter.

1. The Law discovers sin, and makes it appear in its own colors, the more
light and knowledge of the Law, the more sense of sin, as in transparent
vessels, dregs are soon discerned; Romans 6. 9. I was alive without the Law, but
when the Law came, sin revived, and I dyed. When by a sound conviction all
disguises are taken off from the conscience, we find sin to be sin indeed;
Paul was alive before, that is, in his own hopes, as many a stupid soul makes
full account he shall go to heaven, till conscience be opened, and then they
find themselves in the mouth of Death and Hell.

2. The Law gives strength to sin, in regard of the obligation of it, it
binds over a sinner to the curse and wrath of God; God has made a righteous
Law, which must have satisfaction, and till the Law be satisfied, we hear no
news but of a curse, and that makes Death to be full of horrors, Heb. 10. 33.
there remains nothing but a fearful expectation of the fiery indignation of
the Lord. 3 It augmenteth and increases sin by forbidding it; lusts are
exasperated and rage upon a restraint, as the yoke makes the young bullock
more unrulely. Now put all together and you will understand the force of the
expression, The strength of sin is the Law, the Discovery of the Law stops
the sinners mouth, and the curse of the Law shuts him up and holds him
fast, unto the judgment of the great day, by which restraint, sin grows the
more raging and furious all which put together, make Death terrible, not an end
of misery, but a door to open into Hell.

Now this being the case of every man, what shall we do? and how shall we
extricate our souls from such a labyrinth of endless horror? You have an
answer of that, in the next verse in the Apostles Thanksgiving, where he
acquainteth you not only with grounds of Hope, but Triumph; Thanks be to God,
who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

In this thanksgiving you may observe,

1. The Author of the mercy; God by Jesus Diyision of the Text.
Christ.

2. The manner how we come to be interested in it; He gives us victory. Or
rather you may observe, 1 The Act of the Father as to Jesus Christ, in that he
appointed him to get the victory. 2 The Act of the Father as to us; in that he
applies this victory to our souls; Christ's victory and the application of it,
are the two grounds of this thanksgiving.

1. Christ's victory over Sin, Death, and the Law, for it must be extended to
all the things mentioned in the context, they are enemies by combination, and
knit together in a fast league; the Law gives strength to sin, and sin gives
a sting to Death; as long as the Law has power, sin will be strong, and as
long as sin has strength, Death will be terrible: But Christ has overcome
Death, he foiled it in his own person, as I shall show you anon fully; and for
Sin, he has taken away the guilt of it by his own merit, and will destroy it
more and more by the power of the Holy Ghost; when he stood before the
tribunal of God he stood there, as a surety and undertaker, Heb. 7. 22. A
surety of a better restament, now he was a surety mutually Gods and ours, to
work Gods work in us, and our work for us; among other things which he
undertook there, he undertook the abolition of sin on Gods part, he obliged
himself that it should be performed by his Spirit; on our part he obliged us to
endeavors of mortification: now because Christ is an able surety, the work is
as good as done already, Romans 6. 6. Knowing this, that our old man is crucified
with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should
not serve sin; mark, it is crucified with him, as implying his undertaking upon
the cross, that the body of Death might be destroyed: as noting the Work of
Gods Spirit, which was engaged and made sure by Christ's death upon the cross,
that we should not serve sin, as noting the concurrence of our endeavors, to
which we are obliged by the same sponsory Act of Christ: thus much Christ has
done for the abolition of sin: now for the Law, that was an enemy that could
not be overcome but must be satisfied, and so it was by Christ who both
performed the duty, and sustained the penalty of it, chiefly the latter, and
therefore it is said, he was made a curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. The sting is lost
in Christ, and the honey left for us. But this is matter of another respect and
cognizance.

2 The next reason of the Apostles thanksgiving is the application, he has
given us victory, for understanding of which you must note that 1 Christ's
victory is imputed to us as if it were done in our own persons; when we are
actually united to him, we are possessed of all his merit, Christ fought our
war, and joined battle in our stead; we have a mystical victory in Christ,
and are said to overcome, when Christ overcame; this is the reason why the acts
of believers are complicated and folded up with Christ's acts in the expressions
of Scripture, Crucified with him, quickened with him, and raised with him, and
set down with him in, heavenly places, Ephesians. 2. etc. All which are terms
proper to the Judicial Union which is different both from the Moral and
Mystical, as I could easily show you, were it not a matter of another nature:
now this mystical victory is of great use to a believer in time of
discouragements; if the Law challenge, Satan and Conscience say thou art a
sinner under a curse, thou may answer, I am a sinner, but I am crucified in
Christ, in my surety, his payment and suffering is mine: if Death or the world
discourage; you may say, This is a beaten enemy, I foiled it in Christ, I
ascended in Christ, etc.

2. The benefit of this victory is imparted and applied to us, by which he
makes us conquerours over sin and death; all Christ's work was not done upon
the Cross, there is much to be accomplished in our hearts, Romans 16. 20. The
God of peace shall tread Satan under your feet, etc. not only under Christ's
feet, but ours: as Joshua called his fellows to come and tread upon the necks
of the Canaanitish Kings, Josh. 10. 24.
Come put your feet upon the necks of these Kings: so Christ will see us
conquer; he that got a victory for us, will get a victory in us, over sin, and
death, and hell; Christ has trodden them under foot already when his own Genesis
3. 15.
heel was bruised, now he will do it under your feet.

Christ's victory over Death for the comfort and profit of Believers.

Death is either the first, or second, temporal, or eternal, sinners are
under the sentence of both, and both are in a sort put into the hands of Satan,
he had the power of Death, Heb. 2. 14. as Gods executioner; and the one makes
way for the other, Death to the wicked is but a taking them away to torment, as
unruly persons are committed to prison that they may molest no more; Gods
patience expireth with their lives, and then his vengeance begins; The curse
of the first Covenant was eternal Death, Genesis 2. 15. thou shall dye, that is
eternally, the curse must carry proportion with the blessing, the blessing was
eternal life, and the curse was eternal death: I say the sorrow and pain must
have bin perpetual, answerable to the life which he should have enjoyed;
therefore Christ is said to have delivered us. from wrath to come, which
certainly was our portion and inheritance by Adam, and without Christ there is
no escape. But to come to particulars, I shall show you,

1. How Christ delivered us from Death. 2. How far.
1. How be delivered us, The Apostle answers, that Heb. 2. 14. by Death he
destroyed him that had the power of Death, now Christ's Death comes under a
twofold consideration, as a merit, or as a glorious act of war and combat;
as the Act of a Redeemer, or the Act of a Conqueror: which answers to the
double evil in Death, it is a natural evil, and a poenall evil; it is a
natural evil, as it is the dissolution of soul and body; it is a poenall
evil, as it is a curse of the Covenant, or the punishment of sin: 1 There was
merit in Christ's voluntary Death, 'twas Mat. 20. 28.
a ransom for the elect, he dyed not only in bonum eorum, for their good and
profit, but loco and vice ominium, in 1 Timothy 2. 6.
their room and stead; as when the ram Job 33. 24.
was taken, Isaac was spared, so Christ's Death was in stead of ours; God will
not exact the debt twice, of us, and our surety: Job 33. Delivered him from
going down into the pit, for I have found a ransom. The sinner must dye, or
the surety; now says the Lord, I accept of the Death and passion of Christ for
this penitent man; if we go down to the pit, we go not down by way of
vengeance, by Christ's Death the merit of our sin is expiated, justice
satisfied, Gods wrath appeased, the Law fulfilled, sin pardoned, and so the
Jaws of Death are broken: Death in its self is the sentence of the Law, the
fruit of sin, and the recompense of angry justice, and so it has no more to
do with us, for God has found a ransom. 2 You may look upon it as the Act of
a Conqueror, Christ foiled Death in his own person, ever since he rifled the
Grave, death has lost its retentive power; Act. 2. 24. (...), loosing the
pains, etc. it is an allusion to the throws of a travailing woman, the Grave was
in travail, till this precious burden was egested, for he could not be holden
of it, and over since the Grave is a womb rather then a dungeon and pit of
vengeance, Prudentius.
non vitam rapit sed refoomat, it does not destroy life, but renew it; in
almost the same metaphor Christ is called, Col. 1. 18. The first born from the
dead; not that he was the first that was raised from the dead, howbeit he was
the first that arose, others were raised by the power of another, but Christ
arose by his own; so he is called, 1 Cor. 15 20. The first fruits from the dead
as the offering of the first fruits was a blessing to all the store, so Christ
dying and rising is a ground of conquest to all the elect; Christ before his
death had been combating with the powers of darkness and all the subordinate
instruments; Death was Satan's beast of prey, that was set upon him, but our
Lord foiled it in its own dungeon, the battle between Christ and Death was
begun upon the Cross, he grappled with it there, and they went tugging and
wrestling to the Grave, Christ like a prudent warrior carried the war into his
enemies country, and there got loose of the grasp of Death, foiled it in its
own territory, he arose and left Death gasping behind him, so that the quality
of the grave is quite altered, before 'twas a prison, Satan's dungeon, now it is
a chamber of repose, a bed of ease ever since Christ slept there; when the
Prophet speaks of Christ's resurrection, he says, Isa. 53. 8. He shall be
taken from prison and from judgment, by prison meaning the grave; but speaking
of the death of the faithful, he says, Esai. 57. 2. They shall rest in their
beds; 'twas for a while to Christ a prison, that to us it might be a bed of
ease.

2. The next question is, how far he has delivered us from death; we see the
godly are obnoxious to the changes and decays of nature, yea to the strokes of
violence as well as others; and how are we delivered? I answer, it is enough
that the second death has no power over us, Rev. 20. 6. Nothing to do with us.
Romans 8. 1. (...), not one condemnation, etc. We may dye, but we shall not be
damned; and though we go to the grave, yet we are freed from hell: But this is
not all, in the first death believers have a privilege, they do not dye as
others do.

1. The habitude and nature of it is changed, that which is poenall in death is
now gone, it is not a destruction but a delivery, believers have wrong thoughts
of Death; we are delivered from it as it is a punishment and a curse, now it is a
blessing, one of Christ's Legacies of the Church, all things are yours, Death is
yours, 1 Cor. 3. 18. while Death was in the Devils hands it was an enemy, but
it is made a friend and a blessing in Christ, a passage from the vale of tears
to the kingdom of glory, the end of a mortal life, and the beginning of that
which is immortal; as Haman to Mordecai, it intended a mischief, but it proved
a privilege: to a wicked man it is properly an execution, but to the godly a
dismission of their souls into the bosom of Christ, Luke 2. 28. Now let
thou thy servant to depart in peace, they quietly send away their souls, but a
wicked man's soul is taken away; it is twice so expressed, Luke 12. 20. This night
shall they take away thy soul from thee, and Job 27. 8. When God takes away
his soul, etc. they would fain keep it longer, but God takes it away whether
they will or no; a godly man resigneth and sends away his soul in peace, his
life cannot be taken away, it is only yielded up upon the call of providence; and
he dies not because he must dye, but because he would dye, he may dye sooner
then he thought, but not sooner then he would, for when God wills it, he
submits. But to return; the blessing of death lies in 3 things.

1. The Funerals of the godly are but the Funerals of their sins, and
frailties, and weaknesses: peccatum moritur, miseria moritur, homo non moritur,
it is not the man dies, but the sin, the misery dies: all other means and
dispensations do but weaken sin, but Death destroys it; when God justifies,
the damning power is gone, when God sanctifies, the reigning power is gone,
but when by death we come to be glorified, then the very being of it is gone:
when the house was infected with leprosy, so as scraping would not serve the
turn, it was to be dug down, we are so infected with sin that all other
remedies are too weak, nothing but death will serve the turn: when Ivy is
gotten into a wall it cannot be wholly destroyed, till the wall it self be
demolished; cut off the stump, the body, the boughs, the branches, still there
are some strings that are ready to sprowt again; so it is here, original sin
cannot be destroyed, the constant groans of the faithful are, Romans 7. 23.
Who shall deliver us from this body and mass of sin? But now Death is a
sudden cure, sin brought in death, and as it were in revenge, death
destroys sin.

2. There is a way made for a present and complete Vmon of the soul with
Christ. Phil. 1. 23. I desire to be dissolved and be with Christ, we are loosed
from the body and joined to Christ, it is better a soul be separated from the
body then absent from Christ; we have an Union here but not a presence, now
judge you which is better, to be present with the body, or to be present with
the Lord? to have the company of the body, or the company of Christ? Here the
soul is enclosed and imprisoned as it were, but there thou have the free
enjoyment of Christ, without the clog of an earthly estate: the soul as soon as
it departs the body, goes immediately to Christ; as when Potiphars wife laid
hold on Joseph's coat he escaped; so you leave your upper garment in Deaths
hand, but the soul flies to God: the body came from Adam and runs in a
fleshly channel, and what we had from Adam, must for a while be mouldred to
dust, to purge it from the impurity of the conveyance; but the soul by a
natural right returns to God that gave it, and by a special interest to
Christ that redeemed and sanctified it by his own spirit.

3. The body which seems most to suffer, has much advantage: a shed is taken
down to raise up a better structure, it is sown a natural body, it is raised a
spiritual body, etc. 1 Cor. 15. 44. here it is not capable of high enjoyments,
it is humbled with diseases unfit for duties; again, it is sown'd corruptible
body, it is raised an incorruptible body, here it is liable to changes, there it
may live forever, without change and decay; if we love long life, there is
eternal life; it is carnal self-love that makes us willing to abide in the
flesh; if we did but love our selves, but love our own flesh, we would not be
afraid to dye; for to dye, is to be perfected, to have body and soul free from
sin and incorruption.

2. The hurt of it is prevented: as you are chosen and sanctified in Christ
Jesus, it cannot hurt you, I say again death may kill you, but it cannot hurt
you, it has no power over the better part, like a Serpent it feeds only upon
your dust; nay, and for your bodies, that which dies as a creature, is sure to
live as a member of Christ; the Lord Jesus is our head in the grave; your
bodies have a principle of life within them; believers are raised by the Spirit
of holiness, the same Spirit that quickneth them now to the offices of grace,
shall raise their mortal bodies. So Romans 8. 11. He shall quicken your mortal
bodies by his Spirit, that dwells in you: The holy Ghost can never leave his
old mansion and dwelling place: how many grounds of comfort have we against the
mortality of the body! Christ is united to body and soul, and he will not let
his Mystical body want one sinew or joint; in the account that he is to make
to the Father, he says he is to lose nothing, Joh. 6. 39. Mark, he does not
say none, but nothing: Christ will not lose a leg, or a piece of an ear: Again,
God is in Covenant with body and soul, when you go down to the chambers of
death, you may challenge him upon the Charter of his own Grace; God is the God
of Abraham's dust, of a believers dust, though it be mingled with the remains of
wicked men, yet Christ will sever it: Mat. 22. 32. Christ proves the
resurrection of the body, by that argument, that God is the God of Abraham, the
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, the ground of the argument is, that God
made his Covenant not only with the souls of the Patriarchs, but with their
whole persons: Again, Christ has purchased body and soul, so much is intimated
in that place 1 Cor. 6. 20. Ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God
in your bodies; Christ had paid price enough to get a title to body and soul,
and therefore he will not lose one bit of his purchase; the Lord will call the
grave to an account, Where is the body of my Abraham, my Isaac, my Jacob? it is
said, Rev. 20. 13. The Sea gave up her dead, and the Grave gave up her dead,
and Hell gave up her dead: let me note that Hell is there taken for the state
of the departed, or else what is the meaning of that passage that follows
afterward, and death and hell were cast into the lake that burns, etc. Well
then, all the dead shall be cast up, as the Whale cast up Jonah, so the grave
shall cast up her dead: the grave is but a chest wherein our bodies are kept
safe till the day of Christ; and the key of this chest is not in the Devils
hands, but Christ's, see Rev. 1. 18. I have the keys of Death and Hell; when the
body is laid up in the cold pit, it is laid up for another day; God has an
especial care of our dust and remains, when our friends and neighbors have
left is, Christ leaves it not, but keeps it till the great and glorious day.

3. We are eased from the terrors and horrors of death: death is terrible, as
it is a poenall and a natural evil, as I distinguished before; 1 As it is
natural evil, death in it self is the greatest of all evils, (...), said an
Aristotle.
heathen, which in Jobs language may be rendered, The King of terrors, Job 18.
14. We gush to see a Serpent, much more the grim visage of death; moral
Philosophy could never find out a remedy against it; Heathens were either
desperate, rash, stupid, or else they dissembled their gripes and fears; but
Christ has provided a remedy, he has delivered us not only from the hurt of
death, but the fear of death; Heb. 2. 14. to deliver them from the fear of
death, that all their life time were subject to bondage: by his spirit he
fills the soul with the hopes of a better life; nature may shrink, when we
see the pale horse of death approaching; but we may rejoice, when we consider
its errand, it is to carry us home: as when old Jacob saw the chariots come from
Egypt, how did his heart leap within him, because he should see his son Joseph!
Death however we figure it with the pencill of fancy, is sent to carry us to
heaven, to transport us to Jesus Christ: now who would be afraid to be happy?
to be in the Arms of our beloved Jesus? Let them fear death, that know not a
better life; a Christian knows that when he dies, he shall not perish, but
have everlasting life, Joh. 3. 17. The world may thrust you out, but you may
see heaven alluring, ready to receive you, as Stephen saw heaven opened, Act.
7. latter end: there is an intellectual vision, or persuasion of Faith, which
is common to all the Saints; though every one has not such an ecstasy and
sensible representation, as Stephen had, yet usually in the hours of their
departure, faith is mightily strengthened and acted so, that they are exempted
from all fear and sorrow. 2. As it is a poenall evil, it is sad when death is
sent in justice, and clothed with wrath, and comes in the quality of a curse,
you know what was said before, The sting of death is sin, they dye indeed that
dye in their sins, death is a black and gloomy day to them, they drop down like
rotten fruit into the lake of fire: now Christ has taken away the sting, the
dolours and horrors of it; he has taken away death as he has taken away sin,
he has not cast it out, but cast it down, taken away the guilt and power of
it, though not the being of sin; so the hurt, the sting is gone, though not
death it self: it is like a serpent disarmed and unstinged, we may put it into
our bosoms without danger: there are many accusations, by which Satan is apt
to perplex a dying soul, these make death terrible and full of horrors; But
they overcome by the blood of the Lamb, Rev. 12. 11. and get the victory of
these doubts and fears; when sins are pardoned fears vanish; Luther said, Feri
domine, feri, absolutus sum a peccatis meis, strike Lord, strike, my sins are
pardoned.

4. 'Twill be utterly abolished at the last day. We scarce know now what
Christ's purchase means, till the day of judgment; it is said 1 Cor. 15. 26.
The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death, it is weakened now, but then it
shall be abolished as to the elect: Rev. 20. 14. And death and hell shall be
cast into the lake of fire, this is the second death; the dominion of death is
reserved for hell, it must keep company with the damned, whilst you rejoice
with God: for the present it is continued out of dispensation, it does service,
to promote Gods glory; but then the wicked must share death and hell amongst
them, and be kept under a dying life, or a living death: but Rev. 7. 17.
all tears shall be wiped from your eyes, death shall be no more, and you shall
take the harps of God in your hands, and in an holy triumph say, O Death, where
is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy victory? it is true we may say it, yea and
sing it now in hope, as some birds sing in winter, but then we are properly
said to triumph.



terror for wicked men, you may think it strange, that I should draw terror
out of such a comfortable doctrine, but consider Jesus Christ has conquered
death for none but those that have an interest in him, others (alas!) are under
the full power of it; for the present the case of wicked men is sad, in death
'twill be worse, in hell 'twill be worst of all. 1 It Is sad for the present,
there is a bondage upon your souls, not always felt but soon awakened, you
cannot think of death and hell without torment, the thought of it like
Belshazzers handwriting against the wall, smites you with trembling, in the
midst of all your cups and bravery; a small thing will awaken a wicked man's
conscience; the fingers of a man's hand upon the wall: Belshazzer seemed a jolly
fellow: a brave spirit, sets light by the Persian forces that were even at his
door, but God soon takes off the edge of his bravery; and then his joints
trembled, his knuckles smote one against another for fear; if the Lord will but
whist to conscience, the bravest spirits are soon daunted, he needs arm
nothing against you but your own thoughts: certainly none but a child of God
can have a true and solid courage against death, you cannot suppose it without
consternation, David said, Psalm. 23. 4. Though I walk through the valley of the
shadow of death, yet I will fear no evil, that is a griesly, sad, dark place to
walk in the very borders of death, side by side with terrors and destruction,
yet there David would be confident: it is otherwise with wicked men, hereafter
they would not live, and here they would not dye. 2. In death it will be worse,
the nearer you draw to the everlasting estate, the more will conscience be
opened, and scourge you with horror and remorse, I confess every wicked man
does not dye sensible, some are stupid and foolhardy, they may sacrifice a
stout body to a stubborn mind: but at last they dye uncertain, doubtful if
not anxious, and full of horror; As Adrian to his soul, O Animula vagula,
blandula, etc. Oh poor soul whither do thou now go? thou shall never sport
it more, jest it more: Or as he said, anxius vixi, dubious morior, heu quo vado!
I have lived doubtfully, and dye uncertainly, alas whither do I go! A man that
leapeth in the dark near a deep gulf knows not where his feet shall light,
and this is the case of wicked men: But this is not all, usually their death is
full of terror; things written with the juice of a Lemmon, when they are
brought to the fire are plain and legible; so when wicked men are within the
stench and smell of hell, they howl upon their beds, few or none are able to
look death in the face with confidence. Oh consider when you come to dye sin
stareth in the face of conscience, and conscience remitteth you to the law, and
the law binds you over to hell, and hell enlarges her mouth to receive you;
what will you do in such a case? Satan insulteth, your old tempter is become
your new accuser, nay you are at odds with your self, the body curses the
soul for an ill guide, and the soul curses the body for a wicked instrument,
it is a sad parting when they can never expect to meet again, but in flames and
torments, and therefore curse the memory of that day, when ever they were
joined together: A godly man can take fair leave of his body, Farewell flesh,
go rest in hope, thou shall one day awake out of the dust, and then I shall be
satisfied with Gods likeness, I have a longing desire of thy reunion, we have
lived together and glorified God together thus long, God will not suffer thee
to see corruption, etc. 3 In Hell twill be worst of all, envy will be a part
of your torment as well as despair, Luke 16. 23. it is said of the rich man, in
hell he lifted up his eyes, and sees. Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, and says, I
am tormented in this flame, 'twill be an additionall torment, to compare the
believers eternal happiness with your own misery, they are in the presence of
God, and his holy Angels, you have no company but the devil, death, hell, and
the damned, and are holden under the power of everlasting torments; you would
not live and cannot dye, when you have run through many thousands of years you
cannot look for one minute of rest, conscience gnaweth more and more, you burn
but consume not; Oh! Heb. 10. 33.
it is a dreadful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, mark that
attribute living God, we do not speak in the name of an Idol that cannot avenge
his quarrel upon you, or of a God that shall dye and suffer decay, but in the
name of a living God, that lives for ever to see vengeance executed upon his
adversaries, there is no hope of release, as long as God is God, Hell is Hell.

exhort us all to get an interest in this conquest of Christ, every one is not
fit to make use of Christ's victory over death, there are many things necessary
to enjoy the full comfort of it, I shall name them: 1. A care to get sin
pardoned; all the power of the devil and death hangs on sin, therefore see
sin buried ere thou art buried, or it will not be well with thee: there are
two deep pits, wherein you may bury your sins, and you shall never hear of them
any more, the Ocean of divine mercy, and the Grave of Christ: see them buried
in the Ocean of mercy, Mich. 7. 18. Thou will cast all their sins into the
depths of the Sea; there is depth enough to bury them and drown them, that they
may no more come into remembrance; then there is the Grave of Christ, the merit
of Christ is a deep grave, deep enough wherein to bury all the sins of the
world: buried with him in Baptism, Romans 6. 3. Otherwise, if this be not done,
you will desire to be buried eternally, and never to rise more: Let me use one
metaphor more in this matter, and it shall take its rise from that expression
of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 3. we shall be clothed upon, says he, if so be that
we shall be not found altogether naked, it is the great fault of Christians when
they come to die, they are to seek of a shroud, and are found altogether naked,
it is uncomely to see a man in his darkness, you should be wrapped in the
winding sheet of Christ's righteousness, there is no shroud like to that, come
thus to the grave and the grave shall have no power over you: But to leave the
Metaphor, this must be your great work and care (Christians) to reflect upon
these things in the serious applications and discourses of faith, the infinite
mercy of God, the abundant merit of Christ, and the sufficiency of his
righteousness for your acceptance with God. 2 Do not only act faith, but
strive after assurance of Gods love to your souls. Old Simeon said, Luke 2. 29,
30. Mine eyes have seen thy salvation, now let me depart in peace; he held the
Messiah not only in his Arms, but in his heart, and then he could comfortably
dismiss his soul; now let me dye, (said Jacob, when he had seen Joseph), he
can never dye too soon as for himself, his own comfort and profit, that has
seen Jesus, his death is not untimely and immature, by what stroke soever he be
cut off; whereas otherwise if you live an hundred years you dye too soon, if
you dye before you have gotten an interest in Christ, the sinner of an hundred
years shall be accursed, old sinners that are left to be eaten out by their own
rust, are chimneys long foul and come at last to be fired. 3 Mortify
corruptions, sin must dye ere we dye, he dies well whose sins are dead
before him; either sin must dye or the sinner, as the Prophet said in another
case, I say in this, thy life must go for its life, you will find those sins
mortal that are not mortified; what should an unmortified man do with heaven?
there are no sports nor carnal pleasures there, those blessed mansions seem to
him but dark shades, and melancholy retirements: the Apostle has an
expression, Col 1. 12. He has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance
of the Saints in light, we are first made meet for heaven before we enter into
it, we are weaned from the world before we leave it; when men hang upon the
world as long as they can, and when they can hang no longer, think then to make
use of God, the Lord will refuse them with disdain, Judge. 10. 14.
Go to the Gods which you have chosen, let the world now help you, and save
you: in short, a mortified man is prepared and ready, he does but wait for
wind and tide, and falls like a shock of corn in season. 4 An holy life and
conversation; men live as if they never thought to dye, and then dye as if they
never thought to live; the best way to dye well is to live well, they that are
not ashamed to live, are not afraid to die; Balaam desired to dye the death of
the righteous, but would not take pains to live a godly life; every man cannot
say, Thanks be to God that gives us victory through Jesus Christ, you can not
dye in Christ, unless you live in him, and in the power of his life advance
toward heaven: oh labor to exercise your selves in these things, that you may
be in a constant preparation; you never enter into the combat of death but
once, it is impossible to mend oversights, either we are slain or saved
eternally. Now if you do what I have here exhorted you to, you may wait till
your change come; and when it comes, your last hour will prove your best.

improve the comforts of Christ's victory, do not let it go out of your hands.
1 Improve it for your friends that are departed in the Lord; our weeping puts
some disparagement upon Christ's conquest, why should we weep in the day of
their preferment, in the day of their solemn espousals to Jesus Christ? Kinet
Cathol. orthed. Ques. 40. primae ^^^is.
In the primitive times at Funerals they were wont to sing Psalms of
thanksgiving, we should bring them as champions to the grave, as those that
have passed the pikes, and finished their course, and kept the faith, and have
conquered the world, and sin, and death, and danger: Chrysostom in one of his
homilies on the Hebrews, speaks of the ancient rites at funerals, of their
Hymns, and Psalms, and Praises, haec omnia sunt laetantium (says he) All
these signify joy, and will thou weep, and sing a Psalm of praise and triumph
at the same time? I confess it is said, Act. 8. 2. That devout men carried
Stephen to his burial, and made great lamentation over him: it is our loss when
the Church is bereaved of such excellent persons, there is cause of sorrow, but
there should be a mixture, we should not mourn as those without hope, 1 These.
4. 13. as Christians must not rejoice without sorrow, so they must not be sorry
without some mixture of joy; let us declare that we hope for a resurrection,
that we expect to meet our friends again in heaven, and when we weep let it be
like rain when the Sun shines, there should be somewhat of joy in our
countenances as well as tears in our eyes.

2. Improve it for your selves, and that, 1 In life time, that in your
resolutions you may be willing to dye; many times we are like Lot in Sodom,
or like the Israelites in Egypt, we could wish for Canaan, but are loath to go
out of Egypt, this argues little faith. Can we believe there is a heaven so
excellent and glorious, and yet shun it? can we hope for such an 1 Pet. 3. 14.
incorruptible inheritance, and yet be afraid of it? that we shall enter upon
it too soon? what Prince would live uncrowned? what heir would whine when he
is called to come and take the inheritance? what thoughts have we of eternal
life? do we count it a privilege, or a misery, and a burden? And again, it
argues little love, can we pretend to love Christ, and be shie of his company!
he should be unwilling to dye, Illius est nolle mori, qui nolit (...) ad
Christum-Aug.
that is unwilling to go to Christ. And again, it argues little judgment and
consideration; Wherein is this life valuable? the world is nothing else but a
place of banishment, here is nothing but groaning, all the creatures join in
consort with the heirs of promise, Romans 8. 23. What do you see in the world, or
in the present life to make you in love with it? are you not weary of misery
and sin? the longer thou live, thou sinnest the more, certainly thou have
provoked God long enough already, it is high time to breath after a better
estate; and thou have had taste enough of the worlds misery and deceit, and of
the frailties and weaknesses of the body, a longer life would be but a longer
sickness; what is the matter, that we are so loath to let go our hold of
present things? if it be not want of faith or want of love to Christ, or too
much love of the world, certainly it must be fear of death, and what a baseness
and lowness of spirit is this? to fear an enemy so often vanquished by Christ
and his Saints? If you be at this pass, I have preached all this while in vain,
and the victory of Christ, which I have discoursed of is to little purpose; Oh
consider, generous Heathens may shame you, you make all the provision of Christ
in the Gospel, to be of less effect then mere moral principles. 2.
Especially improve this in the very season and hour of death; the great Goliath
is now fallen, and you may come forth and Isai. 66. 24.
look upon the carcass; death its self that startleth the creature, and
seems to be the great check and prejudice of Christian hopes, is vanquished
by Christ, therefore in the very season when it seems to prevail over you,
apply the victory, and say, Thanks be to God, etc. When the pangs come upon
you, remember this is deaths last pull and assault, you may bear with it, it
shall molest Exodus 14. 13.
you no more, as Moses said, The Egyptians which ye have seen to day, ye
shall see them no more again for ever, so you shall feel these things no more,
in heaven there are no groans, nor tears, nor sorrows, have but a little
patience, and as soon as the last gasp is over, the soul shall be carried by
Angels to Christ, and by Christ to God: believers have the same entertainment
that Christ had, he was carried into heaven by Angels, Dan. 7. 13. They brought
him to the ancient of days, and so we are carried by Angels into Abraham's
bosom, Luke 16. 22. they have a train to accompany them into heaven, as their
friends accompany their bodies to the grave; and as Christ was welcomed into
heaven with acclamations, and God says, Psa. 110.
Sit down at my right hand, and 1. Psalm. 2. 8
ask of me and I will give thee, etc. so are believers welcomed, Well done
good and faithful servant, enter into thy masters joy.

What remains then, but that we dye by faith as well as live by faith, but
that we welcome death with confidence, and breath out our souls in triumph?
Moses when he took up the Serpent in his hand, 'twas but a rod, death thus
welcomed and entertained by faith will prove at most but a correction, yea
rather a blessing of the Covenant, a means of passage into glory.

One thing I had almost forgotten, to press you to thankfulness to Christ: Oh
bless your Redeemer, that has delivered you from the fear of death, admire
his love and condescension, that he should come down from heaven and substitute
himself into our room and place, and take the horrors of death into his own
soul; it is said, Mat. 20: 28. The Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but
to minister and to give his life a ransom for many; Christ was a Prince by
birth, heir of all things, yet he came not in the pomp and equipage of a
Prince, if he had come in state to visit us, and to deliver comfort to us by
word of mouth, it had been much; but Christ came not in this way, not in the
pomp of a Prince, but the form of a servant to minister to our necessities, and
that in the highest way of self-denial, he gave his life as a ransom for
many; other Princes are lavish of their subjects blood, and care not how many
lay down their lives for them, many give their lives as a ransom for the
Prince, but here it is quite otherwise, this Prince lays down his life to
redeem the subjects, and he suffered death that it might not be terrible and
destructive to us, Oh blessed be the Lord Jesus Christ for this love for
evermore.

Some may expect, that I should speak something concerning the servant of God,
our dear brother now departed, but I need not say any more, then what I have
spoken already; all along the discourse, I have indeed spoken of him, and that
in the judgment of your consciences, the duties which I pressed upon you, he
performed, the comforts which I have propounded to you, he enjoyed. I shall not
make any particular rehearsal of the passages of his exemplary life, I judge
it not convenient; only to you of this place I may take liberty to commend his
doctrine, and entreat you to be careful of those precious truths which he
sowed among you, whilst the Lord used him here as a skillful seeds man: God
looks for some increase, and takes special notice of the time, that you
have enjoyed his labors, there is an exact account kept in heaven, in that
parable, These three years came I seeking fruit, Luke 13. 7. probably the three
years of Christ's ministry are intended, for then he was entering upon his last
half year, God reckons how many years, how many months your Minister has
been with you, and accordingly does expect fruit: your pastor a little before
his suffering, professed high and worthy thoughts of you, let him not be
deceived; 'twill be sad for you in that great day of separation, that when he
expects to find you among the sheep, and to be his Crown and rejoicing, he
should see you among the goats; he will know you there, memory in heaven is not
abolished, but parfected. I say he will know you, though without any lessening
of his own happiness, or repining at Gods rightous judgments.

FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Table.
A.
AFflictions sweetened by Christ, 75, 76 Atheist in practice; and judgment, 238
Grounds of Atheism, 239 Discoveries of a practical Atheist, 243. 246
B.
BAcksliders have no interest in Christ, 43 Baseness of a man without Christ,
23, 61 Beggerlinesse of a man without Christ, 26 A Believer has all things,
equivalently; conditionally; finally, and in heritively, 65 Blessings turn
curses without an interest in Christ, 55 Blindness of a man without Christ, 28
C.
CArist; How a man may be said to be in Christ, and out of Christ, 18 What it
is to be without Christ, 19 The properties of a man without Christ, 22
Characters of a man without Christ, 34 The misery of a man without Christ, 50.
101 Christ is to the soul, as the sun to the earth, 60 The benefits derived
from Christ, 67 All that Christ has is a believers, 71 and all that a Believer
has, is Christ's 73 Characters of a man's interest in Christ, 85 Christ
precious to a believer. 97 Church compared to a Commonwealth, 103 Wherein they
differ, 107 Necessity of church government, 109 Necessity of Church union, 110
A great misery to be a stranger to the Church of God, 113 A wicked man in the
Church, like a Wen in the body, or a wooden leg, 115 Comfort. Vid. Joy. No
comfort without Christ, 61. 75 Common Prayer Book, an abstract of the Popish
Mass, 207 Three sentences of Scripture misinterpreted therein, 206. 208. 210
Contentation only in Christ, 98 Covenant, and promise, how they differ, 118
Diverse administrations thereof, 119 Covenant of Grace, what, 121 How you may
know whether you be within this Covenant, 123 The difference in being under a
Covenant of Works, and a Covenant of Grace, 126 The misery of strangers to the
Covenant of grace, 135 Characters of a man under the Covenant of grace, 152.
157 The great condescension of God to make a Covenant with man, 161
D.
DEad; a Christlesse man is a dead man, 31 Death as a marriage day. 8 Deformity
of a man without Christ, 29. 62 Duties accepted for the persons sake under the
Covenant of grace, 131 142. 145. 163. 204 Performance of Duties a sandy
foundation, and a rotten prop of hopes for heaven; 177. 202
F.
FOr bearance of God breeds Atheism, 239. 250
G.
GOd dreadful to apprehension without Christ, 55. 77 God to be our God, what it
notes; 152 And what a great happiness it imports, 161 To be without God what,
Vide Atheist. 234 Characters of those that are without any real propriety in
God, 265, 269 Our interest in God is to be proved; 274 And improved, 277 Growth
in grace proceeds from Christ, 60. 91
H.
HOpe of the wicked, vain, 166, 173 Reasons why an unregenerate man is without
hope; 167 The nature of true hope, 170 Characters if an ungrounded and
presumptuous hope, 175 A true hope has a purifying, pacifying, painful
property with it, 179 The false props of awicked man's hope 181. 186. 197. 201.
206. 214. 217 Differences between a well-grounded, and a presumptuous hope, 221
The misery of presumptuous hopes, 227 The same certainty, excellency, efficacy,
difficulty in hope, that is in Faith, 230, 231 Humility how improved, 12, 13
The badge of Christianity, 91, 92
I.
IGnorance, what properties it must have to demonstrate thy want of interest in
God, 267 Joy; the fountain of it, Christ, 29. 61
K.
Knowledge of Christ, spiritual; experimental; affective; appropriating;
practical. 20, 21. 269 A man may have an interest in Christ and yet not know
it, 47 He knows most that does most, 267
L.
Liturgy, V. Common Prayer Book Love of Christ demonstrates interest in
Christ, 37 The object of love, the people of God, 272
M.
MErcy of God in general, no good prop of hope, 193 Misery of a Christlesse
man, 51. etc. Mortification of lusts, a sign that we belong to Christ, 36, 37.
88
N.
Newness of life declares an interest in Christ, 90 White garments a type of
thereof, 95
P.
PRayer; the neglect thereof Atheism, 244 Presumption of the wicked, 172 How
it differs from the hope of the godly, 221 Presumption begets, frustration;
vexation; and damnation; 228 Pride, a ground of Atheism, 242 Promise. Vide
Covenant. Covenants of promise, what, 117 The promise of God in Christ, the
main pillar of hope, 178 Promises convey no comfort without Christ, 212 Every
promise has some condition annexed to it, 213
R.
REmembrance of our sinfulness before conversion works in us An admiration of
Gods grace and mercy, 9 Earnest contention to excel in grace, 10 Compassion to
the unconverted, 11 Humility, 12 Watchfulness over our ways, 14
S.
SAlvation by Christ alone, 99 Sanctification, a blessing of the new Covenant,
154 Scripture; questioning the authority thereof makes Atheists, 241 Sins
before conversion to be called to mind, 5 But not with complacency of spirit,
6 Or stupidity of heart, 7 Or despondency of mind. 8 Reasons thereof, 9 The
dominion of sin taken away, but not the life, 36 The dangers and aggravations
of small sins, 182. 184 Sins of the godly, no ground of hope to the wicked, 188
The same for the matter, but not for the manner, 188. 191 Slavery of a man
without Christ, 24 Spirit of Christ, his threefold operation upon the heart,
35. 96 Strength to perform any duty; to exercise any grace; to subdue any lust;
to resist any temptation; to bear any affliction; derived only from Christ, 58.
59
U.
UNregenerate; every unregenerate man is without Christ, 17 And an Atheist, 237
FINIS.

