LOVE'S NAME LIVES: OR, A Publication of diverse PETITIONS presented by Mistress
LOVE to the Parliament, in behalf of her HUSBAND.

WITH Several LETTERS that interchangeably passed between them a little before
his Death.

AS ALSO One LETTER written to Master LOVE by Mr. Jaquel, one of the Witnesses
against him.

Together with Seven several LETTERS and Notes sent to him, from Dr. Drake,
Mr. Jenkyn, Mr. Case, and Mr. Robinson, his then Fellow Sufferers.

All published for Public Good.

PSALM. 112.6. The Righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

(...)

To the READER.
Reader, take notice,
THere are several Letters published, entitled Love's Letters, pretended to
have past between M. Love and his Wife: Which Letters are not Printed by true
and exact Copies, having in them both more and less than they should have. Now
to prevent the like inconvenience for the future, these Letters and Petitions
are here published. The publishing of which, will (I hope) give no offense; I
am sure can, give no just offense to any: and if any shall take offense
thereat, certain I am, they will take that which is not given them; and that they
cannot do, unless they will be injurious both to themselves and others. But
whether offended, or not offended, I am not, need not be sollicitous; the
rather, for that I can truly say, it is at as great a distance from any
intention in the least to give offense, as it is from my apprehension to imagine
that the publishing of these should give just offense to any.

The Petitions are some of those (and those very affectionate ones) which
Mistress Love presented to the Parliament, in the behalf of that blessed Saint
and Minister of Christ, her dear Husband Master Love; and that either for the
taking off the sentence of death, which he then lay under, and so wholly to
remit it; or if not that, for his banishment; and if neither of them, for his
reprieve till her delivery (she being then big with child) that so she might
with greater hope and probability of safety, both to her self and unborn babe,
undergo so sad and sore an affliction.

The Letters are, some from Mistress Love to her husband, which again occasioned
others from him to her. Now Master Love having his wife frequently with him in
prison, after his trial was ordered, had thereby opportunity, as to open his
very heart unto her, in reference to his own estate and condition, and the
apprehensions which he had, both of it, and of his sufferings, (which
accordingly he did, to her exceeding great satisfaction and comfort) so also to
speak that to her, that might be, and that afterward did prove to be, a great
means of her support, under those trying and pressing afflictions with which
she did encounter: and upon that account, did not, and indeed did not need to
write unto her so fully and largly, as otherwise he would have done: And yet
these brief Notes of his (for so they would rather be called than Letters)
which were not by him intended to be published, do clearly and abundantly
evidence, what, and how indeared his affections were both to his wife and
children: and will (I doubt not) be an answer sufficient to that charge of
unnaturalness that is in print against him: Though, I may say, as to those that
knew him, or have but the least degree of that charity that is called common,
remaining in them; that unchristian charge, and most malicious slander
(invented by the father of lies himself, with many more of the same Satanical
production) of that foul-mouthed, false-mouth'd Animadverter and impudent
Detractour, needs no answer. And notwithstanding all that has been said by
that Doctor of the Chair of Scorners, (whose design seems to be to fright men
more with the rabble of his words, than with the reason of them; the former
being not more formidable, than the latter feeble,) Master Love, though dead,
yet is not dead; for HIS GOOD NAME LIVES, and the remembrance of it to the
godly, is, and will never cease to be, even to perpetual generations, as a box
of most precious and costly ointment, broken or poured forth, the pleasant
savor and sweet perfume whereof, spreads it self every way, even to the
scattering and overcoming of all that noisome and unsavory breath of reproach
and calumny, that by the sons, yea, and daughters too, of slander, with great
endeavor would be, but by no means whatsoever can be cast upon it, and to the
refreshing and reviving of every one who is within the reach of its fragrant
and perfuming odor.

The other Letters, are, one from M. Jaquel to M. Love, which Jaquel was one of
the witnesses against him. The rest, from several of those Ministers, who (as
to imprisonment) were his fellow sufferers; which Letters do sufficiently
demonstrate, what their thoughts and apprehensions were of M. Loves sufferings,
and do all contain in them very precious and spiritual matter, that may be of
considerable use, as in general to any that shall peruse them, so especially to
those who are, or hereafter may be in a suffering condition.

Reader, They are intended for thy benefit, which that thou may reap by them,
is the desire of

The Publisher^

To the Supreme Authority, the PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND. The
humble Petition of MARY, the distressed Wife of CHRISTOPHER LOVE.
Shows,
THat whereas the High Court of Justice has lately sentenced to death her dear
and tender Husband, in whose life, the life of your Petitioner is bound up; in
the execution of which sentence, your poor handmaid should become an unhappy
widow, and the miserable mother of two young fatherless children: And she being
so near to her appointed hour, having sorrow upon sorrow, be forced, through
unexpressable grief, to bow down in travel, and give up the ghost; and so with
one blow, there be destroyed, both Father, and Mother, and Babe in one day.

Yet her spirit is somewhat revived with the thought that there is hope in
Israel concerning this thing, when she considers, that her humble Petition is
this day presented before so many professing godliness, who have tasted
abundantly how gracious the Lord is, and who through mercy are called of God to
inherit a blessing, and to be a blessing to the afflicted in the midst of the
Land.

Therefore your distressed handmaid, throwing her self in all humility at your
feet, beseeches you by the womb that bare you, and breasts that gave you suck,
in the bowels of the Lord Jesus Christ, mercifully to interpose, that this
fatal blow may be prevented: which act of compassion in you, will be to your
poor handmaid as resurrection from the dead; and not only all the
tenderhearted Mothers in England, but even the Babe yet unborn shall rise up
and call you blessed; and this will be to you a glory, and crown of rejoicing
in the sight of the Nation, when the blessing of them that are ready to perish
shall come upon you. And your poor handmaid humbly conceives, That your mercy
herein will be no danger to the State, for that your poor Petitioners Friends
are willing to give all sufficient security, that her Husband shall live
peaceably and quietly for the time to come, and never act any thing to the
prejudice of this Commonwealth, and present Government.

Now the God of heaven bow your hearts to show mercy:

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc. MARY LOVE.

To the Supreme Authority, the PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND. The
humble Petition of Mary, the Wife of Christopher Love, Condemned to dye.
Shows.
THat whereas your distressed handmaid has in all humility, in the exceeding
great bitterness of her spirit, poured out her very soul to this Honorable
House, for the life of her condemned Husband: which Petition was mercifully
received and read in Parliament (as your Petitioner is informed.) For which
high favor she desires to bless God, and be thankful to your Honors. And
although she has great cause to be very sensible of your High displeasure
against her Husband, for which she is heartily sorry; Nevertheless she hoping
that your bowels yearn toward her in this her sad condition, adventures once
more to make her humble supplication, and does pray,

That if your poor Petitioners Husband has provoked you so far, as to render
him utterly incapable of your full pardon; yet you would graciously be pleased
to let your handmaid find so much favor in your eyes, as that you will say of
your Petitioners dear Husband as Solomon said of Abiathar, though thou art
worthy of death, we will not at this Time put thee to death. Oh pardon your
perplexed handmaid, if she again beseech you by the wombs that bare you, and
the breasts that gave you suck, in the bowels of the Lord Jesus Christ, reprieve
him for a time, till she may recover her strength, before he depart hence and
be seen no more; lest at one terrible stroke in his execution, the lives of
him, her and the tender babe in her womb be cut off, and two poor innocent
Orphans be left behind to begin and end their days in misery. And though he
may not be thought worthy to breath in English air (which God forbid) yet give
him, Oh give him leave to sigh out his sorrows under your displeasure in the
utmost parts of the Earth, wheresoever you shall think fit to banish him: Which
although it be a very great punishment in it self; yet your handmaid and her
dying Husband shall acknowledge even this to be a great mercy, and shall
thankfully receive it at your hands.

And shall pray, etc. MARY LOVE.

To the Supreme Authority, the PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND. The
humble Petition of Mary, the Wife of Christopher Love.
Shows,
THat your poor Petitioner has great cause to say, blessed be God, and blessed
be you, for your merciful Vote the 15th of July, (a day never to be forgotten)
in adding a month to the life of her dear Husband, which has opened a door of
hope to her in the midst of the valley of Achor, and made her glad, though she
be a woman of a sorrowful spirit: yet your distressed handmaid is overwhelmed
with grief and anguish of soul, and cannot be comforted, when she remembers the
doleful day, the 15th of August so near approaching, her heart does almost dye
within her, and she is as one giving up the ghost before she is delivered of
the fruit of her womb.

Wherefore your greatly distressed handmaid does again pour out her soul with
renewed and importunate requests, beseeching your Honors to commiserate her
deplorable condition, by putting on bowels of pity and compassion toward her
dear and condemned Husband, that she may not grapple with the intolerable
pains of Travel, and the unsupportable thoughts of her Husbands death in one
day. Oh that the life of your handmaid and her babe might be a ransom for the
life of her condemned Husband; she had rather choose out of love to dye for him,
than for sorrow of heart to dye with him. Now the good Lord incline your hearts
to give him his life for a prey, wheresoever it shall please your Honors to
cast him,

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc. MARY LOVE.

To the Supreme Authority, the PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND. The
humble Petition of Mary, the distressed Wife of Christopher Love.
Humbly shows,
THat your sad and sorrowful Petitioner, in the multitude of her fears
wherewith her spirit is overwhelmed within her; After sundry applications and
grievous disappointments, more bitter than death, cannot cease to follow your
Honors with strong cries and supplications, as the importunate Cannanitish
woman did the Lord Christ. And O that now at last, you would suffer your selves
to be entreated, and let your bowels yearn within you, that so root and branch
may not be cut off in one day. The great God hears the cries of Ravens! O that
that God would open your hearts to hear the cries and heartbreaking groans of
the Mother with the tender Babes, that cannot keep silence whilst there is any
hope.

Your desolate Handmaid waits with all humility and earnest expectation (at
your doors) beseeching you not to forget to show mercy to your poor Petitioner
and her tender Babes; Oh make not your Handmaid a widow, and her children
fatherless; but be graciously pleased to prevent this dreadful blow, which
your Petitioner trembles to think upon, and earnestly beseeches you, to change
the sentence of death into a sentence of banishment; and whilst you are
propagating the Gospel in New- England, let her dying husband (as a Prophet
from the dead) be sent to endeavor the conversion of the poor Indians, that so
many souls may bless God in your behalf; and she shall receive it from your
hands as a signal favor.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc. MARY LOVE.

Mr. Jaquel his Letter to Mr. Love.
My dear friend, and beloved in the Lord,
MY bowels are troubled within me, I am pained, I am pained, even at the very
heart, The Lord knows I want words to express the thoughts of my heart to you,
to you, I say, right Christian Friend, and true Soldier of Jesus Christ. I was
thinking to have been silent, being even ashamed to send you a line written by
that hand, which is very much slackened and taken off from the plough; which I
thought, not many weeks ago, had been very fast settled. Give me leave to
breath forth my heart to you in such rude words and language as I can utter;
and I pray you receive them, and spell out my heart toward you, which at this
time is so full, that I know not how to empty it, but in tears before the Lord
for you night and day. And oh, that the remembrance of the seventh and one and
twentieth of June might often come into my thoughts, to keep my heart humble
for my folly, in taking my own, and carnal friends counsel, and not the
counsel of those that are right godly; which (as I now perceive) did help to
bring forth that sad, and never to be forgotten day, and Sentence on the fifth
of July, against my dear friend. Truly, could not I appeal to God, who knows
all things, what the intention of my heart was, thinking I might rather do you
good than hurt, knowing one had gone before me, and fearing he had much wronged
you, made me willing to testify what I did, being told and informed, it would
do you good and not hurt, being but Misprision at the most. I say, were it not
for the testification in mine own conscience, I were not able to bear up my
spirit, but should (I fear) even sink under the burden. But when I consider to
whom I now write, who, I know is full of charity, and does believe what I say,
and will forgive what wrong I have done him, and I hope, will pray for me to
your God and my God, to your Father and my Father, that he will not lay this to
my charge: for you may charge me to be as one of those Paul charge in 2 Timothy
4.16. And deer Sir, If the Lord will be pleased to let me see your face once
more, that I may open my self to you, I hope I shall stand right in your
affections. Some promises I have met withal in the word, that do (methinks)
add wings to my faith, that God will not suffer you to fall by the hands of
violence; as in Psalm. 79. Psalm. 91. Psalm. 94. Psalm. 3. Isa. 41.10. Isa. 66.5.
and many others, that I know you are better acquainted with than I am, and can
beat them out, and lay them by you, as a glass of cordial water for fainting
times. But dear Sir, let me earnestly beg of you, that you will use what means
you can for your own preservation, and go as far as you can in your Petition to
them, in whose power your life is, for many reasons: As first, Because if you
shall fall, O! how would the enemies rejoice? Malignants and others would make
songs at your death, and say, Where is all his Fastings and Prayers? His God
will not help him: Oh Sir, it would be a day of reproach and blasphemy. And
secondly, Consider how would it sadden the hearts of Gods people, and make them
wring their hands, if they should miss the fruit of their prayers in your
deliverance; which (I am confident) have been poured out in an extraordinary
way for you? And thirdly, Consider the service you may yet do in the Church of
Christ: How many souls may God make you isntrumental to bring home to Christ?
And what service may yet this poor bleeding Nation have by your life? And
fourthly, I need not remember you of your dear and precious Consort, who, I am
confident, is dear in the heart of God, and also to you; and her life even
bound up in yours, and her condition being as it is. And then I humbly beg, you
will consider my condition; for surely, in that day I should hear of your life
being violently taken away, mine would be but little comfort to me, being
isntrumental in taking yours away, although (the Lords knows) not
intentionally, but accidentally. Therefore for these reasons, I humbly beg of
you again and again, that you will do what you dare, and go as far as you can
for your preservation; and the Lord will make you isntrumental for his glory,
if not here, yet in some other place; and (methinks) where ever the Lord cast
you, I could willingly make that promise, and perform it, that Ruth made to
Naomi; and so I am confident, could my dear wife, whose heart (I know) bleeds
for you, and her eyes run down with tears to God for you. Good Sir, in your
addresses, remember me to God, that I may learn to lean upon him more firmly,
and rely upon the Rock of Ages, and not upon broken reeds: And (I hope) through
the strength of Christ, and the supply of your prayers, I shall be better
fortified for the time to come, as Peter was after his fall.

I would fain be remembered to my good friend Dr Dr. I hope I have got better
armor of proof than I had before; but I hope there will be no need of showing
it about him. For poor Po. he has wronged himself more than any man can, for I
hear, he has sent more Papers of his confession since he was there.

Good Sir, I have many things more to say, but will not presume to be more
burdensome to you at this time. Will the Lord let me see your face once more
here? I hope he will. However, it will not be long before we shall enjoy one
another in that place, where violent hands shall not touch us; and then
eternity shall be little enough to praise and magnify the Lord for his riches
of mercy he shows to us.

The Lord stand by you, The Lord preserve you, and put his everlasting arms
under you, and deliver you: Which shall be the earnest groans and sighs of him,
who is (he hopes) a dear, yet a most unworthy Friend, not worthy to be looked
upon by you.

Dr. Drake's Letter to Mr. Love.
Dear and precious friend,
I Cannot but congratulate your liberty, and the singular honor God has laid
upon you. The Captain of our salvation is wise, and knows whom to call out for
his Champion. He has pleased to call you to the forelorn-hope, we are leading
up the van; our brethren in the black bill, are like to bring up the body; and
for our rear (blessed be God) we have armies of prayers and tears; yea, through
mercy, we may say, Our righteousness goes before us, and the glory of the Lord
shall be our reward, Isa. 58.8. Well might we fear, had we not a good God, a
good Cause, and a good Conscience; but where God justifies, who shall condemn?
Certainly, that God who has done us so much good by a prison, (blessed be his
name) can do us much more good by our trial. He bids us not fear them who at
worst can but kill the body: and why should we be afraid of man that shall dye,
etc. and forget the Lord our Maker, yea, our Redeemer? Its too much honor God
lays upon us, to suffer any thing for his Name and Covenants sake; that hereby
we are so indeared in the hearts of his Faithful people, and have been
occasions to blow up the spirit of prayer, that was almost exstinct. Will not
God incline his ear when he has prepared the heart? Did he ever set his
children a begging, but he had a boon for them? I need not stir up your
Christian resolution, but desire rather to light my candle at your Lamp. Yet,
when lately I looked upon Rev. 2, and 3. I espied no less than seven rare
Cordials to persons in our condition, Rev. 2. v. 7, 10, 17, 27. and c. 3. v. 5,
12, 21. 1. A tree of life. 2. Freedom from hurt by the second death. 3. The
hidden Manna and white stone. 4. The morning star and weilding the rod of iron.
5. The white garments the Book of life, and owning us before his Father. 6.
That we shall be pillars in his house, having his new name graven upon us. 7.
That we shall sit in his throne, etc. and all this made over, not (...), or
(...), but (...), to him that it overcoming. A Christian is sure to conquer, if
he dare but fight, and no soldier but he can glory when he puts on his
harness. The Lord arm you with such courage and wisdom, that you may avoid the
snares, and be above the fury of your Adversaries. God, Angels, and Men look
upon you; and while you are a fighting, Christ is weaving your Crown: He by
your example, so hearten his people, and damp the adversary, as they may
rejoice (and bless God) who favor your righteous dealing, and all iniquity may
stop her mouth. So prays

Your unworthy Brother and Companion in Tribulation, and in the Kingdom and
patience of Jesus Christ. I prae. sequar.
June 1. -- 51. I beg your prayers, and present my best affections to your self
and Mistress L.

I Would rather dye with grace, than live with blame;
Far better dye with Love, than live with shame.
For my most honored friend Mr. L.



Another of Dr. Drakes to Mr. Love. June 17. 1651.
Dear Friend,
I Cannot be unmindfull of your person and condition, as being not only in the
body, but also in an especial manner bound with you, Heb. 13.3. And certainly,
if habitual and active grace be such motives of Christian love, is not passive
grace much more? To suffer for Christ is a grace, as well as to believe in him,
Phil. 1.29. (...), etc. Christ and his people are never more lovely than upon
the Cross. May we not under God, thank our prison, that we are so gracious this
day in the eyes of Gods people, yea, and I am persuaded, in the eyes of some
enemies? Must not we by suffering enter into glory, as our blessed Savior?
Luke 24.26. Does not Christ by this means set a higher rate upon reformation,
the Ministry, and the Government? How do the Northern people prize the Sun, who
see it but once in three or six months? and do not our dunghill-hearts
ordinarily value blessings, more by their want, than enjoyment?

In particular, Sir, how are you indeared to God and man in this call, to be
the Proto-Confessour or Proto-Martyr; the Lord enable you by grace, to bear the
honor, as well as the burden. I bless God for your chearfullness and
constancy, whose slame contributes much to the keeping of my poor spark alive.

But my errand is, if it may be, to prevent the latter: and may it stand with
Gods will, I would not have you yet to be a Martyr. Happily you will say, I wish
you worse than your Adversaries do; if so, yet I am sure it is with an honester
heart, etc. --.

Sir, I have only one thing to add, which I apprehend as a providence not to
be slighted, namely, that your day of trial is your day of Jubilee, and your
day of Pentecost, it being precisely the fiftieth day from your apprehension:
ordered so, I am confident, by especial providence, not by the intention of
the Adversary: The Lord make it a Jubilee to you, for liberty of spirit, and a
day of Pentecost for effusion of the Spirit of grace, wisdom and utterance. I
shall say Amen to the Omen, and follow it with what poor interest I have in
heaven; still choosing rather to dye with Love, than to rule with Lust, which
is the Magna charta of these apostatizing times. My best affections to your
self, and dearest consort, I beg your prayers, and rest,

Yours, etc.

Another of Dr. Drakes to Mr. Love.
MY most dear and precious friend in the Lord, in whom I observed great reason,
both of love and honor, from the first day that God blessed me with the
knowledge of you; but never more than at this time, when you are ascending your
triumphant chariot, and mounting into the cloud of witnesses, Heb. 12.1. to
guide and encourage us who are left yet behind, to run with readiness the race
that is set before us. Sweet Sir, I wonder not you are so cheerful, being so
near your journeys end, steered by our great Pilot, out of a dangerous and
troublesome Sea, and entering into the harbor; putting off your pilgrims weeds,
that you may be clothed with the white robes, as a free de^ison of the
heavenly Jerusalem. I mistook in dreaming of an earthly Pentecost and Jubilee;
that 50th day I now perceive was an hint and summons to call you to the
everlasting Jubilee above, Heb. 12. v. 22, 24 a Parasceve to the eternal
Sabbath, Heb. 4. v. 9, 10. How much are we beholding to our very enemies
(rather to God for them) who never do us more good, than when they think to do
us the shrewdest turn. I wonder not now at that Epinicium of the Apostles, Romans
8. ver. 28, and 33. to the end, and 1 Cor. 3. v. 21, 22, 23. Death is so far
from separating, that it brings us immediately to Christ, Phil. 1.23. and that
by a stroke so honorable, so easy, so comfortable, so speedy, that you need
but wink and go to Heaven. The Lord is pleased to give you a writ of ease, and
to pay you your penny at the sixth hour. Blessed be God, we serve a good
Master, who puts us only upon honest and honorable employments, makes our task
easy and short, does all our works for us and in us; and after all, rewards us
freely and richly, as if we had earned our wages Better be Gods hireling than
the worlds darling, Luke 15. v. 17, 19. Dear Sir, I bless God for your
faithfullness, patience, courage, wisdom, whereby you have both tried and
discovered the policy and strength of your Antagonists, and showed to your poor
unworthy fellow sufferers that by grace they are conquerable. The Lord is with
thee, thou mighty man of valor; go in this thy might, and smite the host of
Midian as one man, Judge. 6. v. 12, 14, 16. The Lord make you a true Samson,
that you may do the Devils kingdom more mischief at your death, than ever you
did in all your life God is now but in his old method, to make the blood of the
Martyrs the seed of his Church, Col. 1.24 Hiel deserved a curse for building
Jerico, (Josh. 6.26.) but God deserves blessing for building the new Jerusalem,
though he lay the foundation thereof in Abiram his firstborn (so is Christ,
our high Father: compare Genesis 17.5. with Isa 9.6.) and set up the gates thereof
in his younger Son Segub, (1 King. 16 last.) such are we poor contemptible
creatures, exalted and strengthened by God, not only to do, but also to suffer
for his Name, ( Act. 5.41. Phil. 1.29.) Cause, Church and Covenant. The Lord is
making you such a blessed Segub: making that to be your honor, strength and
safety, which many judged to be your shame, weakness and danger. Dear Sir, God
honors you to be the Elias, and first to ascend the fiery chariot; May I,
without presumption, be the Elisha, and make two or three bold requests unto
you: and first let me beg your prayers for a double portion of your Spirit.
Secondly, let me see you (if possible) before you ascend, though it be but
through the lattess, on your Nuptial morning. Thirdly, let fall your mantle,
that I may by means of it be enabled to divide Jordan, yea, the Red Sea, if God
call me through it, and not sink like an Egyptian in the mighty waters, Psalm.
32.6. Fourthly, if there be any remembrance of things below, in heaven ( Luke
16. v. 24, 25, 28) will you when you are in the blessed Heaven, think of your
poor friend, and the rest of your fellow Soldiers left behind, and laboring
in the storm, till Christ come to them as he does to you. Surely the Church
triumphant does not forget the Church militant: and prayer is no paradox in
heaven, ( Rev. 6. v. 9, 10.) till the body of Christ be perfected: If justice
makes them pray against enemies; why should not charity draw out supplications
for their friends: Surely, there is a communion of Saints between the Church
militant and triumphant; we may bless God for them, and cannot they pray for
us? The Martyrs would not pray to dead Saints, but some of them desired living
Saints to pray for them, both on earth and in heaven: and I think therein they
were not superstitious. Sweet Sir, I know to whom I speak, and am assured, that
Love will not be puffed up with that which would soon burst a bladder of pride:
None higher in Gods eyes than those who are lowest in their own. I see your
time is short, and therefore though my affection be like Jordan at the time of
harvest, I must set bounds and banks to my words, lest I divert and trouble you
in your passage. I doubt not but you remember that you must pass through the
Jordan to the fiery Chariot. Jordan was not more effectual to cleanse Naaman's
Leprosy, than the River of repentant tears is to purge the leprosy of sin (
Psalm. 119. v. 136.) next after the immense ocean of the blood of Christ. It Is
not Abanah and Parphar will wash away the Leprosy, but Jordan; nor will every
tear wash away sin, but penitent tears. You have but little time to mourn,
Christ stands by with his towel and handkerchief, Psalm. 56.8. Rev. 7 last. and
21.4. Isa. 25.8. Spiritual sorrow and joy are inseparable companions in this
life; and the Dove-like spirit of comfort loves these streams, Cant. 3.12.
Matthew. 3.16. Every true Christian has this Baptismus flaminis joined with
Baptism. flaminis: And now God honors you with Baptis. Sanguinis superadded.
The cup of tears and cup of comfort may well go together, and happy he who can
mingle this drink with weeping, Psalm. 102.9. such need not fear to pledge
Christ in his cup of blood; and undoubtedly shall sit at Christ's right hand in
his Kingdom, Matthew. 20. ver. 22, 23. though not in the sense of the two
ambitious Brethren. If we could weep or repent for any thing in heaven, sure it
would be, because we wept and repented no more nor no better on earth. The Lord
enable you and us all to do much work in a little time. If I see you no more, I
must be forced here to take my long leave; yet why say I so? it may prove but a
short leave, since in likelihood (as things stand) few weeks, yea, days, may
bring me to a sight of your blessed soul in the arms of Christ: and surely, the
communion of Saints in heaven, is cumulative to their essential happiness. The
Lord enable me to imitate your graces, and then I shall not doubt to inherit
your happiness, which is only God, the highest end, and the chiefest good. The
Lord be nearer to you than your danger, and support you in the most needful
hour; and when men have done their worst, receive your soul to his mercy, Act.
7. v. 55, 56, 59. Luk 2.29, 30. and 2 Timothy v. 7, 8. So prays

Your poor unworthy Friend, and Companion in the Kingdom and tribulation of
Jesus Christ.
July 12. 1651.
Mr. Robinson's Letter to Mr. Love.
Dear Friend,
THe loss which the Church of God will sustain by your death, is a very great
trouble to me, and I doubt not, but a far greater to others, whose hearts God
has made more sensible to feel his hand. This stroke I am confident will be
your happiness, but a great misery, a sad punishment to many: when God has a
purpose to punish many at once, he uses to take this course. The extinguishing
such a star, (I do not flatter you, God knows) cannot but greatly afflict the
whole world. I wish heartily God would grant me the favor to see you before
your wedding day, for I dare not call it a dying day. I hope I shall be in your
thoughts when you are at the throne of Grace. Good Sir, heap up as many prayers
as you can for the poor Church of God before you leave us, it shall be the best
legacy you can bequeath; what you shall sow, some will live to reap, and you
will not be unrewarded. Jesus Christ had his thoughts on the Church even to his
dying hour; good Sir, imitate your Master, I need not say any thing to
strengthen you against the fear of your approaching day, I doubt not, but you
have often overcome that fear through Jesus Christ. Profectio est quam putas
mortem: It Is but the taking of a journey, and though the way be deep, yet its
but short: God brings you the nearest way. A shorter cut never had any to rest.
I know you have been often upon Mount Nebo, where you have seen Canaan, whither
you are going. The Mystical head cannot be cut off; you have finished your
testimony, and fear not to receive your recompense. Christ has transformed
this black Messenger to you into an Angel of Light. How soon others may follow
you is known only to God; if we stay longer, it is but to row in a stormy Sea,
Moses was very willing to dye, God said, Go up and dye; and he went up and
died. Let not the care of your Relations afflict you, The earth is the Lords
and the fullness thereof; Leave your fatherless children, God will provide for
them; Let your widow trust in God. Your dear yoke fellow is a partaker of the
same grace with you; how rich are they that are heirs to the promises? You can
commend your spirit into Gods hands, much more your wife and children: Remember
that promise, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed; Sir, it is a richer
portion than the Mines of India. You were but a cistern to them, the fountain
lives, and will live when you are dead: God can provide without you, you cannot
without God. Good Sir, Cheer up; I hear how full of joy you are, blessed be
God; all these are but little drops to the ocean. I have writ this to fill you
more and more. An Ax, and a severer are all one; you shall dye without
sickness. When you think of the present ignominy, look on the future glory; you
shall be with God, Christ, Angels, the souls of just men made perfect, in a
short time. What a happiness is it to have grace in perfection! to see God face
to face, to be freed from the being of sin, Temptations of Devils, society of
wicked men! You have faught a good fight, you have finished your course, you
have kept the faith, etc. and you are going to receive your Crown, a crown of
glory, that fades not away. You are now going to that place, where the voice
of the oppressor shall never be heard: You are going to your bed, the best and
safest you ever slept on. The steps of the scaffold will be a Jacobs Ladder,
upon which you shall ascend to your loving Father: The Scaffold will be as
mount Nebo; The Ax of the Executioner will cut off the head of sin, and put an
end to all misery. Be sure, Sir, Not only the Angels of God, but the God of the
Angels himself will mightily strengthen you. If your death, and this kind of
death, were not most for the glory of God, and the benefit of the Church, I am
confident, God would have saved you from this hour.

I have writ thus, not because you want advice, but to testify my love, my
dear love to you, and to give you remembrance of me and mine, before your
departure hence. Good Sir, accept of it as my last farewell; farewell,
farewell, dear Friend. God, that has bound up your soul in the bundle of life,
be your comfort, joy, hope, peace, confidence in life and death to all
eternity: Yea he will be your guide unto death; He will be an Husband and head
to your dearest Wife; He will be a tender Father to your little Babes. This is
the confidence, this shall be the prayer of

SIR, Your dear Friend.
Aug. 19. 1651.
A brief Note from Mr. Jenkyn to Mr. Love.
My dear, dear Heart,
THou art very near to my soul. The Lord Jesus Christ smile with the
pleasantest face upon thee, that ever he did upon Sufferer. -- I here send thee
a Book that I have been much relieved by, in my Imprisonment. What are ten
thousand Deaths, where Christ is apprehended by faith! These considerations
where the leaf is turned down, ( page 335.) do sweetly support faith. -- I am
afraid almost to send these thoughts, for fear over-many notions may disturb
thee. -- I judge these more profitable than speculative discourses of death. --
The great God, that hangs the Earth upon nothing but his Word, bear up thy soul
on his promises. Oh sweet, most sure, sure, sure (oh remember sure!) promises;
as stable as the very Essence of God; for the performances whereof God has
pawned his Being: As I live, etc.

My Heart, I love thee, I kiss thee, I weep upon thee, I rejoice for thee, I
shall see thee in glory. The Lord Jesus strengthen thee. He will.

Mr. Jenkyn his Letter to Mr. Love.
My dear Heart,
BLame me not of this backwardness to cast in this mite. I was hardly persuaded
of the fitness thereof: your greater danger is in the plenty of these tokens,
considering your own store. Though your appetite be never so good, it is
impossible you should concoct all the food dish'd up in Books, Friends Papers,
and your own Meditations by and for you. I shall desire to make up my
Paper-defects by servent prayer: and oh that I could pray so this once, as if I
were not to do it a second time. My only counsel must be, that which I know
has been your only care, and will be your only comfort; namely, that you sleep
in Jesus. Thou shall not sleep (though that were much) in the lap, bosom, and
arms of Jesus; but in this sleep he looks upon thee as a piece of himself, even
as a member, a dear limb. In dying thou shall not dye. They who are fallen
asleep in Christ, perish not. 1 Cor. 15.18, 20.
Christ the first fruits (a most sweet resemblance) the happy hansell of the
grave, the first born from the dead, the Head of the body, did rise from the
dead as such, and not as a private person: Coloss. 1.18.
So that our resurrection is (even now) in its cause. The union 'twixt Christ
and thee (and this union is not only 'twixt Christ and thy soul, but thy body
also; and therefore he is the first fruits of the dead) cannot be broken off by
death. Christ should rebel against the will of his Father, (which were
blasphemy to think) if he should lose any thing which his Father has given
him; as he should, were it not to be raised up at the last day. Christ is the
very RESVRRECTION, and he that believes in him, though dead, yet shall live.
Oh, how has Christ persumed the grave, and beautified the grisly face of
Death! Death is (now) a privilege, our best friend next to Christ, and the
truth is, all our means and sorrows in this life, are for want of that which
we so much fear, death; as the child that cries for want of sleep, and yet
cannot endure to undress and go to bed. My dear heart! thou have better clothes
to put on in the morning of the Resurrection: This mortal shall put on
immortality. Thy garment of grace has had many spots, perhaps; Ephesians. 5.27.
Jude 24. vid.
this day thou shall take thy leave of mourning for them, and therefore the
Lord help thee to mourn more holily and meltingly than ever; but the garment of
glory shall not have one. Lord, is there a condition wherein I shall never sin
more, wherein I shall have as, much grace as I can hold, and wish, and will
desire; wherein I shall no more wash the feet of Jesus Christ, and now and then
be suffered to give them a kiss, but shall lie in his blessed bosom, and be
clasped in his glorious arms to eternity! This is thy approaching happiness;
and every comfort, by how much the nearer, is the sweeter. Now is thy salvation
nearer than when thou first believedst.

Oh dear heart! Now for a strong faith! oh wrestle mightily with the great God,
for strength to overcome him; cling about the promises, precious promises, not
only for their fullness, but infallibility; adventure thy soul upon them. The
faithfullness of God is a foundation which bears the heaviest structure, and
the greatest load of sin and expectation. Jesus Christ calls, beseeches,
commands, threatens, and all to make thee believe. The Lord increase thy faith!
thou art to go through a very great work, but Christ has labored, and thou
art but to enter into his labors. Death is but a nominall enemy when Christ
has disarmed it; there is more terror in the pomp of it (as Seneca said) the
Scaffold, the Axe, Spectators, Reports, than in the thing it self. Oh how may a
Christian insult over it! Oh Death, where is thy Sting! Christ has spoiled
principalities and powers, disarmed, disrobed them. His death is the death of
Death; all its stings are left in his side. Say not therefore (Dear heart) who
shall role away the stone from the mouth of the sepulcher? when thou come
thither, thou shall find it rol'd away to thy hand. Its difficulties and
distresses are taken away in Christ. -- To this dear Lord Jesus I commit thee,
who in his due time will wipe away all tears from the eyes, and sin from the
souls of his poor servants; and out of all our storms, bring us to that haven
where we would be. I know not where to break off, and yet not where to leave
thee so well as there.

Thine in the bowels of this Savior.

Master Case to Master Love.
Heavenly Saint,
THou art now awaked out of thy last natural rest, to go to thy eternal rest:
the night is past, thou shall never know night any more, but God shall give
thee light, and thou shall reign for ever and ever, Rev. 22.3, 4, 5. Thou art
now going where thou shall be in a true sense above ordinances, and above
Scripture, 1 Cor. 13.12, 13 where God in Christ shall be thy all in all. Thy
prison shall be turned into a Palace, and thy filthy garments shall be taken
away, and thou shall be clothed with long white Robes, and in the moment when
thy body and head shall be severed, thou shall be united to Christ thy Head; in
him thou shall be crowned, and with him thou shall reign to eternity.

It is finished.

Joh. 17.1, 4, 5, 6, 11, 13, 24.

Let me see that face once more, which I shall see no more till the last day.
Send up one sigh before thee for thy following Brother and Companion in
tribulation, and in the Kingdom and Patience of Jesus Christ.

Another of Master Case's to Master Love.
Dear soul,
THou art now going to heaven: to quicken thy desires, put it into these
notions, that are most suitable to thy condition.

To the weary it is rest, Isa. 57.2. Rev. 14.13.

To the banished home, 2 Cor. 5.6.

To the reproached glory, Rom, 5.2.

To the molested and captived with corruption, it is the glorious liberty of
the Sons of God, Romans 8.21.

To the resister to blood, it is conquest, Romans 8.37.

To the vexed with sin and sorrow, it is the exstinction of both.

To the hungry soul, it is the hidden Manna, Rev. 22.17.

To the thirsty, rivers of pleasure, water of life, fountain of life, Rev.
22.17. Psalm. 36.8, 9.

To the grieved soul, it is fullness of joy, and to the sorrowful heart
pleasures for ever more, Psalm. 16.8.

In a word, To them that have lien upon the dunghill here, and kept their
integrity, it is a throne upon which they shall sit and reign with Christ for
ever and ever, Rev. 3.31. and 22.5.

Dear heart cheer up, a sharp breakfast, but a blessed supper, the supper of
the Lamb. The Bridegroom says, Lo I come quickly. Let thy rejoiced soul echo
back again, Even so, come Lord Jesus.

There is but a little time for prayer left, in that remember me, and then
everlasting halelujahs will be thy work, and rest. Live for ever with thy God.
Amen.

I shall accompany thee with my prayers, though I cannot with my person.

Mistress Loves Letter to Master Love.
My dear heart,
BEfore I write a word further, I beseech thee think not that it is thy wife,
but a friend now that writes to thee. I hope thou have freely given up thy wife
and children to that God, who has said in the 49. of Jer. and v. 11. Leave thy
fatherless children, I will preserve them alive, and let thy widow trust in
me: thy Maker will be my Husband, and a father to thy children. O that the Lord
would keep thee from having one troubled thought for thy relations. I desire
freely to give thee up into thy Fathers hands, and not only look upon it as a
crown of glory for thee to dye for Christ, but as an honor to me, that I
should have an husband to leave for Christ. I dare not speak to thee, nor have
a thought within my own heart, of my unspeakable loss, but wholly keep my eye
fixed upon thy unexpressable and unconceivable gain. Thou leavest but a
sinful, mortal wise, to be everlastingly married to the Lord of glory: Thou
leavest but children, brothers, and sisters, to go to the Lord Jesus thy eldest
Brother: Thou leavest friends on earth, to go to the enjoyment of Saints and
Angels, and the spirits of just men made perfect in glory; Thou do but leave
earth for heaven, and changest a prison for a Palace. And if natural
affections should begin to arise, I hope that spirit of grace that is within
thee, will quell them; knowing that all things here below, are but dung and
dross in comparison of those things that are above. I know thou keep thine
eye fixed on the hope of glory, which makes thy feet trample on the loss of
earth. My Dear, I know God has not only prepared glory for thee, and thee for
it; but I am persuaded he will sweeten the way for thee to come to the
enjoyment of it. When thou art putting on thy clothes that morning, O think, I
am now putting on my wedding garments, to go to be everlastingly married to my
Redeemer. And when the messenger of death comes to thee, let him not seem
dreadful to thee; but look on him as a messenger that brings thee tidings of
eternal life. When thou go up the scaffold, think, (as thou said to me) it
is but thy fiery chariot, to carry thee up to thy Fathers house. And when thou
layest down thy precious head to receive thy Fathers stroke, remember what thou
said to me, Though thy head was severed from thy body, yet in a moment, thy
soul should be united to thy Head the Lord Jesus in heaven. And though it may
seem something bitter, that by the hands of men we are parted a little sooner
than otherwise we might have been; yet let us consider, it is the decree and
will of our Father; and it will not be long ere we shall enjoy one another in
heaven again. Let us comfort one another with these sayings. Be comforted my
Dear heart, it is but a little stroke, and thou shall be there where the weary
shall be at rest, and where the wicked shall cease from troubling. Remember,
though thou may eat thy dinner with bitter herbs, yet thou shall have a sweet
supper with Christ that night. My Dear, by what I write unto thee, I do not
hereby undertake to teach thee; for these comforts I have received from the
Lord by thee. I will write no more, nor trouble thee any further, but commit
thee into the arms of that God, with whom ere long thee and I shall be.
Farewell, my Dear, I shall never see thy face more, till we both behold the face
of the Lord Jesus at the great Day.

MARY LOVE.
July 14. 1651.
Another of Mistress Loves to Master Love.
My heavenly Dear,
I Call thee so, because God has put heaven in thee, before he has taken thee
to heaven. Thou now beholdest God, Christ and Glory as in a glass; but to
morrow, heaven gates will be opened, and thou shall be in the full enjoyment of
all those glories, which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither can the
heart of man understand. God has now swallowed up thy heart in the thoughts of
heaven; but ere long thou shall be swallowed up in the enjoyment of heaven: And
no marvel there should be such quietness and calmness in thy spirit, whilst
thou art sailing in this tempestuous Sea; because thou perceivest by the eye of
says a haven of rest, where thou shall be richly laden with all the glories of
heaven. O lift up thy heart with joy, when thou layest thy dear head on the
block, in the thought of this, that thou art laying thy head to rest in thy
fathers bosom; which when thou do awake shall be crowned, not with an
earthly fading crown, but with an heavenly eternal crown of glory. And be not
discouraged, when thou shall see a guard of soldiers triumphing with their
trumpets about thee; but lift up thy head, and thou shall behold God with a
guard of his holy Angels, triumphing to receive thee to glory. Be not dismayed
at the scofs and reproaches that thou may meet with in thy short way to
heaven; for be assured, God will not only glorify thy body and soul in heaven,
but he will also make the memory of thee to be glorious on the earth! O let not
one troubled thought for thy wife and babes arise within thee; thy God will be
our God, and our portion; he will be a husband to thy widow, and a father to
thy children, the grace of thy God will be so sufficient for us. Now, my Dear,
I desire willingly and cheerfully to resign my right in thee to thy Father and
my Father, who has the greatest interest in thee. And confident I am, though
men have separated us for a time; yet our God will ere long bring us together
again, where we shall eternally enjoy one another, never to part more. O let me
hear, how God bears up thy heart, and let me taste of those comforts that
support thee, that they may be as pillars of marble to bear up my sinking
spirit. I can write no more, Farewell, farewell my Dear, till we meet there where
we shall never bid farewell more; till which time I leave thee in the bosom of
a loving tender hearted Father, and so I rest,

Till I shall for ever rest in Heaven, MARY LOVE.
August 21. 1651.
Master Love to his Wife, when he should have first suffered.
My dearest Beloved,
I Am now going to my long home, yet I must write thee a word before I go
hence, and shall be seen no more; It is to beg thee to be comforted in my gain,
and not to be troubled in thy loss; Labor to suppress thy inward fears, now
thou art under outward sorrows; as thy outward suffering^ abound, let thy
consolations in Christ abound also. I know thou art a woman of a sorrowful
spirit. My time is short, I have but a few words of counsel to give thee, and
then I shall leave thee to God, who cares for thee and thine. 1. Whil^s thou
art under desertions, labor rather to strengthen and clear up thy evidences
for heaven, than question them. 2. Remember a faith of adherence, or reliance
on the Lord Jesus, bring thee to heaven, though thou want the faith of Evidence
or Assurance. 3. Labor to find that (and more also) in God, which thou have
lost in the creature. 4. Spend not thy days in heaviness for my death; if there
were knowledge of things below, or sorrow in heaven; I should grieve to think my
beloved should mourn on earth. 5. Lie under a soul-searching Ministry: I know
thou art not a spungy hearer, to suck in foul water as well as fair. God has
given thee a good understanding, to be able to discern things that differ; as
the mouth tastes meat, thy ear tries words. 6. Be conversant in Christian
meetings, and much in the exercises of the duties of mortification, in fasting
and prayers; yet have respect to the weakness of thy body and thy present
condition. 7. Have a care of thy self and babes, God will take care for thee
and them. I can write no more; farewell my Dear, farewell, farewell. These are
the last words written by

Thy dying, yet comforted Husband, CHRISTOPHER LOVE.
From the Tower, July 15. 1651. MY Dear, I beg thee to be satisfied: my heart
is greatly comforted in God; I can quietly submit to the good pleasure of his
will, and I hope thou do so also; I am delivered by the determinate counsel
of God, the will of the Lord be done. Read for thy comfort when I am dead and
gone,

Jer. 49.11. and the beginning of the 12. Isa. 54. verse. 5, 6, 7, 8. Psalm 146.
ver. 9.2 Cor. 4. ver. 17, 18. Heb. 12. ver. 6, 7.



Another of Master Loves to his Wife.
More dear to me than ever,
IT adds to my rejoicing, that I have so good and gracious a wife to part with
for the Lord Jesus: In thy grief, I have been grieved; but in thy joy, I have
been comforted. Surely, nature could never help thee to bear so heavy a stroke,
with so much silence and submission to the hand of God! O dearest, every line
thou writest, gladdeth my heart. I dare not think that there is such a creature
as Mary Love in the world; for Kit, and Mall, I can think of them without
trouble, leaving them to so good a God, and so good a Mother. Be comforted
concerning thy Husband, who may more honor God in his death than in his life;
the will of the Lord be done, he is fully satisfied with the hand of God.
Though there be but little between him and death, he knows, there is but little
between him and heaven; and that ravisheth his heart. The Lord bless and
requite thee for thy wise and good counsel; thou have prevented me, the very
things I thought to have written to thee, thou have written to me: I have had
more comfort from thy gracious letter, than from all the counsel I have had
from any else in the world; well, be assured, we shall meet in heaven. I rest,
till I rest in heaven.

Thy dying, but comforted Friend, CHRISTOPHER LOVE.
From the Tower, the Lords Day.
Another of Master Loves to his Wife.
My dearest delight on Earth,
I Was fast asleep when thy Note came. I bless God, I break not an hours sleep
for all my sufferings; I know they work for me a more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory. I slept this night from ten at night, till seven in the
morning, and never waked. My Dear, I am so comforted in the gracious supports
God gives thee, that my burdens are the lighter on my shoulders because they
are not so heavy on thine; or if they be heavy, yet that God helps thee to bear
them. The Lord keep it in the purpose of our hearts for ever, to submit to the
good pleasure of God. I bless God I do find my heart in as quiet and composed a
temper as ever I did in all my life. I am till I dye,

Thy tender hearted Husband, CHRISTOPHER LOVE.
From the Tower, August 18. 1651.
Master Loves last Letter to his Wife, on the day he suffered.
My most gracious Beloved,
I Am now going from a Prison to a Palace; I have finished my work, I am now to
receive my wages; I am going to heaven, where are two of my children, and
leaving thee on the earth where are three of my babes; those two above need not
my care, but the three below need thine. It comforts me to think two of my
children are in the bosom of Abraham, and three of them will be in the arms
and care of so tender and godly a Mother: I know thou art a woman of a
sorrowful spirit, yet be comforted: though thy sorrow be great for thy
Husbands going out of the world; yet thy pains shall be the less in bringing
thy child into the world; thou shall be a joyful Mother, though thou be a
sad Widow. God has many mercies in store for thee; the prayers of a dying
Husband for thee will not be lost. To my shame I speak it, I never prayed so
much for thee at liberty, as I have done in prison. I cannot write more, but I
have a few practical counsels to leave with thee, viz.

1. Keep under a sound, orthodox, and soul-searching Ministry; Oh there are
many deceivers gone out into the world, but Christ's sheep know his voice, and a
stranger will they not follow. Attend on that Ministry that teaches the way of
God in truth, and follow Solomon's advice, Prove. 19.27. Cease to hear
instruction that causes to err from the ways of knowledge.

2. Bring up thy children in the knowledge and admonition of the Lord: the
mother ought to be a teacher in the fathers absence, Prove. 19.27. The words
which his mother taught him: and Timothy was instructed by his Grandmother
Lois, and his mother Eunice, 2 Timothy 1.5.

3. Pray in thy family daily, that thy dwelling may be in the number of the
families that do call on God.

4. Labor for a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great
price, 1 Pet. 3.4.

5. Pore not on the comforts thou want, but on the mercies thou have.

6. Look rather at Gods end in afflicting, than at the measure and degree of
thy afflictions.

7. Labor to clear up thy evidences for heaven, when God takes from thee the
comforts of earth, that as thy sufferings do abound, so thy consolations in
Christ may abound much more, 2 Cor. 1.4.

8. Though it is good to maintain a holy jealousy of the deceitfulness of thy
heart, yet it is evil for thee to cherish fears and doubts, about the truth of
thy graces; If ever I had confidence touching the grace of another, I have
confidence of grace in thee; I can say of thee as Peter did of Silvanus, I am
persuaded that this is the grace of God wherein thou stand, 1 Pet. 5.12. Oh
my dear soul, wherefore do thou doubt, whose heart has been upright, whose
walkings have been holy, etc. I could venture my soul in thy souls stead, such
a confidence have I of thee.

9. When thou find thy heart secure, presumptuous and proud, then pore upon
corruption, more than upon grace; but when thou find thy heart doubting and
unbelieving, then look on thy graces, not on thy infirmities.

10. Study the covenant of grace and merits of Christ, and then be troubled if
thou can. Thou art interested in such a covenant that accepts purposes for
performances, desires for deeds, sincerity for perfection, the righteousness of
another, viz. that of Jesus Christ, as if it were thine own. Oh my Love! rest,
rest then in the love of God, in the bosom of Christ.

11. Swallow up thy will in the will of God; it is a bitter cup we are to
drink, but it is the cup our Father has put into our hands. When Paul was to
go to suffer at Jerusalem, the Christians could say, The will of the Lord be
done; Oh, say thou, when I go to Tower Hill, The will of the Lord be done.

12. Rejoice in my joy; to mourn for me inordinately, argues that either thou
enviest, or suspectest my happiness. The joy of the Lord is my strength, oh let
it be thine also. Dear wife, farewell; I will call thee wise no more, I shall
see thy face no more: yet I am not much troubled, for now I am going to meet
the Bridegroom the Lord Jesus Christ, to whom I shall be eternally married.

Thy Dying, yet most Affectionate Friend till death, CHRISTOPHER LOVE.
From the Tower of London, 22th August, 1651. The day of my glorification.
FINIS.

