THE Penitent Pardoned. A TREATISE. Wherein is handled the duty of confession
of Sin, and the privilege of the pardon of Sin. Together with a Discourse Of
Christ's Ascension into Heaven, and of his coming again from Heaven. Wherein The
opinion of the Chiliasts is considered, and solidly confuted, Being the sum and
substance of several Sermons preached by that faithful servant of Christ, Mr
Christopher Love, late Minister of the Gospel at Lawrence Jury, LONDON.

1 John 1. 19. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us
our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

Heb. 9. 28. Unto them that look for him, shall he appear the second time
without sin unto salvation.

Qui dat peccanti poenitentiam, dat poenitenti veniam. Veniet judicaturus, qui
venit judicandus. London, Printed for John Rothwell, at the Bear and Fountain
in Cheapside, and for Nathanael Brooks, at the Angel in Cornhil, 1657.

To the Christian Reader.
THE extraordinary acceptance which Mr Love's books have found with sober and
solid Christians, as it has occasioned the publishing of more treatises of
his, then was at first intended, so it has imboldned some without our
knowledge and consent, to thrust forth some imperfect Copies under Mr Love's
name; concerning which we will only say, that the want of our attestation (to
whose care the publishing of his sermons were entrusted) is ground enough to
render them as suspected and suppositious to the serious and deliberate Reader.

Amongst some other Sermons of Mr Love's, which have been printed by imperfect
Copies, These two Treatises had the unhappiness to be very hastily and
unhandsomely published, being never perused by any of us, or compared with his
own Notes.

Now that these two, very useful tracts, may be fit to be joined with the rest
of Mr Love's works, the Reader is desired to know, that they have been
diligently compared, with the Notes written with Mr Love's own hand, and have
been corrected from very many faults, with which the former Edition abounded,
and most of them material.

We will add no more but this; that in the Polemicall part of these discourses,
as we approve the authors judgment to be sound and orthodox: so we believe,
that had he lived to publish his own labors, this and other books had come
forth more answerable to the learning, piety, and vigorous parts of the Author.
We commend thee to God, and the word of his Grace, which is able to build thee
up, and to give thee an inheritance amongst those that are sanctified.

London, April 27. 1657. Edmund Calamy. Simeon Ash. William Tailor. William
Whitaker.


The Table.
AFflicted people fit to confess sin page 9, 10 Aggravation of sin 16
Antinomians confuted 24 Aggravation of sin by circumstances 85. and 109 Austins
confession and aggravation of sin ibid. Godly afflicted for sin 94, 95
Antinomians confuted 96 All sins not alike 108 Christ ascended into Heaven 116,
117 Time of Christ's Ascension 126 What we gain by Christ's Ascension 134
B.
Benumbed conscience 55 Boldness in sin 57 Christ's body in Heaven, and why
119, 120 Heretics confuted, that denied Christ's body to be in Heaven 121
Believers went to heaven before the incarnation of Christ 131, 132 Bodies of
Saints shall go to Heaven 197 Endowments of a glorified body 199 Of sin against
the body 208
C.
God loves to have his people confess their sins 7 Confess our bosom sin to
God 12 Small sins must be confessed 14 We must confess sin to God 19 We must
confess our sins to God, 20, 35. and our particular sins 22 Of auricular
confession 19, 24 In what cases we must confess our sins to men 21, 23
Cofession of sin must be affectionate 36 We must confess all sin 39 Confession
must be free 37. and voluntary 38 Confession is not needless as to God 41
Conscience checking for sin 53, 54 Of a senseless sleeping Conscience 56 Comfort
against the fear of death 123 Comfort from the consideration of Christ's coming
to judgment 137 Manner of Christ's second coming 173 of Communion with Christ
it Heaven 210
D.
DEfects in our confession 33 Greatness of David's sin 65 We must not fear
Death 196
E.
SOul eased by confession 6 Extenuation of sin 87
F.
FEar of the godly to sin 24 and 47 Christ's coming, the dread and fear of
wicked men 180
G.
GOD pardons great sins 61, 62 Of gross and heinous sins 80 Directions to
great and heinous sinners 82 Great sins, great humiliation 86 How God makes the
sins of his people turn to their good 92, 93 Christ ascended to give the Holy
Ghost 123 The glory of Christ's second coming 176, 177
H.
HOpe of pardon 17 Humbled sinner amiable to God 40 Christ in Heaven, his Heart
on Earth 125 The Godly die and go to Heaven. 188
I.
Justified persons must confess sin 5 Impenitency exempts from pardon 89
Infants and grown people not under the same necessity of repentance 101 Christ
will come to judge the world 137
L.
LAw of God discovers sin 37. of little sins 73, 74 Love of God to penitent
sinners 87, 88 Limbus Patrum confuted 129 Of Christ's coming at the last day,
and not before 151
M.
WE must confess our Master-sin 34 Mortification of sin 46, 50, 51, 52 Infinite
mercy in God 70. merit in Christ, 71, 72 Meditation of Christ 123 Millenaries
confuted 150. unto 172 What scriptures those Millenaries urge 160, 166, 169
O.
OLd sins 18 Gods children have fallen into the same sin oftener then once,
though this is not usual 102, 103, 104 Comfort against Oppression 141
P.
Public sins public confessions 22 Of good and wicked purposes 32 of pardon
of sin 33 Pardoned sinners love God 45. and they forgive a^^thers ibid Pardon
and repentance joined ibid What a pardoned sinner shuns 61, 62 Peter's sin
aggravated in denying Christ 67 Aggravation of Paul's sin 68, 69 God pardons and
yet punishes 96 Pardon not before faith and repentance 97, 98, 99 Saints
justified must pray for pardon 107 Prophesies of Christ's ascension 117 Christ
prepares heaven for believers 127 We should prepare for heaven 133 Comfort
against persecution 140 Paradise a type of Heaven 189
R.
AFter reproof for sin, we must confess sin 11 Remorse of conscience 20 Of
those that are angry at reproof 36 Remembrance of sin 38 Remission of sin and
renovation of the heart joined together 44 Relapses into sin dangerous 105 Of
the reproaches of Christians and comfort against the^ 140 Resurrection of the
body proved 204
S.
Confession works sorrow for sin ^ Sorrow for sin T. 17, 49, 5^
T.
TYpes of Christ's ascension 11^ Christ triumph over our enemies. 10^
Transubstantiation confuted 128 Time of Christ's coming unknown 148
W.
Witnesses of Christ's ascension 11^
SERMON 1. Febr. 24. 1649.

Text, PSALM 32. latter part of Verse. 5. I said, I will confess my
transgressions to the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin.
THis Psalm treats of the blessedness of a justified, of a pardoned sinner;
touching which, several particulars are handled. Blessed is he whose
transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered: the forgiveness of sin
consists, first in the covering of sin: the covering of sin not from God, but
by God, so it is explained by God himself, Psalm. 85. verse. 2. Thou have
forgiven the iniquity of thy people, Psalm 85. 2.
Thou have covered all their sin.

It is sin in us to hide our sins: as it is sin to hide our talents, so it is
sin to hide our sin; therefore when the Psalmist says the forgiveness of sin
consists in the covering of sin, this covering is understood of Gods covering.
Which is not to be understood of a total abolition or Extirpation of sin, but
of such a covering of it, as it shall never be imputed for condemnation and
that is a second expression to set out Gods pardoning sin. viz.

2. This forgiveness is set out by not imputing of sin, verse. 2. Sin shall not
be imputed unto a justified person, though still it shall be inherent in him.

Secondly, The Psalmist shows the Character of that man whose sin is pardoned,
verse. 2. Blessed is the man in whose spirit there is no guile. If sin be
pardoned to the soul, guile will never be harbored and indulged in the soul.

When I kept silence, my bones waxed old, through my roaring all the day long:
yet for all this David calls him blessed; though Gods hand was heavy upon him,
yet his heart was still toward him; yet a blessed man, though an afflicted man:

I said, I will confess my transgressions to the Lord, and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin. Thus I have brought you by the hand to the Text. I shall
give you a short paraphrase of the words: I said, this word implies in
Scripture phrase three things. Psalm 14. 1.
First, it notes a deliberation or consideration of the mind, Psalm 14. verse.
1. The fool has said in his heart, there is no God: (that is) he has thought
so in his mind, Psalm 30. 6.
that there is no God. Psalm. 30. verse. 6. And in my prosperity I said, I shall
never be moved: that is, I thought so. Saying, is not always an act of the
tongue, but sometimes of the mind: I said I will confess my sin, that is, I
have bethought my self, and considered in my mind, that it is meet for me to
get pardon and to confess my sin to God, I said.

Psalm. 119. v. 57. Thou art my portion, O Lord, Psalm 119. 57.
I have said that I would keep thy words. 1 Kings 5. 5.
There saying, is explained to be purposing or resolving of the will.

I said, it implies the execution, or practice of what the mind resolves upon,
Psalm. 39. verse. 1. I said I will take heed to my ways, Psalm 39. 1.
etc. that is, I did look to my ways, and I am put upon the practice of taking
care unto my steps and to my ways: the meaning of the phrase is this, I said I
will confess my transgression, I have bethought it so in my mind, and it is
good and meet so to do, I have purposed and resolved in my will, and am
actually put on the practice of it.

I said I will confess my transgression. Multi confitentur iniquitatem suam,
sed non adversus se, sed adversus Deum qui dicunt non hoc feci, aut hoc Deus
voluit, fatum mihi hoc fecit, and stellae, etc. Aygnanus in loc.
The Septuagint interpret this place thus (...). I said I will confess my
transgression, I will confess against my self: upon which one has this note,
Many confess their sins, but they blame not themselves but God, the stars, and
what not. It is worth your notice, that sin is expressed by three words in this
Text; first, transgression, secondly, iniquity, and thirdly, sin; I will
comfesse my transgression, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. There are
but four places as I remember in the Scripture where in these three words are
joined together in one verse, Transgression, Iniquity, and Sin. Exodus 34. verse.
7. Keeping mercy for thousands, Exodus 34. 7.
forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin.

Micha 7. v. 18. who is a God like unto thee, Mic. 7. 18.
that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of
his heritage? he retains not his anger for ever, because he delights in
mercy.

Levit. 16, Levit. 16. 21.
verse. 21. And Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of the live Goat,
and confess over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all
their transgressions in all their sins, etc.

And it is likewise used in Job. 13. verse. 23. Job 13. 13.
How many are mine iniquities and sins, make me to know my transgression and my
sin.

In these four places the words are used in Scripture, and in my Text, but not
else as I remember throughout the word of God: and because these three words
are here used, Interpreters take much pains to find out some material
distinction between them: her is Transgression, Sin, and Iniquity; I have
consulted with many, and the truest account I can give you is this; (...)
Transgression signifies in the Hebrew Rebellion; say interpreters, it notes sin
with extensions and aggravations, sin increased to a great height. Secondly,
(...) Sin signifies evils that are of the lesser degree; that are not so
heinous, and so notes only by sin evils of infirmity and common incursion.
Thirdly, (...) Iniquity signifies sin of nature, that pravity of nature wherein
a man was born. But Grammarians in the Latin distinguish these words
otherwise. Iniquity they make to be that which is done against another man:
Sin, that which is done against a man's self: and Transgression, that which is
done immediately against God. But beloved, the Scripture in many places, makes
them all one. Therefore we need not make further curious enquiry after the
distinction of these words, And thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. The
iniquity of my sin; There is some disagreement about the sense of these words,
what it is for God to forgive the iniquity of sin: By the iniquity of sin, some
do understand the punishment that sin deserves: the Hebrew word (...) that
signifies Iniquity, signifies Punishment; the same word here is spoken of Cain,
Et raatum etc. poeaam.
My punishment is greater then I can bear; there is the same word (...):
therefore in some translations it is read thus, Thou for gave the punishment
of my sin. Secondly, others here do understand by the iniquity of sin, (with
whom I do concure) sin with all its aggravations, with all its heinous
circumstances, sin with all its malignity, Thou do forgive the iniquity of my
sin: most Interpreters go this way, and so make the phrase to be very
emphatical, Thou have forgiven me my sin; that is, all heinous circumstances
that might greaten my sin, thou host forgiven them all. J shall only make a
short entrance at this time into the first part of my Text, I said I will
confess my transgression to the Lord: These words contain in them a holy
purpose in the Psalmist to set up the practice of a necessary and Christian
duty, to wit, secret confession of sin to God. In them five parts are
observeable. First, the duty it self, Confession. Secondly, a deliberate
purpose to set on the practice of this duty, I said. Thirdly, the subject
matter of this duty, Transgression, and Transgression with a propriety, my
Transgression, not of other men's sins but my sins, I said I will confese my
transgressions. J remember Ainsworth, he says it should be translated thus,
more agreeable to the Hebrew, (...) I will confess adversum me against my
self my transgression to the Lord. Many men confess sin, but they do confess
sin as against God, that is, they do confess sin as if. God were the author of
sin, that charge him to be the patron of their impiety and wickedness, I said
I will confess my transgression against myself. Fourthly, The object of this
duty, I will confess my transgression to the Lord: and this beloved takes off
Auricular confession, used and stood on much in the Church of Rome. Confession
that God calls for, and the Scripture calls for, is in secret between God and
your own souls; when conscience shall suggest guilt to you in reference to your
former misdoings, when you can pour out your soul in complaint to God, I said,
I will confess my transgression unto the Lord. Fifthly and lastly, The issue
and event of this duty; and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin: observe the
connection; here is a connective particle, and thou forgavest: he does not come
with an Ergo or a Quare, not with a causal, but with an et, a copulative, and
thou forgavest; not J confess sin, therefore I am forgiven; but I confess
sin, (...) and thou have forgiven me. Forgiveness of sin is not laid down as
an effect flowing from a cause, but as a consequent flowing from an antecedent.
Indeed the Papists plead much for merit, because sometimes causal particles are
used, but this is beyond my Text: thus much for the explaining of the words.
said, J will confess my transgression unto the Lord. The point of Doctrine is
this: That justified persons who have their sins forgiven, are yet bound to
confess sin to God.

And here the confession J am to speak of, is a private confession of our
evils to God, between God and our own souls; and though it be but a familiar
subject; yet as God shall enable me, J shall labor to make it useful and
profitable for your edification in a Christian course, in a holy confession of
sin before your God.

There are many Queres to be dispatched in the handling of this point.

The first Quere is, What are the reasons why persons justified and pardoned,
are yet bound to make confession of sin unto God in private. The Reasons are
these following.

Psalm. 32. verse. 3. Psalm 32. 3.
When J kept silence, my bones waxed old, through my roaring all the day long.

Meaning, David when he kept close his sin; he roared by reason of horror; when
he did not pour out his soul in confession to God; but when a man shall with an
ingenuous clearness confess his evils unto God, this does alleviate his
mind, and lighten his burden, and ease his conscience, Spiritualis vomitus.
and quiet his spirit. Origin does call confession of sin to God, the souls
spiritual vomit. Now you know vomiting does give ease to a burdened stomach,
when the stomach is pained and burdened, and oppressed. A man is sick at the
heart when meat does not digest; the vomiting of the load off of the stomach
does ease the stomach: when the conscience is burdened, when a man's spirit is
troubled, pouring out of complaints and confession to God does ease the mind: A
sinner is like a vessel of new wine filled and stopped up close; till it has
vent it is ready to burst; so is a godly man filled with sin, till he can vent
by confession to God, his heart is ready to burst. Psalm 119. 25.
Psalm. 119. verse. 25. My soul cleaves unto the dust, quicken thou me according
to thy word.

Verse. 26. I have declared my ways, and thou heardest me, teach me thy
Statutes.

As if he should have said, My soul cleaves to the dust, I am in a very low and
sad condition, but I have declared my ways, I have confessed my sins; then God
heard me, then I had peace, then I had quiet, then I had comfort: that is the
first Reason, secret confession to God, it does give a great deal of ease and
holy quiet to the mind.

Jer. 31. 18*
Jer. 31. verse. 18. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, etc. (that
is) confessing his sin unto God.

Cant. 2. verse. 14. O my Dove, that art in the clefts of the rock, Cant. 2. 14.
in the secret places of the stairs; let me see thy countenance, let me hear
thy voice: for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely. God delights
to see and hear the complaints and the confessions of his servants unto him: so
David speaks, Psalm 119. 26.
I declared my ways, and thou heardest me with pity and complacency. God had
rather see men come with ropes about their necks, and with sackcloth about
their loins by a humble confession, 1 Kings 20. 31
as the servants of Benhadad did, then to see ornaments about their necks by a
self-justification; Christ loves to hear and see the mourning condition of a
justified person.

Psalm. 32. verse. 6. For this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee in a
time when thou may be found, Psalm 32. 6.
surely in the floods of great waters they shall not come nigh unto him.

Confession quickens supplication, Dan: 9. 20.
in Dan. 9. verse. 20. And whiles I was speaking and praying, and confession my
sin, and the sin of my people Israel, and presenting my supplication before the
Lord my God, for the holy mountain of my God. etc. that Gabriel came and
touched him. etc.

Confession is to the soul as the whet-stone is to the knife, that sharpens it
and puts an edge upon it; so does confession of sin; confessing thy evils to
God does sharpen and put an edge on thy supplications: that man will pray but
faintly, that does confess sin but slightly.

Solemn and secret confession of they evils unto God, does greatly help to
quicken strong supplications unto God.

Psalm. 38. verse. 18. Psalm 38. 18.
For I will declare mine iniquities, I will be sorry for my sin.

Declaration does work compunction; confession of sin, is but the causing of
sin to recoyle on the conscience; which causes blushing and shame of face, and
grief of heart.

Josh. 7. 19.
Josh. 7. verse. 19. And Joshua said unto Achan, My son, give I pray thee, glory
to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto him, and tell me now what
thou have done, hide it not from me: It is a giving glory unto God.



The second Quere is, But when is a man in the best plight to have freedom of
spirit to make secret confession of sin unto God? I will name but three
Seasons: As,

Gregory, Sins do blind the eyes of men when they sin, Oculos quos culpa
claudit poena ape^it. Greg.
yet those eyes come to be opened by the punishment, the punishment opens
those eyes which the fact has shut. As you read of Joseph's brethren, they did
remain 20 years without having conscience recoyle on themselves to confess
their vils in selling their brother Joseph, but when Joseph laid them in a
prison, then they confessed their evil, Genesis 42 21. Genesis 41. 21.
And they said one to another, we are verily guilty concerning our brother, in
that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not
hear; therefore is this distress come upon us.

It may be now thou art in health, thou do not now confess thy uncleanness,
and thy drunkenness, and thy pride, and thy profaneness; but what will thou
do when God brings thee on a deathbed? when God hedges in thy ways with
thorns, the conscience will reflect on thee, and suggest guilt to thee, and
draw out confession from thee, it is a fit season; when God does bring a man
under any outward affliction, then he is in good plight to confess sin. Psalm.
38.
It is worth your notice in the 38. Psalm, it was made when David lay on his
sickbed, as he thought his deathbed: you shall find it is a complaint of a
very strong disease David lay under, in the 3. verse. There is no soundness in
my flesh, because of thine anger, neither is there any rest in my bones because
of my sin. Verse. 5. 5.
My wounds stink and are corrupt, because of my foolishness. Verse. 7. For my
loins are filled with a loathsome disease, and there is no soundness in my
flesh. Here he was lying on a sickbed; and Interpreters say that he made this
Psalm when he was sick. It is worth your notice of the title that David gives
this Psalm, A Psame of David to bring to remembrance. David when he was on his
deathbed as he thought, he said it shall be a Psalm of remembrance, to bring
sin to remembrance, to confess to God my uncleanness with Bathsheba, to bring
to remembrance the evils of my life; it was a good plight David was in when he
lay on a sickbed, he would make this title of the Psalm, A Psalm to call to
remembrance: men are in a fit plight to make confession to God when they lie
under any bodily sickness; call to remembrance thy pride, call to remembrance
thy passion, call to remembrance thy vain dalliance, whatever thy fin be, it
may be I may not hit of it, but when ever God brings thee under affliction,
thou art then in a fit plight to confess sin unto God, and call to remembrance
thy sins. As it was with the Mariners in the storm with Jonah, when there was
scarce any hope to be saved then they fell a calling each one on his God. Which
occasioned the Proverb, He that has not yet learnt to pray, let him go to
sea. So Jer. 2 verse. 24. A wild Ass used to the wilderness, that snuffeth up
the wind at her pleasure, in her occasion who can turn her away? all they that
seek her will not weary themselves, in her month they shall find her.

The men of Israel are there compared unto an Ass, an unruly creature that
runs up and down the wilderness and kicks up the heel: but says God, Though
men weary themselves to take her, yet in her month they shall take her: that
is, when she brings forth young, then they shall take her, referring it to the
people of Israel; they in their prosperity would not be ruled, but when they
were in their month, in their captivity, in their sufferings, then they should
take them, and they would then come to be more pliant in confessing their guilt
more to God then in former time.

A second Season wherein a man is in a good plight to confess sin is, when the
conscience of a man is set in office by God to pursue him with clear and with
strong accusations. When God puts the conscience of a man in office to pursue
him with strong accusations touching evils he has omitted; then that man is in
a fit plight, if he will take hold of it. Even Judas himself when conscience
awakened him, went and confessed to the High Priest and the Scribes; and said,
I have sinned in betraying innocent blood. If Judas took advantage so much upon
the awakening of conscience to confess sin, then a believer has much more
help. Beloved, the main use of conscience in man, is to bring him upon his
knees, to make him humble in the confession of his ways; conscience serves to
excuse me when I do well, but the main use of conscience is to accuse me when I
do ill, and so to put me on confession to God, therefore mark, says David, I
roared all the day; there was the noise of David's conscience for his Adultery,
then I said I will confess my transgressions: when conscience roars by
accusation, then let the heart confess to God: I do earnestly beg you to take
these fit Seasons: you are in a good plight to confess sin when God does lay
you under afflictions, when God does make conscience accuse you, that you do
deceive in your trades, that you are ingulphed under lust; O then pursue these
accusations of conscience, then you are in a fit plight to confess sin to God.

2 Samuel 12. 13.
thus you know David, in 2 Samuel 12. 13. And David said unto Nathan, I have
sinned against the Lord; And this was after that Nathan had said to David, thou
art the man.

The reproof of Nathans Ministry did so prevail on David's heart, that David
said, I have sinned and have done very foolishly. Multi amane veritatem
lucentem, not redanguent^^.
Could you go home after every Sermon you hear, when ever you hear your sins
reproved, and pursue that reproof, and bless God that the Word has checked
you, that the Word has met you, that the Word has found you out as an enemy;
could you go home and pursue a Ministerial reproof with confession, your
hearts would then be in good plight to confess sin unto God.



First see hence, that not only wicked men must confess sin; but regenerate
men, pardoned men. It is no servile, no slavish, no legal work. Though the
lowest Believer be above the power of sin, yet the highest Believer is not
above the confession of sin; because not above the practice of sin. As long as
men continue acting of sin men must never leave confessing of sin: as long as
sin leaks into thy soul, thou must so long be pumping; confession is to the
soul as a pump to the ship. O what leaks into thy heart by heedlesnesse and
carelessness, pump out by confession. Till thou art above the actings of sin,
thou art not above the confessing of sin: as long as the body natural does
gather corrupt humors, so long there must be Purges and Vomits: if the body
should still be gathering corrupt humors, nature woulb bestfled by these
humors; thou art gathering sin to sin, thou art adding iniquity to iniquity:
confession is a spiritual Purge, it does cleanse and purge the heart; see
therefore the great need that even pardoned men have to confess their faults.

Lorinus observes out of Bernard on these words, I confess my transgressions.
That Saul made the same confession that David made when Nathan reproved David;
says David, I have sinned, when Samuel reproved Saul, says Saul, I have
sinned: here is the same confession, but here was not the same event: David
said, I have sinned, and Nathan said, The Lord has taken away thy iniquity: 2 Samuel 12. 13.
but Saul said, I have sinned too, but Samuel told him; the Lord has taken
away thy Kingdom from thee. 1. Sam. 15. 26.
Saul confessed sin, yet had his Kingdom taken away; but David confessed sin, and
had his sin taken away. Beloved, thou may confess sin with Saul, yet not
have thy sin taken away; thou may lose thy soul, as he lost his Kingdom
though he confessed his sin.

The third Quere is this, What Theological rules may be given to guide you in
your confession of sin unto God. Answ. There are seven Rules which I shall lay
down to you.

confession of sin unto God is this; single out some bosom and master lust
that does most frequently enslave thee, and make confession and complaints
against that, to God; do not only confess sin in the lump and general, but
single out the most beloved lust, those sins which for the present do most
subject and enslave thy spirit, which do most overcome thee and prevail over
thee in thy Christian course; against those thou should bend most of thy
complaints and confessions: this wisdom Gods people of old did express; they
singled out the present corruptions that they were guilty of, Judge. 10. 10. And
the Children of Israel cried unto the Lord, saying, We have sinned against
thee, both because we have forsaken our God, and also served Balaam. We have
sinned, there is a general complaint: but we have also served Balaam; they
singled out their idolatry more especially, S Iam, 12. 19.
1 Samuel 12. 19. And all the people said unto Samuel, Pray for thy servants unto
the Lord thy God, that we dye not, for we have added unto all our sins this
evil, to ask us a King.

They were not contented with their old government, but they would alter and
change it: that sin being their particular sin they were guilty of, they would
single out that sin. 1 Chronicles. 21. 17.
Thus in 1 Chronicles. 21. 17. And David said unto God, is it not I, that commanded
the people to be numbered? even I it is that have sinned, and done evil indeed,
but as for these sheep, what have they done, etc.

He singles out a particular sin that he then lay under the guilt of. I may say
to you as the King of Assyria said to the 32. Captains, fight neither against
small nor great, but against the King of Israel; so bend your confession not
against small or great only, but against thy kingly lusts, against thy captain
lusts that do spring from thy constitution; Thy Agag, thy Dalilah, single out
them, and combat against them, and bend most of thy confessions and complaints
against them: do as men in a garrison, though they watch all the Battailments,
and guard every passage; yet to that place, where the breach is (...) widest,
and where the storm is most hot, they will bend most of their strength: do
thou thus, watch every sin, and watch every failing of thy life, but bend
most of thy confession to God against those lusts that do most enslave and
subject thee.

Psalm. 90. 8. Thou have set our iniquities before thee, Psalm 90. 8.
our secret sins in the light of thy countenance.

Psalm. 19. 12. Psalm 19. 12.
Who can understand his errors? cleanse thou me from secret faults.

David did not only confess his murder of Vriah, his adultery with Bethsheba,
but he confessed smaller sins: David's heart smote him for cutting off the lap of
Saul's garment; it was only the appearance of revenge, he had his knife near
his throat: that which had the appearance of a sin, David's heart smote him for.

Conscientions men do not only bewail and confess open and grosser evils; but
the secret and the smallest corruptions of the heart they bewail to God: they
confess their secret pride, their secret worldliness, and secret murmurings
against God, they confess their secret and smaller evils.

Indeed wicked men fall short of this: wicked men confess their Gross and
their open sins, but do dot take notice of their lesser and secret evils: there
are two instances for this, one is in Cain, Cain confessed his murder, his was
greater then it could be forgiven, speaking of the murder of his brother Abel,
Genesis 4. 13.
Genesis 4. 13. And Cain said unto unto the Lord, My punishment is greater then I
can bear. He did not confess his emnity that made him murder his brother: he
confessed his gross sin, but did not confess more sly and secret evils. Thus
you read likewise of Judas, Judas confessed his betraying of Christ (a gross
sin) but he never confessed his covetousness, a secret sin that made him betrry
Jesus Christ; says he, I have sinned in betraying innocent blood: he that did
bewail and confess his murder in betraying Christ, did not confess and
bewail his covetousness and hypocrisy, that were more lurking and secret
evils. That is a second Rule, make conscience to confess small and secret
evils, as well as open and grosser sins.

1 Kings 8. 47. Saying, We have sinned, and have done perversely, we have
committed wickedness. Says Lorinus, Mark what a heap of words a heart-humbled
soul will lay together in confessing of sin; We have sinned, there is one word;
We have done wickedly, there is a second; and we have done perversely, there is
a third. A notable instance you have of Paul in Act. 26. 10, 11. Act. 26. 10,
11.
Which thing I also did in Jerusalem, and many of the Saints did I shut up in
prison, having received authority from the chief Priests; and when they were
put to death, I gave my voice against them. And I punished them often in every
Synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme, and being exceedingly mad against
them, I persecuted them even unto strange Cities.

Here Paul comes to aggravate his sin: there are eight aggravations that here
Paul does lay down of his sin, whereby he would greaten sin unto himself that
he might be the more humble.

Saints, and to wrong them is a sacrilege, the Saints have I cast into prison.

but many have I cast into prison, why? for professing the name of Jesus of
Nazareth, merely for professing Christ.

Many of the Saints did I cast into prison.

shut them up in prison, and kept them close prisoners.

he gave his voice against them to put them to death. Nay,

he compelled them to blaspheme God.

and I was exceedingly mad against them; he was mad with rage, and with
passion, and with fury against the Saints of God.

did persecute them to strange Cities; them I did not kill, I made them leave
their Wives and Children, and made them run and shift for their lives into
strange corners. This is the nature of a true penitent, not to confess sin
slightly and carelessly, but in confession of sin to cloth his sins with all
aggravations that can be; In confession of sin we should aggravate it that we
have sinned against mercies, correction, warnings, resolutions, checks of
conscience, motions of the Spirit, etc. and this is a good Rule if you will
follow it: You have the like instance in the book of Daniel chap. 9. v. 5. Dan.
9. 5.
We have sinned and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have
rebelled, even by departing from thy precepts, and from thy judgments. Verse.
6. Neither have we hearkened unto thy servants the Prophets, which spoke in thy
name to our Kings, our Princes and our Fathers, and to all the people of the
Land. There are seven circumstances that Daniel uses in confessing of his sin,
to aggravate his sin; how does Daniel cloth his confession? First, We have
sinned, there is one. Secondly, We have committed iniquity. Thirdly, We have
done wickedly. Fourthly, We have rebelled against thee. Fifthly, We have
departed from thy precepts. Sixthly, We have not hearkened unto thy servants.
Seventhly, Nor we nor our Princes, nor all the people of the Land: There are
seven aggravations which Daniel reckoned up to his confession: Thus David when
he would beg pardon prayed; for thy names sake pardon my iniquity for it is
great: that is a third Rule about confession.

Dan. 9. 9.
Dan. 9. 9. To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses, though we
have rebelled against him. And thus Shechaniah confesses sin unto God, Ezra
10. 2. And Shechaniah the Son of Jehiel, Ezra 10. 2.
one of the Sons of Ellam, answered and said unto Ezra, We have trespassed
against our God, etc.

And thus the Prodigal in Luke 18. 18. I will arise and go to my Father, Luke
18. 18.
and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven and before thee.

Though he was a Prodigal, yet he would go to God as to a father. In
confession you are to go to God hopefully, as to a displeased father:
confessions when they come to God as a Judge, create fear, horror, and
amazement on the conscience, but when confessions are mingled with hope, and
come to God as a Father, they work a holy brokennesse of heart, a holy
tenderness and remorse on the conscience. We should confess our sins to God
as a Patient confesses his disease and bodily distemper to his Physician in
hope of Cure.

A fifth Rule in confession of sin unto God is this, Content not your selves
with slight and superficial confessions of sin unto God, but leave not
confession till you find sorrow for sin. Psalm. 38. 18.
Psalm. 38. 18. For I will declare mine iniquity, I will be sorry for my sin.
Dan. 9. 8. O Lord to us belongs confusion of face, to our Kings, to our
Princes, and to our fathers, because we have sinned against thee: we blush and
are ashamed to look up.

Leave not confessing of sin, until shame has filled your face, and sorrow
has filled your heart: it is a great fault in many people, if they confess
their sin, in crying God mercy in a general way, they think they have made God
a compensation for all the injuries they have done him, though they never have
any godly sorrow for their sins: but beloved you are not to content your selves
with such confession. We should in this part of prayer imitate that holy Martyr
Bradford who never gave over praying till his heart was somewhat affected and
warmed in the duty.

David did, in Psalm. 51. 3. For I acknowledge my transgressions, Psalm. 51. 3.
and my sin is ever before me. It was meant his old sin of adultery, that was
his sin that he would now call to remembrance: so when he found his heart dead,
he says, Lord, remember not the sins of my youth; he would go so far back as
his youth. I prescribe this rule, not that a godly man, who is under trouble of
mind should take this course to collect old sins, this may lead him to
despair; but in case of barrenness, if any man wants matter in respect of
present sins, and finds his heart hard and very insensible in secret prayer
unto God, in that case he is bound to let conscience recoyle upon himself, and
recollect sins of past years; go back as far as his youth and see what
conscience will bring in to provoke him to make humble confession unto God in
his secret retirements.



Zach. 12. 12. And the Land shall mourn every family apart, Zach. 12. 12.
the family of the house of David apart, and their wives apart, the family of
the house of Nathan apart, and their wives apart, etc. They are to go to God
and confess their sins apart. Thou art a poor professor, that do confess
what thou confessest in public only, and never in private, thou art but a
barren professor.

Pharaoh (you know the story) confessed his sin unto Moses and unto Aaron, but we
never read that Pharaoh confessed his sin unto God. Exodus 9. 27.
Exodus 9. 27. And Pharaoh sent and called for Moses and Aaron, and said unto
them, I have sinned this time, etc.

Saul confessed his sin unto Samuel, but we never read of his confessing sin unto
god. 1 Samuel 15. 24. And Saul said unto Samuel, 1 Samuel 15. 24. 30.
I have sinned, for I have transgressed the Commandment of the Lord, etc.
Verse 30. Then he said, I have sinned, etc.

Judas confessed his sin, but to whom was it? to the High Priest and to the
Pharisees, but Judas never went into a corner and in secret to bewail
bloodshed: wicked men have made public confessions of sin, but in secret
between God and their own souls they never made acknowledgment, and confession
of their evils unto God: thus much for the third Quere.

The fourth Quere is this, Wherein appears the difference of a gody man's making
confession of sin unto God, and between those confessions of sin in wicked men:
and there are these eight differences.

Job. 7. 20. I have sinned, What shall I do unto thee, Job 7. 20.
O thou preserver of men? etc. I have sinned, there is his confession: Lord
what shall I do? there is his industry. Thus the Jews they were convinced by
Peter of their great sin, insomuch as they cried out, Acts 2. 37.
What shall we do to be saved? But false confession leaves men idle, and
careless: confess they do, but they are not inquisitive how to get pardon for
those sins they do confess.

Psalm. 38. 18. For I will declare mine iniquity, I will be sorry for my sin:
there is confession and sorrow joined together. Hos. 12. 4.
Hos. 12. 4. Yea he had power over the Angel, and prevailed, he wept and made
supplication unto him. Whilst confessions are in the mouth, there will be
either tears in the eye, or sorrow in the heart, if confession be true.

The wicked confess sin, but tey never grieve for the sins they have
committed, they are not ashamed, neither can they blush, in the Prophets
language.

I have powered out my soul before God, says the Psalmist: confession of sin is
a pouring out of the soul before God; he that can pour forth complaints against
sin in secret more then in public, is a grecious man

The wicked are only for confession of sin before men, and not before God.

Job 32. 18, 19, 20.
therefore they confess them to God, Job. 32. 18. For I am full of matter, the
spirit within me constrains me. Verse 19. Behold my belly is as wine that
has no vent, it is ready to burst like new bottles. Verse 20. I will speak
that I may be refreshed, I will open my lips, and answer. Thus a godly man in
confessing sin his belly is as ready to burst with new wine, he must needs have
vent, else he is broken, he must needs confess sin, his sin drives him to God.
But confession is extorted and wrested from wicked men. It was the plagues of
Egypt upon Pharaoh, Exodus 9. 1.
that wrung confession from him: before these he would say, Who is the Lord?
Matthew. 27. 3.
It was pangs and horror of conscience in Judas, that forced him to
acknowledge he had sinned in betraying innocent blood. Mariners cast over their
goods, not that they hate them, but as they are forced to do it to escape
drowning; when there is a storm and a tempest in their consciences, then men
are forced to confess sin, it is by compulsion, it is not voluntary.

David confessed his pride and carnal confidence in numbering the people, as well
as his adultery with Bathsheba: David confessed the cutting off the lap of Saul's
garment, as well as spilling the blood of Vriah. But hypocrites confess their
gross sins, but not their small sins. Cain confessed his murder, but not his bad
offering: they confess their gross sins but not their smaller. Pharaoh
confessed his oppression of the children of Israel, but he did not confess the
hardness of his heart. But godly men though they have not so many gross and
open evils, yet small and secret evils pinch their consciences, and trouble
their spirit. Those evils which will not break a wicked man's sleep, will break
their hearts: what though they have not uncleanness in the flesh? what though
they have escaped the pollutions of the world? yet they know they have secret
and inward defilements on the spirit: and these they bewail, and these they
acknowledge to God.

Ahimaaz when he would bring tidings to David, touching the issue of the battle
with Joab and Absalom, says he, I saw a tumult, 2 Samuel 18. 29.
and I heard a noise, but I know nothing. Wicked men will tell you that their
sins do make a noise within them, but they can tell you nothing distinctly, and
nothing particularly, but only go at random. Wicked men in confessing sin are
like Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 2. Dan. 2.
He dreamt something but he could not tell what it was: Wicked men dream of
sins and think of them as confusedly as a man in a dream; but when, how, and
where, and with what aggravating circumstances they know not: they have not a
distinct and clear view of their corruptions. The people of God do in their
confessions single out their special lusts and say thus did the people of
Israel. Judge. 10. 10.
Judge. 10. 10. Thus Belarmine did show his wickedness in saying he was not
wicked; when he was on his deathbed, and his Confessor came to him to have him
confess his sin to him, says Bellarmine, I do not know any sin in my self to
confess. This was not the holiness of the man, but the heedlesnesse, that he
did not observe his ways. Donatus the great ringleader of the Donatists,
says, O Lord I have nothing that thou should pardon me. Beloved, this does
arise from stupidity that men see not sin; it does not arise from holiness, but
from heedlesness and carelesseness. It is an observation that one has on Job,
says Job, I have sinned, and cause me know wine iniquity, and my
transgression, and my sin. Whilst Job made this complaint that he had sinned,
God says, in all this Job sinned not: that is, not absolutely, but meaning
comparatively. Beloved, to be free in complaints, and to be full in confession
of sins, does not argue that you have more sin then other men have; but it
argues that you have more sight then other men have, and the less sin you have
in you.

Psalm. 51. says David, Against thee, thee only have I sinned: it was not
against Vriah that he had sinned; but against thee, thee only have I sinned,
for thou wast dishonored by my sin. When the Apostle speaks of repentance,
he calls it repentance toward God, Acts 20. 21. Testifying both to the Jews,
and also to the Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ. To note, That where sorrow and confession of sin is true, it is more
out of a sense of sin, as it is against God, then as it is against self. But
wicked men never confess sin as it is a dishonor to God, but as it contracts a
guilt and a shame on themselves.

Acts 19. 18. And many that believed came, and confessed and showed their
deeds. Verse 19. Many also of them which used curious Arts, brought their books
together, and burned them before all men, etc. He speaks of their sorcery and
witchcraft; they would burn their books, that there should not be an occasion
of committing again that sin which they confessed unto God. Beloved, this is holy
confession; when thou shall come to God on thy knees in secret, and there
bewail a lust: and thy confession leaves a holy awe and dread on thy soul to
take heed on that sin thou have confessed.

A godly man may commit a sin which he has confessed, but yet he retains a fear
and awe upon his heart, that it shall not prevail over him in his practice.

Wicked men confess sin they have committed, yet they are bold and adventurous
to commit the same sin again which they have confessed.

And thus the Harlot did, Prove. 7. 14. I have peace offerings with me, this day
I have paid my vows. Paying the vow, is a confession that I am in debt to God
for my sin; and I owe God homage and service* yet she made the confession of
sin to be a means to provoke her to be more bold and adventurous in her
wickedness. To confess drunkenness, and afterward to be drunk; to confess
profaneness, and afterward to be profane; this is the bold adventurousness of
wicked men: Thus Pharaoh in Exodus 9. confessed his sin, and afterward when the
plagues were over, runs into the same sin he did confess: and this is the
badge and portraiture of a wicked man. And thus I have done with this fourth
particular.

I now come to the use.



Antinomists, who account it a legal and a servile work, for believers to be
bemoaning themselves unto God, and confessing sin unto God. And therefore in
their prayers (when you may be cast to hear them in public) all their
expressions in prayer, are either extolling the Majesty of God, the excellency
of Christ, the glory of Heaven, the riches of Grace, but not a word of laying
low the creature in prayer; but raptures in prayer, and the extolling of divine
Majesty: these are all the dials of expressions which they use in prayer.

Now to overthrow this vain conceit of the Antinomians, consider,

First, Confession of sin to God has been practiced by all the godly under the
Old Testament; and therefore why should it not be used under the New?

Dan. 9. He made a praher to God, and it consisted of 16. verses, and 14. of
them verses were spent in confessing of sin.

And thus the godly in Nehemiah' s days made a prayer to God, and the whole
prayer consisted of 32. verses, and 31. of them verses were spent in confession
of sin. Nehem. 16. Let thine ear be attentive, and thine eyes open, that thou
may hear the prayer of thy servant, which I pray before thee day and night,
for the Children of Israel thy servants, and confess the sins of the children
of Israel, which we have sinued against thee, both I and my Fathers house have
sinned.

Thus David, 2 Samuel 24. 10. And David's heart smote him, after that he had
numbered the people: and David said unto the Lord, I have sinned greatly in that
I have done: and now, I beseech thee, O Lord, take away the iniquity of thy
servant, for I have done very foolishly. That is one thing to confute this
practice.

Secondly, Not only Believers under the Old Testament, but also Converts under
the New Testament, did make conscience of confessing of sins unto God, John 3*
6. And they were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins, Acts 19. 18.
And many that believed came, and confessed, and showed their deeds. Luke 15.
17. And when he said, How many hired servants of my Father have bread euough,
and to spare, and I perish with hunger? Verse 18. I will arise, and go to my
Father, and will say unto him, Father I have sinned against heaven, and before
thee. It is an Emblem of a Convert, if so be it be a Parable: In the instance
of the Publican, that Christ declares was uniustified rather then the Pharisee,
And the Publican standing afar off, Luke 18. 13.
would not lift up so much as his eyes to Heaven, but smote upon his breast,
saying, God be merciful to me a sinner. Verse 14. I tell you, this man went
down to his house justified rather then the other, etc.

Now (beloved) when you have instances in the Old Testament, and many examples
in the New, why then should we blot out so useful a part of Gods worship as
this, of confession to God in secret?

Thirdly, God does command confession of sin unto him. Jer. 3. 12, 13. Go and
proclaim these words toward the North, and say, Return thou backsliding
Israel, says the Lord, and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you, for I
am merciful says the Lord, and I will not keep anger for ever. Only
acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou have transgressed against the Lord thy
God, etc.

Fourthly, God both in the Old Testament and in the New, has annexed many
gracious promises to a sincere confession of sin unto him: in the Old
Testament, Lev. 26. 40. If they shall confess their iniquity, and the iniquity
of their fathers, with their trespass which they trespassed against me, and
that also they have walked contrary unto me. Verse. 41. And that I also have
walked contrary unto them, and have brought them into the land of their
enemies: if then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they then accept of
the punishment of their iniquity, Then will I remember my Covenant with Jacob,
etc. If they confess their iniquity, I will remember them. And there are
gracious promises made to such as confess their sins; and it is certain that a
man cannot have a promise to any thing which is a duty. Prove. 22. 13. He that
covers his sins shall not prosper, but whosoever confesses and forsakes them
shall have mercy. Job 33. 27. He looks upon men, and if any say I have
sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it profited me not, etc. And in
the New Testament, in 1 John 1. 9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all uurighteousness. Now
beloved, put all these four together; the godly have practiced this under the
Old Testament, and converts under the New, God has commanded it, and he has
recompensed it; therefore those that account confession of sin to be but a
legal and servile work deserve reproof.

A second reproof, is to those of the Popish Religion, who in stead of secret
confession of sin to God in prayer, do press vehemently Auricular confession
in the ear of the Priest. Touching this Auricular confession, they spend many
volumes to make good the divine right of it; the Council of Trent do lay an
Anathema on any that shall not count Auricular confession to be necessary to
salvation. There are these several mistakes and errors in the Popish Doctrine
of Auricular confession.

First, They urge the necessity of it, that you must not expect salvation
without it.

Secondly, Confession against whom, and when you did it, all the circumstances
of your sins you must acknowledge to the Priest.

Thirdly, That the Priest upon your confession, has power from Christ to give
you pardon, and to give you absolution; these go current with them about
Auricular confession.

That you might see this is blameworthy, and worthy of reproof; I shall
confute it by these Confiderations.

First Consideration of the time when Auricular Confession came first in use in
the Church: For 800. years after Christ there was no such practice in the
Church of God: and that the Law of Auricular Confession was not enacted until
Pope Innocent the Third, Dr. Usher.
which was about 1200. years after Christ: and the first Council that did
establish Auricular Confession, was the Laterane Council, and after that the
Council of Trent. The Church of God in the Primitive times having no such
practice, it may be exploded from being now in the Church of God.

Secondly, Why did the Popes invent Auricular confession? One does demonstrate
this;

First there is this Reason: It is a notable invention to discover the secrets
of men's thoughts, and intentions, and designs, both in Church and State

Secondly, It is a means to get money for the Pope: for according as the sin
confessed, is more capital and notorious, so the more money must be given for
indulgence and pardon; thus a reverent Divine calls it, the pick lock of
Sacramental confession: this being enacted merely out of State policy to know
men's secret thoughts and temper; and likewise to bring in profit and revenues
to the Sea of Rome, which does show the practice to be unjustifiable.

Thirdly, Consider what the Scripture does press concerning confession unto
men, mark the Text, Jam. 5. 16 Confess your faults one to another, and pray one
for another, that you may be healed. The Scripture does not tie us to a Priest
as the Popish Religion ties them: but it ties us, that in anguish of conscience
and trouble of mind we confess to any who are abce to give us wholesome
counsel from the Lord. We are to confess our sin to any Christian friend or
member of the Church whom we judge fittest to advise us for their wisdom,
faithfulness, compassion and experience.

A good note our Protestant Interpreters have against the Papists: the Apostle
bids, if a man be sick, call for the Elders of the Church, and they were to
pray for him; but he does not bid them confess sin to the Elders, but confess
sin one to another; which does no way tie to confess sin to a Priest. But this
is a point of controversy, and blessed be God this Church is not tainted with
this erour; therefore I shall leave it: this is the second sort that is to be
reproved; to wit, those of the Popish, Religion, who instead of confession of
sin unto God bring in auricular Confession to the Priest.

Thirdly, This Doctrine reproves those who to avoid the Popish Auricular
Confession unto the Priest, deny all kind of confession of sin unto men: there
are many faulty, many who keep the Devils counsel, who groan under strong
corruptions, yet will never open their minds to have counsel and prayer from
other men. There are some peculiar and select cases wherein we are not only
bound to confess sin unto God, but to confess sin unto men: but before I
handle this, take these two Cautions.

Chrysostom, that we should not go to men to reveal our shame, but go to God;
unless the case be very urgent, that by all the means ye can use, ye cannot
ease your selves, then are ye to confess sin in that case.

Chrysostom in his Homily on Dives and Lazarus, has this expression, If thou
confess thy sin in some men's ears, they will cast thy sins in thy face in a way
of scorn: Some men would deal with you as the Pharisees did with Judas; Judas
when he was smitten in conscience for sin, came to the Pharisees, and said unto
them, Here is your money again, for I have sinned in betraying innocent blood:
say they, What is that to us? look you to it, for what you have done: so men
will express no pity, and will give no counsel; therefore there must be
wisdom in revealing of your sins to other men. Thus you have the Cautions
prescribed unto you Now in what cases is it meet that men should confess their
sins to men as well as unto God? I shall resolve this to you in four Cases.

David fell into the sin of Adultery, and the sin was known among all the
Gentiles, insomuch that the enemies of God spoke ill of Religion, and spoke ill
of God: what does David do to recompense the wrong done to the Church? he
makes the 51. Psalm, which was not for his private use only but for public
use; mark the Title of it. To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David, when
Nathan the Prophet, came unto him, after he had gone in to Bathsheba. This
Psalm was permitted to be sung in the Sanctuary, and in the Temple, that so the
Church of God being scandalized by David's sin, should be satisfied by David's
public confession and repentance: Beloved, this is equitable, because the
Communicants of a Congregation, of a Church, are offended by thy scandal, and
whilst thy sin is notorious they are scrupled: therefore there must be a
public repentance. And besides, public scandal given by any member of the
Church may bring Gods wrath on the Congregation, Compare Josh. 7. 19. with
Josh. 22. 20.
if the offender does not confess his sin. Josh. 22. 20. Did not Achan the son
of Zerah commit a trespass in the accursed thing, and wrath fell on all the
congregation of Israel? and that man perished not alone in his iniquity. Achan
sinned alone, but did not perish alone, the wrath of God fell upon all the
Congregation. Therefore for the good of the Congregation and Church, whereof
thou art a member; if thy sin becomes notorious and known, thou art bound to
confess it; not that every private sin must be confessed to the Church, but in
case of public scandal, thou art then to compensate the congregation by
manifesting thy confession.

A second Case wherein you are to confess sin to men, is, in Case of private
injury done to thy neighbor, in case of wrong, personal injury done to thy
neighbor, thou art to confess sin unto him. Mat. 5. 23, 24. Therefore if thou
bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has ought
against thee: leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way, first be
reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. If thy brother can
say thou have done him wrong, then go first to thy brother and be reconciled to
him. Christ directs that in case of private and personal wrongs I am bound to
make confession, and give all just satisfaction to the man whom I have wronged.
And this Christ advises further, in Luke 17. 3, 4. Take heed to your selves:
if thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him, and if he repent, forgive
him. And if he trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in
a day turn again to thee, saying, I repent; thou shall forgive him. Christ does
here intimate, that we are to confess sin to our brother whom we have wronged;
to private men, against whom we have done private injuries; not only to God,
but to them. That is a second Case wherein confession of sin is required to men
as well as to God.

Jam. 5. 16. Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another,
that ye may be healed. That is, when you are in extreme anguish and perplexity
of conscience, thou art troubled for sin, then confess thy sin to other men
and desire them to pray for thee. And in confessing to men, you are not to
confess all your sins, but only that particular sin that most troubles
conscience: when you go to a Physician, you will discover no more to him then
where the sore lies; you are to confess no more to men then that particular
evil that conscience troubles you most for.

The fourth and last case is this, to confess sin to those that have been
companions and copartners with you in sin; in that case you are to go to men
to confess sin as well as to God. There are some Interpreters that do expound
that place in Jam. 5. 16. Confess your faults one to another, that is, that
those that have been partners together in sin, they should go one to another to
confess their sins: if you have been a drunkard, go to thy companion, and tell
him thy conscience smites thee for thy sin; you that have been unclean
together, if God has troubled thy conscience for thy uncleanness, why go to
thy partner in sin, and tell her God has troubled thy conscience for thy lust,
and it may be this may awaken her conscience too.

Eusebius relates, that John the Evangelist in his journey, returning from
Patmos to Ephesus after the death of Domitian was met by a company of thieves;
amongst whom was a young man their Captain, whom John did convert, and the
story says, that this young man now converted by John's wholesome counsel, went
to all his fellow thieves, and advised them in the name of Jesus Christ, that
they would not walk in that way of wickedness; he was troubled in conscience,
and therefore gave them earnest counsel, that as they loved their souls, they
would not walk in that way of wickedness; and by that means many of these
great robbers became great Converts. In like manner do ye to those that know of
your drunkenness, of your adultery, etc. confess your sins, as Demosthenes
said to the Harlot, I am not the same man I was: and it may be, that so their
consciences may be awakened, and they startled for it, and bethink themselves
of their wicked courses, and God may work a change in them, as he has done in
you.

There is one Use more of this Point, and that is for lamentation and
humiliation; to humble you in the presence of God, that seeing God calls you to
confess sin to him, you have so many palpable and manifest defects in secret
confessing of your sins to God.

10 Defects.
Now beloved, there are ten usual defects, to which not only the wicked but the
godly are liable in their confession of their sin unto God.

Hildersham on Psalm. 51.
Mr. Hildersham has a good note descanting on them words in 1. John 1. 8. If
we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. Says
he, if we say that we have no sin, there is no man so gross, to say that he
has no sin, for his own practice will give the lie to his tongue; but it is
when we come to God, we do as in effect say so, when we do not know what sin
to confess to God; we are so confused and heedlesse in observing our own
ways, that we do not know what to confess in prayer unto God, and that the
Apostle condemns. It is storied of Donatus the father of those Heretics that
Augustine did write against, that he said to God, Non habeo Dominae quod
ignoscas, I am guilty Lord of nothing for thee to pardon.

This was the fault of Bellarmine, when his Confessor came unto him on his
deathbed, Bellarmine did protest unto him, that he did not know one sin that he
was guilty of to confess unto the Priest: this was heedlesnesse in him, for if
he had observed his own ways, he would have found sins enough to have confessed:
many are heedlesse that they do not take notice of their own evils, this is a
common and an ordinary Defect; there are many when they come to prayer though
they have manifold sins in them, yet they are so confused, so indistinct in the
knowledge of their own ways, that they have only general confessions, Lord we
have sinned, Lord we have done evil in thy sight, but cannot call to mind any
particular sin they have done; Was it never thus with you, that ye did not know
what to bewail to God, and what to lament of in his presence? this is a Defect
that godly men are often guilty of.

Moses, though a good man, yet was faulty in this regard; God commanded him to
go to Egypt to deliver his people, but says Moses, I am not eloquent, I am of
a slow speech; he did complain of a natural defect, but he did not complain of
a spiritual defect, but God did answer all his pleas in Exodus 4. 19. And the
Lord said unto Moses in Midian, Go, return into Egypt: for all the men are dead
that sought thy life. Verse. 20. And Moses took his wife, and his sons, and set
them upon an ass, and he returned to the land of Egypt. So that God here put
his finger upon the sore: Moses complained of the peoples incredulity, of his
own natural infirmity, but Moses did not complain of his slavish fear, that if
he should go to Egypt there were men that would kill him; till God did assure
Moses that those men that sought to kill him were dead, Moses would not go:
here a good man would not confess his slavish fear, that he did fear death;
therefore he would not go on Gods command. Beloved, this is a Defect that does
many times cleave to godly men to leave out their predominant sins, and to
confess only those sins which are sins of infirmity; and herein men do but
dissemble with God, and like the lapwing cry lowdest when farthest from the
nest.

sins you do confess. Austin does ingenuously acknowledge this of himself,
says he, I did often beg strength of God against the sin of incontinency, yet
had often an unwillingnesse in my heart that God should hear my prayers, lest I
should leave my sins. Indeed conviction of conscience does force to a
confession of sin, yet the strength of thy depraved affection does make thee
hanker after the sin, and cause a lothnesse to leave it.

David in the Old Testament, and Paul in the New, who did sufficiently confess
original sin, David in the Old Testament, Psalm. 51. 5.
Psalm. 51. there he begins to bewail the root of those sins which he was guilty
of. So Paul in Romans 7. bewails the body of sin: Romans 7. 24.
many men bewail actual sin, but not habitual sin, but not original sin: many
men bewail bad actions, but never confess unto God their vicious inclination.
This Defect good men many times are guilty of.

Prove. 7. 2. Keep my commandments and live, and my Law as the apple of thine
eye. Now you know, a man that keeps his eye will not only keep his eye from
great blows, but from small motes, which may put out the eye as well as a
great blow; men should not only take heed of great blows, great
transgressions, but they should take heed of lesser motes, small sins. Now
beloved, good men many times commit those sins that are infamous, that the
natural light of conscience can control them for, why those evils are
complained of, and confessed; but secret evils, wandering thoughts in duties,
vanity of mind, the deadness of the heart, emptiness of spiritual
meditations, inward distrust; these evils are seldom bewailed and confessed:
this is many times a Defect found in good men, good men are not so apt to
confess omission of good, as commission of evil:



Greenham does take notice of in men's confession of sin; thou will confess thy
pride to God: but if a man should say that thou art proud, thou would be
angry with him; thou will confess thy ways to God, but if men should tell
thee of thy sins, thou would be angry with them: this shows there is much
defect in your confession.

Daniel did, Dan. 9. and as David did, Psa. 51. But many confess sin like
Pharaoh, Exodus 9. 27. And Pharaoh sent and called for Moses and Aaron, and said
unto them, I have sinned this time, the Lord is righteous, and I and my people
are wicked. Verse. 34. And when Pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail, and the
thunder were ceased, he s^nned yet more, and hardened his heart (...).

France, who when he had blasphemed would take his Crucifix and kiss, and cry,
God forgive me, and then swear again: this is the fault which Christians many
times are guilty of, many men rest contented with a confused and a general
confession of sin when they do not come to any distinct view of their
particular sins, there is a tumult in the conscience some noise they make in
prayer, but they know nothing distinctly, but like Nebuchadnezzar in a dream,
he knew he dreamt, but he forgot what his dream was: many men do confess sin,
but they know not what they do confess. You are to be humbled for these
defects that may be found in you^ in your confessing sin to God.



Me thinks I hear you ask me, But seeing these defects are found amongst us, in
confession of sin unto God, what should we do to be healpt against these
defects? For answer, that ye may not be guilty of these defects in confession
of sin,

Romans 3. 20. Therefore by the deeds of the Law, there shall no flesh be
justified in his sight: for by the Law is the knowledge of sin. Jam. 1. 23. For
if any be a hearer of the Word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man beholding
his natural face in a glass. Verse. 24. For he beholds himse;lf, and goes
his way, and straight way forgets what manner of man he was. The
looking-glass will show you the blemishes in the face, which the eye cannot
else discern: beloved, get a knowledge of the spiritualnesse of Gods Law, of
the extent of Gods Law, that the Law does reach the inward man, that Gods law
reaches to those very first motions of the soul, those very inclinations to
sin that are in thine heart, be acquainted with the Law, and by that thou will
come to the knowledge of sin. Physicians have used this remedy to their
Patients: In a Convulsion Fit, they would wish them at that time, to look their
face in a glass, that when the Patient does see what an ugly countenance he
has, and what an ugly posture he is in at that time, he might strive the more
against it: So do you* look your face in a looking-glass to see those
deformities that are within you, this will make you confess, and this will
bring you on your knees.

Lam. 8. 40.
Prove. 4. 25. Let thine eyes look right on, Jer. 8. 6.
and let thine eyelid look straight before thee. Verse. 26. Ponder the path of
thy feet, and let all thy ways be stablished. Look right before you and ponder
the ways of your feet, and that is the way to have the heart so affected with
the evil of your ways as you will particularly confess your sins.

For I acknowledge my transgessions, and my sin is ever before me. He means the
sin of Adultetery. When David came to prayer, he would put before his eyes the
sin of adultery: now set thy sin before thee, Art thou a drunkard? set they
drunkenesse before thee: art thou an adulterer? set thy uncleanness before
thee: art thou an extortioner? then set thy oppression before thee; Thus did
Paul 2 Timothy 1. 14. 15.
set sin before thine eyes when thou come to prayer, and that is the way to
feed thy spirits with confessions to God in a prayer.

Fourthly, Call to remembrance some old transgression of many years past
before thy conversion, and muster up these sins together, that so thou might
have matter of complaint and confession before God. Suppose present guilt does
not come up before thee; then recollect and review old transgressions, sins of
an old date; this* David did when he found his heart dull and sluggish, he
would call to mind the sins of his youth, Psalm. 35. 9. When you see that your
hearts grow barren of spiritual matter through heedlesnesse, go then and
ransack your old ways what did you 20 years ago, let conscience gawle you for
that, that so you may have matter enough to confess unto God. This rule does
not appertain to Christians under trouble of conscience, but only to those
Christians that are sluggish and barren of any spiritual complaints and
confessions in Gods presence.

A word of Use further for direction.

If it be so, that Justified persons are bound to make secret confessions unto
God: then,

First, Christians keep a heedfulnesse over your hearts, that you may not let
sin go unconfest; make conscience and be heedful that sin committed by you may
not be unconfest: a sin unconfest as to the apprehension may be unpardoned; a
sin unconfest cannot be mourned for, cannot be actually repented of. Observe,
that a less sin unrepented of, may damn a man, when a greater sin that is
confessed to God may be pardoned: if you compare Saul and David together, 1 Samuel
15. 9. But Saul and the people spared Agag, and the best of the sheep and of
the oxen, and of the fallings, and of the lambs, and all that was good, and
would not utterly destroy them: but every thing that was vile, and refuse, that
they distroyed utterly. Saul did there commit a far less sin then David's
was, to wit, adultery, Saul did only for his private use spare the fattest of
his sheep and oxen* it was little or nothing in comparison of David's sin, yet
behold David was pardoned and Saul damned, David had his sin pardoned and Saul
not: why? David did confess sin, and Saul not: Saul did delude the reproof of
Samuel, and told him the people did it, and not I; Saul's sin unconfest ruined
him: therefore take heed of letting sin go unconfest, a less sin unconfest may
damn a man, when a greater sin that is confessed may not damn him.

A second Direction is this, Depend not upon the most enlarged and the most
sensible confessions that ever you have made to God, suppose thou have poured
out thy soul to God, thou art never the better: thou O man when thou do
confess sin, thou do but like a beggar show God thy sores, thy botches, and
scabs, do not depend upon your confessions; as you must not depend upon your
righteousness, so not upon confession of your sinfulness. It is worth your
observation, Saul pursuing David like a Partridge over the mountains, David cut
off the lap of his garment; says David, well, I have sinned; and Saul, thou
art more righteous then I: when Nathan came to David, David said, I have
sinned, and Nathan told him, the Lord has taken away thy iniquity. Saul said,
I have sinned, yet the Prophet Samuel told him, the Lord has taken away thy
Kingdom: here is not the same result, for David had his sin taken away, and
Saul had his Kingdom taken away, therefore do not depend on your confessions.

Thirdly, Take this Direction, that when you confess sin to God and are the
most vile in your own eyes, you are then most amiable in Gods eye: Cant. 1. 6.
Look not upon me because I am black, because the sun has looked upon me. The
Church there confessed to Christ I am black and not comely, she was sunburned as
she thought. I, but in verse 8. My Love my Dove, thou art the fairest among
women: Christ looked on her as the fairest among women: so likewise in Cant. 2.
14. O my Dove, thou art in the clefts of the rock, in the secret places of the
stairs: let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice; for sweet is thy
voice, and thy countenance is comely. When the poor Dove, the Church, lay in a
hole under the stairs, bewailing and mourning like a Dove for her sinfulness,
O says Christ to her, let me see thy face, and let me hear thy voice. Christ
does love to hear the moan-makings of his people, Jer. 31. 18. I have surely
heard Ephraim, be moaning himself thus, Thou have chastised me, and I was
chastised, as a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke: turn thou me, and I shall be
turned; thou art the Lord my God. It is worth your notice, Job when he was
afflicted by God in having botches and boyles all over his body, it is said,
Job made his complaint to God, Chap. 7. verse. 20. I have sinned, what shall I
do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? I have sinned says Job, but what does
God say of Job? in all this Job sinned not, Job. 1. 22. In all this Job sinned
not, nor charged God foolishly. It was not spoken absolutely he sinned not, but
the meaning is, he sinned not so as other men sinned. The more you bewail,
condole, and confess sin to God, and are by reason thereof vile in your own
eyes, the more amiable you are in Gods eyes. And thus I have done with the
first part of the Text, I said I will confess my trangression unto the Lord.

I have been all this while in these Sermons on David's Act, I said I will
confess my transgression unto the Lord. I am now come to Gods Act, and thou
forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Thou forgavest, etc. that is, not only my
sin, but the malignity of it, with all its agravations, all its heinous
circumstances: Now here touching Gods Act, two things are to be observed,

Ergo, I said I will confess my transgression to the Lord, therefore he forgave
the iniquity of my sin, but it is with an et, a conjunctive particle, and not
a causall, I confess (...) and thou forgavest.

Secondly, Observe this further, the manner of the expression, the confession
was in purpose and intention, but the forgiveness is actual: observe from
hence this note, That God does recompense the very gracious purposes as well as
performances of his own servants; God forgave, but David did but purpose to
confess; I said I will confess, and thou forgavest. O beloved what a God do
ye serve! your masters are not pleased with your purposes to work, if you do
no labor with your hands; you serve a God which takes will for work; God takes
purposes if they be real, for performances. The Lord does recompense not only
gracious performances, but also gracious purposes in his own servants.

The Use or corollary from hence is this:

That wicked men look to it, God will not only punish their wicked practices,
but their wicked purposes: Did thou ever purpose to be unclean, or to
deceive, and it may be thou wast interrupted, that thou could not have
secrecy and opportunity? Why, God will punish thee for thy purpose, though thou
never do act it. Beloved, it is not only what evil thou have done, but what
evil thou would have done: Would not thou have been an oppressor, if the
World would not have cried shame on thee? would not thou have been a
drunkard, if the world would not brand thee with infamy? God will punish wicked
men for evil purposes.

Further to godly men, Thou can not mourn, but would thou mourn? thou can
not confess sin, but would thou confess sin? thou can not break thy
heart, but would thou break thy heart? God looks on your purposes with
approbation, as well as your practices. As here David, I said I will confess my
sin and thou forgavest.

Thirdly, God does not only look on wicked men's purposes, to punish them for
them, and good men's purposes to reward them for them; but God does look on the
purposes of devils to do hurt, for to prevent them: A notable passage, Luke
21. Peter, Peter, says Christ, Satan has desired to winnow thee like Wheat. I
have (actually) prayed: the hurt was only the devils purpose, and the devils
desire; but when the temptation was but in the desire, then says Christ, I
have actually prayed for thee. O fall down and admire the condescension of
Christ, he does crown your purposes and endeavors, and desires: I said I will
confess my transgression, and thou have forgiven the iniquity of my sin.

From the connection of confession and forgiveness of sin, And thou
forgavest, which is by way of connextion not causation, with an et not an ergo.
The Doctrine I hence observe is this, That there is a necessary connection
between a penitential confession of sin, and forgiveness of sin. I
confessed, and God forgave. You have frequent testimonies that inculcate this
on your thoughts, Prove. 28. 13. He that covers his sins, shall not prosper;
but whosoever confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy. Job, 33. 27. He
looks upon men, and if any said, I have sinned, and perverted that which was
right, and it profited me not. Verse. 28. He will deliver his soul from going
into the pit, and his life shall see the light.

In the handling of this point, there are these particulars which I shall
dispatch.



First for the varieties of names and expressions of forgiveness.

First pardon of sin is a casting of sin behind the back, Isaiah. 38. 17.
Behold for Peace I had great bitterness, but thou have in love to my soul,
delivered it from the pit of corruption, Psalm. 50. 17.
for thou have cast all my sins behind thy back. In Scripture to cast a
thing behind the back, Mehem. 9. 17.
signifies to forget and disregard it; so wicked men cast Gods Covenant behind
their backs; that is, they do not mind it, they will not obey it: so when God
is said to cast sin behind his back, he will take no notice of it so as to
punish it.

Micah. 7. 29. He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us, he will
subdue our iniquities, and will cast all our sins into the depths of the Sea.
It is an allusion unto Gods great Judgment on Pharaoh and the Egyptian Host;
when they pursued the Israelites, they came to the Red Sea, and thinking to go
through as the Israelites did, the Sea fell in upon them, and they were drowned
in the bottom of the sea, so says God, I will deal with sin as I dealt with
Pharaoh, you shall never be troubled more with them, not unto condemnation, you
need not fear the rising of sin again, against you; sin is not like unto light
weeds in the Sea, that will swim of themselves, but Lead that is cast into the
Sea, the allusion holds here, Revel. 18. 21.
Exodus 15. 10. Thou did blow with the wind, the Sea covered them, they sank
as lead in the mighty waters. Job. 7. 21.
God when he pardons sins and casts them into the bottom of the Sea, sin lies
like lead, it can never rise of it self in a way of condemnation to a
justified man, to a pardoned sinner.

Act. 3. 19. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be
blotted out, etc. Isa. 43. 25. I even I am he, that blotteth out thy
transgressions for mine own sake. This is a metaphor taken from men, when a man
is not able to pay his debt, the Creditor does cancel the Bond, blots out the
writing and breaks the Seal, that nothing shall prevail in Law against this
poor man. So the Lord does cancel the bond, and blots out the writing, that
neither sin, nor the Devil shall have any process against him in a way of
condemnation.

Job. 10. 14. If I sin, thou markest me, and thou will not, or, aquit me then
(not set me free) from mine iniquity. Acquitting is a term of Law, giving you
a discharge and dismission of the Court; the Lord in pardoning of sin, gives a
man a Legal discharge, that no proceedings of Heaven shall go against him.

Psalm. 32. 1. Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, and whose sin is
covered. Beloved, if pardon of sin had consisted in the removing of sin, we had
been undone, pardon of sin does not consist in the removal of all sin out of a
man, but in the covering of sin; God will hide sin, that the fierceness of his
wrath, and the Eye of his indignation shall not look on it to condemnation, It
is the same word that refers to garments (...). Genesis 3. 21.
If a man has a Mole or Wenne on his body which his garment covers, Revel. 3.
18.
these infirmities are not seen by men. Beloved, God covers sin as with a
garment, to wit, with the long robe of Christ's Righteousness, sin is covered
in thee by the Righteousness of Jesus Christ.

Psalm. 51. 2. Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my
sin; he means there in reference to justification; That pardon of sin presents
a man to God without spot or wrinkle, or blemish, or any such thing, that
though you have many spots in regard of your sanctification, yet you have no
spot in regard of your justification.

Jer. 31. 34. For I will forgive their iniquity; and I will remember their sin
no more. It is an allusion to the Scapegoat, which was to bear the sins of the
people on his head, to carry them into the land of forgetfulness; Thus the
Lord that remembers all things, that God is said graciously not to remember the
sins of his people, not to remember them so, as to damn them for them; he will
forget your iniquities and remember them no more.

not imputing of sin, Romans 4. 8 Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not
impute sin? It is a word drawn from Merchants, when they have a friend that
owes them money that they care not whether they receive or no, they do not put
it down in their Book. God will not impute sin, he will not set sin on the
score, he will not put sin to thine account, though sin be in thee, yet it is
not imputed to thee. Thus these names or expressions do something Illustrate
the nature of forgiveness.

In the next place, to enquire how many ways a sin may be said to be
forgiven.

First in regard of Gods decree, and so sin is forgiven before all Worlds,
because God intended to deliver the Elect, that such a remnant and number of
men should have sin pardoned. Thus Christ is the Lamb slain from the beginning
of the World.

Secondly, Sin is said to be forgiven when the Lord does manifest forgiveness
of sin.

Thirdly and chiefly, Sin is said to be forgiven, when the eternal guilt and
condemnation due for that sin is taken away, when God does expiate or take off
the guilt of sin, in that properly lies the nature of forgiveness.

In the third place what is considered in sin, when God is said to forgive it;
this is worth your understanding.

Three things are to be considered in sin.

First the blot and pollution of sin; and this cannot be taken away by pardon,
the sin is a sin though it be pardoned, the pollution of sin is not taken away
by pardon, the blot remains.

Secondly, There is considered the desert of sin, it deserves damnation, and
the wrath of God; though it be pardoned, this is not taken away.

A Third thing considered is this, the Ordination or appointment of a sinner to
eternal punishment; and this is fully taken away by pardon, when God does give
remission of sin, he does take away all obligation to wrath, death, hell, and
damnation; and this is properly the nature of forgiveness of sin, it is a
gracious and a free act of God, whereby he acquits a sinner from eternal guilt
and eternal punishment, that is due to all his sin in an eternal punishment,
God does not acquit a pardoned man from external punishments, God may pardon
thy sin, yet he may punish thee externally for thy sins, but not eternally;
and thus much for the first particular.

I confessed and thou forgavest.

For answer in the general, it is not every kind of confession that carries a
connection of pardon, Saul confessed his sin, but God did not take away his sin,
but took away his Kingdom. It is not every kind of confession that has a
connection with forgiveness of sin, but that confession which has connection
with pardon of sin, it has six concomitants joined with it.

Psalm. 32. 21. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, and
in whose spirit is no guile; Guile is not there taken largely in opposition to
Hypocrisy, but for a sinful reserve of sin, when a man will not be free and
open in confessing his sin unto God; David would freely and fully open himself
and confess his evils unto God; that confession that is a free and ingenuous
confession, it has pardon of sin annexed to it; the confessions of them that
roll sin under the tongue, as a sweet morsel that they would not part with,
have not justification entailed on them; those confessions only are connected
with forgiveness that are ingenuous and free.

Ps. 38. 18. For I will declare mine iniquity, I will be sorry for my sin. True
confession of sin is rather a voice of mourning, then a voice of words, it has
ever a sorrow and grief of heart joined with it; That prescription, that God
gave to the Leper in the Law, that he should be cleansed from his leprosi^ and
in Levit. 13. 45. And the Leper in whom the plague is, his clothes shall be
rent, and his head bare, and he shall put a covering upon his upper lip, and
shall cry unclean, unclean, is worth your notice, he was to cry twice, I am
unclean, Lam unclean; there was this confession, but what was joined with his
confession before he could be cleansed? Two things he must do, First, he must
rent his clothes; to note, that there must be brokennesse of heart, and sorrow
of heart joined with confession of sin. Secondly, he must cover his lip, to
note shame that must be mingled with his sorrow, to show, that to us that have
an unclean leprosy of sin in us, the crying I am unclean, unclean, is not
enough; but there must be the renting of the heart, and shame of face; these
must be mingled with those confessions that have a connection with forgiveness.

Prove. 28. 13. He that covers. his sin shall not prosper, but whosoever
confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy. Confession is there joined to
be with a forsaking of sin, Esta spiritualis vomitns. Bern.
in case mercy be to be obtained. One ^cals confession a spiritual vomit; you
know a man that is burdened in the stomach, would be willingly rid of that load
on his stomach that does oppress nature; a man that does confess sin truly
would as willing be rid of sin on his Conscience, as a man that is sick at his
Stomach would be rid of that burden which does oppress it, such a confession
has pardon annexed with it.

Psalm. 38. 18. compared with Psalm. 39. 1. For I will declare mine iniquity, I
will be sorry for my sin, I said I will take heed to my ways that I sin not
with my tongue. David's confessing sin did work in him a holy awe, and a holy
care to take heed of those sins he had confessed, to confess sin and to be bold
and adventurous to run into sin, has not such a connection, with pardon.

David confessed sin and his confession quickened Prayer, Daniel confessed sin, and
confession quickened supplication; Daniel 9. 20. And while I was speaking, and
praying, and confessing my sin, and the sin of my people Israel, etc.
(Beloved,) when confessions of sin are to prayer as the whet-stone to the
knife; when you sharpen your affections and put a keen edge on your hearts in
prayer: this is an evident token that such confession has a connection with
forgiveness of sin. So much for the second particular.







would have us do, can derogate from his free grace, therefore surely this
command can no way eclipse the freeness of grace in what he will do.

Secondly, In regard of means as a way to get pardon: God is the efficient
cause, and Christ is the meritorious cause of pardon; but yet confession of sin
is that cause which Logicians call (causa sine qua non) without which pardon of
sin shall never be obtained, Causa sine qua non.
I confessed and thou forgavest.

Repent that your sins may be blotted out, Act. 3. 19. No blotting out of sin
without repentance; there must be a sorrow and bewailing of sin before it can
be pardoned; and that Christ was broken for sin, it will no ways exempt you
from being broken for sin; though Christ was a man of sorrow, and all in a way
of satisfaction, yet you must shed tears for sin in a way of contrition and
humiliation.



I now come to answer the Objections.









But Positively, though God does know our sins, yet we are bound to confess
our sins for many solid reasons; As;



Psalm. 38. verse. 18.

Bernard, is enjoined by God for this reason, that thou might magnify the
greatness of grace, and see the greatness of sin; if a man should never see
his sin, he could never magnify Gods grace and pardoning mercy.

circumstances, this does greaten the merits of Christ.

Omnisciency, you do by your confessions acknowledge that God sees your sins:
it gives glory to his Patience that he would spare you in the act of sin, that
he would not throw you to hell in the very act of sin: it gives glory to his
Justice, Psalm 51. 4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this
evil in thy s^ght, that thou might be justified when thou speak, and be
clear when thou judge: it confesses Gods Mercy, and this Paul does, 1 Timothy
1. 13. Who was before a Blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious; but I
obtained mercy, etc. He confessed his sin that so he might the abundance of Gods
grace and Love.

concealed guilt breeds horror and hell in the conscience; it is an ingenuous
clearness when a man can open himself to God in free confession, which does
allay the anguish and trouble of mind, Job. 32. 18. For I am full of matter,
the spirit within me constrains me, verse. 19. Behold, my Belly is as Wine
which has no vent, it is ready to burst like new bottles: verse. 20. I will
speak that I may be refreshed, I will open my lips and answer. A godly man is
full of matter, of confession to God, and like a vessel ready to burst, til he
can vent himself by confession in Gods presence; this is the answer to the
first Objection.

Elihu did in Job. 5. 37. If thou be righteous, what give thou him? or what
receives he of thine hand? verse. 8. Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou
art, and thy righteousness may profit the son of man. Therefore if God
receives no injury by my sin, what need I confess sin to God? This is an
objection that the Antinomians make. For answer,







I now come to the Use, which is for trial, to put you on a diligent enquiry,
how you may know whether God has brought you into a pardoned estate, and has
forgiven the iniquity of your sin; how may (...) known whether God has
forgiven you your iniquities? There are ten ways to discover this; I shall
divide them into this order: there are six Concomitants, that do attend a
person in a pardoned estate, and four charactors laid down in Scripture of a
man whose sin is forgiven him. First the Concomitants or those things in the
Scripture which do attend or accompany a person whose sin is forgiven,

First, In Scripture we find that remission of sin is accompanied with
renovation of the heart, if sin be remitted the heart is renewed; they are both
joined together, Rev. 2. 17. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the
hidden Manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name
written, which no man knows saving he that receives it.

Interpreters do give this sense of that promise: you read of two things, a
white Stone, and a new name written in that stone; the white stone it is an
expression borrowed from the practice of the Gentiles, who in their Judicature
did use a white stone: If a malefactor was condemned, and had the sentence of
death past upon him, there was given him a black stone in token of
condemnation; Ovid Metamorph. lib. 15.
but if a man had a white stone given him it was a token of absolution or
pardon. Hence the Heathens named these stones (...) acquitting or condemning
stones. And so the Poet, In ancient times with stones they did,
In judgment seat proceed.
By black the guilty were condemned,
The just by white were freed.


In allusion to this, Mos erat antiquus inveis atrisque labellis. His damnare
nos illis absolvere culpa.
Christ does here promise pardon of sin, which is meant by the stone; but what
must be written on this white stone? there must be written on this white stone,
a new Name, that is a renovation, the renewing of the heart: so that if so be
the nature of a man be not renewed, the sin of a man is not pardoned; therefore
^oe not boast of having your white stone, if there be^ blanck on that stone, if
there be nothing written on that stone, if holiness be not written on that
stone, pardon of sin has renewing of nature to attend it.

Luke 7. 47. Wherefore I say unto thee, her sins which are many are forgiven,
for she loved much. It is a Concomitant that did attend her pardon, much was
forgiven her, therefore she loved much. For not a cause, but consequence of
pardon.

I acknowledged my transgressions unto the Lord* and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin. 1 Job. 1. 9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and
Just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

Mat. 18. 35. So likewise shall my heavenly Father do unto you, if ye from your
heart forgive not every one his brother their trespasses: It is in the Lords
prayer annexed, forgive us our trespasses, Mat. 6. So that forgiving of other
men is in Scripture as an Attendant or Concomitant of Gods forgiving us. Put on
as the Elect of God, says the Apostle, bowels of mercy, forbearing and
forgiving one another.

Luke 4. 19.
Act 5. 31. Him has God exalted with his Right hand to be a Prince and a
Savior, Luke. 24. 45. 46. 47.
for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. There they are
linckt together to give repentance and remission of sin. It is a Question among
the Schoolmen, Whether God by his absolute power can forgive a man his sin, if
a man does not repent him of sin. There are few of them that do incline to the
affirmative, because God has expressly tied himself in the Word, that pardon
must have repentance for sin. We are commanded to repent that we may have
pardon. Act. 8. 22.


Sixthly, Act. 2. 38.
Forgiveness of sin, is accompanied with holy endeavors for the mortification
of sin: he that has the guilt of sin pardoned, labors to have the power of
sin destroyed; therefore in Scripture pardoning mercy and subduing grace, they
are both joined together, Mic. 7. 19. He wi^ turn again, he will have
compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast all their
sins into the depths of the Sea: there is subduing grace, as well as pardoning
mercy. Beloved if God pardon sin there are real endeavors in a soul to have
the power of sin taken away. Indeed many men in the world do lay claim to
pardon, who never have endeavors, and holy pursuits after mortification: many
have counterfeit mortification, who playwith their sins like Fencers; which it
may be given them a touch, a slight blow, but do not fight like warriers,
either to kill or to be killed: but godly men do not play with their sins, but
do with their lusts as a warrier, they do conflict with lusts on these terms,
that either we must kill them, or they will kill us. Many counterfeit
Christians who do lay claim to real pardon, have but counterfeit
mortifications; I may fitly resemble such men as these to the Persians, who had
one Festival annually where in they used this custom, that they labored to
find out all their venomous creatures, as Snakes, Serpents and the like: and
one day in the year they would kill all which they found, but afterward they
let them increase. Many men in some solemn performances to God, will make great
ado of killing their lusts, but afterward they let them increase and live
again. And thus much for the six-Concomitants that do attend a person in a
pardoned state.

The next is, the Characters to be given of a pardoned man, of a man whose sin
is forgiven; I will name but four Characters of a pardoned sinner.

down in the 7. of Micah, Micah 7. 19.
the Prophet brings in the Churches crying out in the extolling of God, Who is
a God like unto thee, pardoning iniquity, transgression and sin! a pardoned man
admires God, because his grace is free, and his bounty is great: and a pardoned
man abaseth himself, because he sees sin exceeding sinful, see Ezra, 9. 6.

Psalm. 38. when the Psalmist said, he would declare his iniquity: Psalm. 38. 18.
then in Psalm. 39. he says, I will take heed to my ways; as if he should have
said, compared with Psalm. 39. 1.
I am sorry for my sin, and the Lord has forgiven me mine iniquity: but here
is the result of it, I will take heed to my ways, and of my sinning another
time: there is no man that knows his sin to be pardoned, that can easily run
into the commission of it again, Job 10. 14.
it is an exeellent expression in the book of Job. If I sin then thou markest
me, and thou will not acquit me from mine iniquity. If I sin, it is not here
spoken absolutely and simply; for what man is he that lives and sins not?
but if I sin as I am charged, that I should sin murmuring and maliciously
against God, and persist in my sin, says Job, If I sin as ye charge me, what
follows? then God will not take away mine iniquity, he will not pardon my sin;
as Job said of himself, you may say of your selves: if I sin obstinately, and
pertinaciously, God will not pardon; thou have been wicked, and thou will be
so; thou have been profane and, thou will be so; This is inconsistent with a
pardoned state.

and soakt in tears: sorrow before pardon is servile and legal; none can
sorrow in an Evangelical manner, but he who is brought into a pardoned estate.
Indeed there may be a fore't, and a constrained sorrow which may come from the
eyes of unpardoned men: there is this difference between the one and the other.
Tears in an unpardoned sinner come from him like water in a Still; but Tears
in a pardoned sinner come from him like water from the clouds: water will drop
from the Still, but it is forced by keeping close the Still, and by the heat of
the fire? the fire of hell may make a wicked man aghast: but sorrow for sin in a
pardoned man, is like water from the clouds that is not forced but does
naturally drop down.

Psalm. 32. 1. 2.
Psalm. 32. some do take guile in a particular sense, others extend it more
largely, as a comprehensive word opposed to sincerity; he is a man in whose
spirit is no guile, that is an upright man. Thus much for the use of Trial.

I now come to answer the Objections.

I hear a doubting Christian say, Woe and alas, what state am I in! I have
misgiving thoughts that God has not pardoned mine iniquities, because I cannot
find that I have a heart to mourn for my iniquity. And is it imaginabl^ that
Christ should shed blood for those sins, which I never shed a tear for? I can
mourn for outward small crosses, but I cannot mourn for great inward
corruptions: this makes me doubt whether ever God has pardoned my sin.

I shall resolve this Objection in these four particulars.

man, if his disposition be hard and rugged, yet he cannot shed tears as those
that have a tender disposition.



Thirdly, You that make this Objection know, you must distinguish of a twofold
sorrow for sin. First, there is a judicious sorrow: and secondly, a sensitive
sorrow.

First, There is a judicious sorrow, and this consists in an apprehension in
the judgment, that sin is the greatest evil in the world, and most to be
lamented, branded, opposed, and resisted: Divines do place more strength and
height of grace in having an indignation stirred up in the understanding
against sin, touching the evil of sin; this is more then to shed a few tears
for sin. Now if thou have a judicious sorrow to apprehend sin to be a great
evil, though it has not vent at the eye, yet this is godly sorrow for sin. A
man that has the Toothache, he will cry out and complain more, and shed more
tears happily for the exquisite pain of the Toothache, then he will do in
the burning Fever; yet ask him which he had rather have, he will tell you the
Toothache: the reason is, because the pestilential Fever is more hazardous to
life: so bad you rather lose your children, then lose the sense of Gods favor.
Which had you rather have, afflictions in the world, or willingly commit sin
against God?

The judgment of a man, if he be a regenerate man, tells him he had rather a
thousand times lose the dearest relation, then the manifestation of Gods love
unto his soul, he had rather endure the greatest affliction, then to venture
willingly on the least sin.

then they have done for inward corruptions; there is great reason for it,
because things of sense do more affect us, then things of faith do; lay a man
upon the Rack, and he shall more roar and cry then any man in the world shall
do in the sense of sin, because the pain is sensitive, and it will have more
sense of sorrow: it was thus with good men in Scripture. We read much of David's
sorrow, he had no rest in his bones by reason of his sin, yet mark, when David
lost Absalom, O what a fit of sorrow was he in, crying out, O my son Absalom,
my son, my son Absalom, would God I had dyed for thee, O Absalom, my son, my
son. We do not read of such cries, O my soul, my soul, O what shall I do for
thee my soul! because the sorrow was sensitive, the loss was sensitive.

Now beloved, Gods people do express more sensitive sorrow for outward crosses
then for inward corruptions. A late Author does quote an instance out of
Jerome, a godly woman lost her children, and she wept even to death, yet she
could not weep so for her sin: the reason is, because things of sense do more
affect a man then things of faith; though there be more evil in one sin then
in a thousand afflictions.

And thus much for the relief of a troubled sinner in answer to the first
Objection.

I shall answer this in four particulars; to take off the trouble of a
perplexed mind.

First, Know and consider that mortifying grace is a consequent of pardon of
sin, and therefore does not go before it: Micah ^. 18. He will turn again he
will have compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities etc. the promises
follows, I will subdue thine iniquity, says God, be not troubled, I have
pardoned thee.

Dan. 4. 14. He cried aloud, and said thus: Hew down the tree, and cut off his
branches, shake off his leaves, and scatter his fruit; let the beasts get away
from under it, and the fowls from his branches; nevertheless leave the stump
of his roots in the earth: So sin in the heart, the branches are cut off by
mortification, the luxuriant buddings, and blossomings, and breakings forth of
sin, they are cut off; but the stump, the root of original sin, from which all
sin flows and grows that remains Dan. 7. 12. As concerning the rest of the
beasts, they had their dominion taken away; yet their lives were prolonged for
a season, and time; Though thou be a mortified man, yet mortification does
only take away the dominion of sin, and not the life of it; for it is prolonged
for a season.



there is this reason to be given for this, because mortification is not so
complete and perfect as remission of sin is; remission of sin is a perfect act,
and all men, though their graces be inequall, yet their forgiveness and pardon
is equal, and alike; because God does not pardon one sin and not another: but
in the work of mortification, it is partly done, partly not done; it is a work
begun: therefore a sin may be fully pardoned, when it is not fully subdued,
because sanctification and mortification cannot hold equipage and proportion
with remission of sin.



I answer, That it is an evident token that Christ has dispossessed the soul of
the power of sin, or taken away the power of sin, seeing the Devil does labor
to possess you so often with the guilt of sin in a way of temptation. Observe
if a man did lie under the power of sin, the Devil would not suggest to that
man the guilt of sin; because then it would awaken a man's conscience, and make
a poor sinner look after Jesus Christ, and after heaven, and pardon. Pharah
does not trouble Israel till he be gone forth of Egypt. Therefore a sinner
under the power and dominion of sin, shall not be troubled under the Devil
about the guilt of sin. The Devil had rather play at small game then not to
game: if he cannot damn a man by keeping him under the power of sin, he will
terrify him by troubling him with the guilt of sin.

Deuteronomy. 22. 23. If a Damsel that is a virgin be betrothed unto a husband, and a
man find her in the City and lie with her, Verse. 24. Then ye shall bring them
both out unto the gate of the City: and ye shall stone them with stones that
they dye: the Damsel because she cried not being in the City; and the man,
because he has humbled his neighbors wife: so shall thou put a way evil from
among you. Verse. 25. But if a man find a betrothed damosel in the field, and a
man force her, and lie with her: then the man only that lay with her shall dye.
All the prevalency of sin over thee which is unwilling, God will charge that on
the Devil, and account thee guiltless, when it has not thy consent; when
thou labourest to suppress vicious corruptions of the heart, God does hold
thee guiltless, though the Devil may labor to commit a spiritual rape upon
thee. It is a text that I have often made use of in the 11. chapter of
Leviticus, Divines make great use of it for the comforting of troubled
consciences, in the 33. verse. Levit. 11. 36.
And every earthen vessel, whereinto any of them falls, whatsoever is in it
shall be unclean: and ye shall break it. Verse. 36. Nevertheless, a fountain
or pit wherein there is plenty of water, shall be clean: but that which touches
their carcass shall be unclean. The significancy of this Law was this, that if
filth do fall upon a pit of water, into a standing pool, because it has no
motion, it cannot purge it self from the filth cast into it, that is unclean:
but if an unclean thing be cast into a fountain of water, that cannot be
unclean, for it has a principle in it to purge and free it self from these
unclean, things that are cast into it; to show, if sin be in your heart as an
unclean thing in a fountain of water, that by reason of your continual motion
unto God, your running unto God, you have a principle in you to empty your
selves. and to purge your selves and clear your selves from those things which
the Devil does defile you with, now your are not unclean, and this should
greatly comfort you.

I do not discern that my conscience checks me for my sin, therefore I may
fear, if there be no remorse after the commission of sin, I may fear that there
is no remission. This is the strongest Objection to make a man ^^ar his pardon;
As I would say nothing to make a deluded wretch to presume, so I would keep
back nothing that might any way establish a troubled mind: thou say thou
do fall into sin, yet thou have no check and remorse of conscience for sin,
therefore thou fear if sin has no remorse on thy part, it has no remission
on Gods part.

For answer, First in the general, know your case is dangerous, but yet it is
not desperate.

Paul, Act. 26. 9. I verily thought with my self, that I ought to do many
things contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth. Paul sinned and he had his
doubts before conversion, even as after conversion; yet this sin troubled him
not, he thought he was bound to do many things, etc. so may thy conscience be
so far disordered, as to think that thou do well when thou do ill, Jonah
4. 9. And God said to Jonah, do thou well to be angry for the gourd, and he
said I do well to be angry even unto the death. Could Jonahs conscience smite
him for his anger when he said he did well? Lord how far will a godly man go, to
the very suburbs of hell if God shall let him alone! I do well, says Jonah,
to be angry, even unto death.

What the eye sees not, the heart rues not: nothing that is unknown, can be the
object of desire, neither can any thing that is unknown be the object of
sorrow; unknown miseries we weep not for, but miseries we know, those we mourn
for: if a man's judgment be not enlightened to see sin, he can never mourn for
it; he may live and dye in a sin that his judgment is not convinced of to be a
sin: thus the godly in the Old Testament lived in the sin of Polygamie,
marrying of many wives, they knew not it was a sin, but they took liberty to
take as many wives as they would.

A godly man that holds an error, conscience may never smite him for it,
because his judgment is mistaken his judgment thinks he holds the truth, and
therefore conscience cannot smite him for holding an error

David could not be so ignorant of Gods Law that lying with another man's wife
was a sin, yet David did continue nine months at least without remorse for it;
when Nathan came and reproved him, then said he, I have sinned, I have sinned.
O beloved, if God does but let a sinners conscience alone, though he be a good
man, yet he may continue for a long time under a known sin, and conscience not
work remorse or trouble in him. And the like instance we have in the sons of
Jacob, who were not sensible of their sin in selling Joseph, until 20. years
after they fell into trouble for it in Egypt.

David, at one time his heart smote him for but the appearance of an evil,
viz. Cutting off Saul's lap, yet at another time his conscience did not smite
him for murdering Vriah. Again, at another time David's conscience smote him but
for vainglory, in numbering the people: it was only vainglory that he would
please himself in a mustered Army; yet at another time David's conscience did
not smite him for adultery. O beloved, how will a man's conscience lie asleep,
and not trouble him, for an evil if God lets him alone.

David, David committed adultery with Bathsheba, but he did not put his
conscience on work to check him for his sin, but he did put his wits on work to
hide the sin. Four projects David had to hide the sin:

Vriah Bathsheba's husband, that so Vriah might come and lie with his wife,
that so he might hide David's uncleanness, 2. Sam. 11.

Vriah drunk, and so thought that surely when he was drunk, that drunkenness
would provoke him with a desire to go to his own house.

Vriah's death, that so there might be no clamor on his part for the
defilement of his wife.

Lastly, David would have fathered his plot on providence, for David himself
had plotted the death of Vriah; mark David's project: a good man did put his
wits on work and made shifts to hide his sin; yet all this while did not put
conscience on work to check him for his sin. O how near the suburbs of hell may
a godly man go, and yet go to heaven!

Abraham, Genesis 20. 9. Then Abimelech called Abraham, and said unto him, What
have thou done unto us, and what have Loffended thee, that thou have brought on
me, and on my kingdom a great sin? thou have done deeds unto me, that ought not
to be done. For this falsehood Ahrahams conscience never smote him, yet a
Heathen by the light of a natural conscience rebuked Abraham for it.
Abimelech, a Heathen, did tell Abraham, Thou have done deeds that ought not to
be done.

And thus I have gone very far in answering this Objection. I have done it
for to stay the troubles of a perplexed conscience; not to make any man
presumptuous: these six steps near going down to the Chambers of death, yet it
is possible that a pardoned sinner may have his conscience thus deluded and out
of office,

Me thinks I hear many a presumptuous heart allege, if this be true, that you
say a pardoned sinner may go thus near hell, and yet come to heaven: if good
men may sin a sin, and yet conscience never trouble them, then I hope that I
may have my sin pardoned as well as the best.

Now lest this Objection might lurk in the heart of any man that hears me, I
will turn the (...) And that no man might be presumptuous and entertain false
persuasions touching pardon; I shall show you, that though a godly man may have
his conscience out of office to smite him for sin; yet in that case there is
great difference between a pardoned sinner and an unpardoned, there are these
five particular differences.

First, Though a pardoned man may have sometimes conscience asleep, yet that
pardoned man dares not be so bold and adventurous to sin against conscience as
wicked men do: you have this fully laid down in Scripture, though but darkly.
Lev. 13. 10. And the Priest shall see him, and behold, if the rising be white
in the skin, and it have turned the hair white, and there be quick ^^w flesh in
the rising, etc. Here were two symptoms of the Plague of Leprosy, the growing
of white hair in the so^e, then raw flesh in the rising: the Hebrew Rabbis do
understand two things by this Law,

First, The turning of the hair white in the sore, they note to be continuance
in sin, living from youth to old age in sin, till the hair be white and gray.

Secondly, There was to be quick and raw flesh in the rising, they understand
it to be adventurousnesse in a sinner to commit sin against a raw, and a
gawled, and a rebuked conscience. Another man might have scabs all over his
flesh, yet he was not to be unclean. Verse. 13. Then the Priest shall consider:
and behold, it the leprosy have covered all his flesh, he shall pronounce him
clean that has the plague, it is all turned white, he is clean. Yet if a man
had rawnesse in the sore, he was to be unclean: to note, that a man may have
many sins, yet not be unclean in Gods sight; but if he sin against the very
dictates of conscience, and be bold and adventurous against the gawlings of a
perplexed conscience, he shall be unclean.

Saul did, 1 Samuel 16. 14. But the spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an
evil spirit from the Lord troubled him, Verse. 17. And Saul said unto his
servants, Provide now a man that can play well, and bring him to me. When an
evil spirit troubled him, that was his conscience, Saul called for music to
still the voice of conscience.

Thirdly, Good men care not for ^ocond company, Mar. 16. 18. For John had said
unto Herod, It is not lawful for thee to have thy ^rothers wife. Verse. 21. And
when a convenient day was come, that Herod on his birthday made a supper to his
lords, high Captains, and chiefest States of Galilee, etc. Good men dare not
avoid a reproving, a searching ministry: as Felix did, Act. 24. 25. And as he
reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come, Felix trembled,
and answered, Go thy way for this time, when I have covenient season I will
call for thee.

He could not endure to lie under a conscience gawling Ministry, godly men do
not thus; if a man be pardoned, though he has sin, yet he is glad when the
Ministry does rowse and awaken his conscience.

Fhurthly, A pardoned sinner dares not content himself under a dawbing and
flattering Ministry, that will sew pillars under his elbowes, and say peace
when there is none, Jer. 23. 13. And I have seen folly in the Prophets of
Samaria, they prophesied in Baal, and caused my people Israel to err, Verse.
14. I have seen also in the Prophets of Jerusalem, and horrible thing; they
commit adultery, and walk in lies; they strengthen also the hands of evil
doers, that none does return from his wickedness: they are all of them unto me
as Sodom, and the inhabitants of them as Gomorrah, Chap. 8. 11. For they have
healed the hurt of the Daughter of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace,
when there is no peace.

Fifthly, They dare not run into the crowd of employments, that so they might
forget the gawlings, of conscience, as Cain did, Genesis 4. Cain to put off the
troubles of his conscience, would fall to buying, building, and drowning
himself in the world, that so he might hear no more. A pardoned sinner does not
thus, but if conscience suggests guilt, he prays to God that conscience might
speak thoroughly and to the heart.

Sixthly, A godly man does not wallow and continue in a custom of sin, that so
custom in his sin, might take away conscience of his sin. Ephesians. 4. 19. Who
being past feeling, (...)
have given themselves over to laciviousnesse, to work all uncleanness with
greediness. Wicked men give themselves over to a custom in sin, that so they
might not have conscience to smite them for sin. They are like a Smiths dog, a
strange dog that comes to a Smiths forge cannot abide to have the sparkles of
fire fly about him; Simile.
but that dog that has always been accustomed to the shop, can sleep still
on, and it never troubles him: wicked men are like Smiths dogs used to the
shop, though flashes of hell fire are cast about them, yet they sleep still and
are not awakened; but godly men do not make use of custom in sin to lull them
asleep in their sweet lusts.

A 7. difference, That though the conscience of apardoned sinner does not smite
him for sin, yet is it sooner and easier awakened and raised out of a dead
sleep, then the conscience of a wicked man; a look from Jesus eye, and the Cock
crowing made Peter weep, he went out and wept bitterly; a rebuke to David from
the Prophet, made him cry out, Lord I have sinned. A reprobate conscience is
not so easily put into office, it does not reprove him, there must be much ado
and great labor taken before his dead conscience will hear the rebukes of the
Word, there is more ado with a wicked man to have his conscience in office
then with a godly man.

Eighthly, There is this difference, though the conscience of a good man be
asleep for a time, and does not smite him for sin, yet some time before he
dies, his conscience shall smite him for sin; there is no godly man in the
world but under known sins, if his conscience has not smitten him, his
conscience shall smite him before he dies; but wicked men live and dye in sin
and never have the control or rebuke of conscience: Ahaz was troubled by
affliction from God, yet conscience never troubled him, for he did yet more
wickedly against God.

Ninthly, Though the conscience of a pardoned sinner may be asleep for a time,
and may not reprove him for sin committed; yet a good man's conscience when it
does reprove him, it does check him more out of a sense of sin and the
dishonor done to God, then out of fear of hell or any outward judgments; but
wicked men are asleep in their consciences, and if conscience does ever awake,
it is not because sin is sin, and because God is dishonored; but because there
is hell for sin, and because there are outward grievous judgments* when God
breaks men by his judgments, then they will put conscience on work, but never
do it out of sense of sin; Take this comparison of Ducks in a pond of water,
cast but a little peble stone into the water, and it will make them dive, but
let it rattle and thunde^ ^n the heavens, the Ducks fear not; a Divine makes
this a fit emblem of a wicked man's conscience, cast but a little pebble stone,
some present affliction near a wicked man, and that will make him dive, that
will trouble conscience and perplex the man; but let God thunder from heaven,
let the Lord declare all the threatenings of his spiritual judgments against
sin, how evil sin is, how God is dishonored by sin, and how the soul is
endangered, all these thundrings from heaven cannot make him startle.

And thus I have run hastily over the answering of this third Objection, I have
done it merely for the relief of a perplexed Conscience; thus I have done with
this doctrine, I confessed, and thou forgavest. Thou forgavest, to forgive; says
Musculus, is a word of favor, or grace, not merit. Thou forgavest; It notes,
pardon of sin is not vouchsafed to men by way of debt, but of gift; I
confessed, and thou forgavest; thou forgavest what? Thou forgavest the iniquity
of my sin, the sin of my sin. Interpreters have various apprehensions touching
the meaning of these words, what it is for God to forgive the iniquity of my
sin. I will bring it to a two fold channel: Some there are that by iniquity,
understand the punishment of sin; I acknowledged my sin, and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin; That is, thou forgavest the punishment of my sin; the
reason of that interpretation is, because in the Hebrew language the same word
(...) that signifies iniquity, signifies punishment, and therefore they
understand the iniquity of sin, the punishment of sin; but Interpreters
generally go against this interpretation, for usually the word is taken for sin
it self; Again the whole scope of the Psalm is not in seeking the outward
punishment to be forgiven; but the forgiveness of sin is referred to eternal
guilt.

Thirdly, Here is in the Text a (...), which is a note of admiration annexed to
his expression; Thou have forgiven, etc. surely that would be no wonder to God
to pass by an external punishment, for that he might do to men whose sins
were never pardoned: What is it for God to forgive the iniquity of sin? I
answer, the iniquity of sin is meant, that God out of his free grace does not
only simply forgive a sin committed, but he forgives the iniquity of that sin,
all the malignity of that sin, all the heinous aggravated circumstances that
may any ways make it great. A Learned Author having a whole Tract upon this
Psalm, has these words, the Psalmist uses this kind of speech, To forgive
the iniquity of sin, that he might touch us, that it was no light fault that
was pardoned, it was sin, and it was the iniquity of sin, sin upon sin, and
sin greatned by many heinous circumstances. Yet, Behold! the great mercy of
God, Thou forgavest the Iniquity of my sin; thus much for the explaining of the
words.

The Observation is this; That such are the riches of Gods pardoning grace,
that he forgives his people not only sin in the general, but their great sins,
such as are clothed with many aggravated and heinous crying circumstances.
Thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin.

In the handling of this point I shall proceed in this method.

First, To prove the point to you by an Induction of particular instances; then
the application of it by several uses. It is a pointfull of comfort, and indeed
I know not such a Text in all the Bible that speaks of Gods grace in pardoning
aggravated sins, more clearly then this Text does.

First of all, I shall give you an induction of instances, that God does not
only forgive his people a bare sin committed, but God does out of the riches
of his Grace forgive his people those sins that you may call the iniquity of
sin, sins clothed with many heinous aggravated circumstances, to prove this
take the instance of David, that speaks the words; an instance of Peter,
another of Paul, many men that have sinned against light and love, sinned
against checks of conscience, and against mercies, are these sins forgiven?
Yes, that is my work to prove, that Gods grace does forgive sins that are
clothed with many heinous and aggravated circumstances, to make them great.

First, I begin with David, because it is the instance in hand; will you
consider David's sin, the sin of Adultery, and ransack the bowels of it? you
shall find David's sin clothed with great, heinous, and aggravated
circumstances to make it great and grievous; and yet for all this that sin
forgiven him.

First Circumstance to aggravate David's sin, if you consider the quality of it,
the kind of it. What sin was it? it was the sin of Adultery; now of all sins
the sin of Adultery is an aggravated sin; there are five circumstances.

1. He that commits adultery, he sins against his own body.

2. He sins against the body of the woman he is unclean with.

3. It is a wrong to his own Wife.

4. It is a wrong to the Adulteresses Husband.

5. It is a wrong to the child that is illegitimately begotten in adultery,
that an ignominy should be on him when he is borne: and therefore that David
should fall to that sin, it was one great sin to aggravate David's sin.

David's person that did commit this sin, Omne animi vitium tanto conspectius in
se Crimen habet quanto major qui peccat habetur.
He was King; Now the greater the person is that sins, the sin is the
greater, 2 Samuel 12. 8, 9.

Nathan tells him, 2 Samuel 12. 8.

David had a Wife of his own, nay many wives of his own, that did greaten
David's sin, and so Nathan told him; for (says Nathan) There was a poor man who
had but* one Lamb, and a rich man that had many Lambs, which killed the poor
man's Lamb; his meaning was, that David should commit adultery with the wife of
that man that had but one wife, when he had many of his own.

David committed this sin, it was when David's Armies were lying in the fields,
this was done then, which was enough to provoke God to make them turn their
backs upon their enemies.

Vriah.

David should commit many sins to hide that one sin, that was an aggraving
Circumstance, David did commit six-sins to hide that one sin of Adultery.

1. He sent for Vriah Bathsheba's husband to leave the Army, when they were
storming a place, this might have endangered the whole Army.

2. The Text says that David made Vriah drunk, thinking thereby to make him go
in to his Wife.

3. He used a means for Vriah to father his bastard that he had gotten in
uncleanness.

4. When that Plot would not take, David did conspire, and consult how to kill
Vriah.

5. David sent a letter by Vriah, wherein Vriah was a messenger of his own
death, unknown to him.

6. When Vriah was dead, the Text says, that David said, The sword makes no
difference, for the sword destroys one man as well as another; he laid Vriahs
death on Gods providence only, when it was he himself did plot how he should
be slain: O where was David's conscience all this while, where was David's
conscience, that should thus fall to commit those sins to hide one sin* you
account that a heinous aggravation of sin, when servants have done an ill turn,
if they shall do many ill turns to hide one: this iniquity was found in David,
to hide one sin, he fell to commit many.

David's sin, was this, that David should marry Vriahs wife, first killed the
husband, then married the wife.

David continued under this sin with all these aggravations for nine months
together without repentance or remorse of conscience. I do not name this to
boulster any man in sin; I only mention this for a distressed conscience, that
though thy sin be an aggravated and a great sin, clothed with many hideous and
heinous circumstances; yet God did forgive such a sin as that, and therefore
well may David say, The Lord forgave the iniquity of my sin, not only sin, but
the iniquity of sin.

Peter, you all know the story, but it may be you have not looked narrowly into
the circumstances that made Peter's sin to be great: In Peter's sin.

Peter should deny Christ, when he did make more confident professions that he
would cleave to Christ, then all the other eleven Disciples: when Christ told
them, You shall be offended because of me this night, says Peter, Though all
men should forsake thee, yet will not I, yet none forsaked Christ but Judas and
he, in so shameful a manner as they; this was a great aggravation.

Secondly, It is observable that Peter did deny himself to be Peter, Joh. 18.
25. And Simon Peter stood and warmed himself, they said therefore unto him, Art
not thou also one of his Disciples? He denied, and said, I am not.

Luke 22. 57. And he denied him, saying, Woman I know him not.

Fourthly, He did not only deny Christ to a single Maid, but the Text says, he
denied Christ to the Maid, and before all the people, there was an open denial
of Christ. Matthew. 26. 69. Now Peter sat without in the Palace, and a Damosel
came unto him, saying, thou also w^st with Jesus of Galilee, verse. 70. But he
denied before them all, saying, I know not what thou say.

Fifthly, When another Damosel came, and she said, Verily thou art one of them,
and a follower of Jesus Christ, be said a second time, Woman I do not know the
man, Luke. 22.

Matthew says he denied with an Oath, Matthew. 26. 72. And again he denied with
an oath, I do not know the man; to swear to a lie is abominable.

Peter about an hour after, and says, Of a truth thou art Peter, and to the
man says he, I do not know him.

Peter did not only speak a falsehood, not only swear a lie, but Peter did
curse himself if so be he knew Jesus Christ, the Text says he began to curse
as well as to swear, Mark 14. 71. But he began to curse and to swear, saying, I
know not this man of whom ye speak; he wished some direful judgment to befall
him if he knew Jesus Christ: Some Interpreters think that he did not only
curse himself, but he cursed Jesus Christ, to make the people think that he did
not care for Jesus Christ, therefore did use some execration to curse Jesus
Christ. And O that pardoning grace should reach such a heinous sinner as this
was!

A third Instance was in Paul; you shall see many circumstances to aggravate
and greaten Paul's sin, Acts 9. 10, 11. I verily thought with my self, that I
ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth. Which thing
I also did in Jerusalem, and many of the (...) did I shut up in Prison, having
received authority from the chief Priests, and when they were put to death, I
gave my voice against them. And I punished them often in every Sy^^gog^e, and
compelled them to blaspheme, and being exceedingly and against them, I
persecuted them even unto strange Cities. There are no less then ten
aggravating circumstances to greaten Paul's sin.

Saints of Christ into prison

many of the Saints.

them into prison.

shut them into prison.

Jerusalem, it was where Paul should have learnt to know better things, for
there the Apostles were, and taught the Doctrine of Christ and of Christianity.

Paul's malice, says he, When they were put to death, I gave my voice against
them, Paul's vote was against the Christians to put them to death.

Paul's rage did go against their souls as well as their bodies, for says he,
I did compel them to blaspheme Christ, he labored to damn their souls, as
well as destroy their bodies.

I was exceeding mad against them, he was even mad with rage, and exceeding mad
with rage.

I drove them into strange Cities.

Paul do this to the Saints? says he, I thought with myself to do many
things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth, there was the person he aimed
at; yet Paul, a man forgiven for all this; for he says, when he aggravates his
sin, in 1 Timothy 1. 11, 12, 13. According to the glorious Gospel of the blessed
God which was committed to my trust. And I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who
has enabled me, for that he counted me faithful putting me into the
Ministry, who was before a blasphemer, and a persecuter, and injurious. But I
obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly its unbelief. Thus I have done with
the Doctrinal part of my Text, laying down to you an induction of instances; I
am the larger in this, because I know perplexed consciences in trouble of mind
are apt but to greaten their own sins, but can you aggravate it worse then
David, Paul, or Peter could do? yet behold those sins, and those aggravated
sins were forgiven by Jesus Christ.

I have four words to say in this Sermon by way of Application; there may be in
such an Assembly as this is, whom God might suffer either before conversion or
after conversion, to be unclean with David, to deny Christ with Peter, it may
be to swear to a lie, to swear to a falsehood, nay, (it may be to engage to a
lie, to a falsehood, O take heed of false Oaths,) it may be to persecute the
Saints of Christ with Paul.

Four Consolations.

sin be great, yet the mercy of God is greater then thy sin, and thou can not
have so many circumstances to greaten thy sin, as can be produced in God to
greaten his own mercy: you shall read what he says himself in Isa. 44. 22. I
have blotted ou^ as a thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a cloud, thy sins,
return unto me, for I have redeemed thee. Suppose thy sin be not only a little
cloud; but suppose it be a great cloud, a thick cloud, says God, I do not
only blot sins out like a little cloud; but I will blot ou^ transgressions that
are like a thick cloud: great sins as well as small does the mercies of God
cover. The Sea can as well cover great rocks as little peble stones, high
mountains as well as mole-hills: Gods mercy is an Ocean that can cover great
enormities as well as lesser infirmities. The glorious body of the Sun in the
Heavens, can scatter the greatest mist as well as the thinnest vapors great
sins as well as small are pardoned by infinite mercy. It is worthy your notice
what Moses speaks of the Mercy-seat, It covered the whole Ark wherein the Law
was kept. To note (says a Divine) though thou art a man or a woman guilty of
all the Laws breach; not only of one command, but of all the commands, yet
the Mercy-Seat covered all the commands; to teach you this, that the mercy of
God can pardon the greatest violation of the Law, therefore that wherein the
Law was kept was all covered by the Mercy-Seat.

The blood of Christ (says the Apostle) cleanses us from all sin; the Red Sea
did with as much ease drown Pharaoh and all his host, as it could do a single
man; the red Sea of Christ's blood can drown a whole host and a huge multitude
of sins, as well as a small lust: Though thou have need to shed more tears for
sin in a way of contri^ion; yet Christ need not shed more blood for sin in a
way of redemption, for he has saved them to the utmost that come unto God by
him: the Apostle triumphing in the 5. of the Romans, Romans 5. 15, 16, 17.
he means there, that there is not so much evil in sin to damn us, as there is
good in the gift, in Christ, for to save, because thy sin is he guilt of a
creature, and Christ's satisfaction is the satisfaction of a God; thy sin, the
sin of a finite creature, and his sufferings, the sufferings of an infinite
Mediator.

when he justifies thy person and does sanctify thy nature. It is observable
of Mary Magdalen, as is conceived she was a notorious whore, every one that saw
her knew she was a common harlot; there was a woman that was a sinner, the
meaning was, she was an infamous notorious harlot; What is done when Christ
converted this woman? Luke 7. 47. Wherefore I say unto thee, her sins which are
many are forg^ven, for she loved much. Christ did delight to wipe away the
ignominy of her harlotry in her after-life. It is worthy observation, that four
women are reckoned in the Genealogy of Christ; what women were they? they were
women that were infamous, the best of them did fill into much scandal, and gave
much offense: there you find mention of Thamar, Rachab, Ruth, and Bathsheba, no
more in the Genealogy but these; what were all these women? Begin with Thamar,
she committed uncleanness with her Father in Law, an infamous woman, as you
have the story in Genesis 38. 18. And he said, What pledge shall I give thee? and
she said, thy Signet, and the Bracelets and thy Staff that is in thine hand;
and be gave it her, and came in unto her, and she conceived by him. Then you
read of Rachab, a common harlot, in Heb. 11. 31. By faith the Harlot Rachab
perished not with them that believed not when she had received the spies with
peace, Matthew. 1. 5. And Salmon begat Boaz of Rachab, etc. A third woman
mentioned in the Genealogy is Ruth, what was she? she was not so infamous as
the rest were, yet she ran into a grievous scandal, Ruth came of Moab, whom Lot
begat of his own daughter, you have the story in the Book of Genesis 19. 36.
Thus were both the daughters of Lot with child by their Father. verse. 37. And
the first borne bare a Son, and called his name Moab: What was she? for her
person she was a good woman; but as all Divines observe of her, she did an
action that had appearance of evil, what did she? read the story in the third
of Ruth, beginning at verse 5. etc. the story says, that she came alone at
midnight to Boaz, there was an action full of infamy, which was a shameful
thing that a woman should come to a man lying alone. Secondly, she came and lay
by him in the night season, but it is true, the Scripture c^ears her for any
thing following, verse. 14. And she lay at his feet until morning, and she rose
up before one could know another: there was no vanity, no folly and no evil,
yet it was a grievous scandal for a woman to be with a man, and Boaz did fear
the scandal of it too; yet this woman is reckoned in the Genealogy of Christ.
The fourth woman is Bathsheba, she was unclean with David. What is the Mystery
of this? truly all Interpreters give this; There are but four women named in
the genealogy, al of them blameworthy, some in a higher and some in a lower
degree; and it is recorded that Christ came from these four, to take off the
ignominy and infamy of your sins that you have fallen into before conversion:
suppose God should suffer thee to fall into execrable villainies, real and
sound conversion to God takes off the reproach and ignominy; therefore Christ
to take off the ignominy and reproach from these women would honor them so
far, as to reckon them in his own Genealogy.

The point was this, That such are the riches of Gods pardoning grace, that he
forgives his people the great sins that are clothed with many heinous and
aggravated circumstances. Now lest any might abuse this Doctrine, and suck
poison from these flowers that are m^st sweetly scattered up and down the
Scripture, I shall labor so to handle the matter, as to keep off presumptuous
men that they be not emboldned in a wicked course of sin. Therefore my use
shall be to two sorts of men,

Five considerations concerning lesser sins
as David's sin was, as Peter's sin was, and Paul sins were, then I have
great hopes of pardon; mine are but sins of an ordinary incursion, therefore
I have hopes my sins are pardoned, because they have not been crying great
sins.

First of all consider, That God has shown as much displeasure against small
and little sins, as against greater and grosser enormities: I will give you
some instances.

First of the neglect of Moses to circumcise his son; one would think that for
forbearing the circumcising of a child when a man was in a journey and had
urgent business lying upon him, his business should have been a plea to
excuse him: yet for the bare omission of that on the eight day, the Lord met
him, and would have killed him, Exodus 4. 24. And it came to pass by the way in
the Ione, that the Lord met him, and sought to kill him. Another time the
Psalmist tells us of Moses sin in the wilderness, Moses spoke unadvisedly with
his lips, only a rash word: and what was the issue of that sin? the Lord would
never suffer Moses to enter into the land of Canaan.

Another instance of Uxzah, one would think it but ^mail thing for Vzzah to
put his hand to uphold the falling Arc, it was out of a good intention, that
the Arc should not fall; yet, you know how the hand of God smote Uzzah for it.

So likewise of David, you would think it but a small matter for a King to
number his people; yet you know how many thousands in Israel God did take away
by the Plague for that very sin: so that beloved, suppose thou have not fallen
into hideous and heinous wickednesses, yet thou see little sins displease God
as well as great; because sin, though little, yet is against a great God, and
little sins displease as well as great.

Pecc^ta minor is infaminae possunt esse major is culpae and reatus.
That though gross sins may carry a greater infamy, yet little secret sins may
carry a greater guilt in them to God. Beloved, the sin of Angels, it was but a
small sin, a spiritual sin, only one sin, and a sin in thought too, not of
act; yet you know that for that sin God did tumble the Angels out of heaven.
Indeed gross sins carry a greater infamy, but little small sins may carry as
great a guilt.

may be aggravated and clothed with such cricumstances, as may make them
great, two instances in Adams sin, and David's sin.

First, Adams sin, you would account it a small matter to eat an apple or some
other fruit; but yet that small fact of eating the forbidden fruit, was so
clothed with many circumstances, which made it a great and grievous sin: for,

First, if you consider the state of Adam, he was not as we are; but Adam was a
perfect and an innocent creature: and it is a greater evil for a perfect
creature to sin, then for us that are imperfect.

Secondly, Consider the place where Adam was, it was in Paradise, and yet there
to sin.

Thirdly, Consider the publicknesse of his person, he did not sin for himself;
but in his sin we all sinned: for a private man to sin is an evil, but for a
public person representing other men, his sin is other men's sin.

Fourthly, How many aggravations were in the bowels of Adams sin: there are six:

First, There was unbliefe in his sin, God did not tell them with an if, or an
and, but told them peremptorily they should dye.

Secondly, There was this aggravation, that Adam did believe the Devil, before
God.

Thirdly, there was pride in this sin; for says the Devil, Ye shall be as
Gods, and that pleased them; it was not enough to be man and woman, but they
must be gods.

Fourthly, There was curiosity in that sin. You shall be as gods knowing good
and evil; now out of mere curiosity to know more then they did know, though
they knew enough to make them happy and blessed, did they plunge themselves
into this sin.

Fifthly, They were not contented with their condition.

Adam killed himself and all his posterity; For by one man sin entered into the
World and death by sin, Romans 5. 12.
so that in him all have sinned, and so all dyed: therefore Adams sin was so
clothed with heinous aggravations, that made it very great.

Look on David's sin in numbering the people, it was a very small sin, and indeed
interpreters justify the fact, in it self it was no sin for a King to number
his Army; yet there were some circumstances with which this fact was clothed,
that made David's fact very sinful: there were six heinous aggravations in that
fact of David's numbering the people.

First of all, there was pride and vain glory; this Tostatus says, that pride
and vain glory was David's sin.

Secondly, There was carnal dependence in his sin, he would number his people,
that seeing how strong he was he might depend on the multitude, this says
Zanchius was David's sin too.

Thirdly, There was covetousness in the sin too. Zanchius says this was
David's sin. It is observable, that when in Israel the soldiers were mustered,
and the subjects numbered, there was a tax by pole, that every one should pay,
this was David's sin that he would needlessly number the people for covetousness
sake.

Fourthly, There was curiosity, for David did a needless act; for what need
David know every particular man in his kingdom. Ioab said to David, 1 Chronicles.
21. 4. Why does my Lord require this thing? why will thou muster up thy forces
in a time of peace? we are all true and loyal to thee: yet vain curiosity made
David do it.

Fifthly, there was the sin of sacrilege, this Zanchius notes: for when the
people were numbered, there was to be given for the use of the Sanctuary, half
a shekel, as you have the story, Exodus 30. 12. When thou take the sum of the
children of Israel, after their number, then shall they give every man a
ransom for his soul unto the Lord, when thou numbrest them, that there be no
plague amongst them, when thou numbrest them, Verse. 13. This they shall give,
every one that passes among them that are numbered, half a shekel after the
shekel of the Sanctuary: compare this with Exodus 38. 25. And the silver of the
that were numbered of the Congregation, was an hundred talents, and a thousand
seven hundred and threescore and fifteen shekels after the shekel of the
Sanctuary, etc. David, some suppose, did defraud the Sanctuary of that money.

Sixthly, In this sin, there was an express breach of Gods Law: this Deodat
says: for his Law was, the people should not be numbered that were under 20
years, but only those above 20 years, now David did number those that were
under 20 year. Exo. 30, 14 Every one that passes among them that are numbered,
from 20 years old and above, shall give an offering unto the Lord* Numb. 1. 3.
From 20 years old and upward, all that are able to go forth to war in Israel:
Now David numbering those that were under those years, did transgress the
command of God. That is a third consideration to you that say you never run
into scandalous sins: yet consider, that little sins may be so aggravated by
circumstances, as that they become grievous: suppose thy sin be secret lust,
and passion, and secret pride: thy sins may have such circumstances, as to make
them great: suppose thy sins be against checks of conscence they are great
sins, because they are against Gods officer in man; Conscience is Gods officer
in thee, and Gods Register, and Vicegerent in man; and for thee to control
thine own conscience against the accusations and against the convictions and
checks of thy conscience, though the sin be but a small trifie, yet it is very
great; He that doubts is damned, if he eats. The Apostle says, it is no sin
to eat meat, but if thou think it is a sin to eat meat, and do it, thou
sinnest against conscience. If thy conscience tells thee that it is unlawful
to do this or that, and yet thou will venture on it, the Apostle says, He that
doubts is damned, if he eats. If thou do any any thing against the rebukes
of conscience, it is a great crime; because conscience is Gods Officer in thee:
to eat meat, is but a trifle; the Question was, whether they might eat meat
offered to an idol, the Apostle says they might do it, I, but suppose
conscience in a man might say, I am persuaded that if I should eat this meat
that was offered to an Idol, I should approve of Idolatary, then says the
Apostle, thou art damned if thou eat: to show that if in so small a thing as
eating flesh, then in other matters also; if thy conscience tells thee, that
thou sinnest if do it and yet do it, thy little sin is become a great sin.

Secondly, the smallest sin may be aggravated, if there be a complacency in thy
heart to a small sin. A small sin that is indulged, is a more aggravating sin
then a greater sin thou do fall into with resistance. It is very observable
in Lev. 13. 12. And if a leprosy break out abroad in the skin and the leprosy
cover all the skin of him that has the plague, from his head even unto his
foot, wheresoever the Priest looks. Ainsworth admires and wonders what God
intends by this Law: the meaning is, the leprosy betokens sin. Now if the
leprosy, or the plague, or the small pox; if it comes out into a scab, and
comes into the flesh, and strikes outward, there is no disease within; but then
there is danger when sores strike inward, and do not come out in the flesh:
this Law has this use in it, if the leprosy were only on the skin, the man
was not unclean, though there was sin in his life, yet sin was not in his
heart: I, but says God, if the scab be in sight deeper then the skin, then
pronounce him unclean; to show, if sin be in thy heart and in thy life too,
though it be but a small sin, yet it is a sin that will damn thee: If I regard
iniquity in my heart, Psalm 66. 18. the Lord will not hear me. Therefore you
that are moral men, that say, you thank God, that you have not broke out into
gross sins: consider, though sin be small, yet your small sins may have such
circumstances, as may make them very great, sinning against your consciences,
or else sin seizing upon the heart.

the Gospel.

First of the Pharisee, in Luke 18. I thank God, says he, I am no
extortioner, no drunkard, no adulterer; I am not this nor that: the Pharisee*
was a man that never broke out into scandalous sins; what was the conclusion?
says Christ, that he that justified himself was not justified; but the
Publican was just^fied rather then the Pharisee: the Publican that had fallen
into extortion, by his office he was tempted unto much extortion, he was a
wicked liver, and yet went away justified. O! a civil honest Pharisee* a
Pharisee that never brake out into scandal, yet was not justified: a Pulican
that was a known and infamous sinner, went away justified.

2 The progidal son that ran away from his father, spent all his substance,
and went to live among hogs and swine, in this world, that is wicked men, yet
this man a pardoned man. The young man who told Christ that he kept al Gods
commands from his youth was an unjustified man, yet the prodigal that was
riotous from his, youth and confessed his sin, became a justified man, I am
persuaded the very intent of these Scriptures, is for this end; that civil
moral men should not presume on pardon, merely on their civil morality.

Jer. 5. 6. Wherefore a Lion out of the forest shall slay them, and a Wolf of
the evenings shall spoil them; a Leopard shall watch over their cities, every
one that go^th out hence shall be torn in pieces, because their transgressions
are many, and their backslidings are increased, Verse. 7. How shall I pardon
thee for this? etc. Because their transgressions were many, therefore God comes
with a question, How shall I pardon? Beloved, Suppose thy sins be not great,
yet if they be many small sins, God may put this question to you, How shall I
pardon you? Let me tell a paradox, that small sins are as hardly yea more
hardly pardoned, then greater sins are. And the reason is, because a man is not
so apt to repent for small sins, as he will be for great, because they are not
so visible, and therefore conscience not so apt to do its office to put a man
upon repentance; that is the reason of Christ's speech, Verily I say unto you,
that Publicans and harlots shall go to heaven before them, why? because the
Pharisees did depend upon their righteousness, and did not see their little
small sins: a Publican, a harlot, that could not but by the light of nature see
their extortion, their wickedness, and harlotry, they should go to heaven
before them, Christ told them of their sins and they repented of them.
Therefore though your sins be but small, yet they may be many, and that will
greaten your sins: a many small sins may run thee into deeper arrearages unto
God, then a few grosser evils. As in Arithmetic many small sigurs put together
amount to agreater sum then a few great ones; So it is in respect of little
sins. O then let me persuade you, that none of you would presume on pardon,
because you have not fallen into greater and grosser evils. Thus much for first
branch of the Use.

David did, Thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin, Considerations concerning
gross sins.
sins clothed with many hideous and heinous circumstances.

First, something by way of admonishment.



A child of God that sins though he be not under ejection but of his
heritage, yet he is under an interdiction thou may have a right to heaven, a
right to salvation, yet God has shut thee up that thou may not have the
manifestations of a reconciled God toward thee; this is astonishment to thee.



David did pour out a river of tears before God did pour in a drop of the oil
of joy and gladness into his heart; David brake Gods Law, God broke his bones;
therefore he prayed, Lord restore to me the joy of thy salvation, that the
bones which thou have broken may rejoice. It is worthy observation of what you
read of Mary Magdalen a notorious sinner, there was a woman which was a sinner,
that is, as some expound it, a knwn harlot, a known strumpet, says Christ, her
sins which are many are forgiven her: but did Christ tell these words to
Mary? no, Christ spoke these words to Simon, in whose house Christ was at
supper: mark the method, Divines make much use of this. Mary fell into a gross
sin, but Mary must not first know her own pardon; Mary was weeping for her sin,
and it was first revealed unto another that she was pardoned; to show, that
when men fall into gross sins, God does many times hide comforts from them,
other men shall have good hope of their pardon, more then they have of
themselves; let this be admonishment and a check to you to take heed of falling
into gross evils; for God may keep you long without manifestation of pardon.

Direction to. great sinners


I now come to give you something by way of direction: Have thou been a man
that God has left to thine own hearts lust? thou have not only sin, but the
iniquity of sin, sin aggravated; then,

First take this rule, Labor in the residue of thy days to be as eminent in
grace, as thou have been formerly notorious in sin: have thy lusts been strong?
labor now, that thy affections may be strong Godward and Heavenward: has thy
sin been clothed with many heinous circumstances to make it great? let thy
graces be clothed with many holy circumstances to make them great: though this
cannot make a compensation to the most High (for nothing thou have or do can
recompense God for the wrong sin does him) yet is this something by way of a
Holy revenge on thy self; the more thou have been notorious in evil, thou
should labor now to be more eminent in good.

Peter, Simon Peter love thou me? out goes higher, Peter do thou love me
more then these? there was this reason why Christ should ask him this Question,
because Peter had sinned against Christ more then all the disciples had,
therefore Peter must love Christ more.

Do I speak to any that have been taler by the head in sin, then any of their
neighbors have been? O! if thou have sinned much, love much; the greater the
sin, the greater the pardon must be, and therefore on thy part the greater must
thy love be to Jesus Christ; this is held out plain in that familiar parable
that Christ uses, Luke 7. 41. There was a certain creditor, Which had two
debtors, the one ought five hundred pence, and the other fifty. Verse. 42. And
when they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both; Tell me therefore,
which of them will love him most, Verse. 43. Simon answered and said, I suppose
that he to whom he forgave most: and he said unto him, thou have rightly
judged. The meaning of this is, the two debtors are two sorts of sinners, he
that owed a little sum he could not pay his debt: though thou have but few
little sins, yet thou can not satisfy for it. He that owned much was a great
sinner, as Mary Magdalen: It may be God has forgiven thee thy hundred of sins,
and thy five hundred of sins: O make good this Parable that he that has most
forgiven him, love most, the greater thy sin has been, the greater thy love
most be. It is thus with Mary Magdalen, Luk 7. 47. wherefore I say unto thee,
Her sins which are many are forgiven her, for she loved much. Her love does
hold proportion to her pardon; much pardon on Christ's part, and much love on
her part. O beloved let me here inculcate this on your thoughts: have any of
you been great sinners? have you been guilty of aggravated and heinous
circumstances? now find that your love does carry some proportion to your
pardon.

into the iniquity of sin? observe this direction, the greater thy sin has
been to God, labor that thy humiliation may be greater, that it may carry some
proportion to the greatness of thy transgression. It is observable of what you
read of three men in Scripture, of David, Manasses, and Peter, these all sinned
greatly; and their sorrow and lamentation did carry proportion to their sin, in
some measure; Manasses sinned greatly, and the Scripture says of him, That he
humbled himself greuly before the Lord. Peter did deny Christ shamfuly, and
Peter went out and wept bitterly. You know David sinned notoriously* and he
mourned exceedingly, rivers of tears ran from his eyes, he watered his couch
with tears: all this teaches you, that the greater thy sin has been, the
greater thy humiliation should be. An observable Law you read of in Lev. 11.
24, 25. And for these you shall be unclean, whosoever touches the carcass of
them shall be unclean until the Even. And whosoever bears ought of the
carcass of them shall wash his clothes and be unclean until the Even, touching
an unclean thing, a man was unclean; but if a man carried an unclean thing any
length of time, then says God he shall be unclean till Even, and he shall wash
his clothes. This law shows, that touching an unclean sin, requires an
humiliation; but if thou have born a sin, and hugged a sin in thy arms, then
there is greater work required of thee, he was to wash his clothes, He that
has continued in sin must wash his heart by humiliation and must take more
pains with his heart that has fallen into a gross evil, then those who have
not fallen so foulely and frequently.

Eusebius, when he came to confess sin, he used these words, Lord there is
none have sinned, as I have sinned, the Devil sinned, Judas sinned grievously,
but none sinned as I: The Devil indeed sinned, but Christ never dyed for the
Devil as he dyed for me, therefore my sin is a greater sin then the Devils:
Judas sinned greatly, but Judas never had the pardon I had; Achan sinned too,
but I sinned further then he* O labor to find out what aggravations there are
that thy evils are capable of, that so thou might come to magnify and
greaten the grace of God in thy esteem. A famous story of Austin, when God
converted him, and smote his conscience for the vanity of his youth; Aug. in
his confession.
how does he aggravate his sin when he was a boy for robbing of an Orchard, he
does aggravate that sin with many circumstances. First, I robbed an Orchard
merely out of vanity, not out of need, to steal for need is more tolerable,
though not justifiable; but when he had enough, that was vanity; then it was
not for the goodness of the fruit, but merely for the lust of the eye: then I
did not rob the Orchard alone, but I got others with me; then, it was an
unseasonable time of night; then, he went to rob the Orchard after he had spent
all the day in vain sport, then, what they could not eat they gave to the hogs;
then, says he, I wronged and injured an honest neighbor that never did me
wrong; O see how he clothed that sin with many heinous crimes and
circumstances, can not thou cloth thy uncleanness, thy oppression, thy
extortion, thy unjust dealing, with heinous circumstances? let me direct you a
little in this rule.

First, To aggravate thy sin, consider all sins against the manifestation of
Gods love are great, when God speaks peace to thee, if thou should then
return to foolishness, Psalm. 85. 8. this greatness sin: it was an aggravation
of Solomon's sin, that he sinned against the Lord after God had revealed
himself twice to him, 1 King 11. 9. And the Lord was angry with Solomon,
because his heart was turned from the Lord God of Israel, which had appeared to
him twice.

Secondly, It aggravates sin, when you commit a sin upon a slight temptation,
for a man to sin when he has little or no provocation, that greatens sin; What
made the sin of the Devil so great? it was this, that those Angels had none to
tempt them: for thee to follow the stews, for thee to follow thy lusts? when
the Devil does not tempt thee to do it, when the provocation is merely from
thine own heart, this greatens a man's sin; and thus in the Prophet Micah, that
men should sell the righteous for silver, and the needy for a pair of shoes. O
when thou shall recollect and say, how have I dishonored God, how have I run
the hazard of an immortal soul? when the Devil has laid no temptation to me,
this greatens sins exceedingly.

A third thing to greaten sin by is, when a man does sin against the checks and
rebukes of his own conscience; Conscience says, do not sin, do not wickedly,
and the man says, I must, I must, I shall lose all else. When Conscience shall
arrest thee, and accuse thee of sin, and thou shall stifle and put by all: this
aggravates thy sin.

Fourthly, The frequency of the acts of sin, to commit a sin once is not so
much, but to fall often into the same sin, this greatens sin.

Fifthly, Complacency of heart in sin, when sin is not only the sin of thy
practice, and of thy life, but thou delightest in sin; if sin be rivetted and
rooted in thy heart, thou art unclean: can thou go to God, and say, Lord what
grace is here land what mercy is here! that thou have pardoned great
transgressions, and those sins that I can aggravate by many heinous
circumstances; I have read my pardon, and yet I have now blotted my pardon:
can thou say, I have sinned, and upon a very trivial occasion and on a small
temptation, I am a drudge to the Devil on an easy temptation; when the Devil
can draw thee by a silken thread to a sin; O it is a great aggravation, when
Conscience arrests thee for sin, and thou will still be stifling the cries of
conscience: would you greaten sin, you are in a ready way to greaten mercy, and
pardoning grace, that is a 4th direction.

Lot of Zoar, Is not this a little one? do not say of wilful enormities as
Jacob did. Peradventure it was an oversight, do not mince the matter, and do
not lessen sin, but greaten sin. The reason why thou should not do it,
consider first by extenuating sin and making it small and little in your eye,
you will lessen the greatness of Gods pardoning grace: who will value the
skill and Physic of a kitchen woman? That Physician is valued that can cure a
deadly and dangerous disease: when a man's spirits are gone, and strength is
consumed, the Physician is prized: thou by lessening thy sin do lessen
pardoning grace.

2. By the extenuating thy sin, thou do lessen the value of Christ's blood.

3. Thou will lessen thine own repentance and humiliation: for what man will
labor after great humiliation for small transgessions? therefore there is a
world of wrong done to thy own soul, when God has pardoned great
transgressions, if thou should extenuate and lessen the greatness of thy
evils,

Sixthly, Content not your selves with slight and superciall repentance so
falling into great and gross evils, be not like Lewis the eleventh King of
France, when he did an evil against his conscience, he pulled off his hat and
took his Crucifixe and cried God mercy for what he had done; so many men, if
they can but cry God mercy in ordinary and general terms, they think they
have made a Compensation to Divine Justice. And thus have I done with the
second branch of the use in these six particulars.

The third and the last branch shall be by way of Consolation, Use 3.
to troubled and perplexed Consciences, Consolations against great sins.
that by reason of their falling into aggravated and heinous sins, do entertain
doubtful thoughts of their own pardon: five Consolations I shall lay down to
you from the scripture, who have repented of great and many sins.



Peter. Peter did sin more then all the Disciples unless Judas that was the
castaway; after Peter did humble himself and repent of his denial, Christ
did show more love to Peter then to all the other Disciples.

First, Christ appeared to Peter after his Resurrection, before he appeared to
any other, so Paul tells you in 1 Cor. 15. 5. And that he was scen of Cephas,
and then of the twelve, there was love in Christ, Peter did deny but three
days before, and Peter must first see him.

Again, When Christ was risen from the dead, he sent a messenger to Peter
particularly by name, Go tell my Disciples in general, and tell Peter that I
am risen, Mark. 16. 7. But go your ways, tell his Disciples and Peter. Peter
was crying, weeping and be wailing that he should deny his Master, and says
Christ, Go tell Peter that I am risen.

3. Christ does single out Peter after he rose from the dead, Christ has more
discourse with Peter then he has all with his Disciples else, Joh. 21. Thus
you see that Jesus Christ manifests love to those sinners that sinned foully,
after they have repented and are sufficiently humbled for their sin. Thus it is
with Mary Magdalen after she repented, what expressions of love does Christ to
her? First, we read that he cast out of her seven Devils, Luke 8. 2. Then he
appeared first to Mary, she was the first that saw him when he was risen:
Mark. 16. 9. Now when Jesus was risen early the first day of the week, he
appeared first to Mary Magdalen. Again, Christ commanded, that where ever the
Gospel came to be preached, the fame of Mary should be made known, Matthew. 26.
1, 3. Verily I say unto you, wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached in the
whole world, there shall also this that this woman has done, be told for a
memorial of her; what a great honor was this to Mary Magdalen? Thus it
appears that God does manifest to those persons that have sinned the grossest
sins, if afterward they shall have the more serious, and through humiliation,
the clearest evidences, and the strongest comforts.

Thirdly, Take this for your comfort; It is not the greatness of that sin thou
committest, but only the hardness and impenitency of thy own heart that can
exempt thee from pardon. Divines do generally say, that the reason of that
saying in Scripture, All sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven, but the blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven, neither in this world nor in the
world to come; It is not that there is not more merit in Christ to save then
there is guilt in that sin; but it is because that man cannot, will not, repent
of the sin; Therefore that sin cannot be forgiven, because he cannot repent.
Suppose thy sin be blasphemy, this does not exempt from pardon. It is not the
greatness of thy sin, but the Judicial hardness and final impenitency of
thy heart, that can exempt thee from pardon. when Peter preached to the Jews
that had a hand in crucifying the Son of God; yet says he, repent and your
sins shall be blotted out, O what sin could be greater then their embrewing
their hands in the blood of Christ? yet do but repent and your sins shall be
blotted out. It is not for want of great mercy on Gods part, and great merits
on Christ's part that men are unpardoned; but it is want of repentance on thine
own part.



that he orders thy very falling into sin to turn to thy good: I do not
mention this to any that they should be imboldened to fall into sin because it
may turn to good; O it is God that orders a man's fall for his good: A threefold
good that God does to his people out of their very sins, God does not only do
good to his people by their afflictions, but he does good to his people by
their very sins.

First, Sometimes God does so order that the falling of a godly man into sin,
shall abate pride in his heart; men of great parts are apt to be proud, God
many times will let strong lusts attend strong gifts, the more to abate and
keep under the exaltation of spirit, therefore says Paul, I have the
messengers of Satan to buffet me, that I might not be exalted above measure;
God does many times to keep under pride, let a temptation loose on a man, and
so God does him good that way. Austin says, I am not afraid to say, that it is
profitable sometimes for good men to fall into sin.

Secondly, It will prevent many other sins; here is Gods great mercy, the
putting of a man to pain takes away pain; God sometimes suffers a man to sin,
that sin might keep out another sin; one sin may be so ordered by God to keep
out another sin.

Thirdy, Falling into sin sometimes does renew the work of repentance, the Lord
sometimes lets them sleep that so he might awaken them by a greater
humiliation, and to taste the more of the bitterness and fruit of sin, here
then is Gods goodness to a sinner, that by letting him fall into a sin he does
thee good, and makes thee to renew repentance, and greatens humiliation in thy
heart.

Now for the finishing of this subject, Cases of Conscience
there are seven Cases of conscience that in this Doctrine are needful to be
resolved.

First, Whether God may forgive a man his sin, and yet the man himself not
know it: here David had sin forgiven him, and David did know it, I acknowledge,
and thou forgavest: but whether may a man have sin forgiven him, and yet not
know he is pardoned? I answer, in the affirmative, that a man may have sin
forgiven him, and yet not know that his sin is pardoned; though David did know
his pardon at this time, yet he did not know his pardon at other times, Psalm.
51. Restore unto me the joy of thy Salvation. God broke David's bones for his
Adultery, and David was driven to shed a River of tears before God did pour in
one drop of joy, Job 33. 10. Behold he finds occasions against me, he
counts me for his enemy. Job thought that God was an enemy unto him: and you
have not only the confession of one man, but the doubts and fears of the
Church in general, Lament. 3. 42. We have transgressed and have rebelled, thou
have not pardoned, we have rebelled, etc. Yet God had pardoned, and God had
forgiven them; yet here was their fear and their doubt, they lay under suspense
of pardon; God may pardon a sin unto the Elect, and yet they not know that
they are pardoned, and in the manifold Wisdom of God there are diverse reasons
for it; first by keeping them under a suspense of pardon, they may sympathize
with and carry more tenderness of compassion toward them that are troubled in
mind; it was one end of Christ's sufferings, his soul was in an agony and
under a desertion, crying, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? what was
the end of it? it was for this, that Christ might carry more compassion, and
more bowels of tenderness toward persons that are under deep desertions; Let
a scholar that studies many things, read in a Book, of the storms and
distresses that seamen are subject unto; yet by all he reads he cannot pity
men in a storm, if he have never been in a storm himself; let one read what
the scripture mentions of the pangs of a woman in travel, she cannot so
compassionate a woman in travel, unless she has had the pangs her self; so
in Divine things, it is experience that makes men have compassion.

Secondly, It is for this reason, to raise up in men's hearts a higher esteem of
pardoning grace; things hardly come by, are highly set by; what is the reason
that birds do chirp and sing more sweetly in the spring then in any other part
of the year? it is for this, because after the vanishing away of a long and
tedious winter the refreshing Spring comes in: Beloved, The Lord makes his
people chirp and sing in the sense of pardoning grace, rejoicing in that the
more, the longer the winter of desertion has been: when God lets them have
long desertion, then they do the more rejoice and sing when pardons are
attained: Men do then prize the shore, when they have been tossed by a tempest
on the sea. Those that have been tossed on the waves of spiritual trouble,
that have had a storm and tempest in their conscience, they will prize
pardoning grace most.

Thirdly, God does sometimes pardon a man's sin, yet not tell him of it; and it
is for rebuke to him, because he has not lived in the exercise of grace: thou
keep back obedience from God, and God keeps back comfort from thee: this is
a main reason why sometimes God pardons a sinner, and yet does not tell him of
it in his own conscience. It is done in heaven, the pardon is written there;
but it is not done in the conscience, it is not written here: It is to give
thee a rebuke, a check in thine own heart; surely I have not exercised grace,
therefore surely God will not give me the comforting work of his Spirit: when
thou art not much in grace, then thou shall be but little in peace, it is just
with God so to do.

Fourthly, the Lord pardons a sin when he does not tell that it is pardoned; it
is to make the repentance of men more visible and satisfactory to the world
that has been offended by their sin. The Lord will make the world see that if
men will sin notoriously they shall smart bitterly; to make the world see
that repentance is no slight work, and to make peace with God, is not easy.

Fifthly, to make men to taste the evils and bitterness of sin; should a man
that is notoriously wicked, presently attain the sense of pardon, it may be he
would not taste the bitterness of sin.

6. Another reason is this, to teach doubting Christians that assurance is not
essential to pardon, it is separable from pardon, it is separable from faith,
therefore from pardon. A man may believe, yet know not that he does believe:
The Lord does it for that end, to teach doubting Christians that though they
have not assurance, yet they may have faith; though they want the sense of
pardon, they may be pardoned: there cannot be fruit, but there must be a tree;
yet there may be a tree, when there is no fruit; there may be grace in the
heart, when there is no peace in the conscience; to have peace is additionall
to grace: now the Lord for these holy ends does sometimes pardon a sin in
heaven, when the pardon is not sealed to the conscience. Thus much for the
first case.

Antinomians say that a pardoned sinner is never afflicted for sin; and say
they, to say that a man whose sin is forgiven is afflicted for sin, does
derogate from the satisfaction and sufferings of Christ. Then the Papists say,
that men are afflicted and punished for sin, and that these punishments are for
satisfaction to divine Justice, and they are meritorious: and on this ground
they bottom Purgatory, that after a man is dead, he must for some years lie in
Purgatory, to satisfy for some notorious gross sin done in his life.

Now Beloved to keep you from swerving either way, I shall lay down the true
genuine state of this Question, and resolve it to you.

First consider this, That God does not afflict any man but where sin is, that
is my first position. God does not cruciate an innocent creature: indeed the
Schoolmen have a question, whether God by his sovereignty may torment an
innocent creature; but that is but a nicety; but this is most certain, that God
in the dispensation of his Judgments does punish no man, but where sin is, sin
entered into the world, and death by sin.

Secondly, though God afflicts none sinlesse, yet sometimes it may be for
trial and not for any particular sin; so was Jobs affliction, it was not for
sin, but for trial, to try Jobs grace.

Thirdly and chiefly, it is apparent from the Scriptures, that pardoned sinners
may be punished for their sins. Would not this be partial for a father to beat
the servant for a fault, yet not beat the child for a worse fault? Now the Lord
will not leave such a plea as this in any wicked man's heart. In all the
Kingdoms of the world, where sword, where pestilence, where famine, and where
plagues have been, the good have fallen with the bad; the righteous have fallen
by the sword, as well as the wicked: the reason is, that the world should not
say that he is a partial God. Now to satisfy and to establish your thoughts
in this point, I shall give you two express testimonies in the Scripture, that
God does punish his people for sin, though their sins be pardoned. The one is
of David, 2 Samuel 12. 14. Howbeit, because by this deed thou have given great
occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child also that is born
unto thee, shall surely dye. I will punish thee in thy child, I will pardon thy
sin, yet I will punish thy sin; so likewise in 2 Samuel 7. 14. 15. I will be his
father, and he shall be my son: If he commit iniquity I will chasten him with
the rod of men, and with the stripes of the children of men, but my mercy shall
not depart away from him, etc. A promise to Solomon, I will be his father, and
he shall be my son: but if he commit iniquity, I will chasten him with rods.
And the Psalmist, when he quotes this expression, referres it to all the godly,
Psalm. 89. 31, 32. If they break my Statutes, and keep not my commandments;
then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with
stripes. It was not only true of Solomon, but it is spoken of all the Church,
If they commit iniquity, I will chastise them with rods. See, here a Solomon
may be chastned with rods if he commits iniquity: nay, not only one man, but
all the Church, 3. 2. You only have I known of all the families of the earth,
therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities. If God be severe, it is
with his own people to make them smart for sin: he may spare wicked men, and
not punish them here, because he has his hell for them hereafter: but this
shall be all the hell of a godly man, and all their punishment. I, but this is
Old Testament, and thus the Antinomians take off, and evade this Scripture: but
does God so in the New Testament? Yes, in the New Testament, Romans 8. 20, And if
Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin. He speaks of the believing
Romans that death on their bodies was because of sin. And then the Apostle
speaks to the godly Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11. 29, 30. For he that eats and
drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation or judgment to himself,
not discerning the Lords body. For this cause many are weak and sickly amongst
you, and many sleep. Many godly men were sick and weak for their profaning the
Lords Supper: and this is under the New Testament, that the Apostle says, as
approving the righteous judgment of God, let not us commit fornication, as
some of them committed, 1 Cor. 10. Let not us fall as they fell, and many of
them it is probable among the 23 thousand were good men: The Apostle approves
of Gods Judgment to be righteous in that Act.

Only one objection against this.

Does not the Scripture say, in Isa. 53. That the chastisement of our peace was
laid on Christ? now if all those chastisments that were due to us for sin, were
laid on Christ, does not this derogate from Christ's sufferings that he must
suffer too? does not this intimate that Christ's sufferings were not
satisfactory?

The Answer is easy.

That when we say, we suffer for sin, and are punished for sin, understand it
thus, there is a great deal of difference between our suffering for sin and
Christ's suffering for sin; we do not suffer for sin as Christ did, because our
punishments for sin are not by way of satisfaction to Divine Justice, but only
by way of castigation from Divine Justice: when God does punish a pardoned man
with some outward Judgment for sin, it is no satisfaction, no compensation:
when the text says, that our chastisements are laid upon Christ: the meaning
is, Christ suffers for sin by way of satisfaction, he appealeth Gods wrath, he
satisfies Gods Justice for the sins that we have done: should we lose our blood
for a sin, should we give the fruit of our body for the sins of our soul, yet
this cannot make a compensation for sin: therefore it may well consist that God
punished Christ for our sins by way of satisfaction to his Justice, and may
punish us by way of castigation, as a father his children.

Now to ratify and satisfy your thoughts the more in this: that though God
does pardon a sin, yet he will punish for a sin: take some reasons for it.

First, Because wicked men that are punished for sin, would accuse God of
partiality and injustice, should he punish them and not his own people for the
same sin: wicked men would account God partial: but the wicked shall say, I
see Gods own people are punished in this life, more severely then I am: the
Lord does it to vindicate the impartiality of his Justice, that he will not
spare sin where ever finds it.

A second Reason is, Because God does command Magistrates to execute
punishments in this life for sin even upon good men; therefore if he commands a
Magistrate to punish a good man for his sin, surely he does approve of their
punishment. Suppose a good man should commit adultery, he was to dye for it:
suppose he should commit murder, he was to dye for it; if God did command that
p^^nall punishment should be inflicted on good men in this life, then surely he
might do it much more himself.



There are many Books in Print, made by several Antinomians that plead for
this, and they say that repentance is not a condition to qualify the subject
to obtain forgiveness, but only a sign to manifest that sin is forgiven, and
that a man is pardoned from all eternity, that before a man believes and
repents, he is pardoned: which is a falsehood, for to a believer the Apostle
does confine pardon. Romans 3. 25. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation,
through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness, for the remission of
sins that are past, through the forbearance of God. For sins that are past,
those sins you have committed and have repented of, he gives you pardon for all
them. He that confesses and forsakes his sin, shall fiade mercy, and he that
does not so, shall not find mercy. He that hides his sin shall not prosper.

I answer to this query, that God does pardon sin after a man repents and
believes, not before: and to give you a proof for this: First, I shall give
you the grounds from the Scripture: then absurdities that would follow if this
were not so.

First from the Scripture, Observe, that the Scripture does limit and confine
pardon to a repenting state. Act. 3. 19. Repent ye therefore and be converted,
that your sin may be blotted out. No blotting out of sin without repentance,
Repent that your sin may be blotted out. Act. 26. 18. To open their eyes, and
to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God,
that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among them that
are sanctified by faith that is in me. So that till thou be turned from
darkness to light, until thou be turned from Satan to God, thou have not
received forgiveness of sins: mark the antecedent word, he opens their eyes,
etc. therefore God expressly does tie forgiveness of sin to repentance: and so
in Joh. 1. 9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us
our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. There is first a
confession, this is a part of repentance, and then forgiveness.

Jer. 23. 8. And I will cleanse them from all their iniquity whereby they have
sinned against me, and I will pardon all their iniquities whereby they have
sinned, and whereby they have transgressed against me. Many promises, that when
men repent of sin they shall have ^in pardoned: but there is never a promise
that has any show, that before a man repents he shall have pardon.

Thirdly, the Scripture does lay all men under a state of wrath and
condemnation, till they believe and repent unless ye repent ye shall all
likewise perish, Luke 13. 5. I tell you, Nay: but except ye repent, ye shall
all likewise perish. Ephesians. 2. 3. Among whom also we had our conversation in
times past in the lusts of our flesh, fullfilling the desires of the flesh, and
of the mind, and were by nature the children of wrath, even as others, Verse.
12. that at that time ye were without Christ, being aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise, having no
hope, and without God in the world. No hope of heaven, no hope of pardon in an
unconverted state. Now by the sufferings of Christ, we receive pardon; a man
unrepenting, is a man without Christ, therefore surely without pardon.
Therefore the Antinomians doctrine does bolster men in profaneness: saying (in
a manner) to a drunkard, go on in drunkenness, for God has pardoned thee from
all eternity: but I say, Repent therefore, that your sins may be blotted out.
There are not only these express testimonies in Scripture, and reasons
grounded thereupon; but manifold and gross absurdities that would follow if
you should deny this truth. This would follow then, that there is no difference
between a converted man, and a man unconverted: and is not this gross to say
that there is as much comfort to a man before he is converted, as to one after
he is converted?

being justified by faith we have peace with God. Now justification is a
pardoning of sin, is Gods gracious act, and not imputing sin unto you; when the
Scripture says, I am justified by faith, and the Antinomian says, I am
justified without faith, where lies the error? Now then to say that a man is
pardoned before he believes and repents, is in express terms to contradict the
Scripture, when the Scripture says, he is justified by faith.

The Antinomians have this evasion, say they, a man is pardoned before he
believes, he is actually pardoned; but when he believes, then he has
manifestation of pardon. On this evasion, another gross error will follow; for
by this reason faith is no more isntrumental to justification, then as it is
declarative to a man that he is justified: whereas the Scripture says there is
more use of faith, for faith is an instrument actually to lay hold on Christ
for pardon; the grace of love to Christ, the grace of humility, the grace of
self-denial, and the grace of mortification; these do evidence and declare a
pardoned state as well as faith: this is to destroy the main use of faith, and
makes faith of little or no use in Justification.





Antinomians make only the decree and the manifestation, and leave out the
execution of it.

Secondly, observe this, That when we say that God does love a man from all
eternity, you must not understand it, that it is a love in purpose: and Divines
do give this solid and useful distinction in it, that there is a twofold love
in God, there is a love of purpose* and a love of complacency or delight: the
love of purpose is in God toward elect men from all eternity, that is, a love
where God has a purpose in time to do a soul good: but a love of complacency
and delight in God, is not in God till he be converted: before conversion, God
has not a love of delight, for there is nothing in thee that God should take
delight in: At that time ye were children of wrath: God does not love an elect
man with the love of complacency, till he be converted, until he does repent
and believe.



Does not God pardon a man before he believes, and repents, then what say ye
of young Infants which cannot actually believe or repent, you will not be so
cruel to say that all Infants go to hell.

This cavil is brought by the Papists against justification by faith.
I believe that Heaven is as full of Infants as any other rank of years in the
world; yet this plea will make nothing for those that plead for justification
before repenting and believing, this is only spoken of justificacation and
salvation of Infants without actual believing.

Thirdly consider, that there is a great difference between the state of an
Infant, and of men grown to years: the scripture tells you, Romans 10. 15.
that faith comes by hearing, that is in men grown in years they must get their
faith in an ordinary way by hearing the Word preached: but this rule holds not
for young Infants, because they are not capable of understanding, they wanting
the use of reason, and God expects no more from them then he gives ability:
faith comes by hearing, faith the scripture: but says the Antinomian, what
need I hear, what need I pray, for a man may have pardon without all? But
consider, that though children cannot exercise faith, yet children may have
habitual faith, as Divines say, children may have grace seminally, though they
cannot have the exercise of grace. Thou can not tell, says Solomon, how the
bones of a child grow in the womb, therefore much more how God by a strange
and a powerful manner can implant and impresse grace in the heart of a sucking
babe; yet there is grace in elect children: in an elect child there is seminall
grace, and habitual grace. As there is sin seminall in a childs nature, that
before a child can act sin, it has sin; so by the same reason, they are
capable of grace, you that will deny grace to children, will fall into the
Pelagian error, that a child has no sin: but a child has a depraved nature,
a nature enclining to sin; therefore when it comes to years, though it should
never see a sin co^mited, yet would it sin: a child cannot act grace cannot act
faith and repentance, that is true, but a child may have grace habitual; Mat.
10. 16.
therefore Christ took children in his arms and blessed them, surely they must be
gracious children; such children are pardoned: we know not how to express their
faith, but they have an habitual faith. And thus much for the answering of
that third case of conscience.



First, by way of comfort.



First, by way of Comfort.

The first answer is this, That it is clear by an induction of particular
instances in Scripture, that pardoned men have fallen often into the same sin,
this is most clear.

First, if you refer it to spiritual sins, to evils that are of daily
incursion, evils that are inward and spiritual, spiritual pride, distempered
passion, omission in duties; a pardoned man may many times fall in such sins as
these.

Joseph, it was a gross sin for Joseph to swear an heathenish Oath, by the
life of Pharaoh, Genesis 42. 15. Hereby ye shall be proved, by the life of
Pharaoh ye shall not go forth hence except your youngest brother come hither.
Send one of you and let him fetch your brother, and ye shall be kept in prison
that your words may be proved, whether there be any truth in you: or else by
the life of Pharaoh surely ye are spies. Yet the Jews were so well instructed,
and had such prohibitions against swearing, one should think that they should
not be guilty of so gross an evil; yet Joseph being in Pharoahs court among
heathens, he swore twice by the life of Pharaoh. And thus you read of
Jehosaphat, he fell twice into the same sin, he made a league with Ahaziah King
of Israel, he loved them that were enemies to God, 2. Chron. 20 35, 36, 37. And
after this did Jehosaphat King of Judah join himself with Ahaziah King of
Israel, who did very wickedly: And he joined himself with him to makships to go
to Tarshish: and they made the ships in Ezion Geber. Then Eliezer the son of
Dodanah of Mareshah prophesied against Jehosaphat, saying, because thou have
joined thyselfe with Ahaziah, the Lord has broken thy works: and the ships
were broken, that they were not able to go to Tarshish. Twice he ran into the
same sin. If there were no more spoken of Sampson in the New Testament, then in
the Old, it were questionable whether he was a good man or no: but what read
you of Sampson? You read of him first of al, that he married a heathenish woman,
which was against Gods command. Nay, he fell to the same sin when the
Philistims killed her, then he married a whore, chap. 16, 1. then went Samson to
Gaza, Jud. 15. 6.
and saw there an harlot, and went in unto her. Nay again, you shall find him
fall three times into the same sin. He did three times tell a lie, one after
another; when Daliah came to inveagle him on the instigation of the Philistims
that she should learn where Sampsons strength lay: first says Sampson, If they
bind me with seven green withs, that were never dried; then shall I be weak,
and be as another man. But when he was bound, he broke the withs as one would
break the thread in two when it touches the fire: then says she, why have thou
deceived me and told me a lie? then he told her again, If thou will bind me
with new ropes that were never used, then I shall be weak like another man: but
he broke the ropes. Nay, he tells her a third lie, he said unto her, If thou
weavest the seven locks of my head with the web, then my strength will go from
me, and this she did also, and his strength remained. But the fourth time he
told her truth, says he, If I be shaven, then my strength will go from me,
and I shall become weak, and be like another man: and she caused the seven
locks upon his head to be shaved off, and his strength went from him. I speak
this to a perplexed conscience; Heb. 11. 32.
that good men may be so overborn, that they may frequently act over the same
sin again and again.

Then Peter that did lie thrice as Sampson did, Peter did deny Christ three
times with an oath and a cursing.

Therefore this should be something to stay the doubting and desponding heart,
that not only sins of an unavoidable infirmity, secret spiritual sins, but also
sins that are more obnoxious to infamy and scandal, good men have fallen into,
and yet have been pardoned.

forgive our brother that sins against us in one day seventy times seven; Luke
17. 4.
if Jesus Christ calls for this at our hands, who have hardly a drop of bowels,
surely God that has a sea and a vast Ocean of mercies, can forgive a sin, and
will forgive a sin, though it be often reiterated.

Thus much for the answer to that question, as to the comfort of troubled souls.

Now by way of Caution, that this comfort the scripture gives be not abused.

Hildersham has on Ps. 51. touching David's foul sin. I do not read of any
express example in all the Scriptures of a godly man falling often into the same
gross sins after repentance, and after humiliation for that sin. Observe this
further, that though it be possible, yet it is but very rare, and though there
be instances that some men have done so, yet there are not more plentiful
instances that good men have not done so, I will give you a few instances.
Jehosaphat entered into a sinful league with Ahaziah as he had done before with
his father, but when the Prophet rebuked him; read the story, 1 King. 22. He
had sinned a once with his father, but he would not sin a second time with his
Son, so that, here you see a good man would not second time join with an
Ahaziah; So likewise you have the instance in Judah, that was in father in law
to Thamar, Genesis 28. 26. And Judah acknowlegded them and said; she has been
more righteous then I, because that I gave her not to Shelah may son: and he
knew her again no more. It was not again done, he knew her again no more, so as
Divines do usually urge it; Noah was drunk, but never but once, and that
before he knew the strength of the grape. David was adulterous, but never but
once: This therefore shall be one caution.



In the third place, Relapses into the same gross sin, are very dangerous and
deadly symptoms of a man in a lost condition, I do not say, they are such
symptoms that infalibly conclude a man to be an unpardonable man; I may say as
Physicians say of a relapse into the same disease; the second time is more
dangerous then the first; the reason is, because the first sickness feeds on
the ill humors, but relapse into the same sickness feeds on the vital
spirits: Beloved, the falling and relapsing into the same sin is a dangerous
symptom, it is a clear symptom of the prevalency of that sin. It is worth
your notice what symptoms, the Lord does give of the plague of leprosy for
the Priest to judge that disease by, Levit. 13. the first symptom was when the
hair was turned white in the fore; Divines accommodate that to a continuance in
sin to old age, that argues you are unclean Lepers. Another symptom was, when
there was raw flesh in the scab; Divines accommodate that unto a man being
adventurous to sin against a raw, a troubled and a wounded Conscience. A third
sign of the plague of leprosy was, when after the sore was healed, there
should a new scab arise in the place thereof: thus when after thou have healeda
sin, by vows, by fasting and prayer, by holy purposes in Christ's strength, and
after the healing the same sore breaks out, and the same lust breaks in upon
thee, this is a dangerous symptom.





But whether may a godly man that is pardoned pray for pardon of sin?
Antinomians account this to be needless; they account all prayer for pardon to
be only in this sense; to wit, of pardon, and a manifestation of pardon.

Rom, 3. 24, 25. Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption
that is in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, through
faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins
that are past, through the forbearance of God. And as sin is remitted and
repented of, it is pardoned; therefore that reason is not valid to take off men
from praying for pardon of sin, the Scripture does express it, I acknowledged
my transgression and thou forgavest. Math. 6. 12. and forgive us our debts as
we forgive our debtors. That Platform according to which we are to model our
prayers, the Antinomians would evade the Text and pretend, that in that Text
and such Scriptures we only pray for a sense and manifestation of pardon in
the conscience, and not for actual exhibition of pardon in regard of God.

To take off this, first, the next words in the Petition, are to be taken for a
real forgiveness, not a forgiveness in sense and feeling; for consider the
whole Petition, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass
against us; there can be no reason shown why the first part of the Petition
should be taken for sense and feeling of forgiveness, and the other should not
be taken so.

Secondly consider this, that in the same sense you must understand a sin to be
forgiven, as in Scripture language it is spoken not to be forgiven; a sin is
said not to be forgiven when there is an actual guilt lies upon a man; a guilt
abiding upon the person of a wicked man that is not taken away, Mat. 12. 32.
And whosoever speaks a word against the son of man, it shall be forgiven him,
but whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him,
neither in this world, neither in the world to come. They that understand
forgiving only in sense and feeling, must understand this clause, not forgiving
only in sense and feeling, and so no real guilt to lie upon the man: so that,

It is against the nature of forgiveness to be only forgiving sin in a man's
own conscience.

Camels, and some to Gnats; The Scripture compares some sin to beams, and some
to motes, some sins as talents, and others but as pence, and in Amos there is
mention made of mighty sins Amos 5. in John of greater sins, Joh. 19. 11. Jesus
answered, Thou could have no power at all against me, except it were given
thee from above; therefore he that delivered me unto thee, has the greater
sin. It is true, every sin deserves hell, yet there is more of the punishment
of hell inflicted on some sinners then others, the reason why I speak of this
case, is to let you know, that as God has suffered any of you to fall into
aggravated and heinous evils, so he requires more of you then of other men.
Consider, That God requires of you more humiliation then he requires of other
men: In the Law you read that if a man touched the unclean thing, he was unclean
till evening, but if a man bare an unclean thing he was to wash his cloths, to
show that the touch of sin requires humiliation; but the bearing of a sin in
thy bosom, thy continuing in sin requires more work then merely the touch of
sin; Peter wept bitterly for his denial, he did more for that sin then for an
ordinary sin. So that you are to consider, that though in regard of Christ
there is no difference between a great sin and a small; as the red Sea could
drown Pharaoh and his host as well as a single man; so Christ's blood can drown
a huge host of sins; but yet you must increase your humiliation on the
aggravation of your guilt; thus much for the sixth case of Conscience.



What are those great and heinous circumstances that do greaten sin; that so I
may see whether I have aggravated my sin or not; here are these circumstances
which do aggravate and greaten sin.

Solomon's sin, 1 Kin. 11. 9.
1 King. 11. Solomon was the beloved of the Lord, yet he provoked him to anger,
after he had appeared to him twice.

Jam. 4. 17. Therefore to him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him
it is sin. It is sin to another man that does not know it; but to him that
knows it, it is a greater sin; this Christ refers to and speaks of Judas that
would betray him; and yet knew that he was the Son of God: What, my Disciples
to betray me! his sin was the greater, Conscience is Gods Officer in man; it is
a greater fault to strike a Constable then an ordinary man out of Office; for
thee to sin against the rebukes and checks of Conscience, aggravates sin.

has given thee warning of sin from other men's blood; this did aggravate
Belshazzars sin, Dan. 5. 22. 23. And thou his son, O Belshazzar, have not
humbled thine heart, though thou knew all this; But have lifted up thy self
against the Lord of heaven, etc. Thou that know how a man is plagued for his
uncleanness; thou that know how a man is plagued for riotous living, yet
thou will live riotous, and thou will live adulterous, that thy sin is the
greater, thou sinnest against the monument of the eye, as well as against the
warning of the ear.

Fourthly, Sin against Gods judgments upon our selves, does weighten sin; this
did aggravate Abaz sin, 2 Chronicles. 28. 22. And in the time of his distress, he
did trespass yet more against the Lord.

Fifthly, To sin against mercies is an aggravation of sin, 2 Samuel 12. I
delivered thee out of Saul's hand, I gave thee thy Masters house, I gave thee
the house of Israel, and if all this had been too little for thee, I would have
moreover given thee such and such things; Wherefore have thou despised? etc.
What thou sin David, and have been laden with a heap of mercies? this
greatens thy sin.

Sixthly, It greatens sin, when the sin is immediately against God, 1 Samuel 2.
25. If one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him; but if a man sin
against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? If a man sins against God, O who
shall plead for him?

1 These. 5. 19.
Quench not the Spirit; a higher degree, there is a grieving the Spirit, Ephesians.
4. 30.
when there are frequent acts to withstand divine motions, that is a grieving
the Spirit. And then there is an higher aggravation then this, that is,
resisting the Spirit, Act. 7. 51. Ye stiff necked, and uncircumcised in heart
and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost, as your Fathers did, so do
ye: This is caused by pertinaciousnesse in withstanding the spirits motion. And
then the scripture speaks of vexing the spirit, Isa. 63. 10. But they rebelled
and vexed his holy spirit, therefore he was turned to be their enemy, and
fought against them: This is not only by one single act; but when continually
throughout thy course, thou have a wilful and a gainsaying heart against all
the motions of Gods spirit within thee: Must not this be a great evil in thee,
when thou do quench, grieve, resist, and vex the spirit? all these
circumstances must needs aggravate and greaten thy sin.

Eighthly, Sin is aggravated when thou do frequently fall into the same sin.



Jeroboams sin, 2 Kin. 17. 21. For he rent Israel from the house of David, and
they made Jeroboam the son of Nebat King, and Jeroboam drove Israel from
following the Lord, and made them sin a great sin. Thou that have sinned a sin,
and art a public person, thy sins are other men's sins, thine is a greater sin
then another man's sin is; for every act that thou have done, will be an
imboldning and encouragement of others to do the like.

David's sin in numbering the people, there did thousands of Israel die of the
plague; when thou sinnest in thy family, God may punish all the house for that
sin, this you shall find an aggravation of Abraham's sin, Genesis 20. 9. Then
Abimelech called Abraham, and said unto him, What have thou done unto us, and
what have I offended thee, that thou have brought on me and on my Kingdom a
great sin? thou have done deeds unto me that ought not to be done.

Sin is an aggravated sin when it is done by a man that lives under much means
of grace; where the Gospel is preached, where sin is reproved, there to live
in a way of wickedness, Mat. 11. 31.
greatens thy sin: that made a woe to be pronounced by Christ, against Chorazin
and Bethsaida, because they had the Gospel, it should be worse with them then
with Sodom and Gomorrah.



Oh then admire the riches of Gods pardoning grace, that he forgives sins
clothed with many aggravated circumstances; O then what remains? there are two
things to be done by you:

First, If at any time you find that you are under these aggravations, that you
can call your sins the iniquity of sin; O then you should admire and magnify
the multitude of Gods mercy, that great sins cannot outvie Gods mercy, but
Gods mercy out-vies thy great sins, Magnify pardoning grace the more; Paul
says, 1 Timothy 1. 13. I was before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and
injurious, but I obtained mercy, etc. O do thou say so, I have been thus vile
and thus wicked, I have thus abounded in sin, yet through the abundance of
grace and love, I have obtained mercy. O let this inhance the value of Christ's
blood.

Secondly, Labor to greaten thine own graces; have thou been notorious in sin?
why should not thou be great in humiliation, great in repentance.

And thus I have by the good hand of God in these Sermons, handled two
Doctrines to you, the one touching David's penitential act confessing sin, and
the other of Gods gracious act, The Lord forgave him the iniquity of his sin.

FINIS.
JOHN 14. 3. And if I go and prepare a place for you. I will come again and
receive you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also.
THis Chapter out of which my Text is taken, is counted famous by most
Interpreters, because in it begins the Legacy that Christ gives, and the last
Will and Testament that Christ made when he was to leave the world, and this
Will and Testament of Christ's, begins in this 14. Chapter, and continues to the
18. Chapter of this Book. The scope and drift of this Chapter, is to comfort
his Disciples, both against their fears of persecution in the World, as also
against their sorrows, upon this consideration, that Christ was shortly to
leave this world, and Christ does here mention many comfortable considerations
to fence them against their fears, for this much troubled them; It went ill
with them when Christ was with them, and they thought it would have been worse
with them when he was gone, and he does encourage them therefore by these
Arguments.

First, He says, I am but going to my Fathers house, and the 28. verse of this
Chapter, he says, ye have heard how I said unto you, I go away, and come again
unto you, If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the
Father, for my Father is greater then I.

Again secondly, he would not have them troubled because of his departure;
because says he, I do not intend to go to my Father alone, but intend for to
have all you with me, though you shall not go with me now. Though you shall not
die with me now, though you shall not go to Heaven with me now, yet you shall
be with me another day, In my Fathers house there are many mansions, I do not
intend to go to heaven alone, for there is room for you as well as for me, and
room for every believer in the world. Heaven first is a Mansion, a place which
notes a duration of Saints in Heaven, Heaven is not a moveable place, but a
Mansion, an abiding place.

Again, there are many Mansions in Heaven, there is room enough for Christ,
for his eleven Apostles, and room enough for all the Believers in the world, it
notes the largeness and amplitude of heaven, Heb. 11. 12. therefore sprang
there even of one, and him as good as dead so many as the stars of the sky in
multitude, and as the sand, which is by the sea shore innumerable: And besides
these there is an innumerable company of Angels, Heb. 12. 22. To this add Rev.
7. 9. A great multitude which no man could number, of all nations and kindreds,
people and tongues, You have here also the duration and continuance implied:
The word is here, not our tent or tabernacle, but our Mansion.

Thirdly, form the certainty of it: It is no poetical fiction; these are no
hyperbolicall expressions, as it follows in the Text, If it were not so, I
would have told you. Christ does not speak more then there is; if there had
been no such thing, Christ would not have said so much; as if he should say, I
do not feed you with the false hopes of an Utopian happiness, as the Devil
deals by his, whom he brings into a fools paradise.

Fourthly, from the end: Say the Disciples, but Lord, thou art going to thy
Fathers house, and what shall become of us? therefore Christ comforts them and
says, I go to prepare a place for you. As if he should have said, I go to
Heaven, to make ready Heaven for you against you die, as Grossi^^ observes,
that the phrase is borrowed from a company of Travelers which send one man
before as a harbinger to provide the Inn, and take up rooms, and make
provision ready for them against they come, so Jesus Christ is gone to Heaven
that he might be as a harbinger to take up Heaven for you, to take up room for
you in Heaven.

Fifthly, He comforts them by a promise of his coming again, verse 3. And if
I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again.

Sixthly, By this, that he will receive us to himself, verse 3. And receive
you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also, and we shall ever be
with the Lord.

I shall explain the Phrases when I come to handle them as they lie in order.

This Text contains in it, the most material and fundamental points of all
the Doctrine of Christianity, as,

If I go.

I go to prepare a place for you.

but I come again.

Fourthly, here is the great Doctrine of the Resurrection of the body, Christ
shall come to receive them again from the dead, and all the Elect with them.

that where I am, there ye may be also.

The first clause, If I go, its a good note that Calvin has on these words,
this conditional Particle ought to be resolved into an Adverb of time, If I
go; It is not a note of dubitation, if Christ should go to heaven or no, or a
supposition, peradventure he may go to Heaven, peradventure not, but it serves
for limitation of time when Christ does go to Heaven. A like phrase you have,
John 12 32. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me.
This he spoke of what death he should die, if he be lifted on the Cross, he
should save many by his death. The word if, does not note a dubitation or a
supposition, it may be, or it may not be, but it notes an Adverb of time, when
I am lifted up, and so in my Text, And if I go and prepare a place for you, I
will come again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may
be also. There is no difficulty in the first expression, If I go and prepare a
place for you, from which words there are two observations, If I go.

First, that Christ's Ascension or going up to Heaven, is a ground of great
comfort and great advantage to all his people while they dwell here upon the
earth.

The second observation, is, from the end and benefit of his going up to
Heaven, If I go, I go to prepare a place for you; That the great end of Jesus
Christ's going bodily to Heaven, is to prepare Heaven for all the Elect.



In the handling of this point there are three particulars.

First, I shall prove it to you by Scripture, that Christ is bodily gone into
Heaven, I prove it by these five arguments in Scripture.

First, by the Types that were before the Law, Enoch was translated and taken
up bodily into Heaven, where now he is. Genesis 5. 24. And Enoch walked with God,
and he was not, for God took him, this is confirmed by the Apostle, Heb. 11. 5.
By faith Enoch was translated, that he should not see death, and was not found,
because God had translated him, for before his translation he had this
testimony, That he pleased God. And under the Law, Elijah was taken up in a
fiery Chariot, 2 King. 2. 11. And it came to pass, as they still went on and
talked, that behold, there appeared a Chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and
parted them both asunder, and Elijah went up by a whirlewind into Heaven. So
Christ makes a third under the Gospel, taken up to Heaven also.

Second Argument to prove this Doctrine, is by Prophesies in the old Testament,
that Jesus Christ was to be taken up into Heaven bodily, three prophesies, one
in the 68 Psalm, there David prophesi'd of Christ in the 18. verse, Thou have
ascended on high, etc. Now we should not have known so full that this had
reference to Jesus Christ's Ascension, if Paul had not expounded this, in Heb.
4. and the 14. verse, Seeing then that we have a great high Priest that is
passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession.
The Prophesies that were long before Christ was born, did declare this, that
Jesus Christ should ascend up into Heaven, and in the 110. Psa. 7. verse, He
shall drink of the brook in the way, therefore shall he lift up the head; what
is that? It is spoken of Christ, I will set him upon my right hand, first he
shall drink of the brook by the way, he shall cry, I thirst upon the Cross,
he shall die and be crucified, then afterward he shall lift up his head, he
shall rise again and ascend up into Heaven, a full Prophecy in Daniel 7. 13,
14. I saw in the night Visions, and behold, One like the Son of man, came with
the Clouds of Heaven, and came to the ancient of days, and they brought him
near before him. And there was given him dominion and glory and a Kingdom,
that all people, Nations and Languages should serve him. His dominion is an
everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his Kingdom, that which
shall not be destroyed. This cannot be spoken of Christ's coming to judgment,
but then the Text says, he shall deliver them to his Father, 1 Cor. 15. But
the coming of Christ in the clouds here, is Christ's going up into Heaven, as
it is in the 1. Acts verse. 9. And when he had spoken these things, while they
beheld, he was taken up, and a Cloud received him out of their sight. And thus
you have it by Prophesies confirmed.

Thirdly, the Doctrine of Christ's going up to Heaven, is confirmed to you by
Christ's promises; Christ upon the earth did promise that he would go up to
Heaven, John 6. 62. What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he
was before? In John 20. 17. Jesus says unto her, Touch me not, for I am not
yet ascended to my Father, but go to my brethren and say unto them, I ascend
unto my Father; and to your Father, and to my God, and your God. Christ did
promise that he would ascend, John 16. 5, 7. But now I go my way to him that
sent me, and none of you asked me, whither go thou? Nevertheless, I tell
you the truth, it is expedient for you that I go away, for if I go not away,
the Comforter will not come unto you, but if I depart, I will send him unto
you. John 16. 16. A little while, and ye shall not see me, and again a little
while, and ye shall see me, because I go to the Father. I could quote you many
Scriptures, that Christ promised he would go away.

Fourthly, the Doctrine of Christ's going up to heaven, is confirmed by the
Testimony of the Apostles, who were eie-witnesses of Christ's Ascension. Gerrard
notes, saying, Jesus Christ did rise invisible, none saw him Rise, the
Scripture tells you that the Soldiers that watched were asleep, yet Christ
gathers all his eleven Apostles that they might be eie-witnesses of his
ascension, that they saw him ascend to Heaven, Acts 1. 9, 10. And when he had
spoken these things, while they beheld he was taken up, and a Cloud received
him out of their sight. And while they looked steadfastly toward heaven, as he
went up, behold, two men stood by them in white apparel; and so the Apostle
Peter, in 1 Pet. 3. 22. Who is gone into Heaven, and is on the right hand of
God, Angels and Authorities, and Powers, being subject unto him. So Paul tells
you in Ephesians 4. 10. He that descended, is the same also that ascended up
far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things. So in Hebrews 9. the
Author of that book tells you, that Jesus Christ is not gone into the holy
place, but is gone into Heaven it self, In verse 24. For Christ is not entered
into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true; but
into Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us. 1 Timothy 3.
16. And without controversy great is the mystery of Godliness, God was
manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto
the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory. And in Mark 16.
19. So then after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up into
Heaven, and sat on the right hand of God. I take the more pains to prove this,
because of what ancient Heresies there have been to overthrow this great
comfortable doctrine of Christ's going bodily into heaven, having our flesh in
heaven this very day.

Fifthly, it may be proved by the concurrent Testimonies of the Angels, who
were witnesses of this truth, Acts 1. 10. And while they looked steadfastly
toward heaven, as he went up, behold, two men stood by them in white apparel.
These two men were Angels, the Angels did give in their concurrent Testimonies,
that Jesus Christ did go into Heaven, and the same Jesus Christ that did go
shall come again. Beloved, I know not any one point in all the Bible, that is
so proved and strengthened, as Christ's personal and bodily going up to Heaven:
and thus much for the strengthening of you in the proof of the point. I lay that
for the foundation, because if the proof of it be not well grounded, then the
fruit of it will not be well regarded.

Secondly, what is the reason that Christ must have his body and soul go up to
heaven.

First, Christ in his bodily presence must go to Heaven, lest his Disciples
should be taken too much with his bodily presence, and never look after the
Communication of his Spirit. Therefore they ask Christ, Lord, when will thou
restore the Kingdom to Israel? They expected that Christ would take away the
Roman Emperor which was a heathen, and expected that he would be King
himself, Acts 1. 6. When they therefore were come together, they asked of him
saying, Lord, will thou at this time restore again the Kingdom to Israel? It
is for this reason say Interpreters, because the Disciples should not dote on
Jesus Christ, as to look on him as a temporal King, and look on him for a
temporal Kingdom, but that they might look after the Kingdom where he is,
therefore Paul has a passage in 2 Cor. 5. 16. Wherefore henceforth know we no
man after the flesh, yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now
henceforth, know we him no more. As if he should say, it may be those that
lived in Christ's time, that knew him according to the flesh as a lovelie
person; but says Paul, we know him in a spiritual way, to look after heaven
by Christ to look after salvation by Christ.

Secondly, Christ must be taken up into Heaven in his body to make a
compensation and a recompense to himself, for his sufferings in his body,
Phil. 2. 8, 9. And being found in fashion as a Man, he humbled himself, and
became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross. Wherefore God also
has highly exalted him, and given him a Name which is above every Name.
Therefore God did exalt Christ and raise him from the dead, and bring him to
Heaven, because he obeyed to the death of the Cross, and took on him the form
of a servant, Psalm. 110. last verse, He shall drink of the brook in the way,
thersfore shall he lift up the Head. Because thou diedst and sufferedst,
therefore thou shall lift up thy head, therefore thou shall ascend up to
Heaven, Heb. 2. 9. But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower then the
Angels, for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor, that he by
the grace of God should taste death for every man. For suffering of death he
was crowned with Glory and Honor, and translated bodily into Heaven, that is a
second Argument.

Thirdly, Christ was taken up bodily to heaven, it was manifest to the world,
that Christ was God as well as man, to manifest the Godhead of Jesus Christ,
therefore taken up bodily to heaven, Ephesians. 4. 9, 10. Now that he ascended, what
is it, but that he also descended first into the lower parts of the earth? He
that descended, is the same also that ascended up far above all Heavens, that
he might fill all things. There the Apostle proves that Christ going up to
Heaven, it was an Argument that Christ came down from heaven; So in John 6. 62.
What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before? That
shows that Christ was in Heaven before, therefore must he be God Coequall and
Coeternall with God the Father, and thus you have the second point dispatched
to you, showing the reasons why Jesus Christ must go bodily into Heaven.

The third point is, I, but what benefit and comfort is that to us, that Jesus
Christ is now bodily in Heaven? what comfort was this to the Disciples, that
Jesus Christ should leave them, that he must go from them, unto his Fathers
house? There are seven particulars that it is great ground of comfort to all
the people of God that Jesus Christ is gone bodily to heaven.

The first ground of comfort is this, Christ's going to heaven bodily, it
assures you of Christ's full Triumph and complete conquest over all your
spiritual Enemies; This the Apostle lays down as a ground of comfort upon
Christ Ascension, Ephesians. 4. 8. Wherefore he says, when he ascended up on high he
led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. That is, the Devil and sin
that carried you captive; Christ by his going up to heaven has led them
captive, that is, has led your spiritual enemies that carried you captive:
Christ alluded to the custom among the Romans, when the Roman Conqueror rode
to the Capitol of Rome to rejoice in his victory over his enemies, the
Conqueror did use to tie his Captives to the Chariots wheels; So Christ did
carry his captives by his wheels as it were, he led captivity captive; Colos.
2. 15. And having spoiled Principalities and powers, he made a show of them
openly, Triumphing over them in it. So that beloved here is one great comfort,
that Christ by going up to heaven does manifest and declare to all the world
that he has overcome the Grave, Death, Devil, and Sin.

Joh. 14. 19. Yet a little while, and the world sees me no more, but ye see
me, because I live, ye shall live also. As if he should say, well, I must leave
you, and I must go to Heaven before you, but because I live in heaven, and
live there bodily you shall also live with me in heaven with your bodies,
Tertullian does make this use of it to comfort the Christians in his days,
says he, Jesus Christ did carry our flesh into heaven with him, and he is of
our flesh and of our bone; Now says Tertullian, Jesus Christ has carried
flesh into heaven, and this is a good pledge unto us that our flesh shall be in
heaven where Christ is also. Therefore O flesh and blood do thou rejoice, that
have possessed heaven in Christ already. And Christ would be imperfect in heaven,
should not the bodies of believers come there also, because he lives in heaven,
you shall live there also.

Thirdly, Christ's going bodily to heaven, it is a ground of comfort to you in
this, because Christ is gone bodily into heaven, to perform and accomplish his
Sacerdotall Office, that is as a high Priest, he is now in heaven to perform
the Office of a high Priest to make intercession to God his Father in your
behalf, that your sins might be pardoned, that your souls might be saved,
that your bodies might he raised, and received into heaven with him in Glory,
Heb. 9. 24. For Christ is not entered into the Holy places made with hands which
are the Figures of the true, but into heaven it self now to appear in the
presence of God for us. Christ is entered into the very heavens, that he might
appear before God for us, so in Heb. 7. 26. For such an high Priest became us
who is holy, harmless, undefiled separate from sinners, and made higher then
the heavens. It became us to have a high Priest in Heaven. Therefore observe,
though it was a great benefit to the Disciples to have Christ's bodily presence*
yet Jesus Christ could never have fulfiled the office of the Priesthood to
make intercession for all the Elect, if Christ had not gone bodily into heaven.
Will you observe one Text in Heb. 8* 4. For if he were on earth he should not
be a priest, seeing there are Priests that offer gifts according to the Law.
Christ must go to heaven and there he is a Priest; now if he were upon the
earth he could not be a Priest for us, therefore we have great advantage by
CHRIST'S going into heaven. O beloved, then look on this as a great comfort,
that our Lord Jesus Christ is now in heaven in his body, flesh and blood,
appearing before God, making Intercession for all his people; this was typified
out under the Law, Exodus 28. 9, 10, 11, and 12. verses. And thou shall take two
Onix stones, and grave them on the names of the children of Israel. Six of
their Names on one stone, and the other six Names of the rest on the other
stone, according to their Birth. With the work of an ingraver in stone, like
the ingravings of a signet shall thou ingrave the two stones, with the names of
the children of Israel, thou shall make them to be set in Ouches of Gold. And
thou shall put the two stones upon the shoulders of the Ephod, for stones of
memorial unto the children of Israel: And Aaron shall bear their names before
the Lord, upon his two shoulders for a memorial. This is a type of Jesus
Christ our high Priest, who is gone into that which is so in it self, the Holy
of Holiest and there he has not only the names of all the elect of God
throughout the world on his breast, but has them in his heart, and there he
makes intercession for them to his father. This is a third ground of comfort
that they have of Christ's going bodily into heaven.

A Fourth ground of comfort you have by Christ's going into Heaven is this, That
Jesus Christ is gone into heaven to convey to you a fuller communication of the
gifts and graces of his spirit, which was bestowed on his people whilst he was
upon the Earth, Ephesians. 4 ver. 8. Wherefore he says, when he ascended up on
high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. It is an allusion to
the Roman custom, that when the conqueror rode in Triumph toward the
Capitol; he did not only lead the Prisoners, by the Charet wheels, but
likewise scattered money to the Spectators that saw him ride along in triumph:
so the Lord Jesus Christ having by his Ascension spoiled death and the Devil;
thus Jesus Christ does cast his gifts unto men, dispenses his graces in a
greater measure into the hearts of his people; not that we are to run into the
Soci^ian error, because of this text they gather that before Christ's Ascension
into heaven there was no saving gift of the spirit, and they ground it on that
text, Ioh. 7. ver. 38, 39. He that believes on me as the Scripture has said,
out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. But this spoke he of the
spirit, which they that believe on him should receive, For the Holy Ghost was
not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified. The Holy Ghost was not
yet given, because that Jesus Christ was not yet glorified, but this Text is
not to be taken simply, then it will follow that Abraham, Isaac and Jacob had
not the spirit, and then they could not be in Heaven, but the meaning is, that
the gifts of the Holy Ghost in that abundant measure was not given, because
Christ was not yet ascended; Christ did reserve the full giving of the Holy
Ghost to the time of his Ascension, and until he was glorified; therefore the
Apostles soon after his ascension received the Holy Ghost in a greater measure
then was given to the people of old: and beloved, not only gifts, to bring you
to Heaven, but also Ministerial gifts, to qualify men fit for the Ministry,
you are to look on this also as the fruit of Ascension, Ephesians 4. 10, 11,
12. verse. He that descended, is the same also that ascended up far above all
heavens, that he might fill all things. And he gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers; For the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of
the body of Christ. So that you are to look upon not only your own Christian
gifts, whereby God brings you to Heaven, but all Ministerial gifts are the
fruits of Christ's going to heaven.

Heb. 4. 14, 16. Seeing then that we have a great high Priest, that is passed
into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession, Let us
therefore come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy and
find grace to help in time of need. Jesus Christ being in Heaven it should
work a holy boldness in us to keep out fear and distrust when thou prayest;
because we have an high Priest that is past into the highest Heavens, Jesus the
Son of God. Who would not come boldly to the Court when he knows that the Kings
Eldest Son is his friend, and is assured of his love, that he will intercede
for him to his Father? Jesus Christ is the King of Heaven, the eldest Son, and
he is bound by office to represent all our supplications and make Intercession
for us.

I am to ascend, and after he was taken up into heaven, he calls them his
brethren. Heb. 2. 11. For both he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified
are all of one, for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren. Though
Christ was crowned with glory and gone up to Heaven, yet he was not ashamed to
call believers brethren; Now in Heaven Christ is thy God there, and Christ is
thy Father there, Christ is thy Prince there, and Christ is thy friend there,
and this may administer much comfort to thee that Jesus Christ retains the
same relation now he is in Heaven, that he had with thee in the world;
therefore Job could speak in a vision, I know that my redeemer lives, I know
my Kinsman lives, (for so the word signifies) I know my kinsman lives.
Christ did call his Disciples Brothers when he was in the flesh, and so he
calls them brothers now he is in heaven. Suppose thou art a poor woman that
do marry a man that is mean and poor in the world, why suppose this man
should come to the dignity of a King, it would be a great comfort to thee that
thou who wast but a beggar art now become a Kings wife; so though thou art
mean, in the world yet Jesus Christ does prefer thee to be his brother.

Heb. 6, 20. Whither the foreruner is for us entered, even Jesus made an high
Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. Christ is our forerunner, gone
to Heaven for us, Christ did not only dye for us, but Christ did go to heaven
for us, Heb. 10. 19, 20. Having therefore brethren, boldness to enter into the
hol^est by the blood of Jesus; By a new and living way which he has
consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to say, his flesh; That is,
having hopes to come to enter into Heaven by the blood of Christ, through
Christ's flesh as dying on the Cross. And thus much be spoken for the
Doctrinall part of this point, the point was this, That Christ's Ascensionor
going up bodily to Heaven is a ground of great comfort to Gods people whilst
they live here upon the Earth.

I shall now draw out some instructions from some circumstances in Christ's
going to heaven. There are five circumstances from which you may gather some
instruction.

First, from the time when Christ did leave the world and ascend up to go to
Heaven, if you read the Evangelists they will tell you it was abote the 33 year
of his Age, he left this world and goes up to Heaven. Learn thus much from
thence, that if Christ would leave the world in the flower of his Age, a young
man, then this should be fastened to the Meditation of you young men, that you
should not have your hearts too much glued to the world, to hanker after a long
life. Suppose God should take thee away now in the flower of thy age, be
willing and submissive, for God took Christ away so.

Secondly, you may learn some what from the place whence Christ did ascend, it
is very observable: It was Mount Olivet, Acts 1. 12. Then returned they unto
Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet, which is from Jerusalem a Sabbath days
Journey. Luke says, it was from Bethany, Luke 2. 50, 51 And he led them out as
far as to Bethany and he lifted up his hands and blessed them. And it came to
pass while he blessed them, he was parted from them, and carried up into
heaven. It was all one, but there is much of Gods mind in this, of all places
in the world Christ did make choice of Bethany by Mount Olivet to go up to
heaven: Beloved, the reason was, because that was the place where Christ was
taken when Judas came with the Scribes and Pharisees to apprehend him; from
that place he was taken to be crucified, and seeing it was from that place, he
would make choice of that place from whence he would take his rise to go up to
Heaven (...) of (...) Bethany in Hebrew, signifies a house of affliction;
Christ made that which was the house of his affliction that Bethany to be the
place of the translation of him into glory. I would give you thence to note,
that God does oftentimes make our sufferings to be Inlets to our glory. So it
was with Christ, from Bethany he was taken a Prisoner, and from that place he
would ascend up into Heaven, so if you suffer with him, you shall also be
glorified with him, you may be carried to Heaven sometime in ways of sharp
afflictions, therefore be not daunted at persecution, for the Lord makes
Bethanics, the houses of our afflictions to have a trapdoore in them to let us
into our Father Mansion.

Thirdly, from the circumstance in Christ's ascension, that just as Christ did
ascend, he was speaking to his Disciples things that did appertain to the
Kingdom of God, and as he was blessing of them, he was taken up before their
eyes. Acts 1. 9. And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was
taken up, and a Cloud received him out of their sight; Whilst he was blessing
of his Disciples, and whilst he was speaking to them things appertaining to
the Kingdom of God, he was taken away. I would give you this note from
thence, that when you come toward the time of your departure out of this
world, make Christ your example; Christ as he was going away, he spoke of
things appertaining to the Kingdom of God; so let your hearts be full fraught
with Divine contemplation, do you leave good counsel behind you when you come
to dye, that so some body may say, these are the last words of a dying Friend.
I might extend this example of Christ before his departure out of the world,
unto Master of families, that when you; come toward your end, leave good
counsel behind you; Let not your speech be filled about worldly affairs, but
let them be settled before, but leave good counsel with your children. Jacob
when he was to die, he called all his children about him and gave good counsel
unto them and blessed them. Likewise David 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. And thou Solomon my
Son, know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and
with a willing mind; for the Lord searches all Hearts, and understands all
the imaginations of the thoughts, if thou seek him, he will be found of thee,
but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever. And thus we see in
the instances of Isaac, and many other Servants of God, Moses to Joshua when he
was to dye, I, but especially take Christ's example, that when you are to leave
the world, you may have your minds possessed with nothing else but with things
appertaining to the Kingdom of God, as Christ was.

Act. 1. 9. And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was
taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight, they saw him by degrees
ascend into Heaven, this must not pass our Meditation, that a cloud should
take Jesus Christ out of our sight, it is for a relief to your Meditations,
that when you see the clouds, to think that these clouds that I see hover in
the Heaven, they are Christ's Chariot that did once carry him to Heaven, and
they are the chariots that shall carry Jesus Christ to judge the world; O labor
to have your Meditations on Divine things, he went up in a cloud, therefore the
clouds are called Gods Chariots.

Acts 1. And an Interpreter does think that there was an hundred and twenty
with Jesus Christ, when he ascended up into Heaven, and he gathered it from
Acts 1. 15. And in those days Peter stood up in the midst of the Disciples, and
said, the number of names together were about an hundred and twenty. Now
learned men do think that there was an hundred and twenty that did see Jesus
Christ ascend up to heaven, it is clear that there were the eleven Apostles
there, and if this be so that Christ gathered about him, his friends, when he
was to leave the world, I gather thence, that when you are drawing toward your
end and departing out of the world; Labor to have your friends about you that
you might give them the advice of a dying friend, and it is a great blessing
for to dye amongst your friends; Christ before that he would go up to Heaven
and leave the world, he would have his friends about him, and then he was
taken up from them.

I now come to draw out more practical application of this point. If it be so
that Christ's going up bodily into Heaven be a ground of such great comfort
unto the people of God upon Earth, the use that I shall draw, it shall be to
deduce four doctrinall and four practical inferences from this point.

Selucians and Hermiani that hold that Christ's Body is not in heaven, but that
it is in the beautiful and splendent body of the Sun, and they say, that is
the reason the Sun does cast such a glorious light, over that the Moon does;
and truly this old Heresy is again revived amongst us, and I have seen it in a
book called Divine Light, when indeed it is nothing but darkness; but Christ
is above the Sun, Christ is above all the visible Heavens: Christ sits in the
third Heaven as Paul calls it; therefore if Christ's Body be gone into Heaven,
they are in an error.

Germany held, that they were the very Christ, and thus in King Henry the
Eights days, there was one held that he was the Christ, and his side was
pierced and there was the print of Nails seen in his hand, etc. I, but if men
say, lo here is Christ, and there is Christ, believe them not, for Christ was
never on the Earth since his ascension.

Transubstatiation is hereby confuted, Christ's body cannot be in Heaven, and on
the earth both at one time.

Carpacratiami that hold, that only his soul did go to heaven, and his body
perished as others; and this cannot be, for the Disciples said that they saw
Christ ascend, and this must be his body, for they could not see his soul,
for the soul is a spirit. Now you see the reason why I spent so much time in
the morning in giving you many Texts of Scripture to prove this point: because
there are so many Heretics that do oppugn this Doctrine of CHRIST'S
Ascension. I now come to give you three or four practical deductions.

Genesis 45. 25* 27. And they went up out of Egypt, and came into the Land of
Canaan, unto Jacob their father, and they told him all the words of Joseph
which he had said unto them, and when he saw the wagons which Joseph had
sent to carry him, the spirit of Jacob their father revived. Did Jacob rejoice
to see a wagon or a chariot that would carry him into Egypt to see his Son
Joseph, and wilt not thou rejoice to think that death is a chariot to carry
thee to Jesus Christ, to carry thee to heaven? O therefore let not thy heart
be troubled to dye, because death is but a chariot to carry thee to heaven? Is
Christ gone into heaven?

Then secondly, labor thou whilst thou live on the earth to ascend to
Christ in divine and holy Ejaculations and Meditations. Is Christ in heaven?
then why should not thy heart be where thy head is, why should thou be
grovelling on the earth seeing thy Christ is now in heaven? It is a speech of
Christ, Canticles 3. 6. Who is this that comes out of the wilderness like
Pillars of smoke perfumed with Myrrh and Frankincense, with all powders of the
Merchant? Thou should ascend up to Christ though thou be in trouble in
the Wilderness of this world; O ascend up to Christ in Holy Meditations; this
use the Apostle makes of it, Colos. 3. 1. If ye then be risen with Christ,
seek those things which are above, where Christ sits on the right Hand of
God. The argument is, where Christ sits at the right Hand of God, set your
affections there: and so in Phil. 3. 20. For our conversation is in heaven,
from whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ. Christ is in
heaven, therefor our conversation must be where our head is. It is a notable
Text, Mat. 24. 28. For wheresoever the Carkase is, there will the Eagles be
gathered together. That Christ is in heaven it should make you ascend in your
hearts heavenward; It is true, there are some that wrest these words, and give
this sense of them, that they make the carkase to be the Jews, and the Eagles
to be the Romans, because the Romans did use the Eagle in their Banner and
Ensign of War, therefore they say, where the Jews were the Romans should
come* though this was a truth, yet not the scope of the Text, it is generally
overthrown by most Interpreters; but Gerrard does chiefly refer these words
to the day of judgment, where the carkase is thither will the Eagles resort,
that is, where Jesus Christ is in heaven, as the Eagles do follow after the
carkase to feed upon that, so the people of God shall be gathered about Jesus
Christ, and this I do confess is the chief scope of the place, and do
believe it is the chief intendment of the holy Ghost: but Gerrard he makes
another use of it too, and referres it to the power and efficacy of the Gospel
in this life; Christ is now in heaven, says Gerrard* and the Gospel shall be so
powerful on men in the world, that it shall make men as eager to come after
Christ into heaven as the Eagle is after the prey.

Lord Jesus Christ: do thou feel the power of the ascension to make thee
more heavenly minded, and less earthly minded; O labor to feel the efficacy
and power of it, else I might say to you as Jacob said to his mother in Genesis
28. 12. My father peradveuture will feel me, and I shall seem to him as a
deceiver, and I shall bring a curse and not a blessing. Nay, without
peradventure God will feel and try whether you are the men or no that have
right to the blessing; that shall have any real advantage and benefit by
Christ's Death, by Christ's ascension. God will try whether you do not seek to
deceive your Souls and deceive God himself; if so, you will rather have a
curse then a blessing, if you seek to apply the comfort of Christ's ascension,
before you feel the efficacy of it on your own hearts.



Act. 1. It was no transient glance of the Eye, but they steadfastly beheld
Jesus Christ, they saw him when he went away. Again,





Elias had a fiery chariot to carry him to heaven, but Christ had none, for he
went to heaven by his own strength.

Enoch, the body of Elias, and the body of Christ, all else in heaven are only
Saints and Angels; Enoch went to heaven bodily as a type of Christ's ascension
before the Law, and Elias unde the Law and Christ under the Gospel. Divines
say, that this shows there was salvation by Christ before the Law* and
salvation by Christ under the Law, and salvation by Christ in the time of the
Gospel, but there is difference between their going to heaven,

Enoch and Elias went to heaven, but they did not die and rise from the dead,
and then ascend into heaven, but first Christ dyed, and then Christ was raised
out of the Grave, and then within forty days he did ascend into heaven, there
was one difference. Again, they did not ascend to heaven by their own strength,
but by the power of God, they did ascend into heaven, but we have got no good
by their ascension, no benefit nor merit accrues unto us by their being in
heaven, but there is great benefit redounding to us by Christ's being in heaven,
for says Christ, I go to Heaven to prepare a place for you.

Again, Enoch went to heaven, but he could not give the spirit, so Elias went
to heaven but he could not give the spirit; I, but our Lord Jesus Christ he
is gone bodily into heaven, he has ascended up on high, and has given gifts
unto men.

Again, they went to heaven, says Polanus, only as Citizens of heaven; but
Christ went to heaven as the Lord of heaven, who is there in his body and in
his person, and these are the short and transient hints that I have given you
on the first part of my Text.

I come now to the second thing in the Text, to the benefit that believers have
by Christ's going bodily into heaven; I go to prepare a place for you.

I go to prepare a place for you. Now in the handling of this Doctrine there
are three particulars.



Secondly, I shall show you how can this scripture say, that by Christ's
Ascension heaven was prepared for us, when other Scriptures say, that heaven
was prepared for us, from the beginning of the world.

Text, that before Christ went to heaven, there was none went into heaven, but
all went into a place called Limbus Patrum.



First, By way of Representation, Christ is not gone to heaven as other men, as
a single and a private person; but Christ is gone into heaven as a common and a
public person; Christ is gone up to heaven with flesh and blood, and with our
natures he is gone to heaven, and he is gone there as a Representer of all
the Elect; Jesus Christ is gone to heaven representing the persons of the Elect
of God upon the earth. Hence it is that you have a passage, Ephesians. 2. 6. And has
raised us up together in heavenly places into Jesus Christ. We are not in
heavenly places, we are in earthly places, but we do sit in heaven; because
Christ is now in heaven, he being gone to heaven as a common and a public
person, a Representer of all the elect, Heb. 6. 20. Whither the forerunner is
for us entered, even Jesus, made an high Priest for ever after the order of
Melchesodec. He did not go there for himself, but for us. Christ did dye as
a public person representing all the elect of God, and Christ did go to
heaven as a public person, and has taken possession of heaven in our stead;
Christ keeps our inheritance there, says Grotius, Christ is said to prepare a
place for us in heaven, just as a company of Travelers, when they are going a
journey; they send one man before to be their harbinger to take up lodging in
the Inn, and make provision for them against they come to the Inn, our Lord
Jesus Christ is gone to heaven before to prepare a place for the elect there.

Secondly, Christ prepares a place for the elect by way of intercession, Heb.
9. 24. For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are
the Figures of the true, but into heaven it self, now to appear in the
presence of God for us. That as the Priest under the Law, when he went to the
holy places he had the names of all the Tribes on his breast, so the Lord
Jesus Christ our great high Priest, having the Names of all the elect not only
on his breast but in his heart, prays to his Father that we might come there,
and this Intercession is another way that heaven is prepared for the elect.

Thirdly, Christ is said to prepare heaven for us by way of Operation in us,
he prepares heaven for us by preparing us for heaven, and this is the sense
that Austin gives of these words. Jesus Christ prepares a Mansion for us in
heaven, when he prepares us the Inhababitants for heaven, here is the great
evidence for heaven: are your hearts prepared? then you may be assured that
heaven is prepared for you, Col. 1. 12, 13, 14. Giving thanks unto the Father,
which has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in
Light; who has delivered us from the power of darkness and translated us into
the Kingdom of his dear Son. In whom we have Redemption, through his blood,
even the forgiveness of sins. An unconverted man is not a meet man for heaven,
now when Christ makes you meet for heaven, he then prepares a place for thee,
1 Peter 1. 3, 4, 5. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively
hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus from the Dead, to an Inheritance,
incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for
you* Who are kept by the power of God through Faith unto Salvation, ready to
be revealed in the last time. So that beloved if you be kept for heaven, and
made meet for heaven, that is a demonstration that heaven is prepared for you.

I now come to the second Quere, which is this: how can this scripture say that
by Christ's ascension Heaven is prepared for us, when other Scriptures say that
heaven was prepared for us from the beginning of the world? Mat. 25. 34. Then
shall the King say unto them on his right hand; Come ye blessed of my father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world: Now if
a Kingdom was prepared for them from the beginning of the world, how does this
Scripture appropriate a preparing of the Kingdom of Heaven only from the
ascension of Christ? Divines do answer, that you must distinguish between the
decrees of God, and the clear manifestation and full execution of those
decrees. Now if you respect the decrees of God, then the Scripture is true,
that the Kingdom of heaven is prepared from the beginning of the world, for
the decree and purpose of God was, before the world was, that the elect should
have heaven as an Inheritance, but if you expect the clear manifestation of it,
then it was not till Jesus Christ Ascended, and the distinction this Scripture
allows of, especially in the point of Justification, in this point the
Scripture does clear this distinction, Heb. 9. 8. The Holy Ghost this
signifying, that the way into the holiest of all was not yet made manifest,
while as the first Tabernacle was yet standing. The meaning is this, that the
way to Heaven it was not manifest to the Jews whilst their Tabernacle stood,
that is, whilst their Leviticall Ceremonies were in use, the way to heaven was
not manifest, the godly went to heaven before Christ's time, but it was not
manifested, for the common sort of the Jews did not understand that by Jesus
Christ's Passion and Ascension they must come to heaven; therefore the Apostle
says, the way to the holiest of all was not yet manifested whilst their first
Tabernacle stood; So my Text is true that heaven was prepared for believers by
the Lord Jesus Christ his ascension.

The third Quere is this, but you will say, if Christ by his ascension into
heaven did prepare heaven for believers; then what became of all the people of
God and holy men of God under the old Testament? whither went they?

The Jesuits raise the difficulty from the Text. They say that before Christ
ascended none did go to heaven, therefore they make Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
with all the Patriarchs and all the holy men of God, to be in the place called
Limbus Patrum, which was for the good men till Christ's ascension; Then there is
Limbus Infantum, a place of receipt of Infants. Then there is Purgatory for men
guilty of gross sins, heaven and hell they concur in to be a truth; Limbus
Patrum, say they, was the place to receive all the good men till Christ's
ascension, and then Christ took them all into heaven; Protestant Divines do
take a deal of pains to vindicate this Text.

If you will ask me what is become of the Patriarchs and all good men of old
before Christ's going into heaven, how can they come to heaven if heaven be
prepared by Christ's ascension?

Gerrard does of Christ's Passion; Beneficia Christi valent non solum antrorsum
sed retrorsum. Ger. loc. com.
the Death of Christ it was availeable before it was in being, so I may say of
Christ's Ascension, that it was availeable before it was in being. Gerrard he
has another passage, that the benefits we have by Christ, they are not only
to be restrained to ages that are to come after Christ, but to look backward
to all ages before Christ. Revel. 5. 9. And they sung a new Song, saying; Thou
art worthy to take the Book and to open the Seals thereof, for thou wast
slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy Blood, out of every Kindred, and
Tongue, and People, and Nation. Not only the Lamb slain decretively in Gods
decree, nor only is the Lamb slain Typically in the ceremonial Sacrifices,
but also vertually, that there was virtue in Jesus Christ, that all the Godly
Jews had virtue by CHRIST'S death; there is my first Answer.

Heb. 9. 8. The holy Ghosts this signifying, that the way into the holiest of
all, was not yet made manifest, whilst the Tabernacle was yet standing. The
Grecians do observe, that Christ does not use a word that signifies to open a
thing that is shut, but to open clear, and manifest a thing that is obscure, it
was open before.

Limbus Patrum there are clear passages in the Scripture and undeniable
reasons drawn from the Scripture that does prove believers under the old
Testament went to heaven before CHRIST'S ascension; As in Luke 16. 22. And it
came to pass that the beggar dyed, and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's
Bosom: the Rich man also dyed, and was buried. He lived two thousand years
and more before Christ was borne, heaven is called Abraham's Bosom, and the
elect that dyed are said to go into Abraham's Bosom, and Eliah and Enoch are
in heaven Heb. 11. 5. By Faith Enoch was translated, that he should not see
death and was not found, because God had translated him. in the 16 verse. but
now they desired a better Country, that is heavenly, wherefore God is not
ashamed to be called their God, for he has prepared for them a City. He is
ashamed to be their God, therefore they have a City prepared for them by God,
that likewise, Lazarus was said to be carried by Angels into Abraham's Bosom,
this was before Christ dyed: then frequent Scriptures there are, touching
Christ's transfiguration, that when Christ was taken up, that he saw Moses and
Elias, from thence Divines gather that they must be in Heaven. There are four
undeniable Reasons will prove that the godly before Christ's Ascension they went
to Heaven.

First, it appears by this, because it is said, that those that were carried to
heaven they were carried to Heaven by the Angels, the Angels carried Lazarus
into Abraham's Bosom; now certainly Angels are not in Limbus Partum, Luke 16.
22. Again if the Believers of old should not go into Heaven, the Death and
Merits of Christ would be extenuated Heb. 13. 8. Jesus Christ the same
yesterday, and to day and for ever. He was the same yesterday, that is, before
he was borne he was of use then, as well as to after time.

Again, if the Souls of wicked men be in Hell before Christ's time, then the
Souls of Godly men must be in Heaven before Christ's time, that must clearly
follow by the Rule of contraries; now that wicked men went to Hell is clear,
Jude 7. Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities about them, in like manner
giving themselves over to Fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set
forth for an examples suffering the vengeance of eternal Fire. They went to
Hell before Christ's time, therefore it must follow clearly that the elect must
go to Heaven before Christ's time.

2 Cor. 4. 13. We having the same Spirit of Faith, according as it is written,
I believed and therefore have I spoken, we also believe and therefore speak;
and they with us had the same justifying Faith. Their circumcision was a sign
of righteousness by Faith. And then again, they had the same Gospel that we
have, Heb. 4. 2. For unto us was the same Gospel Preached, as well as unto
them: but the word Preached did not profit them, not being mixed with Faith in
them that heard it. The same Gospel, only theirs is dark, for the
ceremonial Law was Gospel, merely Types and Shadows of Christ to come,
Shadows of Salvation by Christ's Blood; Nay, they had the same Christ as we
have, 1 Cor. 104. And did all drink the same spiritual drink, for they
drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ.
And in the Wilderness it is said, let not us tempt Christ as they also tempted
him, they sinned against Christ in the Wilderness, and they enjoyed Christ in
the Wilderness: so that they had the same Christ as we have; Again, they are
under the same covenant that we are, Jeremiah 31. It is the same covenant with
ours in Hebrews 8. Is there not then the same reason why Believers under the
old Testament should go to the same place as Believers under the new? for they
had the same Spirit, the same Faith, the same Gospel, the same Christ, and
under the same covenant, therefore they must needs go to the same place,
though heaven be prepared by Christ's Ascension, yet heaven was opened before,
yet not so manifested before, as since Christ dyed, rose and went up to Heaven.

Jesus Christ by his going into Heaven has prepared a place for the elect
there, then learn by way of recompense, by way of compensation and
gratification to Jesus Christ; O prepare thou a heart for Christ who has
prepared a heaven for thee. Shall Christ go to heaven to prepare a place for
thee, and will thou afford Christ no corner in thy heart? thou let thy
lusts sit on the Throne of thy heart, yet you do not give Christ any room
there. We read in Revel. 19. 7. Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to
him, for the Marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made herself
ready. O be thou as the Bride, make thy self ready for the Marriage day, the
betrothing day was when Christ went up to heaven, thy Marriage day is thy dying
day; O against the Marriage day of the Lamb, do thou who art his Bride make
thy self ready, do thou prepare a heart for Christ, who has prepared heaven
for thee. Origin has a good passage on Luke 22. 12. And he shall show you a
large upper room furnished, there make ready, though he does much abuse the
scope of the Scripture. There were three properties of the Room wherein Christ
are the possover, a large, upper, and a furnished Room, he makes this
Allegory of it; I do not give it to you as the sense of it, but take his
gloss, that if thou will come to sup with Christ, thou must make thy heart as
the upper Room, a heart raised in Divine contemplation, and not only an upper
Room, but a large Room, a large Heart, a furnished Room, a Heart adorned
with grace; O do thou prepare a large Room, an upper Room and a furnished
Room for Christ.

Secondly, if Christ be gone into heaven to prepare a place for the Elect, then
we are rather gayners then losers by the want of Christ's bodily presence, we
should be less happy to have Christ upon the Earth, then now Christ is in
heaven; for we are greater gainers by Christ's now being in heaven, then if he
were in person with us upon the Earth; Divines illustrate this: say they, the
body of the Sun is fixed in the Firmament, and gives light over all the world,
now should the body of the Sun be taken from the Firmament and be upon the
Earth amongst us, it would not be of that avail to us as now it is, the Sun
of Righteousness now he is in the heavens, he is of greater avail to us,
then if he were upon the Earth; for if he were on the Earth, all the World
could not see him at once, so that we are greater gainers by Christ's going up
to Heaven, then if he were in person here amongst us, as God says in John 14.
28. Ye have heard how I said unto you, I go away, and come again unto you:
If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I saed, I go unto the Father, for
my Father is greater then I. Truly* it was matter of joy and not of grief that
Christ left this world and went to heaven, because he went there to prepare a
place for us. I would feign know whether Jacob would have been troubled for his
Son Joseph, if Jacob had known this, that his Son was gone into Egypt to
prepare a place for him and all his brethren, against the famine: surely it
would never have troubled him. Truly your Joseph, your Jesus, he is gone to
Heaven, to prepare a place for you there; therefore let it not trouble you,
seeing you are more happy by Christ's presence in heaven, then if you had his
bodily presence upon the earth.

Valens the Arian Emperor, when he did threaten Basil, and said, that
neither by Sea nor Land he should be safe from his power, yet says Basil for
all the Emperors rage, I shall be either in Heaven or under Heaven. Why so,
though thou may be driven to and fro, by Sea and Land, and having no abiding
place of safety to put thy head in, yet maugre the malice of Men and Devils,
thou shall be either in Heaven or under Heaven. A Cardinal threatened Luther
with this, that there should not be a place left for Luther in all the empire;
O says Luther smilingly. if Earth cannot keep me, yet Heaven shall. Beloved,
bear up your hearts, that though thou may not have an abiding place on
Earth, yet thou have one prepared for thee in Heaven.

Lord Jesus Christ* Christ dyed, but not for thee; Christ rose again, but not
for thee; Christ is gone up to Heaven but not for thee; he will prepare no
place in Heaven for thee, therefore thy case is, as was spoken of Judas, Acts
1. 25. That he may take part of this Ministry and Apostleship, from which
Judas by transgression fell, that he might go to his own place. It was to no
place of Christ's preparing, it was to a place prepared of old for condemnation;
In the phrase of Jude, Tophet is prepared of old, it is a place prepared of an
angry God, and not a place prepared by a Mediator. This therefore should be
matter of astonishment to all Christlesse and Graceless men: what though
Christ be gone into Heaven? yet thou shall never follow after him. What though
Christ prepares a place for all his Elect? yet he prepares none for thee,
thy place is prepared by an angry God, thou go to Hell, and not to a place
prepared by Jesus Christ. And thus I have done with the second Doctrine, to
wit, that the fruit and benefit that all the Elect of God has by Christ's going
into Heaven, it is to prepare a place for them, I go to prepare a place for
you.

The third main Doctrine is the Doctrine of Christ's coming again, I go and
prepare a place for you, but I will come again. Christ may stay long, but he
will not stay ever, but Christ that said he would go away, also said, he
would come again. To explicate the phrase. I will come again, what is meant by
Christ's coming again? Beloved, there are four sorts of Interpretations of
these words, neither of which are true but the last.

Christ is come) they make it of his coming in the flesh, John 4. it was the
woman's sense of the coming of Christ in the 25. verse. The woman says unto
him, I know that Messiah comes, which is called Christ, when he is come, he
will tell us all things: why, he was come, but she thought that he had not
been come; O says Jesus Christ, I am he, I am come already, so that the Jews
and the Samaritans did ever take the phrase of Christ's coming not to Judge the
world, but of the coming in the flesh.

Christ by his spirit, so some Interpreters do understand the words, but I
will come again, by my Spirit, and they make it agreeable to that phrase, lo I
go away, but I will be with you to the end of the world? but Calvin rejects
it, because the next words say, I will come again, to receive you to my self.

Christ's coming again to remain a thousand years upon the Earth, and for that
I shall give you several demonstrations from Scripture when I come to handle
it.

Christ's coming again it is to be understood as Calvin and most Interpreters
take it, of Christ's coming to Judge the world, as if he should say, I go to
prepare Heaven for you, and I promise you to come again, that though your
bodies die and rot in the Graves, yet I will come again and raise you up
another day, and receive you unto my self; It is to be understood of his last
coming. And thus much for the explication of the phrase.

Christ does here give them a promise of his coming to comfort their troubled
hearts. From thence observe, that Christ's coming again to judge the world is a
Doctrine full of comfort to every Believer whilst they are here upon the
earth; for the proof of this see 1 Thessalonians. 4. 15. To the end, For this we say
unto you by the Word of the Lord, that we which are alive, and remain unto the
coming of the Lord shall not prevent them which are asleep. For the Lord
himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the
Archangell, and with the Trumpe of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise
first. Then we which are alive, and remain, shall be caught up together with
them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, and so shall we ever be
with the Lord; Wherefore comfort one another with these words. In the handling
of this there are four Queries to be answered.



Answer. First that Tract of time can neither interrupt the accomplishment of a
promise, nor the comfort of a promise, it is comfortable that what is promised
shall sooner or later come to pass, Daniel 10. 1. In the third year of Cyrus
King of Persia, a thing was revealed unto Daniel, whose Name was called
Belteshazzar, and the thing was true, but the time appointed was long, and he
understood the thing, and had understanding of the vision. It is a promise made
by Christ to comfort you against all the troubles of the world, he will come
again, and though the time be long ere he does come, yet the time appointed
will be true, it is certain, though it be long.

and why should not the Disciples do so then, and why should not we do so
now? I will give you two or three instances, John 8. 56. Your Father Abraham
rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it and was glad. The promise was made to
Ahraham above a thousand years before he saw him, and yet he was glad, Heb. 11.
13. These all dyed in Faith, not having received the promises, but having seen
them afar off, and were persuaded of them and embraced them. They did embrace
the promises, though they were far off in their accomplishment. An excellent
Text you have in Isaiah 9. 6. For unto us a child is borne, unto us a Son is
given, and the government shall be upon his shoulders, etc. Behold, this is
matter of joy, for to us a child is borne, and unto us a Son is given, they
might have said, Lord what is that to us? we hear of garments rolled in
blood, and of the confused noise of Warriers, and do thou tell us of that
which shall not be till many years after? and yet the Prophet does think no
fitter a promise to give them, then the the promise that a Virgin should
conceive a Son. I mention it for this, that though promises were made long
since, yet bear up your hearts, for that it will be sure and certain though it
be long: and so much for the first particular.

The next particular is, I, but how does it appear that Christ's coming to
judge the world is a Doctrine so full of comfort to believers?

Christ's coming to judge the world, it is the people of Gods property to long
for the appearance of Christ, when it makes the heart of a Felix to tremble, it
is a Doctrine of Great comfort to a Believer, it is called the day of
Redemption, and called by Peter the day of refreshing, and this made the Church
say, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, this shows that to the People of God there
is no Doctrine so comfortable as the Doctrine of Christ's coming to judge the
world, Titus 1. 13. Looking for that blessed hope and the glorious appearing of
the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. 2 Peter 3. 12. Looking for and
hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the heavens being on fire,
shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, 2 Timothy 4. 8.
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord
the righteous judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but unto
them all that love his appearing. A crown is laid up for me, and not for me
only, but for all them that love his appearing. This shows that surely it must
be a Doctrine of great comfort to the elect of God, because they so long and
look for, and love the coming of Jesus Christ.

1 John 3. 2. Beloved, now are we the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear
what we shall be, but We know that when he shall appear, we shall be
like him, for we shall see him as he is: and in Colos. 3. 4. When Christ, who
is our Life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory. God
has reserved the full glorification of the Elect against the time of his
coming, 1 Peter 5. 4. And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall
receive a Crown of Glory that fades not away. Frequent Texts of Scripture there
are, to prove, that the reserve that Christ has of the full glorifying of the
Elect, it is at the time of his coming to judge the world.



1 Cor. 4. 3, 4, But with with me it is a very small thing that I should be
judged of you, or of man's judgments, yea, I judge not my own self. For I
know nothing by my self, yet am I not hereby justified, but he that judges
me, is the Lord. Censure me what you will, and judge of me what you please,
for he that judges me shall be the Lord, therefore it is a small matter that
I am judged of you. Suppose thou art judged, thou art scandalized, and thou art
aspersed in the world, appeal to Jesus Christ in Heaven, for he that judges
thee is the Lord, and this we find Christ did, 1 Peter 2. 23. who when he
was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not, but
committed himself to him that judges righteously. When thou art reviled, and
aspersed, and censured, do not revile again, do not censure again, but do as
Christ did, commit thy cause to Christ that judges all things righteously.
Christ will come to over-judge all things that have been judged amiss, Jude,
5. To execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly amongst
them, of all their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed; and of all
their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have spoken against him. Men have
hard speeches against many, who are upright in the Land; it is a comfort then
that of Christ's coming again, one end is, to convince men of all their hard
speeches and scandalous aspersions.

1 Thessalonians. 1. 6, 7. Seeing it is a righteous thing with God, to recompense
tribulation to them that trouble you: And to you who are troubled, rest with
us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels.
As if he should have said, you are troubled and persecuted about the Gospel,
for Christ's sake, why, be not troubled, for Christ is coming from Heaven, 1
Peter 4. 13. But rejoice, in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings,
that when his Glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding
joy. when Christ comes to be revealed and to judge the world, you shall be glad
also with exceeding joy, that is a second case wherein this Doctrine may be of
comfort.

Thirdly, this Doctrine may serve for comfort, in case of any inward accusation
of conscience from the apprehension of thine own guiltiness: it may be thou
judge thy self that thou art a damned undone Creature* remember, that there
is a Judgment to pass on thee besides thy own mistake and misapprehension,
Christ's coming to Judgment should be a comfort to thee against thine own
inward accusation, because he that is thy Jesus, is thy Judge, he is thy
Advocate to plead thy cause, and thy Judge to judge thy cause; Suppose thy
conscience does accuse thee, and thou judge thy self to Hell, yet comfort
thy self with this, that thy Jesus will afterward come to judge thee.

Jerome says, that Christ shall come to judge things that are not judged in
the world, and Christ shall come to judge things that are judged amiss in the
world; Christ shall judge all oppressions and violence which is done by an
usurping hand; here is matter of comfort that Christ comes to judge them all
over again; an excellent passage which Solomon has, Eccle. 3. 16, 17. And
moreover I saw under the Sun the place of judgment, that wickedness was
there, and the place of righteousness, that iniquity was there. I said in my
heart, God shall judge the righteous and the wicked: for there is a time there,
for every purpose, and for every work. That is, I saw into Courts of
Judicature, and I saw wickedness was there, and I looked into the place of
righteousness, and behold iniquity was there then I said in my heart, surely
God shall judge both the righteous and the wicked; if there were no argument in
all the Scripture to prove Christ's coming again, this argument it will evince
that Christ shall come to judge the world, there must be a judging over
again; there shall be a general Judgment, because there is so much
perverting of judgment here below: and thus you have wherein, or in what cases
the Doctrine of Christ's coming may serve for comfort.



First, To all tempted and troubled by Satan: this is the time of accomplishing
that promise, Romans 16. he shall tread Satan under your feet shortly.

Secondly, To all persecuted and opposed by men, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6* 7. Seeing it is
a righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation to them which trouble
you, and to you, who are troubled, rest with us: When the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels.

Thirdly, to all merciful ones, Mat. 25. 34, 35, 36. Then shall the King say
to them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world. For I was an hungered, and
ye gave me meat; I was thirsty and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger and
ye took me in, etc. 2 Timothy 1. 16, 18. The Lord give mercy unto the house
Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain. The
Lord grant unto him, that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day.

Fourthly, to all that can lay a grounded claim of interest in Jesus Christ:
His coming again will be comfortable then, 1 John 2. 28. And now little
children abide in him, that when he shall appear, we may have confidence,
and not be ashamed before him at his coming.

Fifthly, Christ's coming again will be comfortable to all that judge
themselves, 1 Cor. 11. 31. For if we would judge our selves, we should not be
judged.

Sixthly, to all them that watch and pray, Luke 21* 36. Watch ye therefore and
pray always, that ye may be counted worthy to escape all these things that
shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man.

Seventhly, to all believers it will be very comfortable, 1 Pet. 1. 7. That
the trial of your Faith, being much more pretio^s, then of Gold that
perishes, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise, and Honor
and Glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ.

I now come to the Application of the point, by way of caution; there are four
cautions that are to be noted.

1 Cor. 1. 7. So that ye come behind in no gift, waiting for the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1. Now we beseech you Brethren by the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye be not soon shaken in your minds. He presses
them to duty on this Doctrine by the coming of Jesus Christ. Now to speak
distinctly to the caution, there are duties that the Doctrine of Christ's coming
is serviceable unto.

Iam. 5. 8. Be ye all patient, stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord
draws nigh.

1 Cor. 1. 7. So that ye come behind in no gifts, waiting for the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ. The waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, it
should provoke you to a holy improvement of growth under Ordinances, for Christ
will call you to an account of your hearing, Revel. 22. 17. And the Spirit and
the Bride say, come; and let him that hears say come. Thou that art an
unfaithful hearer, an unprofitable hearer, thou dare not say as the spirit
says, Lord come, Lord come, but he that grows better by hearing, he will
say, Lord come, Lord come, a notable Text, Mat. 25. 22. He also that had
received two Talents, came and said, Lord, thou deliveredst unto me two
Talents, behold I have gained two other Talents besides them, his Lord said
unto him, well done, good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful over
a few things, I will make thee Ruler over many things* enter thou into joy of
thy Lord. This is Christ's Language as Divines interpret, that when he will
come to judge the world, he will call thee, well done thou good and faithful
servant, thou have improved thy gifts well, thou have improved thy Talents well.

Austine, that when Christ shall come he might find me either Preaching or
Praying. Aut precantem aut predicantem.
Labor then to be about your work when Christ comes, for Christ to come and
find thee in the stews, and to find thee working of wickedness; O how unmeet
art thou for Christ's coming!

Fourthly, this Doctrine it should be a spur to you to moderate the the use
of lawful comforts, Phil. 4. 15. Let your moderation be known unto all men.
The Lord is at hand, Luke 21. 34. And take heed to your selves, lest at any
time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares
of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares. It was Christ's counsel
to his Apostles 1 Peter 4. 7. But the end of all things is at hand, be ye
therefore sober and watch unto Prayer.

Acts 17. 30, 31. And the times of this Ignorance God winked (...), but now
commands all Men every where to repent. Because he has appointed a day in
the which he will judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom he has
or- The Doctrine of Gods appointing the day for the Man Christ to judge the
world, it should be a spur to the grace of Repentance, that now every man
every where should repent, Christ's coming should be a spur to repentance.

Acts 24. 15, 16. And has hope toward God; which they themselves also allow,
that there shall be a resurrection of the Death, both of the just and the
unjust. And herein do I exercise my self to have always a conscience void of
offense toward God and toward men. The thoughts of Christ's coming to judge
the Quick and the Dead should make you have thoughts, to get a good conscience
void of offense toward God and Man, 2 Pet. 3. 11. Seeing then that all these
things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy
conversation and godliness? And thus much for the first caution, that you are
to look on the coming of Christ as a Doctrine serviceable as well for duty as
comfort.



the place from whence he comes; but as Christ shall come as Lightning, it
notes the visibility of Christ's coming, and the celerity of Christ's coming;
Lightning it is visible, and so shall Christ's coming be, all shall see him as
ye see Lightning; Now this bold attempt has been the foundation to many
Superstitions Opinions; it is the reason of bowing and c^inging toward the
East. All rose merely from that ground of Christ's coming from the East; the
Scripture only says, that he shall come down from Heaven, and the Lord
shall come from Heaven, but from what part of the heaven the scripture speaks
not.

Again, pass not bold conjectures in determining the place where Christ shall
come to judge the world: many men where the Scripture is silent do run into
many strong conceits to determine that which the Scripture does not, many Books
do determine the place where Christ shall come to judge the world, and that is
in the Valley of Iehoshaphat, and there is one Text which seems to carry it
that way; which is in Joel 3. 12. Let the Heathen be awaked, and come up to
the Valley of Iehoshaphat, for there will I sit to judge all the Heathen round
about. Here they do conjecture that Christ shall come to the Valley of
Iehoshaphat, and there he shall judge all the world, and I shall, to show the
vanity and wickedness of these, give these five demonstrations.

First, it is not spoken of God the Son, but of God the father, to be thy
judge, therefore it cannot have a reference to the last Judgment, for Christ
judges then.



Iehoshaphat should contain all the men that ever were, that are, and that
shall be in the world to be judged, therefore it is not profitable that this
has reference to the last Judgment.

Fourthly, the time that this judgment, here is spoken of, it is limited by
the prophet himself; for compare this verse with the second verse; I will also
gather all Nations, and will bring them down into the Valley of Jehoshaphat,
and will plead with them there for my People, and for my heritage Israel, whom
they have scattered among the Nations, and parted my Land. The time is spoken
of when God shall turn again the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem, then God
should judge the Babylonians, and those heathen Nations that assisted them for
to undo the people of God; therefore it refers to some time after the captivity*
and not to the general and last coming of the Son of God: and thus much for
taking off that Text from yielding patronage to that fond conceit of Christ's
coming to judge the world in the Valley of Iehoshaphat, and the Scripture is
far from giving you the place where Christ shall come to judgment, either in
the Valley of Iehoshaphat or Mount Olivet, out only in the air. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 7.
Then we which are alive, and remain, shall be caught up together with them
in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, and so shall we ever be with the
Lord. The Scripture does make no mention of Christ's coming upon the Earth at
all. Take heed of bold attempts and conjectures about the place of Christ's
judgment.

Gerrard does confute the folly of such men that do guess at the time when
Christ shall come to judge the world. Austin does make mention of some in his
time, that held that Christ should come to judge the world a thousand years
after his Death, but we have seen their folly and shame, for there is more
time expired then that. Another says, that some held in his time that Christ
should come to judge the world 365. years after his Death, that is a folly
likewise, for there is more time past then that. Luther says, that there were
Anabapists which held that in the year 1530 Christ should come to judge the
world but we have seen their folly likewise, for there is more time past then
then that. Napier, though a learned Nobleman in Scotland, he was too frolic
in this way, for he does boldly say that Christ shall come to judge the world
in the year 1688. But beloved, Christ's coming to judge the world cannot be
determined, for Christ would not gratify his own Apostles to tell them the
time when his coming should be, Mat. 24. He would not tell them when the end
of the word should be; it shows then it is great pride of heart to pass
peremptory conjectures upon the period of time, Christ did not think it meet
for to tell his Apostles of the time of his coming, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 1. But of the
times and seasons, Brethren, ye have no need that I write unto you, nay,
Angels in heaven, and Christ himself as he was mere Man could not tell the
time, Mark 13. 32. But of that day, and that hour, knows no man, no not the
Angels which are in heaven, neither the Son but the Father. Mat. 24. 36. But
of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels of Heaven, but my
father only. I only mention it for this, to show the vanity of our age, of
those who will undertake to show the very day when Christ should come; Likewise
to condemn the former Ages, who run to things not revealed, I remember what a
learned Man says, one that commenteth upon my Text, says he, there is
nothing that does expose the Christian Religion to more contempt, then that the
Preachers, and the hearers of it will run into nice questions, and be
peremptory in their resolves of that the Scripture speaks not of; And Jews and
Gentiles may suspect the whole Gospel, because they see Men peremptory about
things which are not revealed in the Gospel, and shall see their false-hood
appearing to all; be not peremptory in your determinations about the time of
Christ's coming, nor about the place where, for neither is revealed in Scripture
Christ did deny his Disciples when they asked him where he should come* Luke
17. 37. And they answered and said, where Lord? And he said unto them, where
the body is, thither will the Eagles be gathered together. Christ told them of
the destruction of Jerusalem, and of the end of the Wo^ld; then said the
Disciples, but where Lord will thou come? Christ only gives them this answer,
that where the carcass is, thither will the Eagles flee, that is where Christ
is, all the Elect shall be gathered, as Birds of prey flock together after a
carcasset o feed upon; so that Christ would neither tell the place where, nor
the time when, and this should be a check and a control to men's curious
pryings about that which the Scripture is silent in.

Lastly, take heed of bold and adventurous conjectures, about the manner of
Christ's coming to judge the World by vain and carnal corruptions of a
temporal Kingdom of Christ. Many are very peremptory about it, and there be
strange Books, at least in their own expressions, that they can descry the very
manner of his coming, that Christ shall come from heaven, and dwell a thousand
years upon the Earth, and the Dead shall rise and live in the World, but these
are such things which the Scripture does never take notice of. I am to handle
on this promise of Christ, but I will come again, A perplexed Quere, which is
this, whether Christ Jesus in promising to his Disciples to come again, did
mean to come to Reign upon the Earth here a thousand years, or whether it be
to be meant of Christ's last coming to judge the world; this Scripture and
others are made use of and brought to prove that Christ shall come from heaven
in person and live upon the Earth, for a whole thousand years, they fancy that
Jesus Christ when he shall come to this personal Reign, then he shall raise
all the Martyrs that have lost their Lives in his cause, and the Devil shall
be bound up, that he shall tempt Men to sin no more, and wicked Men shall
be tied up that they shall not persecute the Church of God, this is an Ancient
Opinion, and almost since the Apostles days. Before I shall come to give you
my thoughts from the words touching Christ's coming, as they pretend, to Reign
a thousand years upon the Earth; I shall show you the rise of this Opinion.

Eusebius and others, they give us the rise of this Opinion from Cerinthus
which had it, who lived in the time of John. This Cerinthus who was a pesti^ent
Heretic in those times, who held that Christ was borne by the conjunction of a
man and a woman, Christum ex congressu maritali genitum esse, and not born by a
Virgin, and was borne as others are, and so must be a sinner. He was the Man
that was the first author from whom this Opinion had any life or being.
Eusebius says, Papias Bishop of Hieropolis did also hold this Opinion, but not
in so gross a way as Cerinthus did, but rather spiritually: and there was some
spice of this in the Apostles, for they did dream of a temporal Kingdom;
therefore they asked Christ when he was going to Heaven, Lord, when will thou
restore the Kingdom unto Israel? there was in the time of the Apostle a fancy
that Christ must be an Earthly Monarch, and destroy all the Kings of the
Earth, and all the Enemies of the world, and must come here to Rule and Reign
a thousand years upon the Earth; it was brought over into Germany, and there
was taken hold on by John of Leydon, in westphalia, and handed over to us in
England by men of late, Now for the confutation.







First, for express Scriptures which are four, the first scripture Act. 3. 21.
Whom the Heavens must receive, until the times of restitution of all things,
which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world
began. There the Apostle tells you directly, that the Heaven must receive and
keep Jesus Christ; how long? till the restitution of all things. The
Millenaries hold that the restitution of all things may be at the time of
Christ Personal Reign; but I shall show you that this restitution of all
things cannot be til Christ's judging the world. First, there cannot be a total
abolition of sin in the world, at the thousand years end there shall be a
number of men, and wicked, during the thousand years, all things cannot be
restored, for sin brings the creature under a curse, it is apparent that it
cannot be till Christ's last coming to judge the world, because other
Scriptures tell you that the time of restitution cannot be till our bodies be
raised from the Dead, Romans 8. 23. And not only they, but our selves also which
have the fruits of the spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves,
waiting for the Adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body; That is, the
creatures do as it were groan, being used by man as an instrument to Gods
dishonor, so that till the bodies of all the Elect be redeemed and glorified,
till that time the creature lies under a curse by reason of man's sins and
man's abuse. And they themselves that plead f^r Christ's personal reign a
thousand years upon the Earth, though they do hold that the martyrs shall be
raised at at that time; yet do not hold that all the Elect shall be raised at
that time, therefore the Apostle says expressly, that the Heavens must keep
the person of Christ till the restitution of all things, (...) the bodies of
the Elect come to be raised from the Dead. Again, it is apparent from the
context in Acts 3. That the restitution of all things can intend no other time
then the time of Christ's coming to judgment.

First, because it is said that the time here spoken of, is when the Jews were
to be refreshed from the Lords presence, verse. 19, 20, 21. Repent ye
therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be bloted out when the
times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. And he shall
send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you. Whom the Heaven must
receive, until the times of restitution of all things, which God has spoken
by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world began. And they cannot
be refreshed by the Lords presence till Christ's coming to Judgment and their
resurrection.

Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your Sins may be blotted out.

Moses, Daniel and others, nay, none of the Prophets speak of Christ's Reign a
thousand years upon the Earth, therefore* this cannot have a reference to
Christ's Reign for a thousand years upon the Earth. A second Scripture is in
Psalm. 110. 1. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right Hand, until I
make thine Enemies thy Footstool. That Scripture tells you, that Jesus Christ
who is ascended into Heaven and sits at Gods right Hand there, shall so sit,
till he has made all his Enemies his Foote-stoole. That the Apostles tells
you that all Christ's Enemies are to be made his Footstool, cannot be till
Christ coming at the last time. will you mark that Scripture, where the
Apostle tells you directly, 1 Cor. 15. 23, 24, 25, 26. But every man in his
own Order, Christ the first Fruits, afterward they that are Christ's at his
coming. Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to
God even the Father, when he shall put down all rule, and all authority, and
all power. For he must reign till he has put all his enemies under his Feet.
The last enemy that shall be destroyed is Death. Here is the coming of Christ
that has reference to all the Just and Unjust. Mark now, Christ therefore
must reign in Heaven till all enemies be under his Feet, now these thousand
years all enemies are not under his Feet, why? because death will be then,
death is not to be destroyed then, when the end comes he must give up his
Kingdom to his Father: what is more clear then this, that the Heavens must
keep Christ till all things be restored? and that cannot be till the day of
Judgment.

Again, Christ must reign so long till the end of the world. The third
Scripture is in the 1 Cor. 15. 23, 24. But every Man in his own Order, Christ
the first fruits, afterward they that are Christ's at his coming. Then comes
the end, when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God even the Father,
when he shall have put down all rule, and all authority, and all power. This
Scripture tells you that when Christ comes out of Heaven, upon Christ's
coming, three things must be done.

verse. 23. Now that cannot be at the thousand years, because they themselves
hold this, that there shall only be a Resurrection of the Martyrs, and here
the Scripture says, that every man shall rise, which cannot be till the day
of Judgment.



Thirdly, he delivers his Kingdom up to his Father, whereas if Christ should
reign a thousand years here, it could not be said to be the giving up of a
Kingdom, but the taking of a Kingdom into possession, he must resign all to
God the Father. When the Scripture is so express, it is a wonder that men can
receive such fantastical thoughts that Christ must come as an Earthly Monarch
to reign here a thousand years. A fourth Scripture is in Heb. 9. 28. So Christ
was once offered to bear the s^nt of many, and unto them that look for him
shall be appear the second time without sin unto Salvation. From that
Scripture I will argue against Christ's coming to reign upon the Earth for a
thousand years.

First, it is expressly in the Scripture that Christ's coming there spoken of,
referres to the day of Judgment in v. 27. And as it is appointed unto all men
once to dye, but after this the judgment. There Christ's second coming, it does
refer^e unto the day of Judgment; Now if the Scripture does (...) that the
second coming which is his coming to judgment? Then Christ cannot come before
that time to reign upon the Earth, for if he should come to reign upon the
Earth, then the Apostle must call that his third coming; there has been but
one coming, which was from Heaven to the womb of the Virgin, and there is no
other coming to follow but a second coming, that is, to judgment.



First, when Christ is said to come out of Heaven, the Scripture tells you
this concomitant, that the Saints shall come along with him, Jude 14. And Enoch
also the seventh from Adam, Prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord
comes with ten thousand of his Saints: So that when Christ comes from Heaven
he must come with his Saints with him, nay, he must come with his Angels, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. And to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus
Christ shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels* Put these two
Scriptures together, Christ must come with his Saints and Angels. But those
that fancy Christ's coming a thousand years, they cannot prove that Christ
shall come with his Saints and Angels, for the scripture that seems to carry
it that way; does not speak of Angels and Saints coming.

2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. Now we beseech you Brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and by our gathering together unto him. So that the coming of our Lord,
and our gathering together to be judged by Christ, they are both coupled
together; because when the Lords coming is, then is our gathering time, Mat.
25. 31. 32. When the Son of Man shall come in his glory, and all the holy
Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the Throne of his glory. And before
him shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them one from
another, as a Shepherd divides his sheep from the Goats. And in 2 Timothy 4. 1.
I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge
the Quick and the Dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom. The Scripture
tells you that when Christ appears to judge the world, he shall have this
concomitant of his coming, he shall gather all together, to judge both the good
and the bad. Those that pretend that Christ shall come to reign a thousand
years upon the Earth, they cannot prove that then all shall be gathered
together, they only plead for the Matryrs, and none else, therefore it cannot
be referred to his coming to reign a thousand years.

1 Cor. 15. 24. Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the
Kingdom to God, even the Father, etc. When Christ comes, then comes the end;
now those who hold for Christ's personal reign, they hold that the end of the
world shall not be till a thousand years after, because Christ must Reign a
thousand years.

1 Cor. 15. 23. But every man in his own Order, Christ the first fruits,
afterward they that are Christ's at his coming. So that at Christ's coming the
general resurrection of the just and unjust is to be.

Lastly, there is to be the Salvation of the Souls of all the Elect, that is
a fifth concomitant of Christ's coming, Heb. 9. 28. Christ was once offered to
bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for him, shall he appear
the second time without sin unto Salvation. This cannot be referred to
Christ's Personal coming upon the earth to reign a thousand years, because he
does not come then to save the souls of all the Elect; that is the first
reason why Christ cannot come to reign upon the Earth, because when the
Scripture speaks of Christ's coming out of heaven, it does annex five
concomitants with it, which belong not to any coming of Christ upon the Earth,
but to come to judge the world. A second reason is this, that Christ cannot
come to reign upon the Earth, because if it should be so, it would be worse
for Christ, and it would be worse for us then now it is, it would be worse for
Christ, for to leave Heaven and come to the Earth, for Christ to leave Saints
and Angels and Heaven, for to live upon the Earth among the wicked and the
good, for they themselves confess that wicked men shall live upon the Earth
then. Then besides, they fancy Earthly delights, that the fruit of the Vineyard
shall not fade, as now it does, yet they would lessen Christ's Glory, because
he sits this day at his Fathers right Hand: again, for to fancy this, that
Christ must come to reign upon the Earth, it would be a great loss to all
the Elect, for we have the benefit of Christ's everlasting Intercession; and
were Christ upon the Earth, we should lose that benefit, Heb. 8. 4. For if he
were on the Earth, he should not be a Priest, seeing that there are Priests
that offer gifts according to the Law. So that if he were upon the Earth, we
should lose the benefit of his Priesthood; therefore it would it be a great
wrong to us, to have Christ here on the Earth, because the benefit of his
Priestly Office would not be so availeable to us as it is in Heaven. Thus I
have laid down scripture and given you reasons, why Christ cannot come, before
his last coming.

Now there be eight Incongruities, and Absurdities that would follow in case
you should grant that Christ should come to Reign a thousand years upon the
Earth.

Mark. 13. 32. But of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels
which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father, is a false Opinion.

Christ the Son of righteousness being in Heaven, is more available to
Believers, then if he were upon the Earth.

Revel. 20. 5, 7, 8. But the rest of the Dead lived not again until the
thousand years were finished This is the first resurrection, and when the
thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his Prison; And
shall go out to deceive the Nations which are in the four quarters of the
Earth, G^g and Magog, to gather them together to Battle, the number of whom is
as the Sand of the sea. So that after the thousand years, the Devil shall be
let loose again, and there shall be an innumerable company of enemies, and
they shall destroy multitudes of the godly; Therefore Christ would leave his
Church in a worse condition then he found them, if this were true that Christ
should reign a thousand years upon the Earth.

Scripture makes but two comings of Christ; First, his coming from heaven, when
he was borne; his second coming when he comes to judge the world again.

Jesus Christ, yet it is a loss to them to remain there, they shall lose for a
thousand years the bodily presence of Christ; if Christ be on the Earth, ^ee
cannot be in Heaven the same time; Therefore it would be a loss to the Saints
and Angels for them to be a thousand years in Heaven without the company of
Jesus Christ, not to have the person of Jesus Christ with them.

Jews, and a visible King to all the world; besides this would follow then
that Christ's Kingdom must not be aspirituall Kingdom, but a Terrene, a worldly
pompous Kingdom, John 18. 36. Jesus answered, My Kingdom is not of this
world, if my Kingdom were of this world, then would my Servants fight, that I
should not be delivered to the Jews, but now is my Kingdom not from hence,
Luke 17. 20. And when he was demanded of the Pharisees when the Kingdom of
God should come, he answered them and said, the Kingdom of God comes not
with Observation. Would not all the world observe this, for Christ to come
bodily from Heaven, and in the Majesty of a Monarch? Now Christ's Kingdom does
not come with Observation. When the Disciples looked after an Earthly Kingdom,
No, says Christ, my Kingdom is for to Rule and Reign in your hearts, you
shall never see me for to be an outward Pompous King in the world, for Christ's
Kingdom, it is a spiritual Kingdom.

Daniel, and all those phrases in the new Testament, that the Kingdom of the
world is become the Kingdom of the Lord, they deny that Christ is a King in
Heaven. When he was in the Cratch and borne in the Stable, he was a King at
that very hour, Psalm 2. The Apostle referres it to Christ's Birth and Christ's
Resurrection. Christ when he arose from the Dead, he was a King then, and the
Gospel under Christ's time is called a Kingdom. It is remarkable, in John 18.
37. Pilate therefore said unto him, Art thou a King then? Jesus answered, thou
say that I am a King. Christ was a King, though he would not be an Earthly
King to destroy Earthly Governments, therefore when the people in a tumult
would have made him a King, yet he would not Zech. 9. 9. Rejoice greatly, O
Daughter of Zion, shout O Daughter of Jerusalem, behold thy King comes unto
thee, he is just, and having Salvation, lowly, and riding upon an Ass, and
upon a Colt, the fool of an Ass. He was King, when he was on that slow
contemptible creature, so that now to say Christ shall come to reign as King,
it is to intimate to the world, as if Christ were not a King at this day, and
whereas he is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords in Heaven, therefore he cannot
come a thousand years to reign upon the Earth.

Now I will deal fairly to show you the strongest Scripture that has most
show of reason, for the maintaining of this Opinion; and shall labor to take
them off and clear it to you. There are multitudes of quotations that
varieties of men's thoughts fasten upon to prove this point, yet those they most
stand to, I shall fasten upon; their chief Pillar is in Revel. 20. 2, 3, 5, 6.
And he laid hold on the Dragon, that old Serpent, which is the Devil and
Satan, and bound him a thousand years. And I saw thrones, and they sat upon
them, and judgment was given uuto them, and I saw the Souls of them that were
beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word God, and which had not
worshipped the Beast, neither his Image, neither had received his mark upon
their foreheads, or in their hands, and they lived and reigned with Christ a
thousand years; But the rest of the Dead lived not again until the thousand
years were finished. This is the first Resurrection, blessed, and holy is he
that has part in the first Resurrection, on such the second death has no
power, but they shall be Priests of God, and of Christ, and shall reign with
him a thousand years. Now from this Text which is the chiefest in the
Scripture they seem to build these two things upon.

First, That Jesus Christ shall live upon the Earth, and the Saints reign with
him for a thousand years.

Secondly, Those that were Martyrs by Antichrist shall rise from the Dead, and
come upon the Earth, these thousand years to continue with Jesus Christ. This
they build much upon, That Christ shall come to reign a thousand years upon
the Earth. But I shall show you this cannot be the sense of it, and I shall
give you Six Answers.





For lo, says Christ, I am with you to the end of the World; it does not
therefore follow, from that time he will be upon the Earth to the end of the
world, but Christ being with us, or we with him, it is by his spirit, Romans
8. 17. And if Children, then Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Christ: if so
be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together. The
Text it does not denote the sameness of place, and the oneness of situation, I
give this to take off that which is made of this Text.

a thousand years upon the Earth; because then it will not only follow that
men shall live so long, but shall reign with Christ so long on the Earth.
Methuselah lived but nine hundred sixty and nine years, and David says, the
life of man is cut shorter, The Text says, they shall live and reign with
Christ; in that sense taking living properly, and all the phrases properly,
they must necessarily say that men shall live when that time comes, a thousand
years together. Again, it cannot be the sense of this Scripture, because
that cannot be the sense of this Scripture which crosses the sense of other
Scriptures, to make this Scripture to affirm that Christ. shall reign on the
Earth a thousand years, and other Scriptures tell you that Christ shall stay
in Heaven in person, till all men shall rise from the Dead, every man shall
rise, then comes the end, 1 Cor. 15. 23, 24. But every man in his own order,
Christ the first fruits, afterward they that are Christ's, at his coming. Then
comes the end, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1. Now we beseech you Brethren, by the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him. Then besides
it does cross the Scripture to say that at Christ's coming, only some men shall
rise but not all, Job 14, 10, 11, 12. But man dies and wastes away, yea, man
gives up the ghost, and where is he? As the waters fail from the Sea, and
the Flood decays and dries up; So man lies down, and rises not, till the
Heavens be no more, they shall not awake, nor be raised out of their sleep.
Job tells you expressly, That the Dead shall not be raised till the Heavens
be no more, and that cannot be the thousand years, for there will be a
Earth, and a Heaven then; and in Peter's phrase, The Heavens shall melt away
like a scrowle. etc. Now to make a Resurrection, before a Resurrection, it is
that which the Scripture does no where mention, John 5. 28, 29. Marvel not at
this, for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the Graves shall
hear his Voice, and shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the
Resurrection of life, and they that have done evil unto the Resurrection of
damnation. The judging of the just and unjust shall be the same hour, and
upon Christ's coming all men shall be judged, 2 Timothy 4, 1. I charge thee
therefore before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and
the dead, at his appearing, and his Kingdom. So that Christ's appearing, and
Christ's coming is a judging of the quick and the dead. Now beloved, then to
make this Scripture to say that Christ shall come on the Earth before his last
coming, this is to cross other Scriptures, then of necessity therefore it
cannot be the scope of th^s, for there is no jarring between one phrase of the
Scripture and another.

That they live and reign with Christ a thousand years, it is not spoken
whether it be a reigning with Christ in Heaven or on Earth, so the phrase
neither carries it one way or another.

John does not say, that he saw the bodies of men that were beheaded, and they
reigned with Christ, but he d^d in a vision see the Souls of them that were
beheaded; now to say they must come to reign on the Earth for a thousand
years, it were a great inconveniency to them; it is said, I saw the souls of
them; The thousand years cannot be applied to Christ's Personal Reign. For
so Jesus Christ has an eternal Kingdom, he does not reign a thousand years
on Earth or in Heaven, but everlastingly, Kingdoms and States of this world
have lasted a thousand years, and to make Christ's Kingdom to last no longer,
it is to give Christ's Kingdom too narrow a confine. I have consulted with many
Authors, and I find the current of Interpreters generally run this way,
though some do fancy that Text speaks of the binding of the Devil for a
thousand years, and during this time, the Saints should live and reign with
Christ a thousand years. The sense and scope of this place is this.

The period of time, when this time began that the Devil was bound;
Interpreters do unanimously give this Opinion, that it began in the reign of
Constantine the Great, he being the first Christian Emperor in the World, he
coming after 300 years Persecution by the Roman Emperors, who made great
massacre and havoc in the Church of God; in so much that in the book of
Martyrs we read, that there may be for every day in the year five thousand
Christians slain, this is a dreadful Persecution, and the Devil raged and
stirred much. Now upon* Constantines reign the Devil was bound up, that is,
the Roman Emperors, who were acted by the Devil to all this cruelty, when
Constantine a Christian Emperor came to reign, he gvae out imperial Edicts
and Laws for establishment of the Christian Religion, and that put an end to
the Persecution of the Roman Emperors, and to this Opinion many Interpreters
give in their consent, Brightman, Napier, Gerard, and these thousand years
when the Devil was bound did end 300 years ago and more, and this is given to
be the scope and sense of the Scripture.



Turkish Emperor began to bear sway, Gog and Magog, called the Turk
prevailed, and has gotten the greatest part of the world within his power, and
he was the Gog and Magog that did persecute the Saints, and did spread almost
over all the Earth, and truly comparing Scripture and story together, this
seems to be the nearest and the truest sense of this place, and this
interpreters do generally concur in.

Two Objections by those, who plead for a thousand years.

Valens the Emperor after these 300 years, and of Julian the Apostate that
did greatly persecute the Christians, and how can this be true, when we read of
so much persecution, after the Devil was bound up?

Answer, that when it is said the Devil is bound up, it is not meant simply,
that there should be no temptation to sin, for that there should be; Valens
the Emperor did establish Arrianisme and troubled the Church of God. One
answers, it was nothing like the persecution of the Roman Emperors, it was
nothing so long nor so tedious as the persecution under the Roman Emperors,
for, for every day in the year, 5000 Christians were put to death; In
Dioclesians reign there were 17000 Christians killed in one Month, there was
some sprinkling persecution in the time of Valens and Julian the Apostate, but
it was nothing to that of the Roman Emperors.

Constantine, that was a Resurrection, and that they reigned with Christ at
that time?

rising does not carry a reference to the body rising from the Grave only, but
of a man rising from a state of affliction and of sin, they are expressed in
Scripture by a Resurrection. Roman 10. 10, 11. Let their Eyes be darkened, that
they may not see, and bow down their back always. I say then, have they stumbled
that they should fall? God forbid, but rather through their fall, Salvation is
come unto the Gentiles, for to provoke them to jealousy, Isaiah 22. 19. And I
will drive thee from thy Station, and from thy state shall he pull thee down.
The men that are as it were low men in captivity in Babylon, they shall rise,
it does not refer to the resurrection from the Dead at the last day: so a
rising from sin, Coloss. 2. 12. Buried with him in Baptism, wherein also you
are risen with him through the Faith of the operation of God, who has raised
him from the Dead. We are risen with Christ, not bodily, but out of our
sins, Coloss. 3. 1. If ye th^n be risen with Christ, seek those things
which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God. So that here,
this is the first Resurrection, the meaning is this, that those that did escape
the rage and cruelty of the ten Persecutions, and did come to live in
Constantines days, and did all the while of the former Persecutions, keep
themselves from the Idolatry of the Heathens, and Corruptions of Antichrist,
they are said to have the first Resurrection: blessed are they that were raised
up by Christ, from the sins, and from the Errors* Superstition and Idolatry
both of Antichrist and the Heathens.

I, but then it is said, they live and reign with Christ a thousand years.

Beloved, that Phrase, living and reigning with Christ, though some
Interpreters re^erre it to Heaven, yet with Brightman and others, I concur,
and al^o Bernard, that it does denote thus much, that those in Successive Ages,
who enjoyed Liberty in the Christian Religion under Constantine the great, who
lived to a thousand years, and were delivered from former afflictions, that
kept by Christ's Power from the Idolatry of the times, and from Antichrist, they
were said to live with Christ a thousand years, for they lived to him, and
depended on him, and were not plunged into the wickedness of the times: and
thus with consulting of many Authors I find this to be the truest account, in
a few words in defending this Text from giving any foundation to Christ's
personal reign for a thousand years upon the Earth.

The second Scripture that they do urge for Christ's personal reign upon the
earth for a thousand years, is the 2 Peter 3. 7, 10, 11, 12, 13. But the
Heavens and the Earth which are now by the same word are kept in store,
reserved unto fire until the day of judgment, and ^erdition of ungodly men.
But the day of the Lord will come, as a Thief in the Night, in the which the
Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with
fervent heat, the Earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt
up. Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of
persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness, Looking for,
and hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the Heavens being on
fire shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat?
Nevertheless, we, according to his promise, look for new Heavens and a new
Earth, wherein dwells righteousness. Here is mention of a coming of Christ,
we look for and hasten to his coming, at Christ's coming we look for a new
Earth; Now say they, to what purpose were there to be a new Earth, if Christ
were not to come down on this Earth, and the Saints with him for a thousand
years, as the Scripture does seem to give warrant for a thousand years
reign; this Scripture seems to give warrant that he shall be on the Earth,
they say that the righteous shall only have benefit of Christ's personal reign
upon the Earth.

To take off this. ver. 3, 4. Knowing this first, that there shall come in the
last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and saying, where is the
promise of his coming? For since the Eathers ^ell asleep, all things continue
as they were from the beginning of the Creation. We see no change in
providence, therefore where is the promise of Christ's coming? they scoffed at
Christ, that Christ was a contemptible man in this world; this is the answer in
the 7 verse. But the heavens and the earth which are now, by the same word are
kept in store reserved unto fire against the day of judgment and Perdition of
ungodly men. Peter speaks directly that the time of Christ's coming (which they
scoffed at) was not the time of the thousand years, but of the day of
judgment; therefore this coming here that Peter speaks of cannot be meant of a
thousand years before the day of judgment.

men, they say themselves that Christ does suffer the wicked of the world to
live in the world the thousand years, though not to rule as they had done.



Fourthly, it is said here, that Christ should come as a Thief, But the day of
the Lord will ^ome as a Thief in the Night, in the which the Heavens shall
pass away with a great noise, etc. That Epithet is referred to his coming to
judge the world, to his last coming, and not to any other coming, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
2. For your selves know perfectly that the day of the Lord comes as a Thief
in the Night. But if Christ should come to reign upon the Earth, then he
comes visible, and observable, Mat. 33. 44. But know this, that if the good
man of the house had known in what watch the Thief would come, he would have
watched and would not have suffered his house to be broken up. Therefore be ye
also ready, for in such an hour, as you think not, the Son of man comes,
Rovel. 16. 15. Behold, I come as a Thief: Blessed is he that watches, and
keeps his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame.

we according to his promise look for new Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein
dwells righteousness. That the dwelling of a righteousness here, does not
imply that such a thing shall be on the new Earth, but the dwelling of
righteousness referres to righteous men, not to heaven or earth, the Greek
word cleares it plainly, it is a word in the Plural Number. Therefore it is
referred to the Earth, which is in the Singular Number; Therefore Divines say,
from the Original, 2 Peter 3. 13. (...). ^e in whom ^wels righteousness, look
for a new Heaven, and a new Earth. So that the dwelling of righteousness, it
is not to be interpreted as referring to the Earth, but that righteousness
should dwell in men; we read of none being on the Earth, wherein dwells
righteousness. Thus much for that other Scripture, We look for new Heavens
and a new Earth.

A third Scripture, and that they deem to have some strength in too; In Daniel
2. 44. And in the days of these Kings shall the God of Heaven set up a
Kingdom, which shall never be destroyed, and the Kingdom shall not be left
to other People, but it shall break in pieces, and consume all these Kingdoms,
and it shall stand for ever.

Now beloved, to give you the scope of the Text, take these answers.

Luke tells you, Chap. 1. verse. 32, 33. He shall be great, and shall be
called the Son of the highest, and the Lord God shall give unto him the Throne
of his Father David, and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and
of his Kingdom there shall be no end. So that Jesus Christ had a Kingdom, and
he is now King of Kings, and Lord of Lords in heaven.

Alexanders Kingdom, who overcame the Medes and Persians, it was divided
between Ptolomy Lagides King of Egypt, Zeleuchus King of Assyria; In that time
Jesus Christ did set up a Kingdom, for he was born King of the Jews.

Thirdly, it is apparent that this cannot be referred to Christ's Kingdom in
this world for a thousand years. Because it cannot be said that it should be
a Kingdom for ever and ever, for a Kingdom for a thousand years cannot be
said to be a Kingdom for ever and ever, but it is said in Daniel, It shall
be for ever and ever.

A fourth Scripture, is in Ephesians. 5. 5. For this ye know, that no Whoremonger,
nor Unclean person, nor Covetous Man, who is an Idolater, has any inheritance
in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God. And this Text Gerrard quotes and does
well resolve it, they say there is not only a Kingdom of God that is Heaven,
but the Scripture does make mention of a Kingdom of Christ, as a Kingdom of
God; Therefore they build on this Christ's reign, and of having a Kingdom here
upon earth.

First, I answer, it is true, Christ has a Kingdom, but he says expressly,
that his Kingdom is not of this world, John 18. 36. Jesus answered, my Kingdom
is not of this world. etc.





Mat. 26. 29. But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of
the Vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom.
Alsted quotes, from thence they gather, it cannot be meant of Heaven, why?
because there is no eating and drinking there; here is a promise by Jesus
Christ, to come to them no more, till he would drink with them Wine in his
Fathers Kingdom, and it cannot be unless Christ does come in person amongst
his people; and have a Kingdom to eat and drink with his people in this
World. This they stand much upon.

Take these clear answers to these Quotations.

Kingdom which is Christ's personal reign, should be called Christ's
Kingdom, and not his Fathers Kingdom, it should have been called my Kingdom,
and not my Fathers Kingdom, that is one Answer that Divines give.

Luke 24. 42. And they gave him a piece of broyled Fish, and of a hony-combe,
and he took it and did eat before them. So he may as well drink and eat,
but that to me is somewhat uncertain.

I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the Vine, until that day when I
drink it with you in my Fathers K^ngdome: he was taking the Lords Supper, and
was drinking the cup of Wine, says he, I am going away and will drink no
more till we meet in Heaven, not that there should be Eating and Drinking in
Heaven, but when you and I meet, we shall have sweet fellowship and communion
together, as is in Eating and drinking together; As Feasting is a badge of
communion, and of Love, so there shall be endeared love and endeared communion
with Christ in Heaven: you shall drink it new, not new Wine, nor eat new
Bread, but after a new manner of Love and communion, they should express Love
each to other, and have everlasting communion one with another.

They say likewise that there shall be no sin in the world, and that the
Earth shall be restored to its primitive fruitfulness as it were before the
fall, but I shall not middle with these. And thus according unto my poor
measure I have labored to lay down the grounds from Scripture, why Christ
cannot come to reign personally upon the Earth a thousand years, and have
vindicated those Scriptures that seem to patronize that Opinion.

coming of Christ out of Heaven till his last, and great coming to judge the
world? O then labor to make it your work to have Jesus Christ as King to
reign in your hearts by mortification, to rule in thy Heart by his Spirit, to
mortify thy headstrong lusts that are in thee.







This is but a bad preparation, and but poor encouragement to Jesus Christ to
come and reign amongst such Saints as these are, which indeed are a scandal
to Saints, a scandal to Religion, and would be a scandal to that thousand
years of Christ, if he should come to reign, but Christ will have better
Saints then these are to reign with him.

In treating of the Doctrine of Christ's coming again, the other Quere is this,
how or after what manner shall this coming of Christ be? But I will come again.

Now in the resolving of this question, I shall confine my answers to these six
particulars.

certainly.

personally.

visibly.

gloriously.

terribly.

unexpectedly.

These ways the Scripture does furnish you with several hints touching his
coming.

certainly, Christ's coming is to be numbered among poetical Fictions, or with
the delusion of Mahomet, the certainty of Christ's coming again is built on
these three foundations.

First, it is built on the immutability of Gods decree Acts 17. 31. Because he
has appointed a day, in the which he will judge the World in righteousness,
by that man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all men,
in that he has raised him from the Dead. The immutability of Gods decree does
prove the certainty of Christ's coming, God has appointed a day in which he
will judge the world.

Secondly, the certainty does stand upon the infallibility of Christ's promise,
Mat. 26. 64. Jesus says unto him, Thou have said, nevertheless I say unto
you, Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of
power, and coming in the clouds of Heaven, there is Christ's promise, to which
three of the Evangelists do concur.

Solomon's, phrase, a just man perishes in his uprightness, and a wicked man
prolongeth his days in wickedness; therefore to show Gods impartiality; there
must be a coming of the Son of man to judge the world righteously. The
Doctrine of Christ's coming is impugned by Atheists, therefore you read what
Peter tells you, 2 Peter 3. 3, 4. Knowing this first, that there shall come in
the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts and saying, where is the
promise of his coming? For since the Fathers fell asleep, all things continue
as they were from the beginning of the Creation. And we read of the men of
Athens, they questioned this, and would not believe this, For Christ coming to
judge the world, Acts 17. 32. And when they heard of the Resurrection of the
dead, some mocked, and others said, we will hear thee again of this matter.
Of old time, in the times of Jesus Christ or soon after, men did mock at this
Doctrine, that the dead shall rise, and Christ should come to judge both the
quick and the dead; Herein Gerrard, reckons up abundance of Sects, as the
Floriani, the Dosithiani, the Symmachiani, and many others: Indeed there is one
Scripture that these Atheists do abuse in making it to deny the coming of
Christ to judgment, Joh. 8. 15. Ye judge after the flesh, I judge no man.

But Beloved, to this Text that they make use of, to to shake this great Pillar
of our hopes, the coming of Christ again, take these two Answers, when Christ
says, I judge no man, that is, I judge no man with a rash and heady judgment,
as you judge men that are not of your Opinion, you judge things rashly and
inconsideratly, but I judge no man as you do, so Austine, in his 36. Tract on
John, gives it to be the sense of the place, it does not exclude Christ from
judging the world at the last day, but from judging of men as the Pharisees, to
wit, rashly and inconsideratly.

I judge no man, that is, it was not the intent or the end of my first coming
in the flesh to judge men, John 3. When God sent his Son to be borne of a
Virgin, he did not send him to judge the world, but to save the world, he
reserved his judging of the world till his last coming. John 12. 47, 48. And if
any man hear my words, and believe not, I judge him not, for I come not to
judge the world, but to save the world. He that rejects me, and receives
not my words, has one that judges him, the words that I have spoken, the same
shall judge him in the last day. The end of my first coming was not to judge,
it was to be judged; and to be condemned by Pontius Pilate, and to dye the
cursed death. And that is the end of Christ's first coming, that is the first
particular, he shall come certainly.

Secondly, Christ shall not only come certainly, but he shall come personally; It
was the great mistake of Origin, though he holds for the coming of Christ
again, that he pleades for the coming of Christ in spirit, therefore that
Text where it is said, you shall see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds of
Heaven, Origin understands by the Clouds, to be the Saints, because it is
mentioned in Scripture, that the Believers are called a cloud of witnesses. Now
this is to pervert the whole letter of the Bible, and turn all the Scripture
into an Allegory and Metaphorical sense; Now in opposition of that, I lay
down a second property, that Christ's coming shall be a personal coming out
of Heaven, but the Scripture does not speak of Christ's coming on the Earth,
but no further then the Air, Christ in his Body shall come personally out of
Heaven. Now to prove this second property, or second manner or way of Christ's
coming, there are two Texts of Scripture to confirm it. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. Then
we which are alive, and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the
clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord,
verse. 16. For the Lord himself shall descend with a shout from Heaven, etc. If
it had been Christ in his spirit, then it would have been said, the Lord by his
spirit shall descend, But the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a
shout, it notes his personal coming out of Heaven, that whereas Jesus Christ
had a personal translation, and as Christ had a visible Elevation, he was in
the eyes of his Disciples lifted up, so Christ shall bodily descend and come
out from Heaven, the Lord himself, etc. Therefore it cannot be the Lord by
his spirit, Acts 1. 11. Which also said, ye men of Galilee, why stand ye
gazing up into Heaven? This same Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven,
shall so come in like manner, as ye have seen him go into Heaven. The same
Jesus that you saw Ascend, shall descend, so that it cannot be Christ in his
spirit, but in his person. I only mention this to confute those that follow
the conceit of Origin, merely to make Christ's coming to be but a spiritual
coming, a coming in the hearts of Saints.

Acts 1. 11. This same Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven shall so
come in like manner, as ye have seen him go into Heaven. That as Christ's going
up to Heaven bodily was visible, so Christ's coming out of Heaven shall be
visible Mat. 26. 64. Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the
right hand of power, and coming in the clouds. Indeed Christ did rise
invisibly, for no man saw Christ rise from the dead, but Christ shall descend
visibly, you shall see the Son of man, etc. Mat. 24. 30. And then shall
appear the sign of the Son of man in Heaven, and then shall all the Tribes
of the Earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds
of Heaven with power and great glory. All men shall see the glory of Jesus
Christ, the wicked shall see him to their Amazement and consternation, and the
godly shall see him to their joy and consolation,

gloriously, and there shall be many things that shall make the coming of
Christ to be a glorious coming, he shall come in the clouds, these glorious
bodies shall be the triumphant and swift Chariots of the son of God, wherein
he will come to judge the world; and his Atendance shall make him glorious,
Daniel 7. 10. A fiery stream issued, and came forth from before him, thousand
thousands ministered unto him; and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before
him, the judgment was set, and the books where opened, Jude 14. and Enoch
also the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord
comes with ten thousand of his Saints. And in 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. And to you who
are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven,
with his mighty Angels. O then behold the clouds to be the Triumphant Chariots
of Christ, the Innumerable company of Saints and Angels to be attendants on
the person of Christ to come to judge the world, and that is the reason that
he is called so glorious, Mat. 24. 30. And they shall see the Son of man
coming in the clouds of Heaven, with power and great glory. Mat. 16. 27. For
the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his Angels. Luke 9.
26. For whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, of him shall the
Son of man be ashamed, when he shall come in his own glory, and in his
Fathers, and of the Holy Angels. And that is the reason of that Epithet given
to Christ's coming Titus 2. 13. Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious
appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. Now beloved, Christ's
coming to have this property or this manner, the reason must be to distinguish
his second coming from his first coming; to take off the contempt and reproach
that was on Jesus Christ in his first coming, and he shall come in glory in the
second coming.

Phil. 2. 7. But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form
of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men. Now in the second coming,
he comes with that glory and Majesty of a King. In the first coming, he had
no reasonable creature to attend him, at the second coming he shall have all
the Saints and Angels in Heaven to attend him. At his first coming he was
swadled with swaddling bands, but at this second coming he shall be as it were
clothed with the Clouds of Heaven.

Again, his first coming it was in dishonor and contempt, every Traveller had
more honor then Jesus Christ, for the Inn was for every Traveller, but there
was no room for Christ there, he was borne in an outhouse; but his second
coming shall be in great glory.

Again, in his first coming, Christ representing the persons of the Elect came
with sin imputed to him, and was the greatest Beggar in the world, as Luther
says and the greatest sinner in the world, not by way of inherence but by way
of imputation; therefore Luther calls him Peccator maximus, the greatest
sinner: Christ incoming into the the world, had all the sins of the Elect of
God imputed to him; so he came as a sinner, as an evil person, though he was
not so, yet he was looked upon as so; But the second time, he shall come
without sin, he shall not have our sins by imputation cast on him, because
when he comes again he shall make a total Abolition of sin; Therefore,
there needs no impution of our sins upon Jesus Christ. Thus you have a fourth
way of his coming, he shall come Gloriously.

A fifth way of Christ's coming again, is this, he shall come terribly; In
Isaiah 13. 9. Behold the day of the Lord comes, cruel both with wrath and
fierce Anger, to lay the Land desolate, and he shall destroy the sinners
thereof out of it. Revel. 6. 17. For the great day of his wrath is come, and
who shall be able to stand? the coming of Jesus Christ, it is a terrible
coming, that is a fifth way of his coming.

unexpectedly; though it is true, there shall be immediate warnings of his
coming, as the powers of Heaven shall be shaken, the Sun, Moon, and Stars
shall be darkened, but that shall be but a little before his coming: but
beloved, the coming of Christ shall be when men are not aware of it, as in the
days of Noah, men were eating and drinking, and marrying and giving in
marriage when the flood come and destoyed them, so shall the Son of man come.
Christ's coming shall then be to burn all with fire, when men shall be eating
and drinking, possessing, and adding muck to muck, when men are secure and
never think of Christ's coming to burn all with fire; then the powers of Heaven
shall be shaken, and the world be set on fire. Hence it is that you read in
Scripture in five or six places, Christ's coming it shall be as a Thief in the
night; a Thief will come in the dead time of the Night, as Christ said to his
Disciples, in Luke 21. 34. The coming of Christ it is an unexpected coming,
thus you have six Particulars of Christ's coming.



Now the Doctrine of Christ's coming, it is a terrible Doctrine in these four
things.

To all wicked men Christ's coming again it is a terrible Doctrine, because
first all the secretst sins that ever a wicked man has committed in this world,
they shall be made manifest to all. I confess it is a contest among learned
men, whether the sins of good men as well as bad shall not be known, and
there are strong arguments that all shall be made known, but the Scripture is
full in this, that at the day of Judgment, the sins that a wicked man has
done in this world, shall be published to all the Saints and Angels in Heaven,
and all the men that were on Earth. It may be thou go for an honest man
amongst thy Neighbors, yet thou love thy Neighbors wife, and go in unto
her; if thou have been so, or thou have deceived in thy Trade, why for all thy
secrecy here, yet then all the world shall know thy deceit and uncleannes; it
is built upon that Text, Luke 8. 17. For nothing is secret, that shall not be
made manifest, neither any thing hid, that shall not be known, and come
abroad. Here a thousand things are hid that men do not know, here thou carriest
it fairly, and squarely in the world, that men cannot say, black is thine Eye;
but then they may say shame to thy Face; this is dreadful.

Mat. 25. 32. 33. And before him shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall
separate them one from another, as a Shepherd divides his sheep from the
Goats. And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the Goats on the
left. Here thou art mingled, it may be thou live in the same house with a
godly man, and lie in the same bed with a godly man, but remember a parting
time is coming, that as the Shepherd parts the Sheep from the Goats, so does
Christ part the wicked from the godly.





I, but you will say, it is true indeed, A Felix may tremble when Paul shall
Preach to him of Judgment to come, but have we Christians cause of fear?
Yes, you that are Christians, in case you be found under these particulars,
that I am now naming to you, the day of Judgment will be dreadful to you.

Christ's coming again to judge the world is not only a dreadful Doctrine to
a Felix, but may make thee a Christian to tremble in these cases.

Eccle. 3. 16, 17. And moreover, I saw under the Sun the place of Judgment,
that wickedness was there; and the place of righteousness, that iniquity was
there. I said in my heart, God shall judge the righteous, and the wicked, for
there is a time for every purpose, and every work. That is, to judge every
purpose and every work. When God shall come to places of Judgment and places
of Judicature, and shall say, wickedness is there, and shall say bribery is
there, and the deferring of the cause of the poor is there, woe be to all
Oppressions of the poor, and grinding their Faces in Courts of Judicature,
many whereof are Seats of violence and not Courts of Judicature, Christ shall
come to judge things that men will not judge; men will not judge Adulterers,
but whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge. Men will not judge men for
Heresy, but God will judge them, Christ's coming is dreadful to all men that
live by Oppression and Violence in Courts of judicature.

Mark 8. 38. Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my words, in
this Adulterous and sinful Generation, of him also shall the Son of man be
ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father, with the Holy Angels. I
pray you mark, here are two answers to an Objection in these words. First, men
might say, why blessed Jesus, who would be ashamed of thee? if Christ were on
the Earth we would never be ashamed of Christ; Therefore Christ adds,
whosoever is ashamed of me and of my words: though you might not be ashamed
of Christ's person, yet you might be ashamed of his words. Then men may Object
and say, why truly if it were a peaceable time, a safe time to profess Christ;
but what, when we live in a wicked place, and among a wicked people, will not
Christ bear with us, to hold down our heads a little, and to sleep in a whole
Skin? no, says Christ, whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words in
this Adulterous and sinful Generation, of him also shall the Son of man,
etc. Let the place be never so bad, thou must not be ashamed of Jesus Christ,
and his words: if thou be, the Son of man shall be ashamed of thee, when
he comes with the glory of his father. Christ's coming is dreadful to all you,
who are ashamed to profess Jesus Christ in a sinful and Adulterous age and
place, wherein you live, I shall leave it to you to make Application.

Christ's coming to Judgment is dreadful to all those who spend their days in
sensuality and riot, Christ's coming is terrible to them, Luke 21. 34. And take
heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon
you unawares. Men that live in riot and excess, and sensuality, they do but
pamper their flesh and feed themselves, to make themselves a sweeter morsel
both for worms and Devil, Christ's coming will be a dreadful time for them.

Jesus Christ. Will thou mark one scripture, 1 Cor. 16. 22. If any man love
not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha. There is much of
Gods mind in this dark expression, If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ,
let him be an accursed man, that is the meaning of the word Anathema; but the
other word Maranatha, it is a word compounded of two words, and it bears this
sense, Maran signifies a Lord, and Atha signifies venit, he comes; so then
when the Scripture says, he that loves not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
an accursed man; Let him be Maran Atha, when the Lord Jesus shall come to
judge the word, let Christ then curse him that does not love him. O then I
beseech you think this with your selves, that all you who do not bear a
sincere love to Jesus Christ when he comes, his coming shall be with a curse,
a curse to Hell and damnation to all such.

Fifthly, Christ's coming will be dreadful to all them who do obstinately
refuse subjection and obedience to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 1* 7,
8. And to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengence
on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Christ's coming it will be in flaming fire to take vengeance on all such.

Jude 15. To execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly
amongst them, of all their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed,
and of all their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have spoken against him.
I do wish it were engraven befere the Eyes of all wicked raylers. There is
many a railing Rabshakeh, and many a cursing Shimei which has uttered many a
hard speech against the people of God; they accuse one man to be an hypocrite
for carrying of a Bible under his Arm, another man to be an hypocrite for
shedding a tear in his Sermon: O you are the men that Christ will come to
execute Judgment upon, to convince you of your hard speeches.

Seventhly, to unmercifull men Christ's coming is a dreadful time, James 2. 13.
For he shall have Judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy, Christ's
coming to judgment shall be a time of thy having of judgment without mercy,
that show no mercy; In Mat. 25. 41, 42, 43. Then shall he say also unto
them on the left hand, Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Divill and his Angels. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no
meat, I was Thirsty, and ye gave me no Drink; I was a stranger, and ye
took me not in, naked and ye clothed me not, sick and in Prison, and ye
visited me not. Austin has a good gloss upon this Text, says he, If that
man shall go to Hell, that will not give another man Bread when he is an
hungry! O then to what a hell shall that man go to which takes away Bread from
the hungry man And if that man shall go to Hell that will not cloth the naked,
O then to what a Hell shall that man go to that takes clothes off the
necessitous man's back! And if that man shall go to Hell that will not visit
men that are in Prison, O then to what a Hell shall that man go to, that casts
godly men into Prison! Now beloved, I beseech you take heed that you be not
men wanting bowels of mercy toward your distressed Brethren, you are to expect
judgment without mercy, that show no mercy.

Heb. 13. 4. But whoremongers, and Adulterers God will judge. King Henry the 8.
was a lascivious Prince, and old Latimer sent him a Token, a Bible, and about
the Bible was written, whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge; it was to
terrify him. There is a strange Text, 2 Pet. 2. 9. The Lord knows how to
deliver the godly, out of temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto the day
of Judgment to he punished; But chiefly them that walk after the flesh in
the lust of uncleanness. Here is a chiefly for them, God will punish every
unjust man, but God reserves them to the day of Judgment, chiefly them that
walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, etc. Do I speak to men that
may have this chiefly applied to them? O take heed that thou do not fall
under the righteous judgment of God, that thou be not entangled in that
sin, that will make the Lord judge thee chiefly.

2 Pet. 2. 9, 10. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of Temptations,
and to reserve the unjust to the day of judgment to be punished. But chiefly
them that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, and despise
Government, Presumptuous are they, selfe-willed, they are not afraid to speak
evil of Dignities. Men that under pretense of power and the like, shall
trample down Rule, Government, Authority, and Dignity; the Lord has another
day to judge them that will not be judged here, he will judge them with a
chiefly. And thus I have done with the third Doctrine.

I am now to make entrance into the fourth Fundamental Doctrine in these
words, And receive you to my self.

I will come again and receive you unto my self.

There is some difference between a few Interpreters touching the sense of
these words; one carries it this way; that here the promise of Christ's coming
made a little before he was to die, refers not to the last coming; but they
refer it to that forty days that he was upon the Earth, after his
resurrection to the Ascension; they say, that this promise was accomplished,
when Christ after his resurrection did come to his Disciples, and did eat a
broyled Fish with them, and stayed forty days with them. Why? what comfort
would this be to the Disciples to think of Christ's going away and coming
again, and stay but forty days, and then be seen no more? this would have
made them the more sorrowful, that they should never have seen him more. Here
are two or three reasons from the Text, why that cannot be the sense of the
place, because here was a promise before that he was going to his Fathers
House to receive them there; Now that living upon the Earth forty days after
his Resurrection, cannot be his Fathers House; this cannot therefore be meant
of Christ's coming again at that time to them. Again, that it is said, where
he was to go; he was to prepare a place for them, now if his meaning had
been that he would come again at forty days, it should have been an Earthly
place that he had prepared for them: But the current of Interpreters, seeing
the weakness of that, gives many consequent reasons why it must necessarily be
referred to Christ's last coming, and everlasting receiving of them, when the
Body shall be raised, and at that coming he has promised the Elect, that he
will receive them unto himself; as if he should have said, though I leave
your bodies behind me in the world for a season, though they may be mangled
and massacred by cruel persecutors, and though you may be without my bodily
presence for a while, yet I do not go to Heaven to stay there for ever, but I
promise you, I will come again, and then I will take you into Heaven with me.
They would feign have had Christ to have received them into Heaven, and that
they might have gone with him. The Disciples when they heard Christ speak of
going to his Fathers house, they were all on fire to go with Christ into
Heaven: O no, says Christ, I will come again to judge the world, and then I
will receive your very bodies into Heaven with me, that as my body is in
Heaven, so your bodies shall be there also with me.

The Observation is this, that it is one great end of Christ's coming again for
to receive the bodies of all the Elect unto himself into Heaven with him, I
come again and receive you unto my self. I shall not follow the common place
in handling the Resurrection of the body, I shall only handle this point
practically, in showing you what the happiness of the Elect of God is in their
bodies as well as their Souls; Now because this Text is made use of to pervert
many Scriptures, I shall handle this practical Question before I come to
handle the Doctrine.





Acts 7. There is a receiving them before Christ's coming, and this is called a
partial and incomplete reception, it is only a receiving of the spirit and not
of the body.

now speak to those that say the soul is mortal, and that it shall never live
after the death of the body, but to those that say the soul shall sleep and
the soul does perish with the body until the Resurrection. Now against these
that plead for the sleeping of the soul till Christ's coming again, take these
four ways how to strengthen you.

pregnant instances in Scripture that after the godly die, their souls are
received into heaven before Christ comes.

general expressions in the Scripture, as well as particular instances to
prove this.

express passages in the Scripture to confirm this.

absurd inconsequences that will arise in case it should be denied.

Pregnant instances, or examples in the Scripture to prove that after death the
soul is received into Heaven. Take three instances. First, that known, Text,
Luke 23. 43. And Jesus said unto him, verily, I say unto thee. To day thou
shall be with me in Paradise. That day Christ dyed, that day Christ went to
Heaven, therefore that day the soul of that converted thief did go to Heaven.

Now beloved; there are two Evasions that those, who plead for the souls
cessation, for the souls sleeping, make to avoid this Text, and take off this
Instance.

I say unto thee this day, thou shall be with me in Paradise, that to day,
they do not refer it that the Thief should be in Paradise. Peter Martyr does
give two answers to this Evasion.

First, says he, it is not safe to alter a comma, or stop in Scripture, for
so you may pervert the Scripture, and make it speak what it never meant, if
men at their pleasure disagreeing from all Copies, alter comma's in the
translation.

Another Answer, that it appears this cannot be the sense of it, to refer
to day to the time that Christ spoke, and not the time that the thief should
be in Heaven; for says Gerrard, mark the thiefs prayer in ver 42. And he
said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom. Mark,
there is the thiefs when, that when Christ should come to Heaven. Christ should
remember him. Christ's Hodie must answer to his Quando, or else he did not
answer his prayer. Christ's to day, must answer the thiefs when, that when
Christ came to Heaven* then to remember the thief. And Jesus said unto him,
verily I say unto thee, to day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

to day, to tell him the time when he spoke, he knew Christ spoke to him
then, but to speak of the time when the thief should be in Heaven, it was
needful, I say to thee this day thou shall be with me in Heaven.

thou shall be with me in Paradise, but Christ does not say, thou shall be
with me in Heaven.

There are three answers to confute this Evasion,

Paradise understand Heaven by this Text, they then fall in with the Papists,
either for Purgatory, or a Limbus Patrum.

Secondly, take this answer, that in other Scriptures when Paradise is
mentioned, it is to be understood Heaven, and so the Apostle does expound it, 2
Cor. 12. 2, 4, I knew a man in Christ, above fourteen years ago, whether in
the body I cannot tell, or whether out of the body, I cannot tell, God knows,
such an one caught up to the third Heaven. How that he was caught up into
Paradise, and beard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to
utter. So that the Apostle by Paradise does mean Heaven, Revel. 2. 7. He that
has an ear let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches; To him that
overcomes will I give to eat of the Tree of Life, which is in the midst of
the Paradise of God. That is, he shall enjoy Jesus Christ, Christ in Heaven is
the Tree of Life in the Paradise of God, Adam was in before his fall, for the
Earthly Paradise was destroyed by the Flood, therefore of necessity when Christ
tells the thief, To day thou shall be with me in Paradise, it must refer
to the thiefes going to Heaven at that day with Jesus Christ.

A second instance it is in Luke 16. 22. And it came to pass that the Beggar
dyed, and was carried by the Angels into Ahrahams bosom; the rich man also dyed
and was buried. This is another instance, that the souls of the elect after
death they go to Heaven.

There are two Evasions made upon this Text.



To this I answer, though some men do say it is a Parable, yet many say it is
a History. Jerome and many following him does give many arguments to prove,
that it was a History, and not a parable. And Tertullian is confident that this
is an exact History of what was really done; And Peter Martyr does quote
Tertullian; says he, Tertullian is so confident that this is a History, that
he undertakes to tell you who were the men, says he, the Rich man was Herod,
and the Beggar was John the Baptist. But Suppose it be a parable and not a
History, yet parables do carry the resemblance of truth, parables take their
Foundations from truth, that there are some men in Hell, and some men in
Heaven, that in Hell there is torment and in heaven there is joy, that as the
beggar went to Heaven after death, so shall the godly, and as the rich man went
to Hell, so shall all the wicked.

The other Evasion is this, that this beggar is said to be carried into
Abraham's bosom; I answer, First, it is more then probable that Abraham's bosom
is Heaven; now Abraham being in heaven all his children are in Heaven, that are
in his bosom: that is the answer that Gerrard gives.

Again, it is said, that they are carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom;
therefore Abraham's bosom must be in Heaven: certainly the good Angels carry a
good soul into Heaven, and the wicked Angels carry a damned soul into Hell,
and thus you have two instances, that immediately after death the souls of the
Elect go to Heaven.

Mat. 22. 31, 32. But as touching the Resurrection of the dead, have you not
read that which was spoken unto you by God, saying, I am the God of Abraham,
and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, God is not the God of the dead, but
of the living. I argue from that instance that therefore Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob were living at that time, though not in their bodies; if you mark the
reason of that Text, it was not to prove a Resurrection of the body only, which
the Sadduces deny, but also to prove the immortality of the soul. The Sadduces
deny Spirits and Angels too, Acts 23. 8. For the Sadduces say that there is no
Resurrection, neither Angel nor Spirit, but the Pharisees confess both.
Christ does prove that there shall be a Resurrection of the body, and he
likewises proves that the soul does not dye when the body dies. Indeed there
is a quotation that I have read of a learned man that does make use of this
instance, Genesis 25. 8. Then Abraham gave up the ghost, and dyed in a good old
age, an old man, and full of years, and was gathered to his people. Abraham
was not gathered to his Fathers, nor to be gathered in the grave where his
forefathers were, how then can this be true that the Scripture says, Abraham
was gathered unto his Fathers? Divines say, it must be in his soul, that
Abraham went to heaven as his godly forefathers went, that is the meaning of
that phrase, his soul was to be bound up in the bundle of Life, to go to
Heaven as their forefathers did. And thus much for particular instances.

Heb. 12. 23. To the general Assembly, and Church of the first borne, which
are written in Heaven, and to God the judge of all, and to the Spirits of just
men made perfect: thence I argue, that Apostle makes mention, and proves that
there were the Spirits of just men made perfect; Now if their Souls did perish
with their bodies, then the Apostle should say, that their Spirits are
annihilated with the body, but it is the spirits of just men made perfect; The
Scripture takes notice in general expressions that just men have their Souls
made perfect. And then in Eccle. 12. 7. Then shall the dust return to the
Earth, as it was, and the Spirit shall return to God who gave it. Mark, here
are two things

Here is the end of Godly men, the body shall go to the dust, and the soul to
God. Then the time when it shall be is, when that man goes to his long home,
when the keepers of the house shall tremble, that is the hands, and arms; and
the strong men shall bow themselves, that is, the feet and the thighs; and the
grinders shall cease, that is, the teeth; and they that look out at the
windows shall be darkened, that is, the eyes; when nature decays and the
body perishes by Diseases and dies, then shall the body go to the dust, and
the Spirit to God that gave it.



The first is in John 6. 40. And this is the will of him that sent me, that
every one that sees the Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting
life, and I will raise him up at the last day.

Here are two distinct promises.







Another Text is in Luke 16. 9. And I say unto you, make to your selves friends
of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may receive you
into everlasting habitations. Chemnitius makes great use of this Text to prove
what I am now arguing for, that immediately after death, the soul of an Elect
man is received into Heaven. Mark, make you friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness, that is, of your wealth, called so either because it is
unrighteously gotten, or unrighteously kept; use your wealth well, that when
you die you may be received into everlasting habitations. It is questionable
whether it be referred to Angels, or to the poor which shall pray for us that
we be received into Heaven; but says Chemnitius, use your wealth well, that
you may be received into everlasting habitations, upon your failing, upon
dying the Lord receives the Elect into everlasting habitations. This Chemnitius
does build on, that the soul does go to Heaven immediately after Death.

Phil. 3. 23. For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and
to be with Christ, which is far better. The Apostle does Conjoyne these two
conclusions, a departing out of the world, out of this life, and a desire to be
with Jesus Christ, he mentions no middle place for a good soul to go to, he
mentions no Purgatory, nor Limbus Patrum.

And so likewise a fourth Text you have in 2 Cor. 6. 8, 9. Therefore we are
always confident, knowing that whilst we are at home in the body, we are
absent from the Lord. We are confident I say, and willing rather to be absent
from the body, and to be present with the Lord; wherefore we labor, that
whether present or absent, we may be accepted of him. Mark, the Apostle
desires, to be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord, so that
the soul is present with the Lord, whilst absent from the body.

Then again, that Prayer of Stephen proves it likewise, in Acts 7. 59. And
they stoned Stephen, calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus receive my
spirit. It had been uncomfortable for him to have thought that he should have
been stoned for Jesus Christ and it must have been above 1600 years before
Christ should have received his soul, but he prayed, Lord Jesus Christ
receive my soul, which he would not have done, if he had not believed that
his soul would have been received by Jesus Christ immediately after death.

And thus I leave those Scriptures to confirm you in this, that the soul does
not sleep in the body, but at the departure from the body it does immediately
go to Heaven.





Levit. 19. 13. Thou shall not defraud thy Neighbor, neither rob him, the
wages of him that is hired shall not abide with thee all night until the
morning. That the Master was not to keep the hire of the Labourer long from
him, that the Master should not keep the servants wages long from him; Now will
the great God keep from you, who are his servants, that have served him here in
this world, and have done him faithful service, any reward till his last
coming? No, but when you have ended your life, and done your work; you receive
your wages, when your work is done, you have your reward.

Jude, That the men of Sodom and Gomor^ha suffered the vengeance of eternal
fire. And of Judas, Acts 25. That he may take part of this ministry, and
Apostle-ship, from which Judas by transgression fell, that he might go to his
own place. I could give you a multitude of instances where it is shown the
wicked are in Hell, 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20. By which also he went and preached unto
the Spirits in Prison. Which sometimes were disobedient, when once the long
suffering of God waiting in the days of Noah, while the Arc was a preparing,
wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water. To say that a godly man
does not go to Heaven immediately after death, it will follow that a wicked
man does not go to Hell immediately after death.

Christ shall come from Heaven with his Saints; and we read in Scripture, that
there are the Spirits of just men made perfect, as well as the innumerable
company of Angels.

Scripture, and by those express passages in Scripture, and have given you
those absurdities, that will arise in case it should be denied.

A word now from what has been spoken. If it be that Christ does receive
thee, O thou believer, to himself, before the total and complete reception, I
would then give you this use for to comfort you.

John said, that wrote the Revelarions, when he was ready to die, I do
believe, says he, that in this very day my soul shall be presented before
the Lord Jesus Christ. O think, now thou art leaving thy friends, it will not
be a day before Christ and I shall meet in heaven. As in the Book of Martyrs
we read that in Queen Mary's time, two friends were put to death together.
One of them was fearful to think that the flames should scorch his flesh. O
says the other, be of good comfort, for half an hour hence thou shall be
in Heaven! O think, though thou art weak and sick even unto death, yet that
thou shall shortly be with Jesus Christ, doubt not of the truth of this, For I
could even pawn my soul of the truth of it, that the souls of the Elect are
taken up into heaven immediately after death. O then let not death trouble you.

dead and receive them to himself. This is the particular that I am now to
insist upon, and receive you to my self.









There are four reasons.

1 Cor. 15. 12. Now if Christ be preached, that he rose from the dead, etc.
As if he should have said, Christ being risen from the dead, does argue that
our bodies must rise from the Grave, though they be dead there. In 1 Cor. 6.
14. And God has both raised up the Lord, and will also raise up us by his own
power, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14. For if we believe that Jesus dyed, and rose again,
even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. So that
because Jesus Christ's body is raised from the dead, and received up into
Heaven, therefore our bodies must be raised up and received into glory with him.

Secondly, the bodies of the Elect must be raised, because of the inhabitation
of the Spirit; the Spirit does sanctify the bodies of the Elect, as well as
the souls, the very God of peace sanctify you throughout, and I pray God that
your soul, Spirit and Body, be kept blameless unto the coming of the Lord
Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 6. 18, 19, 20. Flee Fornication, every sin that a man
does, is without the body, but he that commits Fornication sins against
his own body. What, know ye not that your body is the Temple of the holy Ghost
which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own? for ye are
bought with a price; Therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit,
which are Gods. Now the spirit of God having a gracious work in the body as
well as the soul; Therefore the body must be raised up from the dead as well
as the soul; and this the Scripture makes an Argument of the resurrection in
Romans 8. 11. But if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell
in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your
mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwells in you. So that spirit that raised
up Christ from the dead, if that dwells in you, and the graces of the spirit,
that spirit shall quicken your mortal bodies; therefore the bodies of the
Elect shall be raised from the dead and received into glory with the soul.

Romans 8. 13. For if ye live after the flesh ye shall die, but if ye through
the spirit do mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live, Now being that
the godly do mortify the deeds of the body, and do expose their bodies to
tortures and torments for Jesus Christ; now because the bodies of the Elect,
do cooperate with the soul in good, therefore the body shall be co-partner
with the soul in good also.

must be raised and received up to Jesus Christ to make his body a perfect
body. Thus much for the Reasons why that Jesus Christ at the second coming
shall raise and receive the bodies of the Elect to himself, as well as the
souls.



Chrysostom says, take Wool, and let this Wool be dyed into a Scarlet, or
purple color, dyed in grain, yet the Wool is the same Wool as it was
before, when it was white, but yet there is a more goodly luster put upon it.
Thy body shall be the same body, but thy body shall have more illustrious
endowments, then now it has.

And thus much only in the general; now to come to particulars. I shall
resolve this question in these six Particulars.

There are six glorious endowments that the body shall receive from Jesus
Christ, at his second coming, when he receives the body to himself.

1 Cor. 15. 44. It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body.
There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body. The meaning is, the
body as it lives here, is a natural body, needing natural refreshments; but
says the Apostle, is shall be raised a spiritual body, it shall have no more
need of natural refreshments, which the natural body requires when it is a
spiritual body it stands in no more need of meat, no more need of drink nor
sleep, and other natural refreshments, it shall be raised a spiritual body.
Mat, 22. 30. For in the resurrection they neither Marry, nor are given in
Marriage, but are as the Angels of God in Heaven. The Angels have no need of
food, and stand in no need of outward helps, Rev. 7. 15, 16. Therefore are they
before the Throne of God, and serve him day and night in his Temple, and he
that sits on the Throne shall dwell among them, They shall hunger no more,
neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on them, nor any heat.
Therefore O believing soul, behold thy happiness of soul and body in glory;
they shall be no more standing in need of natural refreshments then spirits
do; when the Scripture says that your bodies should be received by Christ.
The Platonic Philosophers understand, the body shall be turned into a spirit,
into a ghost, or into wind or air, but that is not the reason of it, it shall
be of the same substance as it is upon the Earth, but it shall be refined.

Phil. 3. 21. Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like
his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue
all things unto himself. The body of Christ is a beautiful body, neither spot
nor wrinckle, nor any such thing in it; thy body shall be like Christ's
glorious Body, 1 Cor. 15. 43. It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory,
it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power. Here thy body it is a vile
body, El^phaz calls the body a house of clay, and Job calls it a house of Earth;
It is the Opinion of Gerrard, and he gives strong reasons for it, that if there
be any defects upon the body in this world, if any of the members of the body
be wanting, it shall be restored to thee at the resurrection, and there are
these reasons to be given for it.





Adams body was in innocence; Adams body was created perfect by God, when
Christ raises thy body, it shall never want a member, nor abound in a member,
thy vile body shall be beautiful: what though others be (...) then thee, and
clearer skinned then thee, what though others men's Earth be painted better then
thine* yet when Christ receives thy body, it shall be a beautiful, a glorious
body, therefore you have that phrase, Mat. 13. 43. Th^^ shall the righteous
shine forth as the Sun, in the Kingdom of their Father.

1 Cor. 15. 52, 53. In a Moment, in the Twinkling of an eye, at the last trump;
for the Trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and
we shall be changed, For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this
mortal must put on immortality. Those mortal bodies that must die, must be
made immortal, and those incorruptible bodies, made incorruptible and never
die, this is the great happiness of the elect, that their bodies shall be made
immortal bodies.

impassive bodies, the body here is exposed to Diseases, Aches, Consumptions
and what not? the body it is an Hospital of Diseases, a Magazine of all
Infirmities, but the Lord shall make this body impassive; liable to no
sufferings, God shall then wipe a way all tears from our eyes, no sorrows, no
crying, nor no pain, there is the great happiness of the body, it shall be
made impassive, not liable to hunger, thirst, pain, Diseases, and the like.

1 Thessalonians. 4. 14. for if we believe that Jesus Christ dyed and rose again,
even them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. Which the body
could not do, if the body did not lose its lumpishnesse and heaviness which
it has here Zanchy does illustrate it by this comparison; ^ says he the body
is like the Chick in the agge, the Bird in the egg strives not, but when it is
flusht, then it can fly; so, when thou ar^ raised, thou can go from one
part of the world to another in a moment; so was Christ's body when it was
raised, Christ was taken immediately up into heaven, which is as Astronomers
say; (if we may believe their gues^es) above 40 Millions of Miles: now the
soul has a lumpish body that it cannot follow the soul, therefore the body
shall be made conformable to the Soul; the body is now a tired Jade to the
Soul, but then it shall not be so.

1 Cor. 15. 44. It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory, it is sown in
weakness, it is raised in power. The body of man is a weak fleshly thing*
Ansel^e is of this Opinion on this Text, 1 Cor. 15. says he* man's body shall
be so strong that he shall be able to toss a mountain, as a child would
toss a tennis ball: this is the great glory that God puts on the body, that
being a natural Body, it shall be made by Christ a spiritual Body; of being
a vile Body, it shall made by Christ a beautiful Body, from being a mortal
Body, it shall be made an immortal Body; from being liable to sorrows and
sufferings in this world, it shall be made impassive, being a heavy lumpish
Body, it shall be made an agile Body; and from being a weak Body, it shall be
made a strong Body.

Now before I come to the Application, there are two Objections which lie in
the way. As in the primitive times there were the Sadduces that held there was
no resurrection, and after Christ's time there was Hymeneus and Philetus, which
said that the Resurrection was past already, and the Church of Corinth was
tainted with this Error, if Christ be risen from the dead, how say some amongst
you, that there is no Resurrection of the dead? Now in the Primitive and
Christ's time, there was this Opinion, that there was no Resurrection of the
Body, and so made this merely but a poetical fiction, and to be no real and
undoubted truth.

The Scripture which they urge is this, you talk of the Body being raised by
Christ, how can this be when the Apostle says expressly, the Body is made of
flesh and blood, 1 Cor. 15. 50. Now this I say Brethren, that flesh and blood
cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, neither does corruption inherit
incorruption. Therefore if flesh and blood cannot come to Gods Kingdom, how
then can the Body come there.



run this way, by flesh and blood is understood the bodies of men as liable to
sin, as in this world they shall not be raised up they shall not come to
Heaven but we shall be changed, we shall not all sleep but be changed, the
Apostle proves this, 1 Cor. 15. 50, 51. Now this I say Brethren, that flesh and
blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, neither does corruption inherit
incorruption, Behold, I show you a mystery, we shall not all sleep, but we
shall all be changed. Our corruptible Bodies shall not come to Heaven as they
are corruptible, but come to Heaven by being incorruptible, but we shall all be
changed, that is, our Bodies shall be changed from being mortal, corruptible,
and being weak and sinful, to be holy and Immortal, so that flesh and blood
as now it is sinful, corruptible, till changed and made glorious and pure,
shall not come to Heaven.

Second Text which they urge against the Body being glorified, and say it is
but a fancy, Job 14. 7, 8. 9. For there is hope of a Tree, if it be cut down,
that it shall sprou^ again, and that the tender branch thereof will not cease.
Though the root thereof wax old in the Earth, and the stock thereof die in the
ground, yet through the sent of water it will bud, and bring forth Bought like
a plant: But man dies and wastes away, yea, man gives up the ghost, and
where is hee^^. A Tree faith Job, if that dies it may live again but if man
dies, he vanishes away, and where is man? on this they build that man shall
never live again.

To this, take this clear Answer, That when Job speaks, Though a tree dies it
lives again, but if man dies he lives not, Job understands it by living
again in this World, so there is more hope of a Tree then of a Man.

But you will ask me, how do you prove this for to be Jobs intent.

I prove it to you from Jobs words in the 12. verse. So man lies down, and
rises not till the heavens be no more, they shall not awake nor be raised
out of their sleep. So that here Job speaks of a rising when the Heavens shall
be no more, when the world shall be burnt with fire, then man shall be
awakned; and in the 14. verse. If a man die, shall be live again? All the
days of my appointed time will I wait till my change come. Job speaks in this
Chapter of the change of the Body and of the raising of the Body. Tertullian
and Austine say well, that there is no Doctrine of Religion is more repugnant
to sense and reason.

There is this reason that may seem to be against the raising of the Body; How
is it possible that the Bodies of men can be raised, when that they are so
confounded together as they are in the Earth.

Suppose a Man be killed and devoured by a Wolf, a Lion eats that Wolf,
suppose that the Lion dies, and the Fowls of the air eat that Lion, and men
eat those Fowls; how can the bodies of Men be raised being thus confounded?
Suppose a Man be drowned in the Sea, and the Fishes in the Sea eat that man,
how can his substance be gathered together at the last Day?

Answer, it is the answer of Perkins. First, much may be done by Nature, by
art. First, an Illustration from a Refiner, put before Refiner a mass of
metal, and there shall be in that one Lump, a vein of Silver, a vein of
Brass, of Gold, of Tyn, of Iron, and the like, and these Metals are all
mingled together; Now a Refiner by his art, he can distinctly sever the Silver
from the Gold, and the Iron from the Lead: Now can art do this, and shall not
the God of Nature sever this man from that man? God shall sever them though
they are heaped together.

Again, a Gardner, sows variety of Seeds, yet do you come to the Garden,
and let one ask you what seed lies in that Bed, or in this Bed, as ro^ting in
the ground, you cannot tell; But come to the Gardner and ask him what Seed is
in that Bed, and he can tell you distinctly the Seed in every Bed; And cannot
the the great God do this? he that made us knows our shape; we cannot tell
what man's dust this is in the Grave, I, but God that laid it in the Grave, he
knows, he knows which shall be my dust, and which shall be thy dust, and
which every man's dust, he knows what body shall spring up thence; Therefore
labor to exalt Faith in the great Mystery of raising, and glorifying your
bodies.

I have now a practical application to make of this.

The Uses.



Let it not trouble thee then that thy body shall be a crucified body, because
at Christ's second coming it shall be a glorious body.

Again, it may be comfort to thee, by reason of thy natural infirmities.
Suppose thy body be a s^^kly body, suppose thy body be full of A^hes, Agues,
Consumptions, Diseases and the like, suppose thy body be maimed, Blind and
Lame, yet remember thy body that is vile, deformed and sickly, it shall have
fresh Robes of glory upon it, and be made like to the glorious Body of Jesus
Christ.

We read in the book of Martyrs, of two Martyrs that were to be burnt at
Stratford Bow near Lordon, one Hugh Laborocke, and John Price the one blind,
and the other lame, this Price being full of fear when the fire was about him,
says Hugh unto him, be not troubled, though thou blind and I lame, yet
remember death will heal thee of thy Blindness and me of Lamenesse. Suppose
thou art blind, lame and maimed, Christ's receiving of thy body will cure all,
and truly there were comfort to a man under a bodily distemper* when a man
should think that this body of mine should rot in the Grave, and never be
raised from the dead.

But thy deformed body it should be a beautiful body, that which is a sickly
body shall be made a healthful body, and freed from all diseases.





Fourthly, if this be true that Jesus Christ will raise thy Body unto glory, O
then do not abuse these Bodies of yours; they are the Temples of the Holy
Ghost, these Bodies of yours shall one day be raised, and received by Jesus
Christ. It is an argument that the Apostle raises, 1 Cor. 6. 14, 15. verse. And
God has both raised up the Lord by his own Power; know ye not that your bodies
are the Members of Christ? shall I then take the members of Christ, and make
them the Members of Harlots? God forbid. This is the Apostles Argument. The
Apostle would reason against Adultery and Uncleanness in the body, what
argument does he use? Know ye this, Christ will raise up our bodies, and
shall we take these Members of our bodies, and make them the members of a
Where? So then Beloved, let the Doctrine of your Resurrection, and of your
bodies being raised and received to Jesus Christ, provoke you that you do not
abse your Bodies. He that keeps company with a Harlot, sins against his own
Body, 1 Cor. 6. 18. Flee Fornication, every sin that a man does, is without
the Body, but he that commits Fornication, sins against his own body.
For a man to lie and swear, it is against his Soul, but for a man to be
unclean, it is to sin against his Body; O do not die with an unclean Body,
with an Adulterous Body, and do not abuse thy Body, do not abuse those Eyes
of thine to be windows of lust, that shall one day behold Jesus Christ; do
not abuse that body that must have a sweet communion with Christ in Heaven.

I am now come to handle the last point in the Text, the last Clause, that
where I am, there you may be also.

These words they note unto you the Event, or Consequent, what shall follow
upon Christ's coming again, and receiving our bodies unto himself at the last
day. The Event shall be this, an everlasting enjoyment of Christ, that is the
result and consequent of Christ's coming, to be ever with him, that where I am,
there you may be also.

I shall open the words, for there is some difficulty in one Expression, where
I am you see it is a word in the present sense, where I am, and though it be a
word of the present Tense, it does not denote thus much that that they should
be at Jerusalem with Christ; for Christ was then at Jerusalem* but as Grotius
says, that here the word of the present Tense, is to be understood of the
suture Tense, that is, where I shall be shortly after I leave this world where
I shall be there you shall be, and so he does bring that Text to prove it.
Joh. 7. 34. Ye shall seek me and shall not find me, and where I am, thither
ye cannot come. It cannot be taken in the present Tense, for he was then
(...) Jerusalem, but it is to be understood in the future Tense, where I shall
be, I go, but I come again, that where I shall be when I come to my Fathers
House in Heaven, I may have all your companies to be personally present with
me in Heaven; that is the scope of the word.

Observe, that when ever Christ speaks of being in Heaven, though he was on
the Earth, yet he speaks in the present Tense, as if he were in Heaven
already; John 3. 13, And no man has ascended up to Heaven, but he that came
down from Heaven, even the Son of man which is in Heaven. Christ was not in
Heaven, he was speaking on Earth to them in his Person, in his Humane Nature,
so likewise in John 17. 24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given
Me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my Glory which then have
given me, for thou lovedst me before the Foundation of the World. Gerrard
does raise this Question here.

Why does Christ say that he is in Heaven, when yet he was in his body on the
Earth?

I am, denotes the certainty of Christ's going to Heaven, that he should be
there as sure as if he were there. Babylon is fallen, why the the Popedom is
not fallen, yet it shall be as sure as if it were fallen. It is to note

Gerrard gives; Christ does express it in the present Tense, where I am,
though he were on Earth, to show that Christ was truly God as well as man, and
in regard of his Divine Nature he was truly in Heaven, as in regard of his
Human Nature he was on Earth. Thus much for the manner of expression, that
where I am, there you may be also; the latter part is this, that they might be
with Christ where he is.

One thing observe, that in Scripture Language, there is a great difference
between Christ's being with us, and our being with Christ. That Christ is said
to be with us, does not denote a personal presence, but a presence by his
Spirit, Mat. 28. last verse. Teaching them to obser^^ all things whatsoever I
shall command you, and lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the
World. It was not in person, for he left them, but I am with you in my
blessings, in my Spirit, but when the Scripture speaks of our being with
Christ, it notes a personal presence, a being with Christ in person, Therefore
Paul says, I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. Christ was with
Paul, because Christ converted him, but Paul was not with Christ, but desired
to be dissolved and to be with Christ, our being with the Lord it notes a
personal presence, an enjoying of the presence of the Lord.

where I am there you may be also. This Doctrine it is out of the common place.
Here in setting out to you that this shall be the consequent of Christ's great,
and last coming to receive the Elect unto himself; that where Christ is, there
ye may be also; I shall show you the great blessedness in this condition in
these eight or nine particulars.

Adam in a state of Innocence; we should have thought our selves happy, to be
as Adam was, to have had the immediate presence of God, we should have thought
this a very happy and glorious Estate. Indeed so it was, but now, to be
present with Christ in Heaven, thou art more happy ten thousand times, then if
thou had been made when Adam was made, to have lived with him in Innocence.

Adam when he was made by God in Innocence, he was instated only into an
earthly Paradise, but now, thou being with Christ art stated into an
everlasting kingdom.

Again, Adam was placed in Innocence; yet so as to be liable to lose that
blessed and glorious condition he was in, and did lose it, though he were a
perfect Creature, yet he lay under a capacity to lose all his excellency, but
when God brings thee to be present with Jesus Christ, thou art instated into a
Kingdom that cannot be shaken, into a happy condition that cannot be lost.



John 17. 24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given Me, be with
Me, where I am, that they may behold my Glory. Beloved, this is the
Beatificall vision, this referres to seeing the Glory of Christ's person in his
Humane Nature, not the glory of his God head, but the Glory of his Man hood,
that they may behold my glorified body, the Glory of my Humane Nature, that was
so contemned, and so despised when I was on the Earth; I beseech thee let all
the Elect that long for me, and for to be with me, I beseech thee that they
may be with me where I am, to behold my glory; It was a solemn wish of
Austine a little before his Death; he wished that he might see three things, and
then if he might die, he did not care: I wish says he, First, that I might
see Rome in its beauty, and to see Paul in the Pulpit, and to see Christ in the
flesh, every Believer shall see the Lord Jesus in the flesh. Job tells you of
his confidence long before Christ was borne, I know my Redeemer lives, and
with these eyes I shall see my Redeemer, here is thy happiness, that being
where Jesus Christ is, thou have a society with Christ in his humane Nature, 1
John 3. 2. Beloved, now we are the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear
what we shall be, but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be
like him, for we shall see him as he is. We do not know what Christ is, we
shall know him then we shall see him as he is glorified in Heaven.

Joh. 1. 26 verse, If any man serve me, let him follow me, and where I am,
there shall also my servant be; If any man serve me, him will my Father
honor. That is, where I shall be in Heaven. Beloved, the time is now of
giving honor to God, and giving Glory to God, but thy being where Christ is,
God then gives thee Glory and gives thee Honor.

beloved, here the highest grown Christian, and the strongest Believer in the
World does stand in more need of Ordinances then a lame man does of Crutches to
go by; but when thou come to have this accomplishment, that thou shall be
where Christ is, thou then stand in no need of Ordinances, then what needs
the Candlestick of Sermons; what needs the Candlestick of Preaching, and the
Candlestick of Praying, when thou art present with Christ the Sun of
righteousness; there is no need of conduit pipes, when thou art by the
Fountain head, thou needst no Ordinances, the conduit pipes are the Ordinances,
there is no need of Ordinances any longer then thou art absent from the
Fountain, which is Jesus Christ, the ceremonial Law is all Gospel, it is a
dark Gospel, the Evangelists are the explained Gospel the ceremonial Law is
a dark Gospel, Exodus 25. Meaning the holy place; There was to be golden
Candlesticks which Typified the Preaching of the Word; In the Holy place there
was the Incense Dishes, to wit Christ's Intercession, this was only in the holy
place, but in the holy of holiest, there was no Candlestick, no Incense Dishes
there, to show, that whilst you are on this side Heaven in the Church of God,
you need the Candlestick, you need Preaching and praying; but in the holy of
holiest there was none of this, to show that it was a Type of Heaven, and when
Christ beings thee there, then thou art above Ordinances, and never till then;
this is a Fourth particular.

A Fifth Privilege, of thy being where Christ is, is this, that thou shall have
a full communion and fellowship with Jesus Christ in Person. Beloved, here we
have our communion with Christ, but it is a communion far different from that
which we shall have in Heaven.

shall enjoy Christ personally, and have communion immediately with Christ in
Heaven.











A sixth particular is this, thy being present with Jesus Christ, there is this
to attend thee, there shall be gladness, and rejoicing among all the Angels
in Heaven; If the Angels in Heaven shall rejoice at a sinners conversion, they
shall much rejoice at a sinners inauguration in Heaven; they and we shall make
but one fold to glorify the great Shepherd of our souls the Lord Jesus, what
great joy shall there be among Angels, Archangels, Thrones, etc. Singing
Hallelujah to God, making you partners of their glory.

state of exemption from sin, from the causes of sin, and from the punishments
of sin.





1 Kings 33. The Palm Tree is an Emblem of victory; Therefore the victorious
are said to wear Palms in their hands triumphing, Revelation 7. to show that
you can never be complete Conquerours, to wear signals of triumph and signals
of conquest in your hands, till you come to enter into the holy of holiest.
Then you have conquered over sin, and over Temptation to sin, and conquered
over all punishments for sin. The Moral Philosophers say, that Rain, Hail,
Storm and Tempests are engendered in the middle Region, but above the middle
Region, there is no Wind, no storm or Tempest; whilst thou art here below,
there are storms, Wind and blustering Temptations; but when God takes thee
above this middle Region, there is no storm nor tempest to disturb thee, but
thou shall be quiet there.

torments in Hell, there are degrees and orders among the Angels in Heaven, not
only Angels, but Archangels, not only Cherubins and Seraphins, but distinct
orders among Angels; there surely is an order and degree among glorified
Saints, that those that have done most for Christ and suffered most for Christ,
they shall have most glory from Jesus Christ. It is the saying of one, that as
God does communicate his Graces in an unequal manner in this Life, so he
shall crown them in an unequal manner in the Life to come: as thou have gone
beyond some men in graces, so thou shall be beyond some men in glory, in
enjoying the bodily presence of Jesus Christ, thou shall know all the bodies of
all thy well-beloved friends that thou know here in the world, this most
Divines do concur in. Bolton is very strong for it, all our Modern Authors
are for it, and some of the Ancients too, I only give it as a probable
advantage and comfort; then a man shall say, Here is the Child that I sought
God for, and may the Minister say, Here is the People that I have Preached to,
and the people say, Here is the Minister now in Heaven that I have heard, take
these probable grounds for it.

Dives in Hell knew Lazarus in Heaven. Then we read likewise in Luke 13. 28.
There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham and
Isaac and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and you your
selves thrust out. Now if the damned in Hell see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in
the Kingdom of God, why shall not the Godly know one another there?

Then again, Peter, James, and John, knew Moses in the transfiguration, Mat.
13. Then again the godly they knew the damned in Hell: Therefore certainly
they may know one another in Heaven. It is said in Mat. 8. 11. And I say unto
you* that many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down with
Abraham and Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven. I do not give you
this for certain, I am loath in things controversall, tossed to and fro by
learned Men, rashly to determine; but there are strong Hints to build hopes on,
that in thy knowing of Christ in Person, and when the bodies of the Elect shall
be raised, thou shall know the bodies of thy Elected Friends. Bolton here
thinks it should detract much from the happiness of every Saint in Heaven, if
every Saint should not know one another, which knew one another here upon
Earth, this adds much to this happiness, in that they shall have a sociable
Communion in being with Christ in Person where he is. And thus much for the
Adjuncts of this Condition, that where Christ is, there ye may be also (...).



place in heaven where Christ is. Historians that write of T^iberius,
stigmatize him for a very fool that would for a drop of drink ^ell his
Kingdom, and so was called of Tiberius (Biberius) O there are many such
Biberius's in the world, that for a draught of drink will venture the danger of
drinking down shovels full of fire to their own damnation; many in the world
that will rather then lofe their places, and possessions here upon Earth,
venture to lose that place where Jesus Christ is. Thus I have in ten Sermons
finished Five maine Points of Religion. And if I go and prepare a place for
you, I will come again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there
ye may be also.

FINIS.

