An Ordonnance Of the Most Christian KING, FORBIDDING His Subjects to have any
Commerce With the SPANIARDS: AND Commanding them to commit Hostilities upon
them. Of the Nineteenth of October, 1673.

Done out of French, According to the Copy Printed at Paris.

In the SAVOY, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, 1673.

An Ordonnance Of the Most Christian King: Forbidding His Subjects to have any
Commerce with the Spaniards, and Commanding them to commit Hostilities upon
them.
Of the Nineteenth of October, 1673.
HIs Majesty having been informed, That the Governor of the Spanish Netherlands
has caused Acts of Hostility to be begun the Sixteenth instant, on his
Majesty's Subjects, all along the Froutiers, has Commanded, and by these
Presents Signed with his own Hand, does Command all his Subjects, Vassals, and
Servants, to fall upon the Spaniards, both by Land and Sea, and does forbid
them to have hereafter any Communication, Commerce, or Intelligence with them,
on pain of Death; And to that end his Majesty has from this present Revoked,
and does now Revoke, all Licenses, Passports, Safeguards, or Safe Conducts,
which may have been granted by himself, his Lieutenants General, and other his
Officers, contrary, to these Presents, and has Declared them void and of no
force, forbidding all persons to have any regard to the same, His Majesty
ordering and commanding Monsieur le Comte de Vermandois Admir^ll of France, the
Mareschals of France, Governors and Lieutenants General for his Majesty in
his Provinces and Armies, Field-Mareschals, Colonels, Mestres de Camp,
Captains, Leaders, and Commanders of his Forces, as well Horse as Foot, French
or Foreign, and all other his Officers whom it may concern, to take care, That
the Contents hereof be punctually executed within their respective
Jurisdictions; For such is his Majesty's pleasure, who Wills that these
Presents be published and affixed in all his Towns, as well Maritime as
others, and in all the Ports, Havens, and other places of his Kingdom, where it
shall be necessary, that none may pretend Ignorance of the same.

Done at Versailles, October 19. 1673. Signed LOUIS. And underneath, Le TELLIER.
It is commanded, That Charles Canto, his Majesty's sworn Crier in Ordinary,
do Publish, and cause to be affixed in all places of this City, Suburbs,
Prevoste, and Viscomte of Paris, where it shall be necessary, the Kings
Ordonnance of the Nineteenth of this Month and Year, that none may pretend
Ignorance.

Done October 20. 1673. Signed, De La REYNIE.


REad, Published with Sound of Trumpet, Cried publicly, and affixed in all the
Carrefours ordinary and extraordinary of this City and Suburbs of Paris, By me
Charles Canto, sworn Crier in Ordinary to the King in the said City, Prevoste
and Viscomte of Paris. At the making of which Proclamation, I was accompanied
with 5 Trumpets, viz. Hierosme Tronson, and Estienne du Bos his Majesty's sworn
Trumpetters, and three other Trumpets.

October. 20. 1673. Signed, CANTO.



FINIS.

