Personal Reprobation Reprobated: BEING A Plain EXPOSITION upon the Nineth
Chapter to the Romans, SHOWING, That there is neither little nor much of any
such Doctrine as Personal Election or Reprobation, asserted by the Apostle in
that Chapter: But that his great Design is to maintain Justification by Faith
in Christ Jesus, without the Works of the Law. Humbly Offered to serious
Consideration,

By Samuel Loveday.

John 3.17. For God sent not his son into the world to condemn the world, but
that the world through him might be saved.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and to be sold by him, and Francis Smith, at
the Elephant and Castle, and P. Parker at the Leg and Star in Cornhil, 1676.
Price Bound, 2 s.

Licensed, Nov. 30. 1675.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Reader,
ALthough it is usual yet not always so needful as in this case, to usher in
the following matter with a preparatory Introduction to prepare thee to
consider of what is here offered, which is not that which is newly sprung up in
my understanding, but that which has been my steadfast belief and satisfied
persuasion more then twenty years, as many can witness; and the truth is,
those prodigious hard favored and frightful notions and Opinions, which I
often meet with, both in words and writings, built upon this portion of
Scripture, has pressed me even beyond my genius to appear in this way; for I am
deeply sensible of my own inabillity in parts and learning to answer the
expectations of the knowing Critics of our age, neither shall make that my aim
in my proceedings: that which I design in this Treatise is in a very plain and
familiar way to offer my Opinion and understanding to the unbia^st Reader upon
this portion of Scripture, as my understanding has been rectified by the
current of other Scriptures, and the judgments of many approved and very
learned men both ancient and modern which I have consulted with: and although
my genius has not at any time inclined me to imbroyl my self in controversies
public or private, but has given my self to the study of those more
immediately necessary doctrines in Religion, yet I am greatly desirous (so far
as God shall enable me) to be instrumental to make an essay, to dispel those
clouds of darkness, that to many, do interpose between them and that truth
shining in this Scripture: and the more willingly do I concern my self in this
matter, because I judge the great name and gracious nature of our good God is
much disparaged and obscured by the more general construction of this portion
of Scripture: the common and general receiving Opinion of men upon this place
of Scripture (I say) does not comport with that name that God is known by
elsewhere in the holy Scriptures, as to be a God good, gracious, merciful,
just, equal, not punishing the guiltless, nor quitting the guilty, but judging
every man according to his works, that takes no pleasure in the destruction of
the wicked; but is long-suffering to us ward, not willing that any should
perish: whereas the common Opinion supposedly deduced from this Chapter does
render God partial in his dealings with the sons of men, whilst they are in no
capacity to act good or evil: I may be bold to say, that there is no portion of
Scripture in the whole book of God, more wronged, wracked, and tortured,
subborned, and made to speak what it never meant as this is: This nineth of the
Romans is made the supterfuge of many dreadful amazing notions; as for instance.

1. That all things happen not only according to Gods fore knowledge but by his
express decree, that Esau was a wicked man by virtue of Gods positive decree
of Reprobation, before he was born; that wicked men by strong impulses from God
do that which is unlawful for them to do; that Gods decrees are not less
efficacious in his permission of evil, then in the bringing forth of good: some
have ventured to say, that all sin is of God, as the author; and man as the
instrument: others affirm, that there are two wills in God, a secret and a
revealed, and by consequence the one quite contrary to the other, as to the
same act, the one decreeing what the other forbids, which to me seems a greater
piece of absurdity, then those are guilty of who were of Opinion, that there
are two Gods, as the different authors of good and evil: But it is true, there
are but few who will be so bold, though of the forenamed Opinions in the root,
to make such an ingenious application of their own Opinions, as others have
done. But (Reader) give me leave to present thee with the standard which I
desire to measure by, to preserve me from all those extravagant notions
aforesaid, which I hope may not be offensive to any to close with upon due
consideration: and in order thereunto, know that I desire but two principles to
be the square and measure of what I hold on the contrary to the premises. 1.
That all sin is of man and not of God; that God does not tempt, much less force
any man to sin. 2. That all good is of God, and not Originally of man,
and in both these principles I have the Apostle James on my side; James 1.
ver. 13. 17. God is the author of all the good men do and receive: man is the
author of all the evil he commits, and of all the evil he suffers for his evil
so committed; all the good we do is by strength received from God, not from any
good distinctly in himself: grace makes men able to do good, not unable to do
evil: God punishes no man with eternal death under the notion of a creature,
but as a malefactor; no man is sinful because he is ordained to condemnation,
but ordained to condemnation because he is sinful, Jude, 4. if any suppose two
wills in God, with respect to man's eternal state, we must; yea it were
preposterous to judge of his revealed will by his supposed secret; but we must
resolve his secret will into his revealed will, Deuteronomy. 29. last. Thus far we may
grant, that Gods antecedent will is, that all men should be saved, and his
subsequent will, wherein he decrees the death of rebellious rejecters of his
grace: I hope it will easily be granted that grace makes men able to choose
good, not unable to refuse it: It is a saying of Tertullian, that as God made
man in his own image so in nothing more lively then in the freedom and liberty
of his will, otherwise (says he) he were neither liable to reward or
punishment, being under a necessity. I am sensible, that I am upon a great
disadvantage in what I shall here offer, because the far greater number of
zealous Professors are so prepossest with ill will to this doctrine, that they
will hardly be willing to read, much less consider of what is offered of this
kind: the zealous Jews were not more prejudic't against our Savior then many
professors are against this doctrine: but know it is commendable and honorable
for persons, to compare what they read and hear to the Scriptures, as the
Bereans did, who hereupon rendered themselves more noble then those of
Thessalonica: Truth is so worthy a jewel, that wise Solomon does counsel us, to
buy it what ever it cost, Pro. 23. he has tied us to no price in the purchase
of it; and this truth now in controversy is of great concernment, rightly to
understand the terms of salvation: it is a dangerous thing to be yoked with
error, especially in a matter of such great importance, about Gods decree,
with respect to man's eternal state: it is an uncomfortable condition, for
persons to live in doubt and question of the reallity of Gods desire of their
salvation, in the offers and tenders of his grace: and no opinion does more
naturally and rationally lead persons to spiritual slothfulness, to live in a
doubt hereof, whether our labor will be successeful in the Lord: I was lately
reading a saying of a learned man, respecting the Opinion that I am now
opposing, as to the tendency of it; and these are his words in substance, if
not verbatim: If the God of this world had a mind or opportunity to petition
to the grandees or pillars in Religion, met in council, that they would take
some pity on him, and establish by law some few doctrins, which he should
nominate for the relief of his tottering kingdom, this would be the first or
chief he would nominate, namely, the doctrine of absolute personal and
irrespective Election and Reprobation: which doctrine is directly calculated for
the flesh and old man: for (says that Doctor) in effect a man may be unjust,
unmerciful, partial and full of dissimulation, hating most men without cause,
and yet most like God himsef: Thus speaks that Author as to the import of
this opinion.

But it will appear from the following Exposition, that our Apostle had no
affinity with such an Opinion of such Personal Election, neither was such an
opinion any ways properly conducing to the effecting his design upon the
unbelieving Jews; who reckoned themselves the elect of God, and none else in
all the world; but the whole world besides were cast off; and therefore they
forbid the Apostles to preach to the gentiles, that they might be saved:
whereas the Apostles design was, to convince the Jews, that Gods elect were
such and such only, who should believe in Jesus Christ, as well gentiles as
Jews, there being no respect of persons with God.

The method which I shall proceed in, is that which is usual in Treatises of
this nature.

I first enquire into the various readings of the words. 2. Consult the
Original reading with them. 3. Give the scope sense and meaning with an eye to
the Context. 4. Lay down those doctrinal conclusions that does naturally flow
from the words.
But I fear I shall hold the Reader too long in the Preface, which to some may
be unpleasant, I shall therefore with a few instructions to the Reader, break
off, and refer him to the book it self. 1. I entreat the Reader, that he would
not judge of the matter of this book, according to those many imperfections in
the management of it, but according to that truth shining in the scope of the
whole; you have here a brief compendium of the whole controversial part of the
Chapter, wherein you may as in a glass see the face of the whole at once. 2.
Know this, that there was a time when I was pathetically engaged in my
judgment on the other hand, till through reading and searching the Scriptures,
and reasoning with those differing from me in the matter, the truth did
forceably and convincingly shine into my understanding; from whence I am
instructed to wait not only with patience, and with charity, but hopes also, as
toward those, who now yet do oppose this truth: My own experience instructing
me that a person may have a good conscience, though ignorant of truth in many
particulars, but no man can have a good conscience who is debauched in morals.
3. Labor to read and weigh what is here offered without a prejudic't mind;
read to understand, not to contradict. 4. This I entreat, that if thou find
some words, phrases, or sayings, often repeated, think it not strange, for thou will find it needful, in order to beating out truth.


I will add no more, but only desire thee, to accept of this my service as
ingeniously and heartily as it is honestly intended; for this I can say, I took
not in hand this task, because I love to see my self in print, or because I
fancy scribbling, but with a hearty and fervent desire of being instrumental to
do some good; which as it has been, so shall be the hearty prayer of,

Thy obliged Friend, to serve the in the truth. S. L.

The CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. WHerein is contained what real, great and constant sorrow the holy
Apostle had for the miserable estate of the Jews under their sin of blindness,
p. 11. Chap. 2. Asserting the great duty of Christians to mourn over the woeful
estate of their unconverted relations, and how much they ought to do or suffer
toward the furtherance of their salvation, p. 18. An explanation of S. Paul's
wishing himself accursed from Christ, p. 22. That Christians stand much engaged
to mourn for their unconverted kindred according to the flesh, and to take all
possible means to convert them, p. 26. A description of Jesus Christ, as to his
deity, and dignity in it self, p. 33.
Chap. 3. Plainly demonstrating, that the wise and holy God in choosing to
salvation eternal, and reprobating to damnation eternal, has a special eye to
qualifications, p. 35. That sometimes some passages of Gods providence do seem
to cross his promises, p. 39. The true seed of Abraham in all ages are such as
bears resemblance to Abraham in faith and love, p. 41. That the true seed of
Abraham are not, nor were not at any time estimated or accounted as they were
found in the external professions or practice of ordinances, though of Gods own
appointment, but as they had the life and power of them in their hearts, p. 45.
That God in choosing and reprobating man has a special eye to qualifications,
p. 52.
Chap. 4. Wherein is evidently asserted by the truth of reason, that the
Apostles affirmation (Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated) could not
respect in the least, n^ther their pensons nor generations, as to a final
saving or damning their whole posterity, p. 57. In excluding Esau, God excludes
works, in choosing Jacob God declares his choosing faith and free grace in the
Gospel for salvation, p. 68.
Chap. 5. Plainly evidencing that the salvation of mankind was the subject of
Gods heart, thoughts and purposes from the beginning, p. 72. What we are to
understand by the purpose of God and the time when they do commence. p. 76. God
is very stable in all his purposes, and among all his purposes in none more
stable, then that purpose respecting the way and terms of man's salvation, p. 86.
Chap. 6. Treating in Eight particulars the explanation of love and hatred in
God, and that in this chapter it cannot intend election, and reprobation to
heaven or hell, p. 94. Whether the first transgression of Adam is the cause of
Gods hatred against mankind, p. 96. The effects of Gods hatred is a privation
of good and in^ction of evil, p. 98.
Chap. 7. Showing Gods unquestionable and absolute right, to state and propound
his own terms, upon which his grace and justification and salvation shall be
had, and here determines it not upon the works of the law, but believing in his
son, p. 102. That Gods speakings of old to his servants were very significant
and teaching to ages and generations to come, p. 122.
Chap. 8. Showing that it is of mere grace and mercy in God, all men having
sinned, to call them upon any terms whatsoever to justification, all grace no
debt, p. 125. Why is willing and running opposed to God and mercy? it is not of
him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy, p.
128. It is possible for persons cordially to desire and laberiously to pursue
this mercy of justification, and yet come short, and not attain it, p. 137.
That persons to some degree righteous and obedient to Gods laws, are very apt
to challenge, and strongly expect the great privilege of justification as a
debt for such their obedience; or as a reward for such work, p. 138.
Chap. 9. Gods act of hardening and reprobating to damnation, is the effects of
great and persevering rebellion, when men shut their eyes and ears at ^st after
much long-suffering and patience, p. 139. As God sealed up Pharaoh for his
impenitency, so did he with the Jews for shutting their eyes and ears,
therefore gave them up to a judicial blindness, p. 151.
Chap. 10. Plainly explaining how and in what sense God may be said to harden
men's hearts, in like manner how God is said to show mercy, p. 164. Gods will
differs from men's will, because it (...) of counsel, he does all things
according to the counsel of his own will, p. 166. Terms of mercy and terms of
wrath are founded in the breast of the most high, p. 168. What mercy is
intended when he says, he has mercy on whom he will, p. 169. Four instances
to evidence, God did not necessitate Pharaoh to be rebellious, p. 172. How God
is said to harden Pharaohs heart, p. 177. Five marks of Gods withdrawing from
hardening sinners, p. 183. No person so near, ready, and liable to fall into his
own destruction as a hardened sinner, he is very near to ruin, p. 190. Those
that slight and undervalue the Scripture^ are not guided by the same spirit
that writ the Scriptures, p. 192. That God Almighty does greatly concern
himself in his peoples afflictions and oppressions, p. 193. That every act of
impunity and reprieve from judgment misimproved, does directly contribute to
the fitting and preparing such a person for wrath, p. 195. That God in his
dealings with Pharaoh laid a platform of his proceedings with reprobates to the
worlds end, p. 199. Six Characters of a heart that is not hard, whatever they
may think of themselves, p. 201.
Chap. 11. Gods will and word are terms equivalent, and his purposes to
mankind in order to mercy and judgment is not irresistible, p. 203. That God
may justly find fault with whom he judicially hardens, p. 213.
Chap. 12. Detecting that unreasonable consequence of Gods forming men on
purpose to damn them, p. 215. The great sin of the circumcised Jews was
spiritual pride, p. 229.
Chap. 13. Explaining the Potter and clay, and that God makes and mars vessels,
according to their submission and rejection of him, p. 231. That sin and
disobedience is of an imbasing nature, it makes man comparable to the earth,
the potters clay, p. 251. The same people or persons at distinct times may be
honorable and dishonorable vessels, p. 253.
Chap. 14. Explaining who are vessels fitted for destruction, and who are
vessels of mercy, and why both become such? p. 255. Wicked men are the proper
subjects of Gods long-suffering, p. 273.
Chap. 15. Showing the super-abounding riches of Gods grace to sinners for
their encouragement to turn, p. 274. That the present state of Christians in
this world is a state of preparation not of perfection, p. 286.
Chap. 16. Gods love to the called whether Jew or Gentile, is great and
singular love, yet not so unchangably fixed in this life; that neither the
obedience of some nor the rebellion of others can alter it, p. 288. The great
aggravation of man's condemnation will be the rejecting and not complying with
Gods frequent and loud call, p. 294. That Gods love or hatred with respect to
persons or people, is not unchangeable or fixed, p. 302.
Chap. 17. That it is not Number, nor being in relation to godly Ancestors that
can secure rebellious persons from Gods wrath and destruction, p. 305. Chap.
18. Explaining the causes why the Jews missed and the Gentiles obtained the
righteousness which is according to faith, p. 316. Chap. 19. Plainly
demonstrating that persons justified and saved in Gospel days, shnll have no
cause to boast, but on the contrary to attribute all to freegrace, p. 321.
Chap. 20. Calling for greatest circumspection, because persons in a very fair
and likely way unto salvation in their own thoughts may suffer disappointment,
it is very easy to stumble at Christ and his ways if careful heed be not
taken, p. 325.
Errata.
PAge 3. line 29. for Appstle read Apostle. p. 6. l. 14. r. unrighteousness.
p. 9. l. 20. dele chiefly. p. 11. l. 15. r. his person. p. 18. l. 20. for would
r. could. p. 18. l. last for summary r. sum up. p. 20. l. 27. for 33. r. 23. p.
21. l. 14. for Christ's r. Christ. p. 22. l. 23. r. abdicated. p. 28. l. 8. r.
was. p. 305. l. 23. for nations r. notions.

A Brief Compendium of the whole Controversiall part of this Chapter, as a
Preface to the Matter following.
Showing the concurrence of each passage therein to the making up of a sweet
harmony ^etween this 9th and 3, 4, 10, 11, Chapters of this Epistle, and herein
I am persuaded that if the Reader do but lay aside prejudice, and observe
narrowly and heed carefully as he go along, he will receive great satisfaction
in the truth of what is spoken from each verse distinctly, by that joint
consent and argument, appearing in the whole, put together: for although it is
possible to wrest and misinterpret some single verses or passages in Scripture,
yet it is granted on all hands, that he that takes in the whole scope of
Epistle, Chapter, and Context, in what he speaks, is in the ready way to make
an unerring Construction of matters. This 9th of the Romans has been much
wronged for want of this observation, by Insitting upon some verses, without
heeding the scope of the whole; it was, (to Solomon) a sight of the true
mother, which would not have the Child divided: an honest Expositor will take
the scope, whether it makes for or against him; now if you shall so observe me,
and go along with me, I dare to promise you ample satisfaction, that there is
no such Doctrine concluded in this context, as Irrespective Election, or
Reprobation of persons.

I proceed, it is granted on all hands, even by those zealous on the other
hand, that the great design that the Apostle carried on in this Epistle and
Chapter, is to assert and maintain justification and eternal salvation to come
in by faith alone, without the works of the law; and that there is an absolute
necessity of believing in Jesus Christ, to prevent eternal perdition, both by
Jew and gentile: this is positively determined, Cha. 2.8.9. tribulation and
wrath upon all that obey not the truth, upon the Jew first, and also upon the
gentile: there being no respect of persons with God, the Jews must come in at
the same door with the gentiles.

Now the Apostle being deeply sensible, that his brethren the Jews lay under
the danger of this great severity, as they were Rejecters of Christ and the
Gospel, he is cordially concerned for them, as appears by his solemn
protestation and asseveration, as to the sorrow of heart that he lay under for
them, verse. 1. and that which he knew was as a stumbling block in their way as
to their believing in Jesus Christ, was their dependence upon their carnal
privileges which they were invested with, as they were Abraham's seed according
to the flesh, which privileges the Apostle grants to be theirs, and makes an
enumeration of them, verses, 3, 4, 5. but that these privileges were not of
such a singular and saving nature as they thought, he takes pains to satisfy
them; and moreover whereas they were ready to plead, that they were not only
thus privileged, but further as they were Abraham's seed, the Inheritance was
theirs, and so intailed upon them, that they could not miscarry, except a
failing should be in Gods word of promise: to which their supposed plea the
Apostle replies, ver. 6. not as though the word of God had taken none effect;
and as to a further amplification, the Apostle in the following verses, takes
pains to assert and maintain, that they may miscar^y to all eternity, and yet
Gods promise stand fir^ and true to those to whom it was made, which he does
pathetically demonstrate, both negatively and affirmatively, to be not Abraham's
seed according to the flesh but according to faith in Christ; the promises made
to Abraham, I will be thy God and the God of thy seed, did not intend Abraham's
seed according to the flesh, but according to the faith in Christ, which was
eminently set forth in the miraculous birth of Isaac, which is also confirmed
in his Epistle to the Galatians, in plain terms, chap. 3. last, if ye be
Christ's, then are you Abraham's seed, and heirs according to promise, else not,
it must be supposed; to which construction agrees, ver. 7. ver. 8. following;
neither because they are the seed of Abraham are they all Children, but in
Isaac shall thy seed be called, or by faith shall thy seed be called, as Isaac
was a child of faith: this is further amplified, ver. 8 the children of the
flesh are not the children of God but the children of the promise are accounted
for the seed; which vigorous and pathetical arguing of the Appstle, does
clearly instruct us what was the false bottom that the Jews rested upon,
namely, that they could not miscarry who descended of Ahrahams loins according
to the flesh: 2ly, that God in his promise to Abraham did not intend his seed,
merely according to the flesh: he proceeds to demonstrate from matter of fact,
because some of Abraham's seed are by God east out and disinherited, namely
Ishmael, who by appointment of God was excluded from inheriting with Isaac,
though begotten from Abraham's own body: and whereas to this instance of Ishmael
the Jews might be ready to say, there might be some reason given for his
rejection on fathers side, mothers side, and his own, he was born before the
covenant of circumcision; his mother was a Bondwoman, and Ishmael is taken
mocking Isaac: the Apostle proceeds to give a 2d without exception, even to the
instance of Esau the natural son of Isaac, in whom the promises were especially
lodged, In Isaac shall thy seed be called: this instance is without any or the
least exception born in circumcision, of his free-wife Rebecca, and a twinn
with Jacob, born at the same time, and yet in his race rejected the Edomites;
God foreseeing they would be a wicked persecuting people, predicts their
servitude and bondage and exclusion from the land of Canaan, to inherit the
barren Mountains of Mount Seir, which shows, that it is not enough to be
Abraham's seed, if they be not of his says and holy ness; for some of Abraham's
seed by his special son Isaac are rejected and hated for sin, Mal. 1. Obed. 10.
for his cruelty against his brother Jacob, shame shall cover him; so that the
Apostles argument lies here, if Esau in his posterity eminently descending
from Abraham's loins through Isaac, in whom the promise was lodged, might be
hated, and his mountain destroyed; then how can you Jews, though the seed of
Abraham, in a remote sense, claim from that foot of account? especially
considering that you have persecuted to death the son of God whom Abraham loved
and rejoiced to see afar off, seeing God is not obliged to any of the seed of
Abraham, but as they are found in Christ, who was Abraham's right seed, as is
eminently expressed, Gal. 3.16. he says not, to seeds, but seed, which seed is
Christ; and if the Jews should further plead, that beside there descent from
Abraham's loins, they are a people near to God, in covenant, by circumcision and
the Ceremonial law, and thereby distinguished from all the nations of the world
to be Gods people: the Apostle follows them in that also, ver. 11. that the
purpose of God according to election should stand, not of works, that is not of
works of that kind, which was eminently typed out in the excluding Ishmael out
of Abraham's family, and from the Inheritance: for in so doing God did also
exclude the works of the law from justification, as we may see plainly Gal.
4.22,23,24. for Isaac and Ishmael were two lively types of the two Covenants,
and that from Sinai is rejected as to Justification, so that neither from their
pedigree nor their legal obedience, could they have any special acceptance
with God, for by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified, and thus it
is not of works, ver. 11.

Now hereupon the Jews proceeds to raise a 2d and new Objection, formed thus,
what does not God Justify according to works ( Paul?) then by this doctrine of
thine thou seem to contradict that declared righteous Rule of Gods
proceedings, which is to judge and reward every man according to his works:
this Obj. the Apostle supposes and replyeth unto, ver. 14. is there
unrighteousness with God? God forbid: no such thing can be (says he) neither
can such a conclusion be drawn from such premises, but more particularly the
Apostle proceeds, in order to clearing his doctrine from the least imputation
of impeaching the righteousness of God, which he endeavors to do from a
double Argument. 1st, That Justification cannot be of works, because it is of
grace and mercy; 2ly, That God cannot be unrighteous, in casting off the seed
of Abraham according to the flesh who were strict observers of the law of
circumcision, and in their room receive the gentiles, who should believe in
Jesus Christ, and obey the Gospel, because from the beginning he had left
himself that liberty, and is not obliged to any man; so that there can be no
righteousness, in doing that which he has a justness of power to do:
this which I say (says the Apostle) is no more then what he has declared
from the beginning, that salvation shall be of grace, Mercy and Compassion, and
consequently not of works; for the Scripture says unto Moses, Exodus 33.19. I
will have Mercy upon whom I will have Mercy, which words were occasioned by
Moses's interceding with God for Israel after that great sin of theirs; that
God would in special own them for his people above all the people of the world
besides; to which petition God returns this checking answer, (say no more) I
will have mercy and compassion on whom I will, or upon what sort of person I
please, and will not give thee an account, though thou be my friend Moses:
thou shall know I have an unquestionable right in this case to show my mercy
and grace on whom I please, Jews or gentiles, and upon what terms I please; and
in these words to Moses we have a prophecy of the admission of the gentiles, or
else it had not served properly to our Apostles turn in this place: from whence
the Apostle draws up this result, ver. 16. so then, it is not of him that
wills, nor of him that rnnneth, but of God that shows Mercy, that is, not
of works but of grace: and 2ly, as he has left himself a liberty which none
can question, to show Mercy to whom, or upon what terms he please, so also he
has the same liberty to inflict spiritual Judgments, yea, judicially to
harden whom or what sort of sinners he please; and to be plain, (as if he
should have said) God has singled out above all sinners as the subjects of
this his severity, such as shall abuse his long-suffering and goodness, the
firstborn of which sort of sinners was Pharaoh of old, who is brought as a
type of such in all generations, both as to the nature of their sin and
destruction; and therefore the Apostle brings that saying of God to Pharaoh,
ver. 17. which he quotes from Exodus 9.16. for this cause have I raised thee up,
or dilivered thee from so many deaths, and kept thee yet alive, that I might
make my power known in thee: and that this Pharaoh was a lively type of these
stubborn rebellious Jews, I think need not be questioned, and as the
righteousness of God in his proceedings with Pharaoh, was never by any
questioned, much less denied, no more can it be questioned in his dealings
with the Jews, who trod in his steps: Now from both these Instances drawn from
Gods sayings to Moses and Pharaoh, the Apostle draws up this result, ver. 18.
so then he has Mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens, that is,
hardens such as Pharaoh, who first hardens themselves in their own hearts
against God as he did now; hereupon the Apostle supposes the Jews raising
another Object. ver. 19. if God hardens, why does he find fault with those so
hardened by him ^ seeing this his will is irresistible: for who has re^sisted
his will? ^erein the Apostle does personate a captious and quarrelsome person,
not one making an humble objection with a desire of an answer, as does plainly
appear by the Apostles Reply to it, ver. 20. wherein he takes pains to humble
and shame them for their bold, and saucy, and quarrelsome disputing against
God, which to effect he asserts the power, yea the unquestionable and
inoffensive power of God to save and reprobate upon his own terms; to the
justness and unquestionablenesse of which terms he does amplify by the
similitude of a potter; who has a power that none questions, to make vessels
of honor and dishonor, and that upon his own terms, and upon his own
discretion, that is to say, when he designs of a lump of clay to make an
honorable vessel, and that piece of clay, mar, break, or run too course for
such a vessel, he has a power (which none questions) to make it again, the
same lump or piece of clay, a vessel for a dishonorable use as he please:
according to that place at least alluded unto Jer. 18. ver. 4. and when thy
second vessel is made, God may justly complain or find fault that it would be
no better a vessel, and the vess^l cannot say, why have thou made me thus?
because it was designed for a better; of which comparison of the potter, we
have the reddition or application, ver. 22. 23. thus if the common and ordinary
potter have such a power and privilege which none is offended at, much more
has God power or liberty to make, vessels of honor of those who shall yield
to his hand and wheel, and fall in with his design, whether Jews or gentiles:
and consequently, has not God ^ower that none can question to make them
vessels ^f dishonor and wrath who have abused all his ^uduring,
long-suffering, and patience exercised ^owards them: an Instance whereof we
have in Pharaoh, and afterward in the circumcised Jews; ^his power God claims,
to make those vessels of wrath who abuse his goodne^, and so treasure up ^rath
against the day of wrath: Chap. 2. but if a ^an cleanse himself he shall be a
vessel of honor, ^repared for the masters use, 2 Timothy 2.21. thus I have given
you in a few words the coherence and scope of this Chap. to the end of verse
23. The Apostle Peter 2 Pet. 3.16. tells us, that in his beloved brother Paul's
Epistles their are some things hard to be understood, which the unlearned or
unskilful wrest to their own destruction, amongst which things (or sayings)
this part of his writing this Chapter, cannot be exempted but necessarily
comprehended, especially if we will observe the context or verse chiessy
before, 2 Peter 3.15. no portion of Scripture seems in the judgment of most men
to be attended with greater difficulty, and many persons takes occasion from
what is here declared to disparadge and obscure the universal and impartial
love and grace of God to Mankind in Jesus Christ: to prevent which mistakes,
it will be altogether needful in our reading this chapter to carry along in
our eye the main scope and design of the Apostle in what he here writes to
this people, which was in a direct line to prove his grand thesis, namely,
justification by faith without the deeds of the law: and therein this Chapter
carries a complete analogy with the former, and two following Chapters of this
Epi^le, the grand scope of all which is to convince the Jew of his sin, in not
believing in Jesus Christ for life and salvation.

The Apostle in this Epistle and Chapter had an eye to the Jews great Argument,
with respect to the covenant made with Abraham, which argument is by them
formed thus: if not any be justified but by faith in Christ, then the Jews
(though the natural seed of Abraham) are not justified, but are in the state of
condemnation, for they hate Christ, have persecuted and slain him: but it is
absurd to conclude, that the Jews are not justified, therefore man may be
justified some other way then by believing in Christ: and the Minor of this
argument is strengthened by a threefold fortification which the Jews think
impregnable.

As first, say they, to the seed of Abraham was the promise made, and if they
be not justified, then there is a failing in Gods word. Secondly, there are not
any amongst all the sons of men so zealous for righteousness, therefore they
must needs be the persons justified. Thirdly, say they, if they be not
justified, then has God cast off his own people which he has chosen:
But these things cannot be so, therefore this doctrine of justification by
faith in Christ must be a doctrine of Paul's devising, and not the truth of God.

Now, my souls desire and prayer to God is, that the truth in this Scripture
might clearly shine into the hearts of all that are sincere, who shall read
the ensuing matter; and that which I design as I go along, shall be to
discharge this Scripture from that hard service which it is pressed to serve in;
which is, to attest a personal absolute Election and reprobation, unchangeable
and irrevocable, established before the foundation of the world; which
preordination of God does unavoydably necessitate men to be what they are, and
shall be, as to sin and death, Righteousness and life; which inference and
conclusion will appear very foreign to the Apostles design in this Chapter.

CHAP. I. Personal Reprobation Reprobated. Wherein is contained what real,
great, and constant sorrow the holy Apostle St. Paul had for the miserable
estate of the Jews under their sin of blindness.
Verse. 1. I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bearing me
witness in the holy Ghost.


IT may be easily and readily supposed, that the Apostle had here to do with a
people, who partly through prejudice to the persons and partly his doctrine,
were likely to be hardly persuaded that Paul had affection for them; that he
had in his heart secret hatred and revenge against them for those injuries done
to him; and therefore he is necessitated to take great pains to raise and beget
in them a credit of his choice love and affection to them, which he labors
after, in the beginning of this Chapter: these 5 first verses contains the
proem or preface to the Chapter.

In which preface, we have the Apostles most ardent and patheticall complaint
and manifestation of sorrow, in the behalf of he Jews, his countrymen, who
were not only ignorant, but persecutors of Christ and his Gospel, which rendered
them in the Apostles judgment in a very sad and deplorable condition.

Now these five verses are two ways understood. First, some understand them to
look backward to what the Apostle had been treating on before, (...) the former
Chapter, in which he had been treating of the choice privileges of such as
were believe^ in Christ, that they were not liable to condemnation, that they
were chosen of God, had the spirit; were heirs of God, joynt-heirs with Christ;
and that nothing should be able to separate them from this their happy estate:
some (I say) do judge that the Apostle having been deeply contemplating upon
these things, breaks forth passionately and abruptly with these affection at
lamentations for those his Countrymen, who for the generallity of them lay
short and at a distance from these privileges. Secondly, there are others, who
understand these verses as a preface to what follows in this Chapter; and as a
preparative to what he had to say, which I think is the likelyest to agree to
truth; and I shall handle them as so understood;
and that great truth which the Apostle takes such pains to fasten upon their
hearts, was this, that he had a cordial and deep sense of the present state of
the Jews and their condition, even to exquisite sorrow and grief.

In which sorrow we have four circumstances considerable. First, the certainty
of it. Secondly, The greatness of it. Thirdly, the cause of it. Fourthly, the
heightning circumstances of this sorrow which are two. 1. The Jews are his
kindred. 2. They were such who had been invested with very great privileges:

of each of these a few words in order.

First, the Apostle is very pathetical in this his ^ttestation of the truth of
this his sorrow; he does with much earnestness assure them, that he had such a
simpathy with them, and sorrow with them; ^e would command their belief i^ this
point, and therefore does he make a solemn and sacred protestation and
profession in these words: I say the truth in Christ, I lie not: The certainty
of this which the Apostle speaks, is two ways confirmed. First, by his positive
attestation, I say the truth in Christ. Secondly, by his duplication or
doubling his speech on the negative as well as the affirmative ( I lie not.)


These words of our Apostle are read two ways: some read instead of in, by
Christ, not as we read here: as Paul having an eye to Christ as a witness; as
if he should say; Christ thou know that I say nothing but truth, that my
sorrow is real, and so also does my conscience bear witness, and so does the
spirit of God also in this matter; and that this is the dialect of the Apostle,
see elsewhere, Gal. 1.10. now the things which I write unto you, behold, before
God I lie not: so also 2 Corinthians. 11.31. the God and father of our Lord Jesus
Christ knows that I lie not: I appeal to him that I lie not, as here.

But 2dly, the most both of ancient and latter Interpreters understands and
reads these words of the Apostle otherways, as containing in them the nature
and force of an oath, because the particle translated in, (say they) may be
more properly translated by; and so says Calvin, Piscator and Musculus, and so
they read those words, 2 Cor. 12.1. I knew a man by Christ; and of the same
mind are most of our latter writers, who also takes these words as an
asseveration or an oath, but take it either way, they carry in them a very
pathetical attestation, that what the Apostle speaks concerning his sorrow for
the Jews, was a real truth.

Secondly, It is farther ratified from his duplication in the negative (I lie
not;) had it not been enough for the Apostle, that he had positively affirmed
it, and called God to witness, that he had said the truth.

I answer, that it was usual amongst the Jews, when they speak earnestly, and
with the greatest confidence, and in things considerable thus to double their
speech: as for instance; in that Message to Hezekiah, Esa. 38. thou shall dye
and not live, so Psalms 118. I shall not dye but live: 1 John 20. confessed and
denied not; and this kind of speaking was usual: see what pains the Apostle
takes to persuade the Jews into as good Opinion of his love to them as a good
Introduction to what he had to say to them: from whence I note by the way. 1.
Doctrine, That it is a matter of great concernment, in order to a right
Receiving what is offered by a Gospel-Minister: that the people be satisfied,
that what be says, he speeks from the root of tender love and pity to their
souls.

The Apostle did not think it lost labor in him to effect this end, by this
means, before us; and the like pains he takes elsewhere: see 2 Corinthians. 7.3.
you are in our hearts to live and dye with you: 2 Corinthians. 11.11. God knows I
love you: Philip. 1.8. God is my Record, how greatly I long after you, in the
Bowels of Christ; see what pains he takes to persuade the Churches into a
belief of his love to them: Paul takes pains also with the Jews to persuade
them, that this sorrow was the effect of his to them; which to do he could
appeal to his own conscience; he was always careful to make conscience to his
Friend: see Acts. 24.16. 2 Corinthians. 1.12. therein was his rejoicing, and he
knew the holy spirit stirred him up to speak that he spoke: I might again note
by the way. 2. Doctrine, That it is warrantable in a Gospel-Minister, in
matters of concernment, where we doubt of being believed in things of God, to
confirm what we say by obliging attestations and protestations, when we have in
so doing a good conscience: I have shown this before, Gal. 1.20. 2 Corinthians.
11.31. Phil. 18.

But some object, Mat. 5.37. let your communication be yea yea, nay nay,
whatever is more then this comes of evil: to which I answer. 1st, That Christ's
design in these words could not intend to oblige persons to these syllabicall
words of yea and nay. 2ly, Neither do they oblige us as to Number, that we must
multiply no more, by way of attestation, for we must not imagine, that Christ
would contradict his words in his own practice;
was not Christ's verily, verily, more then, yea and nay; and the Apostle did
not understand our Lord so, as you may see before, but Christ in this place
designs to take off the Jews from their voluntary vain oaths and attestations
in their Communications one with another; as in Jephthas case, and many others:
and to the same end tends the Apostle James's words, Chap. 5. if Christ's
design had been to forbid all kind of swearing, there needed not to be an
enumeration made, of what they should not swear by; neither can swearing in a
solemn way in the fear of God be a Moral Evil, which is used by God himself,
and Angels, and saints; in the purest times; but where Christ would enjoy^ yea
and nay, he there would oblige us, that what we affirm be truth: that our yea
be yea, and our nay be nay: as S. Paul says, our words were not yea and nay.

The ^d particular to be considered, is, the greatness of this grief and
sorrow of the Apostle for the Jews; the Apostle is not satisfied only to assert
the truth of his sorrow, but the nature and degree of it, which as the learned
tell us, is set forth in 3 circumstances, to be very great, therefore (say
they) this word translated sorrow does signify the sorrow of a woman in travel,
used John 16.21. you now have sorrow: and the Apostle to the Galathians, tells
them, that he was in travel for them, cha. 4.19.

2ly, This sorrow is set forth by the successive continuance of it, it is said
here to be continually like the pains of a woman, one throw after another,
night and day: It was not a transient sorrow but a seizing and lasting sorrow.

Therefore in the third place, the greatness is set forth by the seat of it,
which is, the heart, sharp and deep: when the Scriptures speak of sorrow of
heart and soul it intends sharp and exquisite sorrow; says our Lord, my soul
is sorrowful unto death: my sorrow is very great and deep.

The third circumstance to be considered is the cause of this sorrow, which is
not so fully expressed as it is to be understood in our text; it is so great,
that the Apostle cannot express it, his heart will not serve him to express in
particulars the cause he saw for this sorrow: great grief sometime silenceth a
man from giving the particulars of the cause: the substance of this cause was,
that the Jews had rejected Christ who was sent at first to save them, and that
now they were under judicial blindeness from God thereupon: there is the
ground of Paul's so great sorrow; from whence I would note ^wo Observations by
the way. First Doctrine, That persons that miss or stumble at Christ and the
Gospel, and are destitute of faith in Jesus Christ, (however they may look upon
themselves,) do render themselves objects of soul-pitty and heart-sorrow.

Persons destitute of the true knowledge of God and faith in Christ are in a
sad, a miserable, and deplorable state and condition: here lies the ground of
Paul's sorrow; he understood the danger of such a state, as they were ignorant
of Christ and ^is righteousness, and thereupon judicial obdurat^ess and
blindness was upon them; such was Pha^aohs case, such was Isreal's case, Esa. 6.
and there ^s reason why their case should be pitied and lamented, Act. 13.
they are in a perishing condition, because there is no other name under heaven
by which men can be saved.

Second Doctrine, That to mourn, sorrow, and lay to heart the sin and misery of
others, by those whose own condition is secure, good and safe, is a character
of one whose heart is truly touched for God. This was Paul's case, he knew his
state was good, but this does not satisfy him so long as his kinsmen and
countrymen were without Christ, and this was not only the spirit of Paul, but
others of Gods servants: see Psalms 119.53, 136, 139, 158. Jerem. 9. Ezekiel
19.41. v. Mark. 3.5. Christ is greive^ for the hardness of men's hearts. From
whence we may learn; that sorrow for others is a true discovery of love to
them, which is our duty; that it is ^ discovery of love, see in Christ to
Lazarus, John 11.35. Behold, how he loves him: it is some privilege to be
mourned for in affliction, and in this the Jews had a privilege, so had Job:
his friends came to mourn with him, and for him; the contrary God threatened to
Nineveh, Nahum 3. to Jerusalem, Esa. 51.19. and it is a duty not only to mourn
for those that mourn, but those that have cause to mourn; but I proceed to the
next.

CHAP. II. Asserting the great duty of Christians to mourn over the woeful
estate of their unconverted, relations; and how much they ought to do or suffer
toward the furtherance of their salvation.
Ver. 3. For I would wish my self accursed from Christ, for my Brethren, my
kinsmen, according to the flesh.

4. Who are Isralites, to whom pertains the adoption, and the glory, and the
Covenants; and the giving of the Law; and the service of God, and the promises.

5. Whose are the fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh, Christ came,
who is over all, God blessed for ever, Amen.


THe matter contained in these 3 verses, I shall summary into these three heads
in general. First, we have a strong confirmation of the Apostles former
affirmation and protestation, tending more fully to demonstrate his love to,
and sorrow for the Jews rejection, which he had so pathetically spoken unto in
the former verses. Secondly, we have a character at large of the persons over
whom he thus mourned and sorrowed for, in two considerations. First, they were
his brethren and kindred. Secondly, they were a people dignifyed, and
distinguished with many singular privileges, as above all the people in the
world besides; which privileges and immunities the Apostle does in verse 4th
and 5th enumerate under nine heads, as I shall show you.
Thirdly, we have in these 3 verses a glorious Ellogam of Jesus Christ, in
which we have these two things considerable. First, a description of Christ
what he is. Secondly, we have the Apostle ascribing blessing and praise to him:
in this Ellogam the Apostle has a double designe^ First, to heighten the
privileges of the Jews, of whose loins such a transcendant glorious person
came. 2dly, His design thereby was to aggravate the sins of the Jews, and their
condemnation, in that they should reject such a glorious and worthy person, who
is blessed for ever.



I shall speak to these three heads briefly.

1st, As to the Apostles confirmation of his former protestation seting forth
the reality and greatness of his love to the Jews, and sorrow for their
Rejection, and that his love to and sorrow for them was very great, appears by
this exigency which it drove the Apostle unto, the Argument rises thu^ that
person that can dispriviledge himself even (...) extromity that he might
thereby procure for other their exemption from sorrow and sufferings, must
needs have strong love for those he intends therein; this was Paul's case, and
this he would have the Jews sensible of, and that this was his heart to them,
and consequently that he was not their enemy but their cordial Friend.

2dly, Herein is not only manifested his love to them; but the reality of his
sorrow spoken of before; so that this third verse. is brought as an Argument to
demonstrate, that his sorrow was real and great, and deep, that should drive
him to such a wish of damage to himself, as to wish himself accursed from
Christ, to the end they might be reduced from their unbelief and disobedience:
the Apostle seems to wish himself in a state of damnation to bring them unto a
state of salvation: Oh how great was this love of Paul? it did bear to a degree
a resemblance to the love of God and Christ, both as to the greatness of the
love ^and the undese^vingnesse of the persons for whom, and to whom manifested,
even to enemies: Romans 5. he is willing to be Anathamized for his enemies: the
Jews were Paul's enemies, and sought his life: as we read Acts the 33.13. about
forty Jews laid wait for Paul to kill him.

But to come more closer to the words, and more strictly to enquire what is
wrapped up in this his wish: Interpreters are much divided about this matter in
their Opinions, and many of them very extravagant in their opinions, which I
shall not meddle with: some there are, that the Apostle speaks not here as he
really did mean, but parab^lically, or by a figure, not properly and precisely
to be understood; and that there is no more to be understood in it then this,
that he could suffer a great deal for their good.

Secondly, Others think that he must be understood only conditionally in this
his wish, if it could be, or were possible, as he speaks of the Galathians,
they would have pulled out their own eyes, and have given them to him, if it
had been possible, so if it were possible, I could wish my self accursed^, but
I think these extravagant inter pretations, do not suite with the solemness of
the Apostles attestation and asseveration going before; to the truth and
reallity of which his speech, he calls Christ's conscience and spirit to bear
witness.

There are but three Interpretations worth our taking notice of, and they are
these. First, some do understand him here, willing to hazard his eternal
interest in God and Christ, and glory to come, as really to be separate from
his Lord and savior to all eternity. 2. Others understand the Apostle does
here intend by this anathema Excommunication out of the Church, or from the
society of saints for their profit. 3. Others understand, that in this is not
only by the Apostle intended a privation or loss, but a positive infliction of
punishment besides:
Of each of these a word or two.

1st, That which occasions some to think he does here intend his inward state,
is the word which is made use of to set it out by (anathama) imports; no less
as sometimes used: as for Instance, 1 Cor. 16. If any man love not the Lord
Jesus Christ, let him be anathama when the Lord shall come: but I shall lay
down some reasons why it cannot be so understood, as if Paul hazarded his
eternal state, the, love and favor of God to all eternity, he wished no^ to be
so accursed.

It is greatly questionable, whether such a wish be lawful; to be so prodigal
of his interest in heaven cannot be allowed: covetousness in spirituals is
never blamed: and God does never call for such a ^enture for brethren: our
natural life is the highest required for a brother, 1 John. 3. 2dly, Such a
wish could not be consistent with that dear love the Apostle did bear to
Christ, to wish separation from him upon any account whatsoever, doubtless he
could not bear or endure a separation from Christ. Thirdly, Such a suffering in
the Apostle would have exceeded the sufferings of Christ for mankind, Christ
did not expose himself to an eternal separation from God his Father; it is true
he did endure for a little season the seeming hiding of his Fathers face, but
this separation is not limited. Fourthly, Such a state was worse then the state
of the Jews themselves, they are not abd^cated eternally from God; so that we
cannot rationall^ think that Paul should wish himself accursed as t^ his in
word state and spiritual condition, therefore something else must be enquired
after.


2. Others understand the Apostles anathama, to be only excluded the society
and assemblyes, (...) the saints, to be excommunicated the Gospel Church;
because sometimes and generally that i^ rendered by the name of anathama; as if
the Apostle should have said. I could wish my self excomm^nicated from the
Gospel Church for their sakes not only to be deprived of the honor of an
Apostle, but of membership in the Church.

Obj. But some may say, our text says separate from Christ: I answer the
Church is called Christ, 1 Corinthians. 12.12. So likewise is Christ, that is, the
body of Christ; and our last expositors do so render it, and understand it,
that the Church is called Christ: so Doctor Hammond: Paul did prize at a very
high rate the Communion and fellowship of Saints, yet for the Jews sakes he
could have been content to have been excluded that sweet and happy estate.

But 3dly, Others understand, and they are the most and best approved
interpreters, that the Apostle does wish not only a privation of good, and all
his high privileges, but a dreadful infliction of much sufferings and corporal
punishments; which amongst the Jews did follow their anathama: they were
delivered up to Satan, they were exposed to open shame and ignominy and
detestation, they were anathamized, were disdained of all, abhorred of all: so
that according to that interpretation, this was the sense of the Apostles
words, I could wish my self the veryest abject and object of shame and spite;
let me be as thus exposed to the worst of ruins, yea, the most cursed death it
self: this interpretation seems to agree most currantly with the Scriptures;
not that this anathama must intend the vengance of eternal fire but present
rejection with detestation: so must we understand that word, Gal. 1.8.9. If I,
or an An gel from heaven, preach any other Gospels, let him be anathama; twice
expressed, that is, let him be rejected as an accursed thing; let him be detested
and abominated, and withstood to the highest; and thus it must be understood,
Gal. 3.13. Christ was made a curse for us, which being made a curse, takes in
all Christ's sufferings and humiliation, from the beginning to the end; all his
contempt and shame, and spirting on, and crucifixion, all his abhorrency of man
Esa. 49. and this an athama the ultimate of it was death; and this
understanding does in some measure answer to Moses his wish, Exo. 32.32. Blot
me out of thy book; or as Ainsworth reads it, let me dye: for so the book of
life is understood sometimes, Psalm. 69. let me, says Moses, bear thy
displeasure that thou have against they people; and whereas now I am highly in
thy favor, I am willing to bear thy displeasure, and death from that thy
displeasure rather then Israel should be cut off. So here the much the Apostles
words amounts unto, that where as now he was set by and esteemed of his
friends, and all the faithful Churches of Christ, throughout the world, yet he
could be content for his brethrens sakes, to be looked upon as a person not
only at the greatest distance from his brethren, but from Christ himself: and
to be judged worthy of the worst of deaths for his brethrens sakes: thus as in
a glass you see the most worthy and excellent spirit of the Apostle Paul, who
before his conversion was a cruel and bloody persecutor, yet now, why like
Paul, who so like Christ in his spirit as he? this deep sorrow in him was the
fruit and effect of his tender love to them: Paul is willing to haza^ much for
the soul-good of many; such a spirit (...) manifested in his Ministry, he was
willing to spend, and be spent for poor souls; 2 Corinthians 1.12.

The soul-good of many should be a strong engagement upon our hearts to expose
our selves to loss and sufferings, this was an engagement upon Christ: many
were concerned, the world were concerned; this may be of great use to be
considered by those entrusted with the work of the minisity; especially
consider this example of Paul, to beget a spirit for public good: if many are
concerned as to their inward state, venture far.

We now proceed to the second head, which contains a description of the people
and persons over whom the Apostle Paul thus cordially mourns and sorrows; they
are described by a double character. 1. The relation they stood unto Paul, they
were his brethren and kinsmen according to the flesh. 2. They for whom Paul
thus mourned are a people greatly dignifyed, and distinguished, with very high
privileges above all people in the world;
besides which privileges and immunities the Apostle does enumerate verses 4.
and 5. under nine heads. 1. They were Israelites. 2. They had the Adoption. 3.
The glory. 4. The Covenants, 5. The giving of the law. 6. The service of God.
7. The promises. 8. Theirs were the fathers. 9. Christ came of that line.


A short word by way of explication to each of these.

1. That which heightened the Apostles sorrow for these people, was the near
relation they stood to him, they were his brethren, his kinsmen according to
the flesh: brethren is a word of general signification, and applicable to all
men, without exceptions, yet here it is restrained; he does not only call them
brethren as they were from Adam; but as they sprung from the loins of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob: and he adds, here, according to the flesh, because
notwithstanding they were the seed of Abraham, yet they wanted the spiritual
character, the faith of Abraham: yet Paul owns them as his brethren, as he and
they were of the natural seed of Abraham; the Apostle does fully own, the
brotherhood upon this account, are they the seed of Abraham? and more
particularly, Phil. ^ of the stock of Israel; of the tribe of Benjamin, or
hebrew of the hebrews. S. Paul had a dear love for the people, as they
descended from the same Jacob and Israel, according to the flesh, though as yet
enemies to the faith of Abraham, who foresaw Christ day and rejoiced in it.
Note this Doctrine by the way. Doct. That Christians stand engaged much to
mourn for their unconverted kindred according to the flesh, and to take all
possible means to convert them.

Though it be a duty for Christians to do good to all in this respect, yet more
especially for kindre^ and relations; to do much and suffer much for the
salvation of our kindred; it is observed by the learned, that Christ as to his
Ministry began at Nazareth, whereas he had been brought up to instruct them:
see Luke 4. and doubtless if outward suplie^ are to begin there, much more
spirituals: he is worse then an Infidel, that provides not for his own, they of
his house.

We now proceed to the 2d branch of the Apostles description of this people,
for whose unhappiness he thus mourns; which we have contained in the 4 and 5
verses, in which verses we have the Apostle making a distinct and particular
enumeration of their several privileges and immunities which they were
honored with.

1. They were Israelites, a title of high esteem; sometimes taken in a large,
and sometimes in a strict sense; in one Text in a large sense, all that
descended from the loins of Jacob, after his name, was changed to Israel, for
his princely power in prayer with God. 2ly, Sometimes Israelites are understood
in a more strict sense for sincere, holy persons: thus Nathanael is said to be
an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile: John 1.
so Gal. 6.16. such as walk according to the Gospel-rule, are called, the
Israel of God, now here the Israelites are to be understood in a large sense,
and that was a privilege to descend of him who was in such esteem with God: in
the seed privilege as was to them, did pertain the Adoption, that is, the
childship, or sonship: of all Nations God took them into his family as his
sons: Israel is called Gods first born, Exo. 4. and not only were they so by
title, but he provides them a worthy portion, the land of Candan, a land
flowing with milk and honey for their Inheritance.

They were so called Children, that in comparison all the nations are called
dogs, Mat. 15.16. they are shut out and excluded from the childrens provision;
whereas other nations in comparison did dwell in the dust of the earth, these
children did dwell with God on the throne, as it were: the office of Adoption
was placed amongst them, that if any would come into Adoption, they must come
in through them, by being proselyted first to them, yet this high privilege was
but a show of Gospel-adoption by Christ, Romans 8.15. John 1.12. 1. Ephe. 5.
Adoption is to make a son by favor; Adoption is a legitimate act imitating
nature.

3d Privilege was, they had the glory, glory is diverse ways taken in
Scripture, sometimes for empty pomp and Majesty, Mat. 6.26. Solomon in all his
glory, in his riches, rule, splendour of apparel, and his earthly enjoyments. So
also the sun is said to be glorious, thus Israel waa more glorious then any
nation besides; they had the whole of outward glory. They had glory upon a
spiritual account; the glory of God shown upon them; the Lord walked in the
midst of them; they had the ark of Gods presence, called the glory: 1 Samuel 4.
from whence the temple was called the habitation of Gods glory, the place where
his glory dwelt, Psalm. 26.8. other nations had no glory in comparison of
Israel; they sat in the dust: God was a spirit of glory upon them every way;
and they are promised this glory upon them again upon their return Esa. 60.
their God shall be their glory.

4th Privilege, the Covenants were given and made to them: these were the
people that God entered into Covenant with in special; Genes. 17.

But may some say, did not God enter into Covenant with all flesh? Genesis 9.
and the bow is a token of it still.

I answer, there are two sorts of Covenants, one conditional, the other free;
that Genesis 9. is a Covenant without a condition, and it may be called a free
promise on Gods side voluntarily, but a Covenant properly understood supposes
a mutual contract between two; and in this sort God made his Covenant with
them: Genesis 17.

2ly, No people had the covenant renewed as they had from time to time, and
therefore we have it here in the plural, Covenants; Israel was singularly
dignified above other nations, yet this is not to be understood exclusively,
but chiefly and eminently: Israel had the Covenants, that is, they were
Feoffees in trust, as to the Covenants; if any of the gentiles had any benefit
in them, they must first be proselited to them.

The 5th privilege was, that the law was given them; not only the law of
ceremonies but the Ten Commandments was delivered to them: in special the ten
Commandments are directed to them, as those whom God brought out of Egypt: to
them were committed the Oracles of God: and that is a singular privilege in
Gods account; see Psalm. 147. he has not dealt so with any nation, Acts. 7.
they received the lively Oracles of God: and it is possible, that the Apostle
in these words had a special eye to the manner of the giving of the law upon
Mount Sinai in that magnificent and miraculous way, because he says, giving of
the law, it was no small privilege to this people, that the law that they
should be governed by, should be constituted and framed, and also given to them
by Jehovah himself: Is it not a privilege to that servant in a family, who is
entrusted with the laws and rule by which the whole family is to be guided? the
Jews had a superintendency in this point.

The 6th privilege, that to them pertained the service of God: there is some
difference amongst expositors about the meaning of this: some take it for
divine worship, even the whole ceremonial law; that they and they only were
directed how to serve God therein: others understand it of the priests office,
which was only from amongst them; there were no prophets but what was from
among them, nor no priests to serve at the altar but of them; they only came
near to God to serve him Deuteronomy. 4. and 7. not any but Aarons sons and successors.

7th Privilege, they had the promises pertaining to them only; but some may
say what difference must we make between this and the former covenants? I
answer that by promises here; we must understand, the free and voluntary,
beneficient promises of God are begun in them: where do we find in all the Old
Testament-Scriptures any promise but what was made to them either present or to
come? insomuch that when our Apostl^ Ephesians. 2. is setting forth the state of the
unbelieving Gentiles, he declares them to be without the promises, as they were
not of the commonwealth of Israel; and therefore it is said Act. 26.6. that
the promises were made to the fathers, to them was the free promises of Christ
made: so that not any can come to understand the promises but by plowing with
their heifer.

8th Privilege, theirs are the fathers; it was their privilege to be children
of worthy Ancestors, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who were worthy in the sight of
God, and to whom he made great and precious promises, in which their childrens
children were comprehended; it is a choice privilege to come of a race
accepted of God, a^ these did, they were descended of these worthy Fathers.

9th Privilege, the last but not the least of thest privileges was this, that
Christ came of that line according to the flesh: In which words we have
something expressed and something employed; the Apostle supposes that Christ had
another nature then that of the flesh. 2. It is positively expressed, that Christ
was born of them; it was a great privilege to mankind that the son of God
would take our nature, and a singular privilege to that family in particular
of whom he came, he was born of a sister of Israel, of mankind: therefore
Simon might well say and sing, Luke 2 32. that Christ was the glory of his
people Israel: and well might Mary the mother of Christ say from thenceforth
all generations should call her blessed: Is it not an honor to a family to
have an earthly prince descend of it, much more must it be a privilege to have
the son of God to descend of Israel:


Thus I have briefly touched these distinct privileges which these people had
been inve^ed with, who are now so unhappy, and for whom the Apostle is so
deeply sorrowful: but why does the Apostle make such a particular enumeration
of their birth-priviledges?

First, that he might remove from their minds the least suspicion of prejudice
in his mind against them, whilst he is not willing to obscure the least spark
of their glory according to the flesh. It is true where want of love is, it is
usual with men to slight others as to their privileges: but it was not so with
the Apostle, (...) is free to own what he might, Romans 3.1.2. he says, their
privileges were much every way: St. Paul was far from slighting the Jews as to
their outward privileges, which commonly is a fruit of want of love. 2. This
enumeration of their privileges might be to aggravate their sin the more, who
did not believe, notwithstanding they stood upon the upper ground of all these
advantages; they were Christ's own before as it were, John. 1. he came to his
own and his own received him not.


I shall note a few things briefly from what has been said, and so pass
along. First Doctrine, That the body of the Circumcised Jews indefinitely, and
universally considered were transcendently exalted, dignified and
distinguished; with very great privileges above all the world besides, they
were beloved for their fathers sakes. Second Doctrine, It is possible for
persons invested with the highest privilege under heaven to be enemies to Jesus
Christ. Third Doctrine, That a person or people enjoying the highest
privileges under heaven, yet short of believing in, and closing with, and
obeying Christ, are in a state and condition to be lamented: Or thus, that
believing in, accepting of, and obeying Jesus Christ, is the sum and substance
of all privileges; It was not so great a privilege to be Christ's Mother, as
to be Christ's disciple. Fourth Doctrine, It is a right Gospel Spirit, and
savours of love and respect to our enemies to acknowledge what is worthy in
them, as they have received it from God: see Act. 26.27. King Agrippa,
believe thou the prophets? I know thou believe: Romans 10.2. the Apostle
acknowledges their zeal, though he says, it was not according to knowledge.
Fifth Doctrine, That is good to let persons know what God has done for them,
as to outward benefits and privileges: see Nathan to David: so Paul to the
Galathians, chap. 4.15. Heb. 10.32. Revel. 2.6.

We now proceed to the third and last head, which is the Apostles glorious
Ellogam of Jesus Christ; when the Apostle has occasion to mention Jesus
Christ, he does it with great honor and respect: in this Ellogam we have two
circumstances considerable. 1. A Description of Jesus Christ, as to his deity
and dignity in it self. 2. An acknowledgment of the glory due to him from us.


1. In this description of the Deity and dignity of Christ, we have the
Apostles voluntary acknowledgment of Christ to be God over all: and this the
Apostle does for two ends. First, still to exalt the Jews privileges. 2ly, To
aggravate their sin in rejecting such a Savior who is God over all.


That Jesus Christ is God over all things and persons in heaven and earth the
Scriptures are plain in, and also, that the title of God appropriated to Jesus
Christ is plain, see Acts. 20.28. 1 Timothy. 3.16. God manifested in the flesh.
Titus. 2.13. the great God therefore eternal and everlasting, blessing and
praise due and proper to him, See Heb. 13. Rev. 1. One Point by the way. Doct.
That the love and respect a true believer has, and ows to Jesus Christ, does
so rule in him, that he cannot mention him without honor and praise, who is to
be blessed for ever, says our Text; this is the work of Saints here and
hereafter to all Eternity, Rev. 5. and chap. 11.

But why is this Article Amen here added? It is a Greek word, the English of it
is commonly verily, and it has a twofold signification according as it is
placed: when it is placed in the beginning of a sentence either in the Old or
New Testament, it carries in it an attestation and asseveration: See Psalm. 37.
verily thou shall be fed: Psalm. 39. verily every man is vanity: and it is
commonly so used by Christ, sometimes singly and sometimes doubly: We have it
by him about 50. times used singly in John; only about 24. times verily,
verily; amen, amen, is a word of attestation, but when it is used in the end of
a sentence, it signifies the souls desire of the performance of the promises:
as see Deuteronomy. 27. twelve times all the people shall say amen, or, let it be so
with all my soul; thus it is understood 1 Cor. 14.16. how shall he that
occupies the place of the unlearned, say amen at the giving of thanks? so it
must be understood, Rev. 1. so chap. 22. let it be so I wish with my soul: and
it supposes more then a bare wish, but it carries in it an echo of faith; it
shall be so, as in this Text is read, who is to be or shall be blessed for ever.

One Note, and so I shall conclude the Preface. Doct. It is not only the
soul-desire, but the undoubted faith of Saints, that Christ shall be glorified;
the Saints can say amen to this truth.

Thus we have done with the Preface to this Chapter.

CHAP. III. Plainly Demonstrating, That the wise and holy God in choosing to
salvation Eternal, and Reprobating to damnation Eternal, has a special eye to
Qualifications.
Ver. 6. Not as though the word of God had taken none effect, for they are not
all Israel which are of Israel.


HAving now finished the Apostles Preface contained in the five first verses,
we now proceed to the body of matter contained in this Chapter, which matter
calls for our most serious consideration, to the end we might attain to the
true intent and meaning of the spirit therein.

It appears upon the first cast of our eye upon this Scripture, that the
Apostle had in good earnest to do with a stout and strong adversary, with whom
he is joining issue, and that with all his might; and this enemy was the
zealous circumcised Jew, boasting of his carnal privileges, and expecting
justification and salvation by the deeds of the law, in opposition to Christ
and the Gospel: they being (as they presumed) the seed of those to whom the
promises were by God at first made; and hereupon their confidence was raised
very high of their safe estate. Now to such a people does the Apostle here
address himself. And his great design (as we may clearly see) is to assert
Justification and salvation to come in only and alone by faith in Jesus Christ
without the deeds of the law.

Now the course and Method which the Apostle proceeds in is this; First, to
weaken and dissolve their grand objections, and take off those absurdities
which seemed to the Jews to follow upon the Apostles Doctrine of Justification
by faith alone.

Those two Objections which he knew lay in their minds were these. 1. If the
circumcised Jews be not Justified and saved unto whose fathers God had made
such a plain promise, and renewed from day to day, and from time to time, then
it renders God not so good as his word, then his word is of none effect: But it
is absurd to imagine Gods word to be fallible: his promises are yea and amen;
therefore the circumsised Israel must be Justified and saved, though they do
reject Jesus Christ and the Gospel: this is the sum of the first Argument and
Objection. The 2d Objection is this: If God justifyeth the heathen, the
nations, sinners of the Gentiles, that are strangers to God, and that without
works of legal righteousness, and reject us who are comparatively a righteous
people, walking in his ways living in his Ordinances, and worshipping him; then
does the ways and proceedings of God savor of unrighteousness, and seems to
bear a resemblance of justifying the unrighteous, and condemning the righteous;
which as Abraham said of old, is very far from God: therefore it must needs be
the seed of Abraham, that are the subjects of justification and acceptance with
God.
Now that this must needs be the substance, will appear from those answers which
the Apostle shapes out to them in the following verses: and the taking off the
first of these Objections, takes him up the 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. verses:
and the taking off the second Objection, takes him up the greatest part of the
chapt. from the 14. ver. forwards.

As to the first of these Objections, the Apostles concess with them, that Gods
word cannot fayl, his promises are yea and amen, verse. 6. not as though the
word of God had taken none effect; Gods word and promises are certain and true,
and yet you may be rejected; which to demonstrate he proceeds to distinguish of
the seed of Abraham, and to show, that God in his special promise to Abraham,
did not intend the natural and fleshly seed of Abraham, but such as shall be of
the faith of Abraham: this the Apostle speaks largely unto ver. 6 to the 9. and
to back and confirm this position, that God did not intend Abraham's seed
according to the flesh, the Apostle does descend to some instances of some
persons within the compass of their grant, who though they were the seed of
Abraham, yet were not heirs of the promise: the first Instance is of Ishmael,
who though a child of Abraham, yet was by Gods appointment cast out of the
family, and disinherited from a share with Isaac; and whereas they might
readily plead he was cast out, partly because he was the son of the bondwoman,
and partly for misdemenour, because he was seen mocking Isaac, the Apostle
proceeds to give an instance without exceptions; which is Esau, who was the
immediate Offspring of Isaac, in whom the promise did more especially center,
yet he is hated and comparatively ruinated, which things we have treated on to
ver. 13. all which tends to strengthen the Apostles distinction that Abrabams
seed was not intended the natural or fleshly seed, but the seed according to
says: to which the Apostle to the Galathians; chap. 3.29. does fully speak; if
ye be Christ's, then are you Abraham's seed, and heirs according to promise: So
that if Esau be not an heir, it is because he is not Christ's by faith and
obedience: so that that seed of Abraham who are the elect seed, are such as own
and believe in Christ; therefore if the Jews though the natural seed of
Abraham, do reject Jesus Christ, Gods word of promise stands good and steadfast,
although the unbelieving Jews are rejected: But I shall speak more particularly
to each verse and begin at the 6 verse.

And the Method which I shall follow in the prosecution of this work, is this.
1. To show the design, drift and scope of the text and context. 2. To open
those words that may seem difficult and want explaining. 3. Reduce the whole
into such doctrinal conclusions as may be most proper and profitable, and all
this with as much concisenesse as the matter will admit.


I shall at once cast my eye upon 3. or 4. verses, as to their main scope and
tendency.

As 1st, I shall take notice of those verses in which the Apostles work is to
manage his distinction of Abraham's seed, ver. 6. 7. 8. 9.

I begin with ver. the 6. in which the Apostles design is, to assert the
steadfastness of Gods word of promise made to Abraham, notwithstanding his
rejecting the carnal unbelieving Jew, as not the right seed.

Therefore the Apostle in the 1st place does disclaim the least whisperous
secret imagination of mind that Gods word or promise should be liable to fail:
These words are read three ways.

1st, It cannot be that the word of God has failed. Others read, it is not
possible that the word of God should miscarry: Others read, but not that the
word of God is frustrated: there is no material difference in these readings,
they all amount to thus much: to attest the steadfastness and certainty of Gods
promises to those to whom they are made: By word we are generally to understand
the word of promise; see Psalm. 106.24 and 119.38.

I shall only note two points by the way, and so pass. First Doctrine, That
sometimes some passages of Gods providence does seem to cross his promises.

This passage seems to give occasion to question whether the word of God had
not failed; and thus it seemed in that passage of Abraham's offering up of
Isaac, as also in Gods carrying Israel into Egypt, so also in the death of
Jesus Christ, John 12.34. that Christ should abide for ever seemed to be the
promise: so in this passage before us, it seemed as if God had cast off his
people; Romans 11.1. the Phrases and sayings of Scripture seems to be
contradictory many times, that such as are inconsiderate men may be in danger
to wrest them to their own destruction 2 Peter. 3.16.

But Secondly, That however circumstances may appear to us, it is safe to
conclude, that Gods word and promise rightly understood are certain and
unfailable. And that Opinion or saying whatsoever which carries in it a
question of the truth of Gods promises is in it self false and unsound: we see
here what pains the apostle takes to deliver himself from the least imputation
of his interfering with Gods promises: in what he had been asserting in the
former two verses, as to the privileges and promises to this people; the
Apostle would have God true though all men are liars: see what he says, Romans
4.16. the promises are sure to all the seed, 2 Corinthians. 1.20. all the promises
are in Christ yea and amen; for he is a God that cannot lie, Titus. 1. Gods
Counsels are by the same Apostle said to be immutable.

Now the Apostle in vindication of the stedfastness and immutability of Gods
promises to Abraham takes it for granted, that Abraham had two sorts of seed; a
seed according to the flesh, and a seed according to promise, but the seed
according to the flesh was not the seed to whom the promise was made at first:
for (says he) all are not Israel which are of Israel; but how is this to be
understood? did he not say before, they were Israel, it is without exception? I
answer, so he does also here, own them to be of Israel, but they were not
Israel themselves; they had not Abraham's nor Jacobs spirit; as Christ told the
Jews, John the 8th. though he grant them to be Abraham's seed, yet they had not
the spirit of Abraham; inasmuch as they sought to kill him, and so manifest
themselves to be of their father the devil, though of Abraham's seed: so these
are not Israel, because they rejected Gods way by Christ.

I shall note one point by the way, and pass. Doct. That true heirship to Gods
singular promises comes in by a supernatural way, by a spiritual birth: and not
by common generation.

Persons were never in no age born heirs of singular and special glory; it is
not an Israelite but an Israelite indeed, that is worthy of special noting by
Christ: John 1. says Christ of Nathanael, behold an Israelite indeed, in whom
is no guile, therefore let none expect heirship or acceptance from God from
carnal or birth-priviledges, of most godly parents: and this is farther
ratified verse. the 7th, neither because they are the seed of Abraham are they
all children, that is, Children of God they are not.

Doct. from the 7th, verse. The true seed of Abraham, in all ages are such as
bears resemblance to Abraham in faith and love. It is frequent in Scripture to
reckon persons the Children of those whom they resemble in good or evil; some
of these Israelites are the Children of the Ammonites and the Hittites, Ezekiel.
16. some of them Children of the Adulterer and the whore, Esa. 57.30. yet
Abraham's seed in a large fence: nay some of these very Jews, John 8.44. are the
children of the Devil; and why? but because they resembled the Devil in their
lying and murdering: so the women 1 Peter 3.6. are children of Sarah, who
carry it as she did: Gal. 3.29. if ye be Christ's then are you Abraham's seed,
but these did not imitate Abraham.

But he adds, in Isaac shall thy seed be called, I shall speak but a very few
words to this clause in this place, because I shall have a more proper occasion
afterward.

The occasion of these words was this, Sarah taking notice, that Ishmael
Abraham's son by H^gar the Bondwoman, proved a scoffer, and mocked Isaac her own
son, she made it her request to Abraham to turn him and his mother out of
doors, but Abraham at present seeming somewhat slow and unwilling to answer his
wifes desire herein, at last God commands the same thing of Abraham, which
before his wife desired of him; and that this act might not be too grievous to
him, of casting out his son, God gives him this word of encouragement and
satisfaction, in Isaac shall thy seed be called, Genesis 21.12. he shall be thy
son and heir, and Ishmael shall have no share with him. So that God who does
not use to contradict himself in his promise to Abraham and his seed, does not
intend Ishmael, though a child of Abraham's body.

Verse. 8. That is, they which are the children of the flesh are not the
children of God, but the children of the promise are counted for the seed.


In which words we have contained a more clear interpretation and explication
of those passages, ver. 6. and 7. spoken by God, and the Apostle, that all are
not Israel that are of Israel, nor all children because they are the seed of
Abraham, but in Isaac shall thy seed be called. This verse has the note of
interpretation upon it in these words (that is) or as some read, that is to
say, and this kind of speaking is used by way of interpretation elsewhere also
Romans 7.18. in me (that is) in my flesh^ so chaps 10.6.7. (that is) now this
explication contains in it a negative and an affirmative, which kind of
Dialect in Scripture is the most certain and obliging kind of speaking that
can be.

First, we have it negatively, the children of the flesh are not the children
of God. 2dly, Affirmatively, but the children of the promise are counted for
the seed:
that which will be necessary in order to the prosecuting this subject, will be,
1. To explain who may be understood by the children of the flesh. 2. Who may be
understood by the children of the promise.


First, Who are the children of the flesh.

I answer, Children of the flesh must be taken in the largest fence, that so it
may be the more teaching to us: children of the flesh may bear a threefold
acceptance.

First, Such as have only a natural birth as the offspring of Adam: thus must
John be understood, Ioh. 3.6. that which is born of the flesh is flesh; and
that Christ had such a birth as this is plain, Romans 1.3. he was born of the
seed of David according to the flesh, that is, as man: So ver. 5. of whom
according to the flesh Christ came, that is, was born: Now the greatest number
of men and women in the world have this birth only, and so are children of the
flesh: In this sense Ishmael is said to be born after the flesh, that is to
say, in a common way of generation, as the rest of the sons o^ Adam: as Abrah^m
strong, and Hagar in a natural capacity to bring forth. Secondly, Children of
the flesh in Scripture are taken for such as give themselves up to the guidance
of the fleshly mind and affections, to follow the dictates of the natural man,
the old man; these are said to walk after the flesh, and be in the flesh, this
our Apostle speaks fully unto, Romans 8. from ver. the 1. to the 13. and such a
person so walking may be called a child of the flesh, let his profession be
what it will: and in this sense the spirit is said to war against the flesh,
Gal. 5. that is the fleshly mind: and this was the mind that S. Paul war'd
against, 2 Corinthians. 10. Thirdly, and chiefly, children of the flesh are
understood to be such as look for justification and acceptance with God, upon
the account of the works of the law; circumcision and Obedience to the
ceremonial law: this is plain, for flesh and works of the law, are often taken
one for another; and by this our Apostle, Romans 4.1,2. what shall we say then,
that Abraham our father, according to the flesh, has found? for if Abraham
were justified by works: that which is called flesh in the first part of the
verse is called works in the latter part: this is understood, Gal. 3.3. of
being made perfect by the flesh: and so chap. 4.29. he that was born after the
flesh persecuted him that was born after the spirit, that is he that was born
according to the works of the law: and thus S. Paul must be understood: Phil.
3. though he was circumcised, and kept the law, yet he had no confidence in the
flesh:
now in this third sense must our text be understood, the children of the flesh
are not the children of God: Adoption and heirship does not come in that way;
they that have nothing else to plead must stand off: let us take it in which
sense we will, the text is here, the children of the flesh are not the children
of God. 1. Such as have only nature. Nor 2ly, those who live after the flesh,
though they profess to believe in Christ. Nor 3dly, those who are most
circumspect as to the observation of the law, except they believe in and obey
Jesus Christ.


Secondly, who are the Children of the promise, unto whom these are opposed? By
children of the promise must be understood such as rest and depend upon the
free promise of God in Christ for life and salvation: believers in Christ who
seek for acceptance and salvation by him alone, such as are begotten to love
and obedience by the power of the promises: To this does the Apostles words
agree, Such as are Christ's, are the seed and heirs according to the promises:
therefore does the Apostle oppose the Law to the promise, Gal. 3.18. For if the
inheritance be of the Law, it is no more of the promises; but God gave it to
Abraham by promise: So also Gal. 4.14. if they that are of the law be heirs,
their faith is made void, and the promise of none effect: the Gospel is a
dispensation of promises, and consequently of faith: S. Paul calls the
Saints, Heb. 6.17. the heirs of promises: So also Gal. 4.28. We as Isaac are
children of the promises: So that when the Apostle says here, the Children are
counted for the seed, he intends not others then true believers in Christ
Jesus: Thus I have briefly answered these two Questions, in order to the
explication of the words.

I shall now summary the first part of the words into this Doctrine. Doct. That
the true seed of Abraham are not, nor were not at any time estimated or
accounted as they were found in the external profession or practice of
Ordinances, though of Gods own appointment, but of such who under such
Ordinances had the life and power of them in their hearts.

The true heirs of justification and salvation were in all ages intended to be
inwardly and believin^y children of God: God did never accept of any outside
professors since the beginning; but as he was a searcher of hearts allways, so
he allways required heart and inside-worship: he did always require to be
worshipped with heart, soul, and strength. In Abels time Cain was a worshiper
as well as Abel, but the difference lay in the inside of the worship, therefore
it is said, Heb. 11.4. by faith Abel offered to God a more acceptable sacrifice
then Cain.

In the time of Circumcision God was not satisfied with a fleshly circumcision
only, but God calls for circumcision of heart, Deuteronomy. 10.16. circumcise
therefore the foreskin of your hearts: and we see the severe threatenings of God
against Israel for the want hereof, Ierem. 9. Inward spiritual worship was
always required, and much more in Gospeldays: therefore Christ tells the Jews,
John, 6.53. Except you eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye
have no life in you, Romans 2.28. he is not a Jew who is such outwardly; God
almighty was so cautious and careful, lest men should bear upon works for
Justification and acceptance with him thereupon, that he declares Abraham
justified before he was circumcised; and that our Apostle takes special notice
of, Romans 4.11. Abraham received circumcision; a seal of the righteousness of
the faith which he had; being not yet circumcised: to which agrees these
words, verse, the 5. now to him that works not, but believes in him that
Justifies the ungodly, his faith is accounted to him for righteousness: so
that it is plain, that the spirit of God is greatly concerned in beating men
off from bearing upon works of righteousness: and we see the spirit of St Eaul
to this purpose, Titus 3.5. not by works of righteousness that we have done
but according to his mercy he saved us. This Doct. seems to discover to us a
great mistake amongst professors in this day; there are but a sew who do not
err on this hand, to bear upon their external obedience to ordinances, and
raise their comforts and hopes from thence: Is not this like the plea of the
pharisee? Luke. 18. I fast twice in the wee^; are there not many who bless
themselves upon this account? and this appears, because your comforts are high
and low, according to your duties: but some may say, ought it not so to be? I
answer, you must have a special care to keep allways in a clear sight and sense
and assurance of your relation you stand in to God; if you are truly
regenerated persons and are begotten from above, do not easily let go that
hold; it is the duty of a child to grieve that he has offended his loving
father? but not to call in question his relation to him thereupon: God does not
unchilde for every fault, nor for many sins, if they be not wilfully committed:
but I pray mistake me not, I would not have Gods children pass lightly over
their miscarriages against him, nor their unanswerable returns to him, but
mourn cordially as David and Peter did, not in slavish but filial frame of
spirit: but know this, that our sanctification is not the ground of our
justification, but the Demonstration of it: good works may demonstrate our
justification.

2. Let each of us be instructed from hence, to have a special care that we do
not bear or rest upon our Gospel-obedience for acceptance or justification,
namely, our Baptism, nor other gospelobedience in ordinances: for this we may
be assured of as a truth, that if legal performances of God^ appointment were
not accepted, being only outward, much less are gospel persormances in
ordinances acceptable without the spiritual part of them: Baptism has an
inside as well as circumcision, which consists in two parts: death to sin, life
to righteousness: now if we have not this inside, we are in a sense children of
the flesh, and so not the children of God: therefore S. Peter takes both parts,
1 Peter 3. not the putting away the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a
good conscience; so does Christ, John 3. a true baptized Disciple of Christ, is
one in whom Christ dwells by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. the Ordinance of the Lords supper
has an inside, a spiritual part: our hearts are to be fed as well as our
bodies: we are (as Christ says) to eat his flesh and drink his blood, or else
we have no life in us: it is the spiritual part attending the outward that
renders a person acceptable to God: for he seeks such, especially now, who
worship him in spirit and truth, John 4.

Abraham did much in going out of his country, and offering up his son, yet
his justification came in by his faith: Romans 3. it is true, his works did
manifest the life and truth of his faith, James 2. but it is said, Abraham
believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness.

3. If the children of the flesh or law, be not the children of God, then
certain it is, that the children of faith are; and so thou who art a
Gentile-believer, art one of them: it may be much encouragement to a poor
gospel-believer; it appears thou were one of those whom God had upon his heart
in his promise to Abraham at first: the promise made to Abraham, that he should
be heir of the world, was made upon gospel-terms not fleshly, Romans 4.13. If you
are believers in Christ, you are the proper heirs of that promise with him, and
so the most proper children of God, though thou art a Gentile: so was Zacheus;
yet upon his believing he is pronounced a child of Abraham by Jesus Christ
himself, Luke, 19.9. It is the judgment of some learned men that Abraham's
children may be divided into four ranks, or are of four sorts. 1. Such as were
his natural children according to a fleshly race, who were no sharers in the
promise, such were Ishmael and Esau. 2. Some who were descended of Ahrahams
loins, and were heirs of those temporal promises of Canaan, and such like, such
were the fleshly posterity of Isaac and Jacob. 3. Such as descended of Abraham's
loins according to the flesh, and not only so, but such as were truly godly,
and had the faith of Abraham, even faith in Christ, as Abraham had. 4. Such as
are not of the fleshly seed of Abraham's loins at all, but were only believers:
of which sort are all the believing gentiles,
and these two latter sorts may be reckoned into and are the children of the
promise, which leads us to speak unto the affirmitive part of this
interpretation; But the children of the promise are accounted for the seed.

In handling this head, I shall cast my eye to the verse before and verse
following, ver. 7. ver. 9. In Isaac shall thy seed be called, which saying is
taken out of Genesis 21.14. and the occasion we may there see in the former part
of the chapter, which was this (as I minded before:) after Isaac was born and
grown to some years, Sarah his mother takes notice of Ishmael the bond-womans
son, offering some abuse to her son Isaac in mocking him; she is sorely
displeased thereat, and besought her husband to cast both son and mother out of
doors, but Abraham having love to his son, it seemed grevious to him, to put
her request in execution; but soon after God himself speaks to him, and bids
him hearken to his wife in this matter, and put the son and mother both out of
doors, and he gives Abraham this as an argument, that Ishmael should not
inherit with Isaac, but in Isaac his seed should be called: that Isaac should
be the heir alone without Ishmael: now Abraham having received this command
from God, proceeds accordingly, ver. 14. Abraham arose early in the morning to
perform that service which was too grievous to him in himself: it is worthy our
noting.

By the way note this Doctrine. That our father Abraham was of a tractable
frame of spirit to Gods will, though in things cross and contrary to his own
will and interest: Abraham is not only willing to do it but he rises early to
do it.

This he did also in the offering up Isaac, chap. 22. his dear and only son, he
did arise early to go about it; this was the spirit of our father Abraham whose
steps we are to follow, Romans 5.12. in order to blessing Abraham, God called him
to his foot, Esa. 41.2.

Let us learn this lesson from it, be like Abraham herein, it was kindly taken
at his hand: God reckons him his friend, James 2.23. and this privilege is
promised, John. 15.14. Ye are my friends when ye do whatsoever I command you:
if thou be a believer thou must look to Abraham thy father, Esa. 51. but I
only touch this by the way, and now come to the words ver. 7. In Isaac shall
thy seed be called.

It is not here to be understood, that all that come of Isaacs loins acording
to the flesh are here meant, for we know Esau came of Isaac, but Isaac is here
exhibited as a type of the true seed; they must resemble Isaac in this birth:
but I shall meet with this in the interpretation as it follows: the children
of the promise are accounted for the seed. I have already spoken something to
the explaining these words, who are these children of promise: in general, they
are such as are begotten by the promise through Christ; but I would speak more
particularly a few words.

1. It is to be noted, that the Apostle does not here say, the children of
promise, with respect to Isaac alone personally considered: but the Apostle had
an eye to a race or generation of men so qualified, that is to say, such as
resemble Isaac, as to his extraordinary birth, and the extraordinary interposer
of Gods power: therefore he says in special, the children of the promise: it
is undeniably plain, that if the Apostles design had been here to lift up
Isaac as a type of absolut personal election, honeeded not to have proceeded
this way as he does, to compute Abraham's seed by Isaac, and by him in such a
way: but if the Apostles design was to render Isaac as a type of such a sort
of persons, so qualified, then the whole context will concur with it. 2.
Whereas the Apostle here styles these persons acceptable with God, children of
the promise, we are to understand, such persons as the promises are directed
unto, which is Originally and comprehensively to and in Christ; for this we
have an Emphatical place, Gal. 3.16. Now to Abraham and his seed were the
promises made, he says not, to seeds, a many, but one which is Christ: so that
in a true construction children of promise and children of Christ are the same,
for Christ is the apparent and immediate heir of the promise. To confirm this,
we have a remarkable place, Gal. 3.29. if ye be Christ's then are you Abraham's,
and consequently Isaacs seed, and heirs according to premise; so that the
Apostle here does instruct us, that election consists of such a sort of persons
so qualified, the specifical seed of Isaac: such a kind of persons therefore
might the Apostle well say, Ephesians. 1.4. according as he has chosen us, in him,
before the foundation of the world, that is in Christ.

3. This truth is further confirmed, if we consider, that children of promise
must suppose children of faith: a promise requires believing: Abraham believed
Gods promise, and it was accounted for righteousness: so that we have Isaac
here set forth as a lively type of the nature, not the number of those who
shall be Justified and saved: as afterward we have Pharach set forth as a
lively type of those who shall be rejected by God, namely, such as slight and
reject God and his long-suffering grace in the Gospel, which ought and is
expected to lead them to repentance, Romans 2.2.


This Doctrine from hence may be observed. Doctrine, That God in choosing and
reprobating man has a special eye to qualifications.

Children of the flesh are not the children of God, but the children of faith
in Christ; not by number and name, but species and qualifications, Psalm. 4.3.
God has chosen and set apart for himself the man that is godly. St. Jude tells
us, certain men were Ordained to that condemnation, and he does desipher them
thus, ungodly men turning the grace of God into wantonness, and denying the
Lord; so that Ishmael and Isaac are made use of here but allegorically, as they
are, Gal. 4.

I shall speak but a very few words to ver. 9. and wind up this context with a
word of Use; for this is the word of promise, at this time will I come and
Sarah shall have a son; Isaac is judged a meet type of those who should be
begotten by faith in the free and gracious promise of God in the Gospel: we
have in these words contained an explanation of what is spoken before; Isaac
was a significant son of promise, therefore the Apostle recites the very words
of the Original promise to Abraham, Genesis 17.21. at this time next year will I
return according to the time of life, and Sarah shall have a son: ver. 14. at
the time appointed I will return: the Apostle changes by these words, I will
come; for God to come is understood two ways, 1. To come in power to help,
rescue or deliver. 2. Sometimes to come is to punish,
sometimes for God or Christ to come is metaphorically understood; as Rev. 2.5.
his coming is to remove the Candlestick, to come, ver 16. is to fight against
them: chap. 3.3. is to come as a thief with strength and resolution: we have
two things considerable in these words to Abraham, recited by the Apostle. 1.
That Isaac's birth is the effect of Gods coming in power. 2. That God in
fulfilling this promise admits no delay, at this time, at the set time: neither
sooner nor later, but at the set time; as it was in the birth of John the
Baptist, Luke the 1. his mother went her exact time:
God makes his promise returnable at the set time, so that Isaac's birth is the
effect of Gods coming as to his birth, and the time of it, and also the effect
of Gods free promise; Isaac was the son of Gods word of promise: I shall sum up
all in one Doctrinal conclusion. Doctrine, That a true child of God, and heir
of glory, is one as Isaac was, begotten and brought Jorth by the strength of
the free promise of God, not of his own power, strength or righteousness: This
our Apostle alludes unto, Titus 3. and 5. not of works of righteousness that we
have done.

I told you in the explication, that Isaac's birth was an act of free mercy and
special Providence, for there was no strength in Abraham or Sarah to have a
child according to the course of nature; nothing as they could lean upon so as
to have hope in themselves: therefore it is said, Romans 4. that Abraham against
hope believed in hope, verse. 18. and being not weak in faith, he considered not
his own body now dead, nor yet the deadness of Sarah's womb: he staggered not,
but was fully persuaded that he that had promised was able to perform: and this
frame of spirit God liked well in Abraham, and it was accounted for
righteousness; and hereupon he was called the friend of God, James 2.23.
Isaac's birth was the effect of a promise, and faith in it: so was John's, Luke
the 1. and what Elizabeth said to Mary, is certainly true; verse. 45. blessed is
she, or he that believes, for there shall be a performance of what is
promised: a true child of God is begotten and brought forth of the promise of
God in Christ, therefore believing: Holy S. Paul could say in the behalf of
himself and the rest of believers, we brethren as Isaac, are children of the
promise, that is to say, that as Isaac's birth was the product of the free
promise of God, so is our new birth: and it is a truth, that we are as weak and
unable to save our selves, of our selves, as Abraham was to produce Isaac of
himself, without the mighty interposer: for the promise gives a being to
Christ, and believing to be the means of salvation, Genesis 3. Esa. 55. I will
abundantly pardon: look unto me, and be ye saved all the ends of the earth.
Esa. 45.22.

There are five inferences to be drawn from the promises. 1. There is no ground
from the rejecting the unbelieving Jews, to conclude that there is a failing in
Gods promises to Abraham and his seed, because God did never intend a carnal
seed in that promise, but a spiritual and believing seed, who should seek for
justification by Christ alone: forasmuch as Isaac's birth is a type of Gods
method of saving souls in all ages. 2. Learn from this context the
indispensable necessity of faith, in order to justification and salvation: if
Abraham and Sarah had not seconded Gods promise by faith in it, they had had no
Isaac: therefore is the birth strongly imputed to the faith of them both, Heb.
11.11. the birth of Isaac is not only a promise on Gods part, but believing on
their part. 3. If the works of the law were rejected in point of justification,
which were so labourious, painful, and costly, much less can gospel-works
justify, which in comparison are no works, Romans 4.15. therefore lean not to
them. 4. If ^ods children are the children of promise, that is, begotten upon
the promise, then this does instruct a gospel-minister his work and duty, which
is to lay before persons Gods free promises of life and salvation in Christ:
thus did Peter in his preaching, Acts. 2. chapter 3. chapter 10. 5. Admire the
sweetness of Gods nature to allure by promises to Obedience, this was Gods
proceedings with Abraham; when God would have Abraham to obey him, in any
special service; he makes him a special promise, Genesis 12.17. so that thus far
the Apostle has proceeded to manage his design in distinguishing Abraham's
seed, to the end of the 9th verse.


CHAP. IV. Wherein is evidently asserted by the truth of reason, that the
Apostles affirmation (Jacob have I loved and Esau hated) could not respect in
the least, either their persons or generations, as to a final saving or da^ning
the whole posterity.
Ver. 10. And not only this, but when Rebecca also had conceived by one, even
by our father Isaac.

11. For the Children being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil,
that the purpose of God according to election, might stand, not of works but of
him that calls.

12. It was said unto her, the elder shall serve the younger.

13. As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated.


THe reason why I take in all these 4. verse. is, because they all belong to
make up the Apostles answer to their first objection: the Apostle is in these 4
verses still carrying on the former Argument, to take off the absurdity cast by
the Jews upon Paul's Doctrine of free justification by faith in Christ: their
objection (as I have before-shown) was this, if Abraham's feed be not justified
and saved, then God is not so good as his word of promise to Abraham; but God
is as good as his word, therefore Israel is justified, and thou Paul art
mistaken.

To this the Apostle has been laboring in his reply in the former 4. verses;
and to take them off from their confident opinion of the whole seed of Abraham:
he has been instancing in Ishmael and Isa^, one rejected, the other elected:
Ishmael being cast out of the inheritance shows, that all Abr^hams-natural seed
were not heirs of the promise: we have now in these four verses his 2d instance
to the same end, from Ahraham's family, and that in special from Israel's
family, the special son of promise: yet not all his fleshly seed heirs with
him, though God said, In Isaac shall thy seed be called.

And since we are now entering upon the borders of the controversial part of
this chapter about absolute personal election and reprobation, I shall
endeavor to be as distinct, clear and plain, as possible I can, that at least
what I intend and speak may have a ready access to your understandings and
consciences in the sight of God.

And before I come close to the words, as an introduction to what shall be
said, I would premise three or four things to be considered to prepare you to
what I shall say directly to these verses.

1. I beseech you as a general rule to be observed, not only in this, but for
the right understanding of any single and difficult place of Scripture, take a
diligent heed to the main drift and scope of the place in general: I am well
assured (as I told you before) that there is no one thing will more conduce to
a right understanding of this 9 Chap. of the Romans, then this thing, to know
well what is the main Doctrine that S. Paul is designed to prove and establish,
and from thence you may be assured, that all his arguments runs in a direct
line to that end, for it is certain, that he was a workman that did not take
improper tools to work with, that is to say, improper Arguments to confirm his
grand thesis, but did answer by pertinent and convincing arguments.

There are two opinions, and but two, that I know of, founded upon this portion
of Scripture, the one is this, that the Apostle in this 9 Chapter to the Romans is
insinuating to the Jews, that their casting off and rejection, who for many
ages had been Gods peculiar people, and receiving into love and grafting in the
Gentiles, was the effect of Gods eternal decree before the worlds were made;
and their opinion runs thus, that those whom God has elected before time,
shall one time or other have such means of grace offered to them; as thereby
without possibility of miscarrying they shall be brought to believe, and be
saved: and on the other hand, that those who are under an eternal degree of
reprobation, must by virtue thereof remain under impenitency and unbelief, and
so unavoidably must perish: and from this root are such of the Jews (says this
opinion) cast off and rejected: and without a diligent comparation of the
several passages of this chapter, there does appear some weak ground of such an
opinion.

The second opinion upon this context, and Chapt. and Chapter 3.4.10.11. is this,
that the Apostles absolute design in the whole, is to prevent or answer those
objections which were apt to be upon the Jews hearts against his grand Doctrine
of justification by faith in Christ, which indeed was the main Doctrine, Chap.
3.4.10.11.

Now consider which of these two opinions are likeliest to be nearest the
truth: I will give you 5. or 6. Arguments to demonstrate, that it must be the
last and not the first, and that the rejecting (...) the Jews is not the effect
of Gods absolute decree. First, because their casting off is rendered as the
fruit and effect of their own sin and disobedience to Christ; see chap. 11. and
20. Well: because of unhelief they were broken off. Secondly, because their
casting off is but conditionally till they turn to the Lord, and believe (...)
Jesus Christ, ver. 23. they shall be grafted in again, if they abide not still
in unbelief; and that they shall so believe see ver. 26, 27, 28. Now if their
blinding and hardening were the fruit of Gods absolute decree, it could not be
reverst again, as most will say. 3. That this could not be the Apostles design
to establish absolute personal Election, because such a doctrine would not have
comported with his grand design, to convince the Jews of their sin in
rejecting Jesus Christ; such a Doctrine must run in a direct line of opposition:
I argue thus; was it a likely way to convince them, to tell them, that they
were necessitated to reject Christ from the power of an absolute Decree:
besides the Jews had cause to judge, that the Decree of Election was on their
side, rather then on the Gentil^, for they had the promises made and renewed to
them from time to time: nay, it is plain, that the Jews in rejecting Jesus
Christ did not answer to their predestination: See Luke 7.30. the Pharisees and
Lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves: and S. Peter says,
they were disobedient to that whereunto they were appointed. 4. It is plain and
clear, that a great part of this Chapter is spent in answer to their Objections
against S. Paul's Doctrine; which kind of arguing was needless, if his design
had been to exalt personal Election, therefore the Apostles design is to
fetforth the nature and quality, not the number of those who are the true seed
of Abraham; according as he had done, Gal. 3.29. 5. The Apostle himself in
drawing up his result of all his Arguments, ver. 31, 32. wherein he shows the
true and proper ground of the Jews miscarrying, and the Gentiles obtaining, he
gives not the ground to lie in a previous decree but in themselves, because
they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the Law. 6. Such an
Election and Reprobation (mere personal) is neither proved in this Chapter, nor
in any other part of Scripture, nor in any other part of this Epistle. 7. The
whole current of this Chapter does clearly correspond to the Second Opinion,
that S. Paul is taking off all Objections that lie in the way to contradict
justification by faith alone, without the works of the law:
Now my hearts counsel to all that would find the truth of God in this Chapter,
is to observe the scope of the Epistle and Chapter: and if you find the least
whisper in the whole of such a personal and absolute Election and Reprobation
as men speak of, I have lost my sense and reason: I will be bold to say, there
is as much in the First of Genesis: and whereas you possibly may have the
persons of Esau and Jacob in your eyes; I answer, you shall be forced to
conclude with me before we have done, that the instance of Esau and Jacob does
not at all prove such a notion of personal Election or Reprobation, to life or
death eternal.

The Second thing which I would premise in order to clearing our way, is to
know that the Apostle in these four verses, 10, 11, 12, 13. is still carrying
on the same design as he was in the four former verses, which was to point out
the true seed of Abraham by their qualifications, not name or number: and know
this, that as God before had been declaring his mind more darkly, in the
instance of Ishmael and Isaac, so he is now proceeding more clearly in this
instance of Esau and Jacob; and that he is prosecuting the same matter in hand,
is or may be perceived from two circumstances. 1. From the manner of speaking,
in the first words, and not only this, which kind of explanatory speaking does
note a further prosecution of the same matter; as it is used elsewhere; See
Romans 5.3.11. chap. 8.23. where this kind of speaking, and not only so, is so
used. 2. That the Apostle is carrying on the same Argument, appears from his
mending and strengthening his Argument, for as to his former argument, and
instance of Isaac and Ishmael, the Jews might object something as to the
father, the mother, and the child. 1. Ishmael was begotten before circumcision
was commanded. 2. Of a bondwoman and Abraham's servant Hagar. 3. He discovered
himself in matter of fact: he mocked Isaac, and therefore no marvel though he
was rejected, and yet the word to Abraham might be still steadfast; therefore he
does herein present an instance without exception: 1. Of Esau that was begotten
in Circumcision. 2. Of him in whom the promises were more immediately lodged, In
Isaac shall thy seed be called. 3. Of a religious godly praying mother, she
sought God presently in the case.
4. Those children were twins, both begotten at one and the same time. 5.
Neither was there any difference made by good or bad actions on either side,
for it was said to Rebecca, before they had done good or evil, says our Text.
Yet 6. the Lord tells Rebecca then, that the elder should serve the younger.:
one of these two equals are hated:


so then it is plain that the Apostle in these verses is still upon the same
Argument, and truly the clear sight hereof does much conrribute to a right
understanding of the whole controversy; for some thinking that the Apostle in
ver. the 10. is entering upon a new matter, have lost themselves, and have been
involved in great darkness as to this whole context; therefore I pray remember
that the Apostle is still upon the same Argument, that he was in the 4 former
verses.

The 3d thing premised, to clear our way to the text is this, and it is
undenyably plain, that what is by God spoken to Rebecca, as to these two
persons, Jacob and Esau, is not spoken as to them in a personal capacity, but
as to them, and of them, as heads of two nations: for this see that text,
Genesis 25.23. not one word in that original text of Jacob and Esau as single
persons, but four times expressed as nations and people: two nations are in thy
womb, and two manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels: and the one
people shall be stronger then the other people; four times expressed: So also in
that prophecy recited by the Apostle out of Malachi, as it is written, Jacob I
have loved, Esau have I hated, chap. 1. ver. 2, 3, 4. It is plain, the it is
not Jacob nor Esau in person to be understood, as does easily appear to those
that will but read and consider; in that it is all along rendered in the
plural: Edom said, we are impoverisht, but we will build, and they shall be
called, the people against whom God has indignation; so that love and hatred
in our text cannot be applied to those two single persons in Rebecca's womb, in
a single capacity; but some may object, does not our Apostle in our text ver.
11. call them children? I answer, No, there is no such word as children in the
Original: it is a corruption to accommodate their private opinion, who so
rendered it: It is rendered only thus; before they were born: and if they would
have had honesty supplied the place, they should have in the room of children
supplied nations, which would have answered to the Original text, Genesis 25. two
nations are in thy womb: so that it is very plain from hence, that Jacob and
Esau are not here propounded as types of a mere personal election and
Reprobation, but as to a specifial National election and Reprobation, it
bespeake a laying low a certain sort of people who did not fall in with God in
his design through Christ, although they were the elder, as the covenant of
works was elder then that of grace, neither were these words of God to Rebecca,
the Major shall serve the Minor, ever fulfilled in Jacob and Esau personally,
but Jacob stooped to Esau, called him Lord, Genesis 32. how often does he pay
homage to Esau personally: So that this love or haired was never manifested to
them in person, whilst they lived, the fourth thing I premise to prepare our
way to the Text is this, that whatever is here spoken by God or by the Apostle
concerning Jacob or Esau, either as to them or their generations, is not spoken
as to their final and eternal estate; neither can any man from these Texts
conclude by what is said, that Esau is damned or Jacob saved: nay it has been
the general Opinion of the ancient Fathers (so called) that Esau in person is
saved: so hold ( Moler. Occolampad. Estus, Jerome, Augustine, Anselm, and many
more: and a later Writer, a man of high esteem with most of the reformed
Protestants, says, he does not remember that ever he read any Author that was
of Opinion that Esau was damned, but rather the contrary; and several gives
these reasons for their belief of the contrary. As 1. That he was fully
reconciled to his brother Jacob, notwithstanding the occasion offered of
offense by Jacob, this appears Genesis 33. 2. He joined with him in the burial,
cha. 35. ult. 3. Say they, he dyed in the true religion:
against this some, not for want of ignorance, objects, the Apostles calling
him a profane person, Heb. 12. and that he could not obtain repentance, though
he sought it carefully with tears: to which I answer. 1. That he was profane
at that time in that act, and so was out of Gods favor. 2. As to Repentance it
has respect to his father not himself; he could not make his father repent or
reverse his blessing given to Jacob, as is plain Genesis 27.33. I have blessed him
and he shall be blessed; he could not recall it again:
besides, its plain, that many of Esau's posterity were Godly: It is the
general Opinion of the learned, that holy Job was of Esau's race, and was that
Iobab of whom we read Genesis 36.33. and it is strange, that any should imagine
from what is said, the elder shall serve the yo^ger, to conclude, them saved or
damned: is see vitude and damnation taken one for another? may not a servant be
a happy man when his master is (...) a miserable estate as to his inward
condition? I will give you a saying of Bishop Hooper a Martyr in Queen Mary's
days, Cain was no more excluded by God till he excluded himself then Abel, nor
Saul then David, nor Judas then Peter, nor Esau then Jacob; and further he
says, as to the Text in hand, that the threatening of God against Esau, is no
more of necessity to be executed then his threatening was against Niniveh: It
were strange if what God said (I say) to Rebecca, should be so understood of
their final estate, especially on the left hand. It was never Gods way to
declare the final state of persons: set this instance aside, where shall we
find any like it? would God declare such a dreadful prediction to that godly
mother, in answer of her pathetical prayer to God, to know the ground of that
Rebecca's strange struggling in her Womb: as to tell her, one of those two she
now went with, should be hated of God, and damned to all eternity; this had
been enough to cause an untimely birth, like Elies daughter: what sad parents
had Isaac and Rebecca been, if they had so understood that Oracle? besides, of
what use could such a prediction be to themselves or any body else, to
understand the unavoidable destiny of their children this way? would not the
consequence be sad* and well might it beget in the parents hard thoughts of
God; and despair in the children: whereas Esau as well as Jacob was given in as
the answer of 20 years prayer by Isaac; therefore it cannot be rationally
supposed, that they understood God in this Oracle.

5. I premise, that though our Text seems to intimate, that when the threatening
was given out, there was no good on the one hand, nor evil on the other; yet
when the threatening was executed, there was evil enough for which it was
executed: see Obadiah ver. 10. for his hatred and cruelty against his brother
Jacob.

Now we proceed to the words more closely as they lie in these four verses,
which contains the Apostles second instance or example given, tending to
strengthen and confirm his former position, which was, that God did not take to
himself the whole offspring of Abraham, which did naturally proceed from his
loins, but such as should fall in with his design in Christ.

I shall ^educe this instance and its circumstances into these two parts. 1.
The subjects. 2. The predicate.
1. The subjects in this Instance are, Jacob and Esaus. 2. The predicate or
what is spoken of them or respecting them, which we have in six circumstances.
1. Their parentage, which is Isaac and Rebecca. 2. We have their future state
and portion, in these words, the elder shall serve the younger: or the Major
the Minor. 3. The time when this Oracle was declared, and that we have under a
double circumstance. 1. Before they were born or brought forth. 2. Whilst both
were innocent, having done neither good nor evil.
4. The person to whom this was spoken, and (...) was to Rebecca, a godly
woman, and that in answer of prayer: as we may see Genesis 25. 5. We have the
reason that is rendered why it is thus said of these Nations, upon a double
ground. 1. In excluding Esau he excludes works, (...) of works. 2. By loving or
choosing Jacob, he therein declares his choosing faith and free grace in the
Gospel for salvation.
6. We have an exposition or interpretation of the former servitude and
dominion by love and hatred to each.




Of each of these a very brief word in Order.

And first, I shall speak of the subjects of this instance, which are Jacob and
Esau, whose names are significant: Esau according to the Hebrew signifies
doing or working, and the reason is given, because Esau came forth at his birth
not as a weak and tender infant, but as a strong grown person, all over hairy
like a hairy garment.

The Hebrew word translated Jacob signifies a Supplanter or deceiver: some
renders his name heel or footstep, because he took his brother by the heel,
pulled him back, and got before him: Hose. 12. And as his name is changed, it
signified a prince or strong prevailer: these two were twins, begotten and born
at once? their birth was one continued birth: Jacob holding his brother by the
heel, as one says of them, they were like one long child born at once; yet
because Esau appeared first, he is called the first born and elder brother,
Genesis 27.32. these children (as I have shown you) were both in an even and equal
capacity, one father, one mother, one birth. Now these two children are only
represented in the Oracle to Rebecca as typical and allegorical: God made use
of Esau as a type and representation of all the cruel and bloody persecutors in
all ages of the World, they are in all ages called after his name, Esau and
Edom: whereas the faithful in all ages carries away the name of Jacob and
Israel: the seed of Jacob, the Israel of God, even in Gospel days; as I have
shown before.

So that Jacob and Esau are the two great fathers typically; they are not
spoken of in the Oracle to Rebecca as distinct persons, but as to each race:
see that prophecy that points at that very day of Christ's 2d coming, Obadiah,
21. and saviors shall come upon Zion to judge the mount of Esau, and the
kingdom shall be the Lords: and in that day the house of Jacob shall be a
fire, ver. 18.

2ly, They are not only typically but alligorically, that is, as it is
interpreted by our Apostle, Gal. 4.24. that is, when by one thing another
different thing is meant; so we have Isaac and Ishmael, an allegory of the two
covenants, the legal from Mount Sinai, and the other that which is by Christ,
and as those two sons of Abraham were allegorical, so these two sons of Isaac
must be also: if we understand the Apostle in the present text, giving a new
instance to the same end and import with the former: now as God in ordering
Ishmael and his mother to be cast out, did therein figure out the rejecting of
the law of works as to justification; so did he corroborate and strengthen that
signification in this second instance of Esau, which appears plain in our text,
where he says, not of works but of the caller; so that the covenant of works
is rejected in casting out Ishmael, and hating Esau; so that it is plain, that
God will have none accepted or received for the legitimate seed of Abraham nor
Isaac, that seeks to be justified by works; this way is reprobated, and thus
found in it: and that this point is that which the Apostle would prove to this
people see Romans 3. for by the deeds of the law shall no flesh be justified in
his sight: so verse. 28. the promise to Abraham, that he should be heir of the
world, was not through the law, but through faith, Romans 4.13. we are all the
children of God by faih in Christ Jesus.

So that this is a great truth, that reprobation and election is of works and
faith.

2. That Esau was only a type and representation of all wicked men, in all
ages, but also of the law of works.

The next thing that I am to speak unto, is, the parentage of these subjects
Jacob and Esau; their father was Isaac, their mother was Rebecca: both godly,
praying, holy persons; we may gather that Isaac was near 20 years praying to
God that he might have children, and so much the more earnestly, because the
special promise of God was lodged in him: in Isaac shall thy seed be called^
says God to Abraham: and when Isaac saw, that this promise stuck in the birth,
and did not come forward, he set himself in good earnest to seek God, the text
says, he entreated the Lord, which word signifies earnest importuning prayer;
and the text also says, Gen 25.22. the Lord was entreated: so that to those
parents, these children were the answer of earnest prayer; these were children
of one father, and mother, and twins; yet see what a great difference there was
in their natures, before and after their birth. Jacob was a plain man, Esau
took like Nimrod, of whom it is said, Genesis 10.9. that he was a mighty hunter
before the Lord, or as some read, of the Lord, that is to say, a great
persecutor: to which also Esau in his posterity answered: Esau was the head of
the Edomites, and as these differed much in their nature and civil state, so
also in their moral state: Esau is styled a profane person, one that slighted
spiritual things, as they were contained in his birthright; I am at the point
to dye, and what good will this birthright do to me?

We may note by the way, that very godly persons may have a great difference in
their children, and very bad children in answer of prayer: this was the case
with Isaac and Rebecca; let not godly parents think strange of this, it was so
here: but have a care you do not impute their badness to be the effect of an
absolute decree of God, as some are ready to do; and such an opinion is the
direct way to discourage parents from taking pains with their children.

2. Have a care of setting your love to much upon your children, the child that
Isaac loved best proved worst; it is recorded, Genesis 25. that Isaac loved Esau;
it was observed by a godly man having occasion to speak of Barabbas a wicked
man, that he carried a significant name; Bar-abbas the son of the father; that
it was to be feared, that his father too much loved him, which was one means to
spoil him; what a cross and vexation was Esau to his father and mother in his
marriage? Genesis 26. but I pass this briefly.

CHAP. V. Plainly evidencing, that the salvation of mankind was the subject of
Gods heart, thoughts, and purposes, from the beginning.
WE now proceed to the predicate, the oracle it self, spoken of these children,
which was, the elder shall serve the younger; which words were the words of God
himself spoken to Rebecca in answer of prayer; Rebecca in much perplexity of
mind about the strange struggling in her womb, inquires of God, who gives her
this answer, as a prophetical prediction of their future condition in their
posteritys, which God foresaw was like to be, not as if this foresight did
necessitate its coming to pass: no, Austin long since laid down a Maxim in this
case, which is this, that Gods foresight of things coming to pass, does not
necessitate their coming to pass; it must be granted in this as well as in the
other cases, that those things which God foresees will come to pass, does admit
of a condition in the case, as it is plain, 1 Samuel 23. which is a remarkable
place to that purpose, where David in his flight before Saul was in Keilah, and
afraid Saul would surprise him there, he goes to God to enquire. 1. Whether
Saul would indeed come to that place. 2. Whether the men of the place would
deliver him up:
to both which God gives a positive answer in the affirmative. 1. Saul will
come. 2. The men of the place will deliver him up,
yet neither the one, nor the other came to pass; for when David understood
that Saul would come, he hasted and got away: so also in Ninivehs, case, 40
days (says the prophet) and it shall be destroyed; yet it was not: so though
God foresaw the servitude of Esaus posterity, for it was not fulfilled in
person (as I have said) yet this is executed upon just grounds of desert,
Obadiah 10. Psalm. 137. if the question should be demanded, when this oracle
takes place? I have answered already: we find the first fruits of this
servitude in David's time, as we read 2 Samuel 8.14. 1 Cronicles 18. when David
put garrisons into Edom, and made them tributaries to him; but it shall be more
fully accomplished in the time to come: see Isaac's blessing to Jacob by faith,
as it is recorded of him, Heb. 11. by faith Isaac blessed Jacob, as to things
to come: and see what it is Genesis 27.29. let people serve thee and nations bow
down to thee, and be Lord over thy brethren: this is spoken of Jacobs
posterity, not Jocob in person; this Balaam also by a prophetical spirit
foresaw, Numb. 24. out of Jacob shall come him that shall have the dominion,
that is, his seed: the righteous shall have Dominion in the morning. Psalm.
29.14. so that this oracle spoken to Rebecca, is yet to be fulfilled, as in the
one part so in the other; when saviors shall come upon Mount Zion to judge the
mount of Esau: when the kingdom shall be the Lords: this may be an encouraging
consideration to all the true seed of Jacob, this oracle of God shall certainly
be fulfilled, Esau shall serve Jacob.

2. From hence we may see and learn, how dark many times God is in his
footsteps, contrary to his own order: that the elder should rule, and have the
primogaritorship, yet here it is contrary: God can dispense with his
ceremonical and judicial law, and all to promote the interest of his grace to
true believers, the seed of Jacob. I shall show you how this oracle of God
carries in it also a mistical sense: It is the judgment of most later
interpreters, that by the elder serving the younger, in this passage, is
understood the elder covenant of works must stoop to the covenant of grace; and
that it must be so understood, I shall show you upon a fourfold consideration,
that the elder covenant must stoop and bow to the younger, which appears
clearly thus, 1. As the type and shadow is subordinate to the antytipe and
shadow; for this is granted on all hands, that the ceremonies of the law were
but shadows of good things to come in the Gospel. 2. This appears, because the
most exact and strict Iudesaries, such as S. Paul himself, was forc^ to deny
all such their ceremonial and legal obedience, and make them all stoop to the
dispensation of Christ and the Gospel: see this, Phil. 3. though he was possessed
with as many and great privileges in and from the law as any ever was, yet he
counts them all as dung in comparison of Christ: he calls all these
accomplishments but his own, righteousness of the law. 3. The great minister of
the whole dispensation of the law, is but a servant to Christ the great
minister of the Gospel: and the whole ministration of the Gospel, is called the
ministration of the spirit; whereas the law is called the letter: Moses wa^
faithful in all his house as a servant, Heb. 3.5. but Christ as a Son. 4. The
elder Covenant stoops to and gives way to the younger and last by course, as is
usual in all Covenants or Testaments; if a man makes 20. Wills or Testaments
the last must stand; the death of the Testator confirms the last; thus the
elder serving the younger is intended further then is spoken of Esau and his
posterity, God in that Oracle intended the subjugating the law to the Gospel,
and thus considered it does much contribute to the Apostles argument of
Justification by faith without the works of the law.


We now proceed to the third Circumstance to be spoken unto as to the
predicate, or that spoken of the subject Jacob and Esau, which refers to the
circumstance of time under a double consideration. 1. It was spoken to them
before they were born. 2. Before they had done either good or evil, that is,
whilst they were in a passive state;


And because we have our fifth particular laid down to be handled, contained in
this 11th verse also, I shall invert my order, and handle in the 4th place, the
reason why this speech is spoken the second time to Rebecca, as the first was
to Abraham, In Isaac shall thy seed be called; so here again to Rebecca in
respect to Jacob; this doubling the speech does show the certainty of the
fulfilling, as in like case in Pharaohs two dreams of the lean cattle and thin
ears, Genesis 41.32. this whole 11. verse in most readings is included in a
parenthesis, and in some we have only the latter part, that the purpose of God
according to election might stand, so the Vulgar Latin reads it; and so the
Church of England in their Old Translations, this 11th verse may be left out,
and the sense remai^ good; yet because I find this 11th verse in the greek
all, except the word children, which is no^; but forasmuch as I take these
words as well as the rest to be a part of our Apostles words, I shall take
notice of the whole verse; but these word^ admits of several readings: Some
read, that the purpose of God concerning Election, which is not of works, but
of him that calls, might stand or remain: Some read not for works; Some
read not of works, but of the caller: Others read, that the purpose of Gods
election might not be of works, but of faith, whereby he obeys him that
calls: this last reading seems most clear and coherent to the Context; but
there is no material difference in their reading, they all amount to thus much,
that these Oracles of God reiterated, does pathetically teach, Gods Elect way
of adopting children to Abraham, is not by works of the law, but by the
free grace arising form the heart of God through Jesus Christ;

But before I speak to the words as they lie, I would speak something by way of
Explication of four terms in these verses. 1. What we are to understand by the
purpose of God, and the time when they do commence. 2. What by Election. 3.
What by works. 4. Who is here intended by the caller, and why opposed to works,
as elsewhere to faith.


1. By purpose, as in man so in God, a firm thought and resolution of mind, a
determination touching what a person intends to do, and under this
consideration the redemption of mankind by the death of Christ was purposed
before the foundation of the world: thus God the Father did purpose to elect
all that should be found in his Son, See Ephesians. 1.4. chosen us in him before the
foundation of the world; and cha. 3.11. according to the eternal purpose which
he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord.

2. As to this word translated Election, used both in Old and New Testament, in
the Hebrew it signifies to prove, try, examine; because choosing is first by
trying: thus the word is to be understood, Prove. 7.3. the Lord tries, chooses
or electeth the hearts: thus the word is to be understood, Esa. 48.10. I have
chosen, or elected, or tried, or proved thee in the furnace of affliction. Thus
Soldiers that had been trained for war were called chosen men, tried men: In
this sense is the Apostle Peter to be understood, 1 Pet. 2. Christ is called
elect or tried stone; sometimes it signifies chief best, most honorable,
Exodus 14. chosen chariots: thus we read as choice vows, Deuteronomy. 12.11. Thus the
Hebrew word is not always to be understood Election as is opposed to rejection,
but a person or a thing of high valuation and esteem may be said to be choice
or elect, and we our selves so use it: we are apt to say this or that is a
choice thing, not supposing rejection; all election does not suppose rejection;
so the greek word (...), as Hugo Grotius tells us, is taken for pr^bation, to
prefer one above another, and so to choose in that sense: and so it is
understood Deuteronomy. 7.6. the Lord thy God has chosen thee to be a special people
unto himself above all people that are upon the face of the earth: So Deuteronomy. 10
15. God did choose them above all people: So Prove. 1.20. because they did not
choose the fear of the Lord, that is, prefer that: so that Election does not
always suppose Rejection, but when persons prefer one thing above another. Dr
Hammond tells us, that the Greek words used in Rev. 17.14. called ^sen,
faithful, are joined together as words of the fame import: Election and faith
seems to be taken one for another; and should we read sai^ for election in
these places following, it, would not found incongruously, that the purpose of
God according to faith might stand, v. 11. is not of works, So chap. 11.^.
there is a remnant according to the faith of grace: So ver. 7. Israel has not
obtained, but the believers have obtained, and the rest were blinded, which
reading does very well agree to v. 32. of this Chapter.

3. What works are here excluded whilst he says, not of works? To this I
answer, they must needs intend those works which the Jews gloried in, a
circumcision and keeping the law, which works are distinguished from, and
opposed to faith in Christ, Romans 4.5. now to him that works not, but
believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is accounted for
righteousness.

3. Who is here intended by the caller, in him that calls: I answer, it is
plain, that God is the caller, he is the free inviter to that great feast of
Justification and salvation; see Luke 14. Mat. 2^. It is of him freely
prepared, and he has an undo^ted right to propound the terms in order to
participation of it, therefore are works here opposed to him that calls, or
to the caller.

That which I am to speak unto in the next place, is the time when the Oracle
was delivered to Rebecca, recited by the Apostle; it was when these nations had
not works either good or evil, but in a^ equal condition; then were these words
spoken: God took such a time to declare it; and doubtless our Apostle does
judge this circumstance of time observable, as to his controversy in hand: this
relation of our Apostle many do greatly wrest contrary to the Apostles intent
and meaning, as I shall make plain; though it must be granted, that the Apostle
in this his contention does as we do sometimes by a crooked stick, bend it
quite the other way, to the end he might set it right: so here does the Apostle
decry works, because they too much rested upon them: but I shall afterward
show you, that by all he says, he does not altogether trample upon them;
though at first sight his speaking seems to give encouragement to such an
Opinion: some from these words do urge, that as Esau is here rejected, so are
men by name without the least regard had to works, either good or evil: and
that men are hated, rejected, chosen, elected, merely according to the pleasure
of Gods own will: to which notion we comply thus far, that the gift of
salvation, and the terms thereof does arise out of the heart of God, it is
freely from the caller, neither men nor Angels could propound him way or rules
herein to go by.

But for the discharging this opinion, we must understand, that it is founded
upon a mistaken foundation about Gods election; the authors of that personal
and absolute election takes it for grant, that Gods choice is out of the fallen
lump of mankind: in Adam, as they were all equally fallen in him and run in
debt to God, beyond any possibility to pay, and so God being the great
creditour, may at his pleasure pardon one, and exact the whole debt of another,
without the least blemish to his justice: now this is a fundamental mistake,
for God does neither elect nor reject any as immediately lying in the fall; but
mankind by the promise, gift, and death of Christ are put (...) to another
capacity of liberty and freedom; (...) Christ is the surety, ransom and
propitiatory sacrifice; not for a few, but for all the fallen lum^ of mankind:
this was prophesied by the prophet^ Esa. 53. the Lord has laid on him the
iniquity of (...) all: he is the lamb of God that takes away the sin of (...)
World, John 1.29. a ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2.6. a propitiation for the sin
of the whole world, 1 John 2.2. so that now by Christ the prison-doors are
(...) open, God is reconciled; so that now the condemnation of man does not lie
upon Adams transgress^on, that is, as to the second death with torment^ but for
rejecting this sacrifice, not believing in Christ, not coming to him for life
in whom it is, 1 John 5. this was emphatically typed out in the brazen serpent,
of which Christ is the antityp^ John 3. the people dyed not, because they were
stung but for not looking upon that serpent on the pole: and thus our Lord
applies it, John 3.17,18,19. this is the condemnation, that men love darkness
rather then light. So that all that are now elected to life, are chosen in
Christ, not from Adam; now in this remove from Adam to Christ men are condemned
for not believing, and for (...) obeying, so that salvation and damnation are
conditional, which were very improper, if the former notion were true: see
throughout the whole Scriptures, from the beginning of Genesis to the end of
the Revelations.

Such a notion of Gods electing and destroying men without respect to their
deeds, good or evil, is contradicted: begin with Cain, Genesis 4.7. if the do
well, shall thou not be accepted? Levit. 26. I will walk contrary to you, if
you walk contrary to (...) Deuteronomy. 28. the blessings upon the obedient and
cursings upon the disobedient, Psa. 62. Esa. 3.10. Say ye to the righteous, it
shall go well with him, Romans 2.6. who shall render to every man according to
his deeds, tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil; and
the contrary to them that works good; and the reason is given, there is no
respect of persons with God: and this is confirmed from the righteousness of
God, Genesis 18. Shall not the judge of all the earth do right? that is, not to
make them equals in punishment, who are not equal in guilt, to slay the
righteous with the wicked: this is the voice of the Scriptures throughout:
therefore to make such an application from our Text as before, is contradictory
to the analogy of Scriptures.

But that we may come to a clear and right understanding of the mind of God in
these words of S. Paul, I shall lay down some Rules to consider of in order
thereunto.

1. Know that these works principally heeded in these nations or people, must
be intended the works of Circumcision and legal obedience, and not the works of
faith and holiness: in this sense the one had not then obliged himself to the
worship of God, nor the other turned to Idolatry: when these words were spoken
God did neither for works foredone nor foreseen of that kind respect or
disrespect; for in this both Jew and Gentile are laid level; the Jew is no
better, nor the Gentile no worse upon this account; neither circumcision nor
uncircumcision avails: this allegation of the Apostle in this place, as to
the time of this Oracle, does design the humbling and silencing the Jew, who
entertained two false Opinions of their state. 1. That God designed the whole
posterity of Abbraham for the seed. 2. That they above all other people and
nation of the world did deserve this signal favor (...) their works of legal
righteousness:
Now the ^ter of these their conceits does the Apostle strike at in these
words; for in effect, (says he) God did not choose Jacob nor Abraham into this
favor to be the head of the faithful, upon the account of their works of this
kind; therefore Abraham is pronounced justified before he is circumcised, Romans
4.13, the promise to Abraham that he should be heir of the world, was not made
through the law, (...) through the righteousness of faith.

The Second Rule I offer is this, that what is i^ this Oracle to Rebecca must
not be understood to determine the final and eternal state of them, (...) men;
as I have shown you before: It is true, God has sometimes (as to some) taken
liberty of disposing of men's temporal estates and conditions, without any
respect to their righteousness or unrighteousness, to dispose to a person
less godly riches and rule, whilst a person more godly is subjected to
servitude and poverty; sometimes persons equal in godliness have very unequal
po^tions in the world: for as Solomon says, Eccles^ there is neither love nor
hatred seen in these things; that is; no distinguishing or eternal love seen in
them: God (I say) does sometimes take this liberty to dispense of outward
things without respect to good or bad works, but God does not promise or give
life and glory so promiscuously without any respect to terms of obedience:
before your children aa^ born or have done good (...) evil, it may be said, one
shall be rich the other poor, or may be a servant to the other, as many times
it is, and there is some appearance of love in these things; whilst God gives
Jacobs posterity the land of Canaan, a land flowing with milk and honey, and
gives to the posterity of Esau the barren scraggy mountains, places of mount
Seir; but this is not an infallible character of their goodness or badnesse as
to works, yet it must needs be granted, that there was more manifestation of
love and hatred in these things under the law then under the gospel; and
sometimes the posterity of Jacob were hated as well as Esau, Ier. 12.8. Esa.
60.15. so that by love and hatred we are not bound to understand it here of
their final and eternal state, but thus; that God without any respect to works
of legal obedience, gave Jacob in his posterity rul^, and without any respect
to Esau's idolatry, servitude; and what is this to their eternal state after
death? but God when he dispenceth life and death eternal, renders a reason, and
we find conditions propounded as to life and death.

Now we proceed to the Fourth Circumstance to be handled, which is, the ground
and reason rendered by the Apostle why God chooses such a time to speak to
Rebecca, before the children or nations were born, or before they had done good
or evil, which we have in these words, that the purpose of God according to
election might stand or abide, not by works but by the caller: I have already
spoke to these terms by way of explication, as the word purpose, election, and
works; so that the Apostle does understand that the ground of this saying to
Rebecca, and at such a time, was to declare to the world, that he would exclude
works in point of justification (not of works) and bring in faith: The Apostle
to the end he might assert this great tr^ to the greatest advantage, lays it
down both negatively and affirmatively, not of works but of the caller; I
design much brevity in the following part of this paragraph, therefore I shall
sum (...) what remains to be spoken to this verse, into six Doctrinal
Conclusions.

First Doctrine, That many of Gods sayings of old, besides their literal sense
and proper signification, had a further respect even to things to come. What
God said to Abraham about his excluding Ishmael from his Family and heirship,
besides the reality of it to him, had a further signification it was
allegorical, as the Apostle says, Gal. 4.24. these two sons of Abraham type
out the two Covenants, Law and Gospel, the rejection of Esau held forth the
same, the truth of this Doctrine.

I may prove from a hundred places of Scripture if need were, when God
appointed Noah to make an ark for the saving himself and his house, there was
more in it, 1 Peter. 3. when God appointed his people, that they should not
mussle the mouth of the ox that treads out the corn; besides the literal
sense, he had an eye to Gospel ministers maintenance; See for that 1 Cor.
9.9.10. it was (says he) spoken for our sakes: all these passages of Gods
providence to Israel are also teaching to us: Gods depriving of Esau^
posterity of the land of C^naan, was significant of Gods depriving his elder
people of the antitype thereof, because they sought it not by faith, but as it
were by the works of the law: learn from hence thus much. 1. Admire the depth
and riches of the Scriptures of the old testament. 2. Be cautioned however of
turning Scriptures into allegories, contrary to the scope and current of them.


Second Doctrine is this, That the repetition and second relation of the same
things by God, though under different instances and figures, does greatly
demonstrate the certainty of those things. We have two instances in this
context to the same end, (as I have largely proved before;) and both brought to
demonsttate the same thing in the antitype, to show the stability of Gods
purpose of election, whom, or what kind of persons he would purpose to choose:
the two differing dreams of Pharaoh, of the cattle and corn, did teach the
certainty of the seven years of famine and scarcity, Genesis 41.32.

Third Doctrine, That the salvation of mankind was the subjects of Gods heart,
thoughts and purposes from the beginning. Gods thoughts and purposes was to
provide a way to make men happy from the beginning, even before the foundation
of the world, therefore the Apostle speaks of Gods eternal purpose Ephesians. 3.11. 2
Timothy 1.9. which purpose of his was his design, contrivance and
determination for the saving of lost man, God had strong thoughts of heart this
way, as appears by his early promise and timely sending Jesus Christ, to that
end that men might be redeemed.

This consideration may work admiration in u^, and in the hearts of the sons of
men, that God who is so high should remember us; it is more for God to remember
us then to do for us; to bear us upon his heart in his purposes and designs;
this is an unspeakable high favor. See how the psalmist takes notice of it,
Psalm. 136.23. who remembered us in our low estate, or, as it may be read,
thought upon us: Psalm. 40.17. but I am poor and needy, yet the Lord thinks
upon me; and verse. 5th. how wonderful are thy thoughts to uswards, they cannot
be reckoned up in order before thee: or as Ainsworth, thy thoughts, purposes
and good meanings none can count: or as the chaldes; it is not possible to
order the praise.

Fourth Doctrine, God is very stable in all his pur^ses, and amongst all his
purposes in none more stable, then that purpose respecting the way and terms of
men's salvation. Gods election and reprobation lies upon most certain and
unalterable terms, they are as certain as God himself; therefore it is here
said, to stand remain, abide, that is to say, God has infallibly determined,
that justification and savation shall come in by faith in Christ, and no other
way, Act. 4. there is no name under heaven whereby men may b^ saved but by
Christ: this 4th Doctrine I shall but touch, because they are more remote, and
be more large upon the two last.

Fifth Doctrine, That God has absolutely purposed and determined, and is
resolved, that justification and salvation shall not be by works. Gods purpose
of election is not according to works. As to this Doctrine I shall take liberty
to speak a few words. 1. More particularly to distinguish of works. 2. Show you
how the Scriptures does concur with this truth. 3. Reconcile those Scriptures
that seem to contradict this truth. 4. Give you some reasons why works cannot
justify. 5. Show you what this may teach us, and I will be very brief in each
of these.


1. As to works we must understand them according as this our Apostle declares
in the scope of this Epistle with that of the Galathians, which works are
frequently referred to circumcision and legal obedience, as in oppofition to
faith; thus it is understood. Romans 4.1. sometimes works in opposition to
grace, chap. 11.6.

2. That other Scriptures does concur herewith, that works does not justify in
whole or in part, see Romans 3. we conclude a man is justified by faith without
the deeds of the law, Gal. 2.16. not of works Ephesians. 2. not of works lest any man
should boast, Titus 3.5. not of works of righteousness that we have done: Thus
Scriptures do willingly offer their testimony to the truth in our text, that
the purpose of Gods election might stand, not of works.

But 3dly, does not some Scriptures seem to speak otherways, as Romans 2.13. not
the hearers of the law are just, but the doers of the law are justified and see
how S. James argues chap. 2. was not Abraham our father justified by works
when he offered Isaac? does not these Scriptures seem to cross this Doctrine?

In order to reconciling which Scriptures I answer.

There are two circumstances in works, let them be of what sort they will, if
present, that will render all works unacceptable and unserviceable. 1. When
they are merely external, without heart and soul. 2. When performed with a
conceit of merit.
1. When there is only the external part, see Romans 2.28. he is not a Jew that
is one outwardly; the same may be said of all works whatsoever. 2ly, When our
services to Godward are looked upon as meritorious, and so we take justification
and salvation as a compensation or suitable reward for our work, now this
destroys grace; for if we work for wages, there is no place for grace: but


2. In order to reconciling these Scriptures, I answer, that works are never
rejected of God when mixed with faith, as Abraham's was in offering his son,
Heb. 11. works are then in their right place when they are subservient to
demonstrate the truth and life of our faith, James 2. (as one says) though
works do not justify, yet works does demonstrate, that we are justified: why
cannot works justify simply considered? 1. From the imperfections attending
the best works. 2. They are no more then what we owe to out sovereign Lord; and
when we have done all, we have done no more then our dury is to do. 3. Because
God is not profited, we are as to him unprofitable servants, Luke 17. so that
God may well purpose, that salvation shall not come in this way;
but have a care, that from what has been said, you do not conclude the
Christian life an idle life, a life without works; no, your works a^e not the
fewer nor weaker, because you work from life received: no, know this, that the
highest believer is the most industrious person, witness Abraham; and S. Paul a
man very laborious in his place: the work of a Christian is compared to
laboring, striving, running, fighting, violence in storming; and those that
will do no good works because they shall not merit by them, discover a rotten
heart.

2. Learn from this Doctrine, that personal election is not the subject of our
text, but only rejection and non-election of works; we have only Gods firm
resolution and purpose not to elect by works, as the Jews supposed he would.

The 6th Doctrine drawn from the affirmative part of this condition, but of him
that calls, or of God that inviteth, or freely calls.

Sixth Doctrine, That justification and salvation are the effects of unmerited
and undeserved grace. Gods purpose to elect is this way, no way to be justified
and saved but by grace; that which is here rendered him that calls, is
elsewhere rendered in the room of it faith and grace, not of works but of faith,
not of works but of grace, here not of works but of the caller: so that put all
together, it amounts to thus much, that the salvation of man must (...) had in
a way of grace, Romans 116.

God is so conversant in that gracious work of inviting and calling persons to
repentance and salvation, that we see he is said to be, him that calls, by
way of eminency; he is so styled: Gal. 5.8. hi^ that calls: 1 These. 5. he
that calls; and if we consider Esaiah 55. we may well allow him the title of
him that calls.

This may teach Christians to be greatly humble^ Is thy Justification of grace
notwithstanding all gospel-works that are incumbent upon thee? it informs us,
that all our duties are very inconsiderable to plead with God.

But I shall only note these two things, and (...) pass, which are these, and
respect the premises. 1. That God takes liberty to destinate and dispose of
persons as to their outward estates and conditions in the world, according to
the counsel of his own will, many times without any respect to their works;
some are made superior, some inferior, some rich, some poor. 2. This passage
of such Gods dealings in pro^dence, as to Jacob and Esau about earthly things,
was of a teaching nature, as to Gods Election by free grace, to Justification
and salvation without works, as to their merits, though not without their as to
their presence:
Thus have I done with the 4th circumstance in the predicate, and verse. 11.

There remains a few words to be spoken in order to the conclusion of this
Paragraph, relating^ the Answer to the first Objection, which relates (...) the
5 and 6 circumstances propounded to be sp^ken unto, as to the predicate, or
what is spoken of concerning the subjects Jacob and Esau: and as to the 5 I
shall be more brief, and speak but a few words, because I am sensible there
remains more to be spoken to the 6 which is contained, ver. 13.

The 5 th particular to be spoken unto, was the subject with whom the Lord did
entrust this Oracle of considerable significancy, it was with Rebecca, a woman,
and mother of these children; God does not tie himself always to entrust
stronger, but sometimes weaker instruments with his mind and will.

The first part of this discovery was made to believing Abraham (the friend of
God), and a very strong instrument; in these words, In Isaac shall thy seed be
called: but now in this second part of this discovery, he does not bid Rebecca
call her husband Isaac, that he might impart his mind to him, but does entrust
Rebecca with his mind in so considerable an Oracle, herein manifesting his
equal respect to the weaker sex, if faithful, as to the stronger: it has been
usual with God and Christ to communicate divine light to women for the good and
benefit of mankind in general, as I shall briefly show you by some particular
instances out of the Old and New Testament: see what a glorious prophecy the
Lord entrusted Hannah with, 1 Samuel 2. a prophecy which is yet to be fulfilled;
we read of a woman 2 Kin. 22. who was a prophetess, Huldah by name, who was
entrusted with the mind of God in general, and concerning Josiah in
particular: and although there were so many eminent men in that day, as we
read of, yet they must go to this woman to enquire of her what should come to
pass, and their enquiring of her is called enquiring of the Lord.

And was not the great and unspeakable mystery of Christ's Incarnation first of
all revealed to a w^ man, Luke 1.26. the angel Gabriel is sent to M^ry the
espoused wife of Joseph a carpenter, and not only his birth, but the end, and
unspeakable benefit, upon an universal account, to Jews and Gentiles, her heart
is enlarged and her tongue untied (...) prophecy of these things for general
and comm^ use. So also the glorious resurrection of Jesus Christ was first of
all imparted to a woman, Mary Magdalen by name, Matthew. 28. Mark. 16.9. it (...)
said he first appeared to her: Thus here in our text, God made use of Rebecca
to impart his mind unto: (it was said to her) in which is wrapped up the purpose
of God concerning election not to be (...) works but of the caller: which
mystery was not to (...) concealed in her own breast but declared for our
instruction, as it is this day.

Thus we may perceive, that God bears a choice esteem to faithful women, so as
to entrust them with his mind, and this is no more then he prophesied of by
his servant Joel, chapter 2. that he would power out his spirit upon his handmaids
as well as upon his sons, which accordingly was fulfilled indefinitely, Acts.
2.8. and for that end the Apostles laid on hands on the women as well as the
men; and did not God furnish Priscilla as well as Aquila with abilitys to
instruct learned and eloquent Apollos in the ways of Christ, Act. 18. and we
read of Ph^lips four daughters, which did prophecy: but I shall wind up all
that I have to say to this circumstance, in a word or two of instruction.

As first, It is worth our consideration the successful introduction to this
gracious discovery; (...) was the effect of prayer; Rebecca applies her (...)
to God by prayer in this case, and this discovery is her Answer: the like we
have in that good woman Hannah; she was a zealous, cordial praying person: let
this serve for a spur to prayer even in women; if you would have discoverys of
the mind of God be much in prayer; women have been successful in prayer as
well as men, 1 Samuel. 2. for this child I prayed, and the Lord has given me
my petition: prayer is an inviting duty to the revealing Gods secrets. 2. This
may administer a word of comfort and consolation to women, though they are the
weaker vessel, and have cause to be humbled (as our Apostle says) because they
were first in the transgression, yet the Lord has in all ages made choice of
some of them to be instruments of his glory, even upon a singular account: the
Scriptures takes notice of godly women as well as men; their singular faith is
recorded as well as the faith of men, Heb. 11. Sarah, Rahab, and other women,
received their dead raised to life by faith: our Apostle in his salutations to
the Churches, has the godly, and zealous, and serviceable women upon his heart
as well as men, Romans 16. this I do the rather take notice of, because in this
day men through their pride are apt to undervalue the gifts and graces and
intrustments of God to women. Yet Thirdly, Let me caution that sex to have a
special care of pride; if God have entrusted any of you with knowledge in any
part of his mind, know it is for use; but know your time and plac^: there are
times and places where and when what knowledge you have may be serviceable:
But o^ pass this being but an implicit Doctrine from the words, and I come
to the 6th and last circumstance, contained in ver. 13.

CHAP. VI. Treating in Eight particulars the explanation of Love and Hatred in
God, and that in this Chapter it cannot intend Election and Reprobation to
heaven or hell.
Ver. 13. (As it is written,) Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated.


AS it is written, It is very usual with our Lord Jesus, and with his Apostles,
as they were preaching or writing thus to speak, our Apostle is very frequent
in these quotations, 13 or 14 times to this Church (as it is written;) and the
servants of God had two ends in thus speaking. 1. Sometimes by way of proof and
confirmation. 2. By way of demonstration, more clearly of the matter spoken of;
and to both these ends ar^ the words of Malachi brought.

1. To confirm the truth of that Oracle spoken to Rebecca, from the testimony
of the prophet in his time: it is a good way to prove a point, to say thus, it
is written. But 2dly, This quotation is brought by way of illustration, and
further clearing what was before spoken, and it is considerable, that dominion
and servitude to Rebecca is in Malachi's times turn^ by love and hatred; he
that rules is loved, he (...) serves (in this sense) is hated:
for this prophecy of Malachi is counted by our Apostle for a threefold
illustration and explication of Genesis 25.23. 1. More particularly to
distinguish, who and what those nations and people are of whom God speaks to
Rebecca, for in Genesis 25. we have it only laid down in general, and
comprehensively. two nations, two manner of people: here we have it explained
to be Israel and Edom, these are the two sorts of people. 2. To certify the
Jews, that the servtude of Esau to Jacob was the fruit of a defect of love in
God to him: Esau have I hated: for we have nothing of hatred expressed, Genesis 25.
only their state is there expressed. 3. Malachi gives the reason of this
servitude, which is not spoken unto, Genesis 25. it is as they are the border of
wickedness, and so the people against, whom the Lord has indignation for ever.


Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated; these few words require to be
plainly and fully spoken unto, because they are very much wrested and wronged
to the great disparagement, if not to the overthrow of Gods free and impartial
love to mankind: are not these the inferences drawn from these words?

That by love here in this text is to be understoo^ election to eternal life;
and by hatred, reprobation to hell torments; and that the time of the
commencement of this is from eternity, before the persons are born, or have
done good or evil: so that God elects and reprobates, loves and hates without
any respect to works good or evil: therefore do they read these words in
conjunction, before they were born. or had done goad or evil: one was hated and
the other beloved. or one elected and the other reprobated; and that at the
mere pleasure and purpose of Gods will; and that these two persons by name are
as leading examples or types of (...) kind; and that when God has set this
love or (...) tred, it is for ever, without any revocation; no the one side or
the other.

Now as the Lord shall assist, I take it my proper work to labor to discharge
this portion o^ Scripture from that hard service, in which it is ^ unwillingly
pressed to serve, contrary to its genuine sense; the which I shall do by
inquiring into these Eight circumstances following. 1. What is the nature of
this hatred in God? 2. Does God hate any man without a cause? 3. Whether the
first transgression of Adam is the cause that God takes up against mankind to
ha^ them? 4. What is the cause that does provoke God against any people to hate
them? 5. What are the effects of Gods hatred against any people when conceived?
6. Whether we can find ground from hence or elsewhere to believe that God does
hate parri^lar persons? 7. Whether Gods love or hatred to a people be
irrevokable and unchangeable? 8. How does such an understanding of our ^postle
accommodate his scope and design in the contaxt.


First, Hatred in Scripture is taken two ways. 1. Positively and absolutely in
a strict sense. 2. Comparatively, in a mild and lower sen^.
1. Hatred is taken sometimes in a proper (...) positive sense, to detest and
abhor, to standing from, and seek destruction of: thus Cain hate^ Abel; such a
hatred is in conjunction with malic^ and envy: thus Ahab hated Micaiah, when
(...) sought his life: In this sense the Apostle must be understood, Ephesians. 5. No
man ever hated his own flesh, but nourished and cherished it. 2. Sometimes
hatred is taken in a comparative and mild sense for less love, this is called
hatred; In this sense Jacob hated Leah, Genesis 29. which is there interpreted
only for less love: thus it is understood Deuteronomy. 21.15. Matt. 10.39. Luke 14.
to hate father and mother, and life, that is to love them less then we love
Christ; and in this sense, if we will take the opinion of the Learned, who have
left their opinions behind them, it is, that there is no more in these words,
Esau have I hated, that is, in comparison of Jacob, to whom I have given the
land of Canaan, whilst Esau has only the barren Country of mount Seir.


The Second Question to be spoken unto is this, Does God hate any without a
cause? I answer, that as hatred may be either understood in a comparative
sense, and with respect to external and temporal dispensations, it may
sometimes be without a cause; he may show less love to one then to another in
outward things without a cause: this I spoke unto before from ver. 11. but God
does never hate without a cause; if hatred be understood as to a personal,
final and eternal state.

3. Is Adams sin a sufficient cause taken up by God to hate his posterity? I
answer, that hatred in God is not to be understood as a passion of mind; but
God is said to hate, love, or be angry as the effects appear; now we may see
Gods hatred to Adams posterity by the effects of it, which is an irrevocable
sentence of bodily death to the grave, which hatred is plain without exceptions
to all Adams posterity. But 2ly, If we speak of hatred as antecedaneous to
Reprobation; as to the second death, I dea^ any such hatred to be in God as to
Adams posterity so understoed, but the quite contrary; See Psalm. 145.9. God is
good to all, and his tender mercys are over all his works: and he swears, Ezekiel.
33.11. that he has no pleasure in the death of the wicked; and consider in the
Fall, God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten son for them, Joh.
3. Romans 5.8. God commended his love to us, that whilst (...) were enemies
Christ died for us:
Thus love or hatred in our Text cannot be understood of such a love or hatred,
whereby either person or party are saved or damned: Esau in his lineal
posterity was not so hated, as I have shown already; for many of them it will
be granted were saved, as Job and others of that race.

Fourthly, What is the cause that does provoke God to hate a people? I answer,
Sin; and therefore when God hates he renders a reason, Psa. 5.5. thou hate
the workers of iniquity, Psalm. 11. he that loves violence his soul hates: This
is an undeniable truth, that if God hate so as to reprobate to the second
death, it is for sin, namely actual sin, but God may hate in temporals without
sin, for he afflicts whom he loves, Heb. 11. Esa. 49. Gods carriages to Zion
was as if he hated her, whilst his love was to her; Gods inward love and
outward hate may stand together.

Fifthly, What are the effects of Gods hatred? I answer, a privation of good,
and an infliction of evil is reckoned hatred in these Scriptures following,
Deuteronomy. 1.27. Esa. 60.15. Jer. 12. Amos. ^.8. Ezekiel. 35. Hos. 9.15.

Sixthly, Can it be proved that God hates particular persons? that God hates
things and people is plain, Zech. 8.17. I answer, that wheresoever it may be
elsewhere proved, it cannot be proved from this text cited by our Apostle out
of Malachi; you cannot from that text understand a personal hatred; for it is
plain, that what is said here is upon a national and plural account: I cannot
find in all the whole Scripture where God is said to hate any one single
person, although I can find where God has declared himself to love a
particular person, as of Solomon and the young man, Mark 10. God and Christ
loved them. (...) text in Malachy will not prove, that God ever hated a single
person; for there it relates to a prople upon a national account, and to and of
a people deserving hatred and indignation for ever.

7ly, Is Gods love and hatred unalterable and unchangeble and irrevocable when
it is set? some there are who would endeavor to prove the immutability of Gods
love from John 13.1. whom he loves he loves to the end; to which I answer that
if this text could be taken in the sense those persons would have it, yet still
we want a text that would say something like unto it, that whom he hates he
hates to the end also: but for that text, John. 13. it is plain enough, that
the end there spoken of is the end of Christ's life; he loved them as long as
his life lasted, and therefore would show it in supping with them and washing
their feet, and advising them whilst he had any time so to do.

But that Gods love and hatred is not immutable I shall show. 1. Consider that
God is said to love Jacob and Israel, yet at some times he is said to hate
Israel his Church, Ier. 12. nay further he is said to hate the excellency of
Jacob, Amos. 6.8. and his hatred is taken off again, Esa. 60.15. whereas they
we^ hated God loved them again:
so that God may love those at one time that he hates at another, and therefore
there is not that stresse to be laid upon what is here spoken, as some would
have Christ loved the young man, but it will a be difficult thing to prove,
that Christ loved him to eternity, seeing he went away from him: Gods hatred of
man is for the most part by way of retaliation, as he threatens, Deuteronomy. 7.10. he
will repay hatred: there are haters of God, Romans 1.30. Psalm. 139. hate them
that hate thee, says David.

8thly, How does this accommodate the Apostles design in a further and fuller
answer to their objection in reciting Malachi's words. I answer, the scope
hereof tends to convince the Jews, that all that descended from Abraham's loins
were not intended for heirs of Canaan; for here are some of Isaacs race are not
only denied Canaan, but therein less beloved then some of the same line: your
prophet Malachi (says Paul) tells us, Esau who was Jacobs brother was hated,
from whence I may conclude, that you the unbelieving Jews may be hated also.

But I shall sum up the whole of what has been spoken to this context under
these three heads. 1. That this whole passage respecting Jacob and Esau is not,
neither can it be understood as to them in their particular distinct persons:
but as to their posterity; and therefore from hence cannot fairly be drawn
personal election and reprobation: neither did what was spoken by God take
place upon their persons in their life time, as appears plainly from this
quotation from Malachi: the hatred and love there spoken of is national,
therefore in this Oracle, Jacob and Esau are only spoken as heads or tipes of
two families that should afterward arise. 2. We have heard and learned, that
this Dominion and servitude, love and hatred is not to be understood of
election and reprobation to heaven or hell; there is not one syllable that
should incline us to such a belief, neither from Genesis 25. Malachi 1. nor the
Apostle here: and it is strange that any from these premises should draw such a
consequence, as that Esau either in his person or posterity should be damned
eternally, or Jacob saved, from these places: but only that God has left
himself at liberty, to dispense temporal favors to good and evil promiscuously
on whom he pleases, either with or without respect to works, whether good or
evil. 3. The whole design and scope of our Apostle in this whole passage ^f
Jacob and Esau is to possess the minds of the legal self-righteous Jews, that
God, who had an undoubted and undeniable right to propound his own terms, upon
which justification should be had, here utterly rejected the way of
justification, namely by works: and elected or chosen the way of believing in
Jesus Christ to be his way: and that this purpose and design of God was
pointed out in rejecting Ishmael and Esau, who were the elder children both of
Abraham and Isaac also, yet both exposed in their posterity to a state of less
love and favor: and are in effect shut out of the proper inheritance of
Abraham; that the purpose of God according to election might stand, not of
works, but of him that calls: which is the substance of what Malachi has
written, Jacob have I loved and Esau have I hated: the spirit and meaning of
which was, I will reject works in point of justification, and embrace faith in
Christ.


Thus much for the Apostles answer to the Jews first Objection from verse the
6th to the end of the 13th.

CHAP. VII. Showing Gods unquestionable and absolute right to state, and
propound his own terms upon which his grace of justification and salvation
shall be had, and here determines it not upon the works of the Law, but
believing in his son.
Ver. 14. What shall we say then? is there unrighteousness with God? God
forbid.

15. For he says to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I
will have compassion on whom I will have compassion.

16. So then, it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of
God that shows mercy.

17. For the Scripture says unto Pharaoh, even for this same purpose have I
raised thee up, that I might show my power in thee, and that my name might be
declared throught all the earth.

18. Therefore has he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will be
hardens.


BEfore I proceed to these verses, I judge it may not be amiss or needless to
revive your memories with a few words of introduction; you may remember, that
upon the first entrance upon this subject, I desired you diligently to observe
the main scope and design of the Apostle in this Epistle, chapter and context;
as that which would be of a most worthy tendency to the right understanding of
the matter in controversy between S. Paul and his contrymen the Jews:
consider what is the Apostles ultimate design and scope to effect in this his
labor: which design we may perceive was to convince the Jews in these five
circumstances following. 1. To convince them of sin in not believing in Jesus
Christ, and seeking for justification another way, namely by the works of the
law. 2. To convince the Jews, that that way of justification unto which they
did adhere, was a way absolutely rejected and reprobated of God, and that Gods
purpose of election was not to stand or be founded upon that foundation, but by
faith in Christ. 3. The Apostle does labor to satisfy the Jews, that this was
no new Doctrine broacht by him, but a Doctrine preached by God to Abraham;
though to him more darkly in types and figures, in the casting out of Ishmael
and Esau, from those privileges which were external: in these his lower
passages he did teach higher things, the rejecting the old covenant of works in
point of justification, and choosing the younger Gospel Covenant. 4. It is the
Apostles endeavor to convince the Jews, that God had left himself an absolute
and unquestionable right to propose his own terms and conditions, upon which he
will justify and save, without being imposed on by the creature; and that this
his way which he has unalterably and peremptorily fixed and declared, is the
way of (...) grace. 5. The Apostle is laboring here to convince the Jews, that
their rejecting and casting off, was no other then the fruit and effects of
their rejection of this his way by Christ, as is plain, verse. 32. because they
sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the law.


Now these considerations carried along in our eye will be a light and guide to
us in the following subject.

We now proceed, The Apostle having been in the former Uses laboring to
certify the Jews of the eternal purpose and decree of God to elect and adopt
for Abraham's children only such as should believe in Christ, and to reject
therefrom all others of what line soever descended, who should depend upon
works for that privilege; and in this doing he had been vindicating the truth
of Gods promise to Abraham, against their first Objection, verse the 6th;
showing them, that the rejecting such a carnal seed of Abraham as they were,
did no ways cross, much less make void the word of God, or render it of none
effect.

He now proceeds in these verses to vindicate the righteousness of God in
these his proceedings, in answer to their second Objection, that God is not
only just in decreeing this way of Justification, but righteous in his
prosecution of the same; we may suppose, that the Jews were satisfied that the
Apostle had fully answered their first Objection; and cleared the way as to the
tight seed; the Jews were ready to say, Paul, thou have well salved the truth
of Gods word of promise, but now how can this comport with the righteousness
of God and his equity, whilst he is rejecting the greatest number of Abraham's
seed? who have been willing, and running, zealously laboring in ways of
obedience to that law of God delivered to them: and in the meanwhile receiving
into favor the nations and sinners of the Gentiles, either ignorant of or
disobedient to that law; and that only believing in another: This (says the
Jew) favors to us of unequity and unrighteousness; and thus the Apostles
answer to their first Objection begets another Objection, the answer to
which is that which the Apostle is running at in the following verses, namely,
to vindicate the righteousness of God: The substance of the Apostles answer
amounts to thus much; that as Gods rejecting the Jews, the natural seed of
Abaaham, did no ways entrench upon the truth of his word of promise to Abraham,
so neither does his rejecting these who were zealous of the law entrench upon
his Justice and righteousness: so that God is righteous in his proceedings
though the Jews are not justified by the works of the law.

Ver. 14. What shall we say then, is there unrighteousness with God? God
forbid.


That the Apostle is here in these words replying to a supposed Objection, is
the received opinion of most that I have read, as well Calvinists as others. 2.
That this Objection is occasioned by, or from what goes before, is as
universally granted; the Jews did think by what Paul had said before, that he
had rendered the righteousness of God at least questionable.


I do confess, I find men much divided as to the spring, rise and root of this
Objection; some think this Objection was raised from the Apostles quoting of
Jacob and Esau, with respect to the time when the words were spoken to Rebecea,
which was before they had done good or evil, one to be hated, and the other
loved: whereas they were both equally sons of Isaac, in whom the promise was
lodged; some think, that the Jews thought, that Puul in this instance had at
least implicitly rendered God unrighteous. 2. Some think, that the Jews took
this advantage from Paul's interpretation of these Oracles and instances of
Ishmael and Esau, as thus; that God in his proceedings with Ishmael and Esau
did intend to declare his established purpose of election, to be not by works
but free grace, ver. 11. this interpretation the Jews quarrel at, that Paul
should in effect say, that Gods casting out Ishmael and subjugating Esau typed
out the casting off the Covenant of works for Justification: this
interpretation was very distasteful to the Jews, who judged it to savor of
unrighteousness: for God to slight and reject the zealous Jews, who were
observers of the law, whilst he received into favor the sinners of the
gentiles, as they esteemed them.


Now the Question is, which of these two are likeliest to be the spring of this
Objection; I answer: That it could not so properly be drawn from the first as
the last of these foundations, for these two reasons. 1. What the Apostle
speaks concerning Jacob and Esau, was only what was recorded in their own
Scripture, and they dared not to quarrel at that: they had the very words that
Paul mentions, Genesis 25. Malachi. 1. 2. What Paul had said concerning Jacob and
Esau, and particularly concerning Esau, or the Edomites that could not offend
the Jews, because the Edomites had been their fathers implacable enemies: the
Jews would hardly upon their account interpose or to charge Paul's Doctrine with
imputation of unrighteousness to God: they did not at that day bear any such
love to Edom, therefore the spring and rise of this Objection must stand
grounded upon the Apostles conclusive inference from the premises, Genesis 25.
Mal. 1. that God had rejected that way of saving men on which they depended,
and chosen the way of faith: this is that (says the Jews) which seems to
reflect unrighteousness upon God.


Now to take off this second Objection, the Apostle addresseth himself in the
verses following, both in general and particular. And first he denies the
consequence drawn from the premises in general, in these words, God forbid, let
not this be so much as named; it is in St. Paul's account abominable: the
Syriack read, God forgive; implying the heinousness of the sin wanting
forgiveness; it is a supposition to be abhorred, that there should be any
unrighteousness in God, as we may gather from the usage of the same word
elsewhere, Romans 3.4.6. Gal. 2.27. God forbid. 2. Besides this general
disclaimer, he proceeds more particularly in two parts, which contains the
reasons tending to demonstrate Gods righteousness; for we have two casual
words, ver. 15. ver. 17. for he says to Moses; for the Scripture says to
Pharaoh. 1. With respect to those who are the subjects of his mercy. 2ly, With
respect to the subjects of his Reprobation:
in both these the Apostle renders God righteous.


1st, As to the vindication of Gods righteousness, as to the subjects of mercy:
we have it laid down verse. 15. as to Gods righteousness, with respect to the
vessel of wrath, that we have verse the 17. in that instance of Pharaoh, the
Apostle would assert the undeniable right that God has to show mercy to whom
he will, that is, to what manner of persons he will: and a sole right to
reprobate and reject what manner of persons he will; and they shall be
impenitent rebellious rejecters of his mercy and grace, as Pharaoh did, who was
a type of the unbelieving Jews, to whom Christ was sent: from this eminent
instance of Pharaoh the Apostle draws up a conclusion, that God hardens whom he
will, ver. 18. So that the Apostles design in these verses is to vindicate the
righteousness of God, both in his decree of Justification and Reprobation,
that is, as to the terms and method upon which he does proceed. For take this
by the way, that the great contest between the Jews and St. Paul, was about the
way and terms of Salvation, whether by circumcision and legal Obedience or
through faith in Jesus Christ; what shall we say then? this kind of speaking
is common by the Apostle, sometimes to awaken Christians to look backwards, and
sometimes forwards: these words may be read these three ways: what then do we
say? what then can we say? or as here, what shall we say then? such kind of
interogatories supposes a strong negation, we can say nothing: So it may be
read, Romans 4.1. chap. 6.1. we can say nothing why we should continue in sin: so
cha. 7.7. we can say nothing that can render the law sin, eha. 8.31. we can say
nothing to discourage you: if God be for you, who can be against you? thus it
is to be read, chap. 9.30. 1 Corinthians. 10.19. chap. 11. So that in these words
we have two parts. 1. An Interrogation, is there unrighteousness with God? 2.
This Interrogation is Seconded with a determination of abhorrency, God forbid:
however it may appear, as if there were unrighteousness with God in this
matter; yet there is nothing less, far be it from us to hold or maintain any
such notion that might reflect unrighteousness on God, God forbid.

But I shall be very brief upon this verse because the controversy does not lie
so much in this as in some other parts of this chapter; I shall only note two
Doctrines from this verse, and so proceed. First Doctrine, That the greatest
and most necessary and most glorious truths of Jesus Christ, may be obnoxious
to the cavils and Objections of those who in other matters are masters of great
reason. Second Doctrine, Those Doctrins and opinions whatever they be that
reflect any unrighteousness or hard dealings on God as to man kind, ought to
be matter of abhorrency to a Christian.

Of each of these a few words.

1. See this great truth of justification by faith without the deeds of the
law; how it was cavilled at by the Jews who were the professed people of God,
and men of great parts; the preaching of Christ crucified is to the Jews a
stumbling block, and to the greeks foolishness. 1 Corinthians. 10.23. and indeed
what truths of that day were there on foot at which the Jews did not stumble?
when Christ by divine power of God cast out devils they imputed it to the power
of the devil, contrary to there own reasons; for their children must name over
those possessed with the devil the name of Jesus; as to the Baptism of John,
though they dare not deny, but that it was from heaven yet how they cavil at
it, and reject it, as also the Doctrine of the resurrection, as a ridiculous
thing, appears by their arguing with Christ about it, Math. 22. but amongst all
the Doctrines that were on foot in those days, there were none so
pertinaciously withstood as this of justification by faith: insomuch that it is
recorded of them, Act. 13.44. that they contradicted and blasphemed; and that
this Doctrine was the occasion: see verse. 39. that by Christ all that believe
shall be justified: so Act. 28.26. this is the great Doctrine caviled at; and
so it was by the Romans and Galatians, for the controversy did not lie about
election of persons but ways, as is plain. But I shall but touch this head.

2. That Doctrine or opinion whatsoever, that reflects any unrighteousness upon
God or Christ ought to be abhorred by Christians; the Apostle cannot bear with
the least supposition this way, without a God forbid, or God forgive: it is a
heinous sin: it is the nature of a godly man to vindicate the honor and
righteousness of God in all his ways; he is ready to stand up for Gods
righteousness: so does our Apostle elsewhere also, Romans 3.4.5. it is one of the
attributes of God which his servants in all ages have labored to vindicate, so
did Abraham, Genesis 18. shall not the Judge of ^ll the earth do right? so did Job
take great pains to vindicate Gods righteousness: so also did David and Jeremy,
chap. 12.1. he lays down that as an established truth; let things go how they
will, yet God is righteous; there is no unrighteousness in God, Psalm. 29.

Learn from hence, to try your own hearts as to Godward; if your hearts be
right to Godward, you cannor bear the least imputation to be cast upon Gods
righteousness; is there unrighteousness with God? God forbid. I need not at
this place show you, how dishonorable to Gods righteousness that opinion of
election and Reprobation is, which is commonly imposed upon this Chapter.

But I proceed, and having spoken a few words as to the Apostles vindication of
Gods righteousness in general in ver. 14. I shall proceed to speak to his more
special vindication of Gods righteousness, ver. 15. in these words.

Ver. 15. For he says to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy,
and I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion.


Before I come to speak closely to the matter contained in this Text, give me
leave to recite the opinion of those contrarily minded upon this Text, God is
here (says some) to be understood as a supreme Lord, who will have this to
live, and that to dye, amongst men corrupted alike; this man to be chosen and
that man to be Reprobated, merely to show his prerogative. I will love Jacob,
and I will hate Esau, because I will; I may do what I will with my own: but I
shall say but little to this opinion, in this place, because I shall meet with
it more fully afterward.

Yet thus much I now say, that this kind of speaking sounds contrary to the
current of other Scriptures; for Gods thoughts of mercy are as far above our
imaginations, as the heavens are above the earth; Esau 55. who would have all
men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth: Calvin thinks, that
this word does sound thus, or to this effect ( on whom I once decree to show
mercy, I will go on to show mercy for ever; I will never take it away, but
follow him with perpetual kindness:) but how this paraghraph of Calvin will
accommodate the Context, and the Apostles design, I leave the wise to Judge,
seeing he is now in this context asserting, that the Jews who were once in Gods
favor and love are now cast off for unbelief.

But as the Lord shall assist me I shall endeavor to lay before you the true
and genuine scope and intent of our Apostle in these words; it is plain and
granted on all hands, that the Apostle in these verses is laboring to deliver
his former Doctrine from the least imputation of reflecting unrighteousness
upon God, as they were ready to charge upon him: you have heard before, that
the spring of this objection is from the Apostles interpretation drawn from two
instances of Ishmael and Esau, which was this: see upon verse. 11. that God
therein did teach, that his purpose of election was not of works but of free
grace, or of him that calls: here lies the foot of the objection, and it may
be framed thus: that if thou teach, that God does not reward and deal with men
according to their works, then thou do cast a blemish upon the righteousness
of God, who has declared this to be a part and none of the smaller parts of
his righ^eousness, that he does reward every man according to his works: and
least any should think this objection, to be substantial, I will speak a few
words by way of distinction unto it; therefore remember this I pray, that the
works spoken of, and struck at in this Epistle, chapter and context, are not
intended works of faith and Gospel-obedience and holiness, but these works must
be understood of legal and ceremonial obedience, as circumcision and those
rites on which the Jews rested.

2. Neither the presence of those works, but as looked on as meritorious, for
justification and salvation: now in order to the Apostles asserting this his
Doctrine, and vindicating Gods righteousness, the Apostle in this 15. verse, is
reciting the words of God anciently spoken to Moses, Exodus 33. and doubtless
the Apostle did well know, as he was guided by the spirit of God, that these
words sure his present purpose; as with much strength to s^lence and satisfy
the Jews, who were ready to say, it is true, Paul, thou have spoken something
to this point, that God has not broke his word made to our fathers, Abraham
and Isaac, in rejecting us who are so considerable a part of Abraham's seed* But
suppose we do concess with thee, that herein the word of God is not violated,
yet how can thou clear the righteousness and equity of God in so proceeding,
that we who have been zealous willers and runners, and that according to the
laws and rules given by God himself should lose all our labor, and be
rejected, whilst others who have been no observers of these laws, but are
ungodly, profane and Idolaters, are received into favor, by faith in another;
these proceedings seems to ^vour of unrighteousness, according to Heb. 6.^. God
is not unrighteous to forget our labor of lov^* yet this thou have taught, and
how can thou clear this doctrine from reflecting disparagement upon the
righteousness of God.

Now the business that the Apostle has before him, is to vindicate Gods
righteousness, notwithstanding which to do, he brings these words to Moses: in
which Scripture we have at least implicitly contained, the absolute and
unquestionable right that God has left himself, to state and propound his own
terms and conditions upon, how this grace of Adoption, Justification and
salvation shall be enjoyed, whether upon the works of the law or faith; which
was the case in hand: God has an absolute prerogative without the propositions
of men or angels: I will show (says God) this mercy of justification to what
kind of persons I please, which terms (as I have showed before) are only
believing in his Son, and no other way whatsoever; which conditions was wanting
in the Jews, notwithstanding their pertinacious contending with the holy
Apostle: for although they had been zealous observers of the law as aforesaid,
this was not the terms upon which this adoption to be Abraham's seed was
promised.

2. Whereas they were ready to quarrel at the reception of the Gentiles into
favor, this text does answer, that God was not tied to the Jews only, for he
had an unquestionable right to show (...) on whom he pleased, and consequently
to the Gentiles if he pleases; and they are ^ound within the compass of his
terms; and therefore the Je^ were peremptory and overbold to question (...)
quarrel, and reply against God, as we shall hear more hereafter. God is not
accountable to man in any of his ways toward sinners, by what way or means
they shall be blessed; forasmuch as all has Jew and Gentile have sinned, and
come short of the glory of God, and so stand in need of his relief: and it is
but reasonable, that he which is the free donor of the grace of justification
and salvation, should have liberty to propound his own terms, whether by works
or faith; which was certainly the case in hand. But for the more orderly
management of this portion of Scripture, I shall in the first place endeavor
to explicate these words spoken to Moses, by enquiry into six Circumstances. 1.
What was the occasion of Gods speaking these words to Moses, here cited by our
Apostle? 2. How this word in this quotation does accomodate the Apostles
design in vindicating Gods righteousness, in rejecting the Jews, and
receiving the Gentiles? 3. What kind of grace and compassion, and mercy is
here intended? 4. Why it is rendered in these two words, and how we may
understand them? 5. What kind of people or persons are intended in this
restrictive word whom twice exprest^? 6. How is Gods will to be understood
here, being four times reiterated, I will, I will, I will, I will?


1. It is worth our enquiry the occasion of these words in the Original place
to Moses, Exo. 33. which was this, whilst Moses was with God in the Mount to
receive the law, Aaron and the people fell to Idolatry, they made a golden
calf, and worshipped it, appropriating that great and unparalelled deliverance
lately received, to this calf, or such like Idol: these are (say they) the gods
that brought us out of the land of Egypt, whereupon the wrath of God was justly
kindled against this people, and sends Moses in have down to them, who was
himself so moved at it that he threw the tables of Gods law out of his hands,
and brake them in this his passion: yet soon after, this meek sweet-natured
Moses sets himself to seek Gods face and favor for, and in behalf of this
rebellious and Idolatrous people; all though God had told him, that himself
would not go up with them lest he should consume the by the way, but he would
send his angel before the, yet notwithstanding Moses is not satisfied* but does
passionately still beg Gods face and presence* and sight of his glory; and it
is worthy our taking notice, the argument that Moses uses with God ver. 13.
consider that this people are thy people: and again, ver. 16. to demonstrate
that I and they (...) separated from all the people upon the face of the earth;
in which argument we have Moses pleading the peculiarity of this people, that
God had taken them to himself, and so was obliged to the^ Covenant, let their
manners be what they will.

Now the reply of God to Moses does savor ^f some dislike to Moses's
Intercession upon this ^gument, as if Moses would impose upon God, that he must
of necessity be the God of Israel, (...) cause they are Israel; and hereupon
comes in the words as a reply to Moses; as if God should say, do not think I am
tied to Israel, because I (...) brought them out of Egypt, no, I will be graci^
to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy to whom I will show mercy: I am
not tied to thi^ or that people, upon any external obligations. I have others,
that I shall show mercy unto as well as they; in which words we have a prophecy
of the admission of the gentiles into favor and mercy with God; and indeed, if
this had not been Gods design, how could this have suited to the Apostles
design.

2ly, But how does this Scripture accomodate the Apostle to vindicate Gods
righteousness?

1. I answer, This Citation is out of their own law, and so was a good
testimony to his end, for they owned what was recorded there; Gods way of
saving, according to my Doctrine, is no other then what he declared to Moses of
old, that it was by grace, by compassion, not works; and the Jews would easily
grant; that God could do no unrighteous thing, they honored God and his
sayings, but they questioned whether Paul were within the compass of Gods works
and sayings: therefore the Apostle to deliver himself, cites this saying of
their Law, that said as much in effect as he had said; for the Scripture here
speaks the same to Moses; this in general: but more particularly, this saying
does accomodate the Apostle, if we will consider the spring of the Jews
Objection, as from his Doctrine before laid down, ver. 11. that Gods purpose of
election was not of works but of him that calls, that is, that it lies
merely in Gods own breast, of his mere mercy and compassion, and so cannot be
of works; and that the foot of the Jews objection lay upon the former doctrine,
is the judgment of many besides my self: now if it be of grace, it is not of
works, as the Apostle argues, chap. 4.5. That this was the^ Objection is
further confirmed by the Reply following, ver. 16. It is not of him that
wills, n^ of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy* So that (says
the Apostle) my Doctrine of Justification by free grace and the pleasure of God
through believing, is no other then what in effect and substance God said to
your old friend Moses, Exodus 33. and you will acknowledge God righteous in such
his ways.

3. What kind or degree of grace and mercy in God is this, that this text
speaks of? when it says, I will have mercy on whom I will; because the
Scripture speaks expressly of two kinds or sorts of love and grace shown to
mankind from God. 1. There is one kind of grace which is antecedent to says
and obedience, such is the gift of Christ and means of Salvation. 2ly, That
which is subsequent and follows upon believing, when persons are admitted into
Gods special favor by adoption;
Now which of these are here intended? I answer, the latter not the first, for
these three Reasons. 1. Because God makes no difference nor distinction of men
in the first, namely the gift of Christ, and his preventing grace, as the
learned calls it; in that respect it need not run as it does here, I will have
mercy on whom I will: but on all equally alike John. 3.16. Romans 5.8. 1 John
4.10. and according to this love he calls all men every where to Repent, Acts.
17. and many are called. 2. The whole discourse of the Apostle in this context,
does not relate to the first but the latter: the scope of this Epistle does
relate to Justification and Adoption, not of preventing grace, but subsequent
grace, according to these texts, Gal. 3.26. chap. 4.6. 1 John 12. 3. It must be
taken in the latter not the first sense, because he is taking pains to satisfy
the Jews, that they were excluded from that grace and mercy that he is speaking
of all along, as ver. the 8th, the children of the flesh are not the children
of God, but the children of the promise are accounted for the seed:
but none will venture to say, that the Jews are excluded from Gods preventing
grace; they had the benefits of Christ's death and the privileges of the
Gospel; So that it is not here to be read or understood, I will have mercy,
that is, choose unregenerate men, and thereby draw, nay force and necessitate
them to repentance and faith, but I will justify and save what kind of
persons I please and upon what terms I please.

4. Why does the Lord speak it in two words? which also our Apostle turns by
mercy and compassion. 1. Why in two words. 2. What does these two words, import?


1. This kind of speaking by way of reiteration or repetition does import much
ardency and intentnesse and vehemence in the speaker; as when Thomas says, my
Lord and my God, he shows his warmth of affection to Christ; so in the Lords
thus speaking, he demonstrates that he is much affected with the acts of this
grace and mercy, and that he would also have it taken notice of. But 2ly, What
does these two words signify? I answer. These are two distinct words in the
Original, yet these words are taken one for another, and are the self same in
signification, the greek Lexicon expounds the one by the other: yet some
learned men tells us, that the former word signifies the inward disposition
and passion of the mind to mercy, and the other signifies the outgoings of
this mercy in the execution of it, in matter of ^a^, which is the relieving
those in misery; thus God may bear inward affections and outward manifestations
to whom he pleases.


5. That which we are to enquire into, is the extent of these words, with
respect to who or whom, whether they are to be understood in the abstract or
concreet; that is, whether persons simply considered as such persons only, or
as persons so considered; as such a species or kind of persons so qualified:
it does much tend to the clearing up the truth in this context rightly to
understand this circumstance.

1. I answer, we are not bound to understand it in the abstract of such
distinct persons because this phrase, or this kind of speaking is used
specifically of kind and qualification elsewhere, Psalm. 16.3. in whom is all my
delight, that is thus so qualified: so John 18. I know whom I have chosen,
which supposes such as are contrary to Judas, verse. 18. whom he will be
hardneth; 2 Timothy 1.12. I knew whom I have believed, that is, that he is
mercyful, faithful, powerful, etc. 2. That this place must be understood
specifically of such a kind, appears, because this very grace and mercy of
justification is never promised to any abstracted subject, as to John or
Thomas, but to persons believing as such: the Scripture speaks plentifully
hereunto, Mark 16.16. Joh. 1.12. Joh. 6.40. this is the will of him that sent
me, that whosoever sees the son, and believes on him may have eternal life:
in which words we have explained the terms of this grace and mercy, it is upon
conditions; for in Christ Jesus all the promises are yea and amen: we are all
the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus: so that the words before amounts
to thus much; I will show the mercy of adoption, justification, and salvation,
to all that do believe whether Jews or Gentiles.


The Sixth head to be enquired into is, whether this will of God in our text so
often reiterated, to show mercy and grace, be peremptory and absolute? I
answer, that this kind of speaking, I will, I will, I will, I will, does
import the greatest resolvednesse imaginable, and the greatest peremptoriness
that can be expressed: does it not savor of much resolvedness and peremptoriness
in Pharaoh, Exo. 15. when he speaks after this manner; I will pursue, I will
overtake, I will divide the spoil, even so must it be understood in this text,
that the Lord is much resolved in this matter, that is, to show the mercy of
adoption and salvation to believers, and that, not all the men on earth, nor
angels in heaven, can alter or turn his resolution or purpose, as not to show
this mercy to them that believe, or to show it to any upon any other terms; God
is greatly resolved, everlastingly resolved, to proceed upon these and no other
terms, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile.

Thus I have briefly endeavored to give you the meaning of these words, as
they are a quotation out of Exo. 33. and now according to my promise, I shall
sum up the whole into seven doctrinal conclusions, which are as follows.

1. Doctrine, That Gods speakings of old to his servants were very significant
and teaching to (...) and generations to come after. The sayings which in
themselves seemed da^, yet Christ and his Apostles make great use of them: time
would fail me to mention those many quotations of Christ and his servants out
of the Old Testament; how lightsome does out Lord make those dark words of God,
Exo. 3.6. I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac and Jacob: which ou^ Lord
brings to prove the resurrection of the dead to the Sadducees; so the Apostle
finds argument in this 33. Exo. to prove the initiating the Gentiles.

The 2. Doctrine, Is drawn from the familiarity of God with Moses: from whence
I note. There is much freedom in God to communicate himself in his mind and
will to his faithful servants.

Moses was faithful in all his house; God spoke to him face to face, as a man
speaks to his friend so did God to Abraham, Genesis 18. concerning S^dom: only
from hence learn a word of caution, which is this, that notwithstanding this
his famili^rity with Moses, yet God will not bear with Moses in sin, God slew
him, he must not enter the land of Canaan, because he did not sanctify the name
of God; therefore take heed of that antinomian Opinion, that God sees no sin in
his people, for he said unto Moses.

3. Doctrine, The calling the Gentiles to the grace of the Gospel, was founded
in the will of God from the beginning I will have mercy on them so qualified.
This our Apostle acknowledges, Ephesians. 3. God had a design to enlarge his
grace to the Gentiles, though the Jews the elder brother could not bear to see
the kindness shown by the father to the prodigal, Luke 15. they forbid the
Gospel to be preached to the gentiles, that they might be saved: they would
fain have restrained the grace of God to their terms, but God will have his own
terms Genesis 9.27. God shall persuade Japheth to dwell in the tents of Shem.

4. Doctrine, Not only the means but the terms of salvation are founded in the
avsolute will and pleasure of God. As Christ was the means, so faith the terms
upon which life and justification is attained: it is not what man thinks, but
what God propounds; I will show mercy on whom I will.

5. Doctrine, The justification and adoption of mankind is the effects of
free grace and mere mercy, when all the conditions are performed which are
required. What God does for sinners though upon highest terms of believing and
obeying, is called mercy, compassion, and grace, Ephe. 2.5. saved by grace.

6. Doctrine, That Gods terms of grace and acceptance with him, are fixed on
his part with all p^emptoriness and absolute resolution: so that me^ nor Angels
cannot change nor alter them. Therefore is the gospel called the everlasting
gospel.

7. Doctrine, from these terms grace; mercy, I observe. That men indefinitly
considered, before justification and adoption through faith, are truly
miserable, and stand in need of mercy, let their privileges be what they will
as to preventing grace.

I shall close all with an inference, that God is righteous in rejecting the
zealous Jew, and receiving through faith the believing gentile, because he may
of right show mercy to whom he will; and this is no new assumption, but he was
invested with this power from the beginning; for he said unto Moses, I will
have mercy on whom I will have mercy.

So much for the 15. verse.

CHAP. VIII. Showing that it is of mere grace and mercy in God, all men having
sinned, to call them upon any terms whatsoever, to justification, all grace no
debt.
Ver. 16. So then, it is not of him that wills nor of him that runs, but
of God that shows mercy.


WE have contained in these words, the Apostles emphatical conclusion and
result, drawn upon the premises: these two words so then, are a common note of
inference and conclusion elsewhere, as well as here: as I shall show you from
other Scriptures: and it would reflect a clear light upon the context, if the
reader would take good heed of these words as an inference from what goes
before, although I shall not deny, but that the Apostle in these words may have
an eye to the whole context; yet I shall say, he had a more special eye to the
words immediately going before, cited out of Exo. 33.19. which he brings to
discharge himself from casting any blemish upon Gods righteousness, by his
doctrine of justification by faith, and consequently by free grace: the Apostle
seems to argue thus, if God have a sole and unquestionable right to show mercy
to whom, or what sort of persons he will, and upon what terms he please, then
adoption and justification does not begin in the creatures will, nor end in his
own work. It is not of him that wills or runs: the great controversy
between our Apostle and the Jews (as you have here before) was about the terms
of way of Justification, whether by the works of the law or by grace, through
faith in Christ: that for which the Apostle incurrs the high displeasure of the
Jews, is for asserting faith alone as sufficient to justify circumcision or
uncircumcision; that this was the Apostles Doctrine is plain, if you read this
epistle with that of the Gallathians, it was the preaching this doctrine that
occasioned the Jews to charge him with impeaching Gods righteousnesse^ now we
may easily perceive, that our Apostle (...) these verses is upon his
vindication and Justification from that false imputation, and that which (...)
apprehended himself concerned to speak unto, is still to stand by his
interpretation of those two i^ stances of Ishmael and Esau, which two (as he
(...) taught) did loudly speak the purpose of God (...) to be of works; not of
works, but of grace; to vi^dicate which he before brings the saying of God of
old to Moses; as if he should have said, this ^terable purpose of God is
contained Exodus 33.19. Or as if he should have said, God is not unrighteous in
such his proceedings with mankind* (...) much as he has an unquestionable
right to ^pound his own terms, upon which he will ju^ and save men, and as
equitable a right to propou^ his own terms upon which he will blind, and ^den
and reprobate men.

For thus much does the Lord in effect spe^ is his declaration to Moses; I am
resolved to ad^ ^ustifie, and save persons, in what capacity, and under what
qualifications I please; and will (...) be imposed upon, or taught by man, what
I have to do, or what becomes me to do of this kind^.

This I say does God with a very high hand (...) sert to Moses, in order to
silencing him in his intercession for the sinful Israelits; which if so, then
it follows in this 16 ver. that the great mercy of Adoption and Justification,
as to the terms and conditions of it, does not arise, nor is not at the will or
contrivance of the most earnest desirers, or most industrious persuers of the
law, much less of any other sort of men whatsoever, but of God who is the sole
founder of this mercy and the inviter unto this blessed feast of Justification,
of his own good will and pleasure.

This 16. Ver. well considered, especially in conjunction with ver. 32. of this
chap. and chap. 10.3. does let in a great beam of light to this whole context,
and does to some good degree unty the knot of this controversy, as it, and
they, carry in them a reason why the Jews fell short of Justification, not for
want of willing, or want of running, but want of running in a right way, ver.
32. because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the
law, chap. 10.3. they being ignorant of Gods righteousness, or the way of Gods
righteousness, and going about to establish their own; they did not attain to
the law of righteousness, which Calvin expounds thus, they have not found the
terms of Justification propounded and authorized by God, so that this text
considered with the forenamed, does undeniably prove and demonstrate to those
who are willing to understand, that the famous controversy between the Apostle
and the Jews, was not about personal and absolute election and Reprobation
before time or power to believe, but about the terms of Justification and
adoption, which way persons come to be legitimate children of Abraham, whether
by works or by says, which is answered negatively, not of works: no^ for our
more orderly proceedings, and to answ^ the method of an exposition; I shall
first explain those words that want explication, and afterward observe what is
doctrinal in them. 1. I shall enquire into the subject here spoken of, in these
two words, (it is), what is that he means, it is not of willer or runner? what
is not the product of willing and running? 2. What him is here to be understood
twice expressed, not of him, not of him, who is he that wi^s and runs in vain? 3.
What is this willing and running? and why set forth by these terms? 4. Why is
willing and running opposed to God and mercy? it is not of him that wills,
nor of hi^ that runs, but of God that shows mercy.


To the first, as to these two words, (it is) they are inserted in the
translation, as a necessary supplement, though they are not in the original; as
we have the like supplement elsewhere, as to the same words: and that this
supplement was necessary, is of all granted, and is necessary to fu^ the sense,
and set forth the subject of this spee^h; to show that something was aimed at
by these persons of whom we are speaking there are but two opinions about this
subject that I know of: First, some tells us, that it is election or power to
believe which is here intented in this it is: an^ therefore some to gratify
such a notion, do supply in the room of it is the word election; it is (...) of
him that wills or runs, but this is but to, (...) comodate their own
private Opinion without and warrant from the Original (as I have said before
(...)) for there is not one syllable in the Original of election. The second
Opinion is, that the it is intend^ Justification and Adoption, and those
blessings belonging thereunto, and not election, or precedent or preventing
grace,
and that this latter, and not the first is here intended, I shall offer my
Judgment as follows. First, the truth hereof appears, by comparing the
parallel places with this, which if they should be read of election, how
incongruously would they sound, and indeed without sense: as for instance; ver.
32. because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the
law; so Romans 4.16. These places and indeed the whole context speaks of
Justification and adoption, not of precedent but subsequent grace. But 2ly, If
we read it, and take it for Justification, then it does comport and concur
with the context currently; we may easily see, that Justification is the
antecedents to this relation it is; I need not b^ng texts to prove, that
Justification was that which the Jews run for, and mistt of; that Justification
was the subject of the Apostles discourse, is plain: we have these words,
justify and Justification and Justified above twenty times in Galathians and
Romans. 3. If the Apostle should here mean election, power to believe, or
preventing grace, there were no Argument in his words; he did but fight against
the wind, to say, that election before-time or power to believe was not of
will or works, defacto, this none would oppose, but it is certain, that the
Apostle was here saying something to his Antagonists the Jews, who did seek
Justification in matter of fact by their legal Obedience, Gal. 5.4. So that if
our Apostle should here intend election, (...) power to believe, or faith, it
would have been altogether besides his present business with the Jews. 4. If
we take this it is for Justification, and adoption, and consequently subsequent
grace, the this was not of him that wills or runs; the^ i^ runs in a
strait line with other places of Scripture see Romans 3.24. justified freely by
his grace, ver. 28. without the deeds of the law, Ephesians. 2.8. not of works of
righteousness, Titus 3.5. So that Justification and salvation is not of the
willer or runner.


2. By way of explication what him is here to be understood which is twice
expressed?

I answer, That although the Apostle is principally speaking to and of the
Jews, yet it comprehends all, willers or runners, as well gentiles as Jews; the
whole species and kind of runners; such as propound believing as their own
terms; for faith does not justify as the terms of the creature, but as it is
Gods terms, no more then legal Obe^nce; as the healing the blind man's eyes by
clay, was not by that simpathetical virtue that was in the clay but the power
of God, and the wisdom of God; so it is not of him that wills or runs,
though by faith, as his own terms, to such an and but as he by believing does
humbly fall in with Gods means to such an end.

3. Why willing and running? I answer. 1st, Willing signifies strong desires to
wish, ask, pray with great earnestness; it is taken two ways. 1st, Sometimes
authoritatively to will, is to resolve or establish a thing, I will have it so.
2. Sometimes to will, is taken submissively, as in Christ's prayer to his
father, John 17. father I will, that is, I desire it may be so; and so willing
must suppose a thirsting desire of having it to be so.
2. By running is understood laboring, pursuing, taking pains; running is a
labourious work:
many interpreters would have this passage to allude to that of Jacob and Esau
in person about the blessing, nor in Esau's running for it, but of the
providence of God that confirmed it on Jacob: but I am not of the mind that
Paul looked so far back as this, but he had his example before him; it was a
truth that the Jews with whom he speaks, had deserved to be reckoned great
willers and runners, and as to such, and of such he speaks; chap. 10.1. I bear
them record that they have a zeal of God, here is their will and desire: see how
zealous they were Acts. 15.1. they taught that except persons were circumcised,
and kept the law of Moses^, they could not be saved; and this their zeal held
after they believed in Jesus Christ, see Acts 2.20. they had a strong desire to
be accepted and justified of God: they were these willers chiefly intended.

2. They were also those runners, as is expressed of them ver. 31. They
followed or pursued the law or terms, as they thought would have justified
them: they sought Justification, chap. 11.7. Israel has not obtained that
which he seeks for, so that the spirit of God takes notice in these
emphatical words, that the circumcised Israel were great runners: and as the
fruit and effect of this their runnings, they did boldly challenge
Justification and Adoption thereupon: Now the Apostle to prevent them, tells
them in our text, that it is not of him that wills, nor runs, but in God
(...) shows this mercy of Justification.

4. Why have we here such a formidable o^sition between willing and running,
and God (...) mercy? I answer, These are opposed to set ford the
inconsiderablenesse and successlesnesse of all the utmost endeavors of the
creature, though, willing and running, inward and outward, for the procuring
this blessing, that so it might lay the creature low in all his endeavors,
knowing that he does not receive Justification as a debt but as a grituity,
Romans 4.4.5. willers and runners are apt to have their feet taken in that snare
of prescribing laws to God. 2. This opposition may be made, to show that
propensity and readiness that is in God to show mercy. It is not to be
attributed to man's inward or outward endeavors, but to God who is so ready to
show mercy. 3. This opposition is made to show the posit^ rejection of works
and all endeavors of men, and the absolute and positive way of obtaining is by
sitting still in believing, as the Prophet faith in another case, our strength
is to sit still.
But against this there may seem to lie a twofold objection.

1. If there be no profit in wishing, willing, and desiring, nor in laboring,
running or pursuing after justification, then to what end should our desires be
enlarged, and our endeavors be pursuing; Shall we run in vain, seeing it is
not to be had that way? then let us sit still and be only passive and leave God
to show his grace, where, when, and to whom he please.

To which I answer, 1. These Willers and Runners in our Text must respect the
circumcised Judisaries who trusted to and boasted in their legal obedience to
the Cerbmonial Law, and their own Righteousness, our Text does immediately
concern them. 2. If it be taken for Gospel willing and running to the highest
strain, it cannot be meritorious of justification, because the blood of Christ
admits no competitor or co-partner in the point of justification, See Romans
3.20,24,28. cha. 4. Gal. 3.16. cha. 5.4.
yet notwithstanding it does not follow, that the creature should fit still and
cease all his desires and endeavors; as thus, because the pardon of a
Malefactor arises freely out of the Princes breast, and of his prerogative, it
does not follow that he must sit still, for although it is not in the power of
the malefactor to merit a pardon, yet he may sue it out as the grace of the
prince: It is our duty to hunger and thirst after the grace of justification as
well as after sanctification, and they are pronounced blessed by Christ who are
so qualified.

2. Object. Does not this seem to cross some other Scriptures that exhorts to,
and calls for great industry, as 1 Cor. 9.24. where we are called upon so to
run that we may obtain; where we have obtaining propounded as the great
encouragement to running: So also Heb. 12. we are to have an eye to the
recompense of reward, to encourage us in our running: and Paul himself was not
willing to run in vain; and we are called upon Phil. 2.12. to work out our
salvation with fear and trembling.

I answer, That in all these places the Apostle speaks to justified persons in
order to perseverance, not to such as are strangers to the ways of God and his
Gospel, as these in our. Text were; and all these endeavors are more properly
a^ sanctification then after justification: we are called upon to work out our
salvation, and to perfect our holiness in so doing; but we are never called
upon to work out our justification, that is only the effect of Christ's death
and sufferings, without any other efficient cause or means: all acts of
holiness in man is rather to declare his justified state then procure it,
Abraham in obeying and following God in those several steps which the Sc^pture
takes notice of, did not thereby procure but demonstrate his justification; and
see how Alrahams obedience and faith centers in one; to this end our Apostle
says, that Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness,
thereby he was accounted righteous: yet S. James says, our father Abraham was
justified by works when he offered Isaac, Jam. 2.21. that is, he did declare or
demonstrate it thereby.

Thus I have briefly run through the words by way of explication.

I now return to consider of them as they lie.

And before I proceed to those Doctrinal Conclusions which lies in them, I
shall briefly take notice of them as they are the Apostles Conelusion and
result, and inference from what goes before; for that they are as a
conclusion, they have the note of an inference or conclusion in this so then,
for so these words are used elsewhere: See chap. 10.17. So then faith comes by
hearing, which words are the result from the former; so chap. 8.8. so then they
that are in the flesh cannot please God, cha. 14.12. So then every one must
give an account of bi^self to God: so 1 Cor. 3.7, chap. 7.38, thus we see, that
this kind of speaking is used as a center to draw the precedent and subsequent
matter to it: so that this 16. verse is a result: the Apostle in these words
does conclude and seal up the matter of this first argument, in order to
purging himself from the Jews false imputation of charging God with
unrighteousness, which they gathered from what he had said, as is recorded
verse. 11. that God does not justify by works; this result does cast light upon
the whole Context upon a threefold consideration. 1. As these words does
determine the nature and matter of the controversy between the Apostle and the
Jews, that it was about the terms of justification, and who had right to make
them, both which are here resolved, not of him that is most desirous and
pursuing after it; he has not power to propound, but God who is the gracious
donour of it. 2. By the Apostles result in this verse, he does determine where
the foot of the Jews objection lay, which was from his interpretation made of
these two instances of Ishmael and Esau, as their rejection taught the
rejection of works as to justification, ver. 11. and not upon the unequal
proceedings of God with Jacob and Esau, as some would have it; for it will
easily be granted, that not of works, and not of him that wills or runs,
are terms synonimous, or of like signification. 3. We must understand this
conclusion and inference to be drawn from the words immediately going before,
Exodus 33.19. So then, that is to say, from hence it appears, not to be of the
willer or runner, because God in showing mercy is positively resolved in
himself, and from himself about it; so that this conclusion concludes the
propriety of Exo. 33. to this controversy; and that God sp^ the same in effect
to Moses, as here S. Paul sp^ to the Jews, that is to say, that justification
(...) adoption is of free grace and mercy and not^ works.


Thus much for the scope and explication of the words, I shall now sum up the
whole of this verse in these five doctrinal Conclusions.

From the nature of these words as they are a result or conclusion, whilst S.
Paul is laboring (...) vindicate Gods righteousness and equity in this terms
and proceedings with mankind, he arrives at great fatisfaction in himself.

The Doctrine is this, That he that makes it his work to vindicate Gods
righteousness: in his proceedings with man preva^ in his arguments.

The Apostle had no cause to be ashamed of his contest in this matter, in
asserting justification by faith in Christ without the deeds of the law, though
in so asserting he is charged for impeaching Gods righteousness; yet he
overcame, and in vind^ting Gods righteousness he vindicates his own doctrine,
(So then) it is not.

2. Doctrine, That justification is a prize worth the running for when once
seen and understood. The Apostle supposes that these Jews had been willing and
running after it as a blessed privilege; justification with God is very
desirable: but suppose you should ask me, what it is to be justified? I answer;
when a person is declared just upon the account of pardon and non-imputation of
sin, that is the blessed state which the Apostle speaks of Romans 4.6,7,8.
blessed is the man to whom God does not impute sin: but how may thee and I know
whether we are in this blessed state? I answer. 1. If thou be justified with
God, thou art acquitted in thine own conscience, there remains no more
conscience of sin: this is that spoken of, Romans 5.1. being justified with God
there is peace in thy conscience, that is, quiet, it does not condemn thee. 2.
If thou be justified from sin, thou do experience strength against sin,
that sin which is pardoned, we have a perfect hatred unto; we have an eminent
place for this, 2 Corinthians. 7.11. there was indignation and revenge against it.


3. Doctrine, It is possible for persons cordially to desire and laboriously to
pursue this mercy of justification, and yet come short, and not attain it. This
was the case of the Jews, they were willers and runners, they had a zeal, a
desire, they sought after it, verse 31. yet not attained it, chap. 11.7. Israel
did not attain what they fought after, and why, not because they were not
elected, verse. 32. but because they sought it not by faith; therefore this we
may learn, that in our zeal and running, it is good to keep Gods line.

4. Doctrine, That persons to some degree righteous and obedient to Gods laws,
are very apt to challenge and strongly expect the great privilege of
justification as a debt for such their obedience, or as a reward for such work.
Therefore the Apostle does set himself against this mistake, this makes him so
intently and path^tically cry down works in this Epistle, chap. 4.5. not of
debt, Gal. 2.16. and many other places; this was the state of the Jews, they
thought themselves much wronged, that they were not justified; they made their
boast of the law; oh! how apt are persons to lean upon their works for
justification: we have an eminent instance of this in the parable of the
pharisee, Luke 18.

5. Doctrine, That the absolute right of nominating and appointing the laws and
terms of justification, is in God; because it is of his mere mercy and grace,
that men having all sinned, are called to justification upon any terms
whatsoever: God in showing mercy is resolved to follow his own method: so then
it is not of him that wills, n^r of him that runs, but of God that shows
mercy. Thus I have spoken to the first branch, wherein S. Paul vindicates Gods
righteousness, in that he has a right of prerogative, to show mercy to whom be
please, and upon what terms he will: and so I have done with the 16. verse.

CHAP. IX. Gods act of hardening and reprobating to damnation, is the effects of
great and persevering rebellion, when men shut their eyes and ears at last
after much long-suffering and patience.
Ver. 17. For the Scripture says unto Pharaoh, even for this purpose have I
raised thee up, that I might make my power known, and that my name might be
declared in all the earth.


WE are now entering upon those more difficult places of this chapter, which to
many seems hard to be understood, as S. Peter speaks concerning some things in
his beloved brother Paul's writings, which (as he says) the unlearned wrest, as
they do other Scriptures, to their own destruction. Now amongst these dark and
obscure passages, this seems to be one, concerning Pharaoh: now a right
understanding of this passage requires divine assistance, in conjunction with a
narrow search, and diligent, and studious comparation of Scriptures; the latter
of which I can say, that I have not been wanting in to my power: and forasmuch
as it is Gods work to open our understandings to understand the Scriptures, I
desire the reader to be humbly waiting upon him for light, as he goes along in
the following matter. It is agreed on by most writers, that the Apostle is
still prosecuting his answer to the second objection, levied against his
Doctrine by the Jews, which objection was occasioned by his answer to the
first; and having answered the first branch, and vindicated Gods righteousness
in showing mercy to whom, or what sort of persons he please, and upon what
terms, from that saying of God to Moses of old, he now in these words proceeds
to the second branch of his answer, which is, to vindicate and demonstrate Gods
righteousness in condemning, rejecting and hardening whom he please, or rather
what manner of persons he please: Now his answer in this second branch, the
Apostle builds upon another ancient saying of God by way of threatening to
Pharaoh by the mouth of Moses, Exo. 9.16. which saying of God to Moses is the
subject of our text. The argument in general is formed thus; that as God is
righteous and just, in taking what sort of persons he please, as the subjects
of his mercy, Exo. 33.19. I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, so in
like manner is God righteous and just, in making whom he please the subjects of
his wrath and condemnation; even some of the circumcised seed of Abraham,
according to the flesh, the subjects of his b^indning and hardening; as being
such, who had not (as Calvin says on verse. 31.) complied with those terms
prescribed and authorized by God for justification, but rebelling against the
same; so he: how Gods rejecting and reprobating such wilful rejecters of him,
his grace and mercy, patience, and long sufferings, in his unwearied
applications to them, was emphatically held forth, in his proceedings with
Pharaoh, which is now the subject before us: and that these proceedings of God
on both sides, are the effects of an eternal decree of election and reprobation
from the beginning, is granted; and that this decree of reprobation is
subservient to Gods decree of election and salvation; and is as conducible to
the salvation of men as any other decree whatsoever: and S. Paul made use of
Gods decree of reprobation to promote his own salvation, 1 Cor. 9.27. I keep
under my body, and bring it into subjection, lest when I have preached to
others I my self should be a castaway.

I might add by way of illustration, that the penal part of the laws of the
nation, are as serviceable to deter men from offending, as the preceptory and
positive laws are.

But I shall come to the words more closely, which divides themselves into
these two parts. 1. The preface in these words, for the Scripture says unto
Pharaoh. 2. We have the matter and saying it self, spoken unto Pharaoh by way
of threatening, for this very cause have I raised thee up, to make my power
known in thee: and that my name might be declared in all the earth.


Before I come to the matter and saying it self, which will require some stay
upon it a while, I shall speak a few words to the preface, which is the
Apostles; for the Scripture says unto Pharaoh.

And as to the preface, I shall speak a few words to these four circumstances.
1. As to the connection of these words with the former. 2. The author of these
words. 3. The subject to whom. 4. The time when these words were spoken;
the consideration whereof may reflect some light upon the place.

1. As to the coherence or connection of the words appearing in this particle
(for), which seems (...) couple these words with the former, there are tw^
opinions about these words. 1. Some think this (for) is a relative to verse
(...) 2. Others think, that it is a relative to the words immediately going
before:
I think we may be at liberty to take them either way: if it relates to the 14.
verse, then it runs thus, is there unrighteousness in God, God forbid; for
the Scripture says unto Pharaoh: God is not unrighteous in condemning
unbelievers who are contemners of his grace; as the Jews are to whom he speaks;
for the Scripture says unto Pharaoh: meaning, that God, proceedings with
Pharaoh, a stubborn and impenitent unbeliever even to destruction, is a just
argument, that God is righteous in so proceeding with others in the like
capacity, and so with whom he please: and the connection thus considered does
agree to the Apostles conclusion, verse. 18. so then he shows mercy to whom he
will, and whom he will he hardens.

But suppose we make the connection with verse 16. it is not of him that wills
nor of him that runs, but in God that shows mercy, for the Scripture says
unto Pharaoh; then it follows thus, that the laws, terms, and conditions upon
which men are justified, are not molded or framed by men though never so
zealously bent and intent that way, but by and from God only, who is the donor,
because the Scripture says unto Pharaoh, meaning that inasmuch as God claims
a just and unquestionable right to condemn whom he please, he has the same
right to save whom he please; so that the way by which the Apostle clears Gods
righteousness in his proceedings with Jews and Gentiles, is his undoubted right
thereunto: God is not unrighteous in justifying the gentiles by faith, neither
is he unrighteous in condemning, and hardening the obstinate unbelieving Jews,
because he was righteous in so proceeding with Pharaoh upon like grounds of
disobedience: no man ever questioned the righteousness of Gods proceedings
with Pharaoh, but justified him in it, therefore the Apostle makes him here a
president, Pharaoh being the first born of rebellious unbelievers and obstinate
disobeyers of God, and a type of all gospel-disobeyers to the worlds end: and
so his proceedings with him a pattern of Gods proceedings with such to the
worlds end: as in like manner when God declares his sole love and approbation
to Abraham, upon his believing, he does also declare his good liking to all
such like believers in all succeding generations; Abraham the firstborn of
believing and obedient souls, he is the father of obedience, as Pharaoh was the
father of disobedience, not that the children of these two grand heads are in
degree equal to Abraham in faith, or Pharaoh in disobedience, but their faith
and their disobedience are of the same species that their fathers was, as
Abraham may have many sons or children who comes not to equalize him in the
degree of his faith, provided it be of the same kind, even so may Pharaoh have
sons who may be heirs and liable to the same hardening and condemning, who
notwithstanding have not disobeyed to the degree of Pharaohs disobedience; and
it is a certain truth, that amongst all people and persons that have been since
Pharaohs time, none ever came so near to the degree of Pharaohs disobedience,
as these Jews, to whom the Apostle is speaking, as afterward I shall
demonstrate by the circumstances of them both: for that from this casual word
(for), we may easily gather, that this instance of Pharaoh is not foreign to
the Apostles business in hand; but it does suit with it, to help to carry on
his design in vindication of the righteousness of God, both in showing mercy
and in hardening.

The second circumstance to be taken notice of, is the speaker of these words
which is here appropriated to the Scriptures, the Scripture says unto Pharaoh,
which consideration (by the way) may be of instruction to us, of the divine
authority of the Scriptures; for notwithstanding these words are the words of
God, yet the Apostle says, the Scripture-saith, I have raised thee up to make
my power known: what God speaks and what the Scripture says, are the same with
the Apostle, and so it is elsewhere; see Gal. 3.22. where he says, the
Scriptures has concluded all in unbelief, which the same Apostle appropriates
to God, Romans 11.32. So 1 Timot. 5.18. the Scripture says, thou shall not
muzzle the mouth of the ox, which are a part of Gods words: I must take up
this by the way, that sayings of God, and sayings of Scripture are of equal
authority, and it must needs be so, because the sayings of Scripture are the
breathings of God by his spirit, in his servants: see what Peter says to this
2d Peter. 1. last verse 2. Timothy. 3. but why seeing Gods sayings, and sayings
of Scripture are the same, does the Apostle rather choose to say here, the
Scripture says, rather then God says, as before verse the 15. I answer, the
Apostle might choose his way to declare it, that he might provoke the Jews to
consult and consider the whole passage, as they had it in their law; which also
did so greatly concern them; and for the same reason does he so often use this
dialect, the Scripture says, as Romans 10.11. chap. 11.2. and many other places.

2. It is considerable, that whilst he is saying that the Scripture says; he
so renders it in the present tense, he therein gives the Jews to understand,
that this saying is a standing word, not only spoken, but speaking, it is a
speaking Oracle: what was said to Pharaoh still speaks in all ages (the
Scripture says).

I will only add a word of instruction, see the choice esteem the holy Apostle
had for the Scriptures; whilst he reckons the Scripture sayings, and the
sayings of God equal, Gods faithful servants in all ages have been
distinguished by this; their worthy esteem of the Scriptures both in Old and
New Testement, and so had Jesus Christ himself, let us try our selves by this
rule.

2. Here is a rule for all preachers, the Scripture says, the preacher says
well, whilst he says the Scripture says, in testimony to what he speaks, thus
it is written.

The third circumstance to be considered is the subject to whom spoken to
Pharaoh, worthy our consideration upon a threefold account. 1. It was the
common name of all the kings of Egypt successively, but this was not that
Pharaoh which showed that kindness to Joseph, nor he that appointed the
midwives to slay the male-children, this Pharaoh takes another way, for Moses
was 80 years old at this time; Exo. 7.7. 2. As to this Pharaoh, he was an
imperious proud man, his power was great as he was king of Egypt, he had a vast
strength above other nations, and as his power was, so his heart was great; he
acknowledged none in heaven nor earth above him, as appears by his words,
chap. 5.2. who is the Lord that I should obey him: I know not the Lord, or as
Ainsworth reads it, Jehovah is not revealed to me* Pharaoh was a man much
trusting to and leaning on Magicians and Sorcerers, with which that land
abounded above all lands: here was those Ianies and Iamebrise wh^ (as the
Apostle says) withstood Moses: but that Pharaoh was wholely ignorant of
Jehovah, as to a bear knowledge, few think; and there may be some reasons
given, that Pharaoh must needs know him, though he stubbornly and wilfully
withstood him, being thereunto seduced by the Magitians. 3. This Pharaoh is
considered as a type and head of all the great persecutors of Gods people, as
we may perceive from the prophets, where Gods enemies are threatened under the
names of Pharaoh and Egypt: see Esa. 30. Ezekiel. 31. the great man of sin is
called Pharaoh, and the place of his seat Egypt, Revela. 11.8. Sodom for all
debauchery and profaneness, Egypt for oppression and persecution; so that
Pharaoh is to be understood as a head and leader of disobedience.


The 4th circumstance to be considered, is the time when these words were
spoken to him, and that is plain, if well considered; it was after the sixth
plague, the plague of the botches and boyls: which (as some think) were plague
sores, whereof many died, and so this plague was the more dreadful and amazing;
yet in this plague Pharaoh himself is preserved alive: that this was the time,
and not before, we may find by the scope of the context: we find not one word
like this before; the consideration whereof will reflect light upon this
passage, which does inform us, that God had received very high provocations
against Pharaoh, before he thus speaks to him in this severe threatening. Thus I
have opened the preface, and now I come to the words themselves.

Ver. 14. Even for this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might show
my power in thee, and that my name might be declared in all the earth.


The nature of these words are minatory, or a threatening.

Before I proceed to give my sense and understanding upon these words, it may
not be altogether needless to present the common received Opinions, grounded
upon these words of God to Pharaoh, which are as follows; that God before he
created this Pharaoh, did purpose and peremptorily decree his state and
condition of sin and punishment; or that God made him on purpose to show his
power in his destruction; and that this might be justly executed upon him, he
provoked him to be disobedient to all his following applications to him; or
that God intentially hardened his heart, in order to justification.

And 2ly, Not only so, but that Gods proceedings with Pharaoh was a president
and pattern of his first, and second proceedings with all reprobates to the
worlds end, as he, so they are prepared unavoidably before they are born to
their own eternal ruin, without any possibillity of escape: that those who are
under an eternal decree of Reprobation, are under an impossibillity of
repenting or believing; in order to salvation: These are the common notions
deduced from this passage of Pharaoh; though every one will not so freely
declare them, as some of them have done in my hearing.

Now by the Lords help, my design is, and my endeavor shall be, to set free
this portion of Scripture from this unpleasing service in which it is pressed to
serve, contrary to its genius. I have already minded you in my former
proceedings upon this Context, that our Apostle was far enough in this Epistle
or Chapter from a design to assert or maintain absolute and personal Election
or reprobation from eternity; neither could such a doctrine at all contribute
to his business in hand, which was to convince the Jews of their horrid sin in
rejecting and killing Jesus Christ, and rejecting the Gospel; it was not a
likely way, nor a convincing argument to tell them, that they were necessitated
to do what they did, and be what they were, by the power of an absolute decree
from eternity concerning them: would any parent having a disobedient son, and
taking bad courses, use this argument to reduce him, to tell him he was decreed
and ordained to be what he is, and do what he do, by an absolute and
unavoidable decree of reprobation from eternity, I leave the Judicious Reader
to consider; I shall have occasion to speak more of this afterward.

Now in order to Explication, let us enquire into these Five following
Circumstances. 1. To what end does our Apostle now bring in this passage of
Pharaoh, and how does it accomodate his present design to clear up the
righteousness of God against the Jews Objection, which is his present work? 2.
I shall open the nature of Gods purpose and intention concerning Pharaoh, that
is to say, whether Gods purposes are absolute or conditional, because the
Apostle renders it, for this cause have I raised thee up. 3. Show how God
raised up Pharaoh, or what God did for Pharaoh called here raising him up. 4.
What is that power that God threatens to put forth toward Pharaoh in his
dealings with him. 5. What part or parts of Gods Name is declared in the world,
or throughout the earth, in destroying Pharaoh, after that way and manner which
he did.


As to Gods hardening Pharaoh I shall not speak to it on this ver. because it
will fall in more properly in the handling the next verse where that is expressed.

1. How does this passage of Pharaoh accomodate the Apostles design in
justifying Gods righteousness, which is his present work, in answer to the
second Objection?

I answer, his design in bringing in this example and instance of Pharaoh, is
to show, that God is righteous in rejecting the stubborn, disobedient,
rebellious Jews, who had rejected the many applications of God to them, that
is, deprive them of all their outward privileges and the good promised them;
and to cause them to cease to be a body politic, but to be a people dispersed
up and down the world, which is now their present state: the Apostle argues
thus, if Gods will and pleasure was (and that most righteous) to threaten
Pharaoh an obstinate rebellious person, that if he persisted in his rebellion
he would destroy him with a most prodigious destruction, which also was
performed accordingly thereupon; he may justly do so with others of the like
kind, and consequently with you; the Jews whose stubbornness and rebellion
against God, in order to Christ and the Gospel, does clearly resemble that of
Pheraoh; what God did by Pharaoh he may do by you, for the same sins, if you
persist in them as he did* this is the Apostles Argument.

And 2ly, the Apostle might well bring in Pharaoh, he being in order the first
and most notorious in that sin of disobedience against God with a high hand; he
was the head and father and firstborn of all that race, as Abraham was the
head and father of all true believers; and therefore the Apostle cites Gods
dealing with the father to instruct all his following children, of like strain,
what they must look for at his hands: Pharaoh is here brought in as a proper
parallel instance, in his sin and punishment, in these five circumstances. 1.
God sent a loving message to Pharaoh king of Egypt, to desire him to let his
firstborn son Israel go out of his land; so God sent a loving message to the
Jews to invite them to believe in his only begotten son Jesus Christ; but as
Pharaoh refused in slighting terms, so did they. 2. As Pharaoh was a cruel
oppressor to Gods Son the Israelites, so were the Jews to Gods only begotten
Son Jesus Christ, they were cruel unto him; and that Isreal's being in Egypt did
type out the state and condition of Christ is plain. See Matthew. 2.25. that the
Scripture might be fullfilled, I have called my son out of Egypt. 3. As God did
not cease in Pharaohs rejecting the first message, but sends several more, even
so did God to the Jews, he sent servant after servant, till they misused them,
and at last they kill the son; as we have it in the parable. 4. As Pharaoh was
hardened and strengthened in his rebellion against God, by his long-suffering and
patience toward him, so it was with the Jews, for he stretched out his hand to
a gainsaying and a rebellious people. 5. As God at last sealed up Pharaoh in
his obdurateness and impenitency, so did he do with the Jews; forasmuch as
they had shut their eyes and ears, God at last gives them up to a judicial
blindness, as we read Act. 28.26,27.
so that the intent of bringing Pharaoh upon the stage at this time, is to
demonstrate, 1. That God is at liberty to destroy what sort of persons he will,
whether debauched, profane sinners of the Gentiles, merely for such their
wickedness, or whether Jews and Gentiles for rebelling against the gospel and
the tenders thereof. 2. This liberty of his does issue in this, that he will
pitch upon (without respect of persons) Jews and Gentiles, who are wilful
rejecters of his grace and mercy in Jesus Christ, to be the subjects of
reprobation; as well the Jews who are observant of Moses Law as the idolatrous
gentiles;
so that the Apostle does not here bring Pharaoh as a type of personal
reprobation, but a specifical of such a kind, qualified and fitted for
destruction, as he was not personal reprobation, for these Reasons. 1. That
would not have accomodated his grand design in this Epistle, Chapter and
Context, as I have said before, which was to exalt and magnify faith in
Christ, as the alone condition, law and terms of justification, without the
works of the law. Now if the Apostles design had been to assert and maintain
personal Election and Reprobation without any regard to qualifications of the
creature, but the only pleasure of God, he need not strive as he does about
faith and works. 2. This was not the way to humble the Jews for their unbelief
and crucifixion of Jesus Christ, and rejecting the gospel, which was his
present work, as I have said before. 3. If his design had been to exalt
personal Election and Reprobation, without terms and conditions, this Instance
of Pharaoh would not have conduced to his end, because all the world will
grant, that Pharaoh was destroyed for his disobedience and open rebellion
against God, and abusing his long-suffering and mercy, in his many applications
to him; the man has not yet been heard of who has not justified God in his
proceedings with Pharaoh. 4. Besides, it is undeniably plain, that the Apostle
brings in this instance of Pharaoh as a type of national not personal
reprobation, inasmuch as it is by the Apostle applied to the nation of the
Jews. 5. Whatever we may gather or conclude by circumstances, yet we have no
Scripture in the whole book of God that speaks any thing of Pharaoh himself as
reprobated to eternal misery; all Gods threatenings mentioned and executed,
referred to his temporal overthrow, at least in the sea, as the like was before
spoken concerning Esau and Ishmael; though consequently it must follow that he
d^ing in impenitency, it can amount to no less then perdition to eternity; yet
(I say) the Scriptures does not convincingly assert it in any place, though it
is granted on all hands, that Pharaoh is exhibited as a type of those who shall
eternally perish in abusing Gods grace and mercy:
so that we see, this instance of Pharaoh did accomodate the Apostle, if righly
understood; in vindicating the righteousness of God, whilst he is rejecting the
rebellious Jews.

The second thing to be enquired into is; how far the purpose and intent of God
must be understood to be absolute; and how far conditional? whether this
purpose of God as to Pharaohs destruction was so precise and absolute, that no
interveniences of Pharaoh could prevent or hinder it? or whether it were
conditional, that is to say, that if Pharaoh did repent, and at last quietly
yield to let Israel depart his land and not pursue them, whether then this
wrath of God had not been diverted?

The answer of this question is of great concernment to a right understanding
of this passage, in answer whereunto I shall speak a few words in order to the
general opinion of men about this question: It is commonly objected, that
Pharaoh from first to last of Gods sending to him, was in no capacity to
repent, but shut up by God in a state of impenitency. I shall reply more fully
to that, upon ver. 18. yet at present I shall speak a few words; and by the way
I say this, that to suppose that God by virtue of his eternal decree of
reprobation, had laid upon Pharaoh an unavoidable necessity of rebelling
against him, is a high charge against the most pure and righteous God, and
little less then blasphemy to say or think, God does not necessitate that to be
done which his soul abhors to be done: but some moderate men will plead thus;
that he did foresee Pharaohs rebellion and impenitency: I answer, and it is not
my judgment alone, that God cannot in a proper and strict sense be said to
foresee any thing, for he sees all at once as done; but were it understood as
foresight in God, Gods foresight of things done or to be done in the world,
does not necessitate these things to be done: this was a received maxim of old
amongst the learned, and it may be as well said, that God foresaw that he
might have repented; and those mercies that God used with him were not only
proper and effectual mercies to draw Pharaoh to repentance, but did to some
degree effect it by fits; for he did sometimes yield and promise to obey.

But to come closer to the matter; I must say, that unless Gods dealings with
Pharaoh was different from his dealings with all nations, persons and people,
throughout all ages, there must be supposed a condition in this threatening to
him from God, at least employed, if not expressed, that is to say, that unless
Pharaoh would speedily and willingly let Israel depart his land, he would make
known his avenging power in his destruction: now that this is the general terms
of Gods proceedings is plain, whether as to temporal or eternal destructions,
and sometimes the conditions are expressed, as Jer. 18.7,8. If I pronounce evil
against a nation or people, to pluck up, pull down, or destroy, if they repent,
I will repent: so it is supposed on the contrary, as to Eli's house, 1 Samuel
2.30. I said, indeed his house should continue for ever; but now far ^e it from
me; there was a decree gone out, Zeph. 2.2. yet they are exhorted to repent
before the decree bring forth: God swear to Israel to give them the land of
Canaan, but it seems it was conditional, Numb. 14. and so in general, there is
a condition in Gods highest promises and threatenings: and why should we think
this to Pharaoh had no conditions annexed to it? we grant, that the conditions
are not always expressed, but Gods threatenings seem to be positive, as in
Niniveh's case; Jonas himself thought it had been positive; as appears by his
discontent at the appearance of the condition: have we not positive sayings and
determinations, that such and such shall not inherit heaven? 1 Cor. 6. Ephesians.
5. yet they had a condition, except they repent: and have we not reason to
believe, that Gods purpose unto, and concerning Pharaoh, is of the nature of
all the rest in Scripture? but we have some who will venture to tell us, that
God has two wills, a secret and a revealed will or purpose; and that albeit by
his revealed will he would have all men saved, yet his secret will and purpose
is, that the far greater number shall eternally perish: to which I reply, that
were it granted, that God has two wills, a secret and a revealed, yet this I
find that Gods revealed will is the most severe and hasty, and his secret will
most merciful; as appears by all the former instances: his revealed will was,
that Niniveh should be destroyed, whilst his secret will was, that it should
remain, if it did repent.

2ly, As to answer this question, I do say, that God did manifest, that there
was a condition in the bowels of that threatening to Pharaoh; and that God did
seek and labor with Pharaoh to draw him to repentance, and that by proper and
suitable means; the very tendency whereof, was to lead to repentance, namely,
those miraculous judgments on the one hand, and those deliverances on the
other: these did both tend to draw Pharaoh to a compliance with God: it is a
saying of the synod of Dort, that we must more consider the efficacy of the
means in themselves, then their successes; Gods means was sufficient, though
the end was not effected: but some will further plead, could not God have so
handled Pharaoh if he had pleased, that he should have complied, and let Israel
go, without all those plagues and destruction at last: this question requires a
double answer. 1. That the power of God simply considered in it self, without
that regulation which it admits of, could have effected it, for had God refused
to take off any of those judgments till he had permitted Israel to depart,
doubtless it had been done rather then Pharaoh would have suffered his whole
land to be destroyed. But 2ly, If we speak of the power of God regulated,
managed or acted forth by his wisdom and understanding, and in conjunction
with his righteousness, he was not able, or had not power to work Pharaoh to
repentance, or prevent destruction;
for God cannot do any thing unwisely or unrighteously, by the same rule, as he
cannot ly nor deny himself, Esa. 5. as to his vineyard he could do no more then
he had done; whereas in a strict sense he could have done much more, sent many
more prophets, even without number* but it must be understood, he could not
honorably, wisely and righteously have done more: we have such another
instance, 2 Cron. 36.15,16. without remedy God had lest himself no more means
to heal them, so Mark. 6.5. Christ could do no mighty works: such a kind of
speech we have, Act. 27. though God had given S. Paul the lives of all that
failed with him in the ship, yet (says he) except ye abide in the ship ye
cannot be saved: God is not bound so force men to repentance against their
wills, or beyond an usual way; so God could have kept Adam and the Angels from
falling, by his absolute power, without this regulation by wisdom and counsel:
but it is further objected, that if Gods purpose as to Pharaoh, and others, be
conditional, then there seems not to be so much weight or dread in Gods
threatenings, for the execution of them is suspended upon the creatures
repentance; is not this some blemish to Gods honor? I answer, that there is a
sense wherein all the counsels and purposes of God are absolute and peremptory,
unalterable and unchangable, and are like the great mountains that cannot be
removed by men nor Angels; as for instance Gods eternal purpose is to save all
that continue in faith and love to the end, this is unchangable like God
himself.

2. That all unbelieving rebellious rejecters of his gospel grace shall perish
eternally, this decree is as absolute: these are established by a decree that
cannot be reversed: and thus Gods purpose to Pharaoh must stand, which was
this, that if he did still exalt himself against God, and not let Israel go,
then his great power should certainly be seen in his destruction: the condition
of his repentance is employed not expressed.

The third Particular we are to enquire after, is, what God did to Pharaoh
called here, raising him up? what does this raising up refer unto? there are
many understandings and interpretations upon these words; some understands this
raising up to refer to his creation, others understand this raising up to be
his making him King of Egypt: but I shall be much swayed by the original words,
and the consent of the generallity of ancient Authors herein: the greek word
translated raised thee up, signifies (as the learned in the greek tells us) to
raise out of some low state and condition, sometimes out of some sickness or
disease: so it is used, Jam. 5.15. sometimes out of the grave: Pharaoh was (in
a sense) often in the grave, or dead as we say, for his rebellion reiterated:
the hebrew words from whence the Apostle draws this, Latined (stere feci) is
read thus: I have made thee to stand, the vulgar lattin reads it, I have
sustained thee; the Septuagint reads, thou were kept alive; the Chaldee
Paraphrase reads, for this cause have I endured thee or patiently born with
thee: to which agrees verse 22. he endures with long-suffering; God had
raised him up, and delivered him from six several plagues and still saved him
in person alive: the generallity of interpreters as well Calvinists as others,
do receive this as the most proper reading: I have made thee to stand, I have
kept or sustained thee; thou have often been laid low under the sentence of
death, but upon Moseses intercession I have raised thee up, I have rescued
thee, I have forgiven thy disobedience, and tried thee again; yet with this
purpose, that if still after all this, thou should remain obstinate and
rebellious, then the stroke shall be the heavier at last: my power shall be
seen in thy destruction, which shall be so prodigious, that all the world shall
ring of it; it shall be known in all the earth: now that this raising up
Pharaoh could not refer to his creation or raising him to be king, as some
would have it, but must respect the proceedings and dealings of God with him in
this present treaty, appears from these reasons. 1. Because this minatory
declaration of God, is not sent to Pharaoh till after the six plagues; now had
this speech respected his creation, or making him king, or any other precedent
act of God to him, this message would have beeu applied to him in the beginning
of this treaty, when God first sends Moses to him, as an argument to dismiss
his people, but we have not one word of it then: but now when God had exercised
much patience and long suffering under six plagues, and delivering Pharaoh
under all, he now speaks of raising him up, or making him stand: so that we
have good ground to judge, that this raising up respects some latter, past,
special favor, extended to him. 2ly, That this raising up must be so
understood, and not of raising him from nothing in creation, or to the
kingship, because there could be no argument drawn from such his former raising
up, to vindicate Gods righteousness in his so notorious destruction: it would
have sounded very strange and harsh, to have run thus, for this very purpose
have I created thee, that I might show my power in thy destruction, or, for
this cause have I made thee King, that I might so signally destr^y thee: but to
read it thus, for this cause have I heard thy requests by Moses and Aaron, and
taken off my plagues from thee and thy land; for this very purpose, that if
after all this favor shown to thee thou still continue obstinate, thy judgment
might be the heavier and more remarkable; thus understood, God makes him often
and reitarated favors shown to Pharaoh: and his reiterated refusal an
aggravating argument to his great destruction: and I appeal to each judicious
reader, if this construction does not fall in fully with Gods common
proceedings with men in all ages: for this read Judge. 10.12. where God makes
his often delivering Israel, an argument to forsake them who remained still
disobedient. 3. Such a raising up, as we are speaking of, b^ multi-plyed
favors upon Pharaoh, does most clearly compo^t with the Apostles design in
representing Gods dealings with Pharaoh, a platform for his proceedings with
the unbelieving Jews; for God aggravates the sin and just condemnation of the
Jews from his many gracious applications to them: in convincing miracles, and
prophets, see Matt. 11. Matt. 23.34. behold I send you prophets, wisemen, and
scribes; and some of them you shall, or will kill, that upon you may come all
the blood from Abel to Zacharias: from hence it is, that Jerusalem and the
temple is left desolate to this day; and this is the ground to aggravate their
condemnation, not their birth or former privileges, but their latter, and more
immediate favors received from God in the last tenders of his grace: this was
the case with Pharaoh, Gods raising him and preserving him alive under the
former judgments, is the foot of this conditional threatening. 4. If we should
understand this raising up to be his creation, and read it according to that
construction, that Pharaoh even before he was born, was decreed and ordained of
God to be a vessel of wrath, that is to say, that God created Pharaoh, for this
same purpose, that he might destroy him with a remarkable destruction; how
strangely will this represent God to men, whose tender mercies are over all his
works, to be more cruel then any of his creatures are to their kind; for all
creatures are propense in their affections to those who receive their beings
from them, or are propagated by them; they have bowels of pity toward them:
yet by such a construction, God who is the perfection of all bowels of pity is
presented, implacably bent upon the eternal ruin of his offspring, even to
exquisite torments; and that the greater part of mankind lineally descended
from him by Adam, who was the son of God, Luke. 3.38. and this before personal
or actual sin by them committed: this horrid imputation upon Gods name and
nature, by such a construction, may induce us to incline to the other
interpretation of Gods raising up Pharaoh.


The 4th particular which is by course to be enquired into, is, this power that
conditionally is made known in Pharaoh, in case he remains obstinate; some are
ready to think, that this power respects an inward power exercised in keeping
Pharach in his sinful rebellion, or hardening his heart; but I hope I need not
speak to that: the power here intended is most clearly to be understood the
power of Gods wrath in Pharaohs destruction in the Red Sea, this power of God
is exalted in that Song of Moses, Ex. 15.6. thy right hand, O God, is become
glorious in power, speaking of Pharaohs destruction in the sea; notwithstanding
Pharaohs greatness and power, yet the power of God is above him, and can
easily overthrow him: this is that power which God speaks of in the threatening
which is seen in the execution, and that this is the power we may easily
perceive by the repetition of it again, vsr. 22. of this 9th of the Romans,
What if God willing to show his wrath and make his power known? these two
phrases of wrath and power are exegetical, and does one expound the other; Gods
power is seen in the letting forth his wrath, as is also understood, Psa.
90.11. who knows the power of thy wrath? so that we have thus much in this
passage, that if Pharaoh would not comply with God, but persist in his
stubbornness, then, as hitherto he had largely tasted of Gods long-suffering
and mercy, so he thould also as deeply feel his power, crushing him in his
destruction; So much for the fourth particular.

The Fifth and last propounded to be spoke unto is, how the name of God is
declared in Pharaohs destruction, and what part or parts of his name: by the
Name of God in Scripture is sometimes understood his power, his Name is great
unto the ends of the earth; God did not only design the destruction of Pharaoh
upon his obstinacy, but to get himself a name and a common name; Gods special
Name is that which he is known by to Israel in Egypt, and to Pharaoh, See Exo.
3.15. the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of Jaceb; and chap. 5. to
Pharaoh, the God of Israel, or the God of the hebrews; that God is by name the
God of the hebrews, and of his people, shall be declared: the Nations shall
afterward say, oh! what a God has the Hebrews that has so eminently appeared
for them; this we understand may be the special Name of God intended in our
Text, his great love to his people; he is called, the God of Israel, or of the
hebrews.

2ly, Suppose we take this Name of God for his common name, recorded Exodus
34.6. then it respects Gods proceedings with Pharaoh.

There are three syllables of Gods Name loudly declared in Gods dealings with
Pharaoh. 1. The attribute of his mercy, his favor, his preventing grace, in
sparing him for so long a time, in his oppressing of his people; as also in
delivering him from so many plagues, whenas he might have cut him off at his
first slighting Reply to Moses, Who is the Lord that I should obey him? I will
not let Israel go. 2. We have magnified in Gods dealings to Pharaoh the
attribute of his long-suffering and patience: God was eminently known in this
attribute of his long-suffering after receiving many affronts from him,
therefore the Apostle takes special notice of that ver. 22. he endered with
much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted for destruction. 3. The
attribute of his righteousness is magnified in his dealings with Pharaoh, that
he will not always clear the guilty: God shows his justice, righteousness,
holiness, in this eminent passage of Pharaoh, as we have it in that song made
upon that account, Exo. 15.11. this is imputed to God amongst the rest to be
glorious in holiness:
Thus I have briefly past over the 17th verse, by way of explication, I shall
proceed to the explication of the 18th verse also, and then draw up those
doctrines that arises from both.

CHAP. X. Plainly explaining how, and in what fence God may be said to harden
men's hearts, in like manner how God is said to show mercy.
Ver. 18. Therefore has he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will
he hardens.


THe Apostle having in answer to the Jews second objection been vindicating
Gods rigteousness in justifying the heathen by faith, and hardening and
rejecting the circumcision for unbelief and disobedience to the Gospel; which
answer in the two branches of it he had been prosecuting of by the help of two
ancient sayings of God, one to Moses Exo. 33.19. the other to Pharaoh, chap.
9.16. he now in the verse before us proceeds to draw up the whole of both into
a doctrinal result and conclusion, in these words (so then) or therefore he
has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom be will be hardneth: that is to
say, it clearly appears from the premises, that God is at liberty and has
unquestionable right to make his own terms, upon which he will show mercy, or
upon what terms he will reject: at our first view of these words our Apostle
seems to represent God in his proceedings with his creatures as an absolute
monarch, who proceeds and rules by an arbitrary power, his own will being his
law: and so tied to no law nor conditions; and thus also Daniel represents God,
Dan. 4.35. he does whatever he will in heaven and earth: and that this is the
power of an absolute Monarch, appears from what is declared of that great
heathen Monarch Dan. 5.19. whom he would he slew, and whom he would he kept
alive, whom he would he set up, and whom he would he pulled down; and this is
the character of that great king and Monarch, the man of sin, of whom we read
Dan. 11. three times over expressed, verse. 3. 16. and 36. he shall do according
to his will: thus and much more is God represented to do according to his will,
to show mercy to whom he will, and harden whom he will: from whence some gather
personal peremptory and absolute election and reprobation from his own will,
without any law or condition, with respect to the creature; but although the
Apostle does thus seem to represent God as proceeding in mercy and judgment
with his creatures as an absolute Monarch; yet I shall show you wherein there
is an apparent difference between such an arbitrary proceeding and the
proceedings of God, though according to his will in five circumstances. 1. God
in his proceedings with men cannot will or act any thing but what in it self is
righteous, just and equal: whereas it is very incident to men in such a
capacity to err, whilst they rule according to their will; and therefore it
has been the endeavor of all nations to bound the wills of their Governors
by laws and conditions; men themselves being judges, cannot impeach Gods will
with any injustice or unequallity: God appeals to men, Ezekiel. 18. whether his
ways were not just and equal; it was Abraham's maxim, that the judge of all the
earth will do right, to say, that whatever God wills or acts, is just, is a
great truth, and worthy of our faith, and greatly tends to Gods glory: but to
say of things unequal in themselves, yet done or acted by God, are just, is a
great dishonor to him, Gods will cannot be swayed to injustice. 2. Gods will
differs from men's will, because it admits of council, Ephe. 1.11. he does all
things according to the counsel of his own will. 3. Gods ruling by his will
differs from men's ruling by their wills; for men in that capacity are
understood to rule by their wills without a law, but Gods will is formed into a
law, both as to his mercy, and as to his justice; therefore we find little or
no difference between Gods will and Gods law, they are taken one for another in
Scripture, to do Gods word, and to do Gods will is the same thing, therefore
the 19th verse of this chapter by some is read instead of who has resisted his
will? who has resisted his word? 4. Men commonly ruling by their will do
conceal their will, till the time of execution of it, but Gods will is declared
beforehand both to warn on the one hand and encourage on the other. 5. Persons
ruling according to their wills amongst men, are not steadfast, they may will
one thing to day, and another to morrow; those who are the subjects of their
favor or wrath, are not always the same, but Gods will is the same to day, to
morrow, and for ever; the subjects of Gods favor and wrath are the same
yesterday, to day, and forever; his will is, that whosoever sees the son, and
believes in him should have eternal life: and this is the same still, and his
will is, that he that rejects the son shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abides on him: and thus considered, God may be said to show mercy to whom he
will, yet show mercy to none but such as believe in Jesus Christ: and he may be
said to harden whom he will; and yet to harden none but those who first harden
themselves; for after the same manner does the Apostle speak of the spirits
distributions; he divides to every man severally as he will, yet upon
conditions of coveting and seeking of it.


But before I proceed, there is a question which I would speak a few words
unto, in order to clearing our passage, that is, why the Apostle rather choseth
to declare, God showing mercy to whom he will, and hardening whom he will, then
to declare Gods showing mercy to believers, and hardening impenitent sinners and
rejecters of the gospel.

I answer, he speaks after this manner to silence the proud atrogant Jews, who
would impose upon God, and teach him whom or what sort of people he should
accept into his favor, and whom he should reject; these Jews had a tincture of
proud Pharaohs spirit, who thought there was none above him, therefore to
humble them, the Apostle does assert Gods absolute supremacy and
superintendency over man, he does what he will: this was the occasion of this
kind of speaking at the first, Exo. 33.19 to silence Moses, who seems to be so
pertinatiously pleading with God for Israel, above all the nations of the
world; besides God takes him off by telling him, I will have mercy on whom I
will; in showing mercy, I am not bound to give thee an account, though thou art
my friend Moses: and after this manner does David take off and silence the
heathen, who in an undervaluing way were asking, where was his God? David to
set God out of their reach, tells them, Psalm. 115.3. our God is in the heavens,
he has done whatsoever he will, or pleased. 2. He thus speaks, to show that
the law and terms upon which God shows mercy to some, and hardens some, does
not arise from the creatures side, but has the original from himself; it is
founded in the breast of God, without the creatures contrivance or proposition
of the creatures: terms of mercy and terms of wrath are founded in the breast
of the most high. 3. He thus speaks to magnify the righteousness of God, which
was a great part of his present business, he that has an undeniable right to
show mercy to whom be will, and harden whom he will, cannot be charged with
uurighteousness in his proceedings, though he jnstifie the heathen by faith,
and reject the circumcision for unbelief and disobedience:
thus the Apostle concludes that from Gods hardening Pharaoh, he has a right to
harden whom he will: the words are a conclusion made up of three circumstances.
1. That God had an unquestionable right to harden Pharaoh, or else it had not
been done; that God proceeded rightly and righteously in his proceedings to,
and with Pharaoh. 2. That God has the same right of power to harden all such,
as Pharaoh was, this none can question: he that righteously executes one for
murder, may as righteously execute a thousand being such as he was. 3. It is
supposed in this conclusion, that Gods will is to harden none but such as
Pharaoh was, abusers of his mercy and long-suffering-grace in Christ, that is,
his will is to harden those, who first harden themselves:
I remember what a learned man says upon this head, that every breach between
God and the creature, begins first on the creatures side, from the beginning to
the end; God at first made man upright, but he has found out many inventions.

This Doctrine has been plentifully preached throughout the Scriptures, see 2
Cron. 15.2. the Lord is with you whilst you are with him, if you forsake him,
he will forsake you, 2 Cron. 24.20. because you have forsook the Lord, he has
forsook you; so Pro. 1.24. if Christ takes away the talent, it is from them who
hide it, Mat. 25. the great breach between God and Pharaoh begun on Pharaohs
side. 1. In his cruel persecuting and oppressing his only people and firstborn
son Israel. 2. His slighting and contemning God himself, chap. 5.2. the breach
between God and Israel, the people to whom the Apostle speaks, begun on their
side; Matt. 22. ver. 2. 7. chap. 23. to the end. ver. 37. Oh Jerusalem how
often would I have gathered you, but you would not.


But for our more orderly proceedings, after the manner of an Exposition, I
shall first speak something in order to the Explication of these words, and
those circumstances relative to them, and after that, lay down those doctrinal
Conclusions that does rise from them.

And in order to Explication, I shall enquire into Five Circumstances. 1. What
Mercy is here intended when the Apostle says, He has mercy on whom he will.
2. What is this hardening as to the nature of it. 3. How far was God concerned
in hardening of Pharaoh, and likewise how far he is concerned in hardening of
others in general, and what means God makes use of in hardening. 4. What was
the time that God did properly take in hand to harden Pharaoh, was it an act
from eternity, or in time? 5. Was Pharaohs hardening by God irresistible by
Pharaoh, and irrevocable by God? that is to say, was Pharaoh by virtue of Gods
hardening his heart shut up under an impossibility of obtaining any degree of
softness again.


The Answer to these Five Questions will give some light to the passage,
therefore I shall speak a few words to each of them in order, and chiefly to
the third.

1. As to the Mercy here spoken of, it must needs refer to the mercy of
justification and adoption, according to the scope of the Context, accepting
persons upon gospel-terms, which terms are mercy and grace; as the Scriptures
does fully show, Romans 11.30,31. where the Apostle three times calls
Justification by the name of mercy: so also Ephesians. 2.4. God who is rich in
mercy: after this manner does the Apostle speak to Titus, Tit. 3.5. and 1 Peter
1.3. Gods gospel-proceedings are ways of mercy: now the terms of this mercy is
contrived by God himself without the proposal of the creature: thus must the
Apostle be here understood, where he says, he has mercy on whom he will,
whether Jews or gentiles; all the circumcision that obeyed the Gospel, are
said, to have obtained mercy, that is, are justified.

2. What may we understand by hardening, whom he will he hardneth: The Apostle
in this word alludeth to the phrase so often made use of in the relation of
Pharaoh: Pharaoh hardened his heart, sometimes Pharaoh is said to harden his
own heart, and sometimes God is said to harden his heart: this kind of speaking
is metaphorical, alluding, as the Naturallists tells us, to some elementary
bodies; it is proper to steel, stones, and such like bodies to be hard, and the
description of them is by this, they resist the touch; that which is very hard
is known by this, it is not easily penitrated, it very hardly suffers an
impression, whereby the figure or outward shape suffers alterations; that heart
is in like manner called in Scripture a hard heart, that resists the touch,
when no ordinary nor extraordinary means from God will enter, or make any
impression, neither promises nor threatenings, exhortations, instructions,
reproofs nor corrections; no means neither mercys nor judgments take place upon
him: upon this very consideration is Pharaoh's heart called a hard heart,
because he resisted the touch, when Gods kind messages came to him, when Gods
judgments were upon him they did not penitrate his heart, his heart did not
suffer any alteration or impression: we read of Gods complaint of his people
upon this account Zacha. 7.12. that they had made their hearts harder then an
adamant. And how did this appear, they refused the law and words of God by the
prophets, they made no impression: the word here translated bard has a
threefold acceptance. 1. Sometimes to be heavy, drowsy, or slumbring, Romans
11.7. the rest were blinded or hardened, and Doctor Ainsworth reads, instead
of hard, Pharaohs heart was made heavy. 2ly, Sometimes the word is translated
made strong, so Exo. 8.9. Pharaohs heart waxed strong. But 3ly, and commonly,
it is read hardened, as here;
concerning hardness of heart I can concess with the Calvinists, who speaks of
a threefold hardness of heart incident to men. 1. A natural hardness which
every man has naturally upon him, whereby he does hardly suffer the touch of
Gods word, or at most suffer it to make any impression upon the heart:
unconverted persons have naturally impenitent hearts; therefore conversion is a
taking away the heart of stone and giving a heart of flesh: in conversion the
heart is mollified, so as to receive the word, Act. 2. their hearts could
suffer a prick by the word. 2. There is an acquired hardness, there is a
contracted hardness even in those who have had some softness; the Church
complains of hardness of heart, Esa. 63.17. why have thou hardened our hearts
from thy fear? therefore does our Apostle, Heb. 3. exhort the Hebrews to take
heed of being hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. 3. There is a hardness
which is called a judicial hardness, that is, a hardness, as a judgment from
God, and this is the hardness of heart spoken of, and intended in our Text,
whom he will he hardens; this is the hardness inflicted upon the Jews, which
was threatened, Esa. 6. and accomplished, Act. 28.27.


But the third circumstance requires most to be spoken unto, that is, how far
God was concerned in hardening Pharaohs heart? to the end we might come at the
truth in this head. I shall speak to it negatively and affirmatively.

1. Show you, what God did not do to Pharaoh.

1. God did not necessitate Pharaoh to be rebellious and hard hearted against
him, by an eternal and absolute decree, in order thereunto: the Scriptures
says not one word to that purpose any where; and those who says most that
way, takes this hardening of God, to commence from Gods beginning of his treaty
with him, when he says, I will harden his heart, chap. 4.21. hardness of
heart in men is contrary to Gods nature, therefore not necessitated by him so
to be: see how contrary it was to the nature of Jesus Christ, of whom it is
recorded, Mark. 3.5. he grieved or mourned for the hardness of their hearts,
which grief in Christ supposes four things. 1. That Christ had done what he
could to soften their hearts. 2. He declares, that such a frame of spirit,
namely hardness of heart, was greatly contrary to his spirit, or else he had
not been greived for it as he was. 3. They had a sufficiency of means to have
made them soft. 4. They were not necessitated to be so from him.
2ly, Negatively God does not harden by infusing any quallity of hardness into
man, to make a soft heart a hard heart; so says some of those contrary to us,
God hardens none but those he finds hard. Therefore 3ly, God hardens none by
his primary and antecedent will, but by his subsequent will: God did purpose
the hardening Pharaoh conditionally, if he was found hardening his own heart
first, against all his applycations and commands, to let his people go: God
never hardens properly, by changing the nature of a soft heart into a hard,
this is agreed on all hands. 4. God did not harden Pharaoh by any proper means
tending that way, the means that God used to Pharaoh had no tendency that way
in themselves but as they were abused by him; no, they had rather a tendency to
soften his heart, as for instance, all those loving messages sent from God to
him; and, 2ly, They being disobeyed, the dreadful following judgments sent
thereupon. 3. The sparing Pharaoh in person, though destruction to his subjects
and servants. 4. Gods ready harkning to Pharaohs request presented by Moses and
Aaron, as to the removing and taking off those judgments from time to time;

these had all in the nature of them a choice tendency to soften Pharaohs heart,
and not to harden it.

I might add further, the means used might have humbled Pharaoh and made him
to acknowledge the Lord Jehovah; as Gods silencing his Magicians on whom he too
much leaned; making them to confess that in that plague of the lice, that it
was the finger of God: as also his miraculous distinguishing the land of
Goshen, where his people were from Egypt: these particular dealings of God had
conviction and softning in the bowels of them; and we in charity are bound to
believe were intended for that end: but it is objected, did not God tell Moses
before he went to Pharaoh, that he would harden Pharaohs heart, that he should
not let Israel go? to which I answer. In the first place I premise, that there
is much abuse of many places of Scripture, in laying too much stress upon this
word ( shall;) whereas it may, as the learned Gramarians tells us, be as well
read ( will;) and the truth of this appears from the usage of the word will as
well as shall in the history of Pharaoh, Exo. 3.19. I am sure that the king of
Egypt will not let you go, no, not by a mighty hand, and this hardening is
elsewhere in Scripture applied to Pharaoh as the agent, 1 Samuel 6.6. do not you
harden your hearts, as Pharaoh and the Egyptians hardened their hearts and
would not let Israel go: this was a received Opinion even by the Philistines in
that day, so long after: that this hardening lay at Pharaohs door, not at Gods.
2. In answer to this objection God is said to do many things which are done by
him only providentially and subsequentially; as for instance, Psa. 105.25. God
is said to turn the hearts of the Egyptians, to hate his people, and deal
subtly with his servants, and how did God do this? not positively but
providentially, as be blessed them with increases under their bondage, so that
they grew stronger then they, verse. 24. and from hence arose their hatred: and
it might as well have occasioned them to love them, and fall in with them: how
often is this a ground of love? is any thing more usual then (as we say) to
worship the rising sun, at least to give fained love and obedience to a strong
and prevailing enemy: yet this wrought in them hatred to them because they
were so strong; in this sense God is said to send Joseph into Egypt Genesis
45.7.8. and in this sense God is said to bid Shimei curse David, 2 Samuel 16.10.
the assembly says, it was by a secret command of providence; and in this sense
our Lord is said to come to give division, not peace on earth; yet directly he
brought peace on earth, Luke 2.14. thus Christ came to make seeing men blind,
John 9.39. yet to open blind eyes: the Scriptures does often speak of the
accidental and subsequent effects of ministration; this Solomon takes notice
of, Pro. 1.32. the prosperity of fools shall destroy them: whereas prosperity
may as well lead to repentance and love to God, according to what our Apostle
speaks, Romans 2. the goodness of God leads thee to rep^tance: but we see the
same means may bring forth different effects, as Christ is set as well for the
fall as the rising again of many in Israel, Luke 2.34. the hardening of Pharaoh
by God is not primary and antecedently designed by God in his application to
him, but accidentally as I shall show you more clearly afterward. 3. In answer
to the objection I say, that God in declaring to Moses that he would harden
Pharaoh, supposes a condition, that is to say, that if Pharaoh did not by all
his messages and applications to him, at last let his people go, but harden his
own heart under all his judgments, signs and wonders, that then at last God as
a judgment would harden Pharaohs heart, so as he should pursue them to his own
destruction: so that though it is said by God I will harden Pharaohs heart, yet
God did not do it primarily, nor necessarily; neither did the means that God
made use of necessarily tend to hardening but rather to soften.


But then it may be replied, seeing those means used by God to Pharaoh had a
more proper tendency to soften then harden, why then did not God as well say to
Moses, I will soften Pharaohs heart, as well as say, I will harden it: to which
I answer, that notwithstanding the proper tendency of those means, yet God who
sees the end and effects of all means, and cannot be mistaken, did foresee that
these means would have upon him a contrary tendency, by reason of Pharaohs base
proud heart: therefore I will harden: a wise man may foresee, that the bright
shining warm sun will make the dunghill stink: though the same sun will make
the flower smell swee^. 2. God might thus say, I will harden, as he had an eye
to the end of Pharaohs state, for it was so at last from God. But 3ly, it is
replied, could not God have taken such a course with Pharaoh as to soften him
effectually, and make him let Israel go, and so prevented his own ruin? I said
something to the answer of this before. To which I refer the reader: if we
consider Gods power regulated by the attributes of his wisdom, and
righteousness, and justice, he did what he could to reduce Pharaoh as he is
said in effect to do for his vineyard, Esa. 5.4. God is not bound to proceed by
his absolute irresistible power in converting, nor restraining sinners: this
corrupt notion and expectation from God has been the ground upon which many
have miscarried: (but thus it is), God has made man a rational creature,
capable to choose the good and refuse the evil; God laid before Pharaoh life
and death; life if he would let Israel quietly go, death if he still held them:
there Pharaoh had his choice of these two, as all men have, where the gospel
comes: this is Gods way, Deuteronomy. 30.15. verse. 19. and God takes it for granted,
that they have power to choose; therefore (says he) choose ye: this was his
proceedings with Pharaoh:
so that in order I shall draw up the result of this head. 1. That God hardened
Pharaohs heart, that is, accidentally stired up and awakened the baseness of
his heart, by sending that message to him; to let Israel depart his land, which
was so much against his proud and covetous interest, if God had been pleased
that Israel should still have abode slaves to him, we had not heard nor seen
the relation of Pharaohs rebellion; as now we do: thus God was concerned in
hardening Pharaohs heart, as he crossed his will by declaring his own. 2. God
accidentally hardened Pharaohs heart by declaring himself above him in power,
that must needs provoke proud Pharaoh to hear of a Jehovah above him. 3. God
hardened Pharaohs heart accidentally by deferring the full manifestation of
avenging power, so long as he did; this made Pharaoh grow strong, and thought
he should yet be able to deal with him: as Solomon says, Eccles. 8.11. because
judgment is not speedily executed upon evil doers, their hearts are fully set
in them to do evil. Thus a parent sometimes can say, I have spoiled you by my
indulgence shown to you. 4. God hardened Pharaoh accidentally by his
condescending to remove his judgments so soon, and at his request, and that
this act of God hardened his heart you have declared in the history, when God
had taken off this or that plague: it is as the effect said, Pharaoh hardened
his heart.


Thus much for the third thing to be enquired into, upon which I have been more
long then ordinary.

I now proceed to the fourth circumstance, which is more particularly.

4. The time of Gods hardening Pharaoh positively, for we must needs grant a
twofold hardening of Pharaohs heart. 1. The first of which is charged upon
himself, Pharaoh hardened his heart or made his heart strong, or as some
translations reads, Pharaohs heart hardened it self: now this first hardening
is from God accidentally, as has been shown. As he is said to do many things
providentially. But 2ly, we have a more special and more positive hardening
which is appropriated to God, he is said to harden Pharaohs heart, not as
before accidentally but intentionally and judicially; and that there is such a
hardening imputed to God we may see in other cases and persons, that God does
shut up in and under blindness and hardness of heart to their own
destruction, as the fruit of sin and rebellion against God: Thus God is said to
harden Sihon king of Heshbons heart, made his heart obstinate to his own
destruction: so also it is said of those cities that made war against Israel,
Joshu. 11,20. God hardened their hearts to their own destruction and ruin, and
many more who were immediately hardened by God.


Now the Question is, when God did thus in special harden Pharaohs heart,
whether by purpose from eternity in the beginning of the treaty of God with
him, or after he had obstinately stouted it out against God a long time. I
answer, that the Scripture does no where give us one word of Gods eternal
purpose or previous decree, by virtue whereof Pharaoh was necessitated to this
obdurateness against God: our enemies will not say that, I mean those of them
who have writ about this controversy; neither did God by any of his dealings
with Pharaoh properly provoke him to be hardened, but rather had they (as I
have shown you) a tendency to soften him: but the proper time of this judicial
hardening Pharaoh by God more immediately, was after he had tried him under six
several plagues and their removals under all these six judgments: the relation
runs thus: Pharaoh made his heart strong, or Pharaohs heart hardened it self:
but after the sixth plague the style is changed, and chap. 9.12. God is said to
harden Pharaohs heart: it is true, that God did betimes, even before Moses went
to Pharaoh, predict this judgment, which afterward was executed; he did tell
Moses, chap. 4.21. that he would harden Pharaohs heart, that is conditionally,
if he first hardened his own, and would not let his people go: but this
foretelling of it or threatening of it, does not prove, that it was immediately
done; it is usual for God to foretell things before they come to pass; God as
well at first foretells Exo. 3. of Isreal's borrowing jewels of the Egyptians,
which was the last thing in order to be done, and at first he bids Moses tell
Pharaoh, he would slay his firstborn, chap. 4.21.22.23. but with this proviso,
if he did not let his firstborn Israel go: even so he bids Moses to let
Pharaoh know in like manner, if he did not let them go, he would harden his
heart to his own destruction, I will punish his natural and his acquired
hardness with judicial hardness: the sum of which is to punish sin with sin;
as God threatens Ephraim, Hose. 8.11. because he made many altars to sin,
altars should be to him for sin, that is, God would give up Ephraim to that sin
he delighted; and that is usual for God to foretell his judgments before he
execute them: see concerning the old world, Genesis 6. an end of all flesh is
before me, I will destroy men: yet after God had determined to destroy men, he
waits a 120 years: so as to the destruction of Jerusalem he gives 40. years to
try them: so after he had resolved conditionally to harden Pharaoh, he stays a
considerable while till he had hardened himself and rebelled against him with a
high hand under six plagues; and that the threatening given out chap. 4.21.
refers to this time and latter hardening appears, if we will consider chap.
8.29. where we have that special warning, ver. 29. such as we find not before,
let not Pharaoh deal deceitfully any more, implying, that Pharaoh had dealt
deceitfully before, had promised and not performed; and it is emphatically
added, Pharaoh hardened his heart this time also: Now after these six plagues,
and Pharaohs six hardenings on his side, we have this emphatical threatening
chap. 9.14. I will at this time, or turn, pour out all my plagues upon thy
heart, which some understand of his hardening by God: so that this second
hardening by God is the fruit and effect of his voluntary and obstinate
hardening himself before: Now in speaking to this second sort of hardening, it
will be needful to enquire into the difference between the second and first,
seeing God is concerned in both, either accidentally or intentially; it has
already been made plain, that God did gradually harden Pharaohs heart by his
former applycations unto him, but what did God do more now then before to
Pharaoh: from whence it is now said, God hardened his heart, whereas before it
is said, Pharaah hardened his own heart? I answer as to the negative part, it
has been spoken unto under the former head, that God does not do any thing
positively, much less forcibly to make the heart hard; neither does he infuse
any hardening quallity whereby he hardens soft hearts; but that which we are to
understand as to matter of fact on Gods side is this, that God does harden by
withdrawing those influences of his spirit that should soften; as withdrawing
the sun, makes the earth dark: the Naturallists tells us, that hardening is
occasioned in a natural way by withdrawing the moisture out of any body or
substance, whereby it is condenst and made hard, and stiff and unyeilding to
the touch, as the earth also becomes hard like iron, by the withholding its
moisture by showrs.

Thus withdrawing of the influences of Gods spirit makes the soul dark and hard
it seems to be supposed and granted in Scripture, that the spirit of God
attends men ordinarily in striving with them, as they are considered in a
general capacity, by which means they are not so bad as otherwise they would
be, Genesis 6. my spirit shall not always strive with men: it had strived and
would yet strive, but not always strive: so that the wicked old world had this
means, the spirit; and whereas we read, the spirit shall not always strive
with men; the greek turns it, my spirit shall not always continue with these
men: it was one of the blessings that God bestowed upon rebellious Israel a
long while in the wilderness, that his spirit was with them, Nehem. 9.20. he
gave them his good spirit to guide them, till they grieved and rebelled against
it: this was the blessing which God entrusted Saul with, whilst he was
obedient, 1 Samuel 16.14. but upon his disobedience God took his spirit from him,
and an evil spirit came on him in the room of it: wicked men are attended with
good motions of the spirit, but for great sins God sometimes withdraws it from
them; and this withdrawing is called giving up persons: see that eminent place,
Psalm. 81.11.12. they would not hearken so he gave them up, or as Ainsworth
reads, he lot them go away in the perverseness of their own hearts: or to
walk in their own counsels: this was Pharaohs case, he had grieved, quenched,
rebelled against the motions of Gods spirit, which had several times instigated
him to be willing to let Israel go: Now he is given up to follow his own will
and counsel without control: I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the
spoil: Thus God is said to do with those wicked persons of which we read, To.
1.24. God gave them up, he would possess them no longer: now the fruits and
effects of his giving up or withdrawing the spirit, is very dreadful.

As first, the fruits of it is a heaviness and fatness of heart, a very great
indisposednesse of heart to hear what God or his servants shall speak to them
for their own good: this was the case with Elies sons for their horrible sin in
causing Gods ordinances and sacrifices to stink, 1 Samuel 2.25. they hearkened
not to their fathers instructions, because the Lord would slay them: God as a
judgment had shut their hearts from hearing: such an effect we read of to
Rehoboham, 1 Kings 12.15. he had no disposition to take the council of the old
men which would have been his safety, but the young men's to his own ruin: such
an instance we have Deuteronomy. 2.30. therefore Pharaohs hardening his heart, and not
hearkening, are put together all along. The second effect of this judicial act
of God, is an implacable hatred to Gods most faithful servants, who seeks their
souls good: when Saul had lost the spirit of God, and the evil spirit was upon
him, he fought to kill David, whom he was forced to say, was more righteous
then he, 1 Samuel 16.17. cha. 8.11. Saul cast a javelin at him, with a design to
kill him, whilst he was pleasing him with his music: it is considerable that
after this hardening of Pharaoh, Ex. 10.28. he forbids Moses to come any more
into his presence upon pain of death; see thou see my (...) no more, for in the
day thou see my face thou shall dye: this was the state of the hardened Jews,
Mat. ^. stoned one, killed another, yea Christ himself at last. 3. Such a
person has no sense of sin when committed: a judicial hardened sinner is
insensible, whereas a true-hearted person is sensible of the least sin, and
has checks in his conscience upon that account: the Apostle speaks of some 1 Timothy 4.2. who have their consciences seared with a hot iron, and to the Ephesians.
chap. 4.18. the Apostle speaks of some, that are past feeling: a hardened soul
is under the withdrawings of Gods spirit, is insensible of sin, therefore the
author to the Hebrews, exhorts them to have a care, and use the means to
perserve them from being hardened by the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3. Romans 1.
is full to this purpose. 4. Persons thus withdrawn from, are delivered up to
themselves, do much abuse Gods mercies; all the mercy of God to such a person
does further harden him in order to his own destruction: thus it was with
Pharaoh, and such we read of Romans 2. who are impenitent, who take advantage
thereby to treasure up wrath against the day of wrath: all the mercies of God
to Israel after his withdrawing himself from them, still hardened them more and
more, even those 40. years that God waited upon them. 5. Such withdrawings or
deliverings up is followed with a stupid blindness in their understandings,
that they cannot foresee their own danger that waits for them: thus it was with
Pharaoh, Exo. 14.4. I will harden Pharaoh that he shall pursue he sees, nor
fears no danger, but on the contrary promises himself to overtake and divide
the spoil: so it was with those cities, Joshua 11.20. it was of the Lord to
harden their hearts, that they should come against Israel in battle, that he
might destroy them utterly; yet this they could not see, their own ruin was
hidden from their eyes: so it was with the Jews, whilst under this state, Romans
11.7,8,9,10. they were blinded, according to David's imprecation: the same word
is used for hardening and blinding:
these and many more are the sad effects of Gods withdrawing his spirit, and
the influences thereof, and it may well be said in this case as God speaks to
Israel, Hose. 9.12. yea, woe be to that person from whom I depart, the truth of
it is, the heart of man is so bad and ill inclined, that God needs do no more
then give him up to his own heart: and he will soon act all wickedness with
greediness Act. 7.42, when God gives Israel up, they presently worship the host
of heaven; this considered we may well allow of it as a choice mercy, namely
restraining grace; for by this means men are not so bad to themselves or others
as they would be: if God do but say to Ephraim, let him alone, he will be bad
enough, Hose. 4. if God let a soul alone, it will undo it self to all eternity.
David seems to intimate by his prayer and expostulation with God, Psalm. 51.
that the foundation of his gross falling, was not only the inclination of his
nature in which he was concerned, but the withdrawing Gods spirit and the
influences thereof in him, which makes him so strongly request, that God would
not again take his holy spirit from him, but uphold him or sustain him with his
spirit: he is sensible, that there lay his defect before: Now it is remarkable;
and the consideration of it is much for our instruction, that this withdrawing
the spirit of God, and the influences thereof, was never the portion of any,
but as the fruit aad effect of great disobedience to the motions of Gods spirit
within, and the word without: any body will readily grant this a truth, as to
Pharaohs case; God takes great pains with him before he delivered him up to
this hardening, and it is as clear concerning the Jews, Christ would have
gathered them as a hen gatheneth her chickens under her wing, but they would
not, Mat. 23. and that this delivering up is no other then the fruit and
effects of provoking sin and disobedience, see these places following, Psalm.
81.11. but my people would not harken to my voice, Israel would have none of
me: so I gave them up to the hardness of their hearts, or their hearts lusts:
Act. 7.42. after the children of Israel had made a calf, ahd thereby greatly
provoked God to anger, and this after God had newly delivered them with a high
hand out of Egypt, and brought them through the Red Sea, then God turned and
gave them up: see Romans 1.24. therefore God gave them up: see verse 26. for this
cause God gave them up. So Ephraim is given to Idols, therefore God lets him
alone: when persons sin against light, it is the ready way to forfeit their
light: this was the case with the Jews, their malice was so great against
Christ, that they contrary to their own reason and experience, accuse him of
casting out devils by Beelzebub the prince of Devils; notwithstanding their
children must cast them out by the name of Jesus: after this, Christ speaks to
them in parables, to the end they might not see or understand, to fulfill the
prophefy of Esaiah, chap. 6. recited, Mat. 13. the ground of Gods shuting their
eyes, and blinding and hardening their hearts, was but the effects of their
first shutting their own eyes and ears, as you may read, Act. 28.27. Solomon
says, Pro. 29.1. he that being often reproved hardens his neck, shall suddenly
be destroyed, and that without remedy: all that has been added, confirms the
truth of the fourth head, that Gods hardening Pharaohs heart, was Gods judicial
act upon Pharaohs hardening his own heart, under the first six plagues, and so
we have done with the fourth particular.

We now proceed to the fifth and last circumstance to be spoken unto, by way of
explication, which is this, whether this second hardening is unavoidable in its
approach, or irrecoverable when under it? I shall speak a few words to both
these particulars.

And to the first, I answer that God even in this his approach to harden in
judgment, is very willing to be hindered by the creatures meeting him by
humiliation and compliance: this appears even in this second hardening of
Pharaoh; though God is said to harden his heart, yet still his further
proceedings are conditional, as appears, Exo. 10.4. if thou refuse to humble
thy self, and let Israel go, then I will proceed: now if Pharaoh had been shut
up in and under an impossibillity of relenting and humbling, then this had not
been propounded as a Medium: for it had been rather to have insulted over
Pharaoh in this his deplorable condition. to have stirred him up to do that
which he was in no possibility to perform, which men are not usually found to
do: if I shall see a person in an invincible strong place, from whence he
cannot get out, and then make him promises upon condition of his coming out;
what is this but to insult over his bondage? which God does not do: if God
invites Pharaoh to let Israel go upon promise of impunity, he well knows it was
in his power yet to let them go, though not so easily as he could at first
invitation, because every act of rebellion makes the heart yet harder and
harder: therefore God promises Pharaoh, if he would yet now at last let Israel
go, he would not bring the locusts, or any other plague; we read that the
worst and most rebellious of mankind are still sent unto by God; who could be
worse then the old world, for whom God was grieved at the heart, and repented
that he made man? yet he strives with them by his spirit in the ministry of
Noah a 120. years: so also 2 Cron. 36.15. he had compassion after all that
hardness contracted by them, as appears by their abusing his prophets, see
Ezekiel. 12. we there read of a rebellious house; who had hardened themselves to
a high degree, having eyes and see not, ears and hear not, yet still God uses
means with them; and that with this proviso, ver. 13. it may be they will
consider though they be a rebellious house, God knew that they were not in an
incapacity to consider and return; such a hardened people are not debarred of
means of consideration, the wicked old world were in a capacity of returning to
the last moment of the 120. years so long as the patience of God waited: God
waited after he is said to harden Pharaohs heart under four judgments more to
provoke him to prevent his utter destruction: and besides all this, it appears,
Pharaoh was not put into an incapacity to repent, because after all this
hardening he did repent, though it did not hold with him chap. 9.27. (says he)
God is righteous, I and my people are wicked; and however some may judge of
this repentance, had it been continued in and not repented of, it would have
saved Pharaoh from destruction: so again cha. 10.16. I have sinned against the
Lord and against you; So that God did not harden Pharaoh irrecoverably, so as
that it was impossible for him to repent: neither was Israel so shut up after
the death of Christ, but that they might still repent; for we read of three
thousand of them who were guilty of that great sin of killing Christ, converted
in one day, Acts. 2. by Peter's sermon: and that they are not irrecoverably shut
up by virtue of that sentence, and that hardening and blinding judicially by
God is granted of all sides: for they shall yet in time have soft relenting
hearts given them, and their blinding and hardening is but temporal: the first
prophecy of it Esa. 6. had in it an (until) and Romans 11. they shall be grafted
in again; if they abide not still, in unbelief; and this must needs follow,
unless we grant, that Pharaoh or the Jews had committed that unpardonable sin,
which I suppose none will say: if this be so, then let us take up this
consideration by the way, that if Pharaohs hardening was not irresistible nor
irrecoverable, how can Pharaohs hardening be a meet type of absolute personal
irrecoverable reprobation? except you will plead for a personal conditional
reprobation, seeing all these threatenings against Pharaoh are conditional, if
he do not repent to let Israel go.

2. He was in a capacity to repent even under the worst hardening till his
utter destruction; so that Pharaohs case will not do that service, that it is
by most summoned to do, in the point of personal and absolute irrecoverable
reprobation: but it may be objected, does not this arguing seem to lessen the
judgment of Gods hardening Phara^ heart as if it were not so great as indeed it
is? for if it be not irresistible nor irrecoverable, how is there that dread in
it? I answer that notwithstanding what of this kind can be said, yet it is a
great, yea, the greatest of all judgments that can be inflicted upon a person,
to be hardened by God, and that for these five reasons. First, because this
hardening by God is the fruit and effect of the highest provoking sin, it is
sin punished by sin, to be given over to commit sin with despite, which before
he committed with regret and trouble but now with all greedynesse; see Romans
1.28. it is to be given up to a reprobate mind. 2. This hardness of heart
from God though there may be a possibility to withstand it or recover out of
it, yet know, it is unspeakable hard, next to an impossibility, as it must
needs follow: for every act of impiety does still harden more and more: it was
very hard for Pharaoh to attain to that degree of relenting which he did attain
unto, but yet more hard to keep it upon his heart: custom in sin begets a
second nature: see 13. Jer. 23. can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the
leopard his spots? no more can they learn to do good who are accustomed to do
evil. 3. No person so near, so liable, and ready to fall into his own
destruction as a hardened sinner; he is very near to ruin: who (says Job,
cha. 9.4.) has hardened himself against God, and prospered? muchless can they
think to prosper whom God hardens. 4. To be hardened by God is the greatest of
judgments; because commonly it is the punishment of the abuse of mercy, and no
judgment so severe as that which follows the abuse of mercy. 5. This hardening
by God is a great judgment as it is a token of Gods highest displeasure, see
the woes that go along with it upon the Jews, Mat. 23.
that which yet remains in order to a close of the 17. and 18. verses, is, to
sum up those Doctrines that flow from the words thus explicated, which may be
many; but I shall but little more then name the most of them.

1. From verse. 17. for the Scripture says unto Pharaoh, from this preface
this Doctrine offers it self to our consideration. 1. Doctrine, That the
sayings of God are not less divine or authoritative, because they are written.

The writing of Gods sayings does not take away from them divine authority, but
they are as if God had spoken them at present by his own mouth; The Apostle
might as well have said, God says unto Pharaoh, yet he chooses to say, the
Scripture says.

This Doctrine is very well worth our consideration in this day in which we are
fallen; but I shall but briefly touch it, because I spoke something to it in
the explication: it is plain these words were spoken by God, Exo. 9. yet the
Apostle refers us to the Scripture; and this is usual with the Apostle in
other places: see Gal. 4. the Scriptures says, cast out the bond woman, though
God spoke it: so 1. Timo. 5.18. the Scripture says, thou shall not muzzel the
mouth of the ox, whereas God spoke it; So that to say the Scripture says, and
to say, God says, are the same; and indeed, why should any body question the
truth of this doctrine? are the sayings of Kings and Monarchs of less
authority because they are written and made into a law? holy men appropriates
that to the Scriptures that is proper to God himself, as convincing,
converting, clensing, quickening: they are able to make the man of God wise
unto salvation, 2 Timo. 3.15. able to build up, and give an inheritance amongst
them that are sanctified, Act. 20.

From hence we may note. 1. That those that slight and undervalue the
Scriptures are not guided by the same spirit that the Apostle Paul was: there
are some that will cry up Gods speakings, yet undervalue the Scriptures; nay,
preferring revelations and imaginary speakings of God before the Scriptures:
Holy St. Peter, who we are sure was guided by Gods spirit was of another mind;
who exalts the Scriptures above the real speaking of God to him in the mount,
and calls the Scriptures a more sure word of the prophets. 2. Prize the holy
Scriptures as sayings of God himself, obey them and tremble at them: as if God
were speaking himself with an audible voice, so much for the first Doctrine.


2. Doctrine drawn from the manner of Gods applycation to Pharaoh, the
Scriptures says unto Pharaoh: the greek word says, it is to speak or treat
with.

Doctrine, That Gods way even with very wicked men is to entreat them, not
force them to obedience: Though it is in Gods power to force, compel and crush
them, yet he chooses to treat with them; and invite them by his sayings to
obedience this is a truth from the beginning, even with Adam in the garden,
when he had sinned and forfeited his life, without a word to be spoken to him,
yet God reasons or words it with him; and this is Gods way all along to Saul,
to David, to Solomon, to the Jews: God is speaking before striking, but I shall
say no more to this.

3. Doctrine, which is more general from the text; That God almighty does
greatly concern himself in his peoples afflictions and oppressions. No father
or mother does more cordially and sensibly concern themselves for their natural
children, who are most dear and tender to them, then God does for his: God for
their sakes will interpose with the greatest men and Monarchs on earth, and
make them to know, that he is above them, when they abuse his firstborn: this
is the very ground of Gods sending Moses to Pharaoh; he had a perfect and deep
sense of their afflictions, I have seen, I have seen, (says God) their
afflictions: it is recorded Judges 10.16. that his soul was grieved for the
afflictions of his people: this is the cause propounded why he sends to the
nations, Zecha. 2.8. because they had been afflicting his people who were as
dear to him as the apple of his eye; and so we have it, Esa. 63.9. where he
speaks of this very affliction; if we observe the context, in all their
afflictions he was afflicted with them: God has a simpathy with them in their
afflictions: it is as if he had afflicted himself: it is true, God many times
seems as if he did not regard the afflictions of his people: he bears long with
their enemies, as in this oppression in Egypt; he suffered them to be evil
entreated 400. years, Act. 7.6. as afterward he suffers them to be afflicted
70. years in Babylon, yet this is not because he did not perfectly see and take
notice; but because God has a work to perform both upon his people and upon
their en^mies: and when he has performed his work upon both, when his people
are fit for deliverance, and his enemies sins are full, Genesis 15. then God steps
in precisely, the very same day, Israel must not stay a day longer then needs
must in Egypt; God has great judgments to bring forth upon the nations, upon
this very account, for afflicting and oppressing his firstborn: in special
upon Mystery Babylon, for his peoples sakes, to avenge the blood of his
servants, this doctrine affords two words to two sorts of people. 1. To
persecutors and oppressors of Gods people; know it is a dangerous thing to be
found so doing, wronging Gods firstborn son, such who are so near and dear to
God: woe (says our Lord) to the world because of offenses to his little ones,
and it is not the height or greatness of men or powers that can excuse them;
God speaks to the great and high King Pharaoh in this case, and wherein he
dealt proudly, he made him to know that he was above him. 2. To those whose
portion it may be to be oppressed or persecuted.


I shall only name three words of direction to you. 1. I know for certainty,
that God takes special notice of all your wrongs and injurys, even the least of
them. 2. He sees such a state to be best for you for a time. 3. That state
shall not last a day longer then the set time, see Exo. 12.41.


4. Doctrine, I have raised thee up, or delivered thee, according to the former
interpretation. That every act of impunity and reprieve from judgment
misimproved, does directly contribute to the fitting and preparing such a
person for wrath.

Gods very purpose in reprieving of Pharaoh six times, was, that if after all,
he did not humble himself, and let Israel go, he would make him examplarily the
subject of the power of his wrath, so as that all the world should ring of it;
and he would place the foot of his proceeding in wrath upon his kind and
deliberate treatys with him. Ainsworth reading this text Exo. 9.15. does
reflect much light upon this doctrine; so also does the Chaldee paraphrase,
which I shall not again repeat, inasmuch as you have it before in the
explication: this was Gods argument with his people Judge. 10.11. seven times I
delivered thee: this is Gods argument with David, 2 Samuel 12.8. this is the
argument with Hezekiah, Esa. 38. he had not rendered to God according to the
benefit, and this with Pharaoh: oh what a dangerous state it is for persons or
nations to be rebellious under reiterated mercies and deliverances: no wrath is
raised so high as that which is raised on this foundation: and so I will leave
each person to apply this Doctrine, it may be of instruction to each of us.

5. Doctrine, That I might make my power known; in the which is the power of
his wrath; I note. That as God is incomparable in his long-suffering, patience
and goodness, so he is as transcendant and unconceiveable in the power of his
wrath.

As his thoughts of mercy is above our thoughts and imaginations, Esaias. 55. so
also is the power of his wrath as much above our reach: Psalm. 90.11. who knows
the power of thy anger? see how the prophet Nahum takes notice or both these in
God, Nahum 1.3, slow to anger, great in power, will by no means olear the
guilty: of this power and longsuffering we have the Apostle speaking
afterward. verse 22. there are two natures in God, Esa. 42. he is a lamb, he
is a Lion, from hence learn to make peace with him before his wrath be kindled,
Psalm. 2. last.

And that my name might be declared. 6. Doct. That God almighty designs in his
de^ings with men, the exalting his own name, to make his name known, to get
himself a great name. He aimed at this in the destruction of Pharaoh, Exo.
14.17.18. Neh. 9.9.10. I will but name this. 7. Doctrine. That mercies
exercised and judgments executed does both tend to exalt Gods name.

God had a double work in hand whereby his name should be declared in all the
earth, in the saving Israel, and the destro^ing of Pharaoh: God gets himself a
great name by saving his people in such a miraculous way, and he gets himself a
name also by destroying Pharaoh, see Esa. 63. verses 12, 14. which is eminent
to this purpose, Psa. 83. latter end.

But some may say, how is Gods Name declared in his proceedings with Pharaoh?

I answer, First, by his proceedings with Pharaoh to declare himself the God of
his people, the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: this is that Name that God
would have exalted and magnified: See Exo. 3.15. this is my Name for ever, and
my memorial to all generations: God is willing to be reckoned and named the god
of his faithful servants, Heb. 11. he is not ashamed to be called their God; he
is not asha^e^ that is, he is very forward so to be called; this is the name
that Moses in his Song does endeavor to exalt, Exo. 15.2. he is my God, my
fathers God: he is my God (says Moses) I will prepare him a habitation, my
fathers god I will exalt him; as if he should say, God has in this act shown
himself in special the God of his people; and this is no small privilege in
David's sense, Psa. 48. this god is our god, Psa. 67.6. God even our God shall
bless us; It was a singular strain of faith in them, as it was in Thomas, John
20.29. when he said, my Lord, my God propriety in God is a choice privilege;
it is the privilege of overcoming Saints, Rev. 21.7. I will be their God; as
he is their father in order to simpathy, so their God in order to power of
salvation and deliverance: Oh then the happy state of such a people who are
under such favor and love and care of such a God; as the Psalmist says, Happy
are they who are in such a case, whose God is Jehovah, Psalm. 146.5. Happy is he
that has the God of Jacob for his help: this Name of God is that Name which he
designs should be known in all the earth, declaring therein, that he is well
able to save his people out of the hands and power of their most potent enemies.

Verse. 18. affords us these Doctrines following.

1. Doct. That God was unquestionably righteous in his whole passage and
dealings with Pharaoh of old. The Apostle brings this passage to vindicate Gods
righteousness as to his proceedings with the Jews; to show, that God is not
unrighteous in shutting up rebellious sinners in the obduratnesse of their own
hearts; for he was just in what he did to Pharaoh: these words (as I have shown
you in the explication) are an inference by way of application; the Jews
themselves would easily grant, that Gods proceedings with Pharaoh were not only
righteous but very gracious in the whole treaty with him.

There were six circumstances in Gods dealings with Pharaoh that renders his
last proceedings with him righteous. 1. Pharaoh before God sent to him, was a
cruel oppressor of Gods people, who were near and dear to him, his firstborn.
2. God offered implicitly to forgive all that had been past, if now at last he
would discharge his people out of their slavery at his request. 3. God waits
upon him a considerable time, sends several messages, and made many gracious
applycations unto him, by his special and signal servants, Moses and Aaron; he
sends six sentral messages unto him before he inflicted that spiritual
judgment of hardening him. 4. God never denied or refused his request put up
to him by Moses for the removal of those judgment that were upon him. 5. After
so many returns to his former rebellions, upon the removal of the stroke, yet
after all, God offers him, that if yet he would humble himself, and let Israel
go, he would send no more plagues, chap. 10.4. 6. In Gods inward judicial
hardening him, by withdrawing his spirit, he did not leave him in an utter
incapacity to repent, as has been before proved in the explication:
there is not such a passage in all the Scriptures, wherein the long-suffering
and patience of God is so set forth, as in this of Pharaoh: the Apostle might
well say, he endured with much long suffering the vessels of wrath, whilst he
was filling up his measure.

Yet that which is yet further worth our consideration follows in the second
Doctrine.

The 2d Doctrine, from the 18. verse, That God in his dealings with Pharaoh
laid a platform of his proceedings with reprobates to the worlds end.

And the Apostle does intend no less in laying this instance before the Jews,
to instruct them concerning Gods proceedings with them, to be as just as they
were with Phuraoh to severely punish, after abuses of great long-sufferings and
patience.

He has mercy on whom he will: from whence arises this Doctrine in the third
place. Doctrine, 3. That justification is not the fruit of our merit, but Gods
mercy: here he calls justification by the name of mercy.

4. Doctrine, That the law and terms upon which men are justified and saved,
are founded in Gods own will without the contrivance and proposition of the
creature: he has mercy on whom, or what manner of persons he will. He has
made the passage to life and salvation through grace by faith, and no other way
but by faith alone: those whom he will have mercy on are Jews and gentiles, who
believe and obey, Romans 3.30. seeing it is one God that shall justisie the
circumcision by faith and the uncircumcision through faith: So much for the
first part of the verse.

And whom he will he hardens, from whence I note this Doctrine. 5. Doctrine,
In a Scripture-sence God is concerned in hardening sinners. This I have spoken
unto also sufficiently in the explication.

Whenas the Apostle makes use of this term harden in direct opposition to mercy
or justification, it supposes a hardened person in a sad and deplorable
condition: he hardens, it might as well have been said, he rejects or
reprobates: from whence I note this. 6. Doctrine, That as hardness of heart in
man is the greatest sin, so from God the greatest judgment:

It is such a sin that the sin of Pharaoh is styled hardness of heart: his
refusing counsel, disobeying and rebelling against God; his abuse of Moses, is
all summed up in hardness of heart: so the sins of Israel in the Wilderness
is called hardness of heart, Heb. 3.8. harden not your hearts, as in the
provocation in the Wilderness; which takes in all their murmurings and
rebellion: the sins of the Jews in Christ's time is called by this name of
hardness of heart, Mark 3.5. Mark 6.52. But for the sakes of some it will be
needful to lay down some discoveries of a heart that is not possessed with this
comprehensive sin of hardness of heart; because some are apt to condemn
themselves in this respect who are not concerned.

I shall lay down six characters of a heart that is not hard in this sinful
state, whatever they may think: but I shall but name them. 1. That heart that
stands in awe of God, that fears God, is not a hard heart. 2. That person that
is of a cordial, constant, private, praying spirit is not hard. 3. That person
that trembles at Gods word, so as to put in practice what it commands as soon
as he understands it, is not hard: such a heart had Josiah, 2 Kin. 22.9. 4.
That person that has humble, low thoughts of himself, is not one of a hard
heart. 5. That person that is sensible of the least sin and troubled for it,
and is touched at it, is not hard; and when secret as well as open sins
afflicts and pricks his heart. 6. That person that trembles at Gods judgments,
as did Josiah, that person is not of this number.


Doctrine, 7. That disobedience to Gods declared will and command, persisted
in, is very highly provoking to God; in order to giving up persons to hardness
of heart; This was the case with Pharaoh, this was the case with the Jews.
Doctrine 8. and last, is this, That the law, terms and conditions of hardening,
rejecting and reprobating, are not founded in, or according to the will of men,
but of God. The reason of this text and Doctrine, by S. Paul, is raised upon
occasion of the quarrel some arrogant Jew, who would impose upon God, who
should be the subjects of Gods hardening, namely, such who did not submit to
the law of circumcision; they would have God to harden the gentiles or reject
them, but he declares his will to harden both Jew and gentile, who should
disobey and rebel against Christ and the gospel: and this will of God is made
into a law, as I have shown you, not a secret will as many would have it; but
this his will is Ioh. 6.40. revealed, as with respect to those whom he will
have mercy on: so also as to those whom he will harden, and make subjects of
his wrath, John 3.36. he that believes on the son has everlasting life, and
he that believes not the son has not life, or shall not see life, but the
wrath of God abides on him: These are those whom his will is to harden: Thus I
have done with the 17. and 18. verses.

I now proceed to verse. 19.

CHAP. XI. Gods will and word are terms equivolent and his purposes to mankind
in order to mercy and Judgment is not Irrestible.
Verse. 19. Thou will say then unto me, why does he yet find fault? for who
has resisted his will?


WE have contained in this verse, the Jews quarrelsome replycation by way of
Object, against what had been asserted by the Apostle in these four following
verses: we have the Apostles severe and pathetical reply in two parts. 1. A
sharp reproof. 2ly, A substantial vindication of the righteousness and wise
proceedings of God with mankind;
both which the Objection seems to impeach. But I shall first speak unto the
19. verse before us, in which we have the Objection framed, either as the
Apostle framed it himself, or as they themselves made it: some think the
Apostle framed it himself as personating the Jews in it: the rise of this
Objection may be supposed to be from what the Apostle had been lately asserting
concerning the power and prerogative of God, in justifying and hardening men at
his own will: some think that from the Instance of Pharooh, and the conclusion
drawn thereupon, that God hardens whom he will; from thence the Jews
apprehended themselves some of those subjects of his will to harden: thereupon
their spirits were enraged against the Apostle his doctrine and God himself;
and that what we have in this 119 ver. is the fruit and effect thereof; they
are ready to impeach S. Paul's Doctrine as if he had not represented God
consistent with himself, whilst he had shut them up in hardness and
blindeness, irresistably, aad yet having so done, complained or found fault
with them, and blamed them, who are under such a kind of necessity by a decree
of his own will.

The words themselves are presented as a perverse object or reply against God;
in which we have these four parts considerable. 1. The objector or person
objecting, expressed in the singular particle thou. 2. The person unto whom this
objection is directed; unto me says S. Paul. 3. The Subject objected against,
why does he find fault? 4. The absurdity it, self imputed to God, for who has
resisted his will?
this objection some think is drawn from the passage of Pharaoh, Exo. 9.17.
that God seems to complain of Pharaoh after he was hardened by God, and there
is a colorable ground also as to the Jews, that after they were hardened and
blinded by God, he yet blames them: and the foundation of this Objection is
from a rational principle, that those persons are not to be complained of, who
are determined by an absolute decree or will of God, as they supposed Pharaoh
and themselves were, according to the Apostles Doctrine? It is the principle of
wisemen that persons are excusable who are necessitated by a greater power
then their own to be what they are: The Apostle in these words does not
personate an humble conscientious person modestly desirous of satisfaction,
with a spirit of meekness in things wherein they are dark: But as an impatient
men in hearing the truth, when the light thereof shines into his conscience,
to discover his nakedness: and further we may perceive by the form of the
Objection, that it does discover a confident insulting spirit in the objector,
as also much haughtynesse in the face of it; he finds fault with God for
finding fault: but to come more closely and distinctly to the words themselves,
by way of explication; as I have proceeded in the former verses, so I shall
enquire distinctly into these words, and that under these six considerations.
1. I shall enquire into the reading of the words. 2. I shall enquire what sort
of persons may be supposed to make this quarrelsome Objection or reply? 3. From
what part of S. Paul's Doctrine this Objection is raised? 4. What are we to
understand by Gods finding fault? 5. What may be supposed that God finds fault
with? 6. What is this will which the objecter supposes to be irrisistable in
God?


Of each of these a few words in order.

And 1. As to the reading of the words, most interpreters reads them as they
are here read, yet I meet with a second reading which runs thus, why does he
find fault who has disobeyed his law? and there may be a good color for such
a reading from the consideration of that affirmity that is between Gods will
and Gods law or word, they are taken one from another; see John. 7.17. he that
does my will shall know of my doctrine: by which will is to be understood his
word, and those who thus read the words, do thus paraphrase upon them: why is
he so angry with us: and resolved so severely to deal with us, who are so far
from refusing obedience to his law, that it is only out zeal for the law that
makes us reject your Christian religion? And to make this reading more plain
they proceed also upon the 20 verse: thus from S. Paul's reproof you may be
ashamed of your saucy and profane arguing: for may not God your creator impose
what law he please upon you? is he bound never to abrogate that law given by
Moses? and cannot he give you another law, and require obedience to that? and
for your non-obedience to that law, deal with you, as the potter with his clay,
that marreth in his hand and makes you vessels of dishonor? and this
parraphrase seems to have some color of truth in it. But I rather incline to
the common reading before us, forasmuch as the words so read, well agree with
the Original and the Context.

The second thing that I am to enquire into, is the persons propounding this
quarrelsome objection: it is here propounded in the singular thou: some are of
opinion that the Apostle did not really and in matter of fact meet with such an
Objection; but perceiving the spirit of the Jews his Antagonists did shape it
out accordingly; by way of anticipation; and so applycable to any at any time
who should make such an objection; but it rather seems by the answer, that
there was such an Objection really made, unless we should suppose the Apostle
is making a man of straw, and then fighting against it: for his answer seems to
be directed to a real Antagonist; and that the persons he replied unto, were
the blinded obstinate rebellious Jews is plain enough; they being the people he
now was concerned with in this Epistle and chapter, unto whom in particular he
did direct his speech, under the same appellation, as in the reply to the
Objection: see chap. 2. O man! which O man is understood the Jews; see chap. 2.
ver. 17. thou art called a Jew: So when the Apostle speaks under the same
appellation, O man! he means the Jews see ver. 20. and we may easily perceive,
that they were the people intended, by considering their temper and spirit: we
read of no people in all the book of God, so perverse spirited as they, even
against God himself, in all ages: what cause God had to complain of them all
along: their fathers are said to speak against God, Psalm. 78.19. It is no new
thing for them to quarrel and capitulate with God: see how God complains of the
same people, Mala. 2.17. ye have wearied me by your words, yet you say wherein
have we wearied thee? so Mal. 3.13. your words have been stout against me,
says the Lord; yet ye say, what have we so much spoken against thee? thus they
dispute with God; and the same spirit appeared in this generation, in Christ's
time; see how he represents them in the parable murmuring against God, Mat.
20.11. not allowing him to do what he will with his own: and such a spirit our
Apostle met with from them, Act. 13.45. when he had preached the gospel to them
(in love to their souls) they were filled with envy, yea they contradicted and
blasphemed at the doctrine of the gospel: so that what we have in our text is
no new thing with them, they were much destitute of the fear of God, and a
humble spirit. Some would here have it thus, that S. Paul had been in this
discourse managing the Calvinists opinion of absolute election and reprebation,
and that the Jews like Lutherans (or free-willers) does reply and cavil
thereat; to whom the Apostle takes pains to convince, verse. 20, 21, 22, 23. and
indeed at the first view it seems to sound that way; but upon examination of
the Apostles reply throughout in the four following verses, it will clearly
appear otherways.

The third particular to be enquired into is, from what part of the precedent
doctrine of the Apostle is this objection raised? it is the general received
opinion on both sides, from all that I have read, that I can remember, that
this objection is drawn from the close of the former verse, (whom he will he
hardens): and that which occasions persons so to judge, is from these two
relative particles in this verse; as the particle then or therefore; thou will
say then, as also the particle yet why does he yet find fault? notwithstanding
what has been said before, and that the objection is raised, from that verse
appears from hence, that he keeps the same style, who has resisted his will?
so that it is probable, that the objector had his eye upon the close of that
verse, and indeed the very voice of this verse does discover it to be begotten
of the former; and the objection argues thus: we are hardened by his will and
pleasure, and yet he finds fault and upbraids us for not believing in your
Jesus, notwithstanding we are shut up by an absolute decree; for his will and
counsel must stand: and if we should now believe, it were to no purpose, being
concluded in his will: thus the Objection seems to argue from the Apostles
words going before.

4. What may we understand by Gods finding fault? the word in the greek is to
complain or reprove, not to punish or reprobate, as some imagine it is supposed;
that God does complain of and reprove those hardened by him: Pharaoh being
hardened by God is yet complained of by God, for God to find fault according
to the context, seems to contain a threatening destruction upon those he so
complains of; sometimes for God to complain of or find fault, is to mourn over
a people, as he did over Israel, Why will you die, O house O Israel? and this
kind of complaint is used by God in both Old and New Testament: Christ weeps
over Jerusalem in his complaint for them: so that for God to find fault or
complain, is to mourn and bewail for a person or peoples destruction, and the
cause of it.

5. What is it that God finds fault with and complains of in them? I answer,
the great evil that God complains of in his people is their unbelief and
disobedience, because they believed not on his only begotten son Jesus Christ;
all the threatenings and complaints against the Jews was for their disobedience
to and rejecting of Jesus Christ.

But that circumstance most needful to be enquied into, is about this will of
God which the objection seems to render irresistible; who has resisted his
will? the whole ground of this objection seems to be laid here, that it is not
reasonable to find fault, or blame the Jews who are necessitated by Gods will
to be what they are; the great question is, what will of God is intended here
which none are able to resist? for the words must be understood, who has been
able to resist his will?

I answer first, it cannot be understood of Gods preceptory will, the will of
his commandments, for that will of God has been resisted by some, even from
the beginning of the world to this day: Adam in paradise resisted that will,
and so do all men more or less, as the Apostle James says, in many things we
offend all: and it might have been as properly if not more properly said, who
has not resisted his will? and many have resisted his spirit also: Act. 7. 2.
Suppose we understand it of Gods decreeing will, then it runs thus, who ever
did or can hinder the coming to pass of that which God has purposed the coming
to pass? what he has purposed shall come to pass, and take place against all
interveniences whatsoever; and if it be taken so, what then will appear in this
objection to cross what the Apostle had said in the premises, who has resisted
his will? that is, his absolute will, without conditions expressed or employed:
there are two decrees of God (as I have said before) that none can resist,
nether men nor Angels. 1. That believers in Christ, so continuing to the end,
shall be saved. 2. Such as disobey the Gospel, and so live and dye, shall be
damned;
this will of God is irresistible; but that those who are now unbelievers and
hard-hearted persons may by the help and grace of God be recovered, is very
possible; for we do not read of any such hardening of God, as does leave men
for ever in and under an impossibillity of returning: this was neither the
state of Pharaoh nor the Jews (as you have heard;) so that these circumstances
considered, the present objection in our text seems to be but an irrational
quarrelsome reply, contrary to their own reason and experience, like unto that
quarrel with our Savior, Matt. 12.24. when they charge him with casting out
divils by Beelzebub the prince of divils; when as their children must cast them
out by the name of Jesus: and that this objection does favor of such a spirit,
captious and quarrelsome, designing only to undervalue Gods proceedings, and to
disparage the Apostles doctrine, will very clearly apear in our further
traversing the Apostles answer thereunto, the answer does clearly demonstrate,
that these words proceeded from a base and unworthy spirit, tending to the
disparaging Gods power and Supremacy over Jews and gentiles, which the Apostle
had been before asserting, both as to his showing mercy and as to his
hardening: but I shall be very brief as to this verse, because I shall have
more properly occasion to demonstrat the nature of this objection, in the
answers following, in verses 20, 21, 22, 23.

That only which I shall do in order to the conclusion of this 19. verse, is
only to present you with those doctrinall conclusions that arises from the
words thus opened: which are as follows,

First, From the nature of the Apostles proceedings. 1. Doctrine, That it is
one part of the work of a gospel-Minister to anticipate and answer those
Objections which they foresee may arise either through ignorance or obstinacy
against their Doctrine.

This our Apostle is careful in, and therefore he repeats the Objection, and
prepares to take it off; It is certain, that the best and clearest of doctrines
may admit of cavils and objections, and therefore their mouths must be stopped
by the power of reason and current of Scriptures: whether S. Paul met with this
Objection in so many words, or whether he meets with it in his own apprehension
he proceeds upon it; we are not bound to stay till an Objection comes out, but
we may anticipate it: this was much the practice of Jesus Christ and his
forerunner John, Matt. 3. think not to say you have Abraham to your father,
Matthew. 5. think not that I am come to destroy the law; so chap. 9. when he saw
their blasphemous thoughts concerning his pronouncing forgiveness of sin, he
answers them in their thoughts, so Luke 12. he saw that they had some secret
thoughts that his coming should procure peace, but he teaches them the
contrary, so Luke 4.23. he prepares for their objection against him, because he
did not do those works in his own Country that he did elsewhere; and we have
the same spirit appearing in this Epistle also, chap. 11.19. thou will say
then, they were broken off, that I might be graffed in: the Apostle anticipates
what they would say before they said it: So 1 Cor. 15.34. Some men will say,
how are the dead raised? This may serve for Instruction to Gospel Ministers,
consider well what may be objected against your doctrine, and prepare an
answer, leave not any pit of Objection open lest any should fall into it: this
is greatly the care of our Apostle in this Chapter.

2. Doctrine, That God may justly find fault with those whom he judicially
hardens. It was the ignorance or perverseness of these Objectors, so to think
or suppose, that God might not find fault with those whom he hardens; for it
is certain, God does and may find fault, and blame those whom he hardens; he
did so to the Jews and also to Pharaoh, as you may see Ex. 9.17. Matt. 23.

And that God may justly and righteously complain of those who are hardened by
him, I shall offer four Reasons. 1. Because God does not positively or forcibly
nor yet primarily or antecedently harden any (as you have heard) but
accidentally by the passages of his providence. 2. He hardens none but such as
first harden themselves voluntarily under his mercies, yea such mercies and
means as are as proper, yea much more proper, to soften then to harden;
hardness inflicted by God as a punishment of former sin. 3. God may justly
find fault and complain of those hardened by him, because he hardens none but
fore against his will, when no mercies nor Judgments will work upon them: he
first uses all means to prevent it, as you may see 2 Chronicles. 36.15. it is when
there is no remedy: so Mat. 23.37. how often would I have gathered thee as a
hen gathers her chickens, and ye would not. 4. He may well complain and find
fault with those hardened by him, because they so continue, notwithstanding
they are not necessitated, neither are they shut up in an incapacity of
returning to softness, as has been plainly proved as to Pharaoh and the Jews;
therefore it is not absurd for God to find fault with those hardened by him.

3. Doctrine, That Gods will and purpose as to mankind, in order to mercy and
judgment, is not i^ resistible. This I have also spoken to in the Explication.
The Fourth and last Doctrine is this, That Circumcised Jews, a people near to
God, and a people that had received kindness from God, above all others, are
most abusive, perverse, and rebellious against God:

These are the only people who contend and quarrel with God, God had occasion
in all ages to complain of Israel; see that pathetical complaint, Esa. 1. I
have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me:
these are the people that God complains of, Jer. 2. that said, they were Lords,
and they would come no more to God: these are they that charge Gods ways with
unequallity, which God complains of, Ezekiel. 18.29. is it not such a spirit that
our Apostle in their children here fights against; a perverse, angry,
quarrelsome spirit against God did always attend them: none have been so boldly
abusive to God as his own people; these are they that are finding fault and
replying against God, whilst they are demanding why he finds fault with them.

From hence we may draw a double Use of admiration. 1. At the baseness of men's
hearts, that should so evil requite God, who had made them his people above all
the world besides; God has often had occasion from his people to appeal to the
nations upon this account; as to their respect and stedfastness to their gods
above his people to himself. 2. We have from hence cause to admire at the
unconceiveable patience and long-suffering of God to mankind, yea to his
people: oh the patience of God to those rebellious Jews whom he had brought out
of Egypt: how did he bear with them in all their murmurings and rebellion in
the wilderness, for 40. years: he suffered their manners, as the Psalmist
speaks;
but as to the cursed nature of this Objection, you will preceive more
hereafter, from the Apostles answer in the four following verses. So much for
the 19. verse.

CHAP. XII. Plainly detecting that unreasonable consequence of Gods forming men
on purpose to damn them.
Ver. 20. Nay, but O man! who art thou that replyest against God? shall the
thing formed, say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus?


AS to the reading of these words, I find very little variation, therefore I
shall handle them as they lie before us. These verses to the end of the 23.
requires our diligent enquiry into and careful heeding, because they seem to
have much darkness and knottiness in them, on the one hand.

And 2ly, on the other hand being rightly understood, they will cast and
contribute much light to the precedent verses; but it is plain that these
verses are by many persons much wrested and abused, as they are compelled to
serve in that hard service of strengthening that hard-favoured opinion of
personal and eternal predestination, scarce any one passage of Scripture more
frequently abused then this 20. v. it is a weapon near at hand upon all
occasions to take up to silence, those who do but question their irrational,
absurd and horrid extravagant notions about Gods eternal personal election or
reprobation, they presently snatch up this Apostolical reply, who art thou that
replyest against God? as if he that asserts the doctrine aforesaid were as
infallible as the Apostle was, when he spoke these words; nay although the
matter against which this reply is taken up, be of another nature then this
before us.

Before I come to the words, it may not be amiss to give you a hint of what is
commonly built upon these words by the persons forenamed, which are these and
such like notions, that God of his mere pleasure antecedent to all sin original
or actual, did decree to glorify his soveraignity and justice in the eternal
rejection and damnation of the far greater number of mankind, nay, all but a
remnant; and that this may have a face of justice and equity with it, he has
shut them up under an unavoidable necessity of sinning and rebelling against
himself, and refusing his grace: that God has as absolute power to create,
thus vessels of honor and dishonor, and consequently of wrath, as the potter
has to make vessels for inferior and superior use at his pleasure, without
contradiction, of the same lump of clay.

And that these are the notions declared of many, my own ears are witness,
though indeed there are some who although they hold the same, yet are ashamed
to make application of their own principles; and if any person shall soberly
urge the contradictiousness of such notions to Gods declarations, and his oath
to the contrary, then presently this is returned, who art thou that reply
against God? and it follows, shall the thing formed, say to him that formed it,
why have thou made me thus? and know this, that these abominable God-abusing
notions and opinions, with such confidence, are built upon a double mistake of
the Apostles Doctrine in these verses, and so they are erroneous in their
foundation: as that,

1. This forming and making in this context does refer to man's creation at
first in Adam, and that the lump which is here intended, is the mass of earth
tha^ Adam was made of, and that God from that original, made or determined some
for vessels of honor or elect, and the far greater number for reprobates or
vessels of dishonor and wrath, not considering what the Scripture speaks to
the quite contrary, as to that making, that God made man upright, even all good
and vessels of honor.

2. This mistake is founded either upon an ignorant or wilful
misunderstanding, that this abasing of men according to our text, is the fruit
of disobedience and rebellion, and abuse of Gods mercies, long-suffering, and
patience, as this parable in our text does set forth, as it alludes to Jer.
18.6. it is when the clay is marred in the hand of the potter, in not
submitting and yielding to the mould to be a vessel of honor, then and not
till then his mind changes, and he makes him another vessel: for although it
must needs be granted, that it is in the potters power in one sense to make
most of his vessels for inferior and dishonorable use, yet it is not for his
interest so to do, in case the clay will run, so as to make a finer sort; a
workman does not usually commit such waste upon his materials, much less does
the most wise God, who made man to glorify his grace: but I shall have
occasion to speak to this in the next verse; only in a few words, I shall show
you, that there was no such doctrine on foot in this context and controversy
with the Jews, as personal and absolute eternal election and reprobation, as I
have shown and proved all along by many arguments: it is a grand mistake to
think that any thing of that kind had been proper in this case: for if the
Jews had understood, that personal and absolute election and reprobation had
been S. Paul's doctrine, it had been against their judgment and interest to have
opposed him in it or cavilled against it; for they could not but know, that if
there were any persons above others under personal election, it must be the
circumcised Jews who were chosen in Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: and God had
before told them, that he had elected or chosen them above all the nations of
the world besides, to be a peculiar people unto himself: they are called Gods
charge or lot; therefore we must conclude, that the Apostle was not here
treating of that point, namely, of mere personal election or reprobation, but a
specifical election of persons so qualified, namely, believers and obeyers of
the gospel, whether Jews or gentiles: and this is the doctrine that offends the
Jews, that God had destroyed that personal election (as they thought Paul
preached) and made both Jews and gentiles level, that they had no privilege or
advantage more then the gentiles, as to justification, without faith in Jesus
Christ: of all people under heaven none were more for personal election then
the Jews: see what pains God takes to persuade Peter to be otherwise minded to
go to the gentiles, Act. 10.10.

2. That personal election or reprobation was not the doctrine that was on foot
in these verses, because such a doctrine would have been heterogeneous, and of
another kind to all the rest of the context in general: for it is not hard for
the weakest who are willing to understand, to see that the great controversy
lay about the terms of justification, whether by the law or faith, which
controversy needs not have been, if personal election had been the design.

3. It is plain, that the controversy does not in these verses depend about
that point, nor the first making, but that making which is Gods handling
persons made: it is not said, that God ordained Pharaoh in creation to be hard,
but it was done in time upon his own hardening first, and after he had endured
him in his long suffering a great while, as you shall hear upon ver. 22. 23.
making does not always refer to proper making in creation, in the Scriptures,
but handling as we may perceive, Mat. 23.15. and several other places: this
forming or making Pharaoh was Gods just hardening him, and so as to the Jews,
their objection did not lie, as to their first making or creation; they have
nothing to allege against that, but about their present making or forming by
God to destruction, for their rebellion against Christ and the gospel: the Jews
above all other people were honorable vessels in their first making of this
kind, in Gods handling them: but for their sins they were prophesyed of to be
dishonorable, Hos. 8.8. now shall ye be amongst the gentiles as a vessel in
whom is no pleasure: but I proceed to the words themselves distinctly, wherein
we have the Apostles zealous and pathetical answer to the Jews captious and
quarrelsome objection, ver. 19. this answer of the Apostle consists of two
parts. 1. We have a sharp and severe reproof in the former part of the words.
2. We have a substantial confutation even to conviction, to the end of the 23.
verse.
by the Apostles answer to this objection we may clearly see the nature of it,
that it did tend to the disparagement and impeachment of the wisdom and power
of God, in his handling and hardening whom he will: the objecter will not allow
the almighty that liberty which he will allow a mean tradesman, a potter, to
design and form his vessel either more honorably or more contemptibly at his
pleasure, and according as his stuff will run, either finer or courser: the
Objecter will not allow God to make of a stubborn rebellious person or people,
a vessel or vessels of dishonor, and to make those who obey the gospel, and so
yield and submit in his hands, vessels of honor, namely, such as are called
both Jews and gentiles, before prepared unto glory.

I shall first speak unto the reproof contained in these words, wherein we have
these four circumstances considerable. 1. We have the Apostle designing to
abase the objecter by the manner of his speaking, (but O man who art thou?)
which is compellation of diminution; what a man, a poor mortal man, sold under
sin, liable to death at Gods pleasure, what thou to stir up thy self against
thy creator! this kind of speaking tends to lay men low, as when David thus
speaks, Psalm. 8. what is man that thou art mindful of him? the tendency of his
words are to abase men. 2. In this reproof we have the Apostle laying before
them the transendant power, wisdom, might, majesty of him against whom they
contended, couched in this appellation (God), who art thou that replyest
against God? 3. The Apostle lays before them the nature and quallity of their
sin by name; he calls it, replying, taking up a dispute or answering again, the
which is forbidden to servants, as to poor mortal men, Tit. 2.9. not answering
again or gainsaying. 4. We have the Apostle amplifying and enlarging upon the
indignity and unworthiness of the objecter, by a similitude of the work and
workman; shall the thing formed say to him that formed it why have thou made me
thus?
this comparison sets out the deportment of the objector toward God, with a
kind of unnatural prodigious deformity and unworthiness; for what can be more
repugnant to nature, then for that thing or person which receives his being
from another, to quarrel with him about the nature of that his being the sheep,
that he is not an ox, the ox that he is not a man, men that they are not
angels; or according to the Metaphor, as if the chamberpot should say to the
potter; why was not I a drinking-pot? so that we may perceive by the manner of
the Apostles speaking and arguing, that his design was to abase and lay low
the objector, even those Jews who had been charging God with either defect in
wisdom or in power, this vocative kind of speaking is the effect of passion of
mind, O man! sometimes wonder, sometimes of sorrow mixed with love; see 2 Samuel
18.33. O my son Absalom, O Absalom my son, my son! signifying very high passion
of mind: so Mat. 23.37. O Jerusalem! sorrow mixed with love and pity, the
Apostle is under much passion of mind, for these his contrey-men according to
the flesh; as he also seems to be in the beginning of this chapter; he had a
great zeal for this people, and it grieves him to see them so obstinate against
their own mercy in this passion of mind, he seems to speak to the same people,
chap. 2.1. O man! ver. 3. O man! the Apostle in our Text is not only thus
affected for their sin but the dishonor of God; and now his design is to
vindicate the honor of God; but some may say, what was there more particularly
in this objection that so much provoked the Apostle to make this pathetical
reply in order to abasing the objector? I answer there appears four
circumstances in it, that does so greatly stir up the Apostles zeal. 1. The
Apostle had a clear sight from what spirit this objection did arise, which was
not from ignorance or weakness, but from an arrogant, captious, quarrelsome
spirit, a bold, imperious, insulting spirit against God. 2. The Apostle in this
objection perceives much slighting and undervaluing put upon God himself; from
the very manner of speaking: we have not so much as one of these honorable
names or titles of God inserted, neither God nor Lord, but he and his; which we
always account ^ slight put upon any superiors by inferiors: as she or he
speaking of parents or masters. 3. We have in this objection or reply
self-justification: why does he yet find fault? they see no cause of Gods
finding fault with all their behavior under his judicial hardening, they are
blamed, but they know not for what; they see no cause. 4. We have at least
implicitly a charging all their disobedience, and rebellion, and hardness of
heart upon God, as the fruit of his irresistible determination and decree, as
we may see in the reading the words, who has resisted his will? whereas it
has been proved, that the worst of sinners; such hardened by God, are not
necessitated by God so to remain:
but there are two things to be enquired into by way of explication, the answer
to which may be of great use to clear the Text and context. 1. What is, or
where is it sinful to discourse, reason or word it with Ged? 2ly, What making
or form are the Jews put into by God, at which they are so much offended, and
at which they thus quarrel with God?
of both these I shall particularly speak a few words.

1. We are not to understand by all that the Apostle has so importunately
spoken, as if it were unlawful or unmeet for men with reverence to God and
sobriety, to search out the righteousness, wisdom, and goodness of the ways
and counsels of God: we shall find that this has been allowed and accepted
from men. Questions of this kind have received answer, as is plain in Abraham's
case, Genesis 18, how freely did Abraham reason and discourse with God about the
destruction of Sodom, and God was not angry with him, but condescends to his
propositions: such familliarity did Job take upon him, Job 21. and so did
Jeremiah, chap. 12. let me talk with thee of thy judgments: God is willing his
ways and works should be enquired into, provided it be with a humble spirit and
with due respect to the Majesty and power of God; that is, not replying against
God, which many times is so accounted from this place, to stand up for the
vindication of Gods equitable and impartial proceeding with mankind, when by
the doctrines and principles of some they must necessarily be impeached; for to
show the absurdity of such opinions is not taxable by our Apostle in this text;
those who are of that opinion to urge this text, to oppose such vindication of
Gods righteousness, supposes the Jews to be of that which they call the
Arminian principle, which is a great mistake in them: for there were no people
under heaven more cordially principled on the other hand for a mere personal
election then they; they took all but themselves to be reprobates, and forbid,
that the gospel should be preached to them that they might be saved: 1 These.
2.16. this S. Paul complains of, that by the Jews he was forbidden to discharge
his office in this kind, therefore they were far enough from the opinion of
universal and impartial grace: but this I shall speak unto more afterward as I
proceed; but to speak positively to this question, I answer, to reply or take
up a dispute against God according to this text, is considered two ways. 1. In
matter. 2. In form.


As to the manner or form, when our words are stout and bold, without rendering
God his due Titles; see what a humble frame of spirit Abraham appeared in, in
his reasoning with God; and so likewise Jeremiah, Job, and others also, the
contrary whereunto God complains of, Mal. 3.13. God complains that their words
were stout, so in this text, their words were of a gainsaying nature, the Jews
spoke to God as if he were their equal. this was the manner of Pharaohs
speaking, Exo. 5. who is the Lord? I know him not: and this was the spirit of
the Jews in the wilderness, they murmured and quarrelled against God, thus much
as to the manner.

2. As to the matter condemnable, when what is spoken or thought does tend in
it self to the disparaging the Wisdom of God: this is an exceeding high piece
of presumption against the most high and most wise God; this God will not bear
with in his most dear servant Job: in all his exquisite misery he must not be
allowed to speak the least word that might reflect upon the wisdom of God; see
how severely God speaks to him, Chap. 40.2. Shall he that contendeth with the
allmighty instruct him? he that reproves God let him answer it; and Job falls
flat under it, else he had been broken: see the sharp rebuke of God to such a
people as this, Esa. 45.9. Woe to him that striveth with his maker, shall the
clay say to the fashioner, what make thou? or thy work, he has no hands? It
is imperfect blaming the work of God; this is the spirit discovered in the
Text, God will not have his Wisdom nor his Power questioned.

2. It is sin when men do not quietly sit down under the mighty hand of God,
who art thou that replyest against God? that does not sit down silently under
Gods reproofs, but complains discontentedly, like Jonas to be angry, and
vindicate himself in so doing: but that which is altogether needful to be
enquired into, is the matter against which the Jews find themselves so
aggreived and discontented, and wherein they do implicitly impeach the wisdom
and power of God: and that is supposed here by our Apostle to be about their
form or shape, which they were now made in, therefore the Apostle sets it forth
by a similitude of a workman and his work; as the work disparaging the workman,
saying to him in a disparaging way, why have thou made me thus? or of this
fashion or shape: this our Apostle judges a parallel instance to the case. Now
the question then is, what form of shape are the Jews cast into with which they
are so displeased? to this I shall speak in answer, both negatively and
affirmatively: but before I speak particularly to it, I premise this by the
way, that this word make or form in Scripture has diverse acceptations, a
matter of twelve ways it is taken: so that it is not always to be understood to
respect creation of man, but sometimes to ordain and constitute; thus God is
said to make Saul king, that is, put him into such a capacity: thus it must be
understood, Esa. 43.7.21. this people have I formed for my self, that is, with
respect of their restoration: thus Paul speaks 1 Cor. 4.13. so Rev. 5.10. he
has made us kings and priests.

Now what making did the Jews quarrel at? 1. Negatively, the Jews could not
here mean by making and forming, their original creation in Adam, their forming
there and then was as good as all the rest; there was nothing on foot of this
nature in all the controversy (as I have shown before;) they could not be
offended at their proper term. 2. Neither could it be supposed, that they
intended Gods decree or ordination of Reprobation, for they were far enough
from believing that notion as to themselves especially; neither is there any
thing in the Context that sounds that way as to personal election:
but of this I shall speak more clearly when I come to ver. 21.

But affirmatively, there was a twofold framing or making upon the Jews, at
which they were much offended at God, and both respecting Gods present dealings
with them for their actual rebellion against the Gospel, which was now
judicially upon them. 1. They were by God subjugated in their outward state to
the Nations, as to their outward glory and politic government, wherein they
had exceeded all the world besides; Gods presence was in the midst of them; his
sanctuary was amongst them; they were his firstborn son, the head and not the
tail; this people are now scattered amongst the Nations, and their temple and
glory laid in the dust, they are made as a vessel in whom is no pleasure; as it
was prophesied of them, Hos. 8.8. and herein are a dishonorable vessel
according to our Text: this our Lord tells them Matthew. 23. last. their house is
left desolate: this formation they are greatly offended at, why have thou made
me thus? say they, they are not sensible of any sin of theirs that could
deserve this forming, nay, they questioned whether God had power or right to
thus make them, contrary to his promise made to their fathers Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob. 2. They took themselves wronged (as we may perceive) that God had
put them out of a capacity of obtaining justification or salvation, by all
their zeal and legal obedience, whilst enemies and rejecters of Jesus Christ;
they are threatened with eternal death if they do not believe in Jesus Christ;
ye shall die in your sins, notwithstanding all your legal obedience, if you
believe not that I am he: why have thou made me thus? that is, put me into this
capacity:
Now the great design of the Apostle is still to maintain Gods unquestionable
right of power, to turn a disobedient people into what form he please, when
they have first abas't themselves by rebellion; he still carries on the same
conclusion, be hardens whom he will: but according to promise I shall be brief
upon this verse, because I shall meet with it more fully and properly in the
following verse that which remains according to our usual proceedings, in order
to concluding this verse, is only to lay down those Doctrinal conclusions that
offers themselves to us from these words.

1. From the Apostles zealous replication, I note. 1. Doctrine, That it is the
nature of a true cordial faithful servant of God to have his zeal kindled, when
he hears Gods name and glory dishonored, and his attributes, his wisdom,
power, mercy, and goodness abused.

This was the spirit of meek Moses Exo. 32.19. he brake the tables hereupon:
this was the spirit of Jobs friends, when they saw but the least appearance
hereof, as they thought in Job. So it was with Paul at the sight of Idolatry
Act. 16. his spirit was stirred in him: it is as it is with a dutyful child to
his father, he cannot bear to see him dishonored; so David was sensible
hereof, Psalm. 42.10. as a sword in his bones: Paul and Barnabas waxed bold,
Act. 13.46. when the Jews blasphemed: see also Psalm. 44. so was Hezekiah, upon
the blasphemy of Rabshakeh, 2 Kings 19. compared with Esa. 37.

From the design of the Apostle to abase the Jews. 2. Doctrine, The great sin
of the circumcised Jews was spiritual pride, or pride of spirit.

This sin of pride in them God complains of old, Hose. 5.5. cha. 7.10. their
pride was testified to their face; and to this our Apostle speaks, Romans 2. they
made their boast, they said we see, John 9.

3. Doctrine, It is a very high piece of presumption and impudence in man to
question the reasonableness of the terms and conditions propounded by God in
order to man's justification and salvation. To say or think that there is a
defect in Gods wisdom in propounding such or such a way rather then such; this
was the very case in hand, and the great fault of the Jews; this is very
unreasonable so to reply: it is but reasonable and equal, that he that is sole
author and donor of man's salvation, should take his own way, and propound his
own terms upon which persons shall reap that benefit: if God be about to bless
Abraham with a great blessing, to make him the father of the faithful, he must
follow God at his foot, stoop to his directions in every thing, as to the way
to it; the clay must yield to the hand of the potter, if it will be a vessel of
honor: to this speaks Esaiah 40.13. cha. 45.11. they must not command God.

4. Doctrine, It is very unreasonable and a high provoking sin against God, for
a poor finite creature, who has received his very being from him, and who has
forfeited his very being a thousand times by sin, yet to be found disputing and
quarrelling'with God about the form of his being, why he is not treated better
by his maker. As if a malefactor pardoned by the king should quarrel with him,
that he did not make him one of his bed chamber or confer some great honor
upon him; may not God do what he will with his own? Mat. 20.7,8.

5. Doctrine, That the great dispute that the unbelieving Jews had with God,
was not about their original making, or future rewarding, but about their
present handling, called making. The Jews question with God about the justness
of his present judicial dispensations upon them, why have thou made me thus?
the truth of this will more clearly appear if we consult the context about this
present hardening whom he will.

But I proceed to the next verse.

CHAP. XIII. Explaining the potter and clay, and that God makes and mars
vessels according to their submission or rejection of him.
Ver. 21. Has not the potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one
vessel to honor, and another to dishonor?


THese words are propounded by way of interrogation, which kind of speaking
signifies much intentness in the speaker, and has much awakening force upon
the person unto whom spoken; it is a kind of speech much used by this Apostle,
both in this Epistle and elsewhere. 2. This kind of speaking supposes a
strong assumption and conclusion in the matter it self: Has not, is as much as
if he had said, it is certain he has; it puts the question out of doubt:
we have the Apostle in these words further managing and manifesting his
dislike of the former objection, ver. 19. and also further demonstrating the
unreasonable perverseness of the said objecter, giving yet a more clear
account, that God may harden whom he will, and yet be just in finding fault or
complaining of them so hardened by him: which position is built upon this
double principle. 1. From his unquestionable right of power and prerogative. 2.
From this consideration, that he hardens none but such as by their sin break or
first mar in his hands, when he is about to work them, and soften them for
vessels of honor; or such as first are become clay of the vilest sort.


I need not (I suppose) tell you, that this passage, and the words before us,
in the 21. verse, is the chief of that presumed strength, which many think they
have in this chapter, to stand by them in their opinion of an absolute personal
election and reprobation, upon a mere personal account or consideration: but
upon due consideration and examination, it will appear to be one of the most
serviceable passages in this chapter to the contrary opinion, and to
demonstrate, that there is nothing of such a nature in this context, as
personal election or reprobation before-time, or without condition.

I find three opinions upon these words.

1. Some are of opinion, that the words here are to be taken to relate directly
and properly to God, and admits of no comparison; has not the potter, that is,
has not God power to make one vessel to honor and another to dishonor? (that
is of a right power) over that earth, of which he intended to make man, that of
the same piece of it he may lawfully make some for life, and some for death and
destruction.

But the words does not afford them any such notion, if indeed it had run thus;
has not our or the heavenly potter power? but this word potter without any
article of application to God, will not afford such an interpretation, nor
authorize such a construction.

2. There are others that do grant, that these words are comparatively spoken
in each word as potter, power, clay, vessel; of this mind is Calvin and Beza:
but that the application is not made by the Apostle, but is left to be supposed
by the reader; which if so, then the application must be according to each man's
judgment upon it: some therefore proceeds thus, as granting a comparison, has
not an ordinary potter power over the same clay or lump to make according to
his own pleasure, one vessel to honor and another to dishonor? even so and
much more has God power at his pleasure, of the earth to make one man to life,
and another to condemnation. This is the supplied application which some
(supposing the spirit of God has left none) presume to give out from the
treasuries of their own understandings, to supply the defects of the spirit,
where nothing is wanting, nor no need of their help: yet those whom I have read
that are of this opinion, (I do faithfully assure you) are much divided amongst
themselves about this clay and lump: some think it is men uncreate or before
creation; others think, that it is man create before his fall; others think, it
is after his fall; great division is amongst them about this matter, which does
much incline us to question, whether the truth in this matter is amongst them.

And the truth of this matter is near to each of us, if we will receive it; for
according to the context and parallel place, Jer. 18. the clay and lump here
intended, is man, considered as he has voluntarily abas't himself by a course
of obstinate sinning against God: but the aforesaid extravagant opinions are
occasioned from a mistaken ground, thinking that the spirit of God had not
explained this parable of the potter.

But suppose there were no application of this instance by the spirit of God,
but it be left to men, the question is whether a fairer and better might not be
made, then what commonly is made? surely yea: it is granted on all hands, that
the potter has power over the clay, of the same lump, to make one vessel to
honor and another to dishonor: why not this application as well as that? in
like manner, and much more, has God power, (which none can be offended at,)
over men who have corrupted and abased themselves by a voluntary course of
sinning and disobedience (whereby he may be accounted as a lump of clay,) to
ordain some of them, namely, believers, to vessels of honor, and others of the
same lump who reject his grace and love, vessels of dishonor and wrath: Is not
this interpretation as proper as the former?

But there is a third opinion, which grant, the words are a comparison, and
also, that we have the application made to our hands; and that the spirit is
not beholding to any man to lend him his help herein, but that this application
is ready made, and contained in ver. 22. 23. and this third opinion I find
nearest to the truth; and I question not, but so will you also, as we go along:
it is easily granted, that every comparison contains two parts, the forepart
of it, and the application of it; and the same you shall find here. I scarce
meet with any expositors or interpreters of what judgment soever, as well
those who are for personal and absolute election, as others, who do so much as
put it to the question, whether our Apostle in these words before us, had an
eye, at least of allusion, if not proof and demonstration, to that place, Jer.
18.3,4,5,6,7. the margent of your bibles generally have it quoted; which if it
be but granted, that our Apostle did at all refer unto this 18. of Jer. then we
shall easily see and perceive, that this 21. verse affords no assistance to
that opinion that is commonly built upon it; nay, the opinion it self by that
means will appear importune and unreasonable: what ground can be gathered for
the former interpretation? if Jer. 18. be a parrallel place with this: how then
can God be understood the alone potter, the earth of which Adam was made the
clay and lump, seeing in Ier. 18. we find a potter properly so understood a
tradesman, to whose work Jeremiah is sent, in Ier. 18. Israel in their
degenerated state is this clay and lump, as in a course of sin and rebellion;
his dishonorable state is his state of captivity, Ier. 22.28. Hos. 8.8. but
besides the general received opinion of men of all judgments, I shall lay
before you seven considerations, tending to prove and demonstrate a parrallel
between Ier. 18. and this 21. verse. 1. The words in both places are spoken, to
the same circumcised Israel of God; the Apostle Paul speaks to the same people,
that the prophet Jeremiah speaks unto, this I think will not be denied. 2.
These words were spoken to them at both times, when they were in a state of
actual rebellion against God, which you will find as to the first clear, if
you read Ier. from the first to the 17. chap. and last verse. 3.
Notwithstanding all their wickedness against God in morals, as to judgment
and righteousness, and obedience to Gods requirements, yet they leaned upon
God, and presumed themselves to be Gods only people, and were of opinion, that
God could not righteously leave them: see what pains God takes to beat them off
from this their false confidence, Ier. 7. they leaned upon their
temple-worship, whereupon God threatens to punish the circumcised with the
uncircumcised, chap. 9. 4. The design of both places ver. 21. and Ier. 18. is
to set forth Gods right of power over his people, as they are his, to deal with
them according to their doings, notwithstanding what promises had been made to
Abraham their father, seemingly to them appearing contrary. 5. God in and by
Jeremiah is not looking back to their original in creation in Adam, but looks
directly at their present actual rebellion against God; even so in our context
does the Apostle. 6. The persons in Ier. 18. threatened and made vessels of
dishonor, are the very same who were on the wheel designed for vessels of
honor, but marred in Gods hand, which clearly agrees with 2 Timo. 2.20. if a
man purge himself from this, he shall be a vessel of honor: a great part of
Isreal's dishonor and abasement lay first and last in their temporal captivity
and outward destruction and desolation, Ier. 18. plucking up, and destroying,
laying wast, Ier. 1.10. as also destruction as to their place of worship, Ier.
7.14. I will do to this house which is called by my name as I did to Shilob;
the same is threatened by Christ to the latter generation, Mat. 23. lest your
house he left unto you desolate:
thus we see, that the Apostle Paul might well in this present controversy with
these latter Jews, allude to that passage, Ier. 18. as a place that might
comport with his present business but I shall take a little more particular
notice of these words of Jeremiah as they lie, being well assured that a humble
and sencere heart, who is willing to see truth, may have much sight from this
text, Ier. 18.

We read in the beginning of this chap. that God appoints Jeremiah to meet him
at the potters workhouse, there God promises him to teach him a lesson
relating to his people Israel: he must there study a Sermon, the potters wheel
and instruments must be his books: It is usual with God to teach by tipes and
figures: this method we find often used by God to his prophets: God had
something to teach Jeremiah by this sign and figure; go to the potters house,
there will I cause thee to hear my words: God judges the earthen clay-pots to
be a meet emblem of man in general: it is usual for God in Scriptures to
resemble men to clay, earth, potters vessels, see Esa. 64.8. we are the clay,
thou art the potter: so Job 33.6. I am formed out of the clay, Jer. 19.11. I
will break this city as one breaks a potters vessel: whilst God represents
men as the potters clay, he teaches them a general lesson in four
circumstances. 1. Thereby God teaches and sets forth man's mean and low
original: he is formed out of the clay in Adam: this is one lesson that
Jeremiah learns in the potters house, that the highest, holiest man that ever
lived in the world was but an earthen vessel, had but a house of clay: this
Elihu speaks, Job 33.6. I am formed out of the clay; 2 Cor. 4.7. we have this
treasure in earthen vessels: this is spoken to abase men: to that end both
Elihu and the Apostle speaks: I am formed out of the clay as well as thou; to
this end it is by some supposed our Apostle in our text brings this comparison
to humble these proud Jews: ye are but in the hand of God as clay in the hand
of the potter. 2. Man is compared to clay, or a potters vessel, to set forth
the curious workmanship of God upon man: he is not red lump, but wrought into
clay, that may be molded, shaped and wrought, and made a curious vessel: we
know that there is very curious vessels made of clay: we have it verse. 3. he
wrought a work: or, as some read a curious work on the wheel: God takes much
pains in making and shaping Israel as the potter does with a chrious vessel:
this God would teach Jeremiah; and in such case, the potter is not willing his
curious work should mar, so as that he must be forced to turn it into a
dishonorable vessel. 3. Clay or a potters vessel to set forth the brittleness
of man's nature, easily does he break and miscarry in both respects and that
without remedy: we use to say, who can mend it? when God threatens men with a
sudden and fatal destruction, he compares his destruction to the destruction
of a potters vessel, Jer. 19. Psalm. 2. as a potters vessel will he break them.
4. That man is of clay or an earthen vessel, sets forth not only his easy
destruction by God, but his easiness to be overcome by temptations; he that is
from the earth is easily overeome: this God considers as to his people, Psa.
103. he knows we are but dust.


These are those general lessons that the prophet may learn in the potters
house, but there are more special and particular lessons which God will make
Jeremiah to hear and learn from in the potters house with respect to his people
Israel: from the passages of this earthly potter there are five more special
Lessons that God will by this Emblem instruct Jeremiah in concerning Israel.
1. He will here show him the great care and pains that God had been taking with
Israel to make them an honorable vessel, they had been upon the wheel
curiously wrought; God had taken them close to himself from the common earth
and clay, and prepared them as the potter does his clay, with much labor,
before it comes to the wheel: God as to his choice love and respect to them
says, he has made them to cleave to and clasp about him as a man does a
girdle, designing them to be for a name, a praise and a glory, but they would
not: it is a remarkable passage of Gods care, love and respect to this people,
Jerem. 13.11. as is also by Christ expressed as to this people, Matthew. 23. how
often would I have gathered you and you would not: It is a remarkable
consideration, that Jeremiah must learn and know, that Israel was not rejected
by God in the lump but upon the wheel, whilst he was forming them for honor;
and this is as true concerning the Jews with whom the Apostle had to do at
present in our Text: they also were rejected upon the wheel, not in the lump
originally considered: this well weighed by the judicial reader may satisfy
him, that there is nothing in this verse to the end it is brought for, as to
eternal personal election or reprobation: the instance does not afford the
least whisper that way, and it is to be admired that any should bring it for
that end. The second lesson which God would have Jeremiah to learn in the
potters house was, that Isreal's marring and miscarrying, was from themselves,
as God tells them elsewhere, O Israel thy destruction is of thy self, not of
me: It is not probable, that the potter will bestow the tempering and fitting
the clay, and then work it upon the wheel on purpose to break and spoil it:
what potter on earth being in his wits uses to do so? neither must this
marring be imputed to unskilfulnesse of the potter, nor any efficient cause
without them no, the Text does undeniably import, that the clay it self only
was in the fault* and that Isreal's destruction is of themselves, is
convincingly presented in the parable of the girdle, chap. 13. when Jeremiah is
directed to take a linen girdle, not an ordinary, not a leathern, but one of
the better or higher sort of girdles, a linen girdle, a lasting girdle, and
whereas Jeremiah is forbid to wet it or hide it in a moist place, but in a dry
place, in a Rock; Jeremiah is taught that Isreal's destruction proceeded from
themselves, and from no extrinsick cause: no moisture, yet the girdle is marred
and good for nothing: so here God would well convince Jeremiah, that Isreal's
destruction did not arise from any external or violent means, but it was whilst
on the wheel, in the hand of the potter, in order to her exaltation: Jeremiah
is brought to the potters house, to be taught that their destruction is from
themselves. And as the Apostle in another case says, he that imputes the
present sin and eternal destruction of men to God, let him be accursed; for God
would have all men saved, and no man perish. 3. God would have Jeremiah learn
in the potters house, as to Israel, that their becoming a dishonorable vessel
was not the antecedent design of God, but the subsequent design of God: the
potter at first designed it an honorable vessel, but it is upon its marring
that he proceeds to make it another, as seemed good to him to make it: it was
then become obnoxious to the subsequent will of God, which then, and not till
then, designs it a dishonorable vessel: which is undeniably plain, if we
read verse the 9.10. at what instant I speak concerning a nation to build and
plant, if that nation do evil in my sight, I will repent of the good that I
said I would benefit them: Gods antecedent will was to plant and build, his
subsequent mind to pluck up and destroy. The 4 th Lesson that the Lord would
have Jeremiah to learn in the potters workhouse, was, that God has sole and
absolute power over his people, even so, and much more then the potter over the
clay, to dispose it at his pleasure; therefore (says he) behold, or take
notice, that as the clay is in the hand of the potter, or power of the potter,
so are ye in my hand, says the Lord: Gods propriety is clearer and more
absolule then a potters power can be: for the potter, and his clay, and all are
Gods; the potter has power from his propriety and interest; he may do what he
will with his own but still for his own advantage, much more may God; if the
potters clay will not serve him for one end, it must for another: if his clay
will not yield and comply for an honorable vessel, can it complain, though he
dispose of it to be a dishonorable vessel? so if Israel will not comply with
Gods design, and serve him in their own land, they must submit to serve his
end in their enemies land as a dishonorable vessel. 5. God would have Jeremiah
learn in the potters house this lesson, that the liberty that God claims to
himself in making dishonorable vessels, is such a power as the potters is,
only over those who by voluntary disobedience and rebellion refuse his offers
of grace and honor: God claims no liberty over that nation or person that
repents under the threatenings against it, as is eminent ver. 8. Jer. 18. to
make them vessels of dishonor: so that from what has been spoken upon Jer.
18. we may perceive that it will be very useful in handling this 21. verse, to
carry our eye upon this so parralell a place, which will be greatly helpful in
order to a right understanding: and I will in the fear of God appeal to the
readers conscience, whether by what God has spoken to Jeremiah you can gather
such an opinion, that God has either before, or in the creation, of his mere
pleasure and will, ordained or made of the earth, vessels of wrath, upon a mere
personal account; the whole neither savours of, nor savours such an opinion in
the least, the power which this heavenly potter claims, is, that when persons
have imbased themselves by a course of actual sinning and rebellion against his
grace and mercy, then to turn his hand and make them dishonorable vessels.


But I shall now return to the words as here they lie delivered by the Apostle.

Ver. 21. Has not the potter power over the clay, of the sum lump to make one
vessel to honor, and another to dishonor.


By way of explication here are four words which I shall speak a few words
unto. 1. What potter is here intended. 2. What kind of power this is. 3. What
is this clay. 4. Why is it here added of the same lump?


Of these a few words briefly.

It is the general received opinion of men, that these words potter, clay,
power, and lump, vessels, and such like, are all spoken comparatively: By
potter the Apostle means a common ordinary potter; and herein he argues from
the lesser to the greater, in this similitude, that God is fitly resembled to a
potter, who works in that material of earth and clay: and thus the Church
styles God, Esaias. 64. we are the clay, thou art the potter: God like a potter
makes of low, vile man, honorable vessels; has not the potter, any ordinary
potter, power over the clay, to make it what vessel he please? and when a piece
thereof runs course, and is marred upon the wheel, then without control has
he not power to make it a less honorable vessel? and has not God the same,
and much more power over you who have imbas't your selves by slighting and
abusing all those mercies that he has designed to prefer you and make you
honorable: to be plain (says the Apostle) why may not God for your obstinacy,
and disobedience and rebellion to his son, as zealous as you are for the law of
Moses, of a glorious people and invested with all those extraordinary
privileges, make you a base and contemptible people? and besides you
continuing still in your unbelief, make your condition far worse in the world
to come? such a Paraphrase as this, seems to bear a sweet harmony with the
place alluded to Jer. 18. as also with the scope of the whole context, and with
the Apostles conclusive result, verse. 32. that they did not attain it, because
they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the law.

2. By power here must not be understood bodily strength or might, the potter
may be a weak man, and yet have this power spoken of here; the word here
translated power signifies privilege or prerogative, and so the same word is
understood, John 1.12. power to become the sons of God, that is, as most
understand it, privilege. So here it is to be understood of an uncontrollable
prerogative in God by this similitude: but there seems to lie a considerable
objection in this kind of arguing of the Apostles: does it not seem strange,
that the Apostle does take so much pains to assert the power and prerogative of
God? are there any in the world who own God that question this truth? the
Apostle seems to insinuate, that the hardening and rejecting of the Jews, was
founded in the absolute uncontrollable will of God, rather then upon their own
wickedness: he hardens whom he will: the thing formed must not say ^o him that
formed it, why have thou made me thus? and so in this simillitude, has not the
potter power: might not the Apostle (may some say) more properly have insisted
upon their rebellion as the only cause? and instead of saying, he hardens wh^m
he will, have said, he hardens those who reject his grace: what may be the
reason why the Apostle argues this way rather then that? are there any that
deny this power of God? I answer that the Apostle knew what he did and said of
this kind, though the Jews did not deny the power of God in one kind, yet
they did question and also deny the equitable proceedings of God, as we may
see, Ezekiel. 33. they were bold to say the ways of the Lord were not equal in his
dealings toward them: and further they questioned his wisdom and truth, in
his severe dealings with them, who were the children of the promise to Abraham,
and who walked in the law of God appointed by him to their fathers: they did
question, yea deny, that God could justly east them off upon any terms, or
disinherit them, let their manners be what they would, though greatly
degenerated and corrupted by morral evils, yet as long as they held to
temple-worship they could not be made dishonorable: therefore it is no wonder
though the Apostle argues with them after this manner, it is undeniably plain,
that the Jews would not allow God the power of the potter, to make a
dishonorable vessel of marred clay; they looked upon themselves to be the
children of Abraham in the best sense, whilst they were children of the devil
in the worst sense, John 8.39,40,44. so their fathers were of the same spirit,
Ier. 5.12. they did conclude no evil should befall them, nay their prophets told
them so: see 23 chap. 17. though they walked in the imaginations of their own
hearts: such a spirit appeared from them, Ier. 7. though they did steal,
committed adultery, swear falsely, yet they thought God had no right of power
to punish them, so long as they cried the temple of the Lord: and read but
Romans 2. from verse. 17. to the 23. and you shall see these are the very same to
a tittle, they made their boast of their Jewship and law: it is no new thing
for formal professors to make their external professions a sanctuary in their
own conceit, to shelter them from all evil: O horrid mistake! God has power to
make the best of men base and contemptible, if they live not up to their near
relation to God, notwithstanding any seeming privilege to the contrary; So
much for the potter and power.

The ^ d circumstance is the clay, power over the clay; we have the Apostle in
the following verses in this similitude still taking pains to humble this proud
people, in laying before them their own vileness: He does not say, Has not
the potter power ever the clay that he may do what he will with it? from his
propriety in it because it is his, but because it is clay: and this part of the
similitude sets out the Jews imbased condition; now by sin they were become
clay; time was when they were comparable to fine gold, Lam. 4.2. but by sin
become as earthen pitchers: that place is full to this purpose, to show how sin
abased Israel: Gods people in their sanctified estate are compared to vessels
of gold, 2 Timothy 2.20. but in their sinful state to vessels of wood and earth:
But some may say, has not the goldsmith also power of his gold, to make
vessels at his pleasure, some to dishonor? to which I answer, if the gold
smith makes dishonorable vessels of his materials, to answer the ambitious
desires of some, yet the worthiness of the materials may admit of a question,
why have thou made me thus? so that it is the clay that is liable and obnoxious
to be made a vessel of dishonor, and the makers power incontroulable in so
making of it: the serious consideration of this circumstance will help us much
in our present business, and agree marvellously to the parallel place of Ier.
18. for God did not take Jeremiah to a goldsmiths or silversmiths workhouse,
but the potters house, to show Jeremiah Isreal's abased estate, as now our
Apostle does.

Now these who hold personal eternal election before the world began, must also
understand, that God makes vessels of dishonor, of gold or silver, not clay,
of innocent persons, for so was man made in his first creation in Adam, and in
him he resembles the goldsmith not the potter; and so the work may be admitted
to say, why have thou made me thus? but if of clay, the thing formed of that
mean material, has nothing to say: so that this similitude serves to humble
and lay low the boasting Jew.

4. Why is it here added of the same lump or mass? I answer, This may be taken
two ways, either by this whole lump may be intended the whole stock of Abraham
and Isaac, unto whom the promises were made, and so considered; it anticipates
the Jews Objection, which might have been this, that God accepted of some of
the same offspring of Isaac and Jacob; rejecting Ishmael and Esau; and to come
nearer, some of this present lump of the Jews in the Apostles time, some
believed, some contradicted and blasphemed at the gospel: of the same lineage
and party endued with the same privileges; and thereupon were blinded and
hardened, and rejected: so that in this sense of the same lump, some are
vessels of honor, others vessels of dishonor: yet neither of them without a
cause appearing in them, differing, Act. 28.24. some believed the things that
were spoken, and some believed not.

2ly, By the same lump sometimes is to be understood, a double making, or an
attempt of making the same, a vessel of honor, and upon breaking or
miscarrying, to make the same particular lump again a dishonorable vessel; as
it did not comply to be an honorable vessel; and is the very case in that
parallel place in Jer. 18. where it is plain, that the same piece of clay that
was upon the wheel intended for a vessel of honor, and breaking or marring,
the potter thereupon, makes it again another vessel, as seemed him good, the
same that was for another use: so in the parable of the girdle, chap. 13. the
same that cleaved to Gods loins for a name, and a praise, and glory, is that
girdle which is marred and profitable for nothing; and this is as certainly
true, considered of Israel in general; they all in general were as to their
outward state vessels of honor, they were the glory of the world, the head not
the tail: the same Jews, the same people, distinguished by all these
privileges, verse, 4. 5. of this chap. are now abased, scattered, desolate,
for rejecting Gods design; marring in his hand upon the wheel: but take it
either way, it will not accommodate those who are for understanding this lump,
to be the earth of which Adam was originally made* that God of that lump or
mass in his first creation; made some vessels of honor and some of dishonor,
is not in the least to be imagined from this, or any other text of Scripture,
from the first of Genesis to the last of the Revelations* I am sure that hard
favored Opinion, has no resemblance of the nature of the just, equal
impartial good, God, whose tender mercies are over all his works, Psalm. 145.
and that this lump cannot refer to man in his Original, I shall offer five
reasons. 1. Because in that Original making, there was made no difference in
vessels, not then vessels of honor and dishonor, as is plain, they were all
made innocent and upright, and see what God himself says of what he had made
of this lump, Genesis 1. last. he saw every thing that he had made, and behold it
was good; abundantly, as the hebrew reads, no defect in it, or in any thing, as
was then made; to which Solomon gives testimony, Eccle. 7. last, this one thing
have I found, that God made man upright, but he has sought out many
inventions: man in general considered, was made upright, therefore there were
no vessels of dishonor. 2. If we state this Original after the fall, and then
suppose God made the difference, it will not yet hold, because Jesus Christ
has restored man into an equal capacity of being vessels of honor, for the
plaster in Christ is as large as the sore in Adam, as appears clearly Romans
5.18. as by the disobedience of one condemnation came upon all, so by the
righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men. 3. Because if by a
vessel of dishonor we mean a sinful man, as well as a miserable man, then we
shall make God the author of sin and disobedience, which is far enough from God
to do; he does not use to necessitate that which his soul abhorrs; the potter
did not designedly break the vessel on purpose that he might make it a
dishonorable vessel, when it was more for his interest to make it a vessel of
honor. I remember what Ainsworth observes upon Genesis 1. and last, this shows
(says he) that sin and evil is not of God or by the work of his hands, but
come in after by the creature it self falling from God: to which he cites the
same place, Eccles. 7.31. It is a known maxim, and a proverb, that God did not
make the devil nor a wicked man; it is true, he has made or ordained wicked
men for punishment, as Solomon says, God made man but not sinful man. 4.
Neither could our Apostle mean this Original making in Adam, in this text or
context, for these three reasons. 1. If so, it might well have silenced him as
to his blaming the Jews, when the defect lay in the root and Original. 2. It
had been altogether improper if this had been so, to make so clear an appeal to
Jer. 18. by way of illustration, when we find that the abising Israel was the
fruit of their actual disobedience and rebellion against God, as is plain in
the former part of that prophesy. 3. Besides this the Apostle gives an exact
account why and how Israel came to miss of justification and honor, which was
because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the law.
5. If God had designedly made vessels of wrath, then would he have taken
pleasure in filling them with wrath, which he does not: we have his solemn oath
to the contrary, Eze. 18. but of this more in the next verse.


That which remains as to our closing up this verse is after the manner of an
exposition, to sum up those doctrinal conclusions which does offer themselves
to our consideration from the words thus explicated, which are these: there are
ten Doctrines observable from this 21. verse. worth our noting, which I shall
only name, and so proceed: which are as follows.

Doctrine, 1. That God in his handling and dealing with sinful men is pleased
to resemble himself to a potter, a mean tradesman. God thought a potter and his
clay and his proceedings thereupon a meet resemblance for instruction to the
prophet, Ier. 18. and would have Jeremiah study the metaphor, the proceedings
of the potter, to set forth his proceedings with Israel as they were sinful,
degenerated from him, called marring in his hand, the Church in her humble and
low estate does acknowledge God the potter, she the clay: I gave a threefold
reason, why God is styled a potter and we the clay, which I would not have
forgotten. 1. From the meanness of the material that God works in as well as
the potter; the potter works in the lowest materials, not in gold or silver,
brass or iron, but earth. 2. Because, if the potter makes a very mean vessel of
such materials, it cannot take exception, or say, why have thou made me thus?
because it was at best but clay. 3. The potter does make curious work, a rare
and excellent vessel of clay, so does God many times of great sinners; he makes
of Saul a choice vessel of honor, though of a persecutor, Act. 9.


2. From the Apostles taking such pains to assert the power and prerogative of
God indefinitely, I note this second doctrine. 2. Doctrine, That God is not
tied to any person or people by virtue of any promise or covenant, but only
conditionally.

The promises of God made to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, are only conditionally
as their seed should be found, walking in the steps of the faith of Abraham,
Romans 4.12. Gal. 3.19. if ye be Christ's, then are you Abraham's seed: here was
the Jews mistake, they thought God could not reject them as his seed outward.

3. Doctrine, That sin and disobedience is of an imbasing nature, it makes man
the highest piece of Gods creation. Comparable to the earth, the potters clay,
for we find this similitude used to set forth meanness and baseness, when
applied to men; this comparison is used by way of imbasement, Esa. 29.16. shall
be esteemed as the potters clay: the prophet designs by this similitude to
disparage their work and forwardness in turning things upside down: it shall
soon be broke: to the same end is that similitude made use of, Esa. 41.26. and
Lament. 4.2. (...) made vessels comparable to gold, to be esteemed but as earth.

4. Doctrine, For people or persons to presume upon God for impunity and
acceptance with him, merely upon the account of external acts of Religion and
worship, when living in a course of sinning in morals, is a great and dangerous
mistake, and will end in the greatest disappointment imaginable. This was the
very case with this people to whom our Apostle speaks, and it ought to be a
warning to us; it was the case of those, Mat. 7. compared with Luke 13. they
were such and so disappointed.

5. Doctrine, That Gods rejecting, hardening and reprobating men, rightly
understood, is so equal, wise and just, that it admits of no plea or acception
by man. No more then for a potter to make a mean and contemptible vessel of a
piece of clay that will not yield and comply to the wheel, or hard to be made
for a higher use: who can in this case find fault with the potter? if indeed a
goldsmith should so abase his higher mettel of gold, to make a contemptible
base vessel, some might have a mouth open to say, it is pity such a choice
material should be so made, even so it might admit of some kind of objection
or finding fault, if God shall make vessels of wrath of innocent men, but it is
far from the judge of all the earth to do so.

6. Doctrine, That the power which God claims, which answers to the potters
power according to Ier. 18. is a power or prerogative to harden, reject and
reprobate, only for a course of actual rebellion and disobedience against
Christ and the Gospel. When God is taking pains to make them honorable, and
they mar or break in his hands, to this remember that former instance of the
girdle, Iere. 13. which does greatly contribute to this truth.

7. Doctrine, Of the same lump upon a double notion take this doctrine. That
even of Abraham's posterity and family to whom the promises were immediately
made, proceeds dishonorable vessels. Ishmael and Esau: this is plain, ver. 7.8.

From the second understanding of the same lump made over again, we note. 8.
Doctrine: That the same people or persons at distinct times may be honorable
and dishonorable vessels.

This is plain from the forenamed place, Ier. 18. he made it again another
vessel: the same girdle that did cleave to Gods loins before, is afterward
marred and good for nothing, Ier. 13. so on the other hand, 2 Timothy 2.20. the
vessels of wood and earth, upon purgation, may become of gold and silver fit
for their masters use.

From these two words honor, dishonor. 9. Doctrine, One great part of the
saints reward for obedience and holiness consists in glory and honor.

Psalm. 110. such houour have all the Saints, Psalm. 68.13. though they have lain
amongst the pots they shall be glorious; so says Jesus Christ to his
disciples, John 12.26. if any man follow me him shall my father honor: what
God spoke to Eli is true in this case, 1 Samuel 2.30. he that honors me I will
honor, Romans 2. glory and honor to every man that works good, which glory
and honor is in the highest service they shall be put into as vessels for
their masters use.

10. Doctrine, That a great part of the punishment of slighters and disobeyers
of God shall consist in shame and dishonor. They are called vessels of
dishonor, he that despises me, says God, shall be lightly esteemed, this is
the portion of the wicked in the resurrection, Dan. 12. they shall rise to
shame and contempt.

From all that has been said, learn this one instruction.

That to be vessels of dishonor is the effect and reward of actual sin and
rebellion, not Gods absolute eternal decree of reprobation, there is not the
least whisper in this text with Ier. 18. that way: so I have done with verse. 21.

We now proceed to verse. 22, 23.

CHAP. XIV. Plainly explaining who are vessels fitted for destruction, and who
vessels of mercy; and why both become such: also asserting, that persons even
fitted for destruction may yet be in a capacity of repentance while God spares
them with his patience.
Ver. 22. What if God willing to show his wrath, and make his power known,
endured with much longsufferings the vessels of wrath fitted for destruction.

23. And that he might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of
mercy which he had before prepared unto glory.


THe Apostle in these words is yet further vindicating the justice and
righteousness of God in hardening whom he will, according to his former
conclusion, ver. 18. against which conclusion the cavilling, captious Jews,
raises their Objection, verse. 19. thus, if God hardens whom he will, why does
he, or how can he justly complain or find fault with those so hardened by him?
considering, that this will of his in hardening is irresistible, wh^ has
resisted his will? now the Apostle in this 21.22.23. verses is laboring to
maintain, that God may very justly complain of such. 1. Not only from his
unquestionable and uncontrollable power and prerogative. But 2ly, His equitable
regulation of his power, in that he hardens none but such as first harden
themselves, or become clay, or marred clay: he hardens none as men, nor as
sinners, simply considered, but such as have highly provoked him. But 3ly, From
his manner and method he takes in hardening, which is by means more proper to
soften then harden, namely, by long-suffering and suffering, and consequently
with a sufficiency of means to keep them from further hardening and patience:
he does endure them with much long-also to mollify and soften them; that which
answers to the clay marring in the potters hand, is the abuse of Gods mercies,
long-suffering and goodness; and as the potter may without offense or
contradiction, from his clay, make that a vessel to dishonor, who will not
comply nor yield to the hand or wheel, to be a vessel of honor, so God may as
inoffensively and unquestionably make those persons or people dishonorable,
who despise and abuse his patience and long-sufferings toward them: from the
words the Apostle argues from the lesser to the greater, if the potter may do
so to make of the same lump (these circumstances considered) one vessel to
honor, and another to dishonor, the lawfulness of which power none can
question, much more unquestionable and apparently equal and every way just, is
that power in God which he exercises in destroying terribly those who shall
abuse his great patience; so that it is very plain, that Gods great
long-suffering exercised over sinners does marvellously vindicate and magnify
his justice and righteousness in their destruction: what made Pharaohs signal
and dreadful destruction so unquestionable but this, that God waited so long
upon him, gave him so many deliverances from judgments under all his
reiterated rebellions: from this foot of account it is, that all men do
vindicate Gods proceedings with his circumcised Israel first and last, that he
had stretched out his hand all the day long to them, Romans 10.21. whilst they
were a gainsaying people: God might have destroyed Pharaoh upon his first act
of rebellion, as he might also have dealt with Israel; but what if God willing
to show his wrath, and make his power known, endured with much long-suffering,
as it is in our Text.

This 22. verse is another considerable passage to reflect light upon the whole
passage if it be well weighed and considered, and does undeniably offer
satisfaction to all that are ingenious and willing to be satisfied in the
controversy; for in this passage we may plainly perceive, that the Apostle in
the whole does not design in the least to assert or maintain personal,
peremptory and absolute reprobation from eternity; for if he had so designed,
the words had more properly run thus; and what if God willing to show and
declare his sovereignty over men, was pleased from eternity absolutely to
determine and decree, that the far greater number of mankind should be vessels
of wrath: (what is that to thee?) but from this context it is plain, that God
does neither reprobate men as men, nor as sinners, simply considered, but as
graceless rebellious sinners, such as have highly provoked God by a course of
obstinacy: therefore the words runs thus; And what if God willing to show
his wrath, and make his power known, endured with much longsuffering those who
have made themselves vessels of wrath? yet God waits upon them who are so
sited, in these verses, as also in the whole context: the Apostle has a
special eye upon Pharaoh; for there seems in these words some answer to what
we have, ver. 17. for this same purpose have I raised thee ^p, or made thee to
stand, that I might show my power in thee, that is, have shown thee such signal
deliverances at thy request so many times, that if thou do not humble thy
self at last, thy destruction may be the more dreadful and amasing to all the
world: but I shall come more closely to the words as they lie in these two
verses, as to the nature of these words in the Judgment of the most ^ationall;
they are the reddition or application of the former comparison of the potter,
ver. 21. we know commonly a parable consists of two parts. 1. The parable or
comparison it self. 2. The application,
so as here; the Apostle has formed a comparison of a potter in a proper fence
considered, ver. 21. so here we have the application, as between the potter and
his clay, and his prerogative over it; so now he applys it between God and
rebellious sinners, and his power he may justly elaim over such to destroy them.

And that which some object concerning the form of these words, will not
rationally contradict, but that these verses are taken as an application; that
which is offered in contradiction is because these verses are laid down
interrogation-wise, what if; to which it may be replied, that it is usual so to
render the application of a parable, as appears, Mat. 6. Luke 12. Mat. 6.23. If
thy eye be single; If thy eye be evil, Luke. 12. Luke 18. Shall not God avenge
his own elect? so that it is no strange thing to find the application of a
parable rendered interrogation-wise; and as in that place it is rendered
argumentation-wise, from the less to the greater, so here; as thus: if the
widow by importunity obtained an act of justice from one that had it not in
himself, of one that feared not God, nor regarded man, much more shall the
elect obtain of God who is naturally inclined to acts of justice and mercy;
thus must it be understood here: if the potter have power to make a
dishonorable vessel of the marred clay, God may much more destroy those
terribly which withstand his grace and abuse his long-suffering: all are not of
opinion, that these verses are the application of ver. 21. but those of
clearest understanding in this context, are: and there are four Circumstances
considerable to confirm our belief, that these verses are the application of
verse. 21. 1. From the relative particle (and,) which is in the Original, though
not in all Translations so englished: and it is taken notice of by some very
Learned men, that the Translators have not dealt very fairly with us; an
English word for it it will very well bear: and two of our old Readings so
express it, and what, or even so what if God; so Tindall reads it: the Vulgar
Latin reads, and if God: all which readings do own these verses is the
application. 2. It is the judgment of most Interpreters that these words are
not perfect fence without borrowing some supply somewhere else; there seems
(say they) to be a defect in speech, for here are Questions propounded, what if
God willing to do so or so? but no answer given to them: but if we borrow these
words, ver. 21. has he not power? and place them in the end of these verses,
it will make the reading good fence: has not the potter power to do so and so?
and what if God willing to show his wrath, and make his power known? has he
not power much more? Some Learned men are so sensible of a defect in this case,
that they fetch supply from ver. 20. who art thou that replyest against God?
What if God willing to show his power? but I think that nearest to us will do
us the best service. 3. That which inclines me and others to think that these
verses are a reddition or application to the comparison, ver. 21. is for these
two Considerations. 1. Because there is nothing else delivered by the Apostle
in all the context that can be so properly answering to it as these. 2. It is
not at all likely, that in a similitude of so great importance concerning the
prerogative of God over his creatures, and so liable to diverse and various
interpretations, and not to leave with it its application; it is not usual in
matters of lesser concernment so to do.
4 ly, That which may fully satisfy us of the relation of these verses, is
that sweet harmony between them in the substance of the matter: In the
comparison there are two sorts of vessels: 1. Some to honor, and some to
dishonor, in the power of the potter. 2. As the potter makes his dishononrable
vessels of his marred clay, according to Ier. 18. so God makes his of such as
despise and abuse his longsuffering grace in his continued applications to
them: these are those whom he claims a right to harden and reprobate, such as
have thereby fitted and prepared themselves for destruction, as Pharaoh and the
Jews have done. 3. As the potter has power of the same lump to make honorable
vessels, so God will of all those who comply with his terms of grace in Christ,
make them vessels of honor whether Jews or Gentiles;
so that we may perceive, that these verses are given as an application of the
comparison, ver. 21. has not the potter? the great design of the Apostle in
these verses is to exalt and magnify two great attributes of God. 1. His
powerful wrath, or the power of his wrath. 2. The attribute of his enduring
mercy,
both which attributes of God the Apostle would have the Jews to know, were
magnified in the Gospel Dispensation: there is a revelation of both these, Romans
1.18,19.
but my principal work upon these verses, will be explication, wherein I shall
enquire into these seven circumstances. 1. What may we here understand by Gods
wrath? 2. By his power? 3. When are they said to be shown? 4. In what fence is
God said to exercise longsuffering? 5. What capacity are they understood to be
in on whom God is said to exercise this longsuffering? 6. What does God expect
or aim at in this his long-suffering thus exercised? 7. What kind of sins
makes persons vessels of wrath?


Of each of these a few words briefly, in the 4 first especially.

1. Wrath here as to God must be understood with an emphasis, great wrath and
anger: we often read in Scripture of the wrath of God, though wrath in God is
not rage as many times in man, but his wrath is known by the effects of it,
according as we have it prophesied of, Esaias. 42.23. be shall roar, and tear,
and rend.

2. Power, by power in this place is not the same word which we have before,
ver. 21. has not the potter power over the clay? that is, authority,
privilege or prerogative; the same word which we have Joh. 1.12. but here is
another word which signifies might, strength, to avenge himself of his
adversaries; therefore we have it here in conjunction with wrath, which makes
it the more dreadful, for wrath without power signifies but little as to the
dread of it; but in God there is wrath and power mixed together, which being so
mixed is so great, that David puts it to the question, whether any can know it?
Psalm. 90.11. who knows the power of thine anger? it is most dreadful indeed.

3. But what does the Apostle mean by the showing or making of it known? I
answer by the effects of them openly as in Pharaoh: God did show his powerful
wrath in his destruction, as the Apostle speaks, ver. 17. for this purpose have
I raised thee up, that I might make my power known in thee; that is, in thy
dreadful destruction: now this showing Gods wrath and power does relate to Gods
proceedings with rebellious sinners in this world, yet not with all such
sinners nor all reprobates alike, but such as have highly provoked God: the
Scriptures are plain, that Gods dealings with reprobates is not to all alike:
few are dealt with like Pharaoh.

4. How is long-suffering to be understood in God? I answer God cannot properly
be said to be long-suffering, God cannot suffer: it is only a borrowed word,
and spoken to our understanding: it is a word hard to be translated into our
language, therefore our old translations gives it us in the latin,
longanimitas, which according to the Hebrew signifies to be long before angry,
or long of nostrils, or as we say; slow to anger, not soon angry: the learned
makes some difference between patience and long-suffering; long-suffering being
when we have power to revenge, yet defer it, or delay to do it; this is eminent
in God, who is not hasty to execute his wrath on those who have highly provoked
him by rebellion.

5. What capacity are those in of whom the Apostle speaks, to whom God does
exercise this his long-suffering? 1. I answer, it is generally to be understood
of the rebellious unbelieving Jews, who had highly provoked God by killing his
son. 2. I answer negatively, these people or persons are not under an
unalterable decree of reprobation, as some would have it, God does not exercise
long-suffering upon those who are under such a capacity. But 3dly, This is a
certain truth, that all those that are under those long-sufferings of God are
in and under a possibillity of repentance:
these are those on whom God waits with design and expectation of repentance,
therefore not reprobates by any absolute decree; wherever God neither willed
nor expected repentance, though he granted a reprieve for a time from the
punishment; in such case the Scripture does no where call this forbearance by
the name of long-suffering: as for instance, the devils torments are respited
for a long time from his fall so many 1000 years: yet this respite is no where
styled long-suffering, neither can it properly be so said, that God exercises
long-sufferings to the devils; yet that their torments are suspended for a
certain time is plain, from their words to Jesus Christ; art thou come to
torment us before the time? so in Saul's case: the execution of Gods judgment
threatened upon Saul is suspended for a time, yet it is no where said to be an
exercising long-suffering upon Saul: and the reason is, because as to these and
such like, Gods decrees of punishments were absolute and irrevokable, and so no
repentance expected: whereas on the other hand wherever there is inducing,
waiting and long-suffering, and expectation on Gods part, it does
satisfactorily teach, that such persons are not under an absolute decree of
reprobation as the devils are; yea, the old world of whom S. Peter speaks, 1
Peter 3.20. though they had sinned so greatly as they had, that it grieved God
at the heart, that ever he had made them; yet because Gods resolution as to
their destruction was but conditional, not absolute, but like that of Nineveh,
it is therefore said, that the long-suffering of God waited or expected in the
days of Noah: God expected repentance all that 120. years and offered them
means accordingly by the ministry of Noah; so it was with Pharaoh, though he
was so bad, yet so long as God afforded long-suffering to him, he expected
repentance from him, as appears by the means he uses with him to the last: so
we may say of the Jews, of whom we are speaking, they were in and under the
long sufferings of God, and God expected repentance from them, and blames them
for not repenting and believing all the while: so that take this for a sure and
infallible rule, that those persons or people whoever they are, who are under
the long-sufferings of God, are not shut up under an absolute decree of
reprobation, but repentance is required and expected from them: as see Romans
2.4. the long-sufferings of God leads to repentance: so 2 Peter 3.19.
compared with ver. 15. long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should
perish: the long-suffering of God is salvation, wherever it is exercised
without exception, that is, the design and tendancy; so that those vessels of
wrath fitted for dostruction, are not under an absolute decree, because under
Gods long-sufferings. It is true, that through the baseness of men's hearts,
which is so ready to abuse this his long-suffering, they many times grow worse
under the mercies of God, as Pharaoh did: to this Solomon speaks, Eccles. 8.
because judgment is not speedily executed against an evil doer, his heart is
fully set in him to do evil: wicked men (as one says) deals with God, as birds
do with a scarecrow, afraid of it at first, and dare not come near it; but in
time it not stirring or moving toward them, they grow bold, and will fly to
it, and sit upon it; so by the long-sufferings of God, wicked men grow
hardened, and worse and worse; so that the means appointed to repentance,
through the base heart of man, does harden to destruction: so that Gods will of
showing his wrath, and making his power known, in this place, must be
understood only conditional, not absolutely; the in case persons are not
overcome by his long-sufferings, then this manifestation is to take place: this
was the very case with Pharaoh: if Gods raising him up so often at his request,
did not humble him, and bring him to let his people go, then be would make his
power known in him: from hence it is plain, that the Apostle in this place, is
not treating absolute personal reprobation, but of a conditional and
specifical.

The Sixth thing to be enquired into, is, about this fitting and making up for
destruction, with respect to the time of it, and the author of it: there are
not a few who have drank in that opinion, that this fitting is by God from the
beginning, by an absolute and eternal decree of reprobation; but in the very
considerate and deliberate reading, the words will inlighten and inform us
better, and other ways: fitted, this word I find but three times used in the
whole Scripture, that is 1 Kings 6.35. Proverbs 22.18. and in this place; and
in all these places it signifies, deliberately to prepare, to proportion, to
finish, to complete, and not at all to ordain or decree; neither can the word
be understood in that sense: but that which I would enquire after, is the
author or operator in this fitting, by whom is this fitting accomplished; it
must be either of God or themselves; I answer, this fitting is not appropriated
to God except accidentally and subsequently, as God is said to harden Pharaoh.

1. The truth of this appears in the different reading of what relates to the
reprobate, and the elect in these two verses: if God did in any sense prepare,
or fit these vessels of wrath to destruction, as he prepares the vessels of
mercy to glory: why should the spirit of God render these two so differently,
appropriating the one unto God, and not the other, he does not at all entrust
God in the one, nor man in the other.

A Learned man does well observe upon this place, that this difference in
reading does import something worthy our consideration, and this difference is
taken notice of as considerable, even by those of the Calvinists opinion; one
of them says, they are fitted by God and themselves also; this a very ancient
Writer says, on this place, not (says he) for Gods pleasure, but his own
desert, for (says he) if they deserved it not, his pleasure would have been to
have saved them.

2. It is plain, this fitting is not of God, because Gods applycations of long
sufferings is toward them, as such so fitted, to be a means of their reducing
from that state of fitness for destruction, to a state of preparedness for
glory; for it is undeniably plain, that this fitness is not, as some would
have it, the effect of Gods enduring them, but they are said to be fitted
before God, who did thus endure them with long-suffering: and it cannot be
properly said, that God does endure them especially with much-long suffering
till they have first highly provoked him by a voluntary course of actual
rebellion, which does prepare persons for destruction, as it did Pharaoh, who
was fitted for destruction after the first plague, much more after all the six
plagus; yet after this God waits under sour plagues more: thus it is plain,
that persons may be said to be fitted for destruction, before God is said to
endure them, so that all this endurance as is exercised from the beginning to
the end of it, is upon such as he may justly destroy the first day of his
applycations to them; so that it cannot be fairly gathered, that this fitting
is wrought, much less ordained or decreed by God, but by sinners themselves:
but against this it is objected, that according to this notion men may be said
to make themselves vessels of wrath or dishonor, and how then does it answer
the terms of the text, and the instance of the potter who is said to make
vessels of each sort? I answer, that even in the fimilitude of the potter, it
is plain, that the potter does not antecedently make vessels of dishonor, but
only subsequently, when they will not be otherways formed; as you have largely
heard from Ier. 18. it is marring of the clay that precedes its being a vessel
of dishonor; the potter designed it for honor: so that man anticedently, and
God subsequently makes vessels of dishonor.

2. God is no where said anticedently to make vessels of wrath, but much on the
contrary, to make men upright, Genesis 1. God made men very good, but they found
out many inventious: it is true, there is a way how God may be said to make
vessels of wrath, that is, by making a law or decree wherein he does declare
what sort of sinners shall be vessels of wrath, and so they come judicially to
be vessels of wrath: in this sense must that saying be understood, Jude the
4th. certain men of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the
grace of God into wantonness; so that for God to decree or ordain vessels of
wrath, without respect to quallifications, does not answer the potters power in
the comparison, nor other places of Scripture: the potter does not claim this
power, to make vessels of dishonor of the clay, because it is his own goods,
as men would suppose in God, but because it is clay, and not only so, but
marred clay, not merely from his sovereignty or propriety, but from its
vileness; which liberty might be allowed the potter, if he were a servant, and
the clay none of his own: so that this fitting is to be understood the
voluntary act of the creature not of God; and these words contains a
declaration of Gods carriage toward those whom he meets with, fitted and
prepared for destruction; he endu^es with much long-suffering such as they; but
it is objected, does not the Apostle Peter speak of some made to be taken and
destroyed, 2 Peter 2.12. which some apply to this place, and to Gods making? I
answer. 1. This word is not expressed in the vulgar Latin, but in the room
thereof; they read tending to the snare and destruction; and so making
signifies an aptness or fitness, which may be taken one for another. 2. What
is spoken of and unto persons in an actual course of sin, yea, brutish
sensuallity, and not spoken of men as men; and so this making is appropriated
to themselves. 3. These persons spoken of here are some of those over whom the
long-suffering of God was waiting, 2 Peter 3.9. not willing that any should
perish; therefore not made so by God under any unalterable decree of
Reprobation.


The seventh thing to be enquired into is, how persons comes to be vessels of
wrath? in speaking to which head, I shall First, speak a few words to this
borrowed word vessel. 2ly, Show you what kind of sins are these preparing sins
that prepares for wrath.


1. The Apostle here calls those of whom he speaks by the name of vessels, both
the reprobate, and the Elect; the Original word here translated vessel, does
not always intend a hollow vessel to contain things liquid or dry: but in the
Hebrews the Apostle calls the instruments of the temple or tabernacle, tongs
and fireshovels, yet elsewhere are called vessels; but it is commonly and
properly that by a vessel is meant a cask or vessel to contain: men are called
vessels from a threefold consideration. 1. As they are the fruit and product of
labor and art, as well as design, and some vessels are more curiously wrought
and fixed according to what they are to contain, either liquid substance or
dry, yet all vessels made are the fruit of labor; wicked men takes pains to
make themselves, they weary themselves to destroy themselves; men are not these
vessels in their Original, but by their formation; the clay in the lump is not
the vessel, till it be formed and shaped by gradual proceedings, so men come to
be vessels of, or for wrath, by a gradual and followed course of actual sin and
rebellion. We read of children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. but we must make some
difference between children of wrath, and vessels of wrath; children of wrath
respects the averseness of our nature against God, but vessels of wrath
respects Gods wrath to men, who are fitted and formed to it. 2ly, They are
called vessels, because they are to contain what is put into them, therefore
says the Lord by the prophet Jeremy, chap. 13. speaking of men, every bottle
shall be filled; vessels are not made to keep always empty, but to contain;
when Saul is called a vessel, Act. 9. it was with respect to what God is to put
into him; he is to contain and carry his name amongst the gentiles; says the
Apostle, we have this treasure in earthen vessels. 3. Called vessels of wrath,
because God does design to fill them with wrath, as a vessel is filled with
liquor to pour in wrath, as liquor is poured into a vessel, made for that
purpose, till it be brimfull: for this wrath shall not only be without but
within: I will (says God to Pharaoh) pour all my plaguos upon thy heart, they
shall be within as well as without thee: thus we see that wicked men by
rebellion against God do form themselves into vessels of wrath:
but that which I have yet a few words to speak unto, is this, what sins are
those that tend to make men vessels of wrath, or prepare persons for wrath, as
a vessel is prepared to contain things moist or dry. I answer in general, first
reiterated acts of disobedience and rebellion against the known and declared
will of God; this was the case with Pharaoh and with the Jews. 2. More
particularly slighting and abusing the faithful servants of God, sent of God,
who seek your souls and bodies good: this also in particular was the case with
Pharaoh, he threatens Moses and Aaron, who came from God upon a message for his
good, yet tells them, that if they see his face any more they shall die: this
was also the case of the Jews, see 2 Chronicles. 36.16. they mocked and misused his
servants, till the wrath of God brake out without remedy: this was the case
with the latter Jews, See Matt. 21.40. chap. 23.37. they killed the Prophets,
and stoned them that were sent unto them.
3. Sins of hypocrisy in the worship of God, Job 36.13. the hypocrites in
heart heap up wrath: See with what indignation our Lord appears against the
hypocrites, Mat. 23. eight woes pronounced against them. 4. Such as abuses
Gods mercys and favors multiplied upon them, and grow worse under mercyes, as
Pharaoh did, and so did Israel; see Psalm. 78. hereupon the wrath of God brake
out upon them: see Romans 2.4. abusing Gods mercies, they treasure up wrath
against the day of wrath. 5. Voluntary contracted hardness of heart, this has
been shown at large, Pharaoh hardened his heart a long time, when neither
mercies nor judgments will touch or penetrate the heart, that resists the
touch, impenitent hearts precedes wrath. 6. That sin that prepares a person for
wrath is unbelief and gospel-disobedience: see for this, John, 3.36. the wrath
of God avideth on such: Romans 2.8.9. those who do not believe on, or obey the
truth, tribulation and wrath: 2 These. 1.8. he shall come in flaming fire,
rendering vengeance on them that know not God, nor obey the gospel: there are
several gradual steps by which persons are formed to be vessels of wrath.


But that which remains, is to sum up those doctrinal conclusions that do offer
themselves from the words thus opened.

I shall only name six doctrins and proceed.

1. Doctrine, That Gods proceedings with disobedient rebellious sinners is more
inoffensive and equal then the proceedings of the potter with his marred clay.
This reddition or application is argumentation, arguing from the less to the
greater, as if he should say, and shall not God much more? the unreasonable
stupidity of the Jews was such, that they would not allow God that power which
they would allow a poor potter as to his clay; that after much enduring and
long-sufferings upon disobedient and rebellious sinners, he might then make
them vessels of dishonor.

2. Doct. That God is admirable in his attribute of long-suffering and
forbearance as to the worst of sinners, over such as are fit for destruction.
Wicked men are the subjects, the proper subjects of Gods long-sufferings; it is
not a little but much long-suffering that is exercised over them.

3. Doct. It is not the work of God but the work of men themselves to prepare
and make themselves fit for destruction; God finds men fit for destruction
when he thus endures them. 4. Doct. That which vindicates and justifies the
Revelation of Gods wrath and revenging power, is his precedent long-sufferings
exercised toward them. If God would show his wrath and make his power known
convincingly, to stop every mouth, he ushers it in with much long-suffering,
and those who have had most long-suffering from God, may expect most severity
from God, Mat. 11.22. Romans 2. Rev. 18.

5. Doct. That persons fitted and prepared for destruction may yet be in a
capacity of repentance, whilst God spares them, See three Scriptures, Jer.
36.3.7. Chap. 26.3. Ezekiel 12.3. 6. Doct. That the power which God claims and
exercises in hardening whom he will, respectech not men as men, nor men as
sinners simply considered; but it respects men as they are already actually
prepared and completed for destruction: such as he may justly destroy whether
he harden them or no; so that the proper subjects of Gods wrath and reprobation
are such as not only highly provoked God by sin and disobedience, but after all
abused his long-suffering toward them.

So much for ver. 22.

CHAP. XV. Showing the super-abounding riches of Gods grace to sinners for
their encouragement to turn and persevere through all difficulties in
well-doing, the rich favor and glory they shall enjoy to all eternity.
Ver. 23. And that he might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels
of mercy which he had before prepared unto glory.


THese words seems to be a continued speech tending to vindicate the just and
unquestionable power of God, not only to make vessels of dishonor
subsequently, but much more properly and antecedently to make vessels of honor
and mercy; both which answers to the power of the potter, in the comparison
before: as God may justly on the one side make them vessels of dishonor who
withstand his formation of them and abuse long-suffering extended to them, so
he may much more make them vessels of mercy, who shall be found complying and
tractable to his will, and so be prepared for glory: the Apostle seems to lay
great stresse upon this preparing and fitting, as considered on both sides,
only here is an apparent difference, he entrusts God in this latter not in the
other; It is clearly appropriated to God, to make vessels of honor or mercy,
but no such application to the other: God is not unwilling to be accounted the
author of preparation for glory: we have the Apostle in these words offering a
second reason of Gods enduring with such longsuffering the vessels of wrath,
that had fitted themselves to be destroyed, not only that he might have the
clearer ground of advantage against them to show his wrath, and make his power
known in their eminent and remarkable destruction, who should so a base his
long-suffering.

But 2. That by his so enduring he might make manifest and declare by way of
eminency his grace, love and mercy, upon them who should be prevailed upon by
such his mercy, to comply to his holy will: the Apostle argues thus, if God
shows such mercy to his worst and most provoking enemies, much more to his
obedient friends, Ioh. 15.14. ye are my friends when you do whatsoever. I
command you: Gods mercy exhibited to the old world who were so wicked, that
they had grieved God to the very heart by their sins, is a ground to beget
faith in Gods singular choice love and respect to his friend righteous Noah,
who had been singularly righteous before him in that generation; so Gods
long-suffering to Pharaoh so spare him so long, does demonstrate his fuller
respect to Israel his firstborn, who were in Goshen, where his plagues came
not: that singular favor shown by the father to the prodigal, does demonstrate
a greater love to the elder son, that had not so done amiss: therefore the
father tells him, he was always with him, and all that he had was his: the
potters taking pains with a cracked and marred vessel (that has made it self
obnoxious to his will to be destroyed) to make it a vessel of honor, does
highly declare his very high estimation to that vessel, which is a vessel of
honor, more then if he had ground the marred vessel to powder.

So that to issue the matter in a few words, Gods great love to sinners
demonstrates his singular and choice love to saints. These words are two ways
understood. One way is according to what I have declared as the argument is
drawn from Gods mercy to the vessels of wrath. 2. There are some, yea not a few
who understand this argument, to be drawn from the severity of God to them,
that he shows and exercises his wrath on them, that the riches of his glory
may appear to the vessels of mercy:
from thence some of them of that opinion, renders it in these words, that Gods
showing his wrath, and making his power known, in the dreadful destruction of
reprobates, commends and sets off upon terms of far greater acceptance, the
riches of his grace and love in the salvation of the elect; or thus, (as some
say) God making so many reprobates greatly advances his love to the elect; he
makes the reprobate drink the dregs of his wrath; that his mercy may be the
more sweet to the elect: as two contraries sets off each other the better: but
that this latter cannot be the sense of our Apostle in this place, we may be
satisfied in the very reading the words: for if that opinion were a truth, yet
it does not appear from this context, that such an opinion has any footing in
it as may be easily seen: for here it is undeniably plain, that the argument is
drawn from Gods mercy to the reprobate: the Apostle seems to argue something
like this, chap. 5. if God had such love to enemies, as to give Christ for
them: he argues, with a much more as to those reconciled, as to their salvation.

Here are couched in our text two reasons, why God does endure, and not
sudainly cut off and destroy such as have highly provoked him. 1. That in his
so doing he may leave himself without excuse, and cast all the blame upon the
sinner. 2. That from these his proceedings in ways of mercy to such so
unworthy, he may offer a demonstrative ground, how great his glory shall be
which he will show and bestow on those who are bettered by mercy. God did do
something for this end, that he might make known the riches of his glory on the
believer.


But I shall briefly enquire into some words and circumstances in this text by
way of explication, and so hasten to draw up those Doctrines which flow from
these words so opened. As first, what is here to be understood by Gods glory?
2. Why is it added riches of his glory? 3. What it is to have this riches of
glory known? 4. Who are these vessels of mercy? and why are they so called? 5.
How is the making these vessels of mercy appropriated to God, different from
the former? 6. What may we understand by this preparation? 7. When is it
accomplished?


Of each of these a very short word.

1. this glory twice spoken of in this text, is two ways understood, sometimes
it is taken as the effect for the cause; it is sometimes taken for that in God
which is just matter to glorify God, matter of honor and glory to him; the due
consideration whereof renders God glorious and worthy of admiration and
adoration: this is to be understood by the words of Jesus Christ to Martha,
John 11.40. I told thee (says our Lord) if thou would believe, thou
should see the glory of the Lord, that is, thou should see that for which
thou should glorify God; therefore this glory of God is commonly referred to
Gods power and his grace, because from these appearances from God, for the most
part, men are aptest to glorify him.

2. By Gods glory sometimes is intended his power it self, as Romans 6.4. Christ
was raised from the dead by the glory of the father, that is, the power of the
father, Ephesians. 3.16. according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened
with might. 2 These. 1.6. called the glory of his power: and often it is applied
to his grace, as Ephesians. 1.6.12.16. sometimes glory is spoken of as the portion
of believers in the life to come; see 73 Psalm. 24. receive me unto glory. Pro.
3. the wise shall inherit glory. John 17.22. Romans 2.8. 1 Peter 3.13. I am
inclinable to believe, that the latter is intended in this verse, that which is
the portion of the vessels of mercy, is glory, and the portion of the others is
destruction.

2. Why is this word riches added? that he might make known the riches of his
glory on the vessels of mercy? I answer, riches signifies abundance of
whatsoever is spoken of: this metaphorical word is often borrowed by the
Apostle to do service; in commending the attributes of God, and the future
glory of the Saints; sometimes it is borrowed to set out the unconceivable
fullness of Gods attributes: we read of the riches of Gods goodnes^, Romans 2.4.
despisest thou the riches of his goodnes^* we read of the riches of his
wisdom and knowledge chap. 11.33. of the riches of his grace, Ephesians. 1.7. and
again, the riches of his glory: and we may from hence know, that whatever God
is furnished with, he is richly and plenteously filled with: God is rich o^
plenteous in all his attributes.

2. Sometimes riches is applied to the future reward of the Saints, Romans 10.12.
the same L^ over all is rich unto all that call upon him; for he that calls
upon him shall be saved, Ephesians. 1.18. S. F^ prays, that they might know the
riches of his glory (...) the inheritance of the Saints in light.

3. What is it for this riches of his glory to be known?

I answer, there are two ways of making things known. 1. When they are brought
to open and occular view, to make a thing obvious; in this sense the glory of
God can be no more seen then himself by man in a moral state. But 2ly, things
are made known when they are discovered by arguments to be so to the
understanding;
and in this latter sense it is most like, the Apostle here intends: it is Gods
design to exhibit an argument or Medium, by which men may be led to this
knowledge of the riches of Gods glory in himself, and in his distributions: God
is not wanting in his dispensations to men of sufficiency of means of knowledge
and understanding, whereby they may come to make an estimate in themselves, how
abundant rich in grace and bounty God is to them that obey him.

4. Who are these vessels of mercy, and why so called? it is granted on all
hands, that these vessels of mercy are such as once were miserable, and of the
same lump of those who were dead in sins and trespasses; according to Ephesians. 2.
whilst they were walkers according to the course of this world, these have
obtained mercy: all which is comprehended in that word (called,) verse
following, where these vessels of mercy are so described, even us whom he has
called: vessels of mercy are such in their call, not in their decree.

2. Called vessels by a metaphor, because as vessels properly called, have a
particular form given them by the artificer, who makes and forms them, to be
commodious and fitted to receive and hold things liquid and dry, which is put
into them: so these are called vessels as they are formed and fashioned by God
by his word and spirit; converted, regenerated persons are as vessels, they are
the from of Gods work and workmanship, Ephesians. 2.10. thus these formed by God
are fitted to hold the mercy of God to all eternity; so that whilst men are
dead in sins and trespasses, they are destitute of this formation, and so
incapable to hold present mercy or future glory: vessels of mercy are such as
have suffered a new formation.

5. Why is the making these vessels of mercy appropriated to God differently
from the former?

1. As we are in pursuance of the application of the comparison of the potter:
I answer that the potter may in a more special relation be said to make vessels
of honor, because he makes them antecedently such, but he makes vessels of
dishonor but subsequently, upon their marring; so those that are Gods vessels
of mercy are so antecedently: God has his primary design answered in them,
but the Scriptures does not appropriate the making of vessels of wrath to God;
we have an apparent difference in reading: the vessels of wrath are said to be
fitted and prepared passively, or in a passive sense, but God is not interested
in it by the Apostle, but these are said positively to be prepared by God,
which he has prepared unto glory: and there is little reason why God should be
interested in making vessels of wrath, seeing he has so often disclaimed his
willingness that any should be such: and we have his oath, that he takes no
pleasure in any's being such.

I remember one on this place says, If God made vessels of wrath, he would
take pleasure to fill them with wrath, but that he is unwilling to do: but why
is God in special interested with making vessels of mercy, and it is not
appropriated to man at all?

I answer, first from Gods Original design, will and desire; he wills all men's
salvation, that they would accept of his mercy: 2ly, He gives Jesus Christ as
the effectual means to work us to this-form, Ephesians. 2. created in him. 3. It is
of him as he occasions the publication of the gospel, with all tenders and
offers of grace. 4. Because he follows the soul with the continual strivings
and operations of his spirit within, in order to sanctification; by which it
comes to be a vessel fit for its masters use, 2 Timothy 3.21.


But why are these (by a variation of terms) vessels of honor, called vessels
of mercy? I answer first, mercy supposes misery, that these as well as others
were found in by God. 2. They may be called vessels of mercy. 1. As they
contain mercy here. 2. Because they contain mercy to all eternity.
1. They contain mercy here, as they are partakers of the grace and mercy of
the Gospel, in opposition to the law; they have it not by debt for work done,
but by free grace: for the dispensation of the Gospel is called mercy in this
chap. ver. 16. chap. 11.30.31. 2 Corinthians. 4. as ye have received mercy, yea
faint not, Ephesians. 2.4. the Gospel is the sure mercy of David, Act. 13. Gal. 6.
2. Vessels of mercy, as they are to contain mercy to all eternity, as Jude
says, looking for the mercy of our Lord to eternal glory.



6. How are we to understand this preparation (before?) why before? from whence
some argue thus; That those who are the vessels of mercy are only such who are
necessitated to be such by an absolute decree from eternity; there being
vessols of mercy in time, is the effect of a decree of God afore-time, and that
upon a mere personal account, they were such before they were born; To this I
answer, that this word before or before, is of late foisted in, and is not in
many approved copies; neither Tindal nor the Vulgar Latin, nor the translation
of the Church of England against the College of Rhems; and it will better suit
with the Original to leave it out, and ^ade only, which he has prepared. 2ly,
Had it been the Apostles design to assert their eternal predestination to this
mercy upon a personal account, doubtless he would have rendered it in a word
which signifies to ordain or decree and not render it prepare; which word
signifies another thing, to form, make fit and ready gradually, as appears in
these Scriptures, Matt. 22.14. chap. 26.17.19. Luke. 1.17. Luke. 9.52. chap.
12.47. 2 Timo. 2.21. Revela. 19. Heb. 11. Noah prepared an ark, wrought it with
pains and art with many a stroke: but suppose it should have signified to
ordain, it could not have crossed the text nor Scriptures in general; for it is
granted, that God did predestinate and unalterably decree that all believers in
Christ so persevering shall be vessels of glory: but what need we depart from
the grammatical sense of the word prepare? the prepared ones are the vessels of
merey.


7. When is this preparation accomplished?

I answer in general, that it is the work of a Christian all his days to
prepare, and it is Gods work also to make him meet for the inheritance of glory
to come, Col. 1.12. it was Paul's labor, ver. 28. that he present every man
perfect in Christ Jesus, it must suppose a holding without cracking till they
are finished, as the potters vessel, for a person is not accounted meet by God
for a translation into celestial glory immediately upon repentance, faith, and
obedience; though they may then be termed vessels of mercy, but there is a
great deal of sanctifying and preparing work to be accomplished before we be
meet for Communion with God in glory, Heb. 10. ye had need of patience that
after ye have done the will of God ye may inherit the promise; glory is to be
sought for by patient continuance in well-doing. 1 Timothy 6.17,18,19. there are
good works to be found in order to laying hold of eternal life.

Having thus opened the words, that which now remains, is to give you those
Doctrines that does arise from them: I shall sum up the whole into seven
Doctrins.

1. Doctrine, That Gods present bounty, goodness and mercy extended to very
high hardened, provoking, disobedient sinners, and very rebellious persons,
does exhibit^ a sufficient ground of knowledge of Gods unconceiveable grace and
mercy toward those who by the help of his grace repent, believe, and obey the
Gospel. God who is regular and uniform in all his proceedings, must needs love
his friends dearly, if he so love his enemies; this doctrine I shall but touch
only, I would leave two words of inference upon it. 1. Study the dimension of
Gods grace to the world, to enemies, to such as walk contrary to him; he
causes the sun to shine upon the good and bad, gives rain and fruitful seasons
to the worst of sinner^, nay, he gave Christ for the worst of sinners. 2ly,
Study the immense and unconceivable love that God bears to the vessels of
mercy, O what great goodness has God laid up for them that love him.


2. Doctrine, That the portion of believing obedient holy persons, is a state
of unconceivable glory: The saints and people of God are designed for glory.
How often is the future state of the saints styled glory, Ps. 68.13. Mat.
13.43. they shall shine like the sun in the kingdom of their father: they shall
be equal to the Angels, those glorious creatures: it is called, Ephesians. 1.18.
the riches of the glory of the inheritance: they shall be glorious within,
glorious without, Phil. 3. last. who shall change our vile bodies and make them
like his glorious body; a great change shall be on the saints in that day.

3. Doctrine, It is one piece of the great condescending grace of God to
mankind to declare and make known beforehand for encouragement, what rich
glory and favor they shall enjoy who for the present are tractable and
conformable to his will, even to all eternity. How full of precious promises
are the Scriptures throughout to such, of which promises (one says) they are,
1. The breathings of divine love and affection. 2. The life and soul of faith.
3. The anchor of hope. 4. The wings of prayer. 5. The true foundation of
industry. 6. The rays and beams of the son of righteousness;
God has given us great and precious promises that we may have strong
consolation.

From the Apostles variation in his terms, honor, mercy. 4. Doctrine, That to
contain the saving mercy and grace of God is a state of great honor.

To be vessels of mercy is honorable, to be vessels of honor according this
Text supposes three things. 1. That there is or has been an act of formation
passed upon them to make them such. 2. They are supposed to stand upon terms of
mercy in opposition to works, for these two are opposed all along. 3. It
supposes such as enjoy the mercy of pardoning grace and gloryfying to all
eternity.


5. Doctrine, That the present state of saints in this world is a state of
preparation not of perfection. All men in this world are upon their making or
marring; in this world they are all like the potters vessel upon the wheel: we
are at present shaping and forming, in order to what we shall contain hereafter.

6. Doctrine, That it is altogether necessary for the advancing Gods glory,
that persons be completely fitttd and perfectly prepared before they be
glorified It is altogether needful, that persons be here molded and shaped and
made fit and meet for the inheritance: we read of working out or working
through our salvation that is, our meetness for salvation: this preparation
does consist much in purification, and in subduing corruption, 2 Timo. 2.20. if
a man purge himself, he shall be prepared for the masters use: 2 Cor. 7.1. Heb.
12.14. thus we cannot see God without holiness.

7. Doctrine, That the spiritual work and work manship in new creating and
forming, and preparing persons for glory to come, is and may fitly be ascribed
to God and the effectaal workings of his grace. To this the Scriptures are very
full: I need not stand to speak to them Ephesians. 2.1. Cor. 2.11. Phil. 2.13. 2 Corinthians. 5.5. but how comes it to be ascribed to God? 1. The whole means by
which it is effected is of him, from first to last. 2. It can arise from no
other, but of him, not of themselves, not of the world, not of the devil:
These are all against this formation.

Use, how should this teach us humility, see what a spirit our Apostle had in
Timothy and Titus, as to this, God who was rich in grace: so St. Peter 1 Pet.
1.3. blessed be God who has begotten us again.

But so much for verse 23.

We now proceed to verse, 24.

CHAP. XVI. Gods love to the called, whether Jew or Gentile, is a very great
and singular love, yet not so unchangeably fixed in this life, that neither the
obedience of some nor rebellion of others can alter it.
Ver. 24. Even us whom he has called, not of the Jews only, but also of the
gentiles: or, as in the greek, whom also he has called.


WE have contained in this verse a fuller amplification and description of the
vessel^ of mercy, who are prepared unto glory; they are here said to be such as
are called, they are not such by virtue of an absolute decree of election, but
the Apostle places it upon actual calling: it is very plain, that these words
are relative to the former verse, and calls us to look back to the former: some
learned men takes these words to be exegetical and explanatory of the former,
showing us how God proceeds in making vessels of mercy, namely by calling them:
the Apostle having been in the former parts of this chapter, taking pains to
inform and convince the Jews, that God in his promise to Abraham, did not
intend the natural seed of Abraham, according to the flesh, he is now showing
them which way the seed comes in, namely, by their being called, whether Jews
or gentiles, not the Jews only, but also the gentiles; not all the Jews, nor
all the gentiles, but only the called of both: I shall be very brief in
handling this verse, and also the remaining part of the chapter, therefore I
shall speak a few words by way of explication, and in order thereunto it is
altogether needful to enquire what is meant by calling, (even us whom he has
called;) calling is two ways understood in Scripture, sometimes it is taken in
a large sense for Gods invitation and calling by the preaching of the Gospel to
the ear; this calling is intended by Christ in the parable, Mat. 22.3. where we
read, that Christ sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden,
saying, come: to which agrees the parable of the laborers also, the sending
forth the Gospel is this calling: now this calling barely considered, is common
to thousands that do not answer the call; who are to no degree prepared for
glory, but whilst they are under this call are preparing and fitting themselves
to be vessels of wrath: whilst they refuse to come: of such a sort our Lord
speaks; Mat. 26.16. chap. 22.14. many are called but few chosen. 2. Calling is
understood in a more strict sense in the Scripture, rather as the effect then
the call it self; persons are said to be called when they are found answering
the outward call, by coming and complying by faith and obedience: thus calling
is generally understood in Scriptures, 1 Corin. 1.9. God is faithful by whom we
are called to the fellowship of his son: chap. 7. is any called being
circumcised that is converted by faith and obedience to the gospel, verse. 21.
22. Gal. 1.6. called you unto the grace of Christ, verse. 15. but when it
pleased the Lord to call me by his grace:
these and many other places speaks of calling as answered unto; and in this
sense our text is to be understood of an effectual call, because this call is
a demonstration of vessels of mercy, so that calling according to our text is
comprehensive of repentance, faith and obedience, the whole new creature.

But 2 ly, Why does our Apostle subjoin these words to the former verse. 23. as
with respect to the vessels of mercy? I answer the Apostle in this connection
and explanation is insinuating to the Jews the way how persons comes to be
vessels of wrath and vessels of mercy; vessels of wrath, by obstinately
withstanding, and not answering to the call of God, being sent unto; and
invited according to the parable, Mat. 22. Luke. 14. but made light of it, were
not prevailed upon, and so were excluded from any part of his provision.

But 3 ly, Why is the obedience of believers here and elsewhere rather ascribed
unto Gods calling, then to the creatures compliance, and answered, whom also he
has called, though we know the compliance of the creature is as absolutely
necessary in order to bring forth this effect of preparedness for glory?

I answer, it may well both here and elsewhere be ascribed unto God. 1. Because
Gods call is antecedent and primary to man's compliance; man had not sought
after God, if he had not sought after man first, and called him first; what was
foretold as to these people by the prophet Esaiah, Esa. 65. is true in this,
God is said to be stretching out of his hands all the day long to a gainsaying
and re^ellious people, therefore it may well be appropriated to God. 2. God is
not only the first but the cordial, importunate seeker and caller, he is
unwearied in his calling; he calls again and again; how does the truth of this
appear in that parable? Mat. 22. he sends again and again, and that with
arguments, 3. It may well be appropriated to God, that we are called, because
he gives ears to bear, and legs to come, to answer his call: the abilities of
the creature is every way of God.


These things considered, it may well be ascribed to God the caller, not our
selves: but why have we this particle ( even or also)? this also is to be
understood emphatically, as taking special and singular notice of Gods special
mercy and grace in this act of his calling, it does marvellously demonstrate
the condescending grace of God; this also is often used emphatically in other
places, as 1 These. 4.8. who also has given us his spirit: we have it four
times emphatically used, Romans 8.30,34. why have we this distributive speech
added? not of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles; it is the saying of a
learned man upon this word, we are to take notice that commonly when in
Scriptures we find things affirmed, it supposes, that there are some that
deny those things, and when things in Scripture are denied, it supposes some
body affirming them: so the reason of this kind of speaking here, not the Jews
only, but also of the Gentiles, was because he knew very well, that the
unbelieving and self-opinionated Jews, were inclined to think, that if any
people under heaven were privileged with the choicest favor of God, they must
be themselves, if not only yet chiefly: now to take off this their opinion, the
Apostle adds these words, not the Jews only: God has by his gospel
dispensation pulled down the wall of separation and partition, and made his
gospel-priviledges level to Jews and gentiles: he has made no difference
between Jews and gentiles, having purified the gentiles hearts by faith, Act.
15. therefore our Lord in his parable sends into the highways, to the poor
gentiles that had no riches to trust unto. So that we may perceive that the
Apostle in this verse, is laboring to satisfy the Jews, who were like to be
offended at his appropriating to himself, and those who had received his
doctrine, the dignity of being vessels of mercy, who but a little before were
in their condition: the Apostle gives them to know that this change was made by
Gods calling some of each of them, both Jew and gentile.

Thus much for explication of these words, now that which remains, is to lay
before you those necessary conclusions that present themselves unto us from
these words, which are these that follow.

1. Doctrine, That the character and description of those persons who are
vessels of mercy, and prepared for glory, are such who by God are truly called.
That is, who have answered to his call; Gods way in making vessels of mercy and
glory is by calling them; such as are justified and glorified, are first called
Romans 8. therefore it lies upon each of us to make a diligent enquiry, whether
we are called. 1. If thou art called, thou art removed from thy former state, 1
Peter 2.9. out of darkness into light. 2. If thou art called, thou have obeyed
what is made known to thee; as Saul did, Lord what will thou have me to do?


2. Doctrine, For persons to be effectually called, so as to give answer to the
call of the gospel, is a choice and singular privilege afforded from God. This
doctrine is drawn from that emphatical word (also), which I told you was to be
taken with an emphasis, for it is the character of the true seed of Abraham,
and none else to be effectually called: the whole work of conversion in
gospeldays, is comprenehded in this, to be called: see the promise, Act. 2.39.
it is to all that are called: it is a choice privilege to be called. 3.
Doctrine, It is very proper, and at once the duty and privilege of a called
person, to know and acknowledge his calling to God.

This the Apostle did as to himself and as to others, Romans 1.6. amongst which
we are the called, 1 Corin. 1.9. who has called us, 2 Timothy 1.9. Ephesians. 5.8.
study your former and ptesent state, if you be called be thankful, Col. 1.12. 1
Peter 1.3.

4. Doctrine, That God makes no difference as to nations or conditions of men
in his gospel calling or invitations. Not only Jews but gentiles, he calls the
worst of nations or sinners by the gospel, see Romans 3.29. it is one God who
justifie^ the circumcision by faith, and the uncircumcision through faith, Gal.
3.28. there is neither Jew nor greek, bond nor free, male nor female, for ye
are all one in Christ Jesus: admire the boundless mercy of God in the gospel to
the worst of sinners.

5. Doctrine, That the great and aggravating circumstance in the condemnation
of men, whether Jews or gentiles, will be the rejecting, and not answering the
call of God, not complying with Gods loud-call. This doctrine is employed whilst
S. Paul is insinuating to the Jews the way how he and the rest come to be
vessels of mercy and honor, both Jews and gentiles, as they were called, and
consequently persons come to be vessels of wrath and dishonor as they reject
Gods calls to them, not being called: the truth of this appears, Prove. 1.24.
Esaias. 65.12.66. Jer. 4.13. Mat. 23.27. Gods call does aggravate man's
condemnation greatly, if they had not been called their condemnation had been
the less: our Lord lays an emphasis upon his bidding those gueits: Luke: 14.
not those that were bidden she taste: had they not-been bidden, they might have
had some excuse, but they rejected the call.

Use 1. How sadly may this speak to many in our days, that have had call upon
call, yet not answered. 2. You that are in the Church, examine your selves
whether you are truly called.
So much for verse 24.

Ver. 25. As he says in Hosea, I will call them my people which were not my
people, and her beloved which was not beloved.

26. And it shall come to pass, that in the place where it was said unto them,
ye are not my people, there shall they be called the Children of the living
God.


We are now past the difficult and controversial part of this chapter;
therefore I shall pass the more briefly through the remaining part of this
chapter* and in order thereunto, I shall reduce what remains to be spoken unto
in the close of this chapter into four heads, and speak to it under these four
heads. 1. We have quotations tending to ratify and confirm what the Apostle
Paul had insinuated (at least implicitly), concerning the admission of the
gentiles, upon believing in Jesus Christ, to be the true seed of Abraham and
heirs of promise: and that this was no new nor strange thing, but what their
own prophets had foreseen and fore told should be accomplished, either as to
the gentiles, or such a^ were in the same forlorn and rejected state: this we
have verse 25, 26. The second head speaks thus much, that God by virtue of his
promise to Abraham and his seed, was not obliged to entertain in his favor,
all or the greater number of Abraham's natural or federal seed, but the greatest
part, nay all except a very few, a small remnant, have been liable to rejection
for sin, yea even in former times: this we have verse 27, 28, 29. 3. Under the
third head we have the Apostle summing up in a few words what he had been in
chief treating upon in this chapter, as to the way purposed and determined by
God, in which men may obtain justification: this we have verse 30, 31, 32. in
which we have an epitomy or abridgement of the whole controversy; from whence
we may easily gather, what was the matter he had been running at in this
chapter, because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of
the law. Under the fourth head we have not only the more general and remote
ground of this dreadful miscarriage of the Jews, but the very particular and
immediate ground of it, they stumbled at that stumbling stone, that is, at
Jesus Christ his obscurity and mean appearance in the world; this occasioned
the Jews to be offended: Of these four heads I shall speak briefly in order.


The first of these heads we have contained i^ ver. 25, 26. which two verses
contain a quotation drawn from two places in Hosea, chap. 2.23. chap. 1.10.
both tending to the same matter; the terms of the whole citation does import a
very gracious promise of a singular alteration and change, which the Prophet
foresaw to be made to God upon the present state of some people or other, for
he does not speak expressly, that these who are now, or shall be, in a poor and
low, despicable state and condition, shall be changed to a state honorable and
glorious, and admitted into the choice and singular love and favor of God: we
have (...) double description of their twofold state, neg^rively and
affirmatively. 1. We have their state set forth under three circumstances,
negatively, which they are under before this calling. 1. They are not beleved.
2. They have not received mercy. 3. They were not then Gods people.
2ly, We have as to their changed state three affirmations. 1. They shall be
Gods people. 2. They shall be beloved. 3. They shall be children of the living
God.

Thus we may perceive that the prophet had a clear and distinct prospect of a
great change of estate as to some people, but it is not expressed who; there are
some different apprehensions amongst expositors about this passage.

There are three opinions upon these words. 1. Some are of opinion that these
predictions relate to the Jews only as to their return from their captivated
state, wherein they appeared, as if they were not the people of God, but cast
off by him, that yet there should be a time again when they should have the
face and favor of God, and by him be owned for his people: and the truth is,
the context Hosea 1.2. does run much that way as to them, which makes Calvin
very confident of that side, as if he thought none could contradict him. But 2
ly, There are many others that are of opinion, that these words are a
prophetical prediction of the calling of the gentiles, because they are said to
be a nation not beloved, a people, not the people of God; and those
appellations are commonly applied to the gentiles in Scripture; and also
because the Apostle does cite this saying in this place following, what he had
said verse 24. as a relative to those he there speaks of called, not of the
Jews only but also of the gentiles; of this opinion is Pereus, with much
confidence. But there are a third sort, who judge these words of God by Hosea,
does relate to both Jews and gentiles, and are fulfilled in both Jews and
gentiles; that they are both couched in these words; and I think they may well
answer to both, not only to the Jews in their return out of captivity, but they
will well answer to the acceptance and admission of the gentiles to the grace
and favor of the Gospel:
and so the Apostle Peter seems to apply it chiefly to the gentiles, 1 Pet. 2.9.
which i^ time past were not a people, are now the people of God: it is usual in
predictions in Scripture, the they admit of several sulfillings; so might this
be fulfilled to the Jews and also to the gentiles: and several others: for
instance, that prophecy of calling Gods son out of Egypt, is several times
fulfilled, once it is fulfilled in Christ, as Mat. 2.15. so that Ier. 31. of
Rachels weeping for her children that were not: this has ahd two fulfillings
already: so that Psalm. 41. John 13.18. so that the prophets might it the first
place intend the Jews, and afterward it might relate to the gentiles also; but
take it either way, as relating to the Jews or gentiles, it does accommodate
the Apostle in his design: for if the Jews after they had been rejected from
being a people; may be restored and accepted, why may not the gentiles also,
seeing they are both in the same condition: it may be supposed, that it was not
the chief design of the Apostle in this place to prove or declare either the
re-instating of the Jews into the favor of God after that cloud of displeafure
which for a time had been spread upon them, the calling the gentiles to be a
people, but rather to satisfy the Jews it was no new orstrange thing, or that
which might give them occasion to quarr^ with him, for asserting, that a people
now alienated from God, may be called, and answering his call may be received
into favor with him as his people; for the Jews and gentiles were both laid
level, and were all under sin, as he says Romans 3.9. what are the Jews better
then the gentiles? we have proved (says the Apostle) that all are under sin,
and God makes vessels of mercy both of Jews and gentiles, and this (says the
Apostle) is no more then your own prophets do assert; he will call them his
people that were not his people: so that the great design of our Apostle in
these quotations out of Hosea, was to convince the Jews that his doctrine was
no new doctrine, that persons out of covenant, love, and favor, as the
gentiles were, might notwithstanding be admitted: it may be taken notice of,
that in our Apostles quotations of these Prophets, there are some verbal
variations between the Old and New Testament; and this very usual with the
penmen of the New Testament, when they cite the Old. But this know, that when
it is so, it is neither negligently nor ignorantly, but designedly, to
accommodate the sense, and render the Text more lightsome: yet the difference
here, is but small, not material, as we may see, if we compare Hosea. 2.23. the
Apostle instead of mercy, renders it love, which is more lightsome and Gospel:
for mercy may be where love is not: so when the Old read sons, the New read
children; which is still more evangelical: as to these words I would speak to
them with respect to the author, and the words themselves. 1. It is plain,
that God is the speaker, it is God the Apostle intends, when he uses these
words, for he says also in Hosea, I will call them my people: Gods words and
the Prophets words are the same: what the Prophet speaks, God is said to speak.
2. As to the matter spoken, and that lies (...) two parts. 1. A singular
owning of a people to be his, who had been estranged from God, and out of his
love and favor. 2ly, We have very emphatically described the place where this
happy change shall be made, in the same place where they had been eminently
taked notice of as a forlorn people, not owned by God, ver. 26. It shall come
to pass, that in the place where it was said unto them, ye are not my people,
there they shall be called the children of the living God.



For the opening the words, we are to understand, that to call a people Gods
people, is matter o^ dignity, yea, great dignity and honor: things eminent and
excellent are called Gods; so goodly Cedars, are Cedars of God, Psalm. 36. the
great mo^tains are called the mountains of God: an excellent man a man of God:
so here to be called the people of God, is a title of dignity.

2ly, To be called in this sense is not mean^ a bear title, but it means they
are so; they are (...) people of God really, as Jer. 27. where it is said of
Christ, he shall be called the Lord our righteousness, is the same, as if he
should have said, he shall be the Lord our righteousness: as in like manner,
wh^ the virgin Mary says, from hence forth all gene^tions shall call me
blessed, that is, shall reckon and ^steem me blessed, or acknowledge me
blessed: so (...) be called Gods people, intends no less, then they shall
acknowledge them to be so: the children seting forth the near relation and
tender love that God in this change shall bear to them he shall carry it to
them, as a father to children that are small and tender: living God in
opposition to Idols. It is worthy our taking notice, how the spirit of God does
ingeminate and reiterate to the same effect in these vessels, to assure us the
truth of the matter treated on, that he will certainly own relation and love
also, even to a visible manifestation; a people who were or are at the greatest
distance in both: This does instruct us, how full Gods heart is of goodness to
mankind; how propense to goodness, to pass by transgression; and receive
graciously: for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, as our
Lord in another case says: we have an eminent place to the same purpose, Ier.
32.41. as to Israel in special, as to their return, I will plant them
assuredly, with my whole heart, with my whole soul; what God does for a people,
he does it heartily; therefore the design of this reiteration, is not only to
offer the certainty, but the cordialnesse of this admission into love and
favor; so that (says our Apostle) it is no strange doctrine, for God to admit
the gentiles into favor, who were at the greatest distance, who were strangers
and foreigners: they may also become fellow citizens with the saints and of
the household of faith: yea, children of the living God.

Thus having briefly opened the words, it follows after the method that I have
before observed, that I give those doctrinal conclusions contained in them,
which are as follows; I shall but name them.

Doct. 1. That what God hoth done in former times, either in mercy or
judgment, is significant to us in Gospel-days for our instruction. The Apostle
brings down what God prophesied to Israel, therefore it is common for the
Apostles to cite Gods dealings in both, 1 Cor. 10. Ju^. 2 Peter 2.

Doct. 2. That the sayings of the Prophets are the sayings of God himself, God
speaks in Hosea. This I had occasion to take notice of before as to Pharaoh,
that what God speaks in his servants is undeniably and universally true; see
Luke 1.73. God spoke by the mouth of all his holy prophets: since the world
begun, 2 Pet. 1.21. holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy
spirit, therefore we ought to have a high esteem to the sayings of the
prophets, as if God himself were speaking unto us.

Doct. 3. That for a people to be owned and accented of God as his, is a very
choice and great privilege. It was prophesied as such, I will call them my
people. Doct. 4. Which were not beloved, from whence flows these two Lessons.
1. That Gods love or hatred with respect to persons or people, is not
unchangeably fixed. He may call them his people, that is, own them his people
to day which were not his people yesterday; he may love them to day that were
not beloved yesterday: the truth of this Doctrine you may see proved if you
look back to our Exposition upon ver. 13.

But secondly, I note from these words, which were not beloved, yet in a sense
there was love from God to all men.

2. That the love that God bears to mankind, either Jews or Gentiles, before
conversion and call, is no love in comparison of that love he bears to them who
are truly called: Or thus, That Gods love to converted called persons, is a
very great and singular love. That God bears love to mankind is a truth in
general considered, and is a truth asserted by our Lord, Ioh. 3.16. God so
loved the world that he gave his only son for them; but that love that God
bears to holy persons, to converted ones, to obedient ones, is a choice love
indeed, a love of delight, Joh. 14.21,23. Joh. 16 26. the father himself loves
you, because ye have loved me: It is great love that God bears to a prodigal
upon his return, See Luke 15.20. make this improvement, 1. To admire the
greatness of this privilege, to enjoy the love of God under this
consideration, a love of delight: it is true, others enemies have his love of
pity, Psa. 145. his tender mercies are over all his works. 2. Admire the change
in estate that is made upon conversion, that you that were not a people that
were beloved, should now enjoy such privileges, Ephesians. 2.


Doct. 5. That it is one circumstance of aggravation in the exaltation and the
glorification of Gods people, that they shall receive their glory where they
have had their shame. In the place where it was said ye are not my people,
there^: This place may be considerable both upon a general and particular
account. 1. In general upon the earth Revel. 5.10. where the Saints have
suffered, there they shall reign. 2. In particular which is more proper to our
Text; we have a parallel place, Zephan. 3.19. I will give them praise and fame
in evey land where they have been put to shame:
It will be a circumstance in the exaltation of Jesus Christ, that as he had
suffered a shameful death at Jerusalem so he shall reign there in that place,
Esa. 24. he shall reign in Jerusalem, and before his ancients gloriously; this
is a great condescension in God to his people: and a manifestation of his
choice esteem to them.

2. It may be a great comfort to all faithful, suffering, humble, and abused
saints.

Doctrine, 6. Such as are the truly called of God have the living God to be
their father. They shall be called the children of the living God: he takes
pleasure to discriminate them and distinguish them from all other children and
worshipers whatsoever: the Apostle changes the prophets sons into children, to
show the singular privilege of Gospel-saints; they are all the children of God
by faith in Christ Jesus: O the great privilege of all truly called ones,
that have such a God! who only can swear he lives: he has all life in himself
and gives all life spiritual and temporal.

But for brevity sake I shall say no more to the first head of the four, into
which I reduced the latter end of this chapter.

We are now by course to speak to the second comprehensive head propounded to
be handled, from the close of this chapter which is contained in the 27, 28,
29. verses.

CHAP. XVII. Plainly showing, that it is not Number, nor being in relation to
godly Ancestors that can secure rebellious persons from Gods wrath and
destruction.
Ver. 27. Esaias also cries concerning Israel though the number of the
children of Israel be as the sand on the Sea yet a remnant shall be saved.

28. For he will finish the work and cut it short in righteousness, because a
short work will the Lord make upon the earth.

29. And as Esias said before, except the Lord of Sabbath had left us a seed we
had been as Sodom and been made like unto Gomorrha.


IN which three verses we have the Apostles second testimony taken out of the
prophet. Esaias, chap. 1. chap. 10. the Apostle in maintaining his grand doctrine
of justification by faith alone, does in the Jews apprehensions introduce two
nations, which were hard for them to digest, which was these. 1. That by that
his doctrine as well gentiles as Jews may become the people of God, that is to
say, upon believing. 2. From this his doctrine follows, that far the greater
number of the natural seed of Abraham, the Jews, who reject and abhor this
doctrine of faith, must necessarily be rejected, and cast off by God, from
being his people.
Now the Apostle by concession does allow both these nations to be truly and
naturally deduced from the premises, and therefore does bring the Testimonies
of their own prophets, Hosea and Esaiah, to confirm the same.

The first of these testimonies we have considered already; we now proceed to
the second testimony to confirm the Apostles notion, that not all nor the
greatest number of the seed of Abraham shall be saved, but on the contrary, a
very small remnant, according, to the testimony of that royal Prophet Esaiah,
chap. 10.22,23. chap. 1.9. As to the first testimony we may divide the matter
into two parts. 1. The testimony it self. 2. The amplification of it.
1. The testimony it self is this; that of the ^ast and innumerable body of the
Jews that went into the Babilonish captivity, though their numbers were as the
sand on the sea, yet but a small number should return out of it to re-enjoy
their own land; a remnant is taken for a very small part, in comparison of the
whole piece; and we may take notice, that this prophet Esaiah looked forwards
also in this his prophesy, even to gospel-days, and (...) their last estate is
also taken in by him: for the Apostle cites this place of Esaiah, to sure with
his present design, and the Jews present case, which appears plain enough, by
the manner of the Apostles expressing this return, by the word saved, a remnant
shall be saved. 2. The truth hereof appears from the Prophets amplification of
this return, Esa. 10.21,22. they upon their return shall stay upon God, in
truth they shall return to the mighty God; which return some learned
interpreters expound of Conversion.

2. We have the Apostles amplification of this testimony in four circumstances.
1. The author, the Apostle does not deliver this from himself, but he gives the
Jews their own Prophets testimony; if he had given this of himself, he knew it
would not so readily have been received by them, but Esaiah was a Prophet,
against whom they could not object. 2. In this amplification, it is
considerable, the manner of the prophets delivering this testimony, as our
Apostle has it here, he cries; showing either his grief and sorrow for them,
or pathetical desire that his prophecy might be beeded and regarded by them:
and there seems to be an emphasis, in the Apostles thus delivering himself, as
if he should say, are you angry with me for implicitly whispering? that but a
few or small number of you Jews, the natural seed of Abraham, shall be saved,
when your own prophet Isaiah cried it out, and proclaimed it with a loud voice
in the ears of your forefathers, when time was. 3. In this amplification we
have the Apostles argument; as to the number of the children of Israel, they
were as the sand on the sea, therefore the matter the more to be lamented, that
so few should return. 4. We have hinted in this 18. ver. by the Apostle the way
or means how those few or small number comes to be saved, namely, by a short
word; or as some read, short account, which according to the best
interpreters, refers to the concise contracted word of the gospel: which is a
short word in comparison of the law, but more to that ^non.



The second testimony which is in this 29. verse. is taken from Esa. 1.9. except
the Lord of hosts (...) left us a very small remnant, we had been as Sodom, and
been made like Gomorrha: this small remnant our Apostle here turns, by the word
seed: in this testimony we have two parts.

First, the position it self, a seed or small number shall return, or be left,
in the first, or converted i^ the last: not all or a considerable number, but a
seed shall return; as a few returned out of the captivity, so a few shall be
justified by faith in Christ, chap. 11.6. a remnant according to faith, or the
choice of grace, a seed, it is a metaphor taken from a husbandman, who sells or
spends the greatest part of his crop, and but a small part is left for
seed-corn to stock the ground, in order to a new harvest: this position is
amplifyed two ways. First, from the author of this reservation: styled here,
Jehovah Saboath, the Lord of hosts, as he has all creatures at his command, in
heaven and earth, whereby he is able to save and destroy at his pleasure. 2. We
have here set forth, the deplorable state and condition of Israel considered in
themselves, who had been totally destroyed, if this Jehovah Saboath had not
interposed: their total destruction is set forth by the destruction of Sodom
and Gomorrha:
but to come more close to the words, as I obferved before, upon the testimony
of Hosea, so here, the Apostle does not the himself to exactness of words, but
takes liberty to vary in some words from the letter of Esaiahs prophecy in this
quotation: we shall find some verbal variations if we read them together, yet
no material or substantial, much less contradictious variations.

For explication I shall enquire into these three things. 1. How does this
testimony of Esaiah accommodate the people in his present case? how does it
ferve him at this time? 2. What may we understand by Gods finishing and cutting
short his work, and making a short work in the earth? 3. Why is God as to this
present passage styled by this double name of Jehovah Sabbath?


To the first, I answer, all the service which the Apostle requires of this
testimony at this time, is to satisfy his antagonists the Jews, that it need
not seem strange, or a new thing to them, much less an impossibility, or
contrary to the promise of God to Abraham, that their whole nation, a very
small number only excepted, should be rejected and abandoned for their
disobedience to the gospel, seeing this had been again and again the state of
their forefathers, from whom they claim at prefent all their privileges; and
that for their high provocations against God, as is testified by their own
prophets: from whence it appears, that God was not tied to them first or last,
according to the flesh, but only to the righteous and faithful amongst them,
such as had the says of Abraham, who rejoiced in Christ: the Apostles argument
lies here, if God at any one time cast off the fleshly seed of Abraham from
his promises made to their fathers, for their sin and disobedience; then ^e
might do so again upon the like occasion; but that he has done so before, you
see plainly from your prophets; and thus the Apostle here brings the prophet
Esaiah to confirm his doctrine of the rejection of the Jews for their unbelief,
and crucifying Jesus Christ.

But our second enquiry is, how to understand the second verse? in the judgment
of some judicious and learned interpreters, these words are not so properly
rendered in our common reading as they might be: these words in the Vulgar Latin
are read thus, for consummating a word and abridging it in equity, because a
word abridged, shall our Lord make on the earth, the Church of England reads
thus: in the Rhemish Testament Annotations, for he will finish the word, and
make it short in righteousness for a short word will the Lord make on the
earth, or in the whole world; so some greek copies read: Tindal and most old
readings agree, and read, that which we commonly read work, word; and the
greek lagos, and lattin verbum is so read; some will have this to signify an
account, and so they read, a short account shall the Lord make on the earth,
resembling God to an accountant, who is to adjust or balance an account, set
down his receipts and disbursements, and the remainder to be the true account
due: this short account or word, the ancients, Hierom, Anselm, Aquinaes,
Chrisostom, Ambrose, Cyprian, and many more, understand to be the word of the
Gospel or Christ; the substance of it, the Word Incarnated; for it cannot be
thought, that these words, or this prophecy did only relate to Isaiahs time:
that prophet had a clear sight of things to come, as we may perceive from many
parts of his prophecy, chap. 8.14.28.16. he foresaw that Christ should be for a
stone or stumbling and rock of offense, and that many of the Jews should be
broken, snared, and taken: Esaiah saw the latter as well as the former state of
the Jews, but how may God be said to shorten the account or word? by shortning
or contracting, is to bring it into a narrower compass, as when we comprehend
several words or lines in one, that is to say, that whereas heretofore the seed
of Abraham were by themselves and others reckoned and looked upon as the
peculiar people of God, and all the nations besides reprobates, now God draws
his total sum, his complete account out of both Jews and Gentiles, only so many
of both as shall accept of his free grace in and through Jesus Christ they are
his choice elect sum; God desires no more to balance his account: Doctor
Hammond is much of this opinion, God has singled out his remnant, his seed, to
be such only, who believe in, and obey Jesus Christ: so that this abbreviated
word, this, this shortened word, is the word of faith: it is one word, the whole
dispensation of the gospel is called a word, Act. 10.36. God has reserved to
himself a remnant, according to the choice of grace by faith; and this short
account or contracted word, in much goodness, and much righteousness, he
shall do this in righteousness.

3ly, Why does the Apostle in this passage style God Jehovah sabboath, the Lord
of hosts; some not for want of ignorance and oversight in reading, have from
the sound of the word, thought that God had here styled himself, Lord of
Sabbath; but know, that these two words proceed from two different roots in the
hebrew, and are 2 distinct words, Shabbath and tsabboath: but I need not stay
upon this: Our english reading may satisfy them in the matter: but why does the
Apostle in this place, and at this time, choose to render the almighty by these
two names of his, rather then by any of his other eight names? we have it but
twice used in all the New Testament: in James, 5.4. and here: I answer, in both
these places, the Apostles design is to magnify Gods power, as he is captain
general of the whole creation, who are all in a millitary posture armed and
visited at his command, they are all round about him waiting for his command,
as he is Lord of hosts: but why does the Apostle use it at this time? I answer
to instruct the Jews, that it was not for want of power sufficient in God, for
that he was Lord of hosts, that they were not first and last totally
annihilla^ed, like Sodom and Gomorrha who had so greatly sinned against him;
but that there was a remnant spared; but it was the fruit of his withholding
his power and exercising mercy. 2ly, On the other hand the argument is drawn
from the power of the enemy, that God is here said to be the Lord of hosts, to
let the Jews know, that the will and power of the Babilonians was such to
themward, that had not Gods power been above them, they had been swallowed up
and none lest, Psalm. 124. but God had all creatures, angels, stars, and all at
his beck, Judge. 5. the stars in their courses sought against Sisera, Gods hosts
are all for the good of his people;
and therefore does the Apostle James make use of this his name, chap. 5. as if
he should say in the behalf of those oppressed once, it is not because he does
not hear your cry, for your cry is entered his ears: neither is it wan^ of
power, for he is Lord of hosts; therefore it must be for some other end, that
you are not set free.

That which Esaiah calls a remnant, our Apostle calls a seed, because a seed is
more Evangelical; and it is the language of this chapter ver. 7. 8. so Gal. 4.16.
so that all Israel are not the seed first nor last, but the reserved and saved
are the seed, and they are but a few; ye or we had been as Sodom, and been made
like to Gomorrha; There had been ^er name nor remnant, as in those cities: but
may some say, Was there no seed lest in Sodom, and Gomorrha? did not God
preserve a seed in sparing Lot and his two daughters? I answer. 1. That Lot nor
his daughters were not saved in these citys, but by an escape to Zoar; but
th^se few Jews were spared in the captivity, where the rest were destroyed. 2.
Though Lot and his two daughters were spared, yet there was not a seed left in
a strict sense considered, which was some ground of that incest committed by
Lot with his two daughters; there were no sons nor men left in the destruction
of Sodom and Gomorrha, only father Lot.


That which now remains, is to reduce the whole of these three verses thus
explicated, into these doctrinal conclusions, which are as follows.

1. Doct. Cries: That the true servants of God are greatly concerned, and
deeply affected at the destruction and ruin of their people for sin and
rebellion against God. This crying supposes two things; sometimes a deep sense
and sorrow for the state and condition of those so cried over; this was the
ground of S. Paul's sorrow for his brethren the Jews, as we have it in the
beginning of this chapter. 2. This crying sometimes supposes a loud
proclamation of the mind of God, that it might be taken notice of; thus Esaiah
chap. 58.1. is commanded to cry and lift up his voice as a trumpet:
let it be either of these cryings in our text, it does not cross the
doctrine; and that the true servants of God are of this spirit, see Ier. 9.1.
and Lament. of Jeremiah.

2. D^ That it is not number, nor covenant relation to godly ancestors that can
secure from Gods wrath and their destruction: though they are the children of
Israel they are liable to destruction. It is not that they were Israel, nor
that their number were as the sand on the sea, that keeps of the stroke,
notwithstanding there is but a very final remnant left: it is to be feared
that amongst the vast number of professors, and persons in covenant with God by
external profession in ordinances, there is but a remnant, a seed that God will
own and save, and they are only the righteous: see Esa. 3.10. say ye to the
righteous it shall be well with them: whereas others let them profess what
they will, if workers of iniquity, shall be rejected, Mat. 7. Luke 13. there
are but a few saved, few enters in at the strait gate.

Doctrine. 3. Gods way in time of common calami^y and destruction, is to
preserve seed: a remnant for a stock: so he did in the old world, so in Sodom:
so in the Wilderness Caleb and Joshua. Ver. 28. Doct. 4. That God in gospel
days has shortened contracted or abbreviated his mind and will, in a short
word, in Jesus Christ, and the Gospel. The whole duty of man Christ tells us,
in two heads; To love God above all, and our neighbor as our selves, and tells
us, that on these two, hangs all the law and the prophets: God saves by a short
word.

Doct. 5. That Gods finishing, consummating, and perfecting his reckoning and
account, as to his seed is by faith and no other way; All dutys are
comprehended in the word of faith, the whole seed of Abraham and seed of
Christ, are believers in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3. last.

Doct. 6. That God in his latter and gospel dispensation, and his proceedings
in destruction and salvation, with Jews and gentiles, does marvellously
magnify the attribute of his righteousness. God will balance a very
righteous account, God will consult the honor of his righteousness, he will
cut it short in righteousness; God will save no more then what may well
comport with the attribute of his righteousness to save.

Ver. 29. Doct. 7. That God would have his people to know that he is Lord of
hosts, captain general of all creatures in heaven and earth, and they are in a
millitary and battle-aray at his service for the good of his remnant. This the
Apostle James would have the oppressed saints take notice of, James 5. Heb. 1.
last the angels are all ministering spirits, for those who are heirs of
salvation.

8. Doct. That when God delivers his people into the hands of his and their
enemies for sin, if they be not totally destroyed and swallowed up alive, their
preservation must be appropriated to the gracious interposer, the Lord of
hosts. If a remnant be left it is not the effect of the mercy of the enemy, but
the power and grace of God; the enemy would not be satisfied as long as one is
alive, if God did not interpose: take two words from hence. 1. Acknowledge God
in all thy preservations, in the midst of his and your enemies; say (as the
Psalmist) Psalm. 124. if God had not been on our side at this and that time, we
had been swallowed up quick. 2. If Jehovah of hosts be on thy side, be not
afraid what men can do unto thee: say as David, Psalm. 46. God is my refuge I
will not fear though the earth be removed:
So much for ver. 27. 28. 29. an end of the second head.

CHAP. XVIII. Explaining the causes why the Jews missed and the Gentiles
obtained the righteousness which is according to faith.
Ver. 30. What shall we say then? that the gentiles which followed not after
righteousness, have attained to righteousness, even the righteousness which
is of faith.

31. But Israel which followed after the law of righteousness, has not
attained to the law of righteousness.


WE now proceed to the third head propounded to be handled in order to a brief
conclusion of this chapter, which contains the present state of the Jews and
gentiles: we have the Apostle in these 2. verses drawing up his result as the
sum and substance of what he had been treating about in this chapter, as to the
right way and means appointed by God, in order to justification and salvation,
only by faith: this particle (then), what shall we say then? does undeniably
serve to demonstrate, that these words are relative to the former matter in
this chapter; and if you would be satisfied what has been the Apostles
precedent theme in this Chapter, you may read it in this collection: it is the
judgment of those who would believe, that the Apostles theme in this chapter
was about personal election and reprobation; that this result is only drawn up
from the two last testimonies out of Hosea and Esaiah, which he had been
treating upon: others who are clear in their judgments of the contrary, takes
them to be the result of what he had spoken unto in the whole precedent part of
the chapter and Epistle; and there is some good reason to be given, that these
words are the result of the whole rather then of what he had been speaking of
from the prophets; it being plain, that these prophecies spoke nothing of
justification which notwithstanding is the Apostles great doctrine in this
chapter and Epistle: our adversaries being our judges; they agree, that the
great controversy of the Apostle with the Jews, was about the way or law of
justification, whether by the works of the law or faith in Christ; this is
plain, if any should deny it, cha. 3. cha. 4. cha. 10. of Romans: now if this
was the controversy I appeal to all unbiast souls, if this conclusion be not
very proper to fall in place here.

But some may say, how does it follow from the main body of this chapter, that
either the gentiles not following do attain, or the Jews following does not
attain to righteousness. I answer that both these conclusions are in the bowels
of the doctrine of justification by faith, without the works of the law: as for
instance,

1. The gentiles who did believe were justified, though they did not observe
the Mosaical dispen^tion. 2. It is as plain, that the Jews who did pursue will
and run, in this dispensation, yet were not justified, but rejected by God,
both these are carried along in this Epistle and chapter: their verses cannot
be the result of any other doctrine but that of justification, much less can it
be properly the result of that doctrine of personal election or reprobation:
those who are willing to see the truth, may see as clearly as they may see the
sun shine at noon day, that this conclusion cannot be drawn from such
premises, but may on the contrary draw from them an impregnable argument, that
the Apostle had not been concerned about any such doctrine of election, but
something else: but sorasmuch as I must be brief according to promise in the
conclusion of this chapter, I shall come to the words as they lie, what shall
we say then? this kind of interrogatory speaking is common with this Apostle
on several other places, as I have before spoken, ver. 14. this kind of
speaking does cast a kind of reflection back upon what he had been speaking,
as it does in other places, chap. 6.1. cha. 8.28. and other places: that the
whole world, is divided into Jews and gentiles: by gentiles here must be
understood all the whole uncircumcised world, except such as were proselited to
the Jews religion, that followed not after righteousness, that did not stear a
course that way: but we are to know, that in this kind of speaking there is
more to be understood then is expressed: spoken or expressed, it is not only to be
understood in a negative fence, that they were not just or righteous men, or
that they did not pursue or mind righteousness; or that they could not be
charged with unrighteousness, but affirmatively and positively, they walked
according to the course of this world; in a positive fence they lived in all
wickedness and all abomination, Ephesians. 2. they were abominable, and to every
good work reprobate: for this adverb of denying, has more in it then what is
spoken and expressed; as I might show you in several instances, 1 Cor. 10.5. with
many of them God was not well-pleased, that is, he was greatly displeased and
angry, Heb. 10.38. if any draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in them
(that is,) I shall abhor them: so here, they followed not righteousness, that
is, they were very far from righteousness, they had nothing to plead as to
acceptance; and by this kind of speaking concerning the gentiles the Apostle
does anticipate the Jews, from making this an argument, that the gentiles could
not be gods people, from the consideration of their sinfulness; therefore S.
Paul puts this in the front; they followed not after righteousness; they
attained: the word signifies to overtake, lay hold on righteousness, because
that this righteousness came in by believing, not by working; for these
gentiles when righteousness and justification came to be preached to them by
the gospel, soon laid hold upon, and embraced those doctrines; the gentiles
received the word with joy, Act. 8. and that upon Gods own terms, as a hungry
man falls to his food: the gentiles had no righteousness of their own to
relieve them, as the Jews had, therefore they accepted of the righteousness of
faith: gospel-righteousness is called the righteousness of faith, because men
upon believing are declared righteous; as it was with Abraham, he believed God;
and it was accounted to him for righteousness; as if the Apostle should say to
the Jews, I mean not such a righteousness as you speak of or dream of, which
consists in the observation of the law, but such a righteousness as is
according to Gods free grace; and imputatively by believing, aecording to chap.
4.8. blessed is the man to whom God will not impute sin: the blessedness is
not, that he has no sin, but that it is not imputed. Now when the Apostle here
says, that the gentiles who followed not after righteousness, have attained
to it: he must not be understood, to suppose or imply, in so saying, that this
faith was given them whilst they flept, or that they attained without the
exercise of their inward abilityes; or that they were under an unavoidable
necessity by any decree to that purpose: but all that may be supposed to be
intended in this kind of speaking of the Apostle, may be reduced to these
three particulars, that when it was said, they followed not yet attained. 1.
That God did graciously overlook or wink at their former ignorance, and
notwithstanding all their former idolatry and profaneness did send the gosspel
and the offers of grace and reconciliation amongst them, when they did not
think of it, or seek after it. 2. That these gentiles falling in with the
gospel in the gracious invitations and tenders of it, upon Gods terms, and did
actually believe, they are accepted; and in respect to these two circumstances,
it was prophesyed, Esa. 65.1. and quoted Romans 10. God is found of them that
sought him not, and was made manifest to them that asked not after him. 3.
These gentiles thus receiving and believing the gospel, God keeps covenant
and mercy, and so justifies and saves them: thus it is to be understood, that
those that sought not; yet attained, nor can it be understood otherways,
notwithstanding what has been said; but that those who do unfeignedly seek
after God are in the most likely way to find him, for the promises run
directly and properly to such, 1 Chro. 28.9. Pr. 8.17. Es. 55. and where is any
promise made to those that do not seek.


2. Let not any of us think, that such kind of speaking as this, does prove
that persons living under the sound of the gospel from day to day, and
neglecting obedience thereunto, are not farther from attaining every day then
other.

3. Neither does this kind of speaking, prove, that God will be savingly found
of any persons at any time, but when his heart is engaged in the use of those
means wherein he is to be found: now when the text says, he was found of them
that sought him not, It must be understood, that God was moving toward them,
before they were moving toward him; and hereupon they are drawn to seek God
that never sought him before.

CHAP. XIX. Plainly demonstrating that persons justified and saved in
Gospel-days, shall have no cause to boast, but on the contrary to attribute all
to free grace.
Ver. 31. But Israel that followed after righteousness.


ISrael, or the Israelites are two ways understood in Scriptures, sometimes
upon a spiritual, sometimes upon a fleshly account, sometimes by Israel is
meant those who resemble Israel in faith and holiness; in this sense are they
to be understood ver. 6. all are not Israel in this sense, Nathanael is an
Israelite, John 1. and upon this Israel does our Apostle wish mercy and peace,
Gal. 6. But 2ly, And most commonly, Israel is taken in a larger sense for the
whole posterity of Jacob, who was by God surnamed Israel, his posterity
according to the flesh are called Israel, as distinct from those that did
believe: but others understand, that in this place is intended the rule,
method, or way of righteousness, the way propounded in order to claiming it;
the Jews followed a law which they thought would have led to justification,
being of Gods own giving forth: the Jews did conceive, and therein they were
right, that God had appointed some law or other for the justification of the
world, and without the obedience whereof they could not be justified.
they are here to be understood the body of the rebellious Jews: who were
enemies to Christ, yet these are said to follow after the law of
righteousness: these did eagerly pursue the law of righteousness, or the
righteousness of the law some by the law of righteousness, do understand
righteousness it self, and so the same Apostle is understood, chap. 7. that
the law of the mind was the mind it self;

2ly, They thought this law or rule was that given on Mount Sinai, in the
external part of it, and therefore they followed that law for it, but they
miscarried, and did not attain to the law of righteousness, that is, they
never came to understand and see, and so not to pursue the right law wherein
righteousness was to be had, called Roy. 3.27. the law of faith: so that here
was the case, though the Jews contended, might and main, about the observation
of a law, which they imagined would have justified, yet they came not near unto
the true law: they did not take hold of that right law of righteousness; nay,
which is yet more plainer, the Jews did not attain to the righteousness of
that law which they followed: for whilst they observed some part of the law in
the letter of it, they were short in the spirit of it, and inside of it: as our
Lord tells them Mat. 5. and besides they sought justification in a wrong way,
which God did never intend for that end: and being in a wrong way, the further
and faster they run, the worse. So much for explication, I shall only name
those doctrines which does offer themselves to our considerations, from the
words thus opened, which are as follows, what shall we say then?

1. Doctrine, That it is a matter of great concernment for persons rightly to
understand the right way and proper terms of justification. The Apostle having
been arguing till he is weary, knows not what more to say, yet he is not
willing to leave a matter of such great import; I know not what to say more,
yet I will give you the result of the whole which I have already said.

2. Doctrine, That God has made provision for present grace and future glory
for gentiles indefinitely. 3. Doctrine, That God affords a people a very choice
favor, when he sends the gospel amongst them. By this it was, that the
gentiles came to attain righteousness, the gospel coming into a house or city,
and salvation coming, is all one, and is taken one for another, Luke 19.

4. Doctrine, That God has prepared and made ready the gospel dispensation for
sinners. Such as are far from righteousness; these were the persons which S.
Paul took notice of in his day, to attain to righteousness: in Christ's time
publicans and harlots embraced the gospel before scribes and Pharisees.

5. Doctrine, That persons justified and saved a gospel-dayes shall have no
cause to boast, but to attribute all to free grace: Rom 3.27. boasting is
excluded by the free-law of justification, Ephesians. 2. not of works lest any
should boast. 6. Doctrine, That the gospel is most readily and most sweetly
embraced of the poor. Poor dispisable gentiles first laid hold of it, and the
terms of it, the gentiles were glad of the gospel, Acts. 13. chap. 8. they
rejoiced with great joy, the gentiles by pursuing, overtook and laid hold.

7. Doctrine, Faith is the true and ready way appointed by God to attain
justification and acceptance with God. The righteousness of faith is the only
righteousness in Gods account, Abraham believed God and it was accounted for
righteousness, and he was called the friend of God.

8. Doctrine, But Israel, Doct. A people in covenant with God: yet not
tractably following God, at the worst of people. The gentiles though strangers
to God, yet following God tractably in his gospel dispensation; are preferred
above Israel: Israel is named by a term of diminution, from this adversative
but; ^ut Israel: the first are left upon this account by God.

9. Doctrine, It is possible for persons to be zeal^ in a wrong way, to a good
end. They aimed at righteousness and acceptance with God, Romans 10.2. they had a
zeal, but in a wrong way: Paul was zealous in his persecution, Phil. 3.6. Gal.
4. the goodness of our end will not excuse the badness of our way: (...)

10. Doctrine, Israel suffered a total disappointment in those things they
expected, though they painfully pursued hard after them. They expected singular
acceptance with God, and in the room thereof met with rejection, they expected
justification but they mist it, and lost their labor.

CHAP. XX. Calling for greatest circumspection, because persons in a very fair
and likely way unto salvation in their own thoughts may suffer disappointment,
it is very easy to stumble at Christ and his ways if careful heed be not taken.
Verr. 32. Wherefore? because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by
the works of the law, for they stumbled at that stumbling-stone.

33. As it is written, behold I lay in Sion a stumblingstone and rock of
offense, and whosoever believes shall not be ashamed.


IN which two verses we have contained the fourth and last head, which head
contains the more special and more singular and particular cause of their
coming short of justification, which we have under two circumstances. 1. They
sought it as it were by the works of the law. 2. They stumbled at Jesus Christ:
the Apostle draws this 33. verse out of some passages in the prophesy of
Esaiah chap. 8.14. chap. 28.16. and as the Apostle in other places and cases
does supply the Old Testament imperfections, so here also, he does make these
places more clear by evangelical light: we have three amendments in these
verses. 1. He expounds the prophets indefinitely, he that believes by a
universal, whosoever believes, or every one believing, which is more clearly
in gospel-language expressed, John 6.47. Mark. 16.16. John. 3.16. 2. Whereas the
Prophet expressed himself only thus, he that believes not, expressing the person
or thing to be believed on, our Apostle in his citation of the words mendeth
them, and says on him. 1. Signifying that it is a person who is to be believed
on. 2. That this person is he that is compared to a stumbling-stone.
3. Our Apostle expresses the prophets will not make baste by will not be
ashamed:
but to the words more closely, which in these verses contain a double reason
more particularly of the succeslesness of the Jews endeavors after
justification; that they did not attain though they followed after: we have
here a rational account in sight not supposed but expressed. 1. They sought it
not by faith, but as it were by the works of the law. 2. They stumbled at
something that lay in their way, they stumbled at that stumbling stone;
as the Apostle begins this chapter with cordial grief and sorrow for his
contreymens disappointment, so he concludes the chapter with a rational
account, how this came to pass; this their sad estate was founded in their
unbelief, and their unbelief was founded in their being offended, and so
stumbling at Christ as to his mean and low position; he lay so low that they
stumbled at him: the Apostle by this kind of conclusion, does further amplify
what the subject was upon which he had been treating in this chapter; the
Apostle being to render a true reason of their disappointment, does not in the
least suggest, much less assert in terms, that this their present sad estate
was the effect of an eternal decree of reprobation, upon a mere personal
account, without respect to their works, which had been ^ry proper, if that had
been his theme in this chapter, but it is plain and clear and above-board in
this conclusion; and that it might be satisfactory, he gives it negatively and
affirmatively, not because they were not elected are they not justified, but
because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the law.

I shall enquire into the words as they lie by a brief explication of them.

1. Our apostle in this introduction supposes some body, from what he had said
lately to the Jews, as to their not attaining, asking a question to this
effect, why or wherefore did they not attain? this is supposed from this
wherefore in the beginning; now the answer to this question, both negatively
and affirmatively, takes up the whole of these two verses; these words they
sought it, are not in the Original, but are a supplement from the former verse;
yet they are a necessary supply to accommodate the sense and make it more
clear, these words are also left out in the Vulgar Latin: but why does the
Apostle add these words, (as it were)? this kind of speaking supposes some
kind of resemblance, though not the same thing, as the same kind of speaking
is understood, Cant. 6.12. as it were the company of two armies, that is, it
did seem like or bear some resemblance to such an appearance: so Luke. 22.44.
our Lord it is said, sweat as it were drops of blood, in appearance it seemed
so, but there was water with it: so 1 Cor. 4.9. 2 Cor. 11. Some think the
Apostle speaks this to impeach the Jews, as to their imperfections in their
observations of their own law, and that they did not really and completely do
those works which that law required, there was but some resemblance of their
doing them: their works being works of the devil which they pretended were
according to Gods law, John. 8. and so in a strict sense very far from the
works of the law: others think, he thus speaks to discover the mistake in
general of those who think in the least to obtain justification by the
observation of the law, if strictly observed, for at the best it was but as it
were a way of justification, and not the real way; for faith even in Abraham's
time was the way of justification: but if a second Question should be asked the
Apostle, how comes it to pass that the Jews were so averse to believing in
Christ? for it we have a second answer, in the latter part of these 32. and 33.
verses, they stumbled at the stumbling stone, or as in the original, at the
stone of the stumbling; these two are rendered both with an Emphasis, the stone,
the stumbling: they are both remarkable: by this stone is understood Christ; I
need not stand to prove, that he is said to be a tried stone, a precious corner
stone: now that this stone should be an occasion of stumbling is strange: this
stone was the most excellent of all stones, and this stumbling the most
significant and most dangerous of all stumblings: of this stone and of this
stumbling our Lord Christ speaks, Mat. 21.44. they that fall by stumbling at
this stone, shall be broken: those it falls upon, it shall grind them to
powder: he that is so offended, and stumbles, so as not first nor last to
believe in Christ shall utterly be undone and ruined, there can be no healing
that wound: there was a fivefold ground of offense by the Jews taken up against
Christ. 1. At the meannesse of his parentage, that Joseph who was a Carpenter
was his Father; they would have had him the son of a prince. 2. They were
offended at the meannesse of Christ's person, he did not appear in pomp and
glory, as they expected, and as he shall appear the second time: his garb was
then mean and despisable. 3. At the meannesse and lowness of his educatition,
he was not brought up in humane learning, arts or sciences, which occasioned
this question of the Jews, John. 7.15. how knows this man letters, having
never learned? 4. At the meannesse of his followers, Christ's disciples and
companions were but mean fishermen, and such like: the rulers were not his
followers, but silly people in the worlds account. 5. They were offended at the
plainness and severity of his doctrine, he was bold in reproving sin,
especially the sin of hypocricy, which they were so deeply guilty of: and this
he did without respect of persons:
now the reason why a man stumbles at a stone, stick, or block in his way, is
not always for want of light; men may stumble at noonday if they take not heed
to their feet, if there be not a careful circumspect observation: the Jews
stumbling, was not for want of light, but diligent heeding their own prophets,
which prophesied of Christ in that way he came, as Isa. 53. and others of them:
stumbling does sometimes arise from the thing it self, and that from a twofold
reason. 1. Sometimes because it is laid so low, on the earth; the Jews did
stumble at Christ, by reason of his low position and placing; he was in a low
condition, he was poor and mean; the meannesse and humillity of Christ put the
Eunuch to a loss; he wanted some body to guide him, Act. 8. after this sense
Job is to be understood, Job. 27.2. he complains, that God had taken away his
judgment, that is, that men could not judge him but to be an hypocrite, so the
Jews judged that Christ was smitten of God in his humilliation: so that the low
position of this stone is one reason of their stumbling. 2. It is not only
placed low on the earth, but in the very way and path, even amongst them, where
they go; it was laid and pitched in Zion, which does not always intend the
literal place, the strong hold of Zion, but it is often spoken as to Gods
people, they are often called Zion, as Psalm. 69. Esa. 49. this made the Jews to
undervalue Christ because he was laid amongst them, they knew him and his
original, and that this did heighten their offense see Mat. 13.55.56. John.
6.42. chapter 7.27. and this stumbling in this metaphor implies the dashing the
foot against something hard and resistive, whereby he receives much harm, is
bruised and broke, and not only so, but it occasions a stop in their
proceedings in that journey, they can go no further, by reason thereof, they
stumbled so at Christ as to cavil and quarrel at him, as not being the true
Messiah, when indeed he was, and were mallicious and hateful to him, and so
rejected him, and were rejected by him.


But some may say, may not God be concerned in this stumbling of the Jews? does
not our text say, that the Lord God laid this stone there, even in Zion, and
that as a stumbling-stone and rock of offense? and does not S. Peter speak to
the same purpose 1 Peter, 2.8. They stumbled at the word, being disobedient,
whereunto they were appointed: from which text some gather a necessity for the
Jews, to stumble, disobey, and reject Christ? to which I answer, that such a
construction were not only repugnant to the current of Scriptures but a great
impeachment of Gods justice and holiness, to make him the author of sin and
disobedience, so contrary to his nature, and abhorred by him: some interpreters
mends this construction by turning this word appointed to the word disposed,
with an eye to themselves not God: Dr. Hammond reads the words thus, that those
that are disobedient to the gospel and stand obstinately against Christ, are
those who are by God appointed and declared, to so stumble as to be ruined, by
this their obstinacy: so that instead of Gods appointing the sin according to
this construction, he appoints the punishment of the sin; for disobedience to
the gospel, is not to be imputed to the God of heaven, but the God of this
world: as 2 Cor. 4. the God of this world blindes the minds of those that
believe not: our Lord Jesus gives this as the reason why they did not believe,
because they receive honor one of another: but that God lays this
stumbling block in the Jews way, according to our text, is plain, but for a far
better end in God, then for them to stumble at: their stumbling was accidental
from the evil of their own hearts, as the dunghill stinks because the sun shines
upon it; Christ is not antecedently or intentially a stumbling-stone, but
accidentally and eventially, as Christ also says, he came to make division not
peace, and to set the daughter against the mother^. so Christ is said, Luke
2.34. to be set for the fall and rising of many in Israel; their fall
accidentally, their rising intentially; they stumble at Christ out of
stubborness and wilfulness, not for want of light; this Calvin himself grants.
It is added here in the conclusion, shall not be ashamed or confounded: I
before told you, that in these adverbs of denial, the contrary is intended:
that is, he shall be bold, and shall glory; the reward of believers being not
only privative but positive; they shall not only be delivered from shame but
greatly glorified, Pro. 3. last, these two are opposed one to the other, the
wise shall inherit glory, but shame shall be the promotion of fools.

I shall now only sum up what doctrinal conclusions these two verses thus
opened does afford us, and so close the whole chapter: I shall lay down ten
doctrines.

1. From the question wherefore. 1. Doct. That the notorious succeslesness and
palpable disappointment to the Jews in their pursuing after righteousness,
admits of a question, wherefore, or why it is so?

Here is a reason above-board, God is ready and his servants ought to be ready,
to render a reason of Gods severity to sinners.

2. Doct. Persons in a very fair and likely way to salvation in their own
thoughts, may suffer disappointment. 3. Doct. The true reason of the Jews
rejection and non justification, was founded in their not believing in Jesus
Christ: this is the positive reason, and not their reprobation from eternity;
if you believe not in me, you shall die in your sins, says Christ.

4. Doct. (As it were) The Jews were very imperfect in the law by which they
expected to be justified: their obedience was but like, not the same. 5. Doct.
God has in much wisdom and counsel so ordained and appointed the state and
station of Jesus Christ as to his humiliatian, that if persons be not very
considerate and circumspect about it, they may easily stumble at him (being so
laid) to their utter ruin and destruction. The case stands so with Christ and
his ways, that if we would be kept from stumbling, we must look narrowly into
them: it is easy to stumble at Christ and his ways, if not carefully heeded.

6. Doct. (As it is written) S. Paul in his preachings and writings had a
special eye upon the Scripture (...) before-written. This language is frequent
with the Apostle, we have him a matter of thirty times in his Epistles
appealing to what is written, and sixteen times of them in this Epistle; the
Apostle had a high valuation of what was written in the Scriptures of the
prophets.

7. Doct. (Behold,) That the position, setting or placing of Christ by God, as
to his humiliation, is a very remarkable passage; It wants a behold to awaken
persons to take notice of it and consider it before Christ came in the flesh:
see how careful the spirit of God is to foretell Christ's humility before he
came, especially this prophet Isaiah, from whence this place is fetched. 8.
Doct. The Jews offense against Christ was heightened by his being founded and
laid amongst themselves.

9. Doct. (A rock of offense:) The same Jesus Christ which is a rock of defense
to believers, is a rock of offense to unbelievers: Believers make use of that
in Christ for their encouragement which unbelievers apply for their ruin.

10. Doct. Faith in Jesus Christ does beget patience and stabillity in waiting
for glory and exaltation: Isaiah says, they made not have, that is, those who
fear no disappointment: the Apostle turns it, not ashamed, shall not have cause
of shame: they shall not be disappointed, they shall not be confounded shaken
or shattered: Faith in Christ does fix the heart.

Thus have I very briefly offered my judgment concerning the Apostles scope in
this chapter; and my desire is that what I have offered may be carefully
examined, without prejudice and offense, and my desire also is; that the Lord
may help your understandings to understand the Scriptures, Amen.

FINIS.

