Love Crowned with Victory.
A merry Dialogue betwixt an old rich Country Batchellour, and a young witty
London Virgin.
With Allowance.

To the tune, I Will crown thee my dearest etc. Digby's Farwell, Or Packintons
Pound.


MY Dear can thou love me, I pray tell me true,
For if thou deni'st me i will bid England adieu
I Will Sail the wide Ocean abroad will I range
The Sea is my portion unless my mind change:
And travel abroad as long as I live
And never more love to thy sex will I give
Then be not so coy but answer my flame
Then i will Crown thee my dearest, and i will be thy Swain.
I Will make thee a jointure to thy own content
That afterward thou may never repent
if thou will to me prove constant and kind,
in requital for ever my love thou shall find,
For gold and for silver thou shall have good store
Which will make thee a Lady what would thou have more:
Then be not so coy, but answer my flame
Then i will crown thee my dearest and i will be thy Swain.
Besides thou shall have to thy hearts desire,
Coach-horses and Footmen in noble attire
And abroad ride in state, thy pleasure to take
So that thou will of me a Husband but make
Then i will cherish my dearest in bed and at board
And thou shall have all this world can afford:
then be not so coy but answer my flame
then i will crown thee my dearest and i will be thy Swain.
For Rings and jewels thou shall have of the best
in Silk and Satin thou shall neatly be dressed
And a waiting Gentlewoman thou shall have
Which always shall follow thee gallant and brave
And a Gentleman Usher with his hat in his hand
For to wait upon thee when thou shall command.
then be not so coy, but answer my flame
then etc.
The second part
to the same tune.
And in the morning when thou do rise
Thou shall have the best Cordial to clear thy eyes
And in twining our arms we will embrace each other
But the world shall not know, for our joys we will smother
Then give me a kiss and seal't with thy love
And i will prove true to thee as the Turtle Dove:
then be not so coy but answer my flame
then i will crown thee etc.
If thou will prove constant I vow to perform,
The promise I make thee or else I am forsworn,
Answer but my suit, and yield to be mine,
Then I will reply with my heart I am thine,
So our love will be equal and happy are we,
If we join heart and hands we shall ever agree,
then be not so coy, but answer my flame.
then i will crown thee, etc,
The Maids witty Answer.
I must confess that you promise fare,
But to find a true lover it is very rare,
For your sex are so given to dissemble and cheat,
And draw in young maidens that is loveing and weak,
If I were but certain your love it were true,
I would forsake all the world and my love give to you,
but that I will not give, till I further try,
till I see your love constant I shall ever deny.
The jointer you promise to make over to me,
Before that be acted we nere shall agree,
And if you would have me prove constant and kind,
You must make me a jointer pleasing to my mind,
You say you have gold and silver good store,
Which will make me happy, then i will ask no more,
if you can but give me what I shall desire,
then i will answer your flames, with equal fire,
A gentlewoman you say I shall have,
Which shall wait upon me most gallant and brave,
All this you have promised I never look to see,
Until that I find you prove constant to me,
Perform what you promised with all your heart,
I promise again that we will never part,
so that you will give me what I shall desire,
then i will answer your flames, etc.
A Gentleman usher with his hat in his hand,
You promise shall wait upon me at command,
All this is worth nothing if you fail in the main
You destroy a poor virgin and your own honor strain,
Though my face it is comely my parts are but small,
If you like take the person and portion and all,
so that you will give me what I shall desire,
then your flames I will answer, etc.
My parents consent I would willingly have,
Because they are aged and going to the grave,
I would have you to go and ask their good will,
That our loves may continue and keep constant still,
For if I should marry you, and they not know
Their curse would fall on me with much shame and woe
so if you will give me what I shall desire,
then i will etc.
Coach-horses and Footmen in Livery brave
A Page holding my train I always shall have
So that a husband of you I will make
But two words to a bargain before I you take.
For your bed and your board I shall not accept
Without all your promises be truly kept
then when you have given me what I desire
i will be sure to answer your flames with fire.
Likewise you promise me Jewels and Rings
Sattings and silks and many fine things,
I hope I shall see them before i am your wife,
That afterward we may live without strife.
And if you deceive me in me quite undone,
You Will curse your misfortune and away I must run.
then when you have given me what I desire,
I Will not fail to answer your flames with fire.
If you will perform what you do say
i will be sure to be constant by night and by day
But if you prove false, i will never love man
But him I must love let me do what I can,
For a Virgins heart and her tongue goes together
And he that deceives her is sure to thrive never.
So now you have answered what I desire
I Will answer your flames again with equal fire.
LONDON Printed for. P. Brooksby at the Hospital Gate in West-smithfield


