Love and Honor: Or, The Lovers Farevvel to Calista.
Being sent from Sea in the late Enngagemet against the Dutch, to his Mistress,
under the Name of Calista. With the Ladies deploring and ingenious Answer.
To a New sad Air much in request; Or, Tune of, Now the Tyraut has stolen.


F^rewel my Calista my joy and my grief,
In vain have I loved thee, and found no relief;
Undone by your Virtues so strict and severe,
Your eyes gave me love, but you gave me despair.
Now ca^d by my honor, I seek with content,
That fate which in pity you would not prevent,
To languish in love were to find by delay,
A death that is more welcome the speediest way.
In Seas, and in Battails, among bullets and fire
The danger is les^ then in hopeless desire.
The dea^hs wound you gave me, though far off, bear
My fa^l from your sight's not to cost you a tear.
But if ^he kind flood on a wave should convey,
And under your window my body should lay,
The wound on my breast, when you happen to see
you would say with a sigh, It was given by me,
When Suitors are wounded with stabs of disdain
It Is happiness to be put out of their pain:
The grave is a place to bid torment farewell,
But Lovers are tortured 'twixt Heaven and Hell
When frowns of a Mistress do turn a man over,
It Is safer on Ship, board then it is on the shore:
I find by experience, though with loss of breath
It Is worse to encounter with Cupid then Death
What strength has a Lady with cast of her eye,
To make a man live, or compel him to dye:
I Such power had Calista with smils and with frown
She Would raise me to heaven, then tumble me down,
Put dearest take care how you put faith in men,
For I fear you will never be loved so ^^^n.
You needs must acknowledge, whilst I could draw
I was your unchangeable servant till death, breath
ONce more my last farewell I breath in a blast
The cloud on my vitals is much over-cast:
I faint, fail, I perish, and suddenly dye,
Yet sure should recover if thou were but by:
That I nere enjoyed thee I do not repine,
Thou liv^st with thy honor, and I dye with mine:
For to after ages this story will prove,
I dyed in the war for my King and my Love.
The Ladies Answer.
BLame not your Calista, nor call her your grief
'I was Honor, not she, that denied you relief:
Abuse not her virtues, nor term them severe,
Who loves without honor, must look for despair.
Fow prompted by pity I truly lament,
The force of your fate, which I could not prevent:
And languish to think that your blood should defray
The expense of your love, though so noble a way.
On Seas and in Battails that you did expire,
Was caused by your Valor, not hopeless desire;
Of your Fame, there acquired, I greedily hear,
And grieve when I think that it cost you so dear:
But when your sad friends shall your body convey
By my window your funeral duties to pay,
I Will sigh that your fate then I could not revers(...)
And all my kind wishes I Will show on your Hearse
When Suitors petition and run upon shelves,
Or shot, if denied, they do murder themselves:
The grave is a couch where the vertuons remain,
Without expectation of sorrow or pain.
If the frown^ of a Mistris^ can rule a man's fate,
He values his life at a pitiful rate:
Though now she look cloudy, when she draws the scene
Who knows but the daylight may clear up again
The looks of a Lady you falsely do scan,
It Is not strength in the woman, but weakness in Man
When men set up Idols of flesh, blood, and bon^
And bow down to worship, the fault is their own.
I hope I shall never be deceived by Men:
For your sake I never shall trust them again:
It Is fatal when Lovers do suffer such strife,
That one must lose honor, or the other lose life
My mind never can your last farewell forget,
My tears shall confess I Will not dye in your debt:
I heartily wish I had been by your side,
That you might recover, or I might have dyed
Then both to Elezium we had been conveyed,
Where Ladies by Lovers are never betrayed
But in future ages in sonets they will sing,
Twar long of your love that you died for your King
Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Goldenball, in West-smithfield, near the
Hospital-gate.


