The French King's Declaration of WAR against the Crown of Spain.
Translated out of French.
Ordonnance of the King.
THE sincere desire which the King has had to maintain the Truce concluded in
the Year 1684. induced His Majesty to dissemble the Conduct of the Ministers of
Spain in the Courts of all the Princes of Europe, where they labored nothing
more than to excite them to take up Arms against France. His Majesty was not
ignorant, how far they were concerned in the Negotiation of the League of
Ausbourg; and was likewise informed of the part the Governor of the Spanish
Low Countries had, in the Prince of Orange's Enterprise against England; but
not being able to believe, that he acted therein by the Order of the King his
Master, who was obliged by so many Reasons of Religion, of Blood, and the
Safety of all Kings, to oppose such an Usurpation, His Majesty had hoped, He
should have been able to induce the Catholic King to join with him for the
Re-establishment of the lawful King of England, and the Preservation of the
Catholic Religion against the Union of the Protestant Princes; or at least, if
the state of Affairs in Spain did not permit his Catholic Majesty to enter
into the like Engagements, to observe an exact Neutrality; to which end, His
Majesty has, since the Month of November last past, caused several Proposals
to be made to him, which were well received, whilst the Success of the Prince
of Orange's Enterprise seemed doubtful, but these favorable Dispositions
disappeared so soon as it was known at Madrid, that the King of England had
left his Kingdom, and nothing was then there talked of but a War against
France. His Majesty understood at the same time, that the Spanish Ambassador
was daily with the Prince of Orange, and solicited him to have the English
declare War against France: That the Governor of the Spanish Low Countries
raised Troops with great diligence; that he promised the States General to join
them with their Forces at the beginning of the Campaign, and solicited them,
as well as the Prince of Orange, to send Forces to Flanders, in order to put
those Countries into a posture to make War upon France. All these Advices made
His Majesty think, he ought in prudence to know, what he was to depend upon. He
therefore gave Order to the Marquis de Rebenac, his Ambassador at Madrid, to
demand of the Ministers of the Catholic King a positive Answer, offering him
the Continuance of the Truce, upon condition, He would oblige himself to
observe an exact Neutrality, and not to assist directly or indirectly His
Majesty's Enemies; but the Evil Councils having prevailed, His Majesty was
informed, That the Resolution was taken, to favor the Usurper of England, and
to join with the Protestant Princes. His Majesty understood likewise, almost at
the same time, That the Prince of Orange's Agents had received considerable
Sums of Money at Cadiz and Madrid; that the Troops of Holland and Brandenburg
were entered into the Principal Places of the Spaniards in Flanders; and that
the Governor of the Low Countries for the King of Spain, did solicit the
States General to cause their Forces to advance to Brussels: All these Advices
added to the Answer, which the Marquis de Rebenac received at Madrid, leaving
His Majesty no room to doubt, That the Intention of the Catholic King is to
join with his Enemies; His Majesty has thought, He ought to lose no time to
prevent his Evil Designs; and has resolved to declare War against him, as well
by Sea as Land, as He does by these Presents. His Majesty, for this effect,
Commands and Enjoins all His Subjects, Vassals and Servants, to fall upon the
Spaniards, and has expressly forbidden, and does forbid, their having
henceforward any Communication, Commerce or Intelligence with them, upon pain
of Death. And to this end, His Majesty does revoke all Permissions, Passports,
Safe-guards, and Safe-conducts, that may have been granted by himself, or his
Lieutenant-Generals, and other his Officers, contrary to these Presents, and
has declared, and does declare them to be Null, and of no effect and force,
forbidding all persons whatsoever to have any regard thereunto. His Majesty
Orders and Commands the Lord-Admiral, Mareschals of France, Governors and
Lieutenant-Generals for His Majesty in his Provinces and Armies, Mareschals de
Camp, Colonels, Captains and Commanders of his Forces, as well Horse as Foot
French and Foreigners, and all other his Officers to whom it shall appertain,
to cause the Conten^s of these Presents to be put in Execution within the
Extent of their respective Powers and Jurisdictions: For such is His Majesty's
Pleasure. He Wills also, and Enjoins, That these Presents be Published and
affixed in all the Towns, as well Maritime as others, and in all the Ports,
Harbors, and other Places of his Kingdom and the Territories under his
Obedience, where it shall be needful; to the end, none may pretend cause of
Ignorance.

Given at Versailles the 15 th. Day of April, 1689. Signed Lovis
, and underneath Le T^llier

In the Savoy: Printed by Edward Jones. 1689.


