KNAVES ARE No honest Men. OR, More Knaves yet, A Couple well met.

Being A brief Discourse concerning the (Offices and) Humors of Quarterman
and VVaterton, being both Jacks out of Office.

Which if they were namelesse,
yet I make no doubt,
A man that has senses,
may soon smell them out.
Composed by I. L. a lover of honest Men, and hater of Knaves; and Printed in
the year of the discovery of a Couple.

More Knaves yet: Or, A Couple well met.
Quarterman. WHat, Brother Waterton! Now as I am a Gentleman, and by this
martial hand of mine, I rejoice to see thee: and though the splendant Sun of
our Glory he now Eclipsed for a while, yet let us not quite cast down our
drouping spirits; but let us rather strive to comfort one another, and seek to
thaw the Frozen Zoane of our careful hearts with a Cup of Old Canarie.


VVaterton. Brother Quarterman, I most humbly thank you for your kindness;
and am most willing to attend your portly person to the Tavern, but I beseech
ye Sir, nor too much of that Canarie: for indeed the truth is, we are counted
Canarie-Birds by too many already; and therefore it is sufficient that we
content our selves with a Quart (or a Pottle) of burnt Claret, and so to
clarify our injuried souls from the scandalous report of our reproachful
enemies.


Quart. How! Who dare be so presumptious, as to take notice of our proceedings?
It is not so long that we have been out of our Offices, for all the world to
take notice; Let us make our selves busy still: Have thou never an old Staff
of Office to take in thy hand; were it but the thick end of a Broome-stick
should appear in mine, in the likeness of a Truncheon, it were enough to
strike terror into the hearts of a hundred people: But what News do thou
hear abroad, I prithee, concerning the Times?


Wat. Verily, brother Quarterman, it is suspected amongst our Brethren, that
the King will come to the City, which cannot be without great prejudice to all
our Society, and to us two especially: for as I hope to live, or to be
honored with the Name of High-Constable of Wapping again, I had rather see
Paul's Steeple fall to the very ground, then the King should come with honor to
London again.


Quart. I Will fell thee, Brother Waterton, if so be that I had persevered still
in the seveare Office of my merciless Marshallzie, I would have had Paues by
this time bin ready to run into little St. Gregory's, for her sanctuary, which
now by reason I am jack out of office, (and the Kings coming to town,) may be
prevented, other ways it could not have stood: for when I was first made
Marshall, I had no sooner entered into my Office but Cheape-side-Crosse fell
presently into an Agony, and I had no sooner said, down with it, but down it
went: Heavens grant that I never may see the resurrection of the body thereof,
lest I should be called into question for my presumption at the pulling of it
down.


Wat. Indeed Brother Quarterman, it was an admirable piece of service for the
pulling down of that superstition and idolatry, and therefore there is none but
such as are inclined to Popery that can accuse you for doing of that great work
of piety.


Quart. Verily Brother VVaterton, a man would have thought so, and yet for all
that I was never the better beloved in the City, for my great care and
paines-taking in those pyous works of Reformation.


Wat. Hang love, (Brother Quarterman,) since we can not have it, for indeed it
belongs not to men of our quality to be beloved, but rather to be feared, yet
the truth, is both you and I have been too favorable in our Offices, and as
the old saying is, too much pity spoils a City.

For this should be our common use,
Never to take, but give abuse:
To hang upon the rich men's purses,
And gain a thousand beggars curses.

Quart. Nay, by the mass Brother Waterton, I never wanted for beggars curses,
and the rich sometimes to boot, I would they had cause to curse me still, for I
was like to the Kite, the more they cursed me the better I thrive, and they
shall have good cause for it as long as I live.


Wat. I, but a less Sir the staves are now delivered out of our own hands, and
we both being both disarmed of our Authority, are subject unto injury as well
as other men, (and by pie and pudding,) now that I am turned out of my Office I
am afraid that I shall be called to give an accoumpt, for some things that have
been done in the time of my Constableship brother (Quarterman) this was a very
strange and unexpected alteration; that I who lately durst punish or imprison
right or wrong, am now of a sudden come to that pass that I can secure my
person no more then he that never bore Office before in all his life time.


Quart. Truly Brother VVaterton, the case is not only yours, but also mine,
for I do verily believe that we are both sick of one disease, and the one as
uncureable as the other, for which the only Physic is as follows, an ounce
of honor, mixed with a pottle of preferment, put into a gallon Boule of
security, and made into a posset, under the great miltch Cow of the
Commonwealth.


Wat. And is that good for an Ague I pray you brother Quarterman, for I feel a
kind of shaking and shivering in my bones, that I am afraid things are not as
they should be with me.


Quart. Well, truly and I do believe that the most of our Blood is troubled
with the same disease, are they not think you ^ pray ye tell me how all does
about you in Wapping, and Stepney Parish, how fares it with my two Brothers
Andrew and Benjamin, my Sister Prudence and Priscilla. with the rest of our
dearly beloved Friends and Tub-Preachers, are not they troubled with a shaking
too? if they be not already, I am afraid it will come upon them very shortly,
if they use not some speedy means to prevent it.


Wat. I but do you think there is no other cure for us, but that only which
you told me of before.


Quart. Yes, the best way else is to take a wooden Horse, and so h^yst away for
New England, for the change of the Country may be the means to alter the
constitution of the body.


VVat. But stay, I Will see a little further first, a man had almost as good
venture a hanging here, as to leave his friends and means behind him, to
hazard a drowning, to go to New England or Virginia.


Quart. O Sir, but you look very ill on it already, and your disease begins to
appear very desperate, and desperate diseases requires desperate cures, as the
Proverb says; And therefore Brother as you will,
Either go, or tarry still.



VVat. In truth Brother Quarterman, you and the Doctor are both in one opinion
of me, and most men tells me that I droope mightily of a sudden and indeed I
find a great alteration in my self, not to be the like man I have been
formerly, neither at home nor abroad: but if it be so that rich men are mortal
and must dye, I Will now take my chance in Old-England, and if I dye well, so; if
ill, then let all (High-Constables) learn to be good in their Offices, and
take heed how they lean too much upon a Rotten-Staffe, though nere so rich^y
painted.


Quart. Well, would I had considered as much before as I do now, for I perceive
that he who meddles the least, is counted for the honestest man, and if you and
I had taken that course, I think it had been the wisest way for us both.


VVat. Why, if I had known of it. I would have sent you word by one of my
servants, to have given you noitce of some of your Adversaries, by a trusty
friend, one Munck a Cobiet, and one of the bravest fellows to carry a message
in the world; were it betwixt the Turk and the Devil, he would have let no
flies stick upon his heels I warrant you, but would have helped you to have
scowr'd your enemy, from the very nose to the touchhole behind.


Quart. But now Brother Waterton, I think it would be a wise course both for
you and me, as the times go, to seek our peace, and be in charity with all
men.


VVat. O Sir, but it is a question whether they will be in Charity with us or
no, for indeed the time has been that they would, when we would not, ye know
that we have had good days* when they have felt sorrow, for before that I was
thrown out of my Office then who but M. Waterton High Constable of Wapping, how
then but good your worship standing with their hats in their hands, with
bending knees, and now alas there is a qualme come over my stomach, good
Brother Quarterman fill me the the other cup of Claret quickly.


Quart. What, ill again man? your fits comes very thick upon y^u.


Wat. Yes Brother Quarterman, but I wonder they come no faster upon thee, you
told me that to take a wooden Horse and so for new England was the second best
medicine, but what do you think by the wooden Horse, the Gallows I pray ye,
they say that that is good for an Ague too, and you being so well acquainted
with the Hangman, I make no doubt but he will give you leave to choose your
corner.


Quart. I but Brother Waterton, I hope you are not come to jeare me for my good
counsel?


Water. No Brother Quarterman, and yet I have heard that as honest a man as
either you or I has dyed in the winter.


Qua. Brother Waterton, to tell you the very truth, I thought yt I had an Ague
upon me, which now I find other ways, and rather that it is a strong surfit
which I took above a dozen years ago.


Water. Why, was it with eating hot grains with a Sow for a wager, at that
time you played the Brewers servant.


Quart. Well Brother VVaterton, but I am sure that you took not a surfit when
you strove with the woman at Wapping for your Christmas Days Dinner, as they
call it, when you took the piece of lean beef from her, and she saved you a
labor in fetching your Pie, and Pudding, from the Bake-House.


VVat Well, but for all that I verily believe mine is a surfit too, and as I
imagine a cold surfit, which as near as I can, I Will tell you how I came by it,
upon a cold winters night a Seaman and his wife came at an unseasonable hour
from drinking which I perceiving, and being loath to disturb the Neighbors,
or trouble the Watch, went in courtesy to help them to a lodging my self,
which indeed was the Cage, and coming to the door when I opened the Lock, the
knavish Seaman being too strong for me, thrust me in, and withal lo^kt the
door again, and then threw away the Key into a Ditch, and when he had done,
he went away laughing at the knavish trick which he hah served me.


Quarter. Oh what an impudent Rasca^ was that, to offer to be so presumptious,
a^ to put you into the Cage, knowing you to b^ the High-Constable of VVapping,
and on^ that had borne Office so long in the Parish as you have done: but was
none of you^ Nei^hbours near at that time, to stop the Knave before he were
gone too far?


Wat. No indeed, and they were, it seeme^ they bare me not so much good will as
to do it, for as I beard since, they rejoiced at it, and laugh at the business
as much as the knave tha^ did it.


Quart. It seems by the Story there wa^ good neighborhood among them, and
yet m^ thinks that if they would not do it for love^ fear should have compelled
them to have d^n^ it, but how long did you stay there?


Water. Marry till such time as the Roun^ came by to release me, and then I had
like to have had my b^a^nes knocked out.


Qu^rt. Your brains knocked out man, (marry Heavens forbid,) by what means I
pray you Sir?


Wat. By one of the watchmen, who had got a cup in his head more then the rest
of his fellows, coming to the Cage and asking what I was, to whom I answered,
saying, M. Waterton, High-Constable of VVapping*


Quart. Well, but I hope he did not offer to strike or abuse you for telling
him the truth?


Wat. No, but he put me into a damnable fear that he would have done it, being
mistaken in the dark he told me I lied, and said if I would not hold my
prating, but abuse the High-Constable of VVapp^ng's name in that manner, he
would knock my Cocks-combe for me, as it was never knocked since the first time
that my Dam bound my head.


Quart. Alas good honest Gentleman, then it seems that you were almost in as
bad a case as poor transformed Acteon was, who appearing in a strange shape,
was torn to death by his own Dogs: and you being heard to speak so in an
unexpected place, peradventure might have had your brains beat out: by your
own Friend the Watchman, and so here is to you the other cup of Claret.


Wat. Verily Brother Quarterman; I must unbutten a button or two before, for my
Dublet grows too straight in the waste already, and yet for all that my Sure
is made so little, I am afraid that the Tailors Bill will be made as much too
large, when he and I shall come to a reckoning together.


Quarter. Well, but I would wish the knave to take them again, were it my ^ase
although I were at some loss, to be rid o^ the troublesome Scab, for the law
is chargable you know.


Wat. Yes Sir, but who would have thought that the times would have changed so
suddenly with me, for at that present I had the law in mine own hands, and the
proudest Tailor amongst them all durst not have resisted, not questioned the
matter in those days, but now I could wish with all my heart, that two or
three of my loving Neighbors would take up the business betwixt us, and it
should be a warning to me how I meddle with strange Tailors any more, but I Am
afraid very few will take my part, but rather rejoice to see the Tailor take
vengeance on my purse, because formerly I took so little pity on theirs.


Quart. I Sir, but not of all your Neighbors, I hope you put a difference
betwixt the good and the bad? and though forty or fifty fared the worse, I make
no doubt but others came off the better?


Wat. No indeed Brother Quarterman, it was not only forty nor fifty, but
hundreds, nay even the whole parish, and some as far as Bow, and Brumley, which
I could wish they were all as far as Rome.


Quarter. I, but Brother VVaterton, I hear there is a worse thing then all
this, which is like to come upon us verry shortly.


Wat. Why, what is that I pray you?


Quart. Marry they say that the running Stationers of London, I mean such as
use to sing Ballads, and those that cries Malignant Pamphlets in the Streets,
have all laid their heads together, and are framing a bill of indytement
against us, because diverse times to show the power of our Authority, we have
taken perforce or torn their rediculous Papers.


VVat. By the mass I thought that some thing was the matter that made the
knave so scawcie on Tower Hill the other day, for I did but bid him to be gone,
and not to stand bawling of his Ballads in that manner, and he told me that he
would sing there when I was hanged, nay, perhaps (quoth he,) one that shall be
of thy own Execution.


Quarter. But what was the subject of the matter that he sung at that time I
pray you?


VVat. For that I do not well know, because he had almost done before I came to
him, but I Am sure the knave prayed both for the King, and the Queen too, in
the conclusion.


Quart. And would not the people check him for his impudency, and take your
part?


VVat. Marry they were more readier to uphold him in his knaverie, and break
my pate.


Quart. Well, then it seems that you are in a manner as well beloved in the
Suburbs as I was in the City formerly; which indeed is, as the Devil loves
holy water, if their hearts were according to their hands, in a late Petition
of theirs, against me.


VVat. I, brother Quarterman, and if they knew but as much knaverie by you, as
I do by my self, I would be hanged if they would not, have had a Book, or a
Ballad, out of us both by this time: I thank them heartily, they have remembered
me already in their last Christmas Caroll, because that Mast. Diu with his
Dagger, and my self, suffered no Plums to come to Ratcliffe-Crosse, to make
their profane Pottage on that morning.

Thus got I hate of many, love of none.
(Boy, take the Reckoning) now I must be gone.

Qu. Well, brother Waterton, with all my heart; I Will take my leave too, friends
you know must part.

And so farewell.
FINIS.

