THE ZEALOVS CHRISTIAN, Taking Heaven BY HOLY VIOLENCE: In several SERMONS
Tending to direct men How To hear with Zeal, To pray with importunity.


Preached by that faithful servant of JESUS CHRIST, Mr. CHRISTOPHER LOVE, Late
Minister of Laurence Jury LONDON.

-- The violent take it by force,

Mat. 11. 12. London, Printed by R. and W. Leybourn, for John Rothwell, at the
Sun and Fountain in Pauls-Church-yard. 1653.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
Reader,
THE good acceptance which this Authors Treatises, (already published by us)
have found, and the good success they have had among the people of God,
together with the importunate desires of many godly persons that were (...) of
(...) SERMONS, have put us upon recommending them to the World. The subject of
those Sermons is not only Pipus but Seasonable, Every thing (says Solomon) i^
beautiful in its season, Eccles. 3. 11. The times wherein we live are famous
for a Ferm of godliness, and, no less infamous for the want of the Power of
it. Nothing is more common then for men to hear and pray, and perform the
outside-duties of Religion. Nothing more rare then for man to do these things
as becomes the Gospel. Men have so inured themselves to disputes about the
Circumstantials of Worship, that Substantials are lost in the scuffle. And
therefore it is commendable in a Minister to reduce the thoughts and hearts of
people from needless controversies to the practicals of Christianity. As
Socrates was commended for bringing down Philosophy from high and sublime
speculation, to use and practice.

It was the case of this Reverend Author, not so much to gratify the fancies
of men, as to work upon their affections, and to direct them in the ordering of
their conversation: and that the father, because he observed most men had more
heat in their Brains, then in their Hearts. That zeal that once appeared in the
Professors of this Nation, is evaporated. That violence that sometimes was in
the people of this Nation after Sermons and all Ordinances, is now abated, and
grown remiss; nay, in some, the hatred wherewith they hate the Ordinances and
people of God, is greater then ever was the love wherewith they loved them.
That praying Spirit, that not long ago was shed abroad in the hearts of Gods
people, is now as it were departed.

It is therefore high time to be speak this careless Nation, or rahter the
Professors of this Nation, with that message which GOD sent to the Church of
Ephesus, Remember from Rev. 2. 5.
whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first works, or else I will
come against thee quickly, and remove thy Candlestick out of his place.

And oh! may these ensuing Sermons be useful to revive those sparks of zeal
and importunity, that lie as it were under the ashes. That was the end which
the Author aimed at when he preached them to his Congregation, and that is a
main end that we look to and hope for in the publication of them. The times
wherein we live are times of much hypocrisy. There are many among us that say
they are Jews, and are not, that have a name to live, and are dead: Rev. 2. 9.
3. 1.
yea, there are many that seem to be religious, and yet not only deceive
others, but also deceive, their own selves. And therefore it is time for every
man to search and try if there be any way of wickedness in him. All is not
gold that glisters, nor are all Saints that so call themselves, or are so
called by others.

Here then is a Touchstone by which you may examine your selves: Here is a
Balance of the Sanctuary, wherein you may weigh your graces, and see whether
they be light or no. It is one of the vainest and most foolish things in the
world for men to cheat themselves of eternal happiness. We count it folly for
a man to suffer himself to be cheated in a bargain, and yet what is lost in one
bargain may be regained in another. But here he that is cheated, is cheated
irrecoverably. The loss of the soul is irreparable. Precious is the redemption
of souls, and it cease for ever. And yet there is a strange stupidity among
the sons of men, whereby they are willing to be deceived, and jugled out of
their soul-happinesse. They are willing to rest themselves upon any groundless
presumption, though it be so weak that they dare not put it to trial in their
own hearts, themselves being Judges. O all you poor deluded souls! How long
will you love vanity, and follow Psalm. 4.
after lies? When you may go a sure way, why will you run a hazard? Awake
therefore O thou that sleep, and seriously betake thy self to this weighty,
necessary and profitable duty of examination; and in this work we hope this
Treatise will be useful and acceptable; which if it be done, and the other
branch not left undone, the Authors desire in preaching is satisfied, and our
expectation in publishing answered; and that both those ends may be obtained,
is the earnest desire of

Those that seek not yours, but you. EDMUND CALAMY. SIMEON ASH. JER. WHITAKER.
WILL. TAILOR. MATTHEW POOL.


MAT THEW 11. 12. And from the days of John the Baptist until now, the
Sermons Preachtat Lawrence Jury, April 22, 1649. SERMON I.
Kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force.


THis Text is part of the largecommendation that Christ gives of the person The
Content opened.
and Ministry of John the Baptist. John was a crier in the wilderness to
publish the glory of Christ, and Christ an Herald to proclaim the praise of
John. And this he does,

1 For his constancy in the doctrine of Religion, verse. 7. What went you out to
see? Verse 7.
a read shaken with the wind? a light, fickle, and inconstant Preacher, that
like a reed turns with every wind of doctrine. John was no such man, not like
a reed, to yield to the stream or blast of every wind, but like the oak or
cedar that stands unmoveably in the midst of the greatest storms.

2 For his holiness and high measure of mortification, verse. 8. What went you
out to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? John Verse 8.
was no such man. He was not at all addicted to the garb and pomp of the
Court, but He had a raiment of camels hair, and a leathern girdle about his
loins, Matthew. 3. 4.

3 By comparing him with the former Prophets, with those Teachers that went
before him, verse. 9. What went you out to see? Verse 9.
a Prophet? Yea, I say to you, and more then a Prophet. and v. 11. Verily I say
unto you. Amongst Verse 11.
them that are born of women there has not risen a greater then John the
Baptist. He gives him the precedence above all his predecessors; not in regard
of the dignity of his office, but in respect of the perspicuity of his
doctrine. Yet lest he might be proud himself, or others too much admire him,
it is added by way of qualification in the end of the 11 verse, He that is
least in the Kingdom of heaven is greater then he. Those Disciples and
Apostles that should live after the resurrection of Christ, (from whence the
Gospel or Kingdom of heaven is dated) should be greater then John, in regard of
that full knowledge and clear manifestation they should have of Christ.

4 He commends him for the successefulnesse of his Ministry, and that is set
forth in the Text: From the days of John the Baptist the Kingdom of heaven
suffers violence, and the violent take it by force. A little for the
explication of the Text. The Text opened. Coelum Empyreum.


By the kingdom of heaven] is not meant the glorious seat of the blessed
Angels, but the Evangelicall state of the Christian Church. Regnum coelorum
denotat praedicationem Evangelit, and propagationem Ecclesiae. Paraeus.
It signifies the preaching of the Gospel, and propagation of the Church.
Regnum Dei significatstatum, and conditionem Ecclesiae, quae proprie Christiana
^c^tur. Camero in Mat. 18. ^.
It notes that state and condition of the Church which is properly called
Christian. The Kingdom of heaven is in Scripture interpreted a breaking off
from the observation of the Ceremonial law, and a publishing of the Gospel by
John the Baptist, and so it begun when John did first preach the Gospel. And
whereas Matthew tells us, Matthew. 3. 1. John preached, saying, Repent, for the
Kingdom of heaven is at hand. Mark calls this, The beginning of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, the Son of God, Mark 1. 1. And therefore it is that John is
called an Evangelicall Preacher.

Suffers violence] Violence is not to be taken as it is in our days of
opposition, and as in the days of persecution; as it is in our days in
opposition to right and justice, and as it was at the first coming in of the
Gospel, when the wicked men of the world did go about to oppose and obstruct
the publishing of the Gospel, but it is an holy violence whereby men press
forward to obtain the grace of this Kingdom. And so it is generally taken to
be an holy violence of affection, or a gracious disposition that was implanted
and wrought in the hearts of many men in John Baptists days.

Violence is here opposed to lukewarmnesse and moderation in Religion, to that
coldness and frozennesse that is in the hearts of men under the preaching of
the Word. It is called an holy violence, to distinguish between them that were
Christians indeed and other men; to distinguish them from the Scribes and
Pharisees that were cold and frozen under the Ministry of the Cospel. They
were so earnest after Christ in the Gospel, that no difficulties or
discouragements could take them off from Adeo avidi di sunt ut nulla vi
rbstrahi possunt, sed potius moaiuntur quam abstrahantur ab Evange^io. Luther.
their pursuits after Christ. 'They were so greedy of Christ, that no force
could pluck them away, but they would rather die then be drawn away from the
Gospel. It is a metaphor taken from warriors, who force their passage into a
City, and take it by storm, and divide the spoil. The parallel phrase is, Luke
16. 16. Every man presses into the Kingdom of God.

For the period of time wherein this violence was declared and expressed; it
was in the 15th. year of Tiberius, as you read, Luke 3. 1. in the 29th. year
of Christ.

Many doctrines may be raised from these words, but I shall not multiply
observations. The first and main doctrine is taken from the time wherein this
violence was, and the doctrine is this.

John the Baptist until now the Kingdom of heaven suffers violence.
Frigebant sub ministerio legis Scribarum and Pharisaeorum, fervebant sub
ministerio Joannis. Musculus.
The people were cold and frozen under the Ministry of the Scribes and
Pharisees, they were heated under the Ministry of John.

In the handling of this point two Questions must be answered.

1 Whence it came to pass that people were at that time so fervent and
affectionate toward the Gospel, that the Gospel was so successful then?

2 Whence it comes to pass that it is no more successful now, or why that
holy violence is now abated?

1 What are the reasons why it was so Quest. 1 Why the Gospel so successful
then?
successful in the days of John the Baptist? I answer, diverse reasons may be
rendered.

Natura hominum novitat is avida.
New things are most affecting and pleasing to man's nature. This was the ground
of the peoples admiration at Christ, Mark 1. 27. They were all amazed, saying,
What new Doctrine is this? For with authority Mark 1. 27.
commands he the unclean spirits, and they obey him We are like to the
Athemans, of whom it is written, Act. 17. 21. They spent their time in nothing
else but either to tell or to hear some new thing. While John's Ministry was
new and fresh, all rejoiced in it, John 5. 35. 1 These. 2. 1.
Ye were willing for a season to rejoice in hulight. And so the Ministry of
Paul was most successful (...). Primum advertum nostrum. Principiis savebant,
etc.
among the Thessalonians in the beginning of it, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 1. You know our
entrance in unto you, that it was not in vain. It was Melanchthons observation,
that men were favorers and followers of the Gospel when it first came into a
place.

Isa. 54. 1, 2. Sing, Oh Isa. 54. 1, 2.
barren, thou that did not bear; break forth into singing, and cry aloud thou
that did not travel with child: for more are the children of the desolute
then the children of the married wife, says the Lord. Enlarge the place of thy
tents, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thine habitations; spare not,
lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes, etc Which place is applied by
Paul to the conversion of the Gentiles upon the first promulgation of the
Gospel, Gal 4. 27. where he cites the very words of the first verse now
mentioned.

Another prophecy of the same nature you have, Isa. 2. 2. It shall come to
pass in the Isa. 2. 2.
lust days that the mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the
top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and all Nations
shall flow unto it. Which promise in the same words is repeated, Micab 4. 1.
Another promise of the same nature is Isa 60. 3, 4, 5. Isa. 60. 3, 4, 5.
and in many other places, which it is needless now to mention.

2 There were promises also for the intention of the affections, Isa. 40. 31.
They Isa. 40. 31.
that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with
wings as eagles. The eagle is a bird of the strongest and highest flight of any
that flies in the air. So 12 Zach. 8. In that day he that is feeble shall be as
David, and the house of David shall be as God. Zach. 12. 8.
So 110 Psalm. 3. It is prophesied of the first bringing in of the Gospel, that
Thy people shall be a willing people in the day of thy power. And this was to
be when God should send forth the rod of his power out of Sion, as it is verse.
2 You know what Hushai said of David, 2 Samuel 17. 8. He and his men were 2 Samuel 17 8.
mighty men, and chased in their minds as a Bear robbed of her whelps in the
field. And yet he that is feeble shall be as David. Deodate referres this
promise to the beginning of the Gospel, and so Cartwright. That is the second
reason.



Cor, 3. 15. When 2 Cor. 3. 15, 16.
Moses was read, there was a vail upon their hearts, v. 6. and when they turn
to the Lord, the vail shall be taken away. And verse. 18. But 18.
we all with open face behold as in a glass the glory of the Lord, etc. This
is also foretold, Isa. 30. 26.
Isa. 30. 26. at the promulgation of the Gospel, The light of the Moon shall be
as the light of the Sun, and the ligho of the Sun shall be sevenfold as the
light of seven days, etc.

Mat. 11. 28.
proffer, Come unto me, all you that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give
you rest, Matthew. 11. 28. Which place is not only to be understood of laboring
under the burden of sin, but also under the bondage and yoke of the Ceremonial
law, under all those costly, painful and toilsome rites imposed upon them:
which were a yoke that neither they nor their fathers were able to bear, as
Peter speaks of Circumcision, Acts 15. 10. And so you have the reasons for the
Gospels success Acts 15. 10.
in the days of John. And thus much for the first question.

The second question is this. How comes Quest. 2. Why the Gospel not so
succesfull now as formerly? Reasons.
it to pass that the Ministry of the Word is not so successful now as it
was in the days of the first preaching of it? I anwer, many reasons may be
given. Some from the Minister, some from the people.

1 In regard of the Minister, and they are five. 1 In regard of Minister


John was, Joh. 5. 35. He was a burning and a shining light. There was his zeal
in preaching, there was the holiness of his conversation. Luke 1. 16. And many
of the children of Israel Luke 1. 16.
shall he turn to the Lord their God, and he shall go before them in the spirit
and power of E lias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the
disobedient to the wisdom of the just, etc. Nazianzen said of Basil, that he
thundered in his doctrine, and lightened in his life.

John did, Mark 1. 1. John preached the Gaspel of Jesus Christ. Verse 3. He
preached repentance and remission of sins. Although John did bring in the
Gospel, yet withal he preached up duties, and not cried down duties; he
pressed on duties, and did not cast them off; he did earnestly press on the
duties of the moral law, he preached repentance, whereas many Ministers now a
days account this but a legal and servile work not fit for Christians under
the Gospel to be employed about, not fit for Ministers to preach, or people to
hear. And this is one great reason why men take up such sinful liberty to
follow their own ways and lusts, and by which means the Gospel comes to be
the less successful. But this you see was far from John's mind and temper;
for, said he, Repent, for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand, Matthew. 3. 2. Oh
generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell? was our Saviors
language, Matthew 22. 33. Jerem. 23. 22. But if Jerem. 23. 22.
they had stood in my counsel, and had caused my people to hear my words, then
they should have turned them from their evil way, and from the evil of their
doings: and 32. Behold, I am against them that prophecy false dreams, says 32.
the Lord, and do tell them, and cause my people to err by their lies, and by
their lightness; yet I sent them not, nor commanded them, therefore they shall
not profit this people at all, says the Lord. 2 Cor. 4. But we have renounced
the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in 2 Cor. 4 2
crastinesse, nor handling the Word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of
the truth commending our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God.
It does enervate and emasculate the power of the Word to have it mixed with
falsehoods. Much truth is preached in the Church of Rome, yet conversion is not
ordinarily amongst them, because they adulterate the truth by many errors.

The Scribes did little good by their preaching, because they did mingle so
many ungrounded traditions which they taught without any authority, Matthew. 7.
29. Christ taught as one having authority, and not as the Matthew. 7 29.
Scribes.

John did, either in matter, method, or manner of expression. 1 Cor. 14. part
of the 5 verse, -- Greater is he that prophesies then he that speaks with
tongues, except he interpret, that the Church may receive edifying. Many
Preachers are like Heraclitus, who was called the dark Doctor, they affect
sublime notions, obscure expressions, uncouth phrases, not making difficult
truths plain, but plain truths difficult. They darken 2 Cor. 14 5.
counsel by words without knowledge, Job 38. 2.

John did. Matthew. 3. 2. John preached, saying, Repent, for the Kingdom Job 38.
2.
of heaven is at band; Mark says, the Gospel Mat. 3. 2.
begun with John's Ministry, Mark. 1. 1. and his doctrine began with repentance
Men take up other methods now adays, and so prove unsuccessefull.

John preached what the Prophets taught, and Christ trod in John's steps, and
the Apostles exactly agreed with and continued in the doctrine of their
predecessors. But now in our time Ministers are divided; one preaches one
thing, another preaches another thing; and this does very much trouble the
minds of people, and makes many stumble at the word, and so the Gospel proves
unsuccessefull.

2 This comes to pass from the people, 2 In regard of the people. Reason 1.
Mat. 21. 26.
and that for four reasons.

1 People do more question the office, and calling of the Ministry now then
they did question John's. Matthew. 21. 26. -- All men hold John as a Prophet. The
reason why Paul's Ministry was ineffectuall to many Corinihians was this;
because they questioned his calling, and therefore he labors to vindicate his
Apostolical authority all along the Epistle. This does take off that awe and
majesty that should be in men to the Word. As on the contrary, the reason why
the Ministry of Paul was so effectual to the Thessalonians, was this: Because
when they received the Word of God, they received it not as the word of men,
but (as it is in truth) as the Word of God, which effectually works in them
that believe, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. 1 These. 2. 13.
I know that some question the lawfulness of our Ministry upon this ground,
because miracles do not attend our preaching, as they did at the first
promulgation of the Gospel. But this is no just reason, and (that I may remove
this obstacle of the success of the Gospel) I shall by the way briefly
disprove it. Mat. 21. 25, 26. John 10. 41.


1 John had his calling from heaven, Mat. 21. 25, 26. and yet John did no
miracle, John 10. 41.

2 Miracles are not necessary now as they Miracula non sunt multiplicanda sine
necessitate 1 Cor. 1. 22.
were at the first planting of the Gospel. There was more need of miracles then
that the people might give attendance to the Ministry in those days. The Jews
require a sign, 1 Cor. 1. 22. 1 Cor. 14. 22. Tongues are for a sign not to
them that believe, but to them that believe not, but prophesying serves 1 Cor.
14 22.
not for them that believe not, but for them which believe,

3 Miracles were signs of the Apostleship but not of the Ministry, 2 (or. 12.
12. The signs of an Apostle were wrought among you, -- in signs, and wonders,
and mighty deeds. 2 Cor. 12 12.
Timothy and Titus could work no miracles, yet no man doubts of their
authority. So that want of miracles does not at all invalidate the authority of
the Ministry. So I have removed the first impediment of the success of the
Gospel in our days:

That is the first reason.

Christ and Gospel glutted.

John the Baptist by their coming would destroy the government of the Church
among the Jews, and when that was taken down Christ set up another in its
stead. Now look, as it is in a State, the intervals of government breed many
State-heresies, if I may so call them, mutinies, factions, and parties among
the people, interrupting the peace of the land: So it is in the Church, when
the reins of government are let loose, in-come errors and disorders; and the
good seed is choked by that means.

Germany was because the peoples catechizing went along with Luthers preaching.
It was laid as a charge upon masters of families, that they should catechize
their children, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. And these words which I command thee Deuteronomy. 6. 6,
7.
this day shall be in thine heart, and thou shall teach them diligently unto
thy children, and thou shall talk of them when thou sit in thine house, etc.

People do not back the Ministers preaching of the Word with this duty of
prayer, that God would sanctify the word preached to their souls, and make it
successful. It is an observable passage which you find, Mark 4. 24. Take
heed what you hear; for with what measure you were it shall be measured to you,
and unto you that hear shall more be given. Sometimes this expression is
referred to rash judgment, as Matthew. 7. 2. sometimes to works of mercy, but
here it is used as an argument to stir up people to prepare their hearts for
the hearing of the Word with care and conscience. For if it be your care to fit
your selves for the Word, and to settle it in your hearts, and practice it in
your lives, God will then measure the same back unto you by his blessing of the
Word, to the salvation and edification of your souls: whereas the neglect of
this duty is a great cause why the word is not so successful now as it was
formerly.

MATTHEW 11. 12. And from the days of John the Baptist until now, the Kingdom
of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force.
Sermons Preached at Lawrence Jury, April 22, 1649. SERMON 11.
THe doctrinall part being finished, I now come to application. And this
doctrine may be useful in five respects. 1 For reproof. 2 For comfort. 3 For
instruction. 4 For caution. 5 To stir up our lamentation.



to the utmost, and draw out their strength in ways of wickedness: that like
those in Jerem. 8. 6. that turn to their course, as the hearse rusheth into the
battle; as an horse that Jer. 8. 6.
is so fierce in the war that he rusheth into it without fear of danger: So the
Spirit of God sets forth the wickedness of men's hearts; by nature they rush
into sin, not considering what they do, as the horse. See what Job says
concerning the horse, Job 39. 19. Have thou given the horse strength? have thou
clothed his neck with thunder? 20. Caust thou make him afraid as a
grasse-hopper, the glory of his nostrils is terrible. 21. He paweth in the
valley, and rojoyceth in his strength, he goes on to meet the armed men. 22.
He mocketh at fear, and is not affrighted, neither turns he back from the
sword. Verse 25. He says among the trumpets, Aha, Aha, and he smells the
battle afar off, the thunder of the captains and shooting. Even in this manner
do wicked men rush into wickedness; no fear, nor wit can restrain them; no
dangers, nor threatenings either from God or man can keep them in. Jerem. 2. 23.
They are as a swift Jer. 2. 23
Dromedarie, traversing her ways. Their course is evil, and their force is
not right. Jeremy 23. 10. Their hearts are fully set in them to do evil,
Eccles. 8. 11. They weary themselves to commit iniquity, Jeremy 9. 5. The
people labor Eccles. 8. 11.
in the fire, and weary themselves for very vanity, Habak. 2. 13. They sleep
not except Hab. 2. 13.
they have done mischief, and their sleep is taken away, except they cause some
to fall, Prove. 4. 16. Prove. 4. 16.


2 This reproves those that instead of an holy violence are guilty of
tumultuous violence, that by force and power disturb humane societies,
destroying laws and government, that do as Antiochus did, Dan. 7. Dan 7. 25.
25. He spoke great words against the most high, and were out the Saints of the
most high, and thought to change times and laws.

3 This reproves those that instead of an holy violence, are guilty of
oppressing violence, which is the sin chiefly of rich men Mic. 6. 12. For the
rich men thereof are full violence. Micah 6 12.
It is they that grind the faces of the poor. Mic. 2. 2. They covet fields,
and take them by violence, Micah 2 2.
and houses, and take them away, and so they oppress a man and his house. Amos
3. 10. They Amos 3. 10.
know not to do right, who store up violence and robbery in their palaces.
Prove. 4. 17. They eat the Prove. 4. 17.
bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of violence.

4 This reproves those who are eager and violent in their pursuits after the
things of this life, but not so after spiritual things; we are all upon the
spur, all upon the wing after the world, here is violence upon violence, labor
upon labor for these things which we may have, and yet be never the better,
and want them, and yet be never the worse. Covetous men are said to pant after
the dust of the earth, Amos 2. 7. So eager are they in Amos 2. 7.
their pursuit after the world, as if they were almost out of breath. Psalm. 59.
6, 14. They return at evening, they make a noise like a dog, Psalm. 59. 6, 14.
and go about the city. No creature is so sensible of hunger as a dog. Covetous
men are like dogs toward the world, as if they were made up all of desires,
but toward the things of eternity we are as if we were all Stoics, and had no
passions in us. As hot Ferventissimi in terrenis. s^^gidissimi in coelestibus.
as fire for earth, and as cold as any ice for heaven. Oh how many pant after
the earth who have no breathing after heaven!

5 This reproves those who are violent opposers of the Gospel. As the former
may be called a worldly violence, so this may be called a persecuting violence.
Such was the violence of Paul before his conversion, Act. 26. 11. I punished
them often in every Synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme, and Acts 26. 11.
being exceedingly mad against them, I persecuted them even unto strange
Cities. The Scribes and Pharisees are said to be filled with madness, against
Christ after the miracle was wrought in curing the man with the withered hand,
Luke 6. 11. There are some that understand my Text of this persecuting
violence. Luke 6. 11.
This is called a rage reaching up to heaven, 2 Chronicles. 28. 9.

6 This reproves such, who account an 2 Chronicles. 28. 9.
holy zeal and violence in the ways of religion to be only a furious frenzy.
Such were they, Act. 2. 13. that said, These men Acts 2. 13.
are filled with new wine, when the Apostles were zealous in the preaching of
the Gosgel. Such were the friends of Christ, when he was zealous and servent in
the doing of his Fathers will, and so intent upon it that he had no leisure to
eat his meat, They went to lay hold of him, for they said, He is beside
himself, Mark 3. 21. The like censure did Fest us pass on Paul, when he was
zealous Mark 3. 21.
to win men to the Gospel; he said, Thou art beside thy self, much learning
does make thee mad, Act. 26. 24. Basil, when he was passionately eager against
the Arrian heresy, Acts 26. 24.
it was interpreted a symptom of his dotage. If men will not be bafled out of
their religion, reformation, etc. they are esteemed but furious zealots, men of
violent spirits. Thus it fared with zealous Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 13. Whether we are
beside our selves, it is to God, or whether we be sober, it is for your 2 Cor.
5. 13.
cause.

7 This reproves those who were once violent and zealous in religion, but now
their zeal is abated. We have a proverb: Nothing that is violent is durable; if
the violent motion proceeds from some external Nullum vi^lentum est perpetuum.
artificial cause, and not from a rooted stirring principle within Many that
go in the ways of God merely from an external principle, it may be credit or
profit, though they may be seemingly violent for a time, yet their violence
will not last, they will not be steadfast in the ways of religion and in a
Christian course. Some who have flourished in the Spring have had a withering
time, their fruit decayed as the leaves fall off in Autumn. It may be said of
many in regard of their souls, as it was said of David in regard of his body:
When he was old and stricken in years, they covered him with clothes, and he
gat no heat, 1 King. 1. 1. Many, 1 Kings 1. 1.
though they are plied with ordinances, can get no heat in them. Augustine
observes it of many in his days, that would at their first conversion pray
frequently and live holily, but after a while they would grow more remiss, and
pray more coldly and slightly then they did before. There are few of whom after
a long profession of religion it can be said, as was said of Moses, Deuteronomy. 34.
7. His eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated. Many are like Asa, their
Deuteronomy. 34. 7.
end is worse then their beginning.

8 This reproves those that content themselves with moderation in the matters
of religion, that account a dram of zeal enough for a talent of discretion, as
Mr. Greenham said. Many men are of this opinion, that religion is dangerous,
and that an holy violence in religion is attended with troubles and dangers,
and therefore it is best to be moderate in religion. There are many of these
men in our days, otherwise religion had never come to so low an ebb as now it
is. It was the saying of one, that men may be religious, but then they must not
be too zealous: they must not be too violent for the ways of God, for then
they are called men of hot and furious spirits; Men (it seems) must not love
religion too much. Amama quotes Tarnovius, who mentions a sort of men that
brought in an opinion, which he calls a new Gospel, that if a man perform the
external duties of religion, if he go to the Church, hear the word, pray, etc.
it was sufficient for salvation. Of this temper Gallio was, Act. 18. 17. Gallio
cared for none of those things. A Acts 18. 17.
little religion will serve the turn. Most of the Statists and Politicians of
this world are of this temper, which God will one day account a Laodicean
lukewarmnesse or timorous cowardice. Geographers, who write of the situation of
England, say, that it is between the Torrid and the Frigid Zone, neither hot
nor cold; I wish our hearts were not like our land.

9 This reproves those that express more violence outwardly then they have
inwardly.

There are many men that will hear Sermons on Lords days, and Lectures on
week-dayes, speak well of religion, and of the ways and people of God, but if
you look to them in their families, and in their closets, you shall find them
of another temper. These men are like pepper, hot in the mouth, but cold in the
stomach. I may resemble such to a pot boiling over the fire, hot at the top,
cold at the bottom. So some men are boiling hot in the mouth, but their hearts
are cold and frozen. As it is with men sick of a fever, the face and hands and
other external parts of the body burn, when the heart shakes and quivers with
cold.

10 This reproves those who all their life remain dull and sluggish in
religion, that like Carriers horses keep their ordinary pace, they will not go
beyond their bating place, they are like Dromedaries, swift in the ways of
sin, but like the dull Ass, slow in the vvayes of God. The firstling of other
beasts was to be offered to God, but not the firstling of an ass, Exodus 13.
13. And every firstling of an ass thou shall redeem Exodus 13. 13.
with a lamb, and if thou will not redeem it thou shall break its neck; to note
that of sluggish and dull hearts, the very best services are not acceptable to
God. The snail is reckoned among the unclean creatures, Levit. 11. 30. Those
hearts that are of this Levit. 11 30.
dull constitution are impure and odious in the sight of God. And thus much
shall serve by way of reproof.

2 This doctrine is useful for comfort, Use 2. For Comfor.
and that 1. To Ministers. 2. To hearers.

1 To Ministers; and that for 3 reasons.

1 Though here is matter of trouble, 1 To Ministers for three Reasons.
yet no fear of guilt, if thou discharge thy duty faithfully, though not
succesfully. Ezekiel. 3. 19. If thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his
wickedness, Ezekiel. 3. 19.
nor from his wicked way, he shall die in his iniquity, but thou have delivered
thy soul. Act. Acts 20. 26.
20. 26. when Paul had used his utmost endeavors at Ephesus, he vindicates
himself thus; I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of
all men. Act. 18. 6. when Acts 18. 6.
Paul preached to the Jews, and they would not obey the Gospel, He shook his
raiment, and said unto them, Your blood be upon your own heads, I am clean:
from henceforth I will go to the Gentiles. Though a Minister does all his days
plow the rocks, and sow the sands, and spend his strength in vain, yet this
will bring no guilt upon a Ministers conscience: for though it be the Ministers
duty to preach the Word, yet it is Gods work to convert the soul.

3 God rewards Ministers according to their labor, not success, 2 Cor. 2. 15.
For we are unto God a sweet savor of Christ in 2 Cor. 2. 15.
them that are saved, and in them that perish.

The father pays the nurse, though the child die. The Apothecaries bill must
be paid, though the patient die: So God will reward Ministers, though success
be not answerable to their endeavors, Isa. 49. 4. Then I said, I have labored
in vain, and Isa. 49. 2.
spent my strength for naught and in vain, yet surely my judgment is with the
Lord, and my work with my God; or the reward of my work.

3 The word may live in the hearers hearts when the Minister is dead, John 4.
36, 37. He that reapeth, receives wages, and John 4. 36, 37.
gathers fruit unto life eternal, that both he that sows and he that
reapeth may rejoice together. And herein is that saying true, One sows, and
another reapeth. As a wicked man does hurt after his death, so a good man does
good, 2 King. 23. 15. Jeroboams 2 Kings 23. 15.
wickedness proved a snare to Israel in the days of Josiah, which was 360
years after his death. And David's example did good on Josiah 400 years after, 2
King. 22. 2. Josiah did that which was right in the sight of the 2 Kings 22. 2.
Lord, and walked in all the ways of David his father.

2 As here is comfort for Ministers, so Comfort to hearers for three reasons.
also here is comfort to hearers, and that for 3 reasons:

1 God never expected all should attein the same measure of grace. Although,
Luke Luke 8. 8
8. 8. the seed that fell in good ground is said to bear an hundred fold, yet,
Matthew 13. 23. the grounds differed, and some brought Mat. 13. 23.
forth but sixty, some but thirty. Christ has lambs in his fold as well as
sheep, Babes in his house as well as strong men.

2 It may be what is wanting in a sudden and short violence, is made up in
solidity. Oaks grow not so fast as the Willow-trees, but they grow more
solidly.

3 God will cherish the smallest beginnings of good in the hearts of his
people, Cant. 7. 12. Let us go up early to the vineyards, let us see if the
vine flourish, whether the tender Cant. 7. 12.
grape appear, the pomegranates bud forth, there will I give thee my loves. The
Lord Jesus took notice not only of the strong and grown grapes, but also of
the tender grapes, not only of the fruit, but of the buddings. The very
buddings of grace are accepted. And how should this comfort weak Christians,
and encourage them to increase with the increase of God, and to get more of
this holy violence in heavenly things, Matthew. 12. 20. A bruised reed he will
not break and a smoking flax he will not quench, till he send forth judgment
into victory. He speaks there of new converts holy desires, and gracious
resolutions in a poor soul, though they do but smoke, and not burn, yet Jesus
Christ will not quench them till he have brought forth judgment to victory, by
which he means, till they come to be perfect men and women in Christ Jesus.

MATTHEW 11. 12. And from the days of John the Baptist until now, the Kingdom
of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force.
Sermons Preached at Lawrence Jury, April 29, 1629. SERMON 111.
IN the third place, this doctrine may serve for instruction touching several
things. 1 The nature Use 3. Instruction
of this holy violence. 2 The necessity of it. 3 The discovery of it. 4 The
differences betwixt an heady and holy violence.

Quest. 1. If you ask, what is the nature of this holy violence? 1 What is the
nature of this violence.


I answer, 1 It is a full and vehement bent of a man's desires, affections, and
endeavors after Jesus Christ in the Gospel; so that no difficulties or
discouragements whatsoever shall take him off from his pursuit after Christ in
the way of his ordinances.

2 For the necessity of it, that appears in 2 The necessity of it.
5 regards. 1 In regard of God. 2 In regard of ourselves. 3 In respect of the
devil. 4 In respect of other men. 5 In respect of heaven it self.

1 In regard of God, Eccles. 9. 10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it
with all thy 1 In regard of God. Romans 12: 11. (...). boiling in spirit.
might. God requires this at your hands, Romans 12. 11. Not slothful in
business, fervent in spirit, serving the Lord. The word signifies boiling in
spirit.

2 In regard of our selves, and that for two reasons.

1 We have violent temptations against us, our affections must be equal to our
temptations 2 In respect of our selves.
; if our affections be not violent, how can we resist violent temptations?
shall not we be as violent to save our souls as the Devil is to damn them?
Satan invades the soul with fierce and furious assaults.

2 We have been violent in the ways of sin. Show as much violence in the ways
of God, as you can, and when you have done all, it will come short of your
former violence in the ways of sin, Rom 6. 19. As Romans 6. 19
ye have yielded your members servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity unto
iniquity: even so now yield your members servants to righteousness unto
holiness. There are three To's in the expression of the service of sin, to
uncleanness, to iniquity, and unto iniquity, but in the service of God there
are only two To's, to righteousness, and unto holiness. To note that we were
more addicted to sin formerly then now we are to grace; the reason is, then
there was nothing but sin in the soul, now there is something else besides
grace, a stream of corruption to oppose it. We ought to be as violent in good
as in evil: the same word which signifies to persecute, Act. 26. 11. is used to
set out his earnest pressing toward heaven, Phil. Acts 26. 11. (...) Phil. 3.
14.
3. 14.

3. In regard of the devil. He has violent temptations and suggestions, 1
Pet. 5. 8. Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the Devil as a roaring
lion walks about, seeking In respect of the Devil.
whom he may devour. 1 He is said to be an adversary. Now an adversary will 1
Pet. 5. 8.
watch all opportunities for your hurt, and will be intently set upon it. 2 He
is a lion, not a lamb; a lion, a savage, fierce, and furious creature. 3 He is
not asleep, but a roaring lion. 4 Not a lion standing still, contented with the
prey when he has gotten it, but still going about for more: he is not
contented with what he has gotten, though he has been going about ever since
Adams fall, yet he goes about still for more, he labors to sill hell with
souls. 5 He Vigilat diabolus, and tu do mis. In respect of other men bad men.
seeks whom he may devour. The devil watches, and do thou sleep?

4 In regard of other men, and those either bad or good.

1 In regard of bad men.

1 Consider, they are violent against the truth, and wilt not thou be as eager
and violent in the profession of the Gospel, as they are in their oppositions
against it? As Zeno said to one of his acquaintance, who was enticed to bear
false witness against another, and walked privately, because he would avoid
the man that sought to suborn him. Oh, said Zeno, Shall he not be ashamed of
sin, and will thou be ashamed to set thy self against sin?

2 Bad men rage and are violent in ways of wickedness: Wicked men are as
swift as dromedaries in the ways of sin, and will thou be as a dull ass in
the service of God? shall a man run fast in a way of sin to destroy his soul,
and will you but creep in the ways of God to save your soul? shall wicked men
run post to hell, and will thou but creep slowly to heaven? Shall a man make
speed to the place of execution, and will thou but move slowly toward a crown
and throne? shall wicked men not be ashamed to show their rage in a sinful
course, and shall godly men be ashamed to be zealous in the ways of God? Jer.
8. 6. Jer. 8, 6.
They turn to their course as the horse rusheth (...) i^ruit more in undantis
aquae.
into the battle, Jer. 9. 5. They weary themselves to commit iniquity, will not
you do as much for God as they do for Satan?

2 In regard of good men. How eager 2 In regard of good men, Number. 14. 24. (...)
Implevit ire post me, He went after me with full sail.
and earnest are they after God? Caleb and Joshua followed God fully, Numb. 14.
24. when hypocrites follow God partially and by halves. Psalm. 132. 4, 5. David
was so violent for God, that he would give no sleep to his eyes, nor slumber
to his eyelids, until he found out a place for the Lord, an habitation for
the mighty God of Jacob. As on the contrary, those wicked men, Prove. 4. 16.
were so violent in wickedness, that they could not sleep, except they caused
some to fall. Psalm. 69. 9. The zeal of thine house has eaten me up, and the
Psalm. 132 4, 5.
reproaches of them that reproached thee fell upon Psalm. 69. 9.
me.

5 In respect of heaven it self, Luke 13. 24. Strive to enter in at the strait
gate; for many Luke 13. 24.
I say unto you will seek to enter in, and shall 5 In regard of Heaven it self.
(...) more pugilum certate.
not be able. Strive to an agony, or as in an agony men strive for life: it is
not enough to seek; many seekers shall never find, but there must be striving:
there must be a kind of holy impatiency to get into heaven, 1 Cor. 9. 24, 25.
Know ye not that they which run in a race run all, but one receives the prize:
So run that ye may obtain. And every man that 1 Cor. 9. 24, 25.
striveth for the mastery is temperate in all things. Now they do it to obtain
a corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible. 2 Timothy 2. 5. 2 Timothy 2. 5.
And if a man also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned except he strive
lawfully. Heaven is compared to a hill, and hell to a pit. It Facilis descens^s
Averni. Virgil.
will cost a man sweat and labor to get up an hill, but it is an easy thing
to go down into a pit. Heaven is as Canaan (the type of it) was, though a land
of promise, yet of conquest too. There were many Giants there, the sons of Anak
in the land. Heaven is not had without eagerness, Luk 16. 16. Every man
presses into it. It is an (...). Paraeus.
allusion to soldiers that storm a City or strong Garrison, with all the
speed and violence they can. Should soldiers go about that great work in a
marching pace, they might all be cut off. And thus much shall suffice for the
second thing, to show the necessity of this holy violence.

The 3 thing is the discovery of this holy 3 The discovery of this violence.
violence. Now it is discovered by these follovving marks. A violent or
zealous person is one,

1 Who is patient in his own cause, but impatient in Gods cause. This was the
temper of David. What the enemies did to David was but as a pin in the flesh,
but what they did against God was as a svvord in his bones. Isal. 42. 1 As
with a sword in my bones mine enemies reproached (...), whilst they say daily
unto me, Where is thy God? The reproaching of God was as death to him, as
though he had been slain by it, as slaying (...) Number. 12 3.
in my bones. Moses was a man very meek in his own wrongs, Numb. 12. 3.
Moses was very meek above all the men that were upon the face of the earth; but
in the cause of God, Exodus 32. he carried himself as if he had Exodus 32.
been a man made up all of passion, he broke the tables of stone. So Jesus
Christ was famous for his gentleness, he was a lamb for meekness, and yet
in the cause of his Father, he applied that to himself; The zeal of thine
house has eaten me up, John 2. John 2. 17.
17.

2. He never thinks that he began to serve God soon enough, or did him work
enough, Psalm. 63. 1. Early will I seek thee, and v. 8. Psalm. 63. 1.
My soul follows hard after God. Act. 13. 22. God gave David this testimony,
and said, Acts 13. 22.
I have found David the son of Jesse, a man after mine own heart, which shall
fulfill all my will. Psalm. 119. 6. Then shall I not be Psalm. 119 6.
ashamed, when I have respect to all thy commandments.

3. He is desirous to glorify God by suffering as well as by doing, to follow
the lamb whitherscever he goes; to the wilderness, as well as to paradise;
to a prison, as well as to a palace. Jer. 2. 2. I remember the kindeness Jer.
2. 2.
of thy youth, -- when thou wentest after me in a land that was not sown.
Cant. 8. 5. Who is Cant. 8. 5.
this that comes up from the wilderness, leaning upon her beloved, from the
wilderness of afflictions. Matthew. 8. 19. A certain Scribe Matthew. 8 19.
came to him, and said, Master, I will follow thee whithersoever thou go. He
would follow Christ in doing, but not in suffering, as cloth does last in
wearing, but shrink in wetting; for when Christ told him, The foxes have holes,
the birds of the air nests, but the son of man has not where to lay his head,
verse 20. his courage was abated.

4 He looks more after duty then reward, and complains more of his defects in
it, then for want of expected returns to it. Many men are content to follow
God, so long as there is any advantage in so doing; they will do their duty, but
they do not care for duty, but upon expectation of rewards. Remiss spirits
follow God as a dog does his master, till he comes by a carrion, then he leaves
his master, and turns aside to it: So wicked men follow God till they come at a
carrion, till they meet with some stinking lust, some occasion or object of
sin, but then they depart from God, and close with it. But on the contrary
David followed after God, and thirsted for God even then when he was in a dry
and thirsty land, where no water was, Psalm. 63. 1. Had we been in Psalm. 63. 1.
David's case, we should have said, O Lord, give me drink; had we been in a
barren land, we should have said, O Lord, give me food: but David in a barren
and thirsty land cries, O Lord, give me thy self. That is the spirit of a man
that is truly zealous after the Gospel.

5 Difficulties and opposition do rather quicken then abase his endeavors; what
adventures will he not make? what pains will he not take? what hazards will he
not run for God? And as it is with the fire in the Smiths forge^ that grows
hotter and more violent when the water is sprinkled upon it, or as fire burns
the most vehemently in a cold and frosty day: So that opposition that is made
against a zealous man does but make it the more eager and fervent by a holy
Antiperistasis. Thus it was in the days of Christ, the harder it was to get to
him, the more violent and restless were they till they came to him. They trod
one upon another, being an innumerable multitude of people, Luke 12 1. Some
forced their Luke 12. 1.
passage to Christ (as we say hunger does to meat) through stone walls, Mark 2.
4. And Mark 2. 4.
when they could not come nigh unto Christ for the preasse, they uncovered the
roof where he was, and when they had broken it up, they let down the bed, etc.
Such was the temper of that Syrophenician, whose zeal was not quenched but
increased by opposition, though even Christ did set himself against her as an
adversary; When Christ said, It is not meet to take the childrens bread and
give it to dogs, Mark 7. 27.
Mark 7. 27. Here is cold water (one would think) enough to quench the zeal
of many a professor, but the fire of her zeal made fuel of this cooling
expression; She answered, Yet the dogs under the table, eat of the childrens
crumbs, verse 28. One compares a violent Christian to a burre, the more pains
Verse 28.
you take to get it off, it sticks the faster on: So a zealous Christian, the
more you endeavor to pull him from God, he cleaves the closer to him. This was
David's disposition, when he danced before the Lord, when Michal despised him,
and reproved him, and fell foul upon him for it; he answers, I will yet be
more vile then thus, and will be base in mine own sight, for it was before the
Lord, 2 Samuel 6. 21, 22. And thus much for the third particular, the discovery of
this 2 Samuel 6. 21, 22.
holy violence. I now come to the fourth.

The fourth particular is the difference 4 The difference between a rash and a
holy violence.
betwixt an heady and rash, and an holy and religious violence. Now I shall
show that in 10 particulars.

1 It is most seen in trivial and circumstantiall matters. Such was the
violence of the Pharisees, about washing their vessels and their hands before
meat, but they never looked after the washing of the heart. So the Prelaticall
party shevved much heat and violence about ceremonies, whereas they were
lukevvarm, yea cold in more substantial matters, the observation of the
Sabbath, and the strict exercise of holiness, etc. They were very violent for
the linen Ephod, though it may be there was a leprous skin under it; they took
great care to have railes about the Communion Table, but never took care to
make a rail to keep profane persons from the profanation of the Sacrament;
but now a godly man is most conversant about that which may be most
advantageous to him, which will bring him nearest heaven, which will be of most
use to him to glorify God, and to save his soul.

2 It is kindled by passion and vain glory in the one, by a zeal and holy
indignation in the other. Thus many men are zealous in the broaching of
errors; when they cannot get glory by holding the truth, then they will give
up themselves to vent errors. Whereas true violence comes from a better
principle, and aims at an higher end. The fire of the Altar was to come from
heaven, Levit. 9. 24. And when Nadab and Abihu Levit 9. 24.
offered sacrifice with strange fire, it was not accepted, nay they were slain
in their enterprise. Our zeal should be a fire from heaven. God accounts that
strange fire we fetch from our own hearts.

3 Violent rash zeal makes a man go beyond the bounds of his place and calling.
Samuel reproved Saul for his heady violence, 1 Samuel 13. 13. When Saul had taken
upon 1 Samuel 13 13.
him to offer sacrifice, Samuel said, Thou have done foolishly. Yet Saul
pleaded a fair excuse. verse 11, 12. Saul said, Because I saw V. 11, 12.
that the people were scattered from me, and that thou came not within the
days appointed, and that the Philistines gathered themselves together to
Michmash, therefore said I, The Philististines will come down now upon me to
Gilgal, and I have not made supplication unto the Lord. I forced my self
therefore, and offered a burntoffering.

You see Saul had much to say, yet all would not serve to justify his invasion
into the Priests office. Such was the violence of Peter, Matthew. 26. 51. He
stretched out his hand, and drew his sword and struck a servant Mat. 26. 51.
of the High Priest, and smote off his ear. But an holy violence makes a man
zealous in his place. A zealous Magistrate will severely punish sin, let other
Justices indulge it. A zealous Minister will be faithful and fervent in the
reproving of sin, though others prove dumb dogs, or flatterers that sow
pillowes under men's elbowes: So a zealous master of a family resolves with good
Joshua, That he and his house will serve the Lord, Josh. 24. 15. whatever other
masters and other families do. Fire in its place Josh. 24. 15.
is good and useful, but out of its place how hurtful and destructive?

MATTHEW 11. 12. And from the days of John the Baptist until now, the Kingdom
of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force.
Sermons Preached at Lawrence Jury, April 29, 16 19 SER^^N IIII.
4 AN heady violence is more eager at first then at the latter end. This
difference the Philosopher puts between natural and violent motions, that
natural motions are slow at the beginning, but swifter when they come nearest
their journeys end; as a falling stone moves very slow when it first begins to
fall, but faster when it comes nearer its center. On the contrary, violent
motions are swifter in the beginning, slower in the conclusion. As an arrow
shot out of a bow moves exceeding swiftly at the first, but afterward flags
and grows remiss, (...) at last the motion of it cease. An heady violence is
like the violent motion, swift at first, slow afterward: But contrarily an holy
violence is like a natural motion, that acts with more vigor in the end then
in the beginning. This was the commendation of the Church of Thyatir^ That her
last works were more then her first Revel. 2. 19.

5 Heady violence will be discouraged in religion by small difficulties. Such
was the violence of that man forementioned, that was earnest to come to
Christ, but when Christ told him, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the
air have nests, but the son of man has not where to lay his head, Matthew. 8. 20
his zeal was abated. But an holy violence Math. 20
is quickened, not abated by opposition. Joh 32. 19. Behold, my belly is as
wine which Joh 32. 9.
has no vent, it is ready to burst like new bottles.

6 An heady violence is led more by example then rule; like that violence of
the people of Ephesus for Diana, Act. ^9. Acts (...)
Some cried one thing, and some another, and the most part knew not wherefore
they were come together. Such was the violence of the Scribes and I ha^ sees,
John (...) 48, 49 Then answered him the (...) you also deceived? Have any of
(...) the Pharisees believed on him? But this people who know not the law, are
cursed. But an holy violence is led by Scripture-rule, not by popular example.
The word was the rule that guided Joshua to that resolution, That he and his
house would serve the Lord.

7 One that has this heady violence is most busied with controversials and
circumstantials in religion. Thus Saul was violent against the eating of the
blood of the sacrifices, yet made no conscience of shedding the blood of
fourscore and five of the Priests of the Lord: But an holy violence makes a man
conversant in the practicals of Christianity, Tit. 2. 14. The people Titus 2.
14.
of God are a people zealous of good works. There was less of the power of
religion in those times wherein the Schoolmen most flourished, and the heat of
men's spirits was spent in curious and frivolous speculations; while they that
should have instructed the people turned disputants, the poor multitude became
Atheists. It was an heady violence betwixt the Eastern and Western Churches
touching the time of the observation of Easter, when many other truths of God
that lay a bleeding were neglected, and they did not contend earnestly for many
of the doctrines of faith that was once delivered to the Saints. So many men
among us spend all their time about notions and disputes, and this has proved
a very canker to eat out the power of godliness. In the City of Megara there
was a great contention between two men which of them should stand in the shadow
of an ass upon a Sunshine day. Such was the violence of Paul before his
conversion, Gal. 1. 14. He was exceedingly zealous for the traditions Gal. 1. 14
of his fathers.

8 An heady violence is an uneven violence, there is no uniformity in it; it is
a violence against some sins, not all; it is for some duties, not others; to
act some graces, but not all. Such was the violence of Jehu. He was very hot
and violent against the Priests and worship of Baal, 2 Kings 10. 28. Jehu
destroyed Baal out of Israel: But 2 Kings 10. 28. Verse 31,
Jehu departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, which made Israel to sin, verse
31. Such was the violence of Saul for sacrifice, but not for obedience. But now
an holy violence is uniform, it carries a man out against every sin, for every
duty, it makes a man to walk in all the commandments of God.

9 This heady violence will make a man disturb humane societies and civil
government, anticipate authority: But an holy violence, though violent toward
God yet is quiet and peaceable toward men; though he pursue heaven with
violence, yet he lives in the earth with meekness and quietness. 2 Pet. 2.
10. Those ancient heretics were 2 Pet. 2. 10.
such as did despise government, presumptuous, self-willed, and were not afraid
to speak evil of dignities. But the wisdom that is from above, is first pure,
then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, etc. I am. 3. 17. James 3. 17.


10 Heady violence is accompanied with stoutnesse of heart both toward God and
men, it proceeds from a natural rashness: But holy violence is accompanied
with humiliation, Revel. 3. 19. The Church of Laodicea Revel. 3. 19.
is commanded to be zealous and repent. Their zeal for God must be joined with
the breaking of their own hearts. So the zeal of the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 7. 11.
was accompanied with a godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7. 11.
with fear, with indignation against themselves, with revenge. And thus much
shall suffice for the fourth particular, and last branch of the use of
instruction; namely, the difference between heady and holy violence. And so
much for the third use.

The fourth use is for caution, and that in four particulars. 1 Take heed of
pleading Use 4. For caution in 4 th^n^^.
for, or being contented with a moderation in matters of religion. Moderation
in religion is accounted a virtue in these times, whereas Jesus Christ would
have spued us out of his mouth. If Jesus Christ commend an holy violence in the
matters of religion, what becomes of this moderation? Indeed for men to be
moderate in things that are lawful is good. It is the advice of the Apostle,
Phil. 4. 5. Let your moderation be known Phil. 4. 5.
unto all men; the Lord is at hand: that is, let your moderation be in the love
and desire of things lawful and indifferent, of things in this world; be
moderate in those things, that they may not hinder you in your course toward
heaven, but not in any case to be moderate in religion; and that I shall make
appear in these four particulars.

1 Moderate estates do not content you in the world. Men rise up early, and go
to bed late, and eat the bread of carfulness, and are eager and indefatigable
in their pursuits of the world? If you get not so much this year, you will
endeavor to get more the next year; no man has moderation after the things of
this world, no man is contented with that estate they are in, but labors to
improve it. Like the Chaldeans, of whom it is spoken, Habak. 2. 5. He inlargeth
Habak. 2 5.
his desire as hest, and is as death, and cannot be satisfied But gathers
unto him, all nations, and heapeth unto him all people. And is it reason that
you that are so immoderate in the pursuit and desire of the things of this
world, should be moderate in the things of heaven?

2 You have been very immoderate in your desires after your lusts before your
conversion, and therefore in all reason you should not now be moderate in your
desires after God and the things of God. How many times have you bin as it were
sick till you have you accomplished your ends in a sinful course, and will you
not now be sick of love after Christ, and after heavenly things? Have thou not
burnt in lust, and will you now be key-cold in religion?

3 God does express as great, yea more dislike of lukewarmnesse in religion,
as if a man were of no religion. Famous is that instance of Laodicea, Revel. 3.
15, 16. I would thou were either cold or hot. So then because thou art
lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will sp^^e thee out of my mouth. Not that
God would have men to continue in, or return to Paganism or Judaisme, both of
which his soul abhors; but only because he does exceedingly distaste
lukewarmnesse in the prefession of Christianity.

4 In a false religion men have showed much zeal and forwardness, Isa. 46. 6.
I hey Isa. 46. 6. 1 Kings 18. 28.
lavish gold out of the bag, and weigh silver in the balance, and hire a
Goldsmith, and he makes it a god, they fall down, yea they worship, etc. The
people were so violent in an Idolatrous religion, that they did spare no cost
nor pains to accomplish it. So those false Prophets, those prophets and
worshippers of (...) notes to gush out (...) and plentrull.
Baal, 1 King. 18. 28. They cried aloud, and cut themselves after their manner
with knives and lancers till the blood gushed out upon them. So Paul when he
was a Jew and adversary to Christianity; beyond measure he persecuted the
Church of God, and wasted it, Gal. 1. 13. Gal. 1. 13
Jerem. 32. 35. Those superstitious Jews built Jer. 32. 35.
the high places of Baal, which are in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to
cause their sons and their daughters to pass through the fire unto Moloch,
which I commanded them not. So zealous and servent were they in their
Idolatrous worship and service, that they would cause their children to be
burnt as a sacrifice to their false god. So likewise among us the Papists are
zealous and eager for their worship, witness their whippings and scourgings
and fastings and other penances. If men be thus zealous in false ways, how
servent should we be in a true? But so much for the first branch of the Caution.

John Baptists days that took heaven. You can never go to heaven except you
strive to enter in at the strait gate. You must strive till you sweat, you must
strive with all your might, and all will be little enough. Take heed therefore
you do not think it an easy thing to go to heaven. But withal take this,
though you cannot go to heaven without this holy violence, you shall never go
to heaven for it. James 1. 25. Whosoever Jam. 1. 25.
looks into the perfect law of liberty, and continues therein, he being not
a forgetful hearer of the Word, but a doer also, this man shall be blessed in
his deed. So that you see a man shall not go to heaven for his doing, though he
cannot go to heaven without it.

Paul was thus violent for the propagation of the Gospel, when he came before
Festus, Festus told him, that much learning had made him mad: But Paul said, I
am not mad, but speak forth the words of truth and sobernes.

David was more eager in his dancing before the Ark, notwithstanding the
scoffings of his wife. (...) scandals and reproaches and troubles will make
thee abate thy zeal for God, hou wilt never be able to hold out to the end. I
will never believe that man will endure a rack for his religion, that cannot
bear a reproach. He that cannot endure a frown for it will never endure fire
and faggot; if thou can not endure a taunt or jeer for thy profession of
religion, much less will thou endure a Gibbet. And so much for the use of
Caution.

stir up in us an holy lamentation: If it For lamentation for the apostasy
of our times. We fall short of primitive Christians in three regards.
were so, that in the days of John the Baptist men were so holily violent
after Jesus Christ and his Ordinances; then how should we lament and bewail our
times, when we consider how defective men are now adays, and how much we
fall short of those converts at the first plantation of the Gospel?

We fall short of them. 1 In regard of 1 In love.
their love and union. It was observed that the primitive Christians were so
full of love and affection to one another, that they could be acquainted
together as well in half an hour as in half a year. In those times they were so
conversant in that duty of love, that St. Paul says, They needed not that he
should write to them concerning love, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 9. In those days they were
of one accord. The very Heathens took notice of 1 These. 4. 9.
it, and said: Behold, how the Christians love one another. But we are fallen
into those times wherein the love of men grows cold; we, upon whom the ends of
the world are come, bite, and tear, and devour one another.

2 We come short of them in the contempt 2 In contempt of the world.
of the world. You know how much those Christians, Hebr. 11. lived above the
world: They confessed that they were but strangers and pilgrims upon earth,
verse 13. They were not satisfied with the world, but sought after a better
Country. They came and laid their wealth at the Apostles feet to do with it
whatsoever he pleased. For clothing they were contented with sheeps skins and
goats skins; and instead of our stately houses they were satisfied with dens
and caves of the earth.

3. We fall short of the primitive Christians herein also, that they were
taken off from that form of religion wherein they were born and bred up, and
received a new form of religion. Whereas they might have objected, all our
fathers were bred up in the law of Moses, and shall we take upon us a new
way, a new religion? But they did not contend about it, they forsook the
rudiments of Moses, and embraced this new way and doctrine, which as they
thought was never taught before. But we are more addicted to customs then
Scriptures, we choose rather to follovv what has been, then to consider what
should be. Many have much reasoning and contention for the old form of
religion. Many are so settled in their old forms and ways, wherein they were
born and bred, that they will not endure or seek for a better form and way.
Heylin in his Geography reports of the King of Morocco, that he told the
English Ambassador in King John's time, that he had lately read Paul's Epistles,
which he liked so well, that were he to choose his religion, he would embrace
Christianity; but every one ought to die in the faith wherein he was born: So
it is with many among us, they are persuaded they ought, and resolved they will
live and die in those customs and ways wherein they were born; they will not
deny themselves in these trivial things for the exaltation of Christ; and
herein also we fall short of the primitive Christians. And thus much for the
last use. And so I have dispatched the first and main Doctrine, I hat in the
times of the first promulgation of the Gospel greater success did attend the
Ministry, and multitudes did come in with more holy violence after the
ordinances then ever did before.

MATTHEW 11. 12. And from the days of John the Baptist until now, the Kingdom
of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force.
Sermons Preached at Lawrence Jury, May 6, 1649. SERMON V.
THere is but one Doctrine behind, and that is taken from the consideration of
the quality of those persons who did express this holy violence; who they were
our Savior himself acquaints us, Matthew. 21. 31. Jesus said unto them, Verily
I say unto you, that the publicans Mat. 21. 31, 32.
and harlots go into the Kingdom of God before you. Verse 32. The publicans
and harlots believed John. The Pharisees that led strict lives, had a kind of
legal righteousness, yet they were not the people that did receive Jesus
Christ, but publicans and harlots. The Pharisees and lawyers rejected or
frustrated the counsel of God against themselves, or within themselves, being
not baptized of him. But the Publicans justified God, being baptized with the
baptism of John, Luke 7. 29, 30. They that used this violence were Luke 7. 29,
30.
men that lived by rapine, deceit, exaction, and oppression; so did the
Publicans. Whence the observation is this.



1 I shall demonstrate the truth of it by Scripture-instances.

2 I shall show the reasons why God did pitch upon such chiefly, who were most
notorious ill-livers.

3 I shall show why such men are more violent in religion then others.

1 I shall demonstrate the truth of the Proved by example. Magdalene.
doctrine by Scripture-instances. I shall give but two instances; the one in
Mary Magdalene, the other in Paul. 1 Mary Magdalene, she was an unclean person,
a very harlot, a great sinner, but after her conversion she thought nothing too
much for Christ. 1 She anointed his feet with a pound of Spikenard that was
very costly, worth three hundred pence, that is, worth above nine pound in our
money, John 12. 5. 2 She broke through many difficulties to come to John 12. 5.
Christ. Christ was in another man's house, (and he Simon a Pharisee) Luke 7.
36, 37. Luke 7. 36, 37.
and set down to supper. She might have raised an objection, and said, I cannot
come at him, and they in the house may think evil of it; but all this could
not keep her back. Further, there were more discouragements. Not only Judas
but others were angry at her, Mark 14. 4. There were Mark 14. 4.
some (not only Judas, but others also) that had indignation within
themselves, and said, Why was this waste of the ointment made? Yea, the
Disciples too had indignation at her: Mat. Mat. 26. 8.
26. 8. The Disciples had indignation. Yet she came to Christ through al these
difficulties, and she wept, Luke 7. 44. And that so plentifully, Luke 7. 44.
that she washed the fect of Christ with her tears. Her eyes that had been
windows of lost, were now flood gates of tears.

2 Another instance is that of Saul. Before his conversion he was a notorious
sinner. He had an hand in the death of that holy man Stephen, Act 8. 1. He was
a man Acts 8. 1.
that breathed out threatenings and slaughters against the Disciples of the
Lord, Act. Acts 9. 1.
9. 1. He was a blasphemer, a persecutor, and injurious, 1 Timothy 1. 13. he cared
not 1 Timothy 1. 13.
what he did to the people of God. Yea, further he did compel others to
blaspheme, Act. 26. 11. and being exceedingly mad aagainst Acts 26. 11.
them, he persecuted them even to strange Cities. And yet behold, this man that
was so eminent a sinner before his conversion, afterward made recompense; he
grew and abounded in grace; he grew as eminent in grace, as he was notorious in
sin. As he had hailed men to prison formerly, so now he draws them to Christ.
He preached that faith that once he persecuted, Gal. 1. 23. So much for the
first particular, the proof of the point by Scripture-instances. Gal. 1. 23


The second particular is this: Why did God pitch upon such chiefly, as were
most Quest. why did God call such vile persons?
notorious ill-livers?



1 To beat off the Pharisees from resting in their own righteousness, that
they might see that salvation was of grace, and not of works. Had this effect
appeared in multitudes of the Scribes and Pharisees, some would have attributed
it to their learning, others to their strict and holy walking, and austere
conversation, people would have thought they had merited this at Gods hands;
And therefore God passed by them, and made choice of others far more unholy and
profane, to knock them off from their own righteousness, and from dependence
upon it.

2 It was to magnify the riches, freeness and greatness of Gods grace, that
was brought in and manifested by the Gospel. God would hereby give to
understand that the doctrine of the Gospel was a doctrine of grace (not that
men might live as they list, for these vile people were not encouraged in, but
redeemed from a vain conversation, but) John's work ^ as a tough and hard work
to pull down those that were as high as mountains in pride, as hard as the
rocks of those mountains, to make rough and crooked things smooth and straight.
And yet all this John was to do, all this John did in the preparation of the
people for Christ, Isa. 40. 4. The greater the wound is, the more is the skill
and care of the Physician seen and commended. The more and greater the sins are
that are pardoned, the more is the grace of God advanced.

So much for the second particular.

The third particular is this: Why are Why are such most ^eal (...)
such vile and sinful persons most eager and violent after their conversion?

Answ. 1. This proceeds from an holy indignation against themselves, which is a
fruit of repentance or conversion, as you read, 2 Cor. 7. 11. For this
self-same thing that 2 Cor. 7. 11.
ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what carfulness did it work in you? yea what
clearing of your selves, yea what indignation, yea what fear, yea what desire,
yea what zeal, yea what revenge? There arises in such a desire to be revenged
upon themselves, Isa. 30. 22. Ye shall defile Isa. 30. 22.
also the covering of the graven images of silver, and the ornament of thy
molten images of gold, thou shall cast them away as a menstruous cloth, thou
shall say unto them, Get thee hence. Isa. 2. 20. In that day a man shall cast
Isa. 2. 20
his idols of silver, and his idols of gold which they have made, each one for
himself to worship, to the moles and to the bats. Cranmer burned his right hand
first, because it had subscribed his recantation, and oftentimes repeated in
the flame, Oh this unworthy right hand! An holy indignation makes him to reason
thus within himself. Could I sin worse then others, and shall I now be
contented with less grace then others? Could I be as swift as a Dromedary in
the ways of sin, and shall I creep like a snail in the ways of God? Have I
been zealous for the committing of sin, and shall I be cold in my motions after
Christ? Such persons are ashamed of their former ways, and therefore they now
labor to take off that reproach by making some reparations.

2 This proceeds from that sense that is in such persons of an utter and
absolute necessity of getting into Christ. You know a man that has but cut his
finger will not make much ado, but he that has got a great and dangerous wound
sees a necessity of the cure, and that he is a dead man if he do not get help.
So a man that lives in a common way of sinning, he thinks his sins are
inconsiderable, he sees no necessity of closing with Christ for cure. But a man
that has been much in sin, and notorious in wickedness, when God comes and
opens his eyes by effectual calling, he sees a necessity of getting help by
Jesus Christ, and that if he have not Christ, he is undone for ever, he shall
perish eternally. And thus I have finished the doctrinal part: I proceed now to
make application. And this doctrine is eminently useful to three sorts of men.
1 To those that have been formerly very vile and great sinners, but are now
converted. 2 To mere civil and honest men. 3 To those that yet remain and go
on in a sinful course.

1 To those that have been formerly very great sinners, but are now converted:
To Use 1. To great sinners converted
them I have two things to say.

1 Labor to follow this pattern that is here propounded in the Gospel, and in
this doctrine. Labor to proportion your graces now that you are converted, to
the number and greatness of your sins before conversion. As you have been
violent in sin formerly, so see that now you be as violent after the things of
heaven. So did Manasses, he was a great sinner, he filled Jerusasalem with
blood, he was a gross Idolater, a destroyer of Gods worship, 2 Chronicles. 33. 12.
And therefore he humbled 2 Chronicles. 33. 12.
himself greatly before the God of his fathers. So Paul, because he was a
greater sinner then the rest of the Apostles; therefore he labored more
abundantly then they all. If therefore sin has abounded, see that grace does
abound also. As you have formerly added iniquity unto iniquity, so now see that
you add grace to grace. As you have with much eagerness given up the members
of your bodies, as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin and uncleanness;
so see that you give them up as instruments of righteousness unto holiness.
Particularly, see that you do abound, 1 In the grace of humiliation. 2 In the
grace of love. 1 In the grace of humiliation; little humiliation is not
suitable to great sins. That garment that has most spots in it, must have most
rinsing; that which has most dust in it, needs the most beating. There must be
a sicut, not only qualitatis, but aequalitatis also, if possibly it can be.
There should be some equality between the strength that was put forth in the
service of sin, and that we now put forth in the service of God. It is very
observable, Levit. 11. 24, 25. He that touches an unclean thing, shall be
Levit. 11 24, 25.
unclean till even; but he that bears an unclean thing, shall wash his
clothes, and be unclean till even. Though a man be but defiled a little with
sin, if he does but touch a sin as it were, commit a little sin, he had need be
humbled; but those that wallow in sinful courses, and bear sin about them,
they must look to be more humbled then otherswere.

2 See that you proportion your love to Christ to your sinfulness against
Christ in times past. Have thou been a great and a vile sinner before
conversion, know that a little love to Christ is not answerable to thy great
sins. Luke 7. 17. Her sins which are many are forgiven her, therefore she loved
much. Jesus Christ expects and requires more love of such to whom he has
pardoned much, then he does of those to whom little is forgiven. We read in
John 21. 15. Jesus said unto Peter, Simon, son of John 21. 15.
Jona^, Love thou me more then these? Jesus Christ did not ask him, Love
thou me at all? nor, Love thou me as these? but, Love thou me more then
these? Thou have sinned more then these, do thou love me more then these?
Christ expected more love from Peter then from the rest of the Disciples. And
so Peter did return more love to Christ then the rest did. And though the book
of the Acts be called the Acts of the Apostles, yet there is more spoken of
Peter then of all the rest of the Apostles that had seen Christ in the flesh.
Peter after his fall did show more love then the rest. 1 Peter preached the
first Sermon after Acts 1. 15.
Christ's resurrection and ascension, Act 1. 15. 2 Peter was the first that went
into the Sepulcher after Christ's death and resurrection. Although Peter and
John did run to the Sepulcher, and John out-ran Peter, and came first thither,
yet Peter first went down into the Sepulcher to see where Christ was laid, John
20. 6. 3 When Christ John 20. 6.
after his resurrection was walking upon the waters, Peter cast himself into
the Sea to go to meet Jesus, he had no patience to stay till he came at him,
Joh. 21. 7. 4 Peter converted John 21. 7.
more souls to Christ then all the rest of the Apostles did, 3000 souls at one
Sermon. 5 Peter died for Christ, he was crucified for Christ; and he desired
that he might be crucified with his head downward, because he thought it was
too much honor for him to die as his Master. So you see that as Peter had been
more treacherous to his master then the rest; so Peter was more ardent in his
love to Christ then the rest. And so you must all learn to see, that as your
sins have been more and greater then the sins of other men; so your humiliation
must be more, your love must be stronger. That is the first branch of the first
Use.

2 This may teach you to magnify the riches and freeness of Gods grace, that
God should cast an eye of grace and love upon such a wretch as thou wast; that
God should pass by such men as the strict Pharisee, and pitch upon thee: that
God should not make thee as exemplary in punishment as thou wast in sin; that
thou should be made a monument of his mercy, who deserved to be a spectacle
of wrath; that God should make his mercy to rest upon thee, that might cause
his justice to take hold upon thee. So much for the first Use.

2 This Doctrine is useful to men of a Use 2. To civil men.
civil carriage, of an honest and in-offensive behavior in the world, that
have been religiously educated, lived ingenuously, that never broke out into
such gross and exorbitant courses as other men have done:

To you I would say three things.

1 Whereas you say, that you are of a more civil life then others, and so you
are apt to persuade your selves your case is better then others: Consider,
others are more easily and ordinarily converted then you are: Publicans go to
heaven before you. You read in Luke 18. 14. the Publican went Luke 18. 14.
Long possibilius est meret^ices and notorios peccatores salvari, quam superbos
sanctulos; illi enim tandemcoguntur sentire sua peccata, hi vero in persuasione
propriae sanctitat is moriuntur, nis: mirabili modo convertuntur.
away justified rather then the Pharisee. Luther has a notable gloss upon
these words: It is far more easy for harlots and notorious sinners to be
saved, then for proud titular Saints; because the former are easily brought to
a sense of their sins, but the latter are like to perish in the conceit of
their own righteousness, except they be converted in an extraordinary manner.
This I speak, not that I would dissuade you from a civil course of life, or
draw you to in open profaneness; but that you may not rest upon your moral
accomplishments, upon your good meanings, and think that you are sermon-proof,
that the Minister can hardly meet with your corruptions and consciences.

2 If God does convert such men usually, they are not so eminent in grace then
others. This is expressed, Luke 7. 43, etc. Luke 7. 43.
He to whom most is forgiven, loves most, and does most service. Usually such
content themselves with smaller measures of grace, then they whose
transgressions have exceeded.

3 What thy sins want in bulk and magnitude, thou make up in number; Your
transgressions are many, your backslidings are increased, Jerem. 5. 6. Thy
continuance in sins makes thy sins equivalent to greater Jer. 5. 6.
sins; if your sins fall short of others in nature, it may be they exceed in
aggravations; it may be thou sinnest against more mercy, more knowledge: it may
be thou may have more sin in thine heart, though another sins do more break
out in his life.

So much for the second Use.

3 This Doctrine is useful to profane men, to the looser sort.

1 Let this be an invitation and encouragement Use 3. To profane men in two
regards.
to you to come in to Christ, and to embrace the Gospel. 1 Though your sins be
great, yet they are not so great as the mercies of God. The mercy of God is
compared to a sea; the sea, you know, is a very great deep. A great Leviathan
may be covered in the sea, as well as a little fish; a great rock as well as a
little pebble. A remarkable place you have, Isa. 44. 22. Isa. 44. 22.
I have blotted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy
sins; return unto me, for I have redeemed thee. The Sun can scatter both thick
and thin clouds.

2 Though thou have been very sinful, yet thy conversion takes away all
infamy from thee. Paul was once a blasphemer, etc. but that reproach was rolled
away, when through the grace of God he found mercy. It is very observable, that
in the genealogy of Christ there are but four women mentioned, (it is not
usual to mention women in genealogies) and the Scripture sets a mark of infamy
upon them all. The first is Thamar, Matthew 1. 3. she was an incestuous Mat. 1. 3
woman, for she lay with her father in law, Genesis 38. 38.
as it is recorded, Genesis 38. 38. The second is Rahab, verse 5. she was an
harlot, Heb. 11. Heb. 11. 31.
31. The third is Ruth, verse 5. she came of Moab, the son of Lot by incest,
begotten of his own daughter, Genesis 19. 37. The fourth is Bathsheb. 1, verse. 6.
she was guilty of adultery. Genesis 19. 37.
This is done for the comfort and encouragement of the most infamous sinners to
come in to Christ.

3 If God call you, you are likely to be greater instruments of his glory then
others. A persecuting Saul became a preaching Paul; a wanton Mary became a
weeping Mary; she, whose whoredoms had been spoken of in all the places where
she dwelt, afterward her grace came to be spoken of wheresoever the Gospel was
preached. So much for the first branch of that use.

2 Because Doctrines of comfort many men suck poison from, and so get their
ruin; therefore I shall lay down a Caution or two. Take heed you do not abuse
this doctrine.

1 Do not make the conversion of any scandolous sinner to be any stumbling
block in your way to heaven. It was the great stumbling block in the way of the
Pharisees, when they saw that Christ would eat meat with Publicans and sinners,
they said, He was a friend of Publicans and sinners. Do not entertain hard
thoughts of Christ, not of the ways of Christ for that. Indeed, if religion
were any cloak for sin, if it did countenance and encourage men in sin, it were
something; but it is that which makes of a sinner a Saint. Conversion, though
it find us vile and bad, it does not leave us so.

2 Take heed you do not suck this poison from it, that when you hear, the worse
men are before conversion, the better they will be after conversion. Some, it
may be, will draw this inference from it: That it is the best to be as vile and
wicked as one can, for so one shall be most zealous afterward. Take heed of
that. For

1 It is a great question whether God will convert thee or not; and if thou, be
not converted, all thy sins will be so many cords to tie thee in hell, the
aggravations of thy sin will be additions to thy torment and punishment.

2 The deeper thou art in sin, the greater must thy humiliation be. Will any
wise man break his leg, because a broken bone well set and knit again will be
stronger then ever it was before. Knotty timber shall have most blows.

3 The longer thou continuest in sin, the longer will God keep thee under
suspension, and it will be long before he vouchsafes the comforts of his
Spirit, he will fill thee with indignation and horror. Though great sins
cannot vast are gratiam, lay waste the grace of God, yet they may vast are
conscientiam, lay waste the peace of conscience; though it may be they will not
put thee into a state of ejection, yet they will bring thee into a state of
dejection; if thou art not cast off; yet thou shall he cast down: and therefore
take heed thou do not abuse this precious doctrine.

And so much for this last use.

And so I have done with both Doctrines, and finished the Text; And from the
days of John the Baptist until now the Kingdom of heaven suffers violence,
and the violent take it by force.

FINIS.
The Zealous CHRISTIAN Holding Communion with God, in wrestling and importunate
Prayer.
LUKE 11. 8. I say unto you, though he will not rise and give him, because he
is his friend, yet because of his importunity, he will give unto him as many as
he needs.
Sermons preached at Lawrence Jury in London, June 18. 1649.
MY Text is the conclusion of a familiar Parable used by Christ, whereby he
instructs his Disciples touching the Doctrine and use of prayer. The occasion
offered Context.
to Christ-to fall upon this Subject, is intimated ver. 1. of this chapter, One
of his Disciples said unto him, Lord teach us to pray as John also tought his
disciples. Whether it was a one of the twelve Apostles, or one of the seventy
Disciples that propounded the question is not easy to determine, nor is it
material to know; Hereupon Christ gives them a pl^^ for me or directions for
prayer, to direct them about the matter; and withal, gives them a parable to
inform concerning the manner of praying. For the matter of it, you have it in
these Lords prayer is not commanded to be used.
words, when you pray, say Our father, etc. Not as though it were a command
from Jesus Christ, that always when we pray, we should use that form of
speech which is here set down. Jesus Christ indeed intended it for a platform,
or a pattern to direct us in the making of our prayers; for there is nothing
we stand in need of, and go to God for; but it is to be found in these words;
but he never intended to tie up his people to this form. And that I will prove
by some reasons.

Luke here says, when you pray, Say, Our etc. yet Matthew varies in his
expression and says, when you pray, say after this manner, Mat. 6. 9. to reach
us that we are to stick to the matter contained in this prayer; but we are not
confined every time we pray, to use the same expressions. By Luke we learn,
that the using of this form of words is lawful, by Matthew, that it is not
necessary.

Matthew and Luke there is much difference; and though the difference be not
material, yet it is verbal, which is enough to prove what I intend, to wit,
that we are not bound to the words. In the third Petition it is thus in
Matthew, Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven; In Luke it is thus, thy
will be done as in heaven so in earth. In the fourth Petition, it is said in
Matthew, Give us this day our daily bread. In Luke it is said, Give us daily
day by day our daily bread. In the fifth Petition it is said in Matthew, and
forgive us our debts. In Luke it is said, for we forgive every one that is
indebted to us Lastly, it is said in Matthew, For thine is the Kingdom, the
power and the glory for ever Amen. But these words are wholly left out in Luke.
Which variance teaches us thus much, that you must not recede from the matter,
or purport of the words, yet we are not to be superstitious and sollicitous
about the expressions, as Chemnitius observes Ne de verbis nimis superstitio^^
soliciti simus.
.

necessity that we should have used it, Christ would (as he might easily) have
left a command behind him in the word, and also he would have practiced it
himself, that it might have been our example. This reason Chemnitius gives;
There are many prayers in David's Psalms, many in the Prophets, many in the
Acts of the Apostles, many in the Epistles of Paul, which are different in
expression from this form, and yet doubtless received acceptance from God
Malt^ ^unt preca^^^nes in Psalmis D^vidi^is, multae in Prophetis, maltae in
Acti^ Apostolieis, ^^uliae in E^^st^lis Pan^inis, etc. Reas. 4.


4. Reas. Another argument is this. Because it is the work, and office of the
Spirit of God, not only to help the people of God in the manner how, but also
in the matter what to pray, to put even words into our mouths. Romans 8. 76. We
know not what we should pray for as we Romans 8. ^^.
ought, but the Spirit helps our infirmities. And upon these grounds it
appears that we are not bound to use that form of words. Ministers do
sometimes use this form of prayer, to justify the lawfulness of it, and
sometimes they do not use it, lest people should dote too much upon set
forms. And so much for the matter of prayer; I come now to the manner, and
that is expressed in this Parable; which Parable is laid down in the 5, 6, 7,
8. verses. Luke 11. 5, 6, 7, 8.
And be said unto them, which of you shall have a friend, and shall go unto
him at midnight, and say unto him, Friend, lend me three loaves: For a friend
of mine in his journey is come to me, and I have nothing to set before him. And
be from within shall answer and say, trouble me not, the door is now shut, and
my children are in bed with me; I cannot rise and give thee. I say unto you,
though he will not rise and give him, because he is his friend; yet because of
his importunity, he will arise and give him as many as he needs: Which
Parable consists of two parts.

1. A Prayer. 2. An answer to it.
In the prayer here are four parts. The co^^erence.


1. The relation of the person praying, to him, to whom he prays, his friend
verse. 4. Which of you shall have a friend, etc. Whence observe, God must be a
friend to us, before any of our prayers can be accepted.

2. The time of his address, ver. 5. at midnight, in times of greatest need,
of extremest necessity, Isa. 26. 9. With my soul have I desired thee in the
night. Isa. 26. 9.


From whence observe; That the chiefest time for Gods people to be earnest in
prayer to God, is a time of trouble.

3. The matter of his request, Lend me three loaves. By which some Interpreters
understand the three persons in the Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost. Some refer them to the three cardinal graces, Faith, Hope, and Charity;
but these are vain interpretations. It is observable, that in Parables some
things are used for ornament only, not for the sense. The intent and design
of it is this, That we are to order our prayers according to our present
necessities.

4. There is the occasion of this request, verse 6. A friend ^f (...) in come
to (...), and I have nothing etc.

The Answer returned to this request is double.

1. By way of negation, ver. 7. Trouble me not etc. Observe^, that God^ people
may have denialls to their prayer: The reason of this denial is, the door i^
now sh^^^ and my children are with me in bed. There are some times when Gods
own people may pray to him, yet he shut his eats to their prayers, God will a^
it were hide himself from the prayers of his own people, that they shall not
come at him. Not only the doors are shut, but his God (...) in bed with him.
These children here spoken of are the creatures of: God; from whence observe.
That there may be times, where God may take away all his creature comforts from
his own people, that they shall not any ways he help full to them.

2. By way of concession, and that is in the words of the text; I say unto you,
though he will not arise and give him, because he is his friends, yet because
of his importunity, he will arise and give him (...) ^^thy as he needs.

In which words you have first the relation The Text divided.
of him that prays, ^o him whom he prays, a friend. Obser^^ There must be a
state of friendship between God and a sinner before his prayers can be heard.

2. The condition upon which the prayer was heard, and than is set down two
ways.

1. Negatively, he will hear him, not because he is his friend.

2. Positively, he will (...) him because of his importunity.

Obs. 1. That merely a state of friendship and reconciliation with God is not
a sufficient ground for us, to believe that our prayers shall be heard and
accepted by God.

Obs. 2. There must be an holy importunity, even in Gods own friends, in their
prayers, to which they expect a gracious return.

3. Here is the amplification of the concession: There is more given in the
concession then was desired in the supplication. He desired but three loave,
and because of his holy importunity, he did rise and give him as many as he
needed.

Whence observe; That where there is an holy importunity in our prayers, God
does, in his returns to that soul, give more then was desired.

The first part of the text was the relation of the prayer, to him, to whom he
makes his prayer. The observation is this.

A (...) be brought into a state of friendship, or reconciliation with God,
before any prayer he makes can be accepted.

I will prove this doctrine by three reasons, and then apply it.

The reasons are three.

Genesis 4. 4. God has respect Genesis 4. 4.
unto Abel and unto his offering; first to Abel, then to his sacrifice. God did
accept of his serivce, because his person was in a state of favor with God;
God is first pleased with the works, before he can accept the works. This is
also laid down Heb. 11. 5. by faith Enoch was translated Heb. 11. 5.
that he should not see death, -- for before his translation he had this
testimony that he pleased God. Now without faith in Christ to justify thy
person, thou can not (...)
please God. Here lies the great difference between the Papists and us. The
Papists say that works justify the person, we say, the person justifies the
work; for make the tree good, and the fruit must needs be goodst.

2. Because, till we be brought into that state of reconciliation, we have no
share ^n the intercession, satisfaction and righteousness of Jesus Christ. And
till we have a share in the^, our prayers can not be accepted. Jacob could not
receive the blessing from his father, but in the garments of his elder brother;
not can we receive any thing from the hands of God, but in the Robes of Christ.
No prayer can be accepted by God, but in and through the intercession of Jesus
Christ. If Christ be not an Intercesson in Heaven, no prayer will be heard
(...) in the 8. Chapter of Rev. 1. v. 3. ^. is written, there was an Angel Rev.
8. 3.
thus came and stood at the Altar, having a (...) and there was given unto him
much incense, that he should offer i^ with the prayers of all Saints upon the
golden Altar which was before the throne. The word in the Greek is to (...).
Isa. 56. 7.
this purpose, That he should add it to the prayers of the Saints: As if the
prayer of Christ and a Believer were all one. In the 56. of Isal. 7. God
promises, I will bring my people to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in
my house of prayer, etc. In the (...)
Hebrew it i^ thus, I will make them joyful in the house of my prayer. Our
prayers ar^ but as so many ciphers, that signify nothing, till the
intercession of Christ is added to them; without that they cannot be accepted.

Spirit, we shall never find acceptance with him. All ^^quests that are not
dictated by the Spirit, are but the breathings of the flesh, which God regards
not. Now till we are reconciled to God; we cannot have the Spirit, Gal. 4. 6.
And because ye are sons, Gal. 4. 6.
God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba
Father. So that till you be sons, you cannot have the Spirit.

And so much for the reasons: I come now to the application.

If this be so, that a man must be in a state Use 1.
of friendship before his prayers can be accepted; Hence learn, That all that
ever thou do before that estate, is odious to God. Not only thy sinful
actions, but even thy civil, thy natural, yea, thy religious actions. Not that
they are so in themselves, or in regard of God, but in regard of the doer of
it, Psalm. 109. 7. -- let his prayer be turned into sin. Thou make a (...)
prayer against sin, God will turn thy prayers into sin. Many prayers cannot
then one sin into a grace, but one sin wilfully, and resolutely continued in,
can turn all thy prayers into sin, Prove. 21. 27. Prove. 21. 27.
The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord; how much more when
he brings it with a wicked mind. A diseased body, turns that food into
corrupt humors, which an healthful body does into sound nourishment. I have
read of a precious stone that had excellent virtue in it, but lost all its
efficacy if it was put into a dead man's mouth. Prayer is an Ordinance of great
excellency, of great efficacy; but if it be in a dead man's mouth, if it come
out of the heart of one that is dead in trespasses and sins, it loses all its
virtue: water that in pure in the fountain, is corrupted in the channel.

^erkins) but this, it were sufficient.

a state of favor and reconciliation, with God; for if the person be not in
favor with God, you may be confident the petitions will not be heard nor
accepted, but God looks upon it as the corrupt breathings of thy sinful and
corrupt heart. You are to look therefore in the performance of duty, whether
you can go to God, in prayer as a Father. There are many that look after the
qualification of their duty; but few look after the qualification of the
person, to see whether they be justified or no, whether God be their friend or
not. But we should mainly look to this: for let the heart of a man be never so
well disposed, (let us suppose it, for indeed no unreconciled men can be well
disposed, to speak properly) yet if thy person be not justified, thy prayer
cannot be accepted. God cares not for the Rhetoric of prayers, how eloquent
they are; nor for the Arithmetic of prayers, how many they are; nor for the
Logic of them, how rational and methodical they are; nor for the Music of
them, what an harmony and melody of words thou have; but he looks at the
divinity of prayers, which is from the qualification of a person, from a
justified person, and in a sanctified manner. It is good to enquire, Is my
heart right? Is my mind composed? Are my affections raised, kindled in prayer?
But chiefly enqui^e, is my person accepted of God?



1. They must pray as creatures, that stand in need of their Creator. The
Ravens cry, and God gives them meat.

2. The Lord blames wicked men for not praying to him, Jer. 10. 25. Pour out
thy Jer. 10. 25.
wrath upon the Heathen that know then not, and upon the families that call not
upon thy Name. Romans 3. 11. There is none that understands, Romans 3. 11.
there is none that seeks after God.

3. They are commanded to pray, Acts Act. 22, 23.
8. 22, 23. Peter said to Simon Magus, Repent therefore of this thy
wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be
forgiven thee; for I perceive thou art in the gall of bitterness, and bonds of
iniquity.

LUKE 11. 8. -- Though he will not -- give him because he is his friend, etc.
11. SERMON.
AND thus much for the first Doctrine, and first part of the Text, the relation
between him that prays, and him to whom prayers are made. I come now to the
second part, which is the condition upon which the prayer was heard; and that I
told you was set down two ways.

1. Negatively. 2. Positively. 3. Negatively, Not because he is his friend.
The observation thence is this,

That a state of friendship, or reconciliation with God, is not sufficient to
assure a man that God will give returns to his prayers. Although a man must be
brought into a state of, friendship and favor with God, before his, prayers
can be heard: yet it is not a sufficient ground for a man to believe, that God
will give him an answer of all his prayers. He will give unto him, not because
he is friend. So that a godly man may make many prayers, and yet God may not
give any answer to his prayers.

In the handling of this Doctrine, I shall do three things.

1. Show the reasons of the Doctrine.

2. I shall show, in what cases God may refuse to give his own people the
things that they pray for.

3. I shall show, how we may know, when God denies to hear our prayers, whether
the denial be in mercy.



There is a fivefold qualification that God requires, even of his friends, as a
condition of their acceptance.

1. The heart must be prepared, Psalm. 10. Psalm. 10. 17.
17. Lord thou have heard the desire of the humble, thou will prepare their
heart, thou will cause thine ear to hear. So Job 11. 13, 14, Job 11. 13, 14, 15.
15. If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thine hand toward him. If
iniquity be in thine hand, put it far away, and let not wickedness dwell in thy
tabernacle. For then shall thou lift up thy face without spot; yea, thou shall
be steadfast and shall not fear. That is the first particular.

2. Sin must be removed. So you find in the place last quoted, iniquity must
be put far away, etc. When Gods own people come to worship before God, they
must not let any sin lie upon their consciences, unrepented of and indulged.

3. The affections must be raised. David, when he set himself to prayer, he
says Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul, Psalm. 25. Psalm. 25. 1.
1. You read often in Scripture, of lifting up a prayer to God, Isai. 37. 4 --
It may be Isai. 37. 4.
the Lord thy God will hear the words of Rabshakeh, whom the king of Assyria
has sent, -- wherefore lift up thy prayer for the remnant that is left. Jer.
7. 16. Pray not thou for this Jer. 7. 16.
people, neither lift up cry nor prayer for them. 1 Timothy 2. 8. I will that men
pray every where, Tim. 2. 8.
lifting up holy hands, without warth and doubting.

4. The mind must be compased in prayer, 4. 1 Cor. 7. 35.
1 Cor. 7. 35 We are to attend upon the Lord without distraction. Daniel set
his face unto the Lord God, to seek by prayer and supplications, Daniel 9. 3.
In the morning will I Dan. 9. 3.
direct my prayer unto thee, said David, Psalm. 5. 3. As an Archer when he
shoots an arrow, Psalm. 5. 2. (...) more militari disponam.
takes care that his hand shake not; his heart was so fixed on God, that he
could directly send his prayers unto him. Do thou think, O man, that God will
hear that prayer which thou do not hear thy self? will God regard that
prayer, that thou do not regard? will God grant thy request, when thou do
not know what thou ask, because of that indisposednesse and distraction that
lies upon thy spirit? You must therefore take care, when you be take your
selves to prayer, that the Devil do not distract and disturb you.

Then you shall seek me and find me, when you search for me with all your
heart. God bids us Open our mouths wide, and I will fill them, Psalm. 18. 10.
God has not promised to fill the heart, unless our mouth be opened.

Now put all these together: Our prayers will not be heard, except, 1. Our
hearts be prepared. 2. Sin removed. 3. Our affections raised. 4. Our minds
composed. 5. Our desires enlarged. And judge, whether this be not ground enough
for the Doctrine, That a state of friendship, is not sufficient for the
acceptance of our prayers.

I come now to the second thing, and that is, a case of conscience: it is this;
In Quest. When does God deny requests. Answ. Psalm 66. 18.
what Cases may God refuse to give his people the things they pray for? I
answer.

If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my prayer. Sin which
is in thine heart, by thine indulgence and approbation, does provoke God, that
he will not give an answer to thy prayers

Ye ask and receive not, because Jam. 4. 3.
ye ask amiss, that you may consume it upon your lusts. So the mother of
Zebedees children, Matthew. 20. 21. She said to Christ, Grant that these my two
sons may sit, the one on thy right Mat. 20. 21.
hand, the other on thy left in thy kingdom. Now this was an ambitious desire;
for she showed Christ would have reigned upon earth, as an earthly King, and
she desired that they might be next him, as he sat upon the Throne. Therefore
Christ said, You know not what you ask. Christ would not give any answer to her
request; he would not gratify her pride and ambition.

you would ask gifts from God, it may be God sees, that enlarged gifts would
make thee proud, and that thou would be puffed up with them, and exalt thy
self above thy brethren, therefore God will deny thee. We read, Genesis 26. 1, 2.
When there was a famine in the Land, -- He went to enquire Genesis 26. 1, 2.
of the Lord, whether he should go down into Egypt, God answered, Go not down
into Egypt. God would not let him go; but in the days of Jacob there was a
famine in the Land, Genesis 46. 3. and God said to Jacob, Go down into Egypt. Now
what might be the Genesis 46. 3.
reason, that God would have Jacob go down into Egypt, and not Isaac. The
rason is this, Isaac was a man of weaker Graces then Jacob was; and God saw,
that if Isaac had gone down into Egypt for corn, he would have fallen into
the sins of the Land. Now Jacob was a strong man in grace and in gifts; for
as a Prince he wrastled with God, and prevailed, and was called, Israel. God
saw that Jacob would resist their idolatrous ways, and not be guilty of their
sins. So you may ask mercies of God, and it may be you are not able to manage
them well. And therefore God denies you; when as another asks the same mercy,
and God gives it to him; because he sees he will use it well, and improve it to
Gods glory. Therefore reflect upon thy self; and when God denies thee a mercy,
which thou have begged at his hands; Say to thy self, this denial is in mercy,
for he did not think me fit for it. If men would take this way to consider of
Gods dealing with them, it would silence all the murmurings and repinings of
their hearts against God.

Qui frigide orat, docet negare.
then God may deny you. He that prays coldly, does, as it were, increat God to
give him a denial. God promises to be found, if we seek him with our whole
heart: But if we be careless and regardless our selves, how can we expect that
God should regard us?

So much for answer to that question, In what cases God may deny his peoples
prayers. This is the second thing.

Quest. Denials of prayer, when ^^ mercy?


Seeing God does not hear the prayers of his people in some cases; How may we
know, whether the denial of our prayers be in mercy or no?

God does not hear the prayers of wicked men, he denies them in wrath; but his
peoples prayers he denies in mercy; and that is in these cases.

they pray for, but what is best for them. If God should give his people all
they ask, they would be undone. It is mercy to deny a mad man a sword, for he
would cut his own throat with it: To deny a child a knife, for he would cut his
fingers with it. You have an instance in Peter, Luke 5. Luke 5. 8.
8. When Simon Peter saw him, he fell down at Jesus his knees, saying, Depart
from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord. Had Jesus Christ granted Peter his
request, he had been undone for ever: Therefore he would not depart from him.
So that this denial was in mercy. As on the other side, it is a demonstration
of Gods wrath, many times, when God does grant mercies to wicked men. So it was
to Pharaoh, he desired that God would remove the plagues from him; God granted
it, thereby to harden Pharoahs heart, and make him ripe for destruction.

Concedit iratus quod negat propitias; multos Deus non exaudit ad voluntatem,
ut exaudiat ad salutem.
As in the forementioned instance. God would not let Isaac go down to Egypt,
because it would have been an occasion of sin to him. As he said very well, God
denies that in love, which he grants in anger. God does not hear many in their
desires, that he may hear them for their good.

3. God denies a prayer in mercy, when he gives a better in lieu of it; It was
the desire of Moses that he might go into the land of Canaan, but it was
better to him to go to the heavenly Canaan, and therefore God translated him
thither. So the Apostles desired Christ to tell them, Act 1. 7, 8.
when he would restore the Kingdom to Israel. He would not resolve them that,
yet he gave them a greater mercy, for he gave them the holy Ghost. So David
desired the life of that child that was illegitimate; but God took away the
bastard (which would have been a living monument Aut dal it Deus (...).
of David's folly) and gave him a Solomon. God will either give us what we ask
(says Bernard) or what he knows to be better for us.

4. God may deny to return this request in mercy, to quicken our he'res and
affections in prayer, and to make us more eager in the pursuit after mercy. God
many times denies that mercy which thou beggest, not as though he would not
hear Psalm. 80. 4. Non dissert Deus eo quod dare non ^ult (...) ut ^ucto (...).
thee, but to see how thy heart will be drawn out toward him in prayer, to
make thee more vehement and importunate in thy desires. Thus God was angry with
the prayers of his people, Psalm. 80. 4. that they might be more fervent. God
does not delay to hear our prayers (says Anselme) because he has no mind to
give, but that our desires may be kindled, and so he may take occasion to give
more plentifully.

5. God may deny a thing in mercy, if thou did too eagerly desire the mercy,
and too affectionately set thine heart upon it; if thou love it too much in
the expetition, thou will be excessive in the fruition: Rachell had better
wanted Children, which she so impetuously desired; for she had a child and
died in childe-bed. God turns mercies too passionately desired into curses,
and snares to us, or else takes them away from us. And so I have answered this
second Question. And that is the third and last particular; I come now to
application.

Use 1. Consider this, oh all you wicked and ungodly men; Consider how far you
are from having your prayers heard; What? will not a father hear his child,
when he prays to him coldly and remissely, and will he hear a slave? If God
will (...) ^eare the remiss prayer of a god ly man (...) do thou think he
will heart the prayers of a wicked man? If God will not hear his peoples
prayers at all times, notwithstanding they are in a state of friendship, will
God hear thy prayers, oh wicked man, that art in state of enmity against him?
If God will not hear the prayers of his own people, which are sometimes his
delight, do thou think he will hear thy prayers, which are always an
abomination to him?



I come now to the condition positive, to which, returns of prayer are
annexed; Though he will not rise and give him, because he is his friend; yet
because of his importunity, he will rise and give him as many as he needs. From
which part of the text you may observe this doctrine.

That the people of God must not content themselves with being in a state of
favor, and friendship with God, but they must also labor after this holy
importunity in prayer, before they can have their prayer accepted.

In the handling of this doctrine, I shall proceed in this method.







4. Wherein lies the difference between an holy importunity, and a natural
importunity.

5. What are the reasons, why the people of God must have this importunity in
prayer.

6. How comes it to pass that so many want this holy importunity in their
prayers?

7. What helps may be used to attain this servencie and importunity of spirit.
And then I shall apply it by way of Caution.

It may be some will say, what need is there that this condition should be so
much pressed, what need is there of importunity in prayer? Has not God decreed
what mercy to bestow upon me? if so, then I am sure I shall have those mercies,
let me pray how I will; and on the contrary, if God has not decreed to give me
such a mercy, I shall not have them, let me pray never so well; for the decree
of God is effectual, irresistible, and cannot be altered; All mine importunity
cannot alter the decree of God.

For answer to this, I shall propound Sol.
three things to your consideration.

God will do, but what God would have us to do. Deuteronomy. 29. 29. Secret things
belong Deuteronomy. 29.
to God, but revealed things to us, and to our Children; we know not any thing
of the decree and counsel of God, but only as he is pleased to reveal it.

Though God can give a mercy without prayer, yet he has not any where promised
to give it without prayer. Prayer is the means that God has appointed us to
use for the obtaining of mercy.

3. The decree of God must not make us to be remiss in prayer; for God has
decreed not only the end, but also the means; as God has decreed to give
thee mercy, so he has also decreed that thou should pray for it. And
therefore wheresoever the decree or purpose of God is mentioned, it is used as
an argument, to stir up the people of God to prayer. For thou oh Lord of
hosts, God of Israel, have revealed to thy servant saying, I will build thee an
2 Samuel 27, 28, 29.
house, therefore has thy servant found in his heart to pray this prayer unto
thee. And now oh Lord God, thou art God, that God and thy words be true, and
thou have promised this goodness unto thy servant. Therefore now let it please
thee to bless the house of thy servant, that it may continue for ever before
thee: For thou oh Lord God have spoken it, and with thy blessing let the house
of thy servant be blessed for ever. You see here God had purposed, and promised
to bless the house of David, and to continue it for ever; does this make David
remiss in prayer? does David argue, what need I pray for this mercy, seeing
God is resolved to give it? No, David takes this hint, and uses it to good
purpose in his prayer. Another instance you have in Isaac. God had decreed, and
promised that the seed of Abraham should be multiplied as the stars of the
heaven, Genesis 15. 5. and that this promised should Genesis 15. 5.
be accomplished in Isaac. Did this make Isaac neglect prayer? No, for we read
Genesis 25. 21. Isaac entreated the Lord for his Genesis 25. 21.
wife, because she was barren, and the Lord was entreated of him, etc. Though
God had promised, that in Isaac all the nations of the earth should be blessed,
yet Isaac betakes himself to prayer to God, for the accomplishment of that
mercy, that was decreed and promised.

But you will say, suppose God has decreed he will not give me the mercy I
pray for, what benefit is it for me to pray for it?

I answer. 1. It is more then any man Sol.
does know, that God has decreed he will deny thee the mercy thou ask.

2. If it be so that God has decreed not to give thee the mercy thou prayest
for, yet God will give thee the return of prayer into thy bosom; though it
may be he will not give thee the particular thing thou desire. And thus I
have dispatched the first thing, I have answered the objection.

Quest. What is holy importunity.
The second particular is this, What is this holy importunity?

Answ. (...).
I answer in general, The word in the original signifies impudence, or want of
shame. It is a metaphor taken from beggars, who are impudently importunate, and
take no denial; if you deny them once, they will ask you again, and again,
and never leave till they get what they desire. It is a gathering together of
all the affections of the soul, a stirring them all up in prayer, whereby the
soul is so earnestly desirous after the good it wants, that it will not rest,
nor leave off the duty, until he do find some return. This is meant Romans 12.
12. Continuing instant 1 2.
in prayer. The Original word is very emphaticall; It notes not oneiy to
persevere (...).
, but to persevere and continue with utmost strength, to engage all a man's
possibility in the work. It notes instancy and importunity; It is a phrase
borrowed from dogs, that when they are hunting, will not cease following the
game till they have got it: So a godly man will pursue God in duty, and never
leave till he find the mercy he begs from him. Genesis 32. ^^.
Thus did holy Jacob Genesis 32. 26. God said, (...) for the day breaks: And be
said, I will not let thee go unless thou bless me. So it is said of Elias,
James 5. 17. He prayed James 5. 17. (...).
earnestly. In the Greek, it is in praying, he prayed; to show that a
Christian, when he is praying should yet pray, should pray more earnestly, he
should be as it were in agony in prayer; It was said of Austin in his
preaching, that he never left preaching, till he found he had done some good
upon the hearts of his hearers. So must you pray, and continue praying, and do
not give over, till you find some good done upon your hearts, till you find
sin weakened, and graces strengthened; This is the holy importunity that is here
spoken of. And so much for the second particular.

The third particular is this. When does Quest. When are Gods people most
importunate?
the Lord work in the hearts of his people this holy importunity, what seasons
are they wherein the people of God are most importunate?

Austin tells us it was so in his Plurimi novitate conversionis serventes erant.
time. first, Converts were most fervent, and affectionate toward God in duty,
when they were first brought from the state of nature into the state of grace.
At the first taste of the excellency of grace they are much ravished with it,
because of the newness of the conditions; New things do most affect men.

Psalm. 42. 4.
in Christ. Psalm. 42. 4. When I remembered these things, I pour out my soul in
me: when he remembered, and considered the marks and tokens of Gods grace in
him, and love to hm, this made him importunate. A Christian may be compared to
a Marigold, which while the Sun shines upon it, opens it self, but afterward
shuts. Christians, when the Sun of Gods favor shines upon them, their souls
are enlarged, their affections inflamed toward God; but when God hides his
face, they are troubled, their hearts are straightened, and they cannot pray as
they used to do. It is said of the Nightingale, that when she thinks any one
is near, she sings more sweetly then when she is alone in the wood. The soul,
when it sees that God is near it, and that his favor is toward it, then it
sings most sweetly, then it prays most fervently; but when the love of God is
clouded, and the soul left as it were alone; then the affections flag, and
grow remiss in prayer.

grows near. This we find in Daniel, When Dan. 9. 2, 3.
he understood by books the number of the years, whereof the word of the Lord
came to Jeremiah the Prophet, that he would accomplish seventy years in the
desolation of Jerusalem. Then he set his face to seek the Lord by prayer and
supplication. Daniel prayed at other times, but then he was most importunate,
when the promise was near the accomplishment, then he was most fervent. To the
same purpose is that Jer. 29. 13. Then shall you call upon me, and ye shall
seek for me and find me, when ye Jer. 29. 13:
shall search for me with all your hearts. During the seventy years, the Jews
did not express any holy importunity toward God, which is the reason of that
expression you read, Dan. 9. 13. Though all this evil is come upon us, yet made
we not our prayer before the Dan. 9. 13.
Lord our God, etc. But when the seventy years were come near to an end, the
Jews prayed more the last year, then they did all the seventy years before.
Therefore said God, I know my thoughts that I have toward Jer. 29. 11, 12.
you, thoughts of peace and not of evil, to give you an expected end. Then
shall ye call upon me, and shall go and pray unto me, and I will harken unto
you. Therefore when you see mercies for a Family, or a Nation wanting, if thine
heart be indifferent, that thou do not care whether thou prayest or not, then
you may conclude, that mercy will be long before it comes. But if you find
that God draws out thine heart for mercy, if God stir up thy desires, and
work this holy importunity in thine heart, it is an argument that mercy is
near; for when prayer is in thine heart, mercy is at the door.

(...)
been drawn off from the world by meditation, then it is in a fit posture for
prayer.

Job says, If iniquity be in thine hands, put it away, so shall thou lift up
thine heart, etc. to Job 11. 13.
note, that iniquity entertained and countenanced in the soul, is the great
hinderer of the lifting up of the heart; the great cooler of importunity.

Psalm. 130. 1, 2.
importunate in their prayers, Psalm. 130. 1, 2. Out of the deeps have I cried
unto thee, Lord hear the voice of my supplication. So Psalm. 142. 1, 2. I cried
unto the Lord with my voice. -- Psalm. 142. 1, 2.
I poured out my complaint before him; I showed before him my trouble. So it is
said of the Jews, Psalm. 107. 6. They cried unto the Lord Psalm. 107. 6.
in their trouble, --. And the same words are repeated, verse. 13, 19, 28. When
trouble and great distress was upon the Jews, by Sennacherib, it is said, For
this cause Hezekiah the King, and the Prophet Isaiah, the son of 2 Chronicles. 32.
20.
Amos, prayed, and cried to heaven. So it is said of Manasseh, When he was in
affliction, he besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself 2 Chronicles. 33. 12,
13.
greatly, -- and prayed unto him, etc. So said that good woman, 1 Samuel 1. 15. I
am a woman of a sorrowful spirit, and have poured out 1 Samuel 1. 15.
my soul before the Lord. Thus it was with the whole Church, Isai. 26. 9. With
my soul have I desired thee in the night: yea, with my spirit Isai. 26. 9.
within me will I seek thee early: for when thy judgments are abroad, the
inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness. And that is the last
season, wherein the people of God use to be importunate with God in prayer.

And so much for the third thing.

LUKE 11. 8. Though he will not rise and give him, because he is his friend:
yet because of his importunity, he will, etc.
III. SERMON.
THE fourth particular is this; Difference between holy and (...) in 7. (...).
wherein lies the difference betwixt that holy importunity, in the hearts of
Gods people, and the seeming importunity which flows from the gifts of nature.

Answ. It lies in these seven things.

-- I stretch forth m^ne hands unto Psalm. 143. 6, 7.
thee. My soul thirsts after thee, as a thirsty land; hear me speedily, my
spirit fails; hide not thy face from me, lest I be like them that go down into
the pit. As a thirsty land. A thirsty land is never satisfied, till it gets
rain. So Psalm. 119. 20. My soul breaks for Psalm. 119. 20. Psalm. 42. 1.
the longing it has -- Psalm. 42. 1. As the Heart pants after the water
brooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God. The Heart never ests, never gives
over running, till it come to the water. Such is the importunity of a godly
man, he is never quiet, never satisfied till his prayers be returned into his
bosom. But it is otherwise with an hypocrite, he prays for mercy, for pardon
of sin, but he can rest contented, though God does not hear him; he can beg
grace, but he can be very well satisfied without grace, Prove. 13. 4. The soul
of the sluggard desires and has nothing, but the soul of the diligent Prove.
13. 4.
makes fat.

There be many that say: Who will show us Psalm. 4. 6.
any good; but Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. Observe
the difference, between David's and wicked men's tempers: Their great question
and desire was, Who would show them any good, any temporal good; Who would give
them the increase of corn and wine: But David's heart breathed after other
things, after Gods favor, and the light of his countenance. So Psalm. 143. 6,
7, 8. I stretch forth mine hands unto thee, -- my soul thirsts after thee --
Psalm. 143. 6, 7, 8.
Psalm. 63. 1. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee; my soul thirsts
for thee, my flesh longs for thee in a dry and thirsty land, where Psalm. 63.
1.
no water is. David was in a wilderness, he wanted water: One would have
thought he should have sought God for water; But you see David's desires run
in another channel; he thirsted more for God then for water; he more desired
spiritual advantages, then temporal enjoyments. This importunity, makes a man
more to endeavor against sin then affliction; more to desire saving, grace,
then common mercies. But now the heart of an hypocrite, is more desirous of
temporal then spiritual mercies. You read in Hosea 7. 14. They have not Hos. 7.
14.
eryed unto me with their heart, when they howled upon their beds; they
assemble themselves for corn and wine, and they rebel against me. They howled,
for what? Was it for grace and spiritual blessings? No, it was for corn, and
wine and oil; not for grace, not for acquaintance with God. Another instance
you have, Acts 8. Simon Magus offered money to purchase the Holy Ghost. What
Act. 8.
was his end in desiring the Holy Ghost? Was it to obtain a spiritual mercy?
No, but it was that he might work miracles. And further, when Peter put him
upon the begging of a spiritual mercy, verse. 22. -- pray God, if perhaps the
thoughts of thine heart may be forgiven thee. But Simon Magus followed not
Peter's rule, he had no great desire of the pardon of sin, or any spiritual
mercy; but he prays, That none of those things, which Peter had spoken might
come upon him, verse. 24. That is, that his money might not perish, nor he
perish with it, that his gifts might not perish; this was his great request and
desire.

All my desire Psalm. 38. 9.
is before thee, and my groanings are not hid from thee. David's heart panted
and failed him, verse. 10. but not a word of expressions, though his expressions
were very good. Romans 8. 26. The spirit helps our infirmities, with sighs and
groans that cannot be uttered. It Romans 8. 26.
is said, Revel. 5. 8. The four and twenty Elders had golden vials full of
odours, which are the Rev. 5. 8.
prayers of the Saints. They are called odours for their sweetness, golden,
for their excellency, and vials, which are vessels of large extent in the
belly, but narrow mouthed. The hearts of Gods people are like vials, many
times, enlarged within, when they are straightened in their words and expressions.
There are many times, most dilated desires in the hearts of the Saints, and yet
they are so narrow mouthed, that they are not able to utter. But now it is
otherwise with hypocrites, they have more in the expression then in the action.
It was Gods complaint against the Jews of old, They draw nigh to God with their
lips, when their hearts were far from him. An hypocrite Isai. 29. 13.
indeed performs duty, but his duties never reach to his heart: They are like
a pot, that is hot at the top, but cold at the bottom.

O my Dove that art in the clifts of the rock in the secret places of thy Cant.
2. 14.
stairs; let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy
voice, and thy countenance is comely. The voice of Christ's Church is sweet,
even then when she is in secret, when none but God beholds her, Cant. 8. 13.
Thou that dwell in the gardens, the companions Can 8. 13.
harken to thy voice; cause me to hear it. But now an hypocrite, does never
care to have any secret communion with God; he cares not to pray alone; and if
he be brought to that, he takes no care of his heart, he curbs not his
thoughts; all his care is in company, popular applause, and vainglory, is as
the wind to the sails of a Ship, that makes their affections move the faster.
An hypocrite, in this regard, may be resembled to a Nightingale, which sings
sweetess when any man stands near her. So carnal men when others are witnesses
of their actions, then they put forth the utmost of their ability. They are of
John's temper, he was zealous only upon that condition, that others would see
it.

he is to prayer: The reason is, because he looks upon his enlargements, not as
coming from the strength of his natural parts or abilities, but as the
free-gift, and gracious dispensation of Gods Spirit: and so he sees he has
nothing whereof to boast; and so it makes him low in his own eyes. You know a
violet, that is one of the sweetest flowers, grows lowest in the earth. The
fullest ears of corn, do most hang down: The fullest barrels, make the least
noise: So the most gracious heart, is the most low and vile in its own
apprehensions, is the nearest earth, but dust and ashes. The fuller he is of
divine discoveries, or enlargement, the less boasting does he make in the
world. A ship, the heavier it is laden, the less it is tossed with winds and
waves; the more empty it is, the more it is lifted up above the water. so a
man, the more empty, the more tossed too and fro with every wind of applause.
Grace is, as it were, the balast of the soul, to keep down a man's spirits, and
make him humble in the midst of wit and parts. Be ye therefore sober and watch
unto prayer. Be sober and not puffed up, do not 1 Pet. 4. 7.
boast of your enlargements. Though it is true, it does refer to another thing,
yet Byfield refers it to prayer; and he says, That man that prays to God,
with most enlargednesse of affections toward God, that man cannot but he must
watch and be sober. Sobriety is opposed to pride, for a man may be dumb with
his own gifts and graces; and watchfulness is opposed to remissness, and
deadness, and carelessness of spirit in the performance of duties. Thus it is
with a sincere man, that has this true importunity in him. But now wicked men,
if ever they have enlargements in duty, it puffs them up. It is with them, as
it was with, Uzziah 2 Chr. 26. 16. When God had helped him marvellously, til he
was strong. But when he was strong, his heart was lifted up to his destruction.
When God helps the soul of such a man in duty, it makes him to lift up himself
against God, and be puffed up above his brethren.

Have mercy on me, O Mat. 15. 22.
Lord, thou Son of David, my daughter is grie vously vexed with a devil: Jesus
Christ takes no notice of her; He answered her not a word, verse. 23. There is
one discouragement. One would have thought she would have d^^sted; but she
prayed again, and the Disciples besought him to send her away, verse. 23. There
was another discouragement, which would have knocked off the desires of many;
but she continues her request still. Jesus Christ himself answers her, I am not
sent, but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, verse. 24. There is a third
discouragement; and yet this does not cool her affections, but she comes afresh
upon Christ, she came and worshipped, saying, Lord, help me, verse. 25. Yet she
found another repulse, and that worse then any of the former; It is not meet to
take the childrens bread, and give it to dogs, verse. 26. Christ you see calls
her a dog; and yet all this does not cast her off, but she takes encouragement,
even from this discouraging answer: And she said, Truth Lord, yet the dogs eat
of the crumbs which fall from their masters table, verse. 27. She was resolved
she would not give over, till she got what she came for, till Christ had said,
O woman great is thy faith, be it unto thee even as thou will, verse. 28.
Denials are to the Saints, as water to the Smiths-forge, when it is sprinkled
upon it, it is so far from cooling or quenching it, that it makes it burn with
the greater heat: So the denials, and discouragements Gods people meet with,
they serve for bellows, to blow up those sparks that are in them into a flame,
to make their desires stronger, their affections to burn the hotter. But now to
an hypocrite, denials and discouragements, do take off the wheels of his
affections, and make them to move slowly and heavily: Job 21. 15. What is the
Almighty that we Job. 21. 15.
should serve him, and what profit should we have if we pray unto him? We get
no good by it, the mercies we ask, are not yet in our hands. Now this argues a
sinful impatiency, and a want of holy importunity.

Because you are Gal. 4. 6.
sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying,
Abba father. In the time of the law, those sacrifices that were accepted were
burnt with fire from heaven, Levit. 9. 24. There came fire out from before
Levit. 9. 24.
the Lord, and consumed upon the altar the burnt-offering -- And so in Elijahs
time, 1 King. 18. 38. When Elijah had laid his 1 King 18. 38.
sacrifice upon the altar of the Lord, Then the fire of the Lord, fell and
consumed the burnt-sacrifice and the wood -- So the Heathens vestal-flames were
kindled with sunbeams. The true importunity is from above, it is a fire
kindled, by God himself, in the hearts of his people. But there is another
importunity, that comes from natural principles, from natural abilities, a
strong memory, a profound judgment, a ready wit, a fluent tongue; and these
are very advantageous to the duty. There is the gift of prayer, as well as the
grace of prayer. Some are importunate in prayer, out of fl^thly respects. Now
this is but a counterfeit importunity. And thus much for the fourth particular,
the difference between holy and natural importunity.

LUKE 11. 8. -- Though he will not rise and give him, because he is his friend,
yet because of his importunity he will rise and give --
IIII. SERMON.
THe fifth particular is this. 5th. Particular. Why we must be importunate.
What are the reasons why Gods people must labor for this holy importunity in
their prayers?

Concomitants of prayer.
forth to be necessary, for the acceptance of our prayers.

1. We must pray beleevingly, Heb. 11. Heb. 11. 6.
6. He that comes to God must believe. Mar. 11. 24. Therefore I say unto you
^aith Christ) Mar. 11. 24.
what things soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive them and
ye shall have them. He does not say; pray how you will, you shall have them;
but pray in such and such manner, pray beleevingly, and then you shall receive;
very much to this purpose is 1 James 5. If any man want wisdom, let him ask it
of God. -- Jam. 1. 5.


Ver. 6. But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering, for he that wavereth is
like a wave of Ver. 6.
the sea driven with the wind and tossed. So that you see God looks to the
manner, as well as to the matter of a performance.

2. You must pray regularly, according to the will of God.

3. Dependingly, resting upon Christ's intercession.

4. Waitingly.

5. Preparedly; but these I shall pass by, because they do not so properly
concern the Point in hand.

6. We are commanded to pray earnestly, and fervently, and importunately; So
David did, Psalm. 55. 17. I will pray and Psalm. 55. 17.
cry aloud, and he shall hear my voice. A full place to this purpose is Romans
15. 30. Now I beseech you, brethren, for the Lord Jesus Romans 15. 30. (...).
(...)
Christ's sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that ye st^ive together with me
in your prayers to God for me. The word in the Greek is very emphaticall, it
is the same word that is applied to Christ, when he was in an agony, when he
sweat drops of blood. He beseeches them to contend and strive in their
prayers; we are to be as it were in an agony, when we are in prayer. Prayer is
not a little book labor, it is not a lip labor only, but it is a raising up
and putting forth the heart and affections in the work. So Romans 12. 12. Be
continuing Romans 12. 12. (...).
instant in prayer. It is a metaphor taken from dogs. A dog of all creatures is
the best able to endure hunger, he will run from place to place, and never
leave till he has got his prey: so you are to hunger after God, and after
mercy, and not to rest satisfied, till God does grant the mercy you stand in
need of, pray, and pray, and pray again, and fight till you overcome, pray
till you get an answer. Another place is, Jam. 5. 16. The effectual fervent
James 5. 16. (...).
prayer of a righteous man avails much. The word in the original is
significant. Some expound it a working prayer; It may be interpreted a prayer
well wrought in the heart, and so a prayer that comes from the heart, -- A
prayer wrought in us by the Spirit, and carried on by faith. Another place to
the same purpose is, Acts Acts 26 7. (...)
26. 7. Unto which promise our twelve Tribes instantly serving God -- The word
is rendered by some, continually, daily, constantly, but it signifies most
properly a serving of God, with the utmost of ones strength, to be as a man
upon a rack, to use the very all of their power; or it may be it is borrowed
from one that runs a race, wherein men stretch out their limbs to the utmost.
The word is the same here that is used Acts 12. 5. Prayer was made Acts 12 5.
(...).
without ceasing, or (as it is in the margin of your book, and more agreeably
to the Original) instant and earnest prayer was made for Peter. The prayers of
Gods people were so earnest, that they opened the prison doors for him. So
Colos. 4. 12. Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of Colos. 4. 12. (...).
Christ, saluteth you, always laboring fervently for you in prayers. -- So
that you see it is not every prayer that God is satisfied with, no nor Gods
people neither, it is not every prayer that shall prevail with God. There must
be importunity in it. So much for the first reason.

2. We must have this holy importunity in prayer, because there is much
strength Reas. 2.
and importunity against thee, when ever thou go upon thy knees. There is
strength against you both from without, and from within.

Abraham Genesis 15 11. When Abraham was sacrificing, Gen 15. 11.
fowls came down upon the sacrifice, but Abraham drove them away. Deodate
says, this is a sign that the Devils, those infernal spirits labor to
disturb us in holy duties; as the good Angels behold us in our assemblies, and
rejoice to see our order, so the wicked Angels labor to disturb us and
molest us.

James 1. 14.
James 1. 14. Every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust and
enticed. When you have no will to do good, even then you have a will to do
evil; nay there are (...).
wills of the flesh, and lusts of the flesh, shall we not have half a will for
God, when we have many wills for sin? You see therefore it is not without good
reason that we should be thus importunate in prayer. And so much for the fifth
particular.

Quest. Why so few importunate in prayer?
The sixth particular is this. What are the reasons why so many people do want
this holy importunity, that so many pray, and so few pray with that
earnestness and eagerness of heart, and affection that is required?

I answer, that comes to pass for many reasons.

and instigations of Satan. The Devil acts not only powerfully, but also
subtly and craftily, he will endeavor to divert you from the performance of
duty, he will persuade you to neglect it if he can; But it may be thou will
say, thou will direct thy prayer unto God, and thou will have thine eye fixed
upon God. Why now Satan will fall in with you, he will jogge your arm, he
will take off your eye from the mark, that you shall not be able to hit it.
Thus he dealt with Abraham, as you heard before. Thus he dealt, Job 1. 6. Now
there was a day when Job 1. 6.
the sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan came
also among them. I am not ignorant that many Interpreters, by the sons of God,
do understand the Angels, because the Angels are called the sons of God, Job
38. 7. but Job 38. 7.
it cannot be so taken here; I will give but one reason to prove it; because
the place where the Angels are, is in heaven, and if so, then the Devil must
be in heaven, which is by all denied; he never was in heaven, since he was cast
out of it. And therefore Bolducius says, that this day was the Lords day, and
by the Sons of God are meant, the godly men, that lived in the time, and place
where Job ^ived, the posterity of Seth. And you hall find in Scripture this
very appella tion given to them. Genesis 6. 2. The sons Genesis 6. 2.
of God saw the daughters of men. These sons of God must needs be men, and not
Angels; And so they are to be understood in this place in Job, the people of
God met together, and came before the Lord, and Satan came also among them, he
came to hinder them and disturb them. So it was Zach. 3. 1, 2. And be showed
me Zach. 3. 1, 2.
Joshua the high Priest standing before the Angel of the Lord, and Satan
standing at his right hand to resist him; And the Lord said unto Satan, The
Lord rebuke thee O Satan, even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem rebuke
thee: is not this a firebrand pluckd out of the fire? You see how Satan
labored to divert the thoughts, and distract the heart of the high Priest in
the performance of religious duties. That is the first reason.

2. This importunity is wanting in our prayers, when we know and allow our
selves in any one sin, and let it lie upon our hearts unrepented of. Hildersham
gathers from the 51 Psalm, that all the while that David did lie in that sin
of adultery, all the time that sin was unrepented of, the heart of David was
shut up that he could not pray, as he was wont to do before, and as he did
after he had repented of that sin, at which time he writ that penitential
Psalm. You had need look to your hearts, that there do not lie there any sin
encouraged, and unrepented of; for be sure of this, if thy prayer do not make
thee leave sinning, thy sin will make thee leave praying. That is the second
reason of the want of importunity.

Bolton, that the taking of unfit seasons for the performance of prayer, does
more obstruct, and hinder this holy importunity in prayer, then all the
suggestions and instigations of Satan.

Now there are three unfit seasons for the performance of this duty.

By night upon Cant. 3. 1.
my bed I sought him, but I found him not. Some Inter preters take occasion
hence, to speak against late prayers.

be down upon their knees, before the things of this world are out of their
minds; and so they have no time to consider, or meditate, or to put the heart
into a fit frame for that work. You know we are to attend upon the Lord without
distraction, 1 Cor. 7. 35. It was the fault of those Jews in hearing, that when
they came to hear 1 Cor. 7. 35.
the word, their hearts did go out after their covetousness, Ezekiel. 33. 31.
That is another season unfit for prayer. Ezekiel. 33. 31.


I will that men pray every 1 Timothy 2. 8.
where, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting; to show, that where
there is wrath, the duty of prayer cannot be performed in an acceptable manner.
And of the same mind was the Apostle Peter; who therefore gives this counsel, 1
Pet. 3. 7. 1 Pet 3. 7.
Likewise, ye husbands, dwell with them according to knowledge, giving honor
unto the wife, as unto the weaker vessel, and as being heirs together of the
grace of life, that your prayers be not hindered. The Apostle wisely foresaw,
that if man and wife lived in discontent and trouble, then their prayers would
be hindered; and therefore he advises them, to prevent the hinderance of their
prayers, by avoiding occasions of discontent. And that is the third season,
wherein people are are unfit for prayer: so they are diverted from that
servency, and importunity they might have in their prayers. We should therefore
choose the fittest seasons for prayer. It is said of Luther, by Vitus Theodorus,
who was present with him at Coburge, and many times heard him at his private
prayers, in a letter of his to Melanchthon, That there was no day passed over
his head, wherein Luther did not spend three hours, at the least, in prayers;
and those (not hours that he could best spare, unseasonable hours, but) such
hours as were the fittest for his study. And that was a reason, that Luther was
very importunate in his prayers, as the same Author informs us; Good God, with
how much reverence did I hear him pray! With how much boldness and confidence,
etc. And on the contrary, one reason why men have so little of this holy
importunity, is for want of taking fit seasons for the work.

Use makes perfectness; I am sure it is so in the duty of prayer; let a
Christian pray often, and he will come to pray well, and to pray with much
enlargednesse of heart; and let him leave off prayer, and he will find his
heart exceedingly straightened. Take a Key, if you use it frequently, it will be
bright, but if you lay it aside, it will soon grow rusty; thus will it be with
a man's heart, use prayer much, keep it close to the performance of duty, it is
the way to have thy heart bright. Let this Key of prayer, which does open
heaven, be used, it will be kept bright, and thy prayer will enter into heaven;
but let this Key of prayer be laid aside, and do not thou often use it, and it
will quickly grow rusty again; thy prayers and performances, will not be able
to enter neaven, and thou will not be able to perform duty in that manner that
God expects. If thou do not watch unto prayer, with all carfulness, thou will loose thy zeal and servent affection, and thy holy desires after God in
duty. As it is with a Pump, use it every day, and water will come, but if you
forbear the use of it two or three days, water will neither come so easily,
nor so plentifully. If you do not pump out your holy desires every day, they
will quickly flag and grow remiss. Physicians observe, concerning the teeth,
that that side of the teeth that is not used, is most subject to rheumes and
distillations. That heart that is not inured to prayer and holy duties, is most
subject to Satan's instillations and suggestions. This is the fourth reason.

Matt 26. 39.
and said, Father if it be possible, let this cup pass from me. Verse. 42. He
went again the second time, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if this cup may
not pass from me, thy will be done. Verse. 44. He went away again, and prayed,
saying the same words. To show, that it is lawful (...) forms of prayer, but
not always. You are to strive for the spirit of prayer. A man that will use
his crutches constantly, shall go ^ame all the days of his life. (...) live in
an age, wherein Religion is (...) professed, and the Gospel is fully (...)
known. Do not content your selves (...) forms, labor for the spirit of prayer,
(...) you may go to God, and spread (...) him your wants and necessities, and
(...) those mercies, that are most suitable to (...) wants and exigences. Forms
ind^ed will teach you to beg pardon for sin, in general; but you must beg
pardon for particular sins. You must not only beg mercy in general, but you
must also beg (...) particular mercies, that are most (...) you. And this, set
forms are (...) which yet is the main work in prayer. He that ties himself
always to another man's form, will not be able to pray alone, but weakly, and
coldly, and formally. This is the fifth reason.



LUKE 11. 8. Though he will not rise and give him, because he is his friend,
yet because of his importunity, he will give unto him, etc.
V. SERMON.
THE Fourth paticular is this; By wat helps may a man attain to this holy
importunity in prayer.

For answer, I shall lay down six or seven Theological helps, by which a man
may come to attain this holy importunity.

David's importunity, as you may see, Psalm. 5. verse. 3. he says, My voice shall
thou hear in the morning -- And in the 7 Psalm. 5. 3.
verse, you will find this holy fear did lie at the bottom; Lut as for me, I
will come into thine house, in the multitude of thy mercy; and in thy fear,
will I worship toward thine holy temple. David came to duty, with a strong
(...) of Gods greatness and dreadfulness. So it is the advice of the Apostle,
that if we would serve God acceptably, we must do it with reverence and godly
fear, Heb. 12. 28. That forecited Author, Vitus Theodorus Tanta fiducia ut cum
amico, tanta reverentia ut cum Deo.
writes, concerning Luther, That he prayed with so much confidence, as if he
had been speaking with his friend and familiar; and yet with so much reverence,
as one that considered the great distance between God and him. I may allude to
that place, Isal. 60. 5. though the words are spoken to another purpose; Thy
heart shall fear, and be enlarged. An holy fear, breeds an holy care. If a man
once comes to this, that he is fearlesse of God, he will quickly be careless
in prayer; Job 15. 4. Yea, thou castest off fear, and restrainest prayer before
God. Job. 15. 4.
A man that does cast off the fear of God, does soon cease to pray unto God: He
that fears God most, that man will certainly pray to God best. That is the
first help.

Psalm. 5. 1, 2. Give ear to my Psalm. 5. 1, 2.
words O Lord, and consider my meditation, give ear unto my prayer oh God and
my King; for unto thee will I pray. David's prayer you see is usherd in with
meditation. The same word in the Hebrew signifies both (...)
to meditate, and to pray. You find concerniag Isaac, Genesis 24. 26. Isaac went
out into the fields to meditate, some read it; Genesis 24. 26.
to pray, others translate; It is likely he did both first meditate, and then
pray: Be much employed in the work of meditation, if you would have your
hearts much enlarged in prayer. Meditate in to whose presence you come, what a
glorious God he is, before whom you are to appear.

2. Meditate in whose name you are to come, and to pray, by whom you must have
access to the throne of grace.

3. Meditate what chief mercies you want, and are to beg, what grace you would
have strengthened, what lusts you would have quelled, what doubts you would have
satisfied, what sins you would have pardoned, in a word, what blessings you
would have God to bestow upon you. The meditation of these things must needs
give a man more scope, and stir up a man's affections in prayer.

Cor. 7. 1 Cor. 7.
to f^^e themselves from, and rid their hands of the cares of the world, and he
gives this as a reason, that they may attend upon the Lord without distraction.
The cares of the world will eat out that good that is in the hearts of men,
will rob a man of that freedom and enlargement, that otherwise he might have
in prayer. Anselme, as he was walking in the fields, saw a shepherds boy tie a
stone to a birds leg, and as the bird sought to fly up, ever and anon, the
stone pulled it down again. The spiritual interpretation that he partly made,
and that we may make, is this; when the soul would mount aloft in prayer, and
grow fervent, the cares of the world pluck it down, and cool it. And therefore
you must labor to free your selves from these incombrances. You must do as
Abraham did, when he went to sacrifice, he left his servants and cattle at the
bottom of the hill: So when you go to offer to God the sacrifices of prayer,
you must get above the impediments and distractions of this present life. That
is the third help.

Colos. 4. 2.
is to watch the heart in prayer. Colos. 4. 2. Continue in prayer, and watch in
the same with thanksgiving. There is a watching to prayer, and a watching in
praying. A watching to prayer is, when a man watches his heart, and sees that
he does not omit duties, and there is a watching in prayer, of which I am now
speaking. Now there are four enemies, that a man must watch against in prayer.

1. Watch against drowsinesse of body. This is agreat impediment of prayer, and
we have great need to watch against it.

2. Watch against a deadness and dullness of spirit, against a flat and low
temper, that is a great hinderance of importunity.

3. Watch against Satanicall suggestions; Satan is always ready to assault
thee, he watches to disturb and molest you in your prayers, you had need
watch to counterworke him.

4. You must watch from secular distractions. All these adversaries you must
watch against, and that is the way to get this holy importunity into your
hearts.

David, Psalm. 103. 1. Bless the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me
praise his holy name. Psa. 103. 1.
See how this good man does muster together all the faculties of his soul, how
he calls up al his strength, all that he is or can do to set forth the name of
God. So the Apostle Peter in his first epistle chap. 1. ver. 13. exhorts those
to whom he 1 Pet. 1. 13.
writes, to gird up the loins of their minds. A Christian going toward
heaven, is compared to a man that is going a journey; now a man that is going a
journey, he girts up his clothes together about his loins, that nothing may
hinder him in his journie. To this the Apostle alludes, when he bids them gird
up their loins. So the like you have Luke 17. 8. Luke 17. 8.
Gird up thy self, and serve me. It is an expression of a master to his
servant. God is our master, we are his servants, we are to do his work while
we be in the world. To that end let us gird up our loins, let us gather our
affections together, that we may be the more fit for, and the more vigorous in
the work. A discinct and ungirt mind is not fit for prayer; in ancient times
at the first assemblings, and Church-meetings, the Deacons cried, Let us pray,
let us attend. There are many that pray, and do not Oremus, attendainas.
attend to prayer, many pray, as if they prayed not; if therefore we would
pray, indeeed, we must attend to it, we must stir up all that is within us,
to call upon the name of the Lord.



David took, Psalm. 38. 9. My desires oh Lord are before thee, and my groaning
is not hid from thee. So it was the practice of the Church, Isa. 63. 17. O Lord
why Isai. 63. 17.
have thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our hearts from thy
fear. So it was the way that Ephraim went in, Jer. 31. Jer. 31. 18.
18. I have heard Ephraim bemoaning himself. Thou have chastised me and I was
chastised, as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke. --

Ver. 19. Surely after that I was turned, I repented, and after that I was
instructed, I smote upon my thigh: I was ashamed, yea even confounded, because
I did hear the reproach of my youth. God does love to hear his people
mourning over, and bewailing their wants and weaknesses, and that is one
necessary requisite in an acceptable prayer. Bewail therefore thy dullness,
consider that prayer without this holy importunity, is like a messenger without
legs, as an arrow without feathers, an advocate without a tongue. St Jerome
complained very much of his Siccine putas or ass Jonam, sic Danielem inter
leones, sic latronem in cruce?
distractions and dullness in prayer, and chid himself thus: What do thou
think that Jonah prayed thus when he was in the whales belly, or Daniel when
he was among the Lions, or the thief, when he was upon the cross? Bemoane
your want of importunity, if you would get this importunity. And so much shall
suffice for the helps or means to get importunity. And so I have dispatched
all those particulars propounded in the beginning, I now come to the
application of the point.

I shall apply it by way of Caution, to prevent Use of Caution.
several mistakes in the world about this holy importunity. And there are two
sorts of mistakes. There are some that think they have this importunity when
they have it not. And there are others that think they have not this
importunity, when indeed they have it. Both these mistakes I must labor to
rectify.

To those that think they have importunity upon fal^e grounds.
Every man by nature is proud of his own parts and abilities, and apt to think
that he has more grace then indeed he has. And here there are four mistakes,
or if you will, four grounds of this great mistake. Many conceit they have
importunity, when indeed they have it not.

1. Because they are fluent in their expressions in prayer.

2. Because they have some stirring of the affections in prayer.

3. Because God gives them the mercy they ask.

4. Because they pray by heart and not by book. Now all these are false
grounds, and therefore I shall endeavor to disprove them in order.

The first ground of this deceit is this. There are some that conceive they
have First false ground consuted.
this importunity, because they have multitude of words, and variety of
expressions in prayer.

Now this is no just ground for a man to conclude, that he has this holy
importunity, in four cases.



Isa. 29. 13. For as much as this people draw near me with their mouth, and
with their lips do honor me; but have removed their heart far from me. Some
men are like boiling water, when it boiles fastest, and boiles out of the top,
then there is nothing at the bottom; All their prayers are at the top, in
their mouth, and not in their heart and affections. Their affections do not
carry equipage with their words.

Cant. 8. 13. Thou that dwell in the gardens, the companions hearken to thy
voice, cause me to hear it; to show, that they should not only pray, and be
importunate when the companions hearken to their voice, when they are in
company, but even then when no eye sees them, when no ear hears them, when
none is present, but God alone; God expects that we should pray in secret, as
well as in company.

A second false ground consuted.


2. Another false ground upon which men conceive they have this importunity,
when they have not, is this; Because they find in themselves some stirrings in
their affections in prayer to God. But this is no just ground for that opinion
in these cases.

Jonah, they cried mightily unto God, but what was it for? not that they might
be delivered from their sins and corruptions, but that God would bring them
safe out of that tempest wherein they were.





is in his ordinary course; now this is not the natural strength of the man,
but only the violence of his distemper, and the decay of nature. Just so the
violence that some men have, does not argue a strength of grace, but a decrease
of grace rather. And so much for the second ground of that mistake.

A third ground upon which many mistake, is this. Because God gives them A
third ground confuted.
the mercy they ask: Now they think God would not give them what they ask, if
he did not hear and accept their prayers: But neither is this a good ground,
and that for these reasons.



Samuel, and said, nay, but we will have a King. Well, God hears their
request, and grants it, and gives them a King. Might they thence conclude,
surely their prayers were accepted of God, because God did give them what they
desired? No, God tells us the quite contrary, Hosea 13. 11. I gave thee a King
in mine anger. So in the 78. Psalm. The Israelites were very desirous of meat.
God heard them; Verse 29. 30, 31. So they did eat and were filled, for he gave
them their own desire. They were not estranged from their lust; but while the
meat was in their mouths, the wrath of God came upon them, and slew the
fattest of them, and smote down the chosen men of Israel; So that Gods giving
of a man the mercy he wants, is no argument to a man, to conclude that God
accepts his prayers.

sat for the day of slaughter, and make thee a sweet morsel for worms and
Devils. Now consider, what benefit this will be to thee, to have riches,
pleasures, and worldly contentments, and they prove a snare to thee. So then it
is no just ground for a man to conclude, that he has prayed aright, because
God has answered him. That is the third ground.

A fourth ground of men's presumption, of the goodness and acceptablenesse of A
fourth ground confuted.
their prayers is this; they pray by heart, and not by book, they use not set
forms, they pray ex tempore. But this also is but a false ground, as appears
by these considerations.

1. It is possible, and usual too for men to pray without book, and yet
without heart too. A man may pray a third way, he may pray, and yet neither
pray with books, nor with heart, he may pray by the strength of natural parts,
as I told you even now.

2. A man may pray without a form, and yet make but a formal prayer. A
formal prayer is not to use a form of words; for that Jesus Christ did; he
prayed three times, saying the same words. A man may possibly use a form of
words, and yet not be formal. And on the other, a man may be formal, and yet
not use a form of words; that is, he may pray, and yet not have his heart and
affections wrought upon in that prayer.

Hannah poured out her soul before the Lord; and so the Psalmist, he is said
to pour out his heart; and the Israelites are said to pour out their hearts
like water before the Lord. So that this proves to be a false bottom. And so
much for the first use of Caution.

LUKE 11. 8. I say unto you, though he will not rise and give him, because he
is his friend, yet because of his importunity, he will rise and give him as
many as he needs.
VI. SERMON.
2. THis may be for caution to 2. Caution. To those that think they have not
importunity when they have.
the godly, to prevent the mistakes of those, that have this importunity, and
think they have not; Yet here also they have some seeming reasons. I shall
name them, and withal answer them.

Their first reason is this. Others pray 1. Reason confuted.
better then I, says a godly man. Others perform duties with more
inlargednesse; Now this reasoning is not good.

does not expect any more from a man, but according to that measure of grace,
that he gives the man, and according to his growth and standing in grace. Paul
was not at all discouraged, because Epinetus was the first fruits of Achaia
unto Christ, Romans 16. 5. nor at Andronicus and Junia, that were of note among
the Apostles, Romans 16. 5.
and in Christ before him, verse 7. And if Paul was not discouraged, why
should verse 7.
thou be discouraged to see other Christians outstrip thee, it may be they are
of longer standing then thou.



2. It may be thou do compare their expression with thine affection, it may
be there is more in thy affections, then in all the multitude of their
expressions. Thou are not to compare thy affections with the multitude of other
men's words.

3. I^ may be thou do compare thy (...) with others, when they are at the
best and highest, and thou at the worst and lowest. There is a great difference
betwixt a man and himself, at several times, now you judge unequally, if you
compare your self in that manner.

3. In some cases this may be no discouragement to thee; as 1. If thou art
weaker in natural gifts. Though good affections flow from grace, yet good
expressions proceed from the goodness of natural abilities.

2. In case thou art not of as long standing in religion.

Jonah was entered into the ship there was a great storm, in so much that the
ship was ready to sink: now all the Mariners were at prayer, every man cried
to his God, but Jonah was fast asl^^p, now one would have thought, that Jonah
had been a most stupid man; but the reason was the greatness of his journey, a
little before, which caused him to be so heavy to sleep. It may be a man that
has less grace then thou may pray better then thou, because he is not
troubled with these worldly encumbrances, that thou art necessarily engaged in.

that all men should grow in grace alike. To this purpose I may apply, Nehem.
11. 17. Mattaniah the son of Micha, Nehem. 11. 17.
the son of Zabdi, the son of Asaph was the principal to begin the
thanksgiving in prayer, and Bakbukiah the second among his brethren, and Abda
the son of Shammuz -- the third. God does not intend that all should be alike
in grace, or gifts; God has his first, second, and third; one may fall short
of another, and yet all have truth of grace, yea, all have some growth in
grace. Another may pray better, and yet thou pray well; Another may pray more
affectionately, and yet thou pray as acceptably in the sight of God: so much
for Answer to the first reason.

2. Many a poor soul may say, I can remember since I could pray better, and
2. Reason confuted
more largely. Now if I could pray better formerly then now, I am now grown
remiss, and want this holy importunity. But this is no sound reason; for

no cause to be discouraged. God loves a judicious prayer, as well as a large
and affectionate prayer; you see what you want one way, you make up another
way. A young carpenter gives more blows, and makes more chips, but an old and
experienced workman does the most and the best work. A young Musician can play
more quickly and nimbly upon an instrument, but an old Musician has more skill.





now, yet ought not this to be matter of discouragement to thee.

1. If it does not proceed from a voluntary carelessenesse.

2. If it be not accompanied with hardness and insensiblenesse.

3. If it be not continued in with laziness and contentedness. And so much
for answer to the second reason.

3. Another ground of doubting to the A third Reason confuted.
people of God is this. They complain they have not those enlarged expressions
in prayer, which Gods people use to have. For answer consider these things.

Hannah, she spoke in her heart, but she was not able to express her self. So
it was with holy David, Psalm. 77. 4. I am Psalm. 77. 4.
so troubled that I cannot speak, and yet in the first verse of that Psalm, he
tells us he cried unto the Lord with his voice. Here was an heart full of
prayer, though he wanted utterance.





And so much for answer to the third doubt.

A fourth ground of doubting is this: A fourth Reason confuted.
Many a disconsolate Christian is apt to say, I am troubled with wandering
thoughts; with deadness and dullness of heart in prayer.

I confess thy case is sad, and to be lamented for, and it is just matter of
humiliation: Yet even here is matter of comfort.



2. If thou do what thou can to resist these wanderings when you are come
before God in prayer.

3. If you be sensible of these wanderings afterward. If you can say, you do
these three things, your wanderings shall never be laid to your charge.

And thus I have done with both these Uses of Caution. And so I have done with
the principal Doctrine, which was this, That on holy importunity, and
earnestness of spirit, is a condition required in the prayers of Gods people,
if they expect returns thereunto.

There is another considerable Doctrine yet behind, taken from the
amplification of the concession: He asked but three loaves; but because of his
importunity, he gave him as many as he needed.

The observation thence is this; That when the heart is importunate in begging
mercy, Doct. 4. God is better then our prayers.
God usually gives us more then we pray for.

In the handling of this Doctrine, I shall

1. prove it by Scripture-instances. 2. I shall lay down the reasons of it. 3.
I shall answer some objections, and cases of conscience; and so I shall come to
application.
1. I shall prove it by Scripture instances.

1. You have the instance of Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. She begged a son with much
importunity, being a woman of a sorrowful spirit for want of a son; Well, God
returns her an answer. Chemnitius observes, Petijt Filium, accepit Prophetam.
that Hanna asked a son, and God gave her a Prophet. She begged a son, God gave
her a gracious son; a son greatly beloved of God. She asked a single mercy, and
God gave her a double blessing.

Another instance you have in Abraham, Genesis 17. Abraham prayed, O that Ishmael
might live in thy sight. Well, what answer Genesis 17.
does God return? That you have verse. 19. Verse. 19.
Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed, and thou shall call his name
Isaac, and I will establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant,
and with his seed after him. It was Abraham's desire that Ishmael might live.
Now God, not only grants that, but he grants him a better mercy.

Another instance you have in the Canaanitish woman, Matthew. 15. who did
importunately beg of Christ, the life and health of her daughter. Christ
answered her thus, Be it unto thee even as thou will.

Now if you ask what is the reason, why God deals thus with his people? I
answer.

Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly, above all that we are
able Ephesians. 3. 20.
to ask or think, according to the power that works in us. A man may ask of
another man, and it may be receive; but then he must not ask again: but
herein appears the power and ability, the goodness and bounty of God; if we ask
of him once or twice, he is a God that is able to give, not according to our
asking only, but above what we ask; and not only above what we can ask, but
above what we can ask or think. The words are so full, that they cannot well be
expressed, God does more then (...).
excessively. God has not only a fullness of abundance, but of redundancy;
not only of plenty, but bounty; he is better then our prayers.

we do not know what we need, nor what we should pray for as we ought, Romans 8.
26. Romans 8. 26.
Therefore God supplies our wants, not only in what we ask, but in what we
want, though we do not ask it, nor pray for it.

So much for the Reasons; I come now to answer some objections.

they do prosper in the world, and have more then heart can wish? Psalm. 73. I
answer. Psalm 73.


Balaam: God gave Balaam honors and riches, but Balaam cried our, O that I
might dye the death of the righteous, This God did not grant him. So, many
wicked men do say in a general way, Lord pardon my sins; God does not hear
them. It may be a child of God, may ask of God temporal mercies, and God will
give him spiritual mercies; this is more then he did ask, and that much better
then he gives to wicked men.





Concedit iratus, quod negat propitius.
times give those things in his anger, which he denies when he is well pleased.
God will not hear his own people according to their wills, but according to his
own will. It is in this case, as it is with a father, when his child, for want
of knowledge, asks a knife of him, by which he may cut his fingers; the father
will not give him the knife, except it be in wrath. So a man may ask mercies at
the hand of God, and it may be God will give them in wrath to cut themselves
with them.

They tempted God in their hearts, Psalm. 78. 18.
and asked meat for their lust. There was the end of their desires. They
desired a lawful thing for unlawful ends; But what followed? The wrath of God:
For while the meat was in their mouths, the wrath of God came upon them, verse.
30, 31. V. 30, 31. 3.


3. If you ask any thing of God, and he gives it in wrath, you may know by
this; if it be an occasion of sin to thee, it is given thee in wrath. So it was
with the Israelites, even now mentioned, the meat that God gave them proved an
occasion of sin, verse. 32. -- they sinned still, and believed not his wondrous
works. When the mercies Verse. 32.
you enjoy becomes fuel to your lusts, those mercies are accompanied with the
curse and wrath of God; and this using of mercies will turn to the aggravation
of wrath.

Mat. 8. 31, 32.
32. They besought Christ that they might go into the Herd of Swine: Christ
granted them that, he let them enter into swine, that they might not enter into
men. When the giving of temporal mercies, hinders thee from the receipt of
spiritual mercies, they are given in wrath. There are many men to whom God
gives temporal mercies, they have riches in abundance, pleasure at will, every
thing they can desire; but these mercies take off their thoughts and affections
from better things; by getting these they loose Christ, and grace, immortality,
and eternal happiness. Now in these cases, though God does give mercies, yet
they are given in wrath; and so notwithstanding this objection, the privilege
of Gods people, is much greater then the privilege of wicked men.

But it may be further objected and enquired; If this be so, that mercies are
given to wicked men in wrath, and by a common providence, Quest. When mercies
are returns of prayers
How may I know when mercies come to me as returns of prayers?

Now I shall answer that in these particulars.

quicken the heart to beg for other mercies at the hands of God: when the mercy
shall make thee more to love prayer, more to use prayer. This you find proved
by David's experience, Psalm. 116. 2. Because he has Psalm. 116. 2.
heard my voice, therefore will I call upon him as long as I live. You see
here, because God had heard David's prayer, and given him the mercy he begged,
he makes an argument, and an engagement to himself to pray as long as he
lived. So that to continue prayer, is a means to get more mercy; and the
leaving off of prayer when you have a mercy, is a means to loose that which you
have obtained at the hands of God. But as for the wicked it is not so with
them. Mercies received only from a common, or general providence, have no such
efficacy, as you may see, Job 21. 7, 8, etc. there Job tells you, -- the wicked
live, become old, yea, Job 21. 7, 8, etc.
mighty in power: Their seed is established in their sight with them, and their
offspring before their eyes. Their houses are safe from fear, neither is the
rod of God upon them. Their bull gendereth, and fails not, their cow calveth,
and casts not her calf. And so he goes on, describing that happy condition
that wicked men were in, and how God followed them with mercy after mercy.
Well, what was the effect of this? Did this engage them to call upon God? Did
this make them in love with prayer? No, it had a quite contrary effect, verse.
14. Therefore they say Verse 14.
unto God, Depart from us; for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. And
verse. 15. What is the Almighty, that we should serve him? and Verse. 15.
what profit should we have if we pray unto him?

Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. 27, 28. Hanuah had prayed 1 Samuel 1. 27, 28.
for a child, God gave her a son. Now what does she with this mercy? Observe,
For this child I prayed, and the Lord has granted my petition, -- Therefore
have I lent him to the Lord; as long as he lives. Seeing God has heard my
prayer and granted my request, therefore will I give this mercy to God, to be
employed in this service. So 1 John 3. 22. And whatsoever we ask we receive of
him, because we keep his commandments, and 1 John 3. 22.
do those things that are pleasing in his sight. You see it is made an
evidence, that what we receive is received as an answer to our askings; because
we make those mercies helps to obedience to keep Gods commandments. But now
mercies that come from a common providence, do not draw out the heart toward
God; they rather draw them out toward sin; as it was in the forementioned
Israelites, Psalm 78. though God did give them their hearts desire, yet were
they not estranged from their lust.

Hannah, she asked a son, and God gave her a son, yet she says, 1 Samuel 2. 1. 1 Samuel 2. 1.
My heart rejoices in the Lord. God gave her a son, she rejoiced in that
mercy, but she rejoiced more in the God that gave it. So it was with David,
Psalm. 85. 6. Will thou not Psalm. 85. 6.
revive us again, that thy people may rejoice in thee? We will not rejoice
chiefly in the mercy, but in thee. But on the contrary, those that receive
mercies out of the basket of common providence, they rejoice more in the mercy
then in the God of mercy; they rejoice in their wealth and glory, in the
multitude of their riches; but as for God they bid him depart from them; they
cannot rejoice in God.

LUKE 11. 8. Though he will not rise and give him, because he is his friend:
yet because of his importunity, he will, etc.
VII. SERMON.
Sampson, Judge. 15. when he was ready to dye for thirst, he prayed unto the
Lord, and God clave an hollow place in the jaw bone, and gave him water. Now
Sampson calls the name of the place Enhakkore, the well of him that prayed: he
ascribes (...)
it to the return of his prayers; to that assistance that God gave him to pray.
So Hannah ascribed her mercy to God, not to her self. But now a wicked man that
receives mercies from Gods general providence, his language is, This I have
labored for; this I have ventured my life for; this my friends left me; this I
got by my forecast, providence, and industry: thus they sacrifice to their own
nets; but seldom say, This is the return of prayers, this is the gift of God.

Eli told Hannah that she should have a son, and that her prayer was heard, she
had so much inward joy and contentment of mind, that is said, Hannah went away
rejoicing; and her countenance was no more sad: The consideration of that made
her very much to rejoice. The reason is, because mercies that are given in as
returns of prayer, they are given in with a blessing, and inward quiteness and
contentment of mind. The mercies that God gives his own people, he gives them
with joy and comfort, Prove 10. Prove. 10. 22.
22. The blessing of the Lord makes rich, and he adds no sorrow to it. You
read, 1 Chronicles. 4. 10. And Jabez called on the God of Israel, 1 Chronicles. ^. ^^.
saying, O that thou would bless me indeed, and enlarge my coasts, and that
thy hand might be with me, and that thou would keep me from evil that it may
not grieve me. Jabez knew that it was the manner of God, when he gave blessings
as returns of prayer, not to add grief to it. Isaac he prayed for his wife, and
God gave her to him to be a great comfort to him. It may be wicked men have
wives and no content with them, but sorrow added to them, because they did not
pray for them as Isaac did; they have children, but sorrow with them; and
abundance of riches, and sorrow added to that; and all because they have not
the mercies as returns of prayer. The mercies that are given in a way of
general providence, usually are accompanied with vexatiousnesse and discontent,
snares and sorrows mingled with the mercies. So it was, Psalm. 106. 15. He gave
them their requests, but he sent leanness into their souls. God Psalm. 106. 15.
gives wicked men indeed their requests; but how is it, with a blessing and
with content? No, no such matter, they have a curse with it. You know Saul gave
Michal to David to be a snare to him, a cross and coffeehouse. So does God
many times, in just judgment, give his blessings to wicked men, to be snares,
and curses and crosses to them.

Act. 12. While the Church was met to pray for Peter's enlargement, Act. 12.
the prison-doors were opened; and he came and knocked at the door of the
house, where they were assembled. This was an evident sign, that God gave in
Peter to them as a return of prayer. So Acts 4. 31. When they had prayed, the
place was Act. 4. 31.
shaken where they were assembled together; and they were all filled with the
Holy Ghost, -- You read, Joh. 4. 52, 53. That the Noble man Joh. 4. 52, 53.
enquired diligently, concerning the time wherein the child began to recover;
and when he understood that, he knew it was a return of his prayer, and a fruit
of Christ's love. God tells his people, Isa. 65. 24. Before Isa. 65. 24.
they call I will answer, and while they are yet speaking I will hear. Thus we
read in the Book of Martyrs, That the people of God did make it a sign of Gods
answering our prayers, when God was pleased to give in mercies to them, at the
time wherein they prayed. Thus we read of Luther; That there was a young man
that had made a Covenant, and sealed a Bond with his own blood, to give
himself, soul and body to the Devil; only to live in pleasure, and to do and
have whatsoever he did desire. And when the time of the Bond was almost out, he
being much troubled in his mind, came to Luther and told him what he had done,
and what was like to befall him upon it. Whereupon, Luther called the Church
together, and kept a solemn Fast in the behalf of the young man: And whilst
that Luther was in prayer, being earnest with God, there was a great noise
heard amongst them, and the Bond was cast into the lap of Luther, in the midst
of the Congregation. And so for time to come, the young man did lead an holy
and godly life.

Thou shall make thy prayer unto him, and he shall hear thee; and thou shall
Job. 22. 27, 28.
pay thy vows: thou shall also decree a thing, and it shall be established
unto thee; and the light shall shine upon thy ways. When thou begest a mercy,
and say, Lord give me such a mercy, and I will do thus and thus; I will walk
so and so before thee, I will improve them to thy glory. Now when thou shall
thus ask for mercy, and make vows to God, he will hear; but then thou must be
sure to perform thy vows. This frame of heart we find to be in David, Psalm.
Psalm. 66. 13, 14.
66. 13, 14. I will go into thine house with burnt offerings, I will pay thee
my vows which my lips have uttered, and my mouth has spoken when I was in
trouble. You see David was in trouble, and he prayed to God, and made some
promises and vows, in case God would deliver him. Now God did deliver him out
of trouble, and he did make good his vows. Now here was a return of prayer.
David you see did not grow secure and careless, but he made conscience to pay
what he had promised to God. And so you see how you may discover, whether the
mercies you receive from God be returns of prayer, or only fruits of common
and general providence. And so much for Answer to that Question.

Another Objection, or case of conscience is this; How can this be true, that
God gives Object. 1.
his people more then they need, seeing it is the complaint of Gods people many
times, that they have been a long time begging mercy, and God does not give
them so much as they desire. Many say, I pray for pardon of sin, and I cannot
get it pardoned, and the pardon sealed: I pray daily for power against my
corruptions, and yet I cannot get my lusts subdued? What then shall I think of
my prayers, may some poor soul say?

Now to this I shall lay down several things, by way of answer.

God should have his glory, and thou be without the mercy, then that thou
should have the mercy, and God want his glory. An eminent instance of this
you have, Joh. II. There was a prayer made by Mary and Joh. II.
Martha for their brother Lazarus; And they came unto Jesus and said, he whom
thou love i^ sick: But Jesus said, This sickness is not unto death, but for
the glory of God. When Jesus Christ heard that he was sick, yet he stayed two
days in the place where he was, though he loved Martha, and he loved Lazarus,
yet he stayed two days and would not go to him: but in the 14. verse, Christ
said plainly, Lazarus is dead: And I am glad for your sakes, that I was not
there, to the intent that you might believe. But they said unto him, Lord, if
thou had been here, he had not dyed. Christ came and commanded them to role
the stone away, Martha answered, He has been four days in the grave, and by
this time be stinketh. This was that that Christ aimed at: Christ knew that it
was greater glory to him, to raise the dead out of the grave, then to raise him
out of the bed of sickness: The power of his Godhead did more appear in the
former then in the latter. And when Martha told him, He stinketh; Jesus
answered, Said I not unto thee, if thou did believe, thou should see the
glory of God? that is, thou should see the power of my Godhead. This was the
end of Christ's denying of mercy, though it was earnestly desired.

Because I have called, and ye refused, I have Prove. 1. 24.
stretched out my hand, and no man regarded. Compared with verse 28. Then shall
they call Verse. 28.
upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not
find me. Mic. 3. Mic. 3. 4.
4. Then shall they cry unto the Lord, but he will not hear them; he will even
hide his face from them at that time, as they have behaved themselves ill in
their doings. Zach. 7. 13. Therefore it is come to pass, that as he cried and
they Zach. 7. 13.
would not hear, so they cried, and I would not hear, says the Lord of Hosts.
It may be God has been calling upon thee this many years to believe and to
repent; to be reformed, to forsake the evil of your doings; and thou have not
heatd his calling; his mercies have not drawn thee; his judgments have not
affrighted thee: and is it not just with God to let thee call, and he not hear
thee?

he does, as it were, desire him to say him nay. So when man asks mercies of
God, carelessly and indifferently, this provokes God to give no answer. It may
be thou prayest sleepily and drouzily, and with a wandering heart: And do thou
think God will hear that prayer, that thou do not hear thy self? Do thou
think that God will accept of that prayer, when thou know not what thou
say?

Job, Job 9. 16, 17. If I have called and God answered, yet I will not believe
Job 9. 16, 17.
that God has heard me, because thou breakest me with thy tempest -- Job was
in a fit of impatiency and unbelief. And though God did give him returns of
prayer, yet he would not, did not observe them.

Antigonus, he gave him a Drachme: He said, It is not for a King to give so
little, a Talent had been a more suitable gift. The King replied, Though a
Talent is fit for me to give, yet thou art not fit to receive. So though God is
always fit and ready to give an answer to our prayers, yet we are not always
fit and ready to receive it. God bids us open our mouths wide, and I will fill
it. God denies us, that we may open our mouths the wider, and enlarge our
desires the more after mercy. The Lord does by his people, as a father by his
child; a father may seem to withdraw and hide himself from his child, to try
its love to him; and the child begins to mourn and cry, yet the father comes
not to the child; but when he hears the child cry aloud, then he comes to it
and takes it up in his arms. So the Lord many times, sees his people pray, but
he seems to withdraw from them, to hide himself from the prayers of his people;
and goes as it were out of their sight, until they begin to cry aloug, to be
very earnest and importunate in their prayers, till their desires be enlarged
toward God; and then God graciously returns their prayers into their bosom.
Now this is a very good reason, why God denies the prayers of his people.
Desires deferred, Desideria dilata crescunt at cito data vilescunt.
grow the stronger; but if the mercies be soon given, the desires grow cold,
and the mercy grows contemptible. Mannah lightly come, is lightly set by. God
does by us as a Fisherman does, he draws back the bait, that so the Fish may
come after it the more eagerly, and bite the harder. God seems to draw back a
mercy, that we may more earnestly pursue it.

Abraham a son, that from him should proceed such an one, in whom all the
families of the earth should be blessed, that his seed should be multiplied as
the stars in the firmament; and yet it was fifteen years between the time
of Gods making him that promise, and the accomplishment of it. So likewise you
find it in Zacbariab and Elizabeth, they prayed for a Child at the first
beginning of their marriage, now God did hear their cries and prayers; yet he
did not give them a return till they were old and stricken in years. So
likewise it was with the Church, Lament. 3. verse. 8. Also when I cry and shout
be shuts out my prayer. And ver. 44. Thou have Lam. 3. 8.
covered thy self with a cloud, that our prayers Verse 44.
should not pass through. So also it was, Hab. 1. Hab. 1. 2.
2. O Lord, how long shall I cry, and thou will not hear? It was also the
complaint of holy David, Psalm. 22. 1, 2. My God, my God, why Psalm 22. 1, 2.
have thou for saken me? why art thou so far from helping me, and from the
words of my roaring? O my God I cry in the day time and thou hear not, and
in the night season, and am not silent.

Psalm. 80. 4. O Lord God of hosts, how Psalm. 80. 4.
long will thou be angry against the prayers of thy people. So Job 30. 20, 21.
I cry unto thee, and Job 30. 20, 21.
thou do not hear me. I stand up and thou regardest me not; thou art become
cruel to me with thy strong hand, thou opposest thy self against me.

Father if it be possible let this cup pass from me, Mat. 26. Mat. 26.
yet this cup did not pass from him, but he did drink of it, and yet it is
said that Christ was heard in all that he prayed for, Heb. 5. 7. Heb. 5. 7.
Deuteronomy. 3. ver. 23. I be sought the Lord at that time (says Moses) and ver. 26.
But the Lord Deuteronomy. 3. ver. 23.
was wroth with me for your sakes, and would not hear me: and the Lord said
unto me, let it suffice thee, speak no more to me of this matter. Moses did
importunately desire that he might see the Land, and go over Jordan to
possess it. Moses was a godly man, and here he prays for this mercy, but yet
God was angry with him, and bad him pray no more. God bad him go up into the
Mount and see the Land, but told him he should not go over. So when thou
ask a particular mercy at the hand of God, God may deny them that mercy, and
yet hear their prayers and accept their persons.

Abraham prayed that Ishmael might live. Now God did not hear his prayer in
that as Abraham did desire it, but he gave him Isaac, and with him he
established the Covenant, which was a better mercy. Moses was denied in his
request to go into Canaan, but he was translated into a better place, into the
true Canaan, the Kingdom of heaven.



Job, chap. Job 42.
42. that God forbad his three friends to pray, but bad Job pray for them, and
told him, that he would hear him for them, ver. 8, 9. -- go to my (...), and
offer verse. 8, 9.
up for your selves a burnt offering, and my servant Job shall pray for you,
for him will I accept, least I deal with you after your folly, in that you
have not spoken of me the thing that is right, like my servant Job. And they
did as God commanded them, and the Lord accepted Job. It may be there be times
when you can not pray, or when God will not hear your prayers, but remember
you have a stock of prayers going for you. And thus much shall suffice by way
of answer to this objection; I now come to make application.

LUKE 11. 8. Though he will not rise and give him, because he is his friend,
yet because of his importunity, he will rise and give him, etc.
VIII. SERMON.
IN the first place, let me draw some Inferences or Corollaries from what has
been insisted upon.

Abel, and then to his offering. Psalm. 34. 17. The righteous cry, and the Lord
hears -- Psalm. 34. 17.
The person must be in a state of favor, before the duty can be accepted.



person singly considered, but a member of Christ, as one that has a share in
his intercession. Joh. 15. 7. If ye abide in me -- Joh. 15. 7.
ye shall ask what you will, and it shall be given you. So Joh. 16. 23.
Whatsoever ye ask the Joh. 16. 23
Father in my Name, that he will give to you. All our prayers are but Ciphers,
till Christ's intercession be added. Ciphers in Arithmetic stand for nothing
till a figure be added.

Mat. 6. 7. Ask and ye shall Mat. 6. 7.
have, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you.
Observe the gradation in these words; Ask, but you must not stay there, you
must seek, nor yet must you rest satisfied there, you must knock. Your
affections should be every day more eager and earnest, you should pray more
fervently; Luk 22. 44 (...).
as it is said of Christ, Luke 22. 44.



Nehemiah 1 6. Let thine ear now be attentive, and thine Nehe. 1. 6.
yet open, that thou may hear the prayer of thy servant which I pray before
thee day and night. So you have the example of Daniel, Dan. 6. 10. -- he
kneeled upon his knees Dan. 6. 10.
three times a day, and prayed, and gave thanks before his God, as he did
before time. It was a custom that he had observed of former time. Though he
was a great Courtier, and a man full of great employment, yet he would not
neglect prayer. Nor was this an extraordinary fit but his ordinary course. So
in David, Psalm. 5. 3. My voice Psalm. 5. 3.
shall thou hear in the morning, and in the evening will I direct my prayer
unto thee, and will look up. So Psalm. 88. 13. But unto thee have I cried, O
Lord, and in the morning shall my Psalm. 88. 13
prayer prevent thee. So Psalm. 119. 147. I prevented Psalm. 119. 147.
the dawning of the morning, and cried unto the Lord. Psalm. 55. 17. Evening and
morning Psalm. 55. 17
and at noone will I pray and cry aloud.

2. You have the example of Jesus Christ 2. Mark. 1. 35
himself, Mark. 1. 35. In the morning rising up a great while before day, he
went out and departed into a solitary place, and there prayed, and so at
evening. Mat. 14. Mat. 14. 23
23. He went unto a mountain to pray, and when the evening was come he was
there also. And least you should think this was only upon extraordinary
occasion, it is said, Luke 22. 3. He came to the Luke 22. 3. Joh. 18. 2.
mount of Olives as he was went. Joh. 18. 2. Jesus, resorted thither with his
Disciples.

of Heathens in this. The Heathens sacrificed to Heroules morning and evening
upon the great Altar at Rome.



Exodus 29. 38, 39. Yea extraordinary Exodus 29. 38, 39.
sacrifices did not abolish this number, there was a burnt, offering for the
Sabbath, besides the continual burnt offering, and the burnt offering at the
beginning of the month, and the Pass over, and yet though these extraordinary
works were to be done; yet the ordinary were not to be left undone. 80 that
you see here is good ground and encouragement for then to be-frequent in these
religious duties. And so much for the (...).





1. Let not Gods returns to thy prayers make thee remiss and careless in the
performance of duty. Beware of an empty heart when God brings in thy mercies
with a full hand. Merchant adventurers, i^ they have good returns, are
encouraged to adventure their Ships to Sea again: Our hearts are so base and
disingenuous, that we are apt, when we have what we seek for, to seek no
more. O take heed of this let not Gods goodness make you worse.





Psalm. 85. 8.
sin after God has returned thy prayers into thy bosom. Psalm. 85. 8. I will
hear what the Lord God will speak, for he will speak peace to his people,
but let them not turn again to folly. It would be both sin and folly in thee
to return to sin after God has given thee an answer of peace. This was David's
resolution for his own particular. Psalm. 6. Psalm. 6. 8.
8. Depart from me all you workers of iniquity: Why, what is the reason? The
Lord has heard the voice of my supplication. As if David had said, O ye wicked
men, you have been occasions of sin to me, and companions in sin with me, but
how that God has been thus gracious to me, now that God has graciously
returned my prayers, I will have no more to do with you; Depart from me; yea
workers of iniquity. And so much for the negative Cautions.

I shall now lay down a few positive Caution positive.
cautions.

David, Psalm. 116. Because Psalm. 116.
the Lord has heard my prayer, therefore I will call upon him as long as I
live. So let it be your care, to set your self more solemnly, and seriously to
seek God then ever you have dove.

(...)
God then you have been. Those mercies that thou have won by prayer, are to be
worn by thankfulness, Psalm. 145. 10. All thy Psalm. 145. 10.
works praise thee, O Lord, and thy Saints do bless thee. All Gods works do
praise him; The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his
handy work. That is, they are all the passive monuments of Gods power in
creating them: But the Saints they are agents in praising God. Blessing is more
then praising: A picture praises him that made it; but it does not bless him.
The Saints, they bless God in a peculiar manner; their mouths are full of the
praises of God: They have a principle within them of praising God; they are
agents in setting forth his praise. And therefore it is very fit that you
should bless God.



Comfort.








The Lord, says David, is nigh to all that call upon him; but how? Not only
to them that call on him importunately and powerfully, but to all that call
upon him in truth; if thou can say thou do call upon God in truth, and with
a sincere heart, God will be high unto thee.







They shall call upon me, and I will answer them; and I will be with him in
trouble, etc. It is a mercy to have deliverance out of trouble; but to have it
through prayer, a deliverance that comes in by prayer, is a double, mercy.











given in by prayer, is a pledge of another mercy; and thy mercy in this life,
is a pledge to thee, that thou shall have eternal happiness in heaven to all
eternity.

FINIS.

