THE Hearers Duty: A SERMON PREACHED At Anne Aldersgate London, at the
finishing of the Morning Exercise at the Church.

By Mr. Christopher Love B. D. and Pastor thereof.

Revised and Corrected according to his own Notes.

London, Printed by E. C. for George and Henry Eversden at the Gray-Hound in
Pauls-Church-yard. 1653.

A Sermon Preached at Anne Aldersgate, in the time of the Morning Exercise.
LUKE 11.28. But he said, Yea, rather blessed are they that hear the Word of
God and keep it.


IN the humanity of Jesus Christ such a luster and beauty did shine and break
forth, that even in such a despicable person as he was deemed to be, yet the
very words which he spoke, and the works that he did, declared him to be no
less then the Son of God; as in Joh. 7.46. his very enemies confessed that
never man spoke as Christ spoke, he spoke better then ever man spoke, by the
words he delivered it was evident he was more then man, but the works which he
did, spoke plainly with an audible voice his divinity. And concerning the
miracles which he wrought, it was said of many of them, that never was it thus
done since the beginning of the World, his miracles wrought admiration even in
the hearts of those men, in whom they wrought envy and malice against him. The
miracle specifyed in this Chapter, the dispossessing of a dumb man of the
Devil; this did spread abroad the fame and renown of Christ through many parts
of the world, and though his enemies were so obstinate, that they would not
(notwithstanding these miracles that he wrought) acknowledge his divinity, yet
there was a young woman that slipped out of all the company and went to Christ,
and lift up her voice saluting him in these words, saying, Blessed is the womb
that bare thee, and the paps which gave thee suck; though the Pharisees would
not call him blessed, yet this young woman cried out, Blessed is the womb that
bare thee. And had this commendation been given to another, it might have made
him proud, but it works a contrary effect upon Christ, he rather gives her a
rebuke then any thanks, and tells her, that rather blessed are they that hear
the Word of God and keep it. And thus I have brought you to the words of my
text. But before I come to give you the doctrine which the words will afford,
give me leave to speak something concerning the young woman's saluting of Christ
after this manner; the words which she spoke were a common proverb amongst the
Jews: when any man had done a thing commendable, that was excellent and
extraordinary, they would presently cry out to him, Blessed is the womb that
bare thee, and the paps that gave the suck; from whence I would note to you
thus much.

That good Children are a great blessing and commendation to their Parents.

And hence it is that you read so often in Scripture what a great blessing it
is for a Father, to be the Father of a good Son; and for a Mother to be the
Mother of a good Child, in Prove. 10.1. and 15.20. And on the contrary, what a
great curse it is for Parents to bring forth wicked children into the World, a
wicked child is a shame to his Father, and a heaviness to his Mother that
brought him into the World.



You that have good Children, that are instruments of the praise and glory of
God, bless his name for them; and you that have bad children look upon it as a
stroke of Gods heavy hand upon you; but this is only a point by the way, from
the woman's speaking thus of Christ, blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the
paps that gave thee suck; but Christ told her, rather blessed are they that
hear the Word of God and keep it. (...).
Christ says rather blessed, he does not not say that his mother that bare him
was not blessed, for she did bear him in her heart as well as in her womb: but
Christ speaks this with a gentle and loving rebuke to the woman that gave him
this commendation; says Christ, thou cryest out, blessed is the womb that bear
thee, but I say, rather blessed are they that hear the Word of God and keep it,
so that from hence note, from Christ's example here,

you must take a great deal of heed tha you be not tickled with pride, when
ever you hear your selves or yours commended; you see here Christ would give no
way to their commendations of his mother.

And then again, yea rather blessed; Christ says that those are rather blessed
that hear the Word of God and keep it, then his mother that brought him into
the world: from whence observe,

a believer that hears and obeyes Christ is rather blessed in so doing, then
the Virgin Mary was merely in bringing Jesus Christ into the World, though it
were the happiest birth that ever Woman brought forth.

And oh how should this be a spur to hearers to make them obey and practice
what they hear!

But I shall keep you no longer in the entrance into the words, and therefore I
shall only give you something to note from the manner of the expression that
Christ here uses, and then draw out the doctrine the words will afford. In the
form of speech that Christ here uses, observe, it is not said, blessed are
they that bear the Word of God, (...).
there are many forts of hearers that come short of blessing, but blessed are
they that hear the word of God and keep it.

There are 4. sorts of hearers, spoken of in Mat. 13. and three of them are
bad, and but one good, that hears the Word aright; all that hear the Word do
not obtain a blessing.

(1) It is not said, hear and keep what they do hear.

(2) It is not said, believe (observe that) though this be true, yet it is not
said so, lest men should think that a bare and naked believing were enough to
entitle them to blessedness: there are many men that pretend to faith and
assurance, and yet live above duties, above hearing, and praying, etc. and
therefore Christ says not, Blessed are they that believe, but they that hear
the Word and keep it.

(3) It is not said, keep and hear the Word of God.

(4) It is not said here in the text, hear and keep the Word of God, but
blessed are they that hear and keep the Word; thou shall not only be a blessed
man when thou come to heaven, but thou art a blessed man whilst thou art
here upon earth; thou have thy fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting
life, Romans 6.22.

(5) Observe further, it is not said, Blessed are they that hear and keep it,
but Blessed are they that hear the Word of God and keep it. For you may hear
errors and blasphemies and keep them, and be accursed for so doing; but
blessed are they that hear the Word of God and keep it. And this should teach
men to take heed, how they hear, and what they hear, and whom they hear, and
that they hear nothing but that which is the Word of God. We read of some that
should follow teachers, (...).
that bring in damnable heresies, 2 Pet. 2.3. many shall follow their
pernicious ways. Now such as these are not blessed, that hear men that bring
in errors and heresies, but they are cursed rather.

(6) Observe further, Rather blessed are they that hear my sayings and keep
them; but, that hear Gods Word: for had Christ said, rather blessed are they
that hear my Word, the people might have been ready to think, that Christ did
intail blessedness only to his own Preaching, and to them that did hear Christ
personally teach here upon earth: but says he, Blessed are they that hear the
Word of God, be it either by Paul, or Apollos, or Timothy, or Titus, or any
Minister of Christ to the worlds end. Who ever shall hear the Word of God
contained in the Scriptures, Preached out of their mouths, and shall keep and
obey it, they are rather blessed then my Mother that bare me is, for that only
reason of bringing me into the world. There is in this very expression a secret
glory put upon the Ministers of the Word, and this is the reason of that saying
in Scripture, He that believes shall do greater works then Christ did; that is,
a faithful Minister should convert more souls then ever Christ did: it is
true Christ might (if he had so pleased) have converted every man that heard
him, but he would not, lest men should thereby have undervalued his Ministers,
and have thought that none could convert souls but Christ; and therefore there
were more converted by Peter and other Apostles, then there were by Christ
himself; because he might hereby encourage men to the hearing of ordinary
Ministers.

There were some in the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 1.12. that said some of them,
We are for Paul; others, we are for Apollo; others, we are for Cephas; and
others, we are for Christ. Now the Apostle blames them that any of them should
say, I am of Christ; there were some among them that said, I care not for
hearing of Paul, or Apollo, or Cophas, I will hear Jesus Christ: it was a
vanity in them to undervalue the Ministry of Paul and Apollo, and to cry up
Christ; it is a sinful crying up of Christ to cry down Paul and Apollo. And so
in these times for men to cry up Christ, and yet to cry down the Ministry, is
as sinful now as it was in the Apostles time; and therefore Christ himself was
careful to preserve the honor of the Ministry that was to succeed him to the
end of the world: Blessed are they that hear the Word of God and keep it.

(7) It is not said, hear and that keep it.

Blessed doers never come in with a for, but only with an if or a that; the
Lord does not bless thee for thy hearing, though thou should hear as many
Sermons as there are days, but he blesses them that hear, and that practice
what they hear; hearing the Word and practicing and obeying of it, are the
qualifications or characteristicall notes of such persons as shall be blessed
by Christ; but not the causes of their blessedness.

And thus I have given you these seven notes from the form of speech Christ
here uses. I shall now explain the words a little more to you, Blessed are
they that hear the Word of God and keep it.

What is ^^^nt here by keeping the Word you hear*

Ans^ You must know there is a double keeping of the Word, the one in your
memories, the other in your practice.

1. In our memories, this you have mentioned in Luke 2.19. (...) conservabat.
it is said there that Mary kept ad these things, and pondered them in her
heart. Our memories should be like the Arc wherein the pot of Manna was kept;
the Word of God should be treasured up in our memories as the pot of Manna was
in the Arc: but this is not the keeping here spoken of, for there are many men
that keep the Word in their memories, and yet never practice it in their lives.

2. There is a keeping of the Word in your practice. When you have a
conscionable care to sway your practice answerable to what you hear and know,
and this is the keeping that is here meant; Blessed are they that hear the Word
of God and keep it; that is, keep it in their practice, and make conscience to
do what they hear and know.

The words being thus opened, the observation from them will be this.

That they are rather blessed that hear the Word of God and practice what they
hear,

Beloved, it is a point that I confess, had it not been in the Bible, it had
been incredible, that those that hear the Word and keep it, should be rather
blessed, then she that bare Christ in her womb. That Christ should put a rather
blessed upon thee oh man or woman that hear the Word of God and keep it,
then upon the Virgin Mary for bearing Christ into the World; what a great
privilege is this!

Beloved, it is worth your noting, what a different dialect is used, between
this woman here in the text, and Elizabeth that was cosen german to the Virgin
Mary; this woman in the text she cries out, Blessed is the womb that bare thee,
and the paps that gave thee suck. But Elizabeth she says, Blessed is she that
believes, if the Virgin Mary had not bore Christ in her heart as well as in her
womb, she had not been a blessed woman.

Before I give you the reasons of the point I shall only draw this inference
from it, to confut the dotage of the Church of Rome that do so much dote upon
the Virgin Mary; where they have one service for the glory of Christ, they have
twenty for the glory of the Virgin Mary. They would make the world believe that
she was without sin, and if so, why should Christ pronounce others rather
blessed then she? This then is a confutation of the Church of Rome, that hold
that the Virgin Mary had no original sin; and if so, then she should have been
rather blessed then any one else in the world; and if that be true, then this
text must needs be false, for Christ says here, that rather blessed are they
that hear the Word of God and keep it, then she.

(2) This confutes them, because they do so cry up the righteousness and
holiness and dignity of the Virgin Mary; that they do undervalue the
righteousness of Jesus Christ her Son; they so dote upon the Virgin Mary; that
they make her the great Mediator for us to the Father; whereas we say, and
maintain, that Christ is the only mediator, for there is but one mediator
between God and Man, the man Christ Jesus.

Ministers had never more need to confute Popish doctrines and opinions then
now. For never was Popery more like to increase and flourish in this Land then
now it is, and therefore I do the rather give these glances concerning them
because there is a great deal of danger, lest people be infected with these
Popish fooleries. I speak this upon my own experience; I have been a preacher
these 10. years, and in all that time I never perceived so many inclining
toward Popery, as I have done within these two months; since these late
strange actions that have been done amongst us, I have seen many to stagger
about our Religion, and have been strongly tempted to embrace and fall to
Popery, which is the reason that induced me to make this digression.

We come now to the Reasons of the point.

(1) Because that Christ does count such in near relation to himself, Mark
3.33, 34, 35. when they told Christ, that his mother and his brethren were
without seeking for him, says he, Who is my mother or my brethren? Whosoever
shall hear the Word of God and keep it, the same is my brother my sister and
mother.

(2) Because if you hear the Word of God and keep what you hear, Mat. 7.24.
says Christ there, Whosoever hears these sayings of mine and does them, I
will liken him unto a wise man which built his house upon a rock, and the rain
descended and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house,
and it sell not, for it was founded upon a rock. So those only that hear the
Word of God and practice it, shall have the end of their faith, and have their
souls built upon that rock Christ Jesus, that shall never be removed.

(3) You ar blessed in practicing what you hear, Pet. 3.1. says the Apostle
there, Wives be in subjection to your own husband, that if any obey not the
word, they may without the word be won by the conversation of their wives.

And those men that have been won to Christ by your good example, when they
come to appear before God in judgment, by seeing you they shall glorify God in
the day of their visitation, and shall bless God that by your means they were
brought to heaven.

(4) They that practice what they hear are blessed: Rev. 14.12, 13. Here is the
patience of the Saints, and here are they that keep the commandments of God
and the faith of Jesus: Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, they rest
from their labor, and their works follow them: those that keep the
Commandments of God and the faith of Jesus, they shall come themselves to
heaven though they bring no body else thither. Where a Gospel life goes
before, an Angels life shall follow after. You that lead Gospel lives here,
assure your selves that you shall lead Angels lives hereafter, and therefore
make conscience to do and practice what you hear and know.

We come now to the Application, and the Use that I shall make of it shall be
threefold, for Lamentation, Consolation, and Exhortation.

(1) For Lamentation, Use of Lament.
is it so that they are rather blessed that hear and practis^ what they hear in
the word, then the Virgin Mary? Oh then how should this consideration provoke
you to Lamentation, that when you may have blessing upon such terms as these,
Hear my Word and make conscience to practice it, and you shall be blessed, yet
you do reject your own mercy. Oh thou perverse and hard he arted man or woman,
that wilt not practice what thou hear, thou do reject thy own mercy. The
Devil could not damn thee, if thou would not damn thy self. Thou Oh man
that let the Word say what it will, thou will do what thou list, do thou not
stand in the way of thy own blessedness, and reject thy own mercy?

And to set home this particular upon your hearts, give me leave to press it
with these 3 or 4 Considerations.

(1) Consider, Amos 8.9. because that Israel was weary of the Word of God, and
of his Sabbaths, saying, When will the new moon be gone, that we may sell Corn,
and the Sabbath, that we may set forth Wheat? Therefore says God, I will cause
the Sun to go down at noon, and I will darken the earth in the clear day, and I
will send a famine in the Land, not a famine of bread, or a thirst for water,
but of hearing the Words of the Lord.

God may take away the Word from you, for your not profiting under it, in Mat.
21.43. The Kingdom of God shall be taken from you and given to a Nation
bringing forth the fruits thereof.

(2) Consider, Joh. 15.22. says Christ, If I had not come and spoken unto
them, they had not had sin, but now they have no cloak for their sin. (...).
So in Luke 12.47. That servant that knew his Lords will, and prepared not
himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes.

It is an observation that one has upon the Prophecy of Esaias from the 13. to
the 24. Chapter of that Prophecy, you shall read there of many dismal
denuntiations of judgment, the burden of Babylon, the burden of Tire, the
burden of Damascus, and of Moah, and of Egypt, and the burden of the desert of
the Sea; many nations and people did the Lord command the Prophet to pronounce
a burdensome Prophecy against; but amongst them all there is the burden of the
valley of vision in the 22. Chapter, and it is observed that this is the most
burdensome of them all, and the reason is, because that was a place of vision
and knowledge, where the Word of God was dispensed, and because of their
sinfulness and unprofitablenesse, their burden is heavier then all the rest,
because it is the burden of the valley of vision. Though other men may go to
hell that live in those parts of the World where the Word was never taught, and
where they never heard the voice of the glad tidings of salvation sounding in
their ears; yet those that live where the Gospel is preached, and know and yet
do not walk answerably, shall go to hell with a heavier burden, then the other
shall do.

(3) An other consideration is this, Joh. 2.5. Who so keeps his Word, in him
verily is the love of God perfected, and he that says he loves him and
keeps not his Commandments is a liar, and the truth is not in him.

I shall now speak something by way of Exhortation, Use of Exhorta.
to provoke you all in the fear of God to make conscience to practice what you
hear and know; and to this end consider, that God does look upon all your
knowledge and profession to be nothing worth, unless you practice what you
know and profess. God looks upon all your hearing and praying, etc. as
nothing, unless your conversation be answerable to it: and is it not pity that
for want of practice you should lose the blessing of all your hearing, and make
it of no worth or esteem in Gods account, that though thou have a great deal of
notion all knowledge, yet he looks upon thee as an ignorant for, and thou that
have heard so many Sermons, as if thou had never heard one all thy life time?
It is said of the Sons of Eli, that they knew not the Lord, why they? surely
they did know him, but because they were Sons of Belial, and unholy and profane
in their lives, therefore God did not account their knowledge and gifts to be
any thing, because they did not practice what they did know. Oh then beloved,
shall God account thy hearing as nothing, and thy praying as nothing, because
thou do not make conscience to practice what thou do hear and know?

(2) You can have no persuasion in your own soul of the love of God toward
you, unless you make conscience to practice what you hear; in Joh. 14.15.
says Christ, If you love me keep my Commandments; and therefore often in
Scripture these two are put together, Loving of God and keeping his
Commandments.

But now by way of Consolation, Use of Consolati.
methinks I hear a poor soul say, Are they only blessed that hear the Word of
God and keep what they hear? who then shall shall be blessed, for who is able
to keep what he hears? I many times hear a duty commanded, but I am not able to
perform it, and such and such things required, but I am not able to keep them,
and such and such graces pressed to obtain, but I am not able to get them.

Answ. For thy comfort know, that did thou live under a Covenant of works,
thou could never be a blessed man, for thou art not able to perform the
conditions of it: for that requires thee to keep and fulfill the whole law of
God perfectly and personally. But now being under a Covenant of grace, God
accepts of thy keeping of the Law if it be done sincerely though it be but
imperfectly, and though it be not done in thy own person, yet if it be done in
the person of an other, the Lord accepts of it. God says to us under a
Covenant of grace believe and live, if you make conscience to keep the Word,
though you cannot keep it, yet I will pardon thee and accept of thee; and
though thou can not keep the Law in thy own person, yet if my Son keeps it
for thee, I will accept of his obedience, as if it were done by thee. And
therefore you must not lie down under despondency of mind, because you are not
under a Covenant of works, but under a Covenant of grace, wherein Christ
accepts of sincere obedience though it be not perfect.

(2) Know for thy comfort that if thou have a full purpose of heart to keep
that which thou hear, it is looked upon by God, as if thou did keep it, in
Heb. 11.17. it is said there, that by faith Abraham when he was tried did offer
up his son Isaac; because Abraham did in the resolution and purpose of his
heart determine to obey God in offering up his Son, therefore the Scripture
looks upon it as done, though it were only in purpose, not actually.

Why so, thou that art the Son of Abraham, and have the faith of Abraham, those
holy duties which thou do desire to perform better, as to pray better, and
to hear better, and practice and live better then thou do; in divine account
this is looked upon as if it were really done.

FINIS.

