Short and Plain ANIMADVERSIONS On some Passages in Mr. Dels Sermon First
Preached before the Honorable House of Commons on November. 25. 1646.

But since Printed without their Order. Setting forth the many dangerous and
destructive Assertions therein both to Church and State, the Covenant, and the
Reformation so much desired.

TOGETHER, With an Answer to an unlicensed Pamphlet annexed to the Sermon,
Entitled, A Reply to Master Love's Contradictions.

By Christopher Love Minister of Anne Aldersgate, London.

The second Edition.

Gal. 2.11. I withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed.

Christianus Magistratus animadvertit quidem in haereticos, verum sic moderate
ut sinc qui resipiscere possint, non patitur ut de fide doceant, nec permittit
ut Ecclesias colligant, Episcopos ordinent, alios private honoribus, alios
adimit civitatis Communionem* alios proscribit, alios mulcta pecuntaria punit,
quod Augustini temporibus factum esse legimus. Ipsos impostores ac seductores,
ne illi postquam incorrigibiles apparent, ultra quenquam seducant carceribus
iuclusos, tandiu coercet ac detinet donec in se reuersi resipiscant; sic
coercendi suit qui cogi se ad bonum non sustinent.

Wolf. Musculus in Locis Com. Imprimatur Ja. Cranford. December. 17. 1646.

London, Printed by R. Cotes, for John Bellamie at the three Golden Lions in
Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange; 1647.

To His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, General of the Army raised by the
Parliament, in defense of the true Protestant Religion, etc.
May it please your Excellency:
IT was ordered by a Divine hand, that I should Preach before you in Windsor
Castle, at your very first marching forth with this successful Army, at which
time I treated (from Psalm. 60.10) of Gods marching forth with Isreal's Army, the
footsteps of whose presence has been seen within your Camp: By the same hand
it was likewise ordered, that I should preach in your presence, the very first
Fast day after your return to London as a Conqueror; at which time I had a
fair occasion to press, That such who had bin serviceable to the Church of
God in its necessitous condition, ought from those they do assist to have a
requital, in which I know none deserves a greater share then your Excellency.
Great General, I have presumed to make my humble and particular address, in
dedicating these few lines to your Excellency upon a double ground: 1. To take
off a malicious mis-construction, which some made of what I delivered, laying
my words on the rack of a tortured mis-interpretation, forcing them to speak
what I never meant, as if in some passages of my Sermon, I had some reflections
on your Excellent Self; whereas I can appeal to Heaven, I had rather my
tongue should cleave to the roof of my mouth, then that a thought should be in
my heart, or a word drop from between my lips, to darken that glory which God
has cast upon you. It Is true in handling this Doctrine, That such who are
serviceable to the people of God in their necessitous condition, ought from
those they do assist, to have a requital, and to be sharers with them in their
mercies, Lest there should be an ill use made thereof, as if the requital of
men for their service should be so far extended, as that they must be indulged
in their evils, I was forced, to prevent this mistake, to lay down this
caution, viz. That the requital of men for their good service, must not extend
so far as to tolerate them in their evils. Gainas being addicted to the Arian
Heresy, petitioned Arcadius the Emperor, that he might have favor, within his
Territories, to have a Church for the public exercise of Arianisme, making
this the ground of his request, That he had done him great service, and gotten
great victories for the Romans; yet Arcadius the Emperor denied his request (
upon the advice of Chrysostom,) and although Gain^s had done serv^^e in the
Wars, yet would he not give him a Toleration for the public Exercise of the
Arian Heresy in the Church; see Theod. Hist. lib. 5. c. 32.
In exemplifying which caution, I gave this supposition, Suppose a Commander,
(who has been valiant and faithful in your most successful and serviceable
Army) should run into damnable Heresies, to deny the Divinity of Christ, the
Immortality of the soul, the authority of the Scriptures, though his valor and
fidelity pleads for a requital for his Service, yet not for a toleration in
these opinions. Now they who wrest these words as if they reflected on your
Excellency, do you infinitely more wrong, then they do to so mean an one as
I am that spoke those words; such who apply those words to your Excellency,
what do they bat lay you under cond^mnation, as if you denied the Divinity of
Christ, the Immortality of the Soul, or Authority of the Scriptures, which
thoughts are far from your Noble breast; your moderation is known to all
men, and the soundness of your judgment touching this matter; yea, which is
your glory, that notwithstanding the cl^shing controversies of the times, you
have still pursued your duty, and not cleaved unto Parties. There was another
passage in the Sermon which some wrested, as if I aimed at your Excellency. In
the close of the caution I made use of a Story out of Plutarchs Moralls, of one
Manlius, who being to wage War with the Samnites, he being to withdraw from
the Army for a while, left his Son to command in chief, with this charge,
that he should not give the Samnites battle, without special Order from him;
his Son seeing a fair opportunity against the Enemy, gave them battle,
fought valiantly, and got the victory: returning to his Father a Conqueror,
told him what he had done; his Father did commend him for his valor, yet told
him he should lose his head for his disobedience. I only intended the Story
to this end, To show that Heathens observed this rule, to gratify men for
their services, yet were so just they would punish them for their evils: Now
they that apply this Story to your Excellency, what do they less then charge
you of disobedience to the State you serve? which malice it self cannot fasten
upon you. There is one thing more I would clear my self in your thoughts,
viz. from an unjust aspersion that Master Dell casts upon me in his Epistle
Dedicatory, as if I preached against the Articles at Oxford; I had thought I did
so clearly express my self in that matter, that none would have been so
shameless as to lay such a thing to my charge, when I desired the Honorable
Worthies of Parliament to cast their eyes on the University of Oxford to reform
it your Excellency very well knows, I did premise this clause, that in what I
should say, I would no ways reflect on the Articles at Oxford, which being
made, stands with the Honor and Justice of the Parliament to have them kept;
how unjustly then does Master Dell censure me? This is the first ground of my
humble address to your Excellency, that I might be rectus in curia, clear in
your noble thoughts. The second ground is this, To leave it to your
Excellencies thoughts, whether so dangerously an opinionated a man as Master
Dell is, is fit to be a Chaplain in your Army, who says, That if the Assembly
should condemn the Doctrines he preached, they were the enemies of the truth of
Christ, and the last prop of Antichrist in the Kingdom: Yea, he says further
that the work of Reformation so much desired by the Orthodox and godly
Presbyterian Ministers and people, Is the last and subtillest work of
Antichrist that is now in hand; Mr. Dells Epistle^ fifth leaf. Mr. Dells
Epistle to the Reader.
and he that prevails in this encounter, has Antichrist under his feet for
ever. Although what is desired is no more then is practiced in all Reformed
Churches, as most agreeable to the Word, and is in part confirmed by the
Authority of Parliament; surely such Doctrines as these would not only
blemish, but disturb your Army; and though God has clothed them with
strength to conquer Men, yet if such Doctrines should spread among them,
Errors will conquer them in the end. Most Noble General, however some men
(whose Tongues are their own) are so lavish of their expressions, not caring
what they lay to their charge who are for Presbyterian Government, as if
against Parliament, the Gospel, the Army, and your Excellent Self, and what
not? though all these things be most precious in their eyes: As for your Self,
the people bless God that you were borne, and brought forth for such a time as
this; as God raised up a Moses first to begin our deliverances: He has made
you a Joshua to accomplish our hopes, and to bring us into the promised Land. I
dare say, what Metellus thought the Romans should do ( viz. thank the gods
that so brave a Warrior as Scipio was borne in Rome,) that the people of
England have done, bless their God that he has taught your hands to fight,
and your fingers to war, and laid the necks of your enemies under your feet;
the Lord remember you according to the greatness of his mercy; and the
memorable deeds that you have done for this Nation, which is the earnest prayer
of

Your Excellencies most humbly devoted in all Service and Duty CHRISTOPHER LOVE.

Short and Plain Animadversions on Mr. Dells SERMON. Discovering therein Many
passages to be destructive to Church and State, the COVENANT, and Reformation
so much desired.
Christian Reader,
THe distractions and divisions of the times (increased by furious spirits
venting their luxuriant opinions) threaten sad things; as if God has a
controversy with the Land, and is writing bitter things against it; or, as if
the Troubles we have hitherto undergone, were but the beginning of our sorrows:
Fox Fox in his Acts and monum. 1 Vol. p. 88.
in his Acts and Monuments reports that the inlet to the eighth Persecution,
was the Divisions among the Christians, and want of Discipline; I wish it be
not an inlet to as sad a calamity now. I can appeal to heaven, I delight not
in bitterness, and breaches among brethren; I had rather bring water to
quench, then oil to increase the flame that is kindled among us; I could wish
with Jonah I were cast into the Sea, so that the boisterous storms arisen among
us might be allayed thereby; or with Curtius (who did cast himself into the
Chasma at Rome, that so the breach might be made up and the City not
endangered) cast my self into the breach, if so be I could but stop it. I
acknowledge to God and the world, I am so sensible of my own infirmities that I
would bring nothing into the Press, but that I am pressed thereunto, lest the
Truth and my Integrity should suffer by my silence. The truth is, had not Mr.
Dell discovered such confidence and boldness in delivering so many unsound and
erroneous tenets, I had not expressed a word of dislike in the Pulpit, and had
he not since Printed his Sermon with his Reply (and that without order) I
should not have gainesaid him now in the Press, as I did then in the Pulpit.

Before I begin to take notice of any clause in his Sermon in particular, I
shall advertise the Reader about this in general, that (although as it is
Printed, it is justly to be excepted against, yet) he left out some material
passages he did preach, and inserted what he did not; so that I may say Mr.
Dell dealt with his Sermon as Apelles the Painter did with Antigonus, who
painted that part of his face which was comely, but hid most of his
deformities. I shall now address my self to give innocent touches on several
unsound passages in his Sermon. In the managing whereof I shall endeavor that
my pen drop honey, not vinegar, reason against his opinions, not railing
against his person. In the first place I cannot but take notice how unhappy my
mistaken brother was in the expounding of his Text, which was, Mr. Dell is
mistaken in expounding his Text.
Heb. 9.10. Until the time of Reformation. Now this Reformation he described to
be The mortifying and destroying and utter abolishing out of the faithful and
elect, all that sin, lust, corruption, that did flow in upon them by the fall
of Adam. Mr. Dels Sermon, page 4. lin. 34.

Now this is not the Reformation intended in the Text, For that reforma^ion
which consists in the mortifying and destroying sin, etc. the faithful and
elect had under the Law as well as believers under the Gospel, so that the
times under the Law might be called in this sense a time of Reformation, as
well as the times of the Gospel; for then there was such a kind of
Reformation (consisting in the mortifying and destroying sin, etc. in the
faithful and elect as well as now. Now Mr. Dell expounding the Reformation in
the Text to be the mortifying destroying sin, etc. and likewise affirming (as
he does, p. 3. l. 26.) that this time of Reformation was not til Christ's
coming in the flesh, he must of necessity maintain that all the faithful
before and under the Law had no such Reformation as the mortifying and
destroying of sin; Mr. Dell by the expounding of his Text declar^s himself to
be a Socinian
and so lays them under an impossibility of being saved, and so falls in with
the Socinians, who hold that neither grace nor any thing of the Spirit, not
eternal life was enjoyed by the Elect under the Law, until Christ's coming in
the flesh. Mr. Dels mistake in expounding his Text, would make one think that
he made his Sermon before he chose his Text; some notions about Reformation
swimming in his brain, here meeting the with word (though not the thing
intended) forced it to serve his purpose; though indeed it is little to the
purpose; yet is he not ashamed to say, This the Spirit would have us take
notice of in these word, Sermon. p. 4. l. 12. Although indeed the Spirit of God
intended some other thing in this Text, viz. That Christ changed the Leviticall
ceremonies and sacrifices by offering himself a sacrifice once for all for the
Redemption and justification of the Elect; Now the Priesthood being changed and
Christ our High Priest being come, the yearly sacrifices taken away, and Christ
sacrificed once for all; there being now a better Priest, a better Sacrifice, a
better Tabernacle then was under the Law, this was called a time of
Reformation, so that the Text carries a reference to a change in the Jewish
services, not in the Christians hearts. Thus having briefly laid down his
mistake in expounding his Text, I proceed now to view some passages in his
Sermon.

That he might gain attention and belief, he ushers in what he intends to say
with this insinuating Preamble. I shall represent in some Gospel Light (to this
Honorable Auditory) the true Reformation of the Church of the New Testament,
Mr. Dells Sermon. p. 2. l. ^6.
and blessed is he who shall not be offended at it.

What a great flourish does the man make, what a large promise does he give?
Animadvers.
Parturiunt montes, nascetur ridiculus mus. This which he calls Gospels light,
when it comes to the trial, will be found a false light to put off counterfeit
commodities by, instead of being a true Gospel Light, is it not an Ignis fatuus
to bring men out of their way? If by this Gospel Light, about
Church-Reformation, he means that secular powers cannot reform the hearts of
men, Christ alone must do that, what needs such a triumph and boasting, as if
he had got the victory, when as touching this he shall have no adversary? and
why should he cry up this to be such a Gospel Light (as if all men should
light their candels at his fire) when every eye sees, and all hearts
acknowledge, both in the Generations before us, and in this present age, that
it is Christ's work alone to reform the heart, and not man's? but if by this
Gospel Light about the Reformation of the Church, he means that the Civil
Magistrate, seeing he cannot reform the heart, he must not restrain men's
exorbitant practices, which was the intendment and scope of the Sermon; this is
so far from being Gospel Light, that I shall discover it anon to be
grossness of darkness, and yet must the hidden things of darkness go under
the name of Gospel Light; and oh how sad is it to consider that so good a term
should be a cover for so bad a practice; to be made a Pander to so many wanton
and adulterated opinions? but mark further how he is taken with his own
fancies, and the conceptions of his own brain, that he pronounces them blessed
who shall not be off^nded at it. It Is a words he does not place this blessing
of his among the beatitudes in Christ's first Sermon, Mat. 5. He may as well
add to Scripture in the New Testament, as he has added passages of his own
to the Ol^, which I shall mention by and by: Behold I beseech you upon what
ea^^e terms blessedness is to be had, for not being offended at the ma^er of
his Sermon, surely it is his blessing, not Christ's, which he is so prodigal of
to bestow upon his Disciples that embrace his Doctrine; And if they be blessed
who are not offended at Mr. Dels Sermon, then how far from blessedness in Mr.
Dels opinion is the Honorable House of Commons, who are most of them offended
at it, and the many thousands in City and Country, who are offended at the
Sermon, not blessed ones in his conceit I trow.

^r. Dells Sermon. ^3 l. 16.
If the Law of Moses could not make men perfect as pertaining to the
Conscience, much l^sse c^n any new Laws invented now, and if any such Laws
should be imposed on the people of God now, the Gospel has the same strength
in it self to make him void as the former.

^nimadvers.
Reader, observe that Scripture phrase used by Mr. Dell, Heb. 9.13, 14. Not to
make perfect as appertaining to conscience, is thus interpreted by Exposit^rs,
That the Jews could not obtain righteousness, justification or taking away the
guilt of sin from their consciences, by any, or all of their Leviticall
Ceremonies or Sacrifices, but all the spiritual good they enjoyed, was from
Christ the true Sacrifice. Now observe, Mr. Dell makes it the reason why the
Law of Moses was to be abolisht, because it could not make perfect, as
pertaining to conscience, ^r. Dell an An^^nomian.
as he lays it down p. 3. l. 7. Now by this reason the Moral Law should be
abolisht as well as the Ceremonial; for the Moral Law and our obedience to
it, cannot make us perfect as pertaining to Conscience, i. e. cannot justify
us in the sight of God, nor wipe off the guilt of sin from off the Conscience;
so that it should seem he pleads against the Moral L^w to have it abolisht as
well as the Ceremonial, so shows himself to be a gross Antinomian, as well as
a rigid Anti-Presbyterian.

^r. Dels Sermon. (...).
All such Laws and Ordinances devised by men that cannot make them that obey
and practice them perfect, as appertaining to Conscience, are therefore all to
be at an end when this time of Reformation comes.

Animadvers.
If all Laws and Ordinances devised by men that cannot make them that obey them
and practice them perfect, as pertaining to conscience, are to end in this time
of Reformation, then will it follow, al^ our Stature Laws, and our Ordinances
of Parliament; are to be abolisht, for they are devised by men, and cannot
make perfect as pertaining to Conscience; but if he say that he means such
Laws and Ordinances of men, whereby the Civil Magistrate gives his civil
sanction, to confirm and establish certain Laws and Constitutions for external
conformity, in outward duties of outward worship and government, as he speaks
more plainly in p. 5. l. 26. If he mean that such Laws and Ordinances as these
are to be abolisht, I demand whether this reflects not on the wisdom and
Honor of both the Honorable Houses of Parliament, who have made certain Laws
and Ordinances about Church Government, and confirmed them by their civil
sanction, yet these must be abolisht; but it is not to be doubted but that the
Honorable Houses have showed more wisdom and judgment in ratifying those
Ordinances, then Mr. Dell can show strength of Argument to abolish them.

But I proceed, Mr. Dell afterward declaring that the time of the Gospel, was
the time of this Reformation (which were the words of his Doctrine) has this
passage.

In the time of the Law there were outward duties, mr. Dels Sermon. p. 3 l. 3^.
and performances, and Ceremonies, and Sacrifices, and strict Laws to enjoin
the observation of these things, carrying along with them the severitie of
death, yet notwithstanding all this, there was no true Reformation. Then he
goes on, p. 4. l. 6. Notwithstanding their strict forcing of men to outward
duties, and notwithstanding the outward worship of Moses, the people remained
inwardly corrupt, filthy, and unclean, and without any true Reformation before
God, till Christ, who was God in the flesh, came with the ministration of the
Spirit, and then indeed was the time of Reformation.

Certainly the man seems to be a little angry, Animadvers.
with the directions and Laws of God given to Moses; and if he had lived in
Moses his time, I do verily think he would have pleaded for liberty of
Conscience, and exemption from them: he charges the laws of Moses with
severity, page 3. lin. 35. And that then there was strict forcing of men to the
duties of the outward worship of God, page 4. lin. 4. which he likes not,
neither then nor now; if he blame any, it will reflect on the lawgiver, God
himself, who prescribed those laws to Moses. But what has Master Dell to
allege against the compelling of men to the duties of the outward worship of
God? I am sure there is much to be said for it, this Iehosophat, Hezekiah, Asa,
and Josiah did, else Magistrates are to behold men as indifferent spectator^*
not caring what Religion the people be of; in speaking of the Magistrates
coactive power, I would be cautiously understood. 1. Tha^ the coactive power of
a Magistrate is not Gods way of planting the Gospel in a heathen nation which
never heard of the Gospel before. Procopius in Arc^. histor. says that
Justinian was blamed, because he compelled the Samaritans to embrace the
Christian faith. All the Jews, a nation professing the true God, were
compelled to the duties of the outward worship of God; but the heathens about
them were not so. 2. You must know that there is a great deal of difference
twixt an affirmative compulsion, to say I Will make you be of my mind; and a
negative compulsion, which says you shall not spread, propagate this Heresy
and Blasphemy; thus the Magistrate may compel. 3. The Magistrate may compel
to the means and external acts of worship, but cannot compel to internal
acts of faith, love, and such like, as having no power over the conscience. I
shall have occasion to treat of the Magistrates power more largely, upon some
other passages of Master Dels Sermon. But Master Dell goes on and says, that
during the time of Moses his law, there was no true Reformation, page 3.33. and
that the people were without any true Reformation before God, till Christ who
was God in the flesh come. page. 4.8. By this ^r. Burgess in vindication the
moral (...) does clear discover and ^^rnedly con^^^e this Soci^ian Tenet, ^32.
Mr. Dell discovers himself a downright Socinian, he says there was no
true reformation, the Socinians sa^ so too in effect; that they who lived
before Christ's time, had only temporal and earthly blessings in their
knowledge and affections; holding resolutely that Christ and eternal things,
though they were promised in the Old Testament, yet they were not enjoyed by
any till under the New; whereupon they say, that Grace and Salvation was not
till Christ came, as if there had been no eternal life, nor any thing of the
spirit till Christ came in the flesh: and does not (...). Dell is fal^^^ into
Soci^nisme.
Mr. Dell say so much in effect; when he says, til this time of Reformation,
the faithful were without true Reformation before God? what a heavy charge is
this, that all the Patriarks before the law, and all the elect of God under the
law, were without this true Reformation before God? what is this but to deny
that they are not justified, their sins not pardoned, their souls not saved?
for this is a certain truth, that none are justified, pardoned, or saved, but
such as have this Go^spell Reformation, which he describes to a be mortifying
and destroying of sin, if there was no such a Reformation as this, how could
any before Christ's coming in the flesh be sav^d?

Master Dell having described what this Gospel Reformation is, to be a
mortifying and destroying of sin, etc. he now lays down an exclusive
conclusion in these words

This is true Gospel Reformation, Mr. Dels Se^ p. 5. l. 2.
and besides this I know no other; but as he preached it was thus; this is true
Gospel Reformation, and besides this the New Testament knows no other. He
says it in express terms also, Page 12. l. 22. the taking away of
transgression for us and from us, is the only Reformation of the New Testament.

If it be read as it is Printed, Animadvers.
that Master Del^ knows no other Gospel Reformation besides heart
Reformation, this bewrayes his ignorance, if it be read as it was preached, that
the New Testament knows no other Reformation besides this, herein he shows
his error, to be for the Erastian way. I must needs say, our dissenting
brethren who are of the independent judgment have little reason to thank
Master Dell for this assertion; it strikes at the foundation of the Independent
Reformation and Government as well as at the Presbyteriall. Besides, if no
Reformation besides an heart Reformation, surely it will follow that both
Kingdoms were greatly mistaken in the first Article of our Covenant, wherein
we stand bound to endeavor the Reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of
England and Ireland in doctrine, worship, discipline and government, according
to the word of God, and the example of the best Reformed Churches. Surely both
Kingdoms did not take this upon them, as if they could reform the hearts of
men, (this they know is Christ work, not theirs) but another kind of
Reformation in Ecclesiastical discipline, which has been corrupted by the
Prelates: Mr Dell aga^^^ the first Art^ of the Cove^nan^.
So that if Mr. Dels doctrine pass for current that there is no other
Reformation under the Gospel but a heart Reformation, the first Article of the
Covenant must stand either for a nullity or falsity.

And therefore you see how grossly they are mistaken, Mr. Dels Se^^ p. 5. l. 2^.
who take Gospel Reformation (only to consist in the making, so it was preached)
to be the making of certain laws and constitutions by the sacred power or
clergy, for external conformity in outward duties of outward worship and
government, and to have these confirmed by civil sanction, and enforced upon
men by secular power.

Master Dell himself, Animadvers.
and others of his mind, not any body else that I know of, are mistaken; for
none of a Presbyterian judgment holds that the making of certain laws for
conformity in duties of outward worship backed by the civil sanction of the
Christian Magistrate to be heart-Reformation: but they say only this, that a
visible Church is then in a good readiness for reformation, when there is an
external conformity in duties of outward worship and government, when
confirmed by civil sanction: Indeed Master Dell says much, but d^oves nothing
about this. And to rectify Master Dels mistake, I shall endeavor to prove
that it is so far from being a capital crime, that it ^s a laudable and
warrantable practice in the civil Magistrate, to con^^rme by civil sanction,
and enjoyne by external penalties, external conformity in outward duties of
outward worship and government, which I shall evince by Scripture and reason.
1. By Scripture, did not Darius make a law for external conformity in matters
of Religion? Ruthe^fo^d this place in Sermon (...) the Ho^^rable House (...)
Commons, (...). 31. 1643. th'that Da^ius ^^^uired (...) subjecti^^ to the God
Daniel, (...) the word ^^mb^ing, and ^^ward subje^^^on under the lord s^are. ^.
Burtnons ^^dication of ^^e Indepen^^nt Churches, ^^70.
Dan. 6.26, 27. I make a decree, that in every dominion of my Kingdom men
tremble and fear before the God of Daniell. Nehemiah made a law, and that
under penalty, to bring men in conformity to the observing and Sanctifying of
the Sabbath, Nehem. 13.21, 22. yea, Josiah made all that were present in Judah
and Benjamin to stand to the Covenant; and made all that were present in
Israel to serve, even to serve the Lord their God, 2 Chronicles. 34.32, 33. And
King As^ made a law, commanding Judah to seek the Lord God of their fathers,
and to do the law and Commandments, 2 Chronicles. 14.4. many instances more of the
like nature might be brought. The reasons which evince the warrantablenesse of
Magistrates practice, to enjoyne external conformity in outward duties of
outward worship and government, and to confirm these by civil sanction, I
shall lay down briefly. 1. Because the Magistrate is ordained by God, not only
to be a practicer of the law himself, but to be a protector thereof, and to
punish the breach thereof in others, this not only the Presbyterians, but
Master Burton the vindicator of the Independent Churches says, a man's
practices, if they be against any of Gods commands of the first or second
Table, it appertains to the civil Magistrate to punish, who is for that cause
called custos utriusque tabulae the keeper of both Tables: These be his very
words. Now if a Magistrate may protect the law, and punish the open breach of
the law of the first Table as well as the second, what should hinder but he
may enjoyne external conformity to the law I know not. 2. Reason, else a
Magistrate in a Commonwealth should behold men as an indifferent spectator,
not caring what Religion they be of, whether Papish, Pagans, Arrians,
Socinians, etc. unless he has a power to enjoin external conformity, in
outward worship. 3. Reason, else the holy Princes and Rulers, as Asa,
Iehosaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, with others who are recorded to be zealous in
enjoining outward conformity (and that under a penalty) in outward worship,
should lie under blame for thus doing, as doing a work not belonging to them;
If Mr. Dels assertion were true, that secular power cannot enjoyne outward
conformity in duties of outward worship. But observe good reader, how Mr. Dell
does endeavor to hinder the Magistrate to countenance and confirm by law (or
civil sanction as he calls it) the worship and government of Christ, and
external conformity thereto, by this following passage.

After this manner the old Prelates reformed, who were wont to say in the
Kings, Mr. Dell Se^^ p ^ l 33.
we will study out the faith, and you shall maintain it; and the faith they
studied and brought to the Kings, the Kings must maintain and Though I (...)
not a friend Prelates, yet it is fit we should give the Devil his due; Prelates
renounce what Mr. Dell does cha^^ them with; He says that what they brought
to Kings after they had studied* they must maintai^ and not question* the
Prelates say otherwise, that Kings must truly inform their consciences
to^^ching the truth of that Religion they do establish vide; Davenant:
dispu^^de de judice ac no^ma fidei p: 7^ ad 77.
not question but that it was Jure Divino.

Prithee Reader observe Master Dels reasoning in this place is neither Logical
nor Theological; Animadvers.
this is the force of what he writes. The Prelates desired their government to
be confirmed by Kings to be Iure Divino; therefore the Assembly (for I know
not else who he should mean by that term which he uses ironically, the
sacred Clergy) who desire the Parliament to settle their moddell of Church
government and confirm it by civil sanction, is not Iure Divino.

If Prelaes entreated Princes to confirm by civil sanction, what was not Jure
Divino, shall the Assembly not Petition the Parliament to confirm what is?

But the more to cast dirt on that Ecclesiastical Reformation, which the
Presbyterians desire of the Parliament to settle, he does reproach it with this
scandal; that after this manner the old Prelates Reformed, p. 5. l. 33. now
observe how unjustly this is charged upon them, for, 1. The Prelates desired
the secular power to enjoin conformity to boundless, groundless, burdensome,
and superstitious ceremonies; The Presbyterians desired the removal of them
all* 2. The Prelates desired the King to enjoin a law to profane the Sabbath;
the Presbyterians desire laws to be still in force to have it sanctified. 3.
The Prelates (says Master Dell) brought the faith they studied to the King^
and Kings must maintain it, and not question it, but that it was Jure Divino;
but the Presbyterians say not so, See the ^^nsiderati^^s and cauti^^s agreed
^p^^ by the mini^^^rs of London ^^d Westmin^^^r at Sion ^olledge June ^. 1646.
p. 5. ^.
They acknowledge that it belongs to the Magistrate to have his Conscience
satisfied in the truth of that government of the Church, which he will set up
by his Authority. 4. The Prelates desired the civil Magistrates to inflict
heavier punishments, for not observing a fruitless ceremony, then for gross
sins in practice, or errors in judgment; but the Presbyterians do not so. 5.
The Prelates had costly courts to pick the purse, and crush the person of him
that came under their clutches; the Presbyterians desire none such. Yea, 6. The
Prelates desired Princes to settle a government, which had no footing in the
Word; the Presbyterians desire such a government settled, as may be most
agreeable to the word of God, and the example of the best Reformed Churches:
put these 6 particulars together, then do but judge whether Master Dell spoke
true, that the Prelat^ of old, Reformed after the same manner as the
Presbyterians labor for now. Mr. Dell having laid down some differences twixt
Heart-Reformation, and Ecclesiasticall-Reformation, he has this passage.

Civil Ecclesiastical Reformation is only outward and busieth it self in
reforming the outward man in outward things, ^. Dells Sermon. ^7. l. 1.
and is very industrious and elaborate about outward forms, and outward
orders, and outward government, and outward confession, and outward practice,
and thinks if these be but put into some handsomeness and conformity, they
have brought about an excellent Reformation, though the heart remain sinful,
etc. and so this Reformation is like that Reformation of the Scribes and
Pharisees, notorious Hypocrites; who made clean the outside of the cup or
platter, leaving them all filthy-and unclean within.

^^imadvers.
1. In these words observe he runs into 4 mistakes. 1. He joins Civil and
Ecclesiasticall-Reformation together, as if one and the same, whereas they are
clearly distinct: as 1 There are distinct officers, secular rulers in one;
Pastors, and Teachers in the other. 2. There are distinct censures; the one may
abridge of liberty and life, the other only excommunicate from a Church
society, but cannot inflict any bodily censure. 3. Distinct in their ends;
Church-Reformation only aiming at the gaining of our brother to God, and
preserving the Church from infection and offense: State-Reformation reaching
only to the outward practice, aiming at the outward peace; now though they be
thus distinct, yet he jumbles them together, as if one and the same.

2. He condemns Ecclesiasticall-Reformation, because it busieth it self in
Reforming the outward man, when it cannot reform the heart whereas this is
rather a commendation to our government, that it can do so much (as by Master
Dells own confession, to reform the outward man) then a discommendation to it,
that it can do no more.

3. Take notice he is not only an enemy to our government, but to the
confession of faith, brought in by the revernd Assembly to the Parliament; and
to show how he distastes it, he thinks not one place enough in his Sermon to
manifest his dislike; wherefore I observe he has 3 loose flings at the
confession of faith, as in page 7. l. 16. and page 23. l. 28. and here in this
place of which I am mentioning, page 7. l. 5.

4. He makes tha^ Reformation which the godly Presbyterian Ministers and people
desire, to be no better then the Reformation of the Scribes and Pharisees,
notorious Hypocrites; Though my conscience bears me witness, and his also
could testify, would he become a judge of righteous thoughts, that they of a
Presbyterian judgment rest not in outward forms and professions, as the
Scribes and Pharisees did; but press an inward change as well as an outward
conformity: urge men to get into Christ as well as into a Church; and entreat
men to endeavor Heart-Reformation, as well as Church-Reformation: how unjust
then is Master Dells uncharitable charge against that Church-Reformation which
is labored for?

Reader, I thought fit to let thee know, that in page 7. l. 20. he has added
an objection and answer which he did not preach; I am only engaged to answer
what he preached, though the answer to the objection in the latter part is
unsound, yet I shall pass it over with silence.

I appeal to all that are spiritual, mr. Dells Serm^ p. 9 l. 8.
what heart or nature was ever changed by this sort of Reformation; so it is
printed, but 'twas preached otherwise, in these words. I appeal to you all, and
to all the Kingdom, and to all the world, what heart was ever changed by this
sort of Reformation.

Twere well it could be found what the mystery is, Animadvers.
that now Mr. Dell printing his Sermon should appeal to them that are
spiritual; but when he preached it, would not vouchsafe the Parliament such an
expression, but only say I appeal to you all; truly a man indifferent on
both sides would give this reason; as if Master Dell thought the Parliament
were not spiritual, but carnal and weak, and not competent judges of the
matter, but in his appeal to the people would call them spiritual, as if
there were among them more discerning judges. And truly there is a phrase in
his reply, page 42. lin. 7. that strengthens me in this thought, as if this
were his opinion; for he terms them to be but the world that thinks ill of
his Sermon: so that if the Parliament should think ill of his Sermon, they
should lie under the same condemnation to be but the world; and so not
spiritual in his esteem.

But let us look what a braggadocian he is, in making his appeal, as if all
the world were not able to control him; as if Goliah-like none durst venture
to encounter with him, or gainsay what he affirms. That which he appeals to
all, is this, whether by an Ecclesiasticall-Reformation any heart or nature was
ever changed, if he would hearken to Augustine, ^^gust in E^^st: 48.
he says quod perplurimi conversi suo tempore fuerunt ob metum paenae. He
affirms that many of the Donatists were converted, for fear of
Ecclesiastical censures, and civil punishments from the secular powers. And
Sibellius on ( Jude v. 23.) these words, others save with fear pulling them
out of the fire, expounds them of Church Discipline, ^^bellius on ^^de v. 23.
that the Church should throw out and excommunicate obstinate and notorious
sinners; which should so terrify and affright their consciences, that it should
be a means to saves their souls; and Paul says that the end of
Ecclesiasticall-discipline is, that the soul might be saved in the day of the
Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5.5. yea, though God might not give such frequent
testimonies of conversion by Ecclesiasticall-Reformation, yet very often I
find the usefulness of it, in a way of conviction, 2 These. 3.14. When the
Discipline of the Church was so strict that the members thereof kept not
company with a scandalous sinner, this was the way to make him ashamed. So
Hymeneus and Alexander being excommunicated, it was for this end, that they
might learn not to blaspheme, 1 Timothy 1.20. Mr. Dell then in his appeal to all
the world may find some who were in the world, who held that God may so bless
Ecclesiastical Reformation that some have been converted, many convinced by
it.

Mr. Dell having by five differences distinguished Heart-Reformation from
Ecclesiastical Reformation; thinks that by casting a luster on the former
(which indeed it deserves*) he does blemish the latter, but yet if several
passages in his Sermon be well weighed, instead of casting a reproach on
Ecclesiastical Reformation, God made the mouth of an adversary to a Regular
Government speak what it never meant, and a commendation thereof to be in his
expressions, though far besides his intentions; so that instead of giving it
a wound, he has given it a plaster, and done much like that enraged man that
Plutarch speaks of, who bearing a grudge against Prometheus the Thessalian,
meeting him, drew his sword, thrust him into the body, thought thereby to kill
him, but it was so ordered by a divine hand, that the thrust of the sword was
into his Imposthume, by which the corruption was let out, his life saved, and
his Imposthume cured, which by all the care of friends, and skill of Physicians
could not be cured before: Ioh. 11.5^
As God made Caiphas prophecy truth concerning Jesus Christ, whom he neither
knew nor reverenced, even so has the Lord made Mr. Dell speak well of that
Government which he neither understands nor loves, for observe what he writes
of Ecclesiastical Reformation, that it busieth it self in reforming the
outward man, Sermon. p. 7. l. 2. That it reaches to the body and orders that, yet
a^taines not to the soul, p. ^. l. 35. That it reformes outward and gross
sins. p. 8. l. 14. That it brings men to outward order and conformity, p. 9.
l. ult. Now truly me thinks this is a tolerable commendation of our
Church-Reformation, that it can do so much (by Mr. Dells own confession) and
no ground for the discommendation of it that it can do no more, but leaves
heart-Reformation for Jesus Christ, whose work it is.

Master Dell proceeds to make use of the Lords speech to David, 1 Kings 18.8.
Whereas it was in thy heart to build me a house to my Name, thou did well,
mr. Dells Se^^* p. ^3. l. 30.
it was in thy heart, nevertheless thou shall not build me a house, but thy
son shall, etc. And elsewhere the reason is rendered, because thou have been a
man of War^e, and have shed blood.

I have nothing to say against the Scripture quoted; Animadvers.
I believe it to be unquestionably true (though Mr. Dell was pleased to accuse
me, as if this Scripture could not be quiet for me) yet I have something to
say against his sense of this Scripture; and his absurd Application thereof. As
I apprehend Mr. Dels sense of that Text, he carries it thus far; that it
would be absolutely evil in David to build the Temple, because he had had
wars and had shed blood; indeed this is the Papists reason, from whence they
argue (as Peter Martyr well observes on the book of Samuel) that Clergymen
must not be in Arms, must not be warlike men, and if this reason should hold
good, it would be unlawful for Mr. Dell, being a Minister, to be a Chaplain in
the Army; now this could not be the reason simply why David should not build
the Temple, because he had shed blood; for this should then have hindered
Solomon from building the Temple, for Solomon had shed blood, had a hand in
killing Ioab and his Brother Adonijah also. Vide T^sta^ bus^ens. in Ch^ 22.8.
The true reason why David should not build God a house, was this: because
David had not leisure nor opportunity in regard of continual wars, to set
about the work, therefore God indulged him; The Lord considering that during
David's seven years and a halfes Reign over Judah, there was a continual war
between the house of Saul and David, then after he was King of Israel, he had
wars with the Iebusites in Jerusalem, afterward fought twice with the
Philistines, and still set upon by daily assaults; it was inconvenient for him
to build the Temple, considering also that there was to be above sevenscore
thousand men to be employed about the building of the Temple, King 5.15.6
which David could not conveniently spare from the war during his Reign,
this then was the only reason why God dispensed with David, that he should
not build the Temple; not as if it had been evil in him to undertake it, but
inconvenient for him, because he had not leisure or time to undertake so long
and great a work.

I have something likewise to say against his absurd application of that Text
in 1 King. 8.18. He applies it thus to the Parliament.

So I say to You touching this work of Reformation, You did well that it was in
Your hearts to reform the Kingdom of God, and the spiritual Church which is
Christ's dear body, ^r. Dels Sermon. 14. l. 1.
nevertheless You shall not reform it, for You have been men of War, and have
shed much blood, but Christ the Prince of Peace, he shall reform the Church of
God: when You understand the Reformation of the Church to be as great as the
Work of Redemption, You will acknowledge the Work is too great for You.

^nimadvers.
Reader observe, there are no less than six absurdities in his Application of
the Text, 1 Kings 8.18. to the Parliament.

Absurdity.
First, he takes it for granted, that it was in the Parliaments heart, as if
they should undertake this work of heart Reformation; which doubtless was
never in the thoughts of their heart, they well know and believe it is Christ's
work and not theirs to reform the heart.

Absurdity.
Secondly, he takes for granted, that this was a good thought in the Parliament
to undertake the work of Reformation in men; whereas, if this thought had been
in any of their hearts, (which I believe never was) it had been an impious and
unwarrantable thought; to think to do that work, which belongs only to Jesus
Christ. As it is a bad thoug^t in the Pope to conceive he can give pardons for
sin; it is as bad in any, if he should think he can give Grace to sinners.

Absurdity.
Thirdly, he takes it for granted that the intention in the Parliament to
reform was good, but the execution of that intention was evil: wherea^,
certainly, if the action or the execution of a thought b^ evil* the intention
to that action must be evil also; if to act murder, adultery, theft, be
evil, to intend to act any of these must be evil likewise; so, if the
Parliament should make it their work to reform men's hearts, and that be evil,
then undoubtedly the thought and intendment of this work, must be evil also;
which may evince Mr. Dell, of a third absurdity, in holding that intention in
the Parliament to be good, and the execution of this evil.

Fourthly, 4 Absurdity.
He makes it the ground or reason why the Parliament shall not make it their
work to Reform the spiritual Church (as he calls it) i. e. why they shall not
undertake to reform men's hearts, because they have been men of war, and have
shed much blood; so that belike, if the Parliament had not been a warlike
Parliament, then it had been their work to undertake to reform the hearts of
men; but they having shed much blood, must not now meddle with the Reformation
of the Church; well argued Mr. Dell.

Fifthly, 5 Absurdity.
by this manner of arguing, because the Parliament have been men of war, and
have shed blood, and therefore cannot reform the Church; if this reason stood
in force as the impediment, then Jesus Christ himself should not undertake
this Work of Reformation (which would be blasphemy to conceive) for Christ is
a man of war, and is said to have his vesture dipped in the blood of his
enemies, which Brightman expounds to be the Turk in the East, Brightman on
Revel. 19.13.
the Beast, and the false Prophet in the West. Now all wars against Turk and
Pope, are Christ's wars, done by his Authority and approbation; so likewise
the war which the Parliament has undertaken may be said to be rather Christ's
war then theirs, his Cause, his people, his Truth, his glory being concerned
therein. Now this Reason would exclude Christ (which God forbid) as well as any
other, from setting about Church-reformation.

Sixthly, 6 Absurdity.
he lays a blemish on the Honorable House of Commons, as if they did not yet
understand the Reformation of the Church; and as if they did not yet
acknowledge, that to reform men's hearts is too hard a work for them; I beseech
you observe whether his words bring him not into this Absurdity. His words are
th^se, page 14. l. 13. You did well that you thought to reform the Church, but
when you understand the Reformation of the Church, is as great a work as the
redemption of it, You will acknowledge the work is too great for You.

Do not these words plainly intimate, as if the Parliament did not yet
understand the Reformation of the hearts of men to be as great as the work of
Redemption, and as if they did not yet acknowledge this work of Reformation to
be too hard for them; Oh the impudence of the man that should cast such a
shameless aspersion on so grave and judicious a Council, so intelligent and
profound in matters spiritual and civil.

Mr. Dels Sermon. ^. 15. l. 31
Christ sent his Disciples not forth with any power of swords, or guns, or
prisons to reform the World, or with any power of States or Armies, but sent
forth poor illiterate and mechanic men, and only armed them with the power
of the Word, and behold what Wonders they wrought by that power alone!

Animadvers. See Mr. Ru^herfords due ^^ght of Presby^eries, p. 359. ^onclus. 1.
1. Presbyterians (as well as Mr. Dell) grant that fire and sword, prisons, and
the co-active power of the Magistrate by inflicting corporal punishments, is
not Gods way of planting the Gospel in a heathen nation which never heard of
the Gospel before: All Protestant Authors acknowledge that it is the Word, not
the sword that must propagate the Gospel; let the Pope, Spaniard, Mahomet,
propagate Religion by the sword; I know none of a Presbyterian judgment that
pleads for that.

2. Those of a Presbyterian way do utterly renounce this practice;
acknowledging the power of Church-reformation extends not so far as to reach
to estate, liberty, or life, the censures of the Church are only spiritual,
such censures that reach to estate, liberty, or life, are committed only to
the Magistrates hand; wherefore Mr. Dell is to blame here tacitly to suggest,
as if some would have swords, guns, and prisons to be the Churches weapons, and
instruments; and what he does but privately hint at, here he does openly
declare elsewhere, as if some in this age preached that the government of the
Church, which has power over men's estates, ^ee Mr. Dels ^pistle D^di^atory
third ^ase.
bodies and lives, belongs not to King nor Parliament, but to the Ministers and
their Elders: Some indeed may preach it, as Mr. Dell has written it, upon
hearsay, and so charge that on the Presbyterians what they never meant;
unless he names the men, and proves the words, I shall not believe that any of
a Presbyterian judgment should preach thus: read over all the Presbyterian
Authors about Ecclesiastical discipline, they unanimously renounce that the
government of the Church reaches to men's estates, liberty and lives, but that
censures in those regards belong to the secular powers.

3. That because Christ sent out his Disciples without power of swords, States,
or Armies, to propagate the Gospel; it will not therefore follow, that States
should not employ their outward power to preserve the gospel in safety from
open enemies without the Church, and in truth from perverting Heretics within
the Church, which is all that Presbyterians desire that Magistrates should do.

Reader, take notice that Mr. Dell in handling the third general, which was,
by what means Christ brought about this Reformation; he gives an Orthodox
answer, that it is brought about by the Word and Spirit, Sermon. p. 14. but yet in
the explicating and amplifying of these two means, he has very harsh and
unsavory passages against the moral Law, which makes me suspect him to be
tainted with the Antinomian error. I Will gather up his own words scattered up
and down his book, as in page 17. lin. 23. he says, The word by which the
Church is Reformed is not the word of the Law, for the Law made nothing
perfect, but the word of the Gospel, this, this is the onely-word that works
Reformation, by which it seems to me he excludes the Law from being any way
isntrumental for the converting and reforming of a sinner. Then observe
further in page 18. lin. 5. he says to the same effect, That the word whereby
Christ Reformes, is not the word without us, as the word of the Law is, but the
word within us. Then in page 19. lin. 3. he says, That the word of the Gospel
is the only reforming word, and if there be never so much preaching, if it
be but legal, it will Reform no body aright: Now what he means by legal
preaching, I cannot tell; for my part I account that only to be legal
preathing, either to cry up the observation of the ceremonial Law, or to
preach justification by the works of the moral Law; besides this, I know not
what is legal preaching: Surely Mr. Dell has not such cause to tax the godly
Ministers of this Kingdom to be legal Preachers, for who goes about to set up
the ceremonial Law for the observation thereof, or the moral Law to get
justification thereby? I know none: but if Mr. Dell means, that to preach the
duties of the moral Law, or the matter contained in the Law, (which to me
seems to be his sense) that this cannot be isntrumental to reform the
heart; in this I am against him, and the Scriptures also gainsay him touching
this matter; When the Levites read the Law, and expounded it, the people wept
very sore, Nehem. 8.8, 9. A good evidence of the Reformation of some among
them; besides the preaching of the Prophets was but an expatiating and
explicating the duties commanded in the Law of Moses, and shall we imagine that
none were reformed by that way of preaching? besides, to what end does Christ
himself expound and press the Law, Mat. 5. and the Apostles after him urge
the duties of the Law, Ephesians. 6.1, 2. James 2.8.10, 11. If preaching the duties
of the moral Law, or the matter contained in it, could be no ways
isntrumental to reform the hearts of men? I have herein been too large.

I shall only mention one unsavory passage more about the Law, then proceed
to what else may be justly excepted against, It Is in page 19. lin. 14.

^r. Dels Sermon. ^. 19.14.
In the Law there was letter without the spirit, and so that could do nothing,
but in the Gospel the word and the spirit are always joined together.

Animadvers.
Here he falls into the Socinian Error again, as if the Spirit did not
accompany the Ministry of Moses, as if there was in the Law only the letter
without the Spirit, whereas indeed the efficacy of the Spirit was as Really
operative then as now, though not so abundantly.

Does not the Scripture assure us that the Spirit did accompany the Ministry
of the Prophets, and did not Christ by his Spirit preach unto the Old World in
the Ministry of Noah? How then dares Master Dell affirm that in the law there
was letter without the Spirit? But then observe he runs into another error, 1
Pet. 19.20.
that in the Gospel the Word and Spirit are always joined. If this were true,
then certainly none could perish that hear the Gospel, which would be near of
Kin to Origens opinion, that all shall be saved; yea by this it is manifest that
in the Gospel the Word and Spirit are not always joined together, in that the
Gospel becomes a block of offense to some, and a savor of death unto death, 2
Cor. 2.16. which could not be if in the Gospel the Word and Spirit were always
joined together.

Mr. Dell Sermon. p. 20. l. 3^.
Object. Yea but I hope you will allow Secular power too, may not the spiritual
Church of Christ be reformed with Worldly and Secular power?

I answer, by no means, and that for these causes. So it is printed, but it
was preached thus; I answer by no means, and what I say I shall make good out
of the Gospel, if it offend any, we cannot help that the word of God should
be a stone of stumbling and rock of offense.

Animadvers.
All these words are left out in the printed Copy; and what should be the reason
thereof? Oh that the omission of these words did arise from a suspicion of the
invalidity and impertinency of his proofs for what he intends: if this did
abate his confidence in the Press from what it was in the Pulpit, I should in
time hope that he would with Augustine write a book of Retractations, and
reclaim his dangerous opinions; I am not in despair as touching this, for he
has turned from Episcopacy to Independency, and now for Anarchy; and who knows
whether he may not turn for Presbytery in the end, which is my earnest desire
to God for him, since I heard and read what opinions he holds.

There is one thing more I might inquire into, What reason Mr. Dell had to use
those words as a Prologue to what he was to say, If it offend any we cannot
help that the Word of God should be a stone of stumbling and rock of offense.
If he intended only that Magistrates cannot reform the heart, that is
Christ's work alone; I do not think there was one in the Congregation that
would be, or could be offended at that; wherefore it made me think when he
used those words, that something either erroneous (as indeed it was) or
controversall would fall from him, else there had been no need of such a
Preamble as that was.

I will now address my self to view over those causes or reasons he gives,
why he will by no means grant the Spiritual Church of Christ, to be reformed
by worldly and Secular power, which if he means in this sense that Secular
powers cannot Reform the heart, he might well spare his pains in alleging
reasons; all the Congregation was fully satisfied in that without further
reasons; but certainly something else these causes he lays down were
intended for, to plead for some such thing as this, that because the Magistrate
cannot reform the heart, therefore he must not put to his hand to repress
the divulging of Heretical opinions; nor punish those persons that do: I
cannot discern at what mark he should aim at but this. I now come to
consider of the Causes or Reasons as he lays them down.

His first Reason:

Forcible Reformation is unbeseeming the Gospel, Mr. Dell Ser^. p. 21. l: 1:
for the Gospel is a Gospel of peace not of force and fury; Civil
Ecclesiastical Reformation reformes by breathing out threatenings, punishments,
prisons, fire and death.

To strengthen this; he quotes many Authors, in page 21.

Observe 1. Animader^.
If by forcible Reformation he means that a Christian Magistrate should not
force by fire and sword, an heathen people to embrace the faith, I shall not
contend with him; but if he means that Magistrates must not among people
professing the faith, put forth their power to suppress Heresies, and punish
the divulgers thereof, this is not unbeseeming the Gospel, but most consonant
unto it. For did not Paul in the want of a Christian Magistrate in an
extraordinary way do the Magistrates work, inflict a bodily punishment on
Elymas the Sorcerer, struck him blind, only because he would have seduced
Paulus Sergius from the faith? Acts 13.8, 9, 10, 11. Now what Paul did
extraordinarily, the Christian Magistrate may do ordinarily as an ordinary act
of his charge. There are a cloud of witnesses that affirm this, that it is the
Magistrates duty to suppesse errors, and punish the spreaders thereof.

^neh^^m mis^^m. in cap de ^^gistratu sic ^^bit omnes fere nostra^ibus ^^ius
sunt sen^tiae quod Ho^^^ si^t gladis ^^itudi.

^^a in librum ^^tra Holderum ^^lac. Andreae ^^no 81. edito 21.


Zanchy says, That almost all Divines in his time were of this mind, that
Heretics were to be punished with the sword. So is Beza likewise who says,
Docemus Christianis Magistratibus praecipue dandam operam, ut purus ac sincerus
Dei cultus vigeat ejusque perturbatores ut res postvlat, authoritate sua
legitime juadicatos, capitali quoque paena si necessitas et sceleris magnitudo
postulent, coerceant potius, quam ecclesia detrimentum capiat. The Christian
Magistrate (says Beza) should use his endeavor, that the pure and sincere
worship of God might flourish, and that he should restrain and punish, and
that with a capital punishment, if need so require, all the disturbers
thereof, rather then the Church should receive any damage. Of the same mind
is Bullinger, conc. 18. fol. 89. and Aretius in Historia valentini gentilis.
Danaeus in Ethic. Christi, lib. 2. c. 13. fol. 199. So Iunius in defensione, 2.
de Trinitate adversus Samosatenianos edita Heidelb. Ann. 1591. p. 40. now lest
it might invalidate what these Orthodox Divines assert as being of a
Presbyterian judgment; I shall here insert what some of the Independent way
do hold, touching the Magistrates power, in suppressing Heresies and punishing
the promoters thereof. Mr. John Goodwin in a book, entitled M. S. to A. S.
page 50. says that if the Magistrate avoid this danger, that he smite not the
truth of God instead of Heresy, and the Worship of God instead of
superstition, he professes, that for his part when the civil Magistrate shall
be far enough out of this danger of fighting against God (in opposing truth
instead of Heresy) he has nothing to say against his fighting with
superstion, Heresy, Schism, as well as corruptions in manners: He grants
what the Presbyterian desire; so does Mr. Burton likewise in his vindication of
the Independent Churches, page 70. you must distinguish betwixt men's
consciences and their practice, the conscience simply considered is for God,
but for man's practices, if they be against any of Gods commands of the first
or second Table, that appertains to the civil Magistrate to punish, who is
for this cause called custos utriusque tabulae, the keeper of both Tables. I
shall only instance in one more, the glory of their way; I mean that man of
God, See Mr. Bur^roughs of he^ Divisions, p ^ and 21.
Mr. Buroughs, who quotes that text in Deuteronomy. 13.6. That the Magistrate must
not tolerate, but may inflict death for Idolatry; yea, as he says, lest any
should put off this, saying this is in the Old Testament; he therefore to take
this off, does urge, Zach. 13.3. He that takes upon him to prophecy, to speak
lies in the name of the Lord, his father and mother that begat him, shall say
unto him, thou shall not live, and they shall thrust him through when he
prophe^^eth. And this Text he affirms to be a prophecy of the times of the
Gospel; not as if the paren^s should presently run a knife into him, but that
they should be the means that such an erroneous Idolatrous Prophet, or
Teacher, should be brought before the Civil Magistrate to receive condign
punishment, even to the taking away his life.

2. Observe that the many quotations in page 21. prove only that an Heathen
people must not be forced by fire and sword to embrace the Faith; but
contradicts not this, that a Christian people should not by the Christian
Magistrate, be punished for, or restrained from the professing of blasphemous
opinions, or damnable Heresies.

3. Observe, it is an unjust charge on Ecclesiastical Reformation, as if that
did breath out threatenings, punishments, prisons, death. The Church by all its
censures can inflict no corporal punishment, it is the sword in the Magistrates
hand only must do that; thus much in answer to the first cause.

His second reason he lays down, is, That forcible Reformation is unsuitable
to Christ's Kingdom; Mr. Dels Ser^ p. 22. l. 16
which if it be meant in the sense mentioned in my Animadversions on the
foregoing Reason, it is no ways unsuitable to Christ's Kingdom, but is assented
to by Presbyterians and Independents also, as consonant to the word. Now under
this second cause he has this groundless assertion, Mr. Dells Ser^ p. 22. l.
21.
viz. You may as well go about to bring the Angels of Heaven, under an outward
and secular power, as the faithful, who being borne of the Spirit, are more
spiritual then they, Sermon. p. 22. l. 21.

If Mr. Dells assertion should be believed, Animadvers.
that the faithful are more spiritual then Angels; then four absurdities
would follow: 1 Civil Laws must have no more to do with the faithful, then
it has with Angels; (who are above the reach of humane laws.) 2 If more
spiritual then Angels, then must they have no bodies, as Angels have not. 3 If
more spiritual then Angels, then must they be more free from sin then they
are* 4 If more spiritual then Angels, then men whiles they live here, should
have a greater degree of grace then Angels have. Considering then that the
faithful here on earth are to be subject to humane Laws, which Angels are
not, seeing they have bodies which Angels have not, and have sin in their
natures, and imperfection in their graces, which the Angels of heaven have not,
I cannot see reason why Mr. Dell should say, That the faithful and elect were
more spiritual then Angels.


Mr. Dels Sermon. ^. 23. l. 1. ^nimadvers.
His third Reason, by ^orcible Reformation, humane Institution is set up.

I shall be as brief in my answer, as he is in this Reason; If humane
Institution should be set up by the Civil Magistrate, (which is not intended
by any) as a part of Gods worship this would be unjustifiable; but if humane
Institutions be set up ( circa sacra) only as a prop to Gods worship, by
their Civil sanction to give protection for the free and public exercise of
the worship of God. Against this there can be nothing justly objected.

^r: Dells Sermon. ^. 23. l. 9. ^nimadvers.
His fourth Reason, It brings men into blind obedience.

If Ecclesiastical Reformation brings men into blind obedience, this is but
an accidental effect, the fault lies not in the Reformation, but in the
ignorance of a man's own mind, or perverseness of will, that will not know or
learn.

Mr. Dell Sermon. ^. 23. l 35. Animadvers.
His fifth Reason: It makes men Hypocrites, and not Saints; yea, says
afterward, page 24. lin. 13. This Reformation makes no Saints, but all
Hypocrites.

If Church-Reformation (confirmed by the Secular Power) makes Hypocrites, this
is but an accidental effect as the former was, the fault is not in the
Reformation, but in the unsoundnesse of men's hearts. This would reflect on the
sincere powerful preaching of the Word, as well as the Reformation; for by
living under it, many are molded into a form of godliness, who yet are
hypocrites; shall the word be therefore blamed? Josiah in that glorious
Reformation in Judah, caused all Judah to stand to the Covenant, 2 Chronicles. ^4.
32. yet many of those that did so were but mere hypocrites, as they are
charged by Jeremiah, c. 3.6, 10. shall therefore the Covenant he then pressed upon
the people be ill thought of; because many did show themselves hypocrites after
their taking of it?

Mr. Del^ Sermon. 24. l. 16.
His sixth Reason, He says, it causes disturbances and tumults in the world.

In laying down my answer to this sixth cause. Animadvers.
I shall suggest these four particulars.

1. That this effect is but accidental, as the two former were: disturbance
and tumults do not arise from any thing in Ecclesiastical Reformation, but
from the turbulency and violence of men's spirits, who plead for a lawless
liberty, and are loath to be restrained by the golden reins of Discipline.

2. That disturbances and tumults following a Reformation, is no grounded
Argument that that Reformation is evil, for then this would condemn Jesus
Christ himself, for when he came from the bosom of his Father to reform his
Church, it is said, That he came not to send peace in the world, but a sword;
for I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter
against her mother, etc. Mat. 10.34, 35. Now because these offenses and
differences do arise because of Christ; dare any lay the blame on him, as if
he were the cause thereof?

3. Where Presbyteriall Government is in use protected, and confirmed by the
Civil Magistrate, there is most peace, union, and brotherly love, and least
divisions and disturbances; should I confirm this by quoting any Author of a
Presbyterian judgment, some would not therefore believe it; wherefore that
holy man of God, Mr. Buroughs, though he be dead, yet he speaks, in a
Speech of his at Guildhall, on Friday, October 6. 1643. he has these words,
That Scotland is certainly a Nation that God does love, a Nation that God does
honor, it is a Nation that is united the most firmly under Heaven; we may
truly call it a Phiadelthia, had we the like union among us, O what great
things had we done before this time: So it should seem in Mr. Buroughs
opinion Presbyterian Government was no cause of Disturbance^ and Tumults, but a
bond to union: yea, Mr. Buroughs was not alone of this mind, but the other
fou^e Apologists, Mr. Goodwin, Mr. Nigh, Mr. Bridge, Mr. Simpson acknowledge,
that Presbyterian Government has been accompanied with more peace then other
forms of Government, see the Apologeticall Narration, p. 4. Is not Mr. Dels
charge then unjust, that Ecclesiastical Reformation which Presbyterians desire
to settle, does breed disturbances and tumults in the world.

4. Where Errors and Heresies spread, are connived at, or tolerated for want of
Ecclesiastical Reformation, there are likely to be^ most disturbances and
divisions. This generation can give a sighing testimony hereto. ^panhemius
^^argeth the ^nabaptists in ^ermany, to be ^he occasion of ^any commoti^ns.
Spanhemius in a small Tract, or Narration of the rise and progress of the
Anabaptists in Germany, declares that they occasioned many commotions, and the
effusion of much blood in those parts of the world; what the Division of the
times may do among us, who knows? These particulars considered, Mr. Dell and
others of his mind had more ground to lay these brats of Disturbances and
Tumults at their own doors, that cry down an Ecclesiastical Reformation,
and cry up a Toleration, then father it upon them who desire unity, truth, and
order.

Mr. Dells Sermon, p. 24 l. 33 ^nimadvers
His seventh Reason, Christ uses no such outward force, it was foretold of him,
That he should not strivel, nor cry, nor lift up his voice in the streets, to
call in outward and Secular aid and power. It Is true, Christ used not outward
power, and who says he should: do not (as I have said before) all
Presbyterians hold, that the Word, not the Sword must propagate the Faith; but
what then, did not Christ call for outward aid from the Rulers of the world to
preserve the Faith? are we not enjoined by Christ to pray for Kings, that they
might protect us in the profession of godliness? are not Kings nursing
Fathers, ^eply, p. 36. ^ne 13.
appointed by Christ to take care of his Churches safety? Does not Mr. Dell say
as much, that the Magistrate should protect us in godliness. It is worth your
notice, that he does not only corruptly expound, but impudently add to the
Scripture. He tells you, That it was foretold that Christ should neither
strive nor cry, nor lift-up his voice in the streets, to call in for outward
and Secular aid and power. He quotes not the place where this Prophecy is,
least the Reader should readily turn to it, ^stendit qualis (...) Christi
ad^^ncus sine pom^^ aut apparatu ^^alis Regibus ^^renis esse so^^^, adventu
enim ^egum varit ^epitus and in^^ntes ac^lama^^nes, Cal^^n in loc. ^^d. Wolf,
^usculus, in ^4.42.2.
and so discern his perverting of the sense, and adding to the words this
phrase, To call in for outward and Secular aid, which is not in the Text; yet
he would make the world believe, as if it was prophesied of Christ, he should
neither strive, nor cry, nor lift up his voice in the streets to call in for
Secular aid; that holy Prophecy (which he does so grossly abuse) is in Isaiah
42.2. He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the
streets: which Calvin expounds indeed to be a Prophecy of Christ, (but far
from what Mr. Dell intends) signifying, that Christ coming in the flesh,
should be without pomp and worldly glory, that he should not be received as
the Princes of this world, for when they come through some populous City, they
are received in great state, and with loud acclamations from the people. And
Musculus says to the same effect also, that Christ delights not in pomp and
vain glory, as the Princes of the world do, but would live and lead an
obscure life in the world. This I only urge to show his gross mi^takes, and
^olly in adding that clause to Isaiahs Prophecy, which overthrows the Prophets
intendment in it.

As the Disciples shook off the dust of their feet as a witness against them
that received not their Doctrine; Mr. Dels Ser^ p. 25. l. 16.
this is all that Ministers of the Gospel can do to any that refuse their
Doctrine, and not go to the Secular Magistrate to ask power to punish them, or
imprison them, etc.

It Is one thing for a man not to receive the Word, Animadvers.
and another thing to vent blasphemies and errors against the Word; I grant,
that Ministers must not go to the Secular Magistrate to have men punished who
do not believe or receive their Doctrine, nor are any punished for this; yet
Ministers must go to the Civil Magistrate to have Heretics and Blasphemers
punished by his hand; else guilt lies upon them. Now because I perceive the
thing which Mr. Dell drives at, is to deny this, as appears by a following
passage, page 25. line 32. avoid an Heretic, but not imprison him, or kill
him, or banish him:) I shall therefore make this good, that it is no such new or
unheard of thing, that Ministers should call to the Civil Magistrate to have
Heretics punished; I may make it evident from the most ancient and general
Council. Socrat. lib. 1. Hist. Eccl. c. 8
The Nicene Council after they had cast out Arius the Heretic out of the
Church of Alexandria, made their addresses unto Constantine the Great that he
might be punished: so did the Ephesian Council with Nestorius that grand
Heretic, desire Theodosius and Valeminian to banish him, which was done
accordingly. Thus did the Constantinopolitan Council with that gross
Heretic Macedonius: and the Calcedon Council with the Eutichean Heretics;
yea, not only the general Counsels, but the Reformed Churches they do the
like; yea, in New England also the Churches did call to the Civil Magistrate
to imprison some, and banish others, who were the broachers of damnable
Heresies and Errors; and it is to be observed, that Gerrard who did much
differ both from Lutherans and Calvinists in this controversy about punishing
any Heretics with death; yet he grants this that I urge. Quod Magistratus ad
fidem Christi conversi auxilium contra Haereticos Orthodoxi implorare possint
libenter concedimus, ^errard, loc. ^^om de Magi^ratu politico^um. 33.
that is, That the Orthodox may lawfully beg the power and help of the
Christian Magistrate against Heretics. But it may be objected, why the
Apostles and the Church in the Primitive times did not go to the Civil
Magistrate to have Heretics punished? Sol. 'Twas not as if they thought they
might not warrantably go to the Civil Magistrate, but 'twas because they knew
the Magistrate was not then Christian, nor converted to the Faith, so that if
they had gone to have him punish others for being Heretics, they had bin
punished themselves for being Christians; this was the true reason of their
forbearance; and yet Historians tell us, that the Primitive Christians did
sometimes desire the Heathen Emperors aid against Heretics; in particular,
the Christians petitioned Aurelian^^ the Emperor to punish Samosatenus that
gross Heretic, which accordingly he did, Vide Eusebius Hist. Eccl. lib. 7. c.
29.

Mr. Dels Sermon. ^. 25. l. 10.
If men be wicked, is it not misery enough for them to refuse eternal life,
except also they inflict on them a temporal death? Then he brings in a saying
of Luthers; Quando non invocat brachium seculare? Et morte u^raque terreat
mundum.

^nimadvers.
1. Take notice that Mr. Dell makes the misery of wicked men, which they may
endure hereafter, to be an Argument to exemp^ them from all corporal
punishments here, as if because it is misery enough to be thrust to Hell for
Murder, Treason, Theft; therefore the Magistrate must not inflict on them
temporal punishment for any of those offenses.

2. Take notice that the quotation of Luthers speech does not serve his
purpose, to prove that Magistrates must not punish Heretics; but Luthers
speech tends to this, that the Popish Clergy did call for the Secular powers to
terrify Protestants under the notion of Heretics, with both kind of deaths.
Now is this a good consequence, because the Popish Clergy did call for the
Secular powers against Protestants, under the notion of Heretics, who were
not so; therefore godly Ministers must not desire the Secular power against
Heretics, who are so?

Mr. Dels Sermon. ^. 25. l. 33.
They that do these things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, but not one
word of outward and corporal punishment in all the Gospel.

Here still he harps upon the same string, Animadvers.
as if, because a man shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, therefore must
have no corporal punishment. Those that shall not inherit the Kingdom of God,
are mentioned by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. to be Fornicators, Idolaters,
Adulterers, Effeminate, abusers of themselves with mankind, Thieves, Covetous,
Drunkards, Revilers, Extortioners, and such like, shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God; and because of this, by Mr. Dells assertion, they must be
exempted from corporal punishment; certainly all the Libertines in the Land
would gratify Master Dell, could he but justify this Doctrine.

Christ reproves his Disciples for discovering such a spirit of Tyranny, as to
punish men for not receiving him, Mr. Dels Sermon p. 26. l. 1.
Luke 9. when the Apostles of a Prelaticall and Antichristian spirit in that
particular, desired fire to come down from heaven upon them that would not
receive him, Christ did severely rebuke them: then afterward says, They were
of the spirit of Satan, and of Antichrist, and that this was Antichrist
Triumphant.

You need not wonder that Master Dell should call the Reverend Assembly the
last prop of Antichrist, Animadvers.
and other godly Ministers the Toes of Antichrist; he that cannot afford the
Apostles a good word, what can others of inferior indowments expect from him?
Oh what a censorious tongue has this man, to asperse the Apostles for every
infirmity, with the foul blot of Antichristianity! It Is true, the desire of
the Apostles was inconsiderate and vindicative, and shall this molehill be
made a mountain, to be called in them a spirit of Tyranny, a Prelaticall and
Antichristian spirit? yea, to charge it upon Christ, as if he should say, They
were not of his Spirit, but of Satan's, and of Antichrists, and this to be
Antichrist Triumphant. Oh what a shameless and senseless aspersion is this!
How could Antichrist be said then to be Triumphant, when the Mystery of
Iniquity did not begin to work till afterward, nor did Antichrist become
Triumphant till long after the Roman Emperors relinquisht Rome, and gave way
to the Pope, 2 Thessalonians. 2.6, 7, 8. which was not till many years after the
Apostles desired fire to come down from heaven? For my part I shall incline to
think they to come nearest the Apostolical practice and spirit, at whom
Master Dell casts forth his more bitter invectives.

Mr. Dells Ser^on, p. 26. l. 20
Object. May a Christian then live as he list?

Ans. No, by no means, for he has the Word and Spirit in him to keep him from
living as he list, and he knows that no man in Gods Kingdom may live as he
wills, but as God wills.

^nimadvers.
1. Observe, though he says that man should not live as he list; yet for any
thing the Magistrate has to do with him, he may live as he list.

2. He takes it for granted, as if the Word and Spirit did so keep a man in
order, as if that man should not live as it pleases himself, but in all
things please God.

3. He concludes, because men know they may not live as they will, but as God
wills; therefore that they do live as God wills, which is not true.

Mr. Dels Sermon. ^. 26. l. 24.
Object. But would you have no Law?

Ans. No Laws in Gods Kingdom, but Gods Laws, viz. the Law of the New nature,
the law of the Spirit, and the law of Love.

^nimadvers.
All that I shall say touching this, is to desire Master Dell to look into his
heart, and try whether the law of a New nature, the law of the Spirit, and the
law of Love, did guide him in preaching this Sermon, and publishing his
Epistle: Would the law of Love make him so censorious of the Assembly, to call
them the last prop of Antichrist, and to censure other Ministers to be but the
Toes of Antichrist? Would the law of Love make you asperse the Apostles, that
they discovered a spirit of Tyranny, Prelacy, and Antichristianity? truly love
would keep you from thinking or speaking evil, but out of the abundance of the
heart your mouth spoke, it may be discovered what was in the heart, by what was
heard from the tongue.

Mr. Dels Sermon. ^. 27. l 9.
Object. But would you have sin suffered?

Ans. No, but more through^y destroyed then any powers in the world can destroy
it, even by the spirit of judgment and burning.

^nimadvers.
It should seem sin must be tolerated (be it what it will) till the Spirit
comes to subdue it; till the spirit of judgment comes it must be suffered.

Mr. Dells Sermon. ^ 27 l. 27. Animadvers.
I crave leave to speak a few words in the behalf of two Kingdoms.

When I heard him begin to crave liberty to speak in the behalf of two
Kingdoms, I began to listen; I was in hope he had been turned a Scotist, that
Scotland should have had one good word from him, but when I heard him out the
sentence, I perceived they came not into his thoughts; he is, I believe, as
little a friend to their Nation, as he is to their government.

It grieves me to see how the City, Mr. Dels Ser^ p. 30. l. 11
Country, Country Towns, Villages, do all rise up, for the most part, against
the Ministration of the spirit, for this is a certain sign of the undoing of
them all.

When I heard him lash the Assembly, Animadvers.
all the godly Ministers and people of the Land who are in the Presbyterian
way, I did verily imagine London should not escape his censure: I may say to
thee, O City of Renown, Famous things have been done in thee, and spoken of
thee, O thou City of God, thou have been a little Sanctuary to the banished
ones, who were scattered from several quarters of the Land, relieved the
needy, have exhausted thy treasure to save the Nation, countenanced and
encouraged a godly and powerful Ministry within thy walls, and is this thy
requital, that thou must be put in the front among those that rise up against
the Ministration of the Spirit?

But you honorable and beloved Christians, Mr. Dels Ser^ p. 30. l. 33.
let not your soul enter into those men's secrets, neither yet walk in their
open and public ways, for ruin and destruction are in their paths, the way
of peace they shall never know, seeing God is to enter into controversy with
all flesh, for their rising up against the Ministration of the spirit.

Observe five harsh censures in these words: Animadvers.
1. That the Presbyterians (for I know not whom else he can mean) have some
secret plots and contrivements, which he wishes the Parliament to take heed
of. This jealousy springs not from a good root; Nero that was unchaste
himself, thought all men else to be so, he guesseth at other men's temper by
his own. 2. He seems by his words to suggest, as if the Parliament should not
join with Presbyterian Ministers in that public way of worship which is
established. I know not what else he should intend by that caution to the
Parliament, That they should not walk in our open and public ways. 3. He
censures them of a Presbyterian judgment, as if they should ruin and destroy
others, or be destroyed themselves, I know not else what he should mean by
that phrase, Ruin and destruction are in their paths. 4. That they shall never
savingly understand the ways or means pertaining to their salvation, for so
does he pronounce, The way of peace they shall never know. 5. That they do
rise up against the Ministration of the Spirit, if such uncharitable censures
proceed from him that pretends he is guided by the Law of love, what would he
not say or do when he is swayed by a spirit of revenge?

^^. Dells Sermon. ^ 1. l. ult. ^^imadvers.
And thus much unto you from the Lord.

Those few grains of truth which were scattered thinly up and down the
Sermon, was from the Lord; but those heaps of chafe, and that Mass of Error
which thou see here discovered, was from some one else: The false Prophets
when they vented the vanities of their own hearts, would tell the people, the
Lord had spoken when he had not, that their falsehoods might be less
suspected; undoubtedly there are many things in this Sermon, which God will
never own, though it may be confidently told you, all is from the Lord.

A Short ANSWER to an Unlicensed Pamphlet, entitled, A Reply to the chief
Contradictions of Master LOVE'S Sermon.
Master DELL,
I Little thought, that you who pretend so much to be guided by the law of
Love, and of the Spirit, would have brought forth such fruits of the flesh. The
best word you can afford me (who never spoke ill word of you in my life) is,
Satan, the Old man, the false Prophet, etc. Well, your words shall provoke me
to a diligent search in mine own soul, but not to a turbulent passion against
your person, what ever you say of me shall not exasperate me to bring a
railing accusation against you. The truth is, I am exceedingly unwilling to
show your nakedness to the world, for men to see your shame, and were it not
that the truth of God is more concerned then my self, I should be silent; I
cannot but say with the Philosopher, Amicus Plato, amicus Socrates, sed magis
amica v^ritas. Before I shall speak to your reply, I cannot but take notice of
one passage in the Title of your Book, viz. See the Title Page to Mr. Dells
Sermon.
All published for the good of the faithful at their desire. To which I have
Three things to say.

1. That your Sermon, Epistle, and Reply tends directly to the hurt of the
faithful, not to their good; for what tends it to? but to pervert men's
judgments, alienate men's affections from a Regular Government, and from the
orthodox and godly Ministers of the Land; and is this for the good of the
faithful? Your Book is stu^ft with selfe-contradictions,
Scripture-mis-interpretations, censorious expressions, and scandalous
aspersions on the City, Assembly, and Ministry of the Land; and is this for the
good of the faithful? Yea, the publishing your Book is likely to sow more
seeds of Discord, and kindle a greater fire of Contention in the Kingdom, then
you will be able to quench; and is this for the good of the faithful? I cannot
but give you notice of one thing from your name Del, which in the Saxon
language signifies Vide Minsh^^ (...) his guide unto the ^ongues p. 125 ^n the
word Deal from ^he Sax^n word Deelen, dividere. a gr. (...).
Division (from whence our English word deal, to distribute, or divide comes)
and how unhappily does your practice answer your name, and show that Mr. Dell
is not only a Dissenting but a Dividing Brother; if so? how can what you
publish be for the good of the faithful?

2 If by faithful you mean such of your mind and way, that your Book was
published for their good, I can assure you, you miss your end, you could not
do your party a greater piece of dis-service then in publishing your Book,
wherein there are such weak (yet confident) Assertions, such dangerous
positions) such vainglorious expressions, and rigid censures, which has made
you lose more friends then you have purchased.

Whereas you say it was published at the desire of the faithful; I dare not
say they are not faithful, but I will say in this they were not wise, to
desire you to publish that in Print which was so much distasted (by the
Honorable House of Commons) in the Pulpit. I have no more to say to the Title
of your book; I now address my self to answer your Reply: Wherein I must tell
you that I have not had fair dealing from you, which I shall demonstrate in
three Particulars.

Mr. Dels Reply p. 34. line 10.
1. You charge me with that which I never mentioned in my Sermon nor ever entered
into my heart as if I should say, The Reformation of Jesus Christ which he
works by his Word and Spirit in all the faithful, and in all the Churches of
the Saints, is no Reformation at all: then you demand, How durst you affirm
this Master Love? See Mr. Dells Reply, page 34. line 10. I may retort upon you,
How durst you say this Mr. Dell? in what you have laid down for my words not a
syllable tending to this purpose, is to be found: such a considerable charge
against me would neither have been left out by your notary, nor forgotten by
you, had I spoken such words as those; it makes me think you cannot confute
what I speak, seeing you encounter with that which I spoke not, a valiant
champion I Will assure you.

2. You deal not fairly with me in this, in that you pervert my words,
making them to prove that which was not intended by me: that you may
acknowledge I do not wrong you, I shall give you two instances in your Reply,
the one is in page 35. line 15. where you endeavor to invalidate that saying
of the Apostle* (The rest I will set in Order when I come) for that purpose I
intended it; In your Reply you intimate as if I urged it to prove the power of
the Civil Magistrate circa Sacra which I did not; I urged that Scripture in
confutation of that exclusive assertion you laid down in your Sermon, page 5.
line 2. This is true Gospel Reformation, and besides this I know no other, and
elsewhere, that this is the only Reformation of the New Testament, page 12.22.
You your self in writing down my words clear it, that I urged those words in
answer to that exclusive assertion; (as you laid it down, page 35. line 10) If
no other reformation besides heart-Reformation, 1 Cor. 11.
then (said I) I wonder how Paul could be ^o out, who said, when I come I will
set all things in Order; whence I argued this must be Church Order, in
reference to some Reformation of things externally amiss among them; and not
an Order about heart-Reformation; for Paul, as I urged, could not order who
should have grace, who not; who should not have small measure of grace, who
great, this was not in Paul's power to Order; wherefore of necessity it must be
an ordering of things by Ecclesiastical discipline, of things externally
amiss in the Church of Corinth by their scandalousnesse of life, and
unpreparednesse of heart, in coming to the Lords Supper, or something else
about external Order, as the scope of the place (being the close of Paul's
directions about coming to Sacrament, 2 Cor. 11.34) and the current of
Expositers will warrant: Certum Paulus non nisi de exter^^ decoro loq^ tur,
Call. in 1 Cor: 11.
Calvin says expressly the Apostle means only External Order in matters
Ecclesiastical, Pareus in ^in diciti (...) lus non po^^rat brevibu^^ Epistolis
o^^nia comple^^ quae ad pa^^cularem sin (...) la^um ecclesiarum discip^^nam and
errorum vitior^^ que correc^ r^m requir^ (...); ideo etc.
So does Pareus on the place, seeing (says he) Paul could not in short
Epistles express all things needful about the particular Discipline of each of
the Churches: therefore he promised when he came he would set what is amiss
in order. Reliqua (...) dinabo, ea (...) pertinentia a^ ordinem ec^^^siasticae
Poli^^tiae, Piscator locum.
So says Piscator; the rest I will set in order, that is, says he, the things
pertaining to the Order of Ecclesiastical Government. This text then is
pertinent and prevalent enough to gainsay what you affirm; viz. that there is
no Reformation but heart-Reformation. The other instance I shall give of your
perverting my words, page 39. where you accuse me that the Scripture could not
be quiet for me, as if I did deny that speech 1 Kings 8.18. where God said to
David it was well it was in his heart to build but should not. Alas, I meddle not
with the Scripture; only with your corrupt and absurd application of this to
the Honorable House of Commons.

3. You deal not fairly with me in inserting what was most easy for you to
cavil at; and omitting the strength of the Arguments I urged: and seeing you
could not easily unty the knot, you would fairly cut it. And thus having showed
wherein you have not dealt ingenously with me, I come now to show wherein you
have dealt injuriously with the Truth. I betake my ^elf to answer your Reply:
and that I might deal fairly with you, I shall lay down (what you say were) my
own words, and lay down your Reply so much as is needful; then affix an answer.

The words of mine, with which you begin, are.

Love. Cast your eyes upon the begun Reformation, though peradventure cried
down with Confidence, no such thing as the Reformation of the Church. See Reply
page 33.

Reply. Page 34. To which you reply: I taught indeed that the Kingdom of Christ
is a spiritual Kingdom, and the Reformation of it is answerable; but little
thought that any man would have been so blind or worse, as to have affirmed the
preaching of this spiritual and glorious Reformation, was to preach against all
Reformation. Is the Reformation of Jesus Christ, which he works by his Word
and Spirit in all the faithful, no Reformation at all? How durst you affirm
this Mr. Love?

Answ. Mr Dell to clear himself from what I charged him with ( viz. That he
c^yed down all Ecclesiastical Reformation) says, That he little thought any
man would be so blind or worse, to affirm that the preaching of this spiritual
Reformation, was to preach against all Reformation. To which I must needs
confess, to preach of spiritual Reformation, as it should be preached, is not
to preach against all other Reformation: but to preach of spiritual
Reformation, as Mr. Dell preached it, viz. exclusively, is to preach against all
other Reformation. Yet Mr. Dell, to make men believe as if he were not against
Ecclesiastical Reformation, says, That he thinks him mad or worse, that
affirms spiritual Reformation excludes all other Reformation: truly I am of
his mind. Now that I might turn the edge of this Assertion against Mr Dell I
shall reduce it into this Syllogism.

Major. That man that affirms spiritual Reformation, excludes al other
Reformation, is either blind or worse.

Minor. But Mr. Dell affirms spiritual Reformation excludes all other
Reformation. Concl. Therefore mr. Dell is either blind or worse.

The Major Proposition is evident, Master Del himself confesses it in the page
fore quoted, p. 34.

The Minor is as evident, viz. that Mr Dell affirms spiritual Reformation, and
excludes all other Reformation; for he says expressly, That besides this
spiritual Reformation he knows no other, Sermon. page 5. line 2. and that this
spiritual Reformation is the only Reformation of the New Testament, Sermon.
page 12. l. 22. what then follows, but that M. Dell is either blind or worse?
And whereas you lay to my charge in your Reply, That I should affirm the
Reformation of Jesus Christ by his Word and Spirit in the faithful is no
Reformation: Truly Sir, I never durst hold so, its far from my heart, I
acknowledge heart-reformation to be the most glorious Reformation, yet not the
only Reformation. I had thought you would have answered what I spoke, and not
unjustly fasten upon me what I spoke not, but I perceive your tongue is your
own.

Love. As if all were encompassed within the narrow heart of man.

Reply, Yet I said plainly enough when the heart is Reformed, all is Reformed,
and Gospel Reformation though it begins in the inward man, ends in the outward,
did you Sir, accuse me rightly then or no?

Ans. It Is true, you said so in page 6. l. 22. and you said the quite contrary
in page 5. l. 2. Besides heart Reformation I know no other; and page 12. l. 22.
Besides heart Reformation, the new Testament knows no other. Now if what you
say in one place, you contradict in another, who can help it? And whereas you
demand whether I accused you rightly, in laying to your charge that you held
only for heart Reformation denying all other. I answer, I did, and I stand to
the accusation still, for did not you say, Besides heart* Reformation, there is
no other Reformation that you know of; and that this is the only Reformation
of the new Testament; Let the Reader judge whether I did not then accuse you
rightly.

Love. If this be so, raze out the first Article of the Covenant.

Reply. page 37. I had rather the whole Covenant were rased out, then the least
truth contained in the Word of God, though I like the Covenant well enough
according to the true intention of it. And again, if the thing be truly
considered, it will appear that you are more against the Covenant then I, for
the Covenant engages us to reform according to the Word of God, but you it
seems would reform without, yea, against the Word, with outward and secular
power, which you will not suffer in the Magistrates hands neither, but will
needs have it in your own.

Answ. I have laid down all your words in this Reply, that others may discern,
and you might be convinced of the impertinency and falsehood thereof; and that
in five particulars.

1. In this Reply, you take not off what I urged, viz. If there be only heart
Reformation, then must you raze out the first Article of the Covenant, which
binds to a Reformation in Worship, Discipline, and Government, which is a
Reformation distinct from heart Reformation; but against this you speak not a
word in this Reply, then I Will conclude that your silence gives consent.

2. You say you like the Covenant well enough according to the true intention of
it: truly Sir, you must pardon me, I cannot believe you; and that upon these
grounds.

1. The Covenant, according to the true intention of it, ties to the
Preservation of the Reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and Government; but you like not that: you had rather pull
down then preserve the Discipline of the Church of Scotland, it being
Presbyteriall; yea* you call that the carnal Church that calls for the aid of
the civil Magistrate for his civil sanction, which Scotland does; and will you
make me believe you would preserve that Church or Government?

2. The Covenant, according to the true intention of it ties us to endeavor to
bring the Churches of God in the three Kingdoms, to uniformity in Religion,
Confession of Faith, Form of Church Government, Directory for Worship; but you
like not these; you have in Print and Pulpit declared your dislike against
most, or all of these: How then dare you say you like the Covenant well enough
according to the true intention of it?

3. You do untruly say, that I am more against the Covenant then you. In this I
hope I shall easily convince you by an induction of particular passages in the
Covenant. 1. I acknowledge the Church of Scotland a Reformed Church, so do not
you. 2. I would in my place* and calling endeavor to preserve the Reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government, so will not you. 3. I do acknowledge the Covenant holds ^orth that
Reformation of Church Government or Discipline, mentioned in the first Article,
to be a distinct reformation from that mentioned in the end of the Covenant,
but so do not you; for you hold that besides heart Reformation there is no
other. Yea, 4. I, according to the Covenant, endeavor after uniformitie in
matters of Religion, but you do not so, unless your mind be changed from what
it was when you printed a Book against uniformity. 5. I am for a Confession of
Faith; but you had three passages in your Sermon against it. 6. I am for a Form
of Church government; but you not so, your Sermon will testify against you. 7.
I am for a Directory for Worship and Catechizing; you not so. 8. I acknowledge
my self bound in my place and calling to endeavor the extirpation of Schism
and Heresy, as well as Popery or Prelacy; but you do not so. These things
considered, with what face can you say, that I am more against the Covenant
then you? I hope the ingenuous Reader will be a judge of Righteous thoughts
about this matter betwixt us both.

4. You accuse me, and many others through my weak sides, as if we would
Reform without and against the Word; though the Lord knows the purpose of our
hearts, that we desire to make the Word the rule to square all our services
by; but because you only say it, but not prove it, it is not worth a words
speaking more.

5. You most falsely accuse me, and others of the Presbyterian judgment, that we
will not suffer Secular power in the Magistrates hands, but will needs have it
in our own; we desire none of the Magistrates power in our hands, which I have
sufficiently spoken to in my Animadversions on your Sermon. I must needs say
you show not plain and Christian dealing, that when you cannot overthrow what
Presbyterians say or practice, by convincing arguments, you would endeavor to
do it by slanderous reports; this is not fair.

Mr. Love, If this doctrine be true, that Gospel Reformation is only
spiritual, then I wonder how Paul was so out, who said, When I come I will set
all things in order? surely this was a Church Order.

Reply, Page 35. But pray what outward or secular power had Paul (who suffered
not only much from the world, but most from the false Apostles) to set the
Church in order? Did Paul think you use any worldly power to set the Church in
order, or only the power of the Word and Spirit? But these men think if the
Church he set in order by the Word and Spirit only (which were sufficient in
Paul's time) it is likely to be out of Order for them.

Ans. Having spoken to this Reply before, I may spare my pains now; yet m^st I
let you know that you do me wrong in three particulars.

1. In laying down a part of my words which you thought might best serve your
purpose, and leave out the other part of my words, on which the weight of my
argument lay, in urging that text, 1 Cor. 11.34. The rest I Will set in order when
I come: I said this order must be about matters of Ecclesiastical Discipline,
and not ordering about heart Reformation, for Paul could not order any thing
about this, who should have this Reformation, who should not; who should have
grace, who not; who should have small measures of grace, who great: so Paul's
words must have reference to external order in matters Ecclesiastical, as
Calvin, Piscator, and Paraeus expounds it.

4. You do me wrong in laying down my words to some other thing then I
intended, as if I urged that Text to prove the power of the Civil Magistrate
in matters of Religion; which I did not (other Scriptures testify that
sufficiently I need not wrest this) but only to prove that the new Testament
warrants another kind of Reformation besides heart-Reformation; consisting in
Ecclesiastical Constitutions for external order; which this Text affirms.

3. In affirming that I (with others) think, if the Church b^e set in order by
the Word and Spirit, it is like to be out of order for us. I acknowledge the
Church is then best ordered for us, when ordered by the Word; seeing that
order allows not such confused disorders, as the want of Church Discipline
would bring in.

Love. To cry down all kind of government under heart-government, and all
Reformation as carnal, because you have the civil Magistrates hand to it; is
against that place in 1 Timothy 2 2. pray for Kings and all in authority that we
may lead a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.

Reply. Well argued now indeed. Babes and Sucklings you shall come forth and
answer this Master in Israel, the sense of this place is evidently this, that
Christians should pray for Kings and Governors, that God would so incline
their hearts, that whilst we live in godliness under them, they would suffer
us to live in peace, and not make us fare the worse in the world for our
interest in the Kingdom of God, and what one drop can Mr. Love squeeze out of
this Scripture to cool the tip of his tongue? for the meaning is not that the
Magistrate should enforce godliness, but protect us in godliness.

An. To this I have 4 Things to say, 1. It Is true, you have my sense in the
words you laydown for mine, but not my words. I said indeed, To cry down all
Government and Reformation as carnal, because it has the Protection or civil
sanction of the Magistrate, does cross that place, 1 Timothy 2.2. and so I say
still; and in stead of your calling forth your Babes and sucklings to answer
this; you your self dare not come forth and deny it. 2. You had need call for
Babes and Sucklings to answer this; some body else had need do it, for indeed
you do not do it your self; nay, you grant as much as I affirm, which I
shall declare presently. 3. I cannot but take notice what a charitable allusion
you have in comparing me to Dives, that I should squeeze a drop to cool the
tip of my tongue; excellent good language for you to have in your mouth, what a
damned man in Hell spoke (if it be not a Parable) where the Law of Love did
not bear sway. You that have borrowed this one expression from Dives, have
borrowed many other expressions from some one else, not far from him. 4. You
grant what I affirm from 1 Timothy 2.2. You say, the Magistrate should not
enforce godliness, but protect godliness; So say I too; if he must protect
us, how can this be but by giving his Civil Sanction to allow us the public
exercise of that Religion and Government Christ has set up within his
Dominion? ^hus instead of denying, you confirm what I said.

Love. To justle out the Magistrates power, is to justle out the first Article
of the Covenant; and they that justle out that, will* justle out you shortly.

Reply. Good Sir, ascribe not your own work to our hands, the justling out of
the Magistrate, have you not made it a chief part of your business now for a
long while together? and are you not still so diligent^y acting it every day,
that now you think your work is in some forwardness, and are pretty well
able to deal with him? and now because you would not be mistrusted your
selves, you pu^likely slander us with it; we see clearly through all your
sl^nder disguises.

Answ. To return you an answer to this, I have three things to lay down, viz.
1. Here you leave out my words, and vary from the sense that I intended them;
indeed I said, that to justle out the Magistrates power, as if he had nothing
to do with matters of Reformation, was to justle out them from having any
thing to do with the first Article of the Covenant, no more then any common man
in the Kingdom. 2. You ungroundedly say, as if I had made it, (with others) the
chief part of our business for a long while together, to justle out the
Magistrate: the Lord judge between you and us concerning this thing:
Magistrates never flourisht more, nor were they an^ where more secured, then
where the Presbyteriall government was established; and never was Magistracy
more slighted and opposed, then where Anabaptists and Heretics prevailed. 3.
You say, that we slander you, that we might not be mistrusted our selves; I
could wish it were a slander, not a truth; as for any mistrust that we would
avoid, we fear none; the simplicity of our hearts which we have in Christ
Jesus, bears us up against all mistrusts, though we be slanderously reported.


Love. Ezra was of another mind, Ezra. 7.26. Whosoever will not do the Law of
thy God and the Law of the King, let judgment be executed speedily upon him;
whether it be unto death, or unto banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or
to imprisonment.

Reply. Well Sir, will you stand to this place, and shall this end the
controversy? Pray mark then, this was part of the decree of Artaxerxes a King
of the Nations touching the Jews, for the rebuilding of the material Temple,
that they should have liberty to do it, and not be molested in their doing of
it; but should have what assistance the State could afford: the decree was
this, Ezra 7.13.21. I make a decree, etc.

Answ. Sir, instead of making a reply to that text, Ezra 7.26. which I quoted,
you pass that over with silence, and spend but one line about it, and spend
above fifty lines at least in clearing Ezra 7.13.21 which I quoted not: whether
this be a pertinent Reply, let the Reader judge.

And whereas you vauntingly boast and triumph, as if you had got the day,
daring me to stand to this, which I am not ashamed nor afraid to do,
maintaining still that this Scripture does warrant, that the civil Magistrate
has power to punish with death, banishment or otherwise (as the evil
deserves) for transgrefling the Laws of God, Mr. Buroughs of heart-Divisions,
p. 24.

Principes by fuere profani, ad quos lex illa forensis a Mose ^^ta non
pertineba^, and tamen aequum putabant, ut in impies capitali poena
animadverteretur; voluit igitur formulas illas Edictorum extare Spiritus
Sanctus* ut Principes Christianos puderet in vindi^^nda Religione, profanis
Regi^us priores concedere. Beza de Haereticis.


as well as the Kings: and to this purpose Mr. Buroughs (with many others)
urges this text as well as I, and Beza on the place says, that these heathen
Princes thought it equal that a capital punishment should be inflicted on the
transgressors of Gods Law; and (says he) the spirit of God would have these
decrees of heathen Princes to be exstant to shame Christian Princes, if they
should not do so now.

I now come to view over what you lay down in page 38. to be the force of the
place, Ezra. 7.26.

1. You say that the force of the place is that the Magistrate may make a
decree for all that are minded of their own free will to build the spiritual
Temple of Jesus Christ, and to gather up into a Communion of Saints.

To which I have two things to urge, 1. Here you speak for the civil Sanction
of the Magistrate in matters of Religion, that he make a decree; but elsewhere
you speak against this, as in Sermon. p. 5. lin. 28. where you express your
self that the duties of outward worship and government should not be confirmed
by civil Sanction; and in page 24. lin. 34. and ult. that Christ called not
for outward aid of the Magistrate; why then do you here call in for his aid
to make a decree to give you liberty for your selves, when you deny such a
thing to us? 2. The extent of this decree, which you say this place Ezra 7.26.
does in force, that who are minded of their free will to gather into Communion
of Saints, should do it; what is this but to say, that this Text does warrant
this, that the Magistrate should give an universal Toleration to any who will
call themselves Saints to assemble together, and publicly profess their way;
Acts. 19.32. ^ (...).
should the Magistrate give this scope, that who will may gather into
Communion; Churches in time would be like that rude multitude (who yet is
called a Church as the Greek word signifies) in Ephesus, who raised an uproare
against Paul; could you make this place to enforce this, you would put a weapon
into the hands of Papisticall, Prelaticall, Anabaptisticall, Anarchicall and
Malignant men, which they never yet used; to plead for gathering together in
Communion, as well as you.

2. You say, this is the force of the place, that the Magistrate ought to
permit this to be d^ne according to the Law of God in your hands, or rather the
Law of the spirit of life in your hearts, and not to enforce upon you any
Clergy-Constitutions, page 28*

Answ. 1. This place warrants the Magistrate to permit the free and public
exercise of the truth, not of error; The Magistrate that is enjoined by God to
protect the true Religion must not tolerate a false.

2. This place does rather plead for a Clergy-constitution (as you scoffingly
call it) hen any ways deny it; for this decree of Artaxerxes was granted upon
the request of Ezra, who was a Priest (compare Ezr. 7.6. with Ez^. 10.10.)
which place will warrant what you deny in your Sermon, viz. that Ministers may
petition the civil Magistrate to have Idolaters, Heretics; or other gross
transgressors of Gods Law to be punished with death, banishment, or
imprisonment, as the cause shall require; This decree then of banishment,
death, etc. being granted upon the request of Ezra a Priest, in that sense it
may be somewhat like a Clergy-constitution. I shall say more to your third.

3. In the third place you say, that the force of this text is, that the
Magistrate may deter me and the rest of the Kingdom, that are of the like
mind, from resisting and hindering you in gathering into Communion, page 38.
and a little before you say he may do it upon pain of death and banishment.

Answ. I am glad you speak out, now I know what you mean, and would you stand
to any thing, I should know where to find you.

1. You grant that the Magistrate may deter me and others of the like mind,
that we hinder not your gathering together in a Communion of Saints, and that
upon pain of death and banishment: by this I see your spirit, that you would
have the Magistrate deter, and that by death and banishment, the
Presbyterians who do oppose your gathering into Communion. Oh what juggling
Hypocrisy is this, one while to cry down the Magistrates power, when
Presbyterians desire his aid against Sectaries and Heretics; anon to cry it
up, that he should deter upon pain of death or banishment, those of a
Presbyterian judgment? Presbyterians had need look about them, should Mr.
Dells Faction prevail* this is the best they can expect, th^^ the Magistrate
should deter them, and that with death, or banishment, should they oppose
what Mr. Dell says is the Communion of Saints.

2. But suppose I should fight with you with your own weapons, and argue by
your own Principles; Presbyterians plead their way to be truth and your way to
be wrong, and that they are bound to oppose it, (and their consciences rest
satisfied therein:) now if they should oppose your way, the Magistrate (by your
own Principles) cannot touch them, because they follow their consciences; How
then dare you say the Magistrate may deter men by punishments, for opposing
you, and yet he must not deter Heretics by corporal penalties for opposing
the truth?

Love. If it was good in your hearts to think to reform it is much better to
do it.

Reply. Does not God say, it was well that David thought to build a Temple, but
yet for all that he should not build it? And do you dare to blame this very
thing? Cannot the Scripture be quiet for you?

Answ. I might observe that you do not only leave out much of my words, but
also pervert them; it is a fault so frequently committed by you, and reproved by
me, that I am weary to tell you of it any more. I come to answer your
Interrogatories in your Reply. You demand, does not God say, it was well that
David thought to build the Temple, yet he should not build it? I say so too,
and never said the contrary; I acknowledge, God said, 'twas well that David
thought to build him an house, but yet he should not do it, I denied not that,
but this I deny, that ever God said to the Parliament, it was well in them to
think to reform, but yet they must not do it. I have spoken to this at large
in my Animadversions on your Sermon, wherefore I forbear it now; and whereas
you charge me that the Scripture cannot be quiet for me, I answer; I meddle
not with the Scripture, but only with your corrupt application of it; in which
there were six absurdities, as I have evidently demonstrated in my
Animadversions on your Sermon.

Love. You need not fear losing a Party.

Reply Yea, but how if God be in that party? What then Sir, Is it not better
keeping a little poor despised party that has God in it, then a great and
numerous party without God? Again, did you preach before the Parliament to make
or cast off parties; does this appertain to the Mystery of Christ and the
Father? Reader, those men are so over-busie in making and marring parties, that
I much fear they will in the end throw the Kingdom into more misery and
blood, then their Predecessors have done.

Answer. There are no less then five mistakes, which run through the ve^nes of
this Reply.

1. That that party which opposes Presbyteriall government are the peculiar
people who have God among them. 1. Mistake*


2. That the Presbyterian party, though great and numerous, 2. Mistake.
have not God on their side, but are still without God.

3. That I preached before the Parliament to make parties; 3 Mistake.
whereas the Lord knows, I did not intend to preach a word of all this: to
which you reply, until I heard the many falsehood that you so confidently
delivered.

4. That my preaching did not appertain to the mystery of Christ and the
Father, 4 Mistake
because (as you say) I preached to make parties; but yours must go under the
name of Gospel Light, and preaching of Christ, though the scope and intendment;
of your Sermon was to make a party what else did you intend in your last
address to the Parliament, after you desired a Toleration to assemble
together, when and where and how you list; if the Parliament would grant you
this Liberty, how did you as the head of a Party assure the Parliament in
these words? We will be willingly contented to do and suffer all things with
you, we will cheerfully run through honor and dishonor with you, fame and
infamy, gain and loss, trouble and quietness, peace and war, life and
death, and that you would desire nothing but this Liberty, to preach and
publish the truth. If this was not a party, if you might have a Toleration, I
understand not plain English.

5. Your fifth mistake is, 5 M^^eak
in affirming that the Presbyterians will throw the Kingdom into more misery
and blood then the Prelates have done: alas, I may return you an answer in
your own words, that you ascribe your own works to our hands; if ever the
Kingdom be brought into misery and blood (which God forbid) you may thank your
selves for crying up an universal Toleration; for making a causeless
separation from Communion with us (whom yet you (at least some of you)
acknowledge to be a Churches of Christ) for fostering Divisions, alienating
the people from their faithful Pastors, and broaching damnable Heresies, which
crying Provocations may prove a grave to all our hopes, and a resurrection to
all our former troubles, miseries and bloodshed.

Love. Reformation is no forcing conscience, it meddles not with conscience, it
retains practice; if a Jesuit come from Rome to kill a great person, he does
it in conscience, but I meddle not with his conscience, I restrain his practice.

P. 39.
Reply. Does your Reformation only restrain outward Practice? then to tie up
mad Dogs and Bears and Tigers is your most excellent Reformation you that will
not meddle with the consciences of men, it is no wonder you are making so many
Iron yokes for their necks, and so many snares and fetters to hamper the
outward man, the proper subject it seems of your Reformation; and thus taking
upon your selves the Reformation of the outward man, you do indeed put the
Magistrates work to an end, and then the Assembly may serve in the place of the
House of Commons, and Sion College in the place of the Lord Major, Aldermen,
and Common Council. See ye not, Oh you Powers of the world, how the
Ecclesiastical powers would eat you out? etc.

Answ, In this part of your Reply ('it is so long I cannot write it all) I
perceive four bitter invectives, viz.

1. Against Ecclesiastical Reformation, as if it were not worthy the name of
Reformation, because it does only restrain outward practice; whereas it is
rather a commendation to the Reformation desired, that it can do so much, then
a discommendation of it that it can do no more.

P. 40.
2. You inveigh against Reformation, that the excellency of it is to tie up
mad-dogs, and Bears, and Tigers: To tell you the truth, I think those that tie
up those un^uly creatures, do better then they that let them loose to hurt and
to destroy; Presbyterians (as you confess) by their Reformation tie up those
savage Beasts, but you by your universal Toleration let loose Heretics, (who
in Scripture are compared to hurtful beasts) to have their liberty to vent
errors, destroy souls, and make prey of the simple; who then do best, whether
they that tie up mad-Dogs, Bears, or Tigers, or those that let them loose, the
Reader will judge.

3. You inveigh against the Reformation likewise, as if iron yokes and fetters
for the outward man were the proper subject of this Reformation: whereas
Presbyterians do unanimously acknowledge the censures of the Church are only
spiritual, they reach not the outward man neither in estate, liberty, or life;
that belongs only to the civil Magistrate: Mr. Dell, let me tell you it is not
fit, that when you cannot confute a party, you should belie them; when you
cannot overthrow what the Presbyterians hold, to asperse them with what they
hold not.

4. You inveigh against the Assembly at Westminster, and the Ministers of
London, as if the Assembly would ^ome in the place of the House of Commons, and
Sion College in the place of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council, p.
40. I see at whom you level your invenomed arrows, you carry an akeing tooth
against the Assembly and City Ministers; it is your usual way, that those with
whom you dare not dispute by arguments, you would disparage by slanders. Time
has bin when you would have given better words of the Convocation house, then
you can now give the Assembly, and of the lazy Prelates, then you can now of
painful Preache^s; I wish you might repent of both.

There are many other unsavory passages in the latter end of your Reply, which
has made your Book to stink before the people, both in vain commendations of
your self, censorious expressions of me, and scandalous aspersions on others.
Is not the end of your Reply stuffed with a high conceit of your own Sermon, and
a false conceit of mine? Do not you boast that your Sermon savors well to the
faithful, and ill to the world, and mine the contrary? Are not you so highly
conceited of your Sermon, that it might be preached any where, where the gospel
has a free passage, and mine only fit for Rome, or some place else, where the
precious Word is under restraint? do not you glory in your own light, which you
call sometimes new, other whiles Gospel light, and lay me under this
condemnation, that I have but old light, and am but an old Creature still? I Will
not spend time in my own vindication, I had rather write an hundred lines to
vindicate the truth, then one line to vindicate my self. But you rest not
here, you are lavish in your censures of others also. Do not you say
Ecclesiastical Powers would ^ate out the Powers of the world? Do not you say
that the Ministers of this Kingdom (if you mean any body else tell, us so)
would exalt themselves in Christ's stead in the Church, and set under their feet
the Magistrates power in the World, and that this is so evident, that there is
some operation of Satan upon him that sees it not. I need not return answer to
these vainglorious and censorious expressions, the very mention thereof will
be a sufficient Confutation to work in the hearts of the people, a detestation
of what you preached and printed. I may end this answer as you do (almost) your
Reply, concerning me, that there are many other weak, passionate,
inconsiderate, and erroneous passages in your Epistles, Sermon, and Reply,
neither worth troubling the Reader with, nor my self.

A Postscript, Vindicating the Author from many unjust aspersions cast upon
him.
MAster Dell in his Epistle to the Honorable house of Commons, reports that I
preached against the Articles at Oxford; which I did not, for when I desired the
Honorable Worthies of Parliament to cast their eyes upon the Universitie to
reform it I did Premise this, that in what I should say I would no ways
reflect on the Articles at Oxford? which being made (as I said) stands with the
honor and justice of the Parliament to have them kept; was this to preach
against the Articles?

2. Mr Dell in his Epistle also charge me that I called the Parliament a
mongrill Parliament, which I did not; Indeed I said because errors and
heresies spread, and the promoters thereof are not punished therefore others
accuse them to be so, but I never did.

3. It is reported that Mr Dell should show me his notes before he preached, and
that I did approve the matter, yet spent time in study to gainsay what he
delivered: the original of this report I find to be one Mr Ireton in
Paternoster Row; who says that his Brother Commissary Ireton did affirm this
to be true, which indeed is utterly false; I never saw Mr Dels face until the
monday before the Fast, nor had I any more words with him then to put to his
choice what part of the day he would choose to preach on; I never knew one word
of his Sermon until I heard him preach it.

4. I am aspersed for gainsaying what was preached, and that so suddenly and
publickely; the truth is, had I consulted with flesh and blood, to consider the
greatness of the Assembly, the scantling minute I had for meditation and
recollection of what he preached; if I had considered also whom I should likely
displease, what censures I should incur, I should have been silent; but
overlooking this and well weighing that I could not be true unto my own
Principles, nor my inward peace, nor to the truth it self, I was constrained
in Spirit to show my dislike in giving some innocent touches on several
unsound passages in the Sermon; presuming if one man dare be so bold to publish
Error, another may take boldness to Vindicate the truth.

5. I am censured for not Printing my Sermon, as if I were ashamed or recanted
of what I said (which I profess I do not;) well I had rather lie under this
censure then run into Mr Dells error, to Print a Sermon preached before the
Parliament, without their Order.

FINIS.

