LOVE THE PRETIOVS OINTMENT, That flows down from the head CHRIST JESUS, to
all his Members, and makes them dwell together in Unity.

Joh. 13. 34, 35. A New Commandment I give unto you, That ye Love one another,
as I have loved you, that ye love one another: By this shall all men know that
ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to another.

Acts 4. 32. The multitude of them that believed, were of one heart, and of one
soul.

1 Cor. 13. 4, 5. Charity suffers long, and is kind, is not easily provoked,
thinks none evil.

Ephesians. 4. 1, 2, 3. Walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called.

With all Lowliness, and meekness, with long suffering, for bearing one another
in Love.

Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old-bailey. 1654.

The Balm of Love, to heal divisions, and the wounds made by them, and to
make the Body of Christ whole and entire for its own beauty, strength, and
safety.
THe Spouse of Christ Jesus, when she shines in Love, she is amiable in Beauty,
precious in the eye of her Husband, powerful with God her Father, prosperous
in her own spiritual health and vigor, and prepared for her consummate
marriage in celestial glory. Her husband is God, and God is love, and God
cannot but love that love which is like himself. And that he may love his
Spouse for her love, when she becomes one Spirit with him, by this unity of
Spirit he gives her an uniformity of love; the ointment of Christ Jesus, the
Head, flows down into all his members, and breaths love into them; and as
far as his life goes, so far goes his love: therefore no love, no life in
Christ Jesus. Agreeably, the beloved Disciple, and an especial Teacher of
love, having showed that the New Birth brings love with life, he fitly adds,
He that loves not, abides in death. No wonder 1 John 3. 14 Joh. 13. 34
then, if the great Master and Lover of this Disciple, make love the mark of
his true Disciples, seeing those are only Christ's true Disciples which so
learn Christ, as they draw that spirit from him, which teaches them love, and
breaths it into them.

And surely if a son of God, by that spiritual eye which he receives from
Christ Jesus with his Sonship, do clearly behold another son of the same
father, how can he choose but love him as a brother? he cannot choose but love
him for the unity that is between them; for they are one spirit, by being John
17. 21. 1 Cor. 12. 13. Ephesians. 5.
begotten of one Spirit in Christ Jesus: and as none hates his own flesh, but
cherishes and loves it, so none should hate his own spirit, but cherish and
love it. Secondly, he should love his brother for uniformity as well as for
unity there is a spiritual likeness and conformity between spiritual
brethren; and commonly likeness breeds love: they are both created unto one
image, and how can a son of God but love his own likeness which he sees in
his brother? As in a glass face answers to face, so a Saints soul answers
to the soul of a Saint; and when one sees his own shape in the other, from
this likeness and harmony there must needs arise spiritual love and amity.
Thirdly, if a Saint consider the excellency of a Saint, how can he choose but
love him for his excellency? God is the chiefest and highest excellence, and he
that most resembles God, is therefore most excellent; Now among visible
creatures, there is none that resembles God more then a Saint, for he is a
son of God, begotten to the true Col. 3. 10. 1 John 5. 1.
image of God his Father; therefore he that loves God that begat, loves also
the Sons whom God has begotten, and the man according to Gods own heart
because his goodness (the fruit of love) extends Ps. 16.2, 3.
not unto God, therefore he communicates it to the Saints and Sons of God that
excel in virtue; as if that were the next degree to doing good unto God
himself, to love, cherish, and do good to his sons and Saints: And indeed,
what is a fitter object of love, next to the chief and sovereign good, then a
Saint, who by a derivative goodness most represents him? God is light, and a
Saint is light in the Ephesians. 5. 8
Lord; God is goodness and righteousness, and a Saint is created according to
God in righteousness Ephesians. 4. 24
and true holmesse. The heart of a Saint is according to Gods heart; yea, he is
partaker of a Divine 1 Samuel 13. 14. 2 Pet. 1. 4 2 Cor. 3. 18. Gal. 5. 22. Ephesians.
5. 9
nature and grows in it from glory to glory. And as this Divine nature is
glorious and lovely, so are the fruits of it attractively amiable, Love, joy,
peace, longsuffering, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance; yea, all
goodness, righteousness, and truth.

The beauty of the body is by no means comparable with the beauty of the
soul, for the beauty of the soul is the Image of God; and the glory of this
Image having in it divine light, virtue, and goodness, shines in the soul
with a far higher excellence, then color and complexion laid on the clay and
earth of a fading and corruptible body: and according to this excellence the
beauty of the soul is preserved to immortality, when the beauty of the body is
suffered either to vanish before the body, or to lie with it in the dust, and
there to dye a kind of second death; neither shall it ever recover life again,
but by a conjunction with the beauty of the soul: If corporal beauty have
been joined with spiritual beauty, then shall it rise in a far more
excellent beauty; but if it had not with it spiritual beauty, (purity, and
goodness, and fairness of soul) it shall not arise in glory and beauty, it
shall not see the face of God, but it shall be sent away with ugly spirits,
being it self transformed into the deformed character of a countenance
weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth

If then a Saint be so lovely, and the love of a Saint is so just and
reasonable, and God does love this Love, and does give his Saints the Spirit of
love of purpose to love one another, and so this love is the mark of a Saint,
a Son, and a Christian; let every Saint make himself sure of this love, and
not only of the show and word of it, but of the essence and life of it. Let
him love a Saint whom God loves; and love him because God loves this love of a
Saint. Let him love a Saint as he loves his own safety, which is annexed to the
love of the Saints: Let him love a Saint, because a Saint loves God: Let him
love a Saint, because he is like himself, and because the Saint loves him.
Dilige Deum tuum, dilige in Deo tuo, charum Claud. Mam. de statu animae Lib. 1.
tuum, Imaginem Dei tui: Ille te perinde, diligendo Deum, in Deo diligat: Love
thy God, and in God love thy brother the image of God; and let thy brother, in
requital, by loving God, love thee also in God.

True Christian love will not be solitary, and fruitless; but it must bring
forth peace, and be attended by it. Love is it self the fruit of the spirit,
and peace is the fruit of this love; yea, love which delights Col. 3. 14. 15.
to be fruitful, loves this peace, because by her she communicates her other
fruitfulness. It is best sowing in a calm; and, if we will believe St James,
Jam. 3. 18.
the fruit of righteousness is best sown in peace: So Peace (the eldest
daughter of Love) is a midwife to her mother, and delivers her of the rest of
her children; and without her help the mother does nothing b^t make abortions
Therefore, as thou w^uldest have thy love to be fruitful* and by her fruits
profitable to the Saints; so be thou sure to have her attended by peace, that
through peace with the Saints, thy love may profitably extend it self to the
Saints. The unity of the spirit must be kept in the bond of peace: and indeed,
with whom will thou keep peace, if thou will not keep it with those who are
one spirit with thee? By one spirit are we all Cor. 12. 12, 13.
baptized into one body, and we be members one of another by our unity in this
one body. How comely, yea, how necessary is it to the preservation and
prosperity of the body, that the members of one body be at peace and unity? and
how monstrous and destructive is it, when one member fights with another? That
fatal sentence cannot be avoided; If Gal. 5. 15.
ye bite one another, ye shall be consumed one of another. But contrarily,
the Kingdom of God which is peace, flourishes by the peace of the subjects of
that Kingdom; and therefore St. Paul having taught the former Romans 14. 17, 18.
to the Romans, adjoyneth the latter, and that with a vehemency; for he
injoynes them, not barely to follow, but as it were to persecute (even with a
swift and eager prosecution to run after) the things of peace; yea, he adjures
the Philippians by all conlation Phil. 2.
in Christ, and by the fellowship of the Spirit, and by the bowels of mercy,
that they be of one accord. Finally, the Son of God, our Savior (of whom
Melchisedech was a type) is the King of peace, Heb. 7.2.
as well as the King of righteousness; and his subjects, who will partake of
his righteousness, must also partake of his peace. Christ has made peace
between God and us, even peace between Heaven and Earth; not that men being at
peace above with God, should have discord below among themselves; but the peace
which is begun in Heaven, must come down and dwell among his members on Earth;
we must be one as he and his Father are Joh 17.21
one: the peace which we receive from God by Christ, we must impart each to
other; yea, it must Col 3.15.
rule in our hearts, being called to it in one body. Accordingly as we expect
peace from God through Christ, so let us hear and obey Christ commanding peace
amongst our selves: Have peace one with another, and then let us not doubt, but
if the Peace of God Mar. 9. 50.
be among us, the God of peace is also with us. Deus semper in pace est; Where
spiritual and true peace is, Chrysol. Ser. 54.
there ever God is.

The two excellent and powerful Graces, Love and Peace, may not be bounded by
us, but by God himself, the Author and Commander of it; Him must we follow in
the enlarging or straitning of it, and not go from his leading to the right
hand, or to the left: where God commands love and peace we may Act 10. 15
not forbid them; neither whom God by sanctifying has made fit for our peace,
must we account common or unclean, and fit for separation Now Colos. 1 4. Ephesians.
4. 3. 15.
the extent and bound which God appoints for our love and peace is no less
then all the Saints, even the whole Body of Christ; the bond of peace is not
one 1 John 5. 1. 2 Timothy 2.22
jot shorter then the unity of the spirit. If then God have not disdained to
bestow on any man his sanctifying Spirit, let not man scorn on such a one to
bestow his love and peace; for he that denies his love and peace to that man
in whom is the Spirit, he denies his love and peace to the spirit which is in
that man: Therefore if God have gone before with his saving grace and
sanctifying spirit, let us not doubt to follow God with our love and Docere
voluit quod haec tria sibi invicem connexa sint, and cohaerent Deus, Christus,
and Ecclesia, seu universitas credentium, adeo ut qui unum ex his vel diligat
vel odiat, omnia diligat aut odiat. Ferus 1 John 5.
peace. Now we know that God (according to his promise to Abraham) has an holy
seed out of all Nations, which is the Catholic and Universal Church: if then
the Church be Catholic and Universal, let our love and peace be also
Catholic and Universal. And to this end our affections must be enlarged, and
made capable of the whole world; for he that will love a Catholic Church with
a Catholic love, must not have a narrow love contracted and confined to the
measure of one City, Kingdom, or nation; but extended and enlarged to the
measure of all Cities, Kingdoms, and Nations, even of the whole world. If that
which is to be loved be universal, the affection which loves must not be
partial: For if the love be but to a part, when it should be to the whole,
this is not that Catholic love which belongs to the Catholic Church; and
whatsoever title such men may take to themselves, they are not true, but
counterfeit Catholics; for they have not that Catholic spirit of love which
is in the true Catholic Church, and by which the Catholic Church does love it
self with a Catholic love. But such men by likelihood have a private spirit,
by which they love a private part and faction, and are short of that universal
spirit which loves the universal Church with an universal love: for there is
a private spirit of love as well as of faith; and it is that kind of spirit
which Saint James mentions, Jam. 4. 5. and 3. 14, 15
a spirit that lusts after envy, after Sects and divisions. But let us never
rest until we get that Catholic spirit by which we may embrace the Catholic
Church with a Catholic love; and then we may be assured we are not titular,
but true and real Catholics. Hereby we know that we are of the truth (says
Saint John) and we shall assure our hearts before 1 John 3.19
God: And, We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the
brethren; even the brethren 1 John 4.12
who is love, dwells in him, and he in God; And we know that we dwell in him
and he in us, because he has given us his spirit, even the spirit of this
Catholic and Universal love. Let no man therefore say of another, He is of
such a Nation with which my Nation is at enmity; or of such a Church which
professes some differences with the Church in which I live, and therefore I
will by no means have love and peace with him; but remember, that in every
Act. 10. 35
Nation, he that fears God and works righteousness is accepted of God: and
therefore do thou enquire, whether this spirit of fear and holiness be in
him, which those that have are accepted of God: if he be accepted of God, take
heed he be not rejected of thee: It were a madness in thee for Gods sake to
hate one whom God loves, and for Christ's sake to to hate a member of Christ.
Indeed, if he be of a Church infected with errors, thou must be wary of him,
that he infect thee not with those errors; but be also wary of not hating the
Spirit of Christ in a member of Christ: It is an Apostolical, and so an
undeniable Inference, If ye have put on the Col. 3, 10.
New-man, in which is neither Greek nor Jew, Circumcision nor Uncircumcision,
Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free, but Christ is all in all; Put on therefore
(there is a binding force in this therefore) as the elect of God, holy and
beloved, bowels of mercy, kindness, etc. And above all these things, put an
charity, which is the bond of perfectness; and let the peace of God rule in
your hearts, to which ye are called in one body.

Let us then have love and peace with a believing Muscovite, Grecian,
Ethiopian, Indian, if he be of that one body wherein Christ is all in all, and
by the unity whereof we are called to love and peace; yea, from this universal
peace and love may not be excluded any remnant according to the election of
grace, pertaining to the body of Christ, though so-journing in the tents and
territories of Rome: we may not hate the seven thousand that do not bow their
knees to Baal, though dispersed among seven millions of Idolaters; we may not
hate Israel, though in bondage under Pharaoh. But to the true Israel, even to
the pure in heart, and those who in Christ Jesus are new creatures, and walk
according to this rule, peace, and the prayers of peace, the true fruits of
Gal. 6. 15, 16.
love do belong, the divine Apostle being herein our guide and example. And
while thus we enjoy and Ephesians. 4. 16 1 John 3. 14 and 4. 7.
embrace this universal love with the universal body of Christ, great is our
safety; for hereby we know and may assure our hearts, that we belong to that
universal body, which alone loves it self with this univerall love. That is
the truly Catholic Church, which is endued with this Catholic love; that is
a living Church, which is a loving Church: We therefore embracing and
exercising this Catholic love, are of the Church truly Catholic; even of
that Church, which being a Church of love, is also a Church of life.

But it is never enough to be lamented, That when Christ has made Love the
very Character and Badge of his Disciples, those that would be called
Christians, that is, the Disciples of Christ, are far from that wherein this
Discipleship does especially consist. One Apostle having named some chief
Graces and Virtues, says; but the greatest of these is love. And in another
place, Above all these things put on love, which is the bond of perfectness.
And another Apostle, Above all things have fervent love among your selves. But
how comes it to pass then, that when Christ and his Apostles set up love above
all things, we see so many things set up above love, yea, we see love destroyed
for little things, which is better than all things? Yea, when love by uniting
would mutuelly preserve the Saints, they by hatred and contention will destroy
both love and themselves; yet the same evil spirit that moves to this
destroying by hatred and division, preserves his own Kingdom by unity And
though his depraved nature be contrary to true love, yet his craft so far
overrules, or at least guides his malice, that he holds unity for our ruin,
and his own preservation. But Christians, whose Divine Nature is especially
made up of love, run hastily and headily into hatred and dizision; and thus do
they go contrary to the Divine Nature, wherein is the virtue ^f the Dove, and
the wisdom (commanded) in the Serpent. But do not those talk of
Christianity, and thus walk contrary to it, merely turn Christianity into
talking, and make themselves but tinkling Cymballs?

Let true Christians seriously consider, that union in Christ their head is a
stronger root of love and unity than lesser differences can be of division. It
was the great Plot of Christ by the expense of his most precious Blood, to
recapitulate and bring into unity under one Head those that lay scattered under
sundry differences; and is it not then to counterworke against Christ's great
Plot and Mystery of Godliness, by small differences to divide those whom he
has by so dear a purchase knit together, yet (which is a high degree of this
mischief) men pretend for Christianity to hate and destroy Christians, but is
it not the same which in others has bin truly called Antichristian; for both
this and that persecutes Christ in his members, opposes Christ in his
Doctrine, and in his maine work of dispensation; let such hear Paul speaking:
Where there are divisions among you, are ye not carnal, and walk as men? And
indeed, is it not carnal to hate a member of Christ for that difference which
he may have, and yet be a member of Christ? Is not he more to be loved for
being a member of Christ then to be hated for that difference? yea if Christ
do love and forgive him, how dare thou to hate him whom Christ loves? Have
thou seen any warrant in Scripture to give thee authority to hate a member of
Christ who agrees with Christ by faith and love, but agrees not with thee in
all thy opinions? The Scripture says, We know but in part; and if so, thou
must give every Saint these grains of allowance which the Apostle gives him.
It may be the knowledge of that point wherein he differs from thee is not
within his part, and thou will have him know beyond his part, or else thou will
fall out with him; Is not this to fall out with a Saint for impossibilities;
and which is more, is it not to fight against God in his dispensations? God is
not pleased to put this knowledge within his part, and therefore thou fall'st
out with him; and is not thy quarrel against God also, because God has not
revealed it unto him? yea, as confident as thou art, it may be that opinion for
which thou fall'st out with him is not in thy part, but that which he holds is
within his part; and then what a double madness is it to hate thy brother, for
not maintaining that opinion which thou hold, but know not to be a truth,
and for that truth which thy brother knows, and therefore maintains? But if
of ignorance he err in those things that are out of his part, bear with him
as thou would be born with, yea loved, notwithstanding that error, for this
is the Law and the Prophets. It is not to be believed, that any Saint willingly
would maintain a known error, and if he hold it of weakness, receive him
that is weak, and not for contentions and dividing disputations; bear with
him in that which is beyond his part, and he shall bear with thee in that
which is beyond thy part, for there is a great number of truths which some
Saints know, and others do not: yea many which none attain unto We have plain
places of Scripture wherein love to all Saints is commended and commanded but
none wherein hatred of Saints for lesser measures of knowledge is enjoined or
approved.

Again, the Body of Christ does edify it self in love, therefore no love, no
edification. But on the contrary, as love edifies, so hatred pulls down, and
tears the building into pieces. Now what says the Scripture? Who so destroys
the Temple of God, hin shall God destroy. A fearful work paid with fearful
wages, Temple destruction followed with destruction of Temple destroyers.
Neither is this wholly deferred to the great day, but even in this life
division of Saints threatens destruction; for if ye bite one another, ye shall
be consumed one of another. When these lesser differences make a division, the
great Malignant puts in his wedge, and the less^r follow and serve him in this
work, and both tear Saints asunder to destroy them by dividing; yea to
destroy one Saint by another. A sad thing when Saints shall do the Devils
works, dividing and destroying. But far from Saints be the works and paths of
the destroyer. But let them much rather do the works of God, even of that God
who is Love and his work is Salvation. Let them strive to preserve each other
by provoking one another to love and good works, and by being knit and linkt
together so fast in love, that none of these infernal Wedges and Engines may
tear shem asunder. Let them walk in those saving truths to which they have
attained with one mind, and one love; and if any thing besides be not yet
attained to wait with mutual patience and forbearance until the same be
revealed

I know there are errors to whose owners and maintainers the A postle allows
not, God speed. But I speak not of those, but of such differences and
divisions as are of a lower nature. And is not the internal unity of the
Spirit a greater band of love and peace th^n difference in small ma^ters or
externals, be of hatred, division, and mutual destruction? Is not such a
destruction like unto this, that when two owners of a field of Corn cannot
agree about the fashion of the hedge, upon this disagreement they will both
agree to set the Corn on fire and destroy it? What were this but to destroy
the Corn for that very thing whose maine, if not only use, is to preserve it?
Let Saints hear the voice and judgment of Moses (a great Saint, and who in
this voice spoke as one that was designed to be the great Judge of Israel) Why
sttive ye, since ye are brethren? Why tear ye the Body of Christ into pieces
for the cloths of the body? Is not the body better then raiment? Christ has
shed his blood for his Saints, and his Spirit into the Saints to purchase love,
peace, and unity for them; do not rob him of his purchase by divisions, and
tearing his body asunder, least he again cry out from Heaven, Why do you
persecute me? and why do you tear me in pe ces in my members? Let us not
prefer low quarrels and opinions before Christ dwelling and living in his
members; what is this but to make Idols of them, and to make our selves like
those of Canaan, who sacrificed their S^ns and Daughters to their Idols; and
what follows? Thus was the Land defiled with innocent blood.

But let every men sadly and sincerely examine the matter, both as a Christian,
and as a wise man: as a Christian, let him ask his Soul whether it can be the
Spirit that hates and endeavors to destroy a man that has the Spitit,
certainly it is impossible, that the Spirit should hate the Spirit, or him that
has it. For the fruit of the Spirit is love, even love to all the brethren
that are borne of the same Spirit. And if it be a work of the flesh, what has
a spiritual man to do with the flesh but to kill it? and not for the flesh to
kill those that have the Spirit. Secondly as a wise man, who would by such
devision and opposition of Brethren make a gap, and open a gate for the common
enemy to come in and destroy both? wherefore (to conclude) let not lesser
faults or exceptions which may stand with brotherhood, dissolve brother hood;
much less set Brethren to destroy one another. And if it were lawful (as it
is not in Abraham's judgment, who was the Father of the faithful and told his
Nephew Lot, Let us not strive, because we are brethren) yet first of all,
means should be used for reconciliation and satisfaction; thus did the whole
Congregation of Israel by Messengers sent to the Tribes of Reuben, Gad, and
half tribe (...) Manasseth, when they were suspected for setting up a new and
forbidden kind of Worship. Lastly, far be it from Brethren upon doubtful
and disputable differences, yea doubtful breaches of Covenant, to break that
plain and downright part of the Covenant; That each one of us according to
our place and interest, shall endeavor that these Kingdoms may rentaine
conjoined in a firm peace and union to all posterity To break a certain and
clear part of the Covenant for uncertainties, is a most certain sin: Surely
the breach of this peace and union is in it self a great Judgment upon the
Kingdoms* But how great a Judgment shall he deserve, that by a breach of Oath
is a cause of this Judgment? Come not into their secret, O my Soul, for
cursed is their anger, and their wrath is cruel; divide them in Jacob, and
scatter them in Israel; for they would divide Jacob, and by dividing scatter
and destroy Israel, even our Jerusalem, compacted and knit together in both
Nations by Saintship and Covenant But pray we for the union and peace of
Jerusalem; let us say (and endeavor what we say) peace be within thy walls,
and prosperity in thy palaces. For my Brethren and companions sake I will now
say, Peace be within thee: and let all the Brethren and Companions agree in
this, and say, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

