

GRACE: THE TRUTH and GROWTH AND DIFFERENT DEGREES thereof. The sum and
substance of XV. SERMONS. Preached by that faithful and painful servant of
Jesus Christ, Mr. CHRISTOPHER LOVE, Late Minister of Lawrence Jury, LONDON.
They being his last SERMONS. To which is added a Funeral Sermon, being the
very last Sermon he ever preached.

The kingdom of heaven is like a grain of Mustardseed which a man took and
sowed in his field, which indeed is the least of all seeds, but when it is
grown, it is the greatest amongst herbs, and becomes a tree, etc. Mat. 12. 31.
32. London, Printed by E. G. for J. Rothwell, at the Sun and Fountain in Paul's
Churchyard. 1652.

To the Christian Reader.
OUr purpose in publishing this small Treatise, is not to make old sores bleed,
or foment any ones discontent, or renew any ones grief, concerning the much
lamented death of this godly and Reverend Author; nor shall we mention what
great loss the Church of God had in the death of so useful and hopeful a
Minister: But we shall in a few words acquaint thee why this little piece is
thus made public.

There are many imperfect copies of Mr. Love's Sermons, which are likely to be
obtruded into the world, by some who regard no other end in publishing and
printing books, then their own private gain; To prevent which, we have from his
own notes published these Sermons, and shall desire the Reader to take notice,
that whatever Sermons of this Author shall be thought fit to be published,
shall be attested with some of our hands, who are entrusted with his Papers,
and hope none will be so injurious to the Author and others, as to presume to
print any thing of Mr. Love's without the said Attestation.

Thou have here but the marrow and substance of the last Sermons preached by
that late faithful Servant of God. Pulpit-repetitions and enlargments are here
omitted, we having endeavored to accommodate thee in the price in buying, and
in thy pains in reading, that thou might have much fruit, though there be not
many leaves. Libri rerum non verborum soecundi.
Those books are best that have much worth and weight in a little bulk, and
such is this if we mistake not.

The Reverend Author, though he had not attained many years, yet he had gotten
much experience about soul-affairs. These were his last Meditations, and
therefore the more desired by, and we hope will be the more acceptable to
those, to whose souls his Ministry was profitable and precious. Thou will find
here no new, uncouth, and unscripturall expressions, but plain practical
Doctrine, old Divinity, sound, solid, and conscience-searching truths. The
gracious Author preaching and pressing them on the hearts of his hearers, from
his own experience of them. Neither will thou meet with any railings or
reproachings of the public and present Governors, (the usual, though the most
unjust, charge against the Presbyterian Ministers.) This whole discourse is not
about State, but Soul-affairs, which is another reason why it is published, to
check the licentiousness of this Age, which has surfetted upon absurd and
unprofitable Pamphlets. The Lord give thee to have thy spiritual senses
exercised, Heb. 5. 14.
to discern both good and evil. But alas! What between State-mutations, and
Church-dissensions, spiritual truths lie by neglected. It is much to be feared
the Work of Grace goes on but slowly, few enquire into their Soul-state. But to
enquire into our spiritual estate is the best husbandry in the world. If we
are to be diligent to know the state of our flocks, Pro. 27. 23
then surely we should give all diligence to know how it is with our precious
and immortal souls. The benefit and profit of this soul-searching, will
abundantly recompense our pains and care in performing it.

There are two great mistakes to which the best Christians are very subject.

1. Either to despise and disparage the work of grace, if their measures be
small.

2. Or else, if their seize be somewhat considerable, to sit down
contented with their acquired measures.

We beseech you take heed of both these evils, which are both alike;
unthankfulness to God, and injuriousnesse to your own soul, the one despises
the truth, and the other neglects the Growth of Grace.

1. If thou art one of the tender Plants in Christ's Orchard, a weak Lamb in his
Flock, a Babe in his Family, yet Oh, despise not the day of small things in thy
soul; though thy gifts be few, and thy comforts fewer, yet tread not out thy
self the smoking flax; stay thy self upon his name who is a rock of Ages,
and whose work is perfect, and his grace unchangable, who will bring forth
judgment unto victory. Slight not the least measure of grace: though the
first and ruder draught be but drawn on thy soul, yet be comforted in this,
that the image of Christ is begun to be renewed there. But be sure thy grace be
right. Temporary faith, partial obedience, mercenary love, pretended zeal,
legal sorrow, feigned humility, may make up a lifelesse picture of a
professor, who has the form without the power of Godliness: but it is true
Grace that makes a true Christian. Common gifts and graces may bring a man near
heaven, but they will never bring a man into heaven. This Treatise therefore
will teach thee to bring thy grace to the true touchstone. It is one of the
saddest considerations that can settle on the heart of a Christian, to think
how high a formal hypocrite may go toward Heaven with his seeming grace, and
how low a true child of God may fall by sin toward Hell, and yet have real
Grace. It is a dreadful thing to think how many Professors in our age rest in
duties performed, and parts acquired, and never examine themselves whether they
are in the faith, and have attained that true Grace which Reprobates and
hypocrites can never have. When we find in Scripture, Genesis 4. 3.
Cain sacrificing, Ex 9. 27
Pharaoh confessing his sin, 1 Kings 21. 27.
Ahab fasting, 1 Samuel 24. 16.
Saul weeping, 2 Kings 10 16.
Jehu reforming, Mat. 27. 3
Judas repenting and restoring, Act. 8. 13
Simon Magus believing, Mar. 6. 20.
Herod rejoicing, and Acts 24. 25.
Felix trembling at the Word, and yet not one of these had one dram of Grace.
How careful should we then be to examine and prove our selves whether we are
in a state of true grace? Oh! it is very sad to fall short of them that fall
short of Heaven. As for the most part of Professors of our times; it is much to
be feared, that their spiritual trading lies more for the increase of gifts
and parts, (in which their Religion consists) then for Grace, Plus scientiae,
minuf conscientiae.
which is the true reason why we have so little truth and peace amongst us: for
parts puff up the mind, pride begets contention, and contention increases
error. Former times had less gifts, but more Grace, less knowledge and more
conscience.

1. If thou art one of those, that upon good Scripture-grounds can say thou
have the truth of Grace, Isa 5. 8.
labor then after growth in Grace. Oh labor, that whilst others are joining
house to house, and laying field to field, till they be placed alone in the
midst of the earth, 2 Pet. 1. 6, 7, 8.
that you give all diligence to add to your faith virtue, and to your virtue
knowledge, and to your knowledge temperance, and to your temperance patience,
and to patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly-kindnesse, and to
brotherly-kindnesse charity, that these graces may be in you and abound, that
you may be neither barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus.

No Christian should content himself with any measures of Grace attained, for
he is like to make use of all the grace he has, had he a Benjamins portion.
The time is coming when one dram of true grace, will be of more worth then all
the world. Plus valebit conscientia pura quam marsupia plena.
The comforts of grace, the joy and peace of believing, will be Cordials to you
when you are dying, and will set up such a light in the soul, which the shadow
of death shall neither damp nor darken. But alas! most men are laboring, more
after wealth then faith, more after greatness in the world then true grace of
whom when they die it may be said, They had laid up goods for many years; but
it cannot be said, In them was found some good thing toward the Lord. Men do
usually lay up riches for a dear year, they will say, they know not what need
they may have before they come to die: Be then as wise and provident for your
precious souls. Your temptations and trials may be such, that you may have use
for all your faith and patience. Rev. 13. 10
Eat (said the Angel to Elijah,) for the journey is long. 1 Kings 19. 7.
It is no short way to Heaven, nor is the opposition small thou shall meet
withal in thy passage thither. Oh then get thy soul well stored with
spiritual provision of grace, and the comforts of it. It is true, thy safety
is in the being, but thy comfort stands in the strength and activity of thy
graces. Weak Grace is saving, but strong Grace is comfortable; truth of grace
shall be rewarded with heaven, growth of Grace does, as it were, antedate
heaven. The least true grace will bring thee to Heaven, but the more Grace thou
have, the fitter for, and surer thou will be of Heaven. The Lord make these and
all the labors of his servants profitable to his Church. Ye therefore, beloved
seeing you know these things before, 2 Pet. 3 ^ 7 18.
beware lest ye also, being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from
your own steadfastness. But grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ; to him be glory both now and for ever. Amen.

Reader we remain Ready to serve thee in thy Soul-affairs, EDMUND CALAMY.
SIMEON ASH. JEREM. WHITAKER. WILLIAM TAILOR.

London, February 13. 1651-52.
Sermon I. At Lawrence J^y, London. March 9. 1650/1.
1. KINGS 14. part of the 13. verse. -- Because in him there is found some good
thing toward the Lord God of Israel in the house of Jeroboam.
THis Chapter conteins in it Ahijahs Prophecy, foretelling what dismal
judgments should befall Jeroboam and his posterity, for his Idolatry in
worship, and defection from the Government and house of David. For which sins
God did destroy him and his posterity: and not only the bad, 1 Kings 15. 29.
but the good were punished for their fathers guilt. For so it is intimated in
this verse, out of which the Text is taken. Here was a young man, Ieroboam's
son that should die for the fathers fault; and yet here was a mitigation of the
punishment, that he should not die after the same manner that the rest did, he
shall go to his grave in peace, because in him there is found some good, etc.
Behold the goodness of God! a little good in him, and yet the great God takes
notice of the little good in him. God found as it were one pearl in a heap of
pebbles, one good young man in Jeroboams household, that had some good in him
toward the Lord God of Israel.

In the whole verse, three parts.

I. A lamentation for the death of this son of Jeroboam; It is said, all Israel
shall mourn for him, and so they did, v. 18. -- which argued there was goodness
in him; for if he had not been desired and prized while he lived, he would not
have been so lamented at his death.

II. A limitation of his punishment, he only of Jeroboams family shall come to
the grave, the rest of his posterity that died in the City, dogs should eat,
and him that dies in the field, should the fowls of the air devour. verse.
11.

III. The commendation of his life, in him was found some good, etc. (of this I
am now to treat.)

He is commended by the Holy Ghost; for his goodness is set forth.

1. By the quality of his goodness; it was a good thing, not a good word only,
or a good purpose or inclination, with which too many content themselves, but
it was a good action.

2. By the quantity of it; it was but some little good thing that was found in
him, and yet that little good God did not despise or overlook.

3. By the sincerity of his goodness; there are two notable demonstrations of
this young man's goodness.

1. It was toward the Lord God of Israel.

2. It was in Jeroboams house.

1. His goodness was toward the Lord God of Israel. This argued Paul's
sincerity, that in his 2 Cor. 12 19.
speaking, writing and actions he could and did appeal to God. Gal. 1. 20.
That Religion says the Apostle, is Jam. 2. 27
pure and undefiled, that is, so before God and the Father. Many Hypocrites may
be good toward men, who are not so toward God; to be rich indeed, is to be
Luke 12. 21.
rich toward God. True repentance is As 20. 21.
repentance toward God; and he is unblamable indeed that is Act. 24. 16.
void of offense toward God, as well as toward men.

2. He was good in the house of Jeroboam. A wicked man may seem good in a good
place, but to be good in a bad place argues men to be good indeed. To be good
in David's house, this was not so much; but for this young man to be good in the
house of Jeroboam his father, whom the Scripture brands for his Idolatry, that
he made all Jsrael to sin and yet could not make his son to sin; this argued he
was sincerely good: as it did argue Lots sincerity to be righteous in Sodom;
for Job to be good in Chaldea; and to be Saints in Nero's Palace, and to fear
God in Jeroboams family, this is goodness indeed.

There is only one difficulty in the Text, viz. What was that good thing that
was found in Abijah.

For answer to this, it is true, the Scripture does not particularly express
what that good thing was which was found in him: but Tostatus and P. Martyr
affirm from the Hebrew Rabbis, that when the Jews of the ten Tribes did on
their appointed times repair to Jerusalem to worship according to the command
of God, and Jerboam commanded Soldiers to intercept them: this Abijah did
hinder the soldiers to kill them, and gave them passes to go to Jerusalem to
worship God, and encouraged them therein, notwithstanding the rage of his
father, who had forsaken the true worship of God, and set up Calves at Dan and
Bethel.

Others think the goodness of this young Prince was in this, that he would not
consent to his father in taking away the government from the house of David;
but where the Scripture has not a tongue to speak, we have not an ear to
hear, and therefore we shall not undertake to determine what the Scripture has
not determined.

There are many collateral observations which I shall deduce from the several
circumstances in the text, and but name some of them. From the consideration
that this good Abijah died:

Good men, and useful, 1. Observation.
and hopeful instruments may be taken away by death, when wicked men may live
long upon the earth.

Bad Jeroboam lived long, his good son died soon; so true is that of Solomon,
A righteous man may perish in his righteousness, when a wicked man may prolong
his days in his wickedness; Briers and Thorns and Thistles wither not so soon
as Lilies and Roses, they may be taken out of the world, of whom the world is
not worthy, and they remain behind, who are not worthy to live in the world.

2. From the consideration of the death of godly Abijah, 1 Kings 16. 26.
when wicked Nadab the other son of Jeroboam lived, -- Observe

That good children may be taken away by death from their parents, 2.
Observation.
when ungodly children may live to be a shame and a curse to their parents

3. From the consideration of the cause why this gracious young man died so
soon, it was for his fathers sins, as we may gather from verse. 9, 10, 11, 12.

That good children as well as bad may be outwardly punished, 3. Observation.
for the sins of their parents.

4. From all Isreal's lamenting the death of this hopeful young man; Observe

That good men who have been, 4. Observation.
and might be further useful in their lives, Isa. 57. 1. 1 --
should be much lamented at their death; they that have lived desired, should
die lamented.

5. From these words, he shall go to his grave in peace;

It is a great blessing to go to ones grave in peace in times of war and common
calamity. 5. Observation.


He was good toward God;

He is good indeed, 6. Observation.
who is so to God, as well as unto men; many are good in man's sight, that are
not so in the sight of God. -- Romans 2. 28.


There are two other circumstances upon which I shall a little enlarge my
self, before I come to the main point I intend to handle

From the age of this son of Jeroboam, who is here commended for his goodness,
it is said, he was a child, verse. 12. Whence it may be observed,

It is very commendable to see goodness in young people: to see young men good
men, 1. Doct.
is a very commendable thing.

There were many good men in that time but to be good so soon as Abijah was,
when he was a child, the Scripture records this to his praise.

1. I shall show you that it is a commendable thing to see young men good men.
This I prove,

First, Because the Scripture makes very honorable mention of young men, when
good men; as first of Obadiah, 1 Kings 18. 12.
that he feared the Lord from his youth. And it is recorded to the honor of 2 Timothy 3. 15.
Timothy that be knew the holy Scriptures from a child. Jerome conceives that
John was the most Joh. 13.
beloved disciple, because he was the youngest of all Jer. 2. 2.
God remembers the kindness of our youth. God takes more kindly the kindness
of our youth then of our age. It was matter of joy unto John, that he found 2
Epist. John 4.
children walking in the truth.

Secondly, Because God commends moral and common goodness in the young man
Mar. 10. 21.
in the Gospel, Christ is said to love him, for his moral goodness and
natural ingenuity

2. The reason why it is so commendable in a young man to be a good man, is
this, because their temptations are more, and their affections are stronger to
carry them from God; youth has a stronger aptitude and proclivity to sin
then any other age, their blood is sooner stirred up to choler, and their
strength to lust. As every relation has its special sin, so every age of a
man's life; old age is peevish and covetous; middle age proud, malicious and
revengful; young men are usually rash, lustful and voluptuous; and therefore
Paul bids 2 Timothy 2. 22.
Timothy fly all youthful lusts; and therefore seeing youth is exposed to so
many temptations, and subject to so many corruptions, -- it is rare to see
young men good.

Oh then be exhorted you that are young, to become religious betimes; 1 Use.
and to quicken you hereunto, Consider.

1. If you be not good in your youth, you can never use the Psalmists
arguments, Cast me not off O Lord in the time of my old age, for sake me not
when my strength fails, v. 9. -- and his argument he had before, Ps. 71. 9.
compared with v. 5.
v. 5. for thou art my hope, and h^st been my trust from my youth, and who
would be without such an argument on his deathbed?

2. Consider, there are recorded in Scripture many young men that were good, of
al sorts and conditions, and of all callings; and the Holy Ghost does not only
set down their goodness, but their age in which they were good: Solomon a
young King, Obadiah a young Courtier, Daniel a young Prophet, John a young
Apostle, Timothy a young preacher, and here Abijah a young Prince; and all
these were good men, and are recorded for our example and encouragement.

3. Consider, that God in the dispensations of his grace bestows it upon young
men, and passes by the elder. Thus Abel the younger was righteous, and Cain
wicked: Jacob the younger brother loved, and Esau hated; Thus David the
youngest of Iesses sons, 1 Samuel 16. 11, 12.
and yet the best of them, and the chosen of the Lord.

God does many times do as Jacob did when he blessed the children of Joseph, he
stretched out his right hand Genesis 48. 14.
and laid it upon the head of Ephraim the younger, -- so does God in the
dispensation of his grace many times pitch on the youngest, God says, as
Joseph, of all the rest, bring me Benjamin, and gives him a double portion.

4. The time of your youth is the freest age of your life to betake your selves
to the exercise of religion and duties of godliness. Young men that are
servants, have more freedom and less cares then when they grow in years, and
the 1 Cor. 7. 33.
cares and encumbrances of a family fill their hands and clog their hearts.

5. Consider, if thou art not gracious in youth, the fins of thy youth may
trouble thy conscience in thy old age. Many young men who are active and
venturous in the heat of their youth, get those bodily bruises and blows, that
they feel the ache thereof to their dying day. Thou that give a blow or a
bruise to thy conscience in thy youth, may feel this in thy old age.

Those sins which now thou feel not, may be a trouble to thy conscience, and
an aching to thy heart, when thou lie on thy death bed. And though God do not
remember the sins of your youth to damn your souls; yet he may make you
remember them so as to be a trouble to your consciences. Quae fueru^^ inania
juven^utis gaudia, haec sunt ac^rba senectutis gravamina.
These things which are the joys of youth, may be the bitter burdens of old
age. Take heed of laying a load on thy conscience when thou art young, lest
God write bitter things against thee when old, and make thee to possess the
sins of thy youth, Job 13. 26.
and fill thy bones with the sins of thy youth. Job 29. 11.


A second use of reproof of two sorts of people.

First, Of those who instead of being good when young, are wicked when they are
young, such as fill their youth with manifold evils. Usually youth is subject
to these evils:

1. Pride is the sin of youth, a Preacher must not be a young novice, 1 Timothy ^.
6.
lest he be lifted up with pride.

2 Rashness and indiscretion is usually the sin of a young head. Exhort young
men (says Paul to Titus) to be sober^minded, Tit. 2. 6. (...)
to be discreet or wise; how rash and heady was the counsel of the young men
to Rehoboam, which made him lose his Kingdom? years teach experience.

3. Lustfulnesse, which was the ground of Paul's caution to young Timothy. 2 Timothy 2. 22
It Timothy, who was so abstemious a man, that Paul gave him advice to drink
some wine with his water, had need of this caution, how much more have they
that are not so exercised in duties of mortification? Which gave Solomon ground
to give that counsel, Put away the evils of thy flesh, Eccl. 11. 10
for childhood and youth are vanity. He was a young man that followed the
harlot to her house. Prove. 7. 7.


4. Fickleness and unsetlednesse of judgment; and therefore in times of
error, the younger sort are most subject to be seduced; Children are tossed to
and fro with every wind of doctrine: Ephesians. 4. 14.
the hebrew calls a young man (...), which comes from (...), and signifies to
toss to and fro, (...) from (...) movit de loco in locum.
intimating that they are unsettled and unstaied in their judgments and
resolutions. Mat. 19. 22.
How soon was the mind of that rich and forward young man changed, 2 King. 2.
23.
mentioned in the Gospel?

5. To scoff and condemn the aged; Job 30. 1, 12.
they were children who did mock the aged Prophet; the young men derided Job.

6 Sensual pleasures and pastimes, Eccl. 11. 9.
-- they do rejoice and cheer their hearts in the days of their youth; Judge.
14. 10.
Sampson made a feast, for so used the young men to do.

Secondly, Job 1. 4.
Reproof lights heavily on those who seem to be good in their youth, but in
their old age cast off goodness; how many are like Joash, who seemed to be a
good young man whilst he seemed to be under the tuition of Jehojada, but when
he was dead, how did he break out.

How many are there in the world, who have lost their affection and desires
after God, which they had in their youth? It was a brand set upon Solomon, who,
though when young, was well taught by his mother; Prove. 31. 1.
yet when he grew old, his wives turned away his heart from God. So David had
his first days which were better then his last. Even so amongst us, we have too
many, who when they were young did love Religion, and delight in Ordinances,
and when they became old have abated exceedingly, which may make them to fear
the sincerity of their goodness; for he that is truly good in youth will be so
in his old age.

A second remarkable circumstance is this, that this young Abijah was good in
the house of Jeroboam. Whence observe

That it is a great commendation for men to retein their goodness whilst they
live in bad places and families; That this is so, we may see by that
commendable mention the Scriptures make of such as were good in evil places.
Thus God commends the Church of Pergamus, I know thy works, and where thou
dwell, even where Satan's seat is, Rev. 2. 13.
and thou hold fast my name, and have not denied my faith, even in those
days wherein Antipas my faithful Martyr, who was slain amongst you, where Satan
dwells. Pergamus was a City more given to Idolatry then all the Cities of
Asia, and yet there were some that held fast the name of Christ, Phil. 4. 22.
and did not deny his faith: to be a Saint in Nero 's family is very
commendable.

And the reason thereof is,

1. Because many of Gods children have failed, and abated much of their
goodness in bad places. How did Peter fall in the High Priests Hall; though
when in good company he was zealous, yet there he denied Christ. So Abraham
when he was in Gerar, and Isaac also, denied their wives: so Joseph in
Pharaoh's Court, and learned the Court Oath, to swear by the life of Pharaoh.
Hence God commands the children of Israel, not to mix themselves with the
Heathens, lest they learn their manners and customs. Bad places are like bad
air for zeal to breath in; as sheep amongst brairs lose part of their fleece,
so good men in bad company lose part of their goodness. Heb. 12. 15
As one scabbed sheep may infect a whole flock: so one root of bitterness may
spring up and defile many.

2. Reas. Because it is a clear evidence of the sincerity of a man's goodness,
to be good in a bad place. This shows thy grace to be grace indeed, when thou
have discouragements to be good, and then art holy; this is a demonstration
that thou art sincerely good, and that thy goodness is not counterfeit and
taken up upon any sinister and hypocritical end. It is good to be good with the
good; but it is most excellent to be good amongst the bad, and to be best
amongst the worst.

From hence learn the power and unlooseableness of saving grace; Use. 1.
grace makes a man good in the worst times; let a man be cast into prison or
bad company (which is the worst temptation) yet he shall not lose his grace:
true grace is compared to oil; now cast oil into a vessel of water, and the
oil will not mix with the water, but will lie on the top; grace will swim upon
the water of temptation* As all the water in the salt sea cannot make the fish
salt: so all the wicked in the world cannot change the nature of grace; a good
man like the fish retains his goodness in bad places; thus Joseph retained his
goodness in the Court of wicked Pharaoh, Nehemiah in the Court of Artaxerxes,
Obadiah in Ahab's Court, Daniel in Nebuchadnezzars, the Saints in Nero's
household, and Abijah in wicked and idolatrous Ieroboam's house.

Though it be a commendable thing to be good in bad places; 2.
yet you ought to bewail your living in bad places: it is your misery, though
not your sin; thus did Isaiah, Woe is me, I am undone; Isa. 6. (...)
because I am a man of unclean lips, Psalm. 120 5
and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips; so David, Woe is me that
I dwell in Mesech, and have my habitation in the tents of Kedar, i. e. with the
sinful, idolatrous and barbarous people, the posterity of Ishmael; Genesis 25. 13
thus Lots righteous soul was vexed from day to day, 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8.
while he dwelt in Sodom, and saw their unclean conversations.

Hence we may gather, 3
that it is our duty, the more bad the place or family is where God has cast
your dwelling, the better and more blameless you should labor to be; you will
by this adorn your Profession, stop the mouths of adversaries, allure and win
others to embrace Christianity. Phil. 2. 15.
-- We must be blameless and harmless, the Sons of God without rebuke, in the
midst of a crooked and perverse nation, amongst whom ye shine as lights in the
world. Stars shine brightest in a dark night, and fire burns hottest in a
cold and frosty day: so should thy star of profession shine brightest in
darkest places, where thou live, and the fire of thy zeal burn hottest in
cold time, when the love of many waxes cold.

Then certainly it is a vain plea for men to excuse their wickedness, 4
because they live in bad places; this was Abraham's fault to excuse his lie by
being at Gerar. Seneca blames men Genesis 20. 11
of laying the fault of their badness on the place where they live: Non ego s^m
ambitiosus, sed nemo Romae aliter vivere potest: non ego sum sumptuosus, sed
urbs ipsa magnas impensas exigit. Sen.
I am not ambitious by nature, but no man that lives at Rome can be otherwise.
I am not given to costly and rich Apparel, but I must do so when I am at Rome.
It is the badnesse of thy heart, and not the place that makes thee bad; no
place though never so good, can exempt a man from sin; the Angels sinned in
Heaven, Adam in Paradise, Judas in Christ's family, and no place though never so
bad can excuse a man from sin.

If it be so commendable to be good in bad places, 5
then it is abominable to be bad in good places, to be dirty swine in a fair
meadow; Oh how many are bad in good families, who despise good counsels, and
hate the duties of Religion in religious families! If it was bad for Peter to
be evil amongst the Highpriests servants, how abominable was it for Judas to
be a Traitor amongst the Apostles, and in the family of Christ himself!

Delight not to be in bad places and companys; 6
to delight in such, argues thou art bad thy self. Bonus mali consortio fecile
pej^ratur.
We are to hate the garment spotted with the flesh; some expound this, To avoid
the occasions of sin: but Mr. Perkins gives this sense, Jude 23.
To hate bad company, and he says, it alludes unto the Ceremonial law, That if
a man had a leprous garment, Lev. 15. 4.
or a^ga^ment any otherwise made unclean, his company was to be a voided. God
therefore gave that command, Deuteronomy. 22. 10.
Not to plough with an Ox and an Ass together the Ass was an unclean
creature, and the Ox was one of the clean beasts, and they must not be in the
same yoke; To note, (say Divines) that Gods people and profane persons must
not be yoked together. Though they may occasionally meet together, 1 Cor. 5. 9,
10.
yet they must not be yoked together; a man may trade with the wickedest man
alive, Psa. 26. 4, 5
commerce is not forbidden, but our joining with wicked men in a needless
familiarity.

Keep company with the godly, 7.
and delight your selves with such as are good. It is lawful to be in bad
company when a just occasion calls, but it is profitable to be in good company.
He that walks with wise men shall be wise, Pro. 13. 20
but he that is a companion of fools shall be destroyed. As a man that comes in
a shop of persumes will carry away the sent with him: so a man by conversing
with the godly shall carry away some good with him. Labor to to choose those
for thy companions from whom thou may get some good; but if God should cast
thee into a house like the family of Jeroboam, imitate good Abijah, of whom it
is said, That in him was found some good to the Lord God of Israel, even in the
house of Jeroboam.

Sermon II. At Lawrence Jury, London. 1650.
1 KING. 14. part of the 13. verse. -- Because in him there is found some good
thing toward the Lord God of Israel, in the house of Jeroboam.
HAving dispatched the Observations which may be gathered from the circumstance
in the Text, I come to that main Doctrine which I intend to handle, which is;

God does not only exactly take notice of, Doct.
but also tenderly cherish, and graciously reward the smallest beginnings, and
weakest measures of grace, which he works in the hearts of his own people.

I might produce a cloud of testimonies to confirm this point. Our Savior
Christ said, that be will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking
flax. Observe, Mat. 12. 20
it is not said; the strong Oak shall not be broken, but the bruised reed shall
not be broken; not the light and flaming torch, but the smoking flax, shall not
be quenched. -- Smoking flax, where there is but little fire, and much smoke of
infirmity, yet Christ will not quench it, Verba p^^iu^ ad cor nostrum quam ad
cor Dei accommodata.
i. e. he will-cherish it; here is the figure Meiosis, here is less spoken
then intended. -- He will be so far from quenching, that he will cherish the
smoking fl^x; as in another place God is said, Psalm. 51. 17
that he will not despise a broken heart, i. e. He will highly esteem it.

Solomon speaks of the fig tree putting forth her green figs, and the Vine with
her tender grapes gives a good smell, that is, the little measure and weak
beginnings of grace in young Converts, do please the Lord Jesus Christ, and are
as a sweet smell in his nostrils. Again, Christ says, Cant. 2. 13.
Let us see if the vine flourish, whether the tender gr^p^ appear, and the
pomegranate bud forth. The green buds regarded by Christ as well as the ripe
and grown fruit. Cant. 7. 1^.


In opening of the Doctrine, I shall endeavor to clear these two things;

1. That some of Gods people have but weak measures and small beginnings of
grace.

2. Though there be but a little grace, yet God will regard and reward it.

1. That some of Gods people have but a little grace, --, 1. Propsition.
have but the beginnings of grace wrought in their souls.

In the handling whereof are three things,

1. The truth of the Proposition may be made good from the Scriptures.

2. I will lay down notes of discovery, to know such as have but small measures
of grace wrought in them.

3. And then show why God in his wisdom will not suffer his people to be all of
an equal strength and stature in grace.

1. How douth it appear that some of Gods people are but weak in grace? 1 Quest


1. By the different names and titles that are given unto Christians in holy
Scriptures, 1. Answ.
arguing they are of different measure and growth in grace. 1. Romans 15. 1
Some are called strong men, and others weak. 2. Some are called 1 Cor. 3. 1
Babes in Christ, and others called grown men. 3. 1 John 2. 14
Some are called Isa. 61. 3.
Trees of Righteousnes^, Psalm: 92. 12
Plants of renown, Mat. 12. 20
that grow like Cedars in Lebanon: Others are but a bruised reed. Some are
Cant. 1. 8.
Kids in Christ's flock, and Lambs: 1 John 21. 15, 16, 17.
Others are as the He-Goats that go stately before the flock. 4. Some have
grace flaming forth in much zeal and vivacity, they have Isa. 4. 4.
the spirit of burning; and others are but smoking flax, i. e. Christians that
have much of the smoke of infirmity, and but little of the flame of grace.

2. By the Analogy that is between spiritual and natural differences of age, 2
Answ.
strength, and stature in man; the Holy Scripture exactly sets down all the
different degrees of grace, under the similitude of the different ages of men.

1. There is a Gal. 4. 19
forming of Christ in the heart, and so a spiritual conception.

2. There are those that are but newborn Babes in Christ. 1 Pet. 1. 23 etc. 2.
2.


3. There are some that are advanced from infancy to be Young Men. 1 John 2. 13


4. There are some that are grown men in Christ, ibid.
Old men. -- And all this does but set forth the different degrees of grace
that are in Christians, some having less some more. -- In the Church of Christ,
which is his Orchard, there are trees of all sorts, Spikenard and Saffron,
Calamus and Cynamon with all trees of Frankinzense, Cant. 2. 14
Myrre and Aloes, Brightman.
etc. Brightman on this Scripture notes, that hereby is meant the several sorts
of Christians. Spikenard and Saffron are young weak Professors; these are
tender Plants that scarce lift up the head above the ground. Calamus and
Cynamon which are shrubs of two cubits high, more Christians of a middle size;
and the other trees note Christians of a more eminent measure and growth in
grace.

A second question, How may a man know himself, 2 Quest.
that be is but of a little measure and small beginning in grace?

1. To be much in dependence on duties, Answ. 1.
argues thou art but weak in grace. A young Christian is like a young
Carpenter, he makes many chips, and has many blows, but does not make such
smooth work as an experienced Carpenter, who will make fewer chips, and at
fewer blows better work: so young Christians, they are much in the use of duty,
but they are ap to rely upon duty; they think duties make them Saints, and
they are apt to make Saviors of their duties. Young Christians are 1.
Affectionate in duties, and 2. Frequent in their duties. 3. And see not their
failings in their duties, and so are apt to rest on their duties. As it is a
sign of an Apostate Professor to cast off duty, so also a note of a young and
weak Professor to rest too much upon his duties.

2. A weak Christian is not clearly insighted into the close and spiritual
failings, Aasw. 2.
which cleave to his performances. He does see his gifts, and takes notice of
his affections, but he does not see the vanity of his mind, the unsoundness of
his ends, his carnal dependence upon his duty, self-love and vain glory; but
in tract of time a grown Christian does take notice of these things in himself;
an experienced Christian will take as much notice of his failing in duty, as of
his ability in it, and though he discern an enlargement of gifts and graces in
him at some times; yet he still discerns much spiritual pride, popular
applause, ostentation of gifts, too much forwardness in setting out his parts,
which a weak Christian seldom perceives.

3. To have a scrupulous conscience about Answ 3.
matters of indifferency argues a weak Christian; Romans 14. 1.
for so the Apostle calls them, weak in the faith, Romans 15. 1.
such as did bind the conscience when the Scriptures left it free. One
believer thought he might eat any thing, and another doubted of the lawfulnes
of eating sundry things. Now those that doubted, the Apostle calls Rom 14. 21.
Weak; and the weak conscience is apt to be defiled. Not to know our liberty,
and to abuse our liberty, 1 Cor. 8. 7. c. 9. 2.
is an argument we have but little grace. Young Converts make more sinners then
ever God made, they perplex and entangle themselves merely in indifferent
things. It is true, there ought to be a conscientious tenderness in all
Christians: tenderness of conscience is our duty, but a tormenting, intangling
scrupulosity is our infirmity: and yet as a weak Christian is better then no
Christian, a weak faith is better then a dead faith; so a scrupulous
conscience is better then a seared conscience.

4. To be so intently set on the exercises of Religion as to neglect our
particular callings, Answ. 4.
is a sign we are but weak in grace. It was a good saying of that famous man
of God, Dr. Sibbs; I like that Christian well, that will hear much and live
much, that, will pray much and work much. Dr. Sibbs.
In young Converts their affections are strong and stirring, and they think
they can never hear enough, and they many times do neglect the duties of their
callings, which does argue their weakness and infirmity. An experienced grown
Christian, is regular in his general and particular calling; so as the one
shall not justle and hinder the other.

5. To have men's persons in admiration argues weakness in grace; Answ. 5,
such were the Corinthians who had men's persons in admiration: the Apostle
calls them, Children, Babes and poor, low, and carnal Christians: Babes,
though they had the life of Christians; yet they had but little of the strength
of Christians. -- They were carnal, 1 Cor. 3. 1, 4.
they savoure'd more of the flesh then of the Spirit. Ignorance is often a
cause of admiration; weak Christians who have but little knowledge, are apt to
be so taken with men's persons, that one cries, I am of Paul, Jam. 2. 1. (...).
and another, I am of Apollo, and so fall into the sin condemned of having the
faith of Christ with respect of persons, to cry up one Minister, and to cry
down others. To idolize some, and to despise others argues that thou art weak
in faith. A solid Christian loves all good ministers, and can contemn none.

6. To be easily seduced and led away into error, argues but weakness in
grace. Answ. 6.
Those the Apostle calls Children who are tossed to and fro, Ephesians. 4. 14.
and carried about with every wind of doctrine. Weakness of head does argue
that grace is not very strong in thy heart. The way not to fall from our
steadfastness, is, to grow in grace; for the Apostle Peter does join those two
duties together, 2 Pet. 3. 17 18.
having given a caution, verse. 17. not to fall from steadfastnesse, verse. 18.
He gives counsel to grow in grace; strong Christians are steadfast, whereas weak
ones are inconstant; and therefore those Professors that have been whirled
about with diverse opinions, it is an evidence they have but weak grace, if any.

7. Such as are only acquainted with the common Principles of Religion, Answ. 7.
without further search into the depths and mysteries of Religion. -- There are
some Professors who may be fitly styled Babes in Christ, because they have need
of milk, being unskilful in the Word of Righteousness, Heb. 5. 12, 13.
that is, in the more solid doctrines of the Gospel, concerning Christ, who is
our Righteousness. Thus the Disciples and Apostles of Christ knew but little of
the mystery of our Redemption at first, and were ignorant concerning the Luke
9. 45.
Passsion of Christ, of the Mar. 9. 10.
Resurrection, as also of the John 10, 16, 17.
Ascension of Christ, till the Holy Ghost came and taught them these things,
and brought those things to remembrance that Christ had taught them.

8. Weak Christians are strong in affections, Answ. 8.
and not in judgment, they have usually more heat then light; young Christians
are like young horses, they have much metal, but are not so fit for a journey,
because they are not so through paced: there are many Christians that have much
zeal and affection, but are not so solid in their judgments; but this argues
much weakness in grace.

9. A weak Christian is one that cannot bear reproof. Answ. 9.
Sharp weather will discover whether thou art of a weak or sound body; -- so a
sharp reproof will discover whether thou art of a weak spiritual temper and
constitution. When Nathan came to David he could bear the reproof, though the
Prophet told him to his face, He was the man that had sinned; but Asa, 2 Samuel
12. 7.
though a good man, could not endure the faithful reproof of a Prophet, 2 Chronicles. 16. 10.
But was wroth with the Seer, and put him in the prisonhouse.

10. A weak Believer is one that can trust God for his soul, Ans. 10.
but not for his body. -- So Jesus Christ argues that those had little faith,
Mat. 6. 30.
who did expect heaven and happiness from God their Father, and durst trust
him with their souls and eternal concerments, and yet durst not trust him for
food and raiment. There are those that dare trust God for heaven, and yet not
trust him for earth, but these are (...) of little faith. The Disciples when
they wanted bread, (...).
began to reason amongst themselves how they should be supplied. -- Oh ye of
little faith (says Christ) Why do you thus reason? Mat. 16. 8.
Can you trust me for the bread of eternal life, and dare you not trust me for
the bread of this life?

Be not then discouraged you that discern in your selves but small measures of
grace; 1 Use.
look on your wants and imperfections, so as to grow in grace, and not to be
content with any measure: But look not on the small beginnings in grace, as
discouragement to you. When you see in a field a great Oak, you may say, this
great tree was once but a small acorne. Those Christians who are now but small
spriggs, may hereafter be tall Cedars: say to thy soul, though I am but weak,
yet I shall be strong: grace where it is true will be growing, the smoking flax
may be a burning and shining lamp in Gods Candlestick: and therefore as you
must not be content with the greatest measure of grace; so neither be
discouraged with the least measure of Grace. A grain of mustard seed, Mat. 17.
20
may grow a great tree.

Content not your selves with small measures of grace; 2 Use.
a little of the world will not content you. -- In the womb a foot contents us,
three foot in the Cradle, and seven foot in the grave: but betwixt the Cradle
and the grave, a whole world will not content us, and shall a little grace
content us? For wealth and desire of it, thou art as the Horse-leech which
cries, give, and as the grave that never says it is enough; and for grace will thou be content with a little?

Sermon III. At Lawrence Jury, London. March 16. 1650/1.
1. KINGS 14. part of the 13. verse. -- Because in him there is found some good
thing toward the Lord God of Israel in the house of Jeroboam.
WE have given some Scripture Characters of those that have a little grace, now
we proceed to resolve a third question.

3. Quest. 3 Quest.
Why does God so order and ordain it, that among his own people all shall not
be of an equal stature in Christ, but there are of them some in whom there
shall be but the beginnings of grace found?

Answ. Answ.
It is true, it is not with Regeneration as it was in the Creation; it is not
with the Trees of Righteousness, as it was with the Trees of Paradise, which
were created all perfect at the first: but it is not so in the Work of Grace,
we are not perfectly sanctified, nor at once, but we perfect holiness in the
fear of God, and that by degrees; and God has given to some of his people but
small beginnings and measures of grace, and that for these Reasons.

1. To put a difference between our estate on earth, and our being in heaven.
In heaven we shall all have an equal stature in grace, though it be disputed
that there are different degrees of glory. But in heaven the spirits of just
men shall all be made perfect, Heb. 12. 23
and there we shall all come unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ. Ephesians. 4. 13.
All believers here are justified by God alike. God does not acquit the strong,
and hold guilty the weak, but justification is alike to all, but our
sanctification is not alike, but when we come to heaven, our sanctification
shall be then as our Justification is now, that is, perfect and equal, we shall
have not only a perfection of parts, but of degrees.

2. This is to make men live in a continual dependence upon divine influxe and
supplies from the Spirit of God. If children should be born perfect men as Adam
was created, we should not then see that continual need of, and dependence on
our Parents. We are bred in the womb, and afterward born in the world, and then
by degrees grow up from stature to stature; and so it is in grace, God deals
thus -- Converting grace does not make us so perfect as we shall be afterward.
At the first Creation he made the trees all fruitful, and at their full growth;
but now it is otherwise, they are first kernels or seeds, then plants before
they are grown trees, and they have dependence on the influences of heaven: so
we are first babes, then young men, and then strong men in Christ, to keep our
souls in a dependence on Gods grace.

3. For the greater ornament of the mystical body of Christ. In a natural body,
if every member should be of an equal bigness, the body would be monstrous:
but the body is so proportioned in its different members, that the lesser
become serviceable to the greater, and so they all orderly discharge their
mutual operations. As in Music there would be no harmony, if the strings were
all of an equal bigness; but one string being the base, and the other the
treble, that makes the Music to be more melodious; so it is in grace, the
different degrees of grace makes the body of Christ more harmonious. It is here
as in some curious piece of needle work; if all the silks were of one color,
it would not set out the work with so much luster and amiablenesse, as the
variety of colors will do.

4. To make Gods people see a necessity of maintaining fellowship and communion
together, to edify and build up each other. There would be no need of
Christian discourse and holy fellowship, did not our weakness require it. As
among the members of the body, God has so ordered them, that each member is
serviceable to another, the eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee:
1 Cor. 12. 21.
so among the people of God, some being weak, others strong, there is a
necessity of maintaining Communion together. There is an instinct in nature,
that things weak in themselves cleave to those things which are stronger then
they. Pro. 30. 26
The Conies are but a feeble flock, yet make they their houses in the rocks:
among birds the Dove the silliest and most shiftlesse creature, Cant. 2. 14.
yet she hides her self in the clefts of the rock; the Vine among the trees the
weakest, yet it clings to the wall; the Hopps among the plants, yet it twines
about the pole. So God has ordered it in his infinite wisdom, that some
Christians should be stronger, and some weaker in grace, that the strong may
help the weak, and each be serviceable to one another.

5. To set out the glory of God in all his glorious attributes.

1. This different size of grace in Christians, does glorify the mercy of God,
and the free grace of God, who when there are some Christians that have but a
little grace, yet God rewards those small measures of grace with great measures
of glory.

1. This magnifies the power of God, who when we are weak, yet the great God
manifests his power in our weakness, 2 Cor. 12. 9, 10.
yea, his strength is made perfect in weakness. Ver. 10*
And therefore Paul adds, verse. 10. For when I am weak, then am I strong, that
is, in Christ. Is it not a demonstration of great power, to keep a small spark
of fire that it shall not be quenched in a flood of water? yet behold that
little spark of grace in thee, shall not be quenched in thee by the flood and
torrent of thy corruptions. It is by Gods power that the least measure of grace
shall be preserved. There is not so much of Gods power seen in preserving the
Angels, as a weak Believer; for the Angels, though mutable, yet are perfect
creatures, they have no weights of sins and corruptions to pull them down. But
alas! we have such a bias and inclination to sin, that we are apt to be turned
aside from God every moment. The Power of God is more seen in preserving a poor
believer in the state of grace, then in preserving the Angels in the state of
innocence. And as Gods power is seen in preserving of a little grace, so it is
also seen in the increasing of small grace. Grace is like to that cloud which the
Prophets servants saw, which at first was but like a man's hand, but afterward,
it overspread the whole heavens. 1 Kings 18 44, 45.
True grace is of a spreading and increasing nature; and therefore the increase
of our graces may be shadowed out in the vision of the waters of the Sanctuary,
which at first were but to the ankles after that to the knees, then to the
loins, and at last so deep that they could not be passed over. Ezekiel. 47. 3, 4,
5.


3. God does hereby glorify his wisdom, As Gods wisdom is demonstrated in
the world, by the variety of creatures, which are not all of the same bulk and
bigness, but some bigger and some lesser: so in the Church of God, his wisdom
appears, that some Christians are of greater, and some of a lesser measure of
grace. Search the whole Creation and you shall find the wisdom of God in the
variety of Creatures. In the heavens there are the greater and lesser lights,
and so stars of different magnitude, do beautify and bespangle the heavens:
so in the sea there are greater and lesser fishes: in the air the great Eagle
and little Sparrow: on the earth the Elephant and little Dog: amongst the
creeping things there is the great Serpent and the little Pismire: amongst the
vegetables, the tall Cedar and the Hysop on the wall: And also amongst the
rational Creatures, there is a Giant and a Dwarf: a grown man of a tall
stature, and a child but of a span long. So is Gods wisdom greatly
illustrated, that as there is variety of natural proportions in the world; so
there are various proportions of grace in his Church amongst his children.

Before I come to apply this point, which is of very great use to Gods
children, for their comfort; I shall lay down some general Positions about
small measures of grace.

That in the Church there are found more weak Christians then strong, 1. Posit.
more young Converts then old and grown Christians.

As in a Forest there are more young sprouts then old trees, in a garden more
young slips then old roots, in the world more young children then old men. In
Niniveh there were 120000 Infants, but there was not such a number of old men.
Jon. 4. 11. Quo perfect^^res, ^o pauciores.
By how much things are perfect, by so much they are the fewer. Look amongst
other creatures, those that are of a bigger bulk are of a lesser number, as in
the sea there are more young and little fish then great whales; on the earth
the smallest things are innumerable; Jer. 46. 23.
in the air there are more swarms of flies, then flocks of birds; so in the
Church of God there are more that are young and weak Converts then old
Christians. It is with most Christians as it was with Jonathans signal arrows,
which he shot to warn David by, 1 Samuel 20. 36.
of which two fell short, and but one beyond the mark: -- So where one Christian
shoots home to the mark of the price of the high calling in Christ Jesus, there
are many fall short.

That there are many that have but weak measures and small beginnings of grace,
2. Posit.
who have been a long time under the Profession of Religion, and under the
means of grace; such were the Hebrews, who for the time that they ought to be
teachers, yet had need that one should teach them again, Heb. 5. 12.
which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God, and are become such as
have need of milk and not of strong meat; and I may accommodate to this purpose
that speech of Christ, Mat. 19. 30
Many that are first shall be last, and the last shall be first. There are many
who went out early, and took as it were the first step in Profession of
Religion; and yet others have over-gone them, who went out after them. Many who
have but weak measures of grace, have been of long standing under the means of
grace. And therefore Christians are not to judge the strength of grace by their
Profession, but by their Proficiency; It is not how many years you have been
Professors, but what experience and judgment have you gotten under Ordinances.

That the smallest measures of grace cannot merit eternal life and glory, 3.
Posit.
because great measures cannot. Miserationes Dei sunt merita nostra.
In merit there ought to be a proportion; but between grace and glory there is
none; our services are imperfect, our salvation is perfect; our services but
momentary, our glory is eternal; Deus coronat non merita nostra, sed dona sua.
there is no comparison between our light duties and eternal weight of glory.
Cant. 2. 14
The Church in the Canticles is described according to the several parts of her
body: Her voice is sweet, her Countenance comely, and her Doves eyes are
btautifull. Behold thou art fair my Love, (says Christ) thou have Doves eyes,
Cant. 1. 15
thy Cheeks are comely with rows of Jewels, and thy neck with chains of Gold.
Now it is very observable, Cant. 1. 10.
that though Christ commends the Churches Eyes, her Hair, her Teeth, her Lips
and Speech, her Temples, her Breasts, her Neck, etc. Cant. 4. 1, 2 3, 4, etc.
yet he does not commend her hands, to show that though she be adorned with
many graces, as with so many beautiful ornaments and co^mely lineaments, yet
she merits nothing at the hands of Christ by all her doings. The Churches
beauty is perfect through the comeliness of Christ. Ezekiel. 16. 14.


That believers ought not to rest satisfied with the small measures of grace,
4. Posit.
they have received; though a little grace may bring you to heaven, yet you are
not to take up therewith; but if you have got a little grace, labor for more;
and to quicken you hereunto, Consider,

1. Small measures of grace are not so sensible and evidential to your selves,
little things because they are little, are not seen. There may be a little dust
hovering up and down in the air, yet because it is small we see it not: this
i^ the reason why Christians doubt; grace is little, and therefore it is not
discerned. Mat. 8. 26. compared with Mar. 4. 40.
Compare Mat. 8. 28. with Mar. 4. 40. and we shall find, that in Matthew,
Christ says, in his reproof to his disciples, O ye of little faith. And in
Mark, How is it that ye have no faith? You may from the variety of these
expressions gather this, that a little faith unexercised, as to comfort, is as
good as no faith: it was so little, it was as good as none in that particular
exigence they were in; you may have a little grace, and yet as to comfort, that
little and weak grace may not further thee in a way of strong consolation. Not
but that a weak Christian is accepted, that the weaker Christian may lie in his
Fathers bosom; -- yet it is the strength of grace that gives us strong
consolation.

2. Consider, that small measures of grace, though they may bring you to
heaven, yet they are not so useful to others; a weak Christian cannot do much
good in Christian converse, because they want judgment and experience in the
ways of God; and therefore such are not to be received to doubtful
disputations, Romans 14. 1, etc. 15. 1.
but are to be born withal. Gal. 6. 1.
Spiritual and strong Christians are most useful. Young converts are not fit
for some exercises about Religion; they are not fit to strengthen others. When
thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren: Luke 22. 32
It is not to be understood of his first conversion; but of his Progress in
Religion, as if Christ had said; when thou art strengthened thy self, strengthen
thy brethren. -- There are some duties which young converts are not fit for;
Mar. 16. 16 17.
A piece of new cloth is not fit for an old garment, neither old bottles fit
for new wine. Pareus.
Pareus and most Expositors refer that place to that case of conscience, Verse.
14.
Why Christ's disciples did not fast often: -- They were like old and weak
bottles, and so were not fit for that strong duty which was as new wine, and
would be apt to break them. Christ said to his disciples, That he had many
things to say unto them, Joh. 16. 12
which in regard of their weakness they were not then able to hear.

3, Nor are small measures of grace so honorable to God; God is glorified,
Joh. 15. 8.
when his people bear much fruit. Much means and pains and little fruit, is a
shame to the Vine dresser; and therefore believers must not rest satisfied with
small measures of grace.

It is our duty to improve those small measures of grace which God has given
us. 5. Posit.


And consider, As he that is faithful in a little, God will make him ruler
over much. Luke 19. 17
Use of grace will increase it; -- yet if thy grace be increased, ascribe all
to God, it is Gods pound, and not thy pains has gained.

1. Use is of comfort to weak Christians, 1. Use.
to those young Abijahs, in whom there is found but some little good. Let such
know to their comfort,

1. Though thy grace be but little in quantity, yet it is much in value. A
pearl, though but little in substance, yet it is of great worth, so a little
grace is of great value; The heart of a wicked man is nothing worth; you may
have much knowledge, and seeming grace, but no true worth. A shop full of
barrels will not make a man rich, unless those vessels be full of commodities:
gifts as to heaven, are but the lumber of a Christian, it is grace that makes
him rich toward God.

2. Though thy grace be little for the present, yet it will grow for the future
to a greater measure. Mat. 13. 31 32.
The little grain of Mustardseed (the least of seeds) will in time grow up to a
tree. Grace is fitly compared to leaven, which is of a spreading nature; Mat.
13. 33 1
to the cloud which the Prophets servant saw, Kings 18. 44.
and to the waters of the Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 47. 3. 4.
which did all increase. An Infant of days shall proceed by degrees, till he
become like the Ancient of days, perfect as his heavenly Father is perfect.
Arbor procera Cypressu^.
Naturalists observe, that the seeds of the Cypressetree are very small, and
yet of them proceeds a very high tree: Such is the birth and growth of grace.

3. The little measure of grace once begun in the soul shall be perfected. Mat.
12. 20
-- God will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax until
judgment be perfected in victory. By judgment is meant there, the work of
Sanctification, till that comes to be prevalent over corruption. Paul was
confident, Phil. 1. 6.
That the that bad begun a good work in them, would finish it, unto the day of
Jesus Christ. 1 These. 5. 24.
The Lord is faithful and will do it. God has commanded us to go on to
perfection, Heb. 6. 1.
and he does not command impossibilities. God blames men of folly, in not
proceeding to finish when they have begun to build. Luke 14. 28, 29.
God will never begin to rear up a structure of grace, and never finish it. --
Besides, God has promised to perfect that which concerns his servants. Psalm.
138. 8.


4. The weakest Christian has grace alike for quality, though not for
quantity, though thy grace be not so much; yet it is as true as others: though
but a convert of yesterday: yet grace as true as of an old Stander in Religion.
-- Faith is alike precious in all believers; 2 Pet. 1. 1.
for quality, though not for quantity. -- Faith in all believers is alike,

1. In respect of the Author, God.

2. The Object, it holds upon the same Christ.

3. The Means of working it are the same, viz. the Word and Spirit. A little
grace is true grace. Fire in the spark is as well fire as the flame: the
filings of gold are gold, as well as the whole wedge, a drop of water is water,
as well as the whole Ocean. A little grace is true grace.

4. The End, it has the same salvation of soul, 1 Pet. 1. 9.

5. God will not put your weak grace to trial beyond your strength; Isa. 27. 8.
God will debate with it in measure; he will stay his rough wind in the day of
his East Wind. -- Thou shall not have such boisterous storms of temptation, as
a strong Christian -- God will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are
able. 1 Cor. 10. 13.
God will take care that the spirit shall not fail. Isa. 57. 16.


6. Take this for your comfort, the least measure of grace is enough to bring
you to heaven. This is not spoken to make you idle, but only to comfort a
perplexed conscience. Many because their grace is weak, they think they have no
grace. Rev. 3. 8.
I have set before thee (says Christ to the Church of Philadelphia) an open
door, and no man can shut in for thou have a little strength, and have kept my
Word, and have not denied my name. It is true, our comfort lies much in the
comparative degree, but our salvation in the positive degree; strong grace has
strong comfort; much faith will bring thee with much comfort to heaven; but a
little faith will bring thee safely to heaven.

Sermon IV. At Lawrence Jury, London. March 16. 1650/1.
1. KINGS 14. part of the 13. verse. -- Because in him there is found some good
thing toward the Lord God of Israel in the house of Jeroboam.
BEfore we come to the use of Caution, I shall here state a case of conscience,
which is this, A case of conscience resolved.
That if amongst Gods People there are some found that have but little grace,
and but small measures found in them; Then what is the least measure of geace,
less then which a man cannot be said to be in the state of grace?

This is a practical and useful case.

First: this is of great use to Christians, who are but of a lower form in
Religion, and have but little grace; yet they may know that little they have:
and though they have not attained strength of grace; yet they may know the
truth of grace in themselves: and although they come short of strong believers,
yet they shall hereby know they go beyond the hypocrite: for the least measure
of grace, is better then the greatest measure of gifts.

Secondly, the knowledge of this will quicken the soul unto due indevours
after a further increase. This will teach them to abound more and more. 1. These
4. 1


Now that we may discover what is the lowest degree of true grace, we shall
show you it in some of these following particulars.

1. A light in the soul to see the evil and the mischievous nature of sin,
though not an ability to mortify sin. The entrance of Gods Word gives light,
and gives understanding to the simple, Psalm. 119.
that is, the first work of the Word upon the soul, the very beginning of
converting; grace in the heart is light, whereby thou see sin and its
sinfulness. And it was in the first creation, the first thing that was created
was light: so in the second creation, the first work is to open the eyes of the
blind, and to turn them from darkness to light, Acts 26. 18
and from the power of Satan unto God. Upon the work of conversion in the
souie, the first degree of grace is to be enlightened with the light of the
living So that where this light is wanting; Job 33. 30.
there cannot be a work of grace.

2. A settled and fixed purpose of heart to leave sin, and to cleave unto God.
-- Grace does not consist so much in an actual mortifying of sin, as in an
unfeigned and settled purpose of heart to leave every sin.

The Prodigals resolution to go to his fathers house, Luke 15. 17, 18.
argued some grace in him. I will arise and go to my fathers house, that is, I
will leave my wicked company and courses* and it is said, His father saw him
afar off, and ran and met him. The Lord did work in him a purpose to leave his
sin. Gregory on this says, Greg.
That remission of sin came to his heart before his Confession break out in
his speech to his father. So David, I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine
iniquity have I not hid; Psalm. 32. 5.
I said I will confess my transgression to the Lord, and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin. August.
Augustine observes on this place, That David does not say he did confess, but
he purposed to confess hi^ sin, and yet this his purpose was true grace,
though one of the least measures of grace. That holy purpose of David argued
grace in him, when he said, Psalm. 17. 3.
I have purposed and will not transgress thy law, Psalm. 119. 106.
I have sworn and will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments. It
argues grace when a soul does cleave unto the Lord with full purpose of heart.
Act. 11. 23.


3. Another low measure of grace is this; A sensible complaint of the want of
grace. Thus he that came to Christ, and said with tears, Lord I believe, help
thou my unbelief, he had grace. Mar. 9. 24.
He does not say, Lord help my faith, but Lord help my unbelief. His expression
about his unbelief, did note not only his want, but his sensiblenesse of his
want. This is that Poverty of Spirit, which has the first place in the
Beatitudes; Mat. 5. 3.
this is the lowest round of the ladder. The Apostle tells us, That the Spirit
helps our infirmities, in sighs and groans that cannot be uttered. Romans 8. 26.
Observe here, that it is not said the Spirit helps us with comforts and joys,
but with sighs and groans, whence we may learn that the Spirits help is as well
in sighs and groans, and sensible complaints of our wants, as in holy
ravishments. Strength of grace is seen in holy joys and ravishments of Spirit,
but truth of grace may be seen and discerned in sighs, groans and complaints of
our wants; they are said to be sighs and groans which cannot be uttered, not
in regard of their greatness; but (as Master Perkins observes) in regard of
their weakness. Perkins. Curae leves loqueuntur, ingentes stupent.
Gods children at first wanting ability to express their own thoughts. To be
sensible of the want of grace is grace; for nature cannot make a man duly
sensible of the want of grace, nor sensibly to complain of that want.

4. Earnest desire after more grace, argues there is grace in the soul, though
it be but small. I do not place the beginning of grace in an ability to
exercise grace; but rather in an earnest desire after grace. Desire after
grace, is accounted by God the grace it self we desire; for so we find that
Nehemiah's desire to fear the Lord, is counted for actual fearing God. Neh. 1.
11. compared with Neh. 5.
Desires are the seeds of grace, and the graces themselves are the blossoms
and sweet fruit that spring from thence; grace exercised is the fruit of a holy
desire after grace.

That the desires after grace is in Gods acceptance grace, may be thus
demonstrated.

1. Gods people have appealed unto God, concerning the uprightness of their
hearts, merely by their desires; -- so says the Church. Isa. 26. 8, 9.
The desire of our soul is to thy name, and the remembrance of thee; and with
my soul have I desired thee in the night.

2. God has made many gracious promises, not only to the acting and exercising
of grace, but to the desires after grace. Blessed are they that do hunger and
thirst after Righteousness: Mat. 5. 6.
for they shall be filled. -- If any man thirst (says Christ) let him come unto
me and drink; Joh. 7. 37.
nay there is a general and universal invitation to every one that thirsts,
to come to the waters; and God has promised to give to him that is at hirst of
the fountain of the water of life freely. Isa. 55. 1.
The Lord has promised to fulfill the desire of those that fear him, Rev. 21. 6.
and will hear the desire of the humble. Psa. 145. 19
So that by these promises it does appear, Psalm. 10. 17.
that hungring and thirsting, and desires after grace, are graces in Gods
account and acceptance.

Now lest men should rest in lazy and sluggish desires, and thereby neglect the
exercise of grace, I shall give you an account in what sense the Scripture
reckons upon desires after grace, to be grace.

1. They are supernatural desires. It Is true there are natural desires in the
soul after that which is good, -- it is the language of nature, Psalm. 4. 6.
Who will show us any good; now these desires may and do arise from the motion
of the natural and unsanctified will of man; and these desires are after
happiness, and not after holiness; such were the desires of Balaam: who said,
Numb. 23. 10.
Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his. This
was but a natural desire. But true desires in the soul are after heaven, for
holiness sake. Veluntatem fi^is, non mediorum. Bern.
Bernard notably sets out these desires of natural men, -- That they have a
desire of the End, and not of the Means.

2. Desires after grace are joined with holy endeavors; and therefore the
Apostle joins desire and zeal together; 2 Cor. 7. 11.
to intimate that true desires are always joined with zealous endeavors. Thus
the Apostle also joyneth a readiness of will, and performance together. God
will never accept the will for the deed, unless there be an endeavor to
perform, 2 Cor. 8. 11.
what we say we are willing to do. And therefore Solomon rightly describes, how
pernicious desires are without endeavors. The desires of the flothfull (says
he) kill him, because his hands refuse to labor. Bernard describes the
laziness to the life: Carnal men love to obtain, Pro. 21. 25
but love not to follow Christ: they will not endeavor to seek him whom they
desire so find. Conales cupiunt Christum consequi, sed non se quinon cu rant
quaerere quem desiderant iavenire


3. Desires which are true and gracious are unsatisfiable; thus David speaks of
his desires: My soul (says he) breaks for the longing it has to thy
judgments at all times; yea he further describ es the ardency and
unsatisfiablenesse of his desires by the Hearts panting after the waterbrooks.
Bern.
The Heart is naturally the most thirsty of all creatures, -- Psalm. 119. 20.
but this thirst is much increased when the poor beast is chased with dogs:
even so the true desires of the soul after grace, Psalm. 42. 1.
are earnest, ardent and vehement desires. 2 Cor. 7. 11.


4. You may know true desires after grace by their Object. Desires they are not
gracious, if they be more after outward things then after God. Psalm. 42. 2.
So David, My soul thirsts after God, after the living God. Psalm. 63. 1.
My soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs after thee in a dry and thirsty
land where no water is. Thus his soul longed, and did break with longing after
Gods judgments. -- Now therefore would thou know whether thou have any
beginning of grace in thy soul, Psa. 119. 20
examine what thy desires are; perhaps thou can not pray, but thou desire
to pray: perhaps thou can not mourn for sin, but do thou mourn that thou
can not mourn? Perhaps thou do not believe, (as thou fear) but do thou
desire to believe? Perhaps thou can not repent, but do thou desire to
repent, and do thou labor to repent? Then thou may conclude that thou
have some beginnings of true grace in thy soul.

5. We may know the truth of grace though it be little, by the earnest desire
after the Word and the means of grace. -- Thus Peter sets forth our desires, 1
Pet. 2. 2.
As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow
thereby. There is in a child a natural instinct as soon as ever it is born, to
desire after the mothers breast: the Apostle makes it a resemblance of a
spiritual man; a man spiritually new born, will desire after the Word, the means
of grace, that he may grow in grace.

6. An indeared love to those that have grace. 1 John 3. 14.
By this you know you are past from death to life, because you love the
brethren. Casuists upon this text, say, that love to Gods children is the first
grace, and first appears in young converts. The natives in New England, it is
observed, upon their conversion, (for God has begun there to bring some of
those poor creatures from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to
himself) the first appearance of grace in them, is in their love and respect to
those that are truly gracious. Thus I have showed you an answer to the
question, what are the least measures of grace, without which, or some of them,
a man cannot be said to have grace, and wheresoever any of these are, that man's
condition is safe, and these little measures of grace will bring a man to
heaven.

I shall here lay down some cautions to prevent mis-application. --

Though these small measures of grace are saving, 1. Caution.
yet you must not content your selves with them. Take heed, lest what I have
said, for the support of the weakness of some Christians, become not a pillow
for the idleness of others; But let us strive to go on unto perfection. We must
not sit down with any measure of grace. Heb. 6. 1.
And to persuade you hereunto;

1. Consider, that things merely necessary and sufficient to maintain a natural
life, will not content a man: what man is content, though he has clothes enough
to hide his nakedness, and food enough to keep life and soul together? -- But
he desires not only clothes for nakedness, but ornament, and not only food for
hunger and necessity, but delight. Now shall men be unbounden after their
desires for outward things, and shall they sit down and say they have enough
for heavenly things?

2. Consider, if thou contentest thy self with a small measure of grace, though
thou shall have the fruit of thy grace when thou die, yet thou will want the
comfort of thy grace whilst thou live. It is strength of grace that gives
assurance. Weak grace will bring thy soul to heaven, but it is the strength of
grace will bring heaven into thy soul. Isa. 32. 17.
The work of Righteousness shall be Peace, and the effect of Righteousness
shall be quietness and assurance for ever. A child of God has seldom peace
and comfort from the habit of Righteousness, but from the exercise of
Righteousness. He that lacks these things (says Peter) is blind, and cannot
see afar off, etc. 2 Pet. 1. 9, 10, 11.
This is not spoken of wicked men who have no grace, but of such who have
grace: and because they exercise it not, do not discern the comfortable fruits
of grace in their souls. A little faith unexercised, is as to comfort (as we
have showed) as good as no faith. Mat. 8. 26. compared with Mar. 4. 40.
-- They that add not to the ftocke of grace, will want the comfort of grace.
So that a weak Christian, who is compared by Peter to a pu^blinde man: He
cannot see (because the eyesight of his faith is weak) afar off; 2 Pet. 1. 9.
(...).
he cannot see his name writ in heaven; -- He will want the comfortable
evidence of grace in his heart, who contents himself with measures of grace.

The second caution is, Take not those things to be evidences of the truth of
grace, 2. Caution.
which are evidences only of the growth and strength of grace. Weak Converts
do involve themselves in a Labyrinth of misery, in judging themselves by those
symptoms, which are evidences only of the strength of grace. Thou must not
judge thy self whether thou art in the state of grace by this; as whether thou
have ravishing joys and comforts of the Holy Ghost; these are things that God
indulgeth to some few, and those of a long standing in the school of Christ. In
a School, a scholar must not compare himself with one of the highest Form: if
thou would judge of the truth of thy grace, judge by the lowest measure. The
reason why hypocrites and low-form Christians do mistake, is this: hypocrites
judge they have grace because they have gifts, and weak Christians judge they
have no grace because they do not find such measures of grace in them as are
in others. We do not use to say, it is not day because it is not noon. -- It is
unthankfulness to God, and uncharitableness to our selves, to argue a nullity
of grace from the weakness of it; and therefore if thou can not say, I see my
grace, yet it is well if thou can say, Blessed be God, I see my sin; If thou
can not say that thou leavest sin, yet it is well if thou can say, I have a
full purpose of heart to do so: if thou can but cry out for the want of
grace, yet comfort thy self, and do not conclude thou have no grace

Do not conclude you have small measures of grace, 3. Caution.
because you have but small measures of comfort; this is the fault of young
converts, they take measure of their grace by their comfort, which is a false
and deceitful rule; growth of grace is not to be measured by the working of
joy: the sweet blossom of joy may fall off, when the fruit of grace may come
on; yea sometimes Christians of the greatest measure of grace, may have the
least measure of comfort; and all to let us know, that as the being and
exercise, so the comforts of our graces comes from free grace. Our Lord Jesus
Christ, who was anointed above his fellows, and was full of grace and truth,
yet in the time of his desertion was without comfort, when by reason of the
suspension of the favor of God his Father, he cried out, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me. And so sometimes Christians that have but little
measures of grace, may have much comfort; and this is the reason of that flash
of joy that young converts have; it is Gods indulgence toward them, to give
them great joy at their first conversion: and indeed their joy at that time is
the more taken notice of, because usually such have much trouble of mind when
they pass through the pangs of the new birth, the change is then specifical,
which afterward is but gradual: and so though they have afterward more grace,
more settled joys and comforts, yet at their first conversion they may have more
sense of their joys, though afterward they may find an increase of grace,
when joy may be as real, though not so sensible; and therefore do not judge thy
grace by thy comfort.

Do not conclude the measure of thy grace little, 4. Caution.
because thou have but a little measure of gifts. Gifts are the issues of time
and experience, and the fruits of studies advantaged by the strength of natural
parts. A man may have a quick and pregnant invention, a profound judgment, a
retentive memory, a clear elocution, and the like, and yet none of these things
can be arguments of grace, but all are but natural endowments. Gifts may be
high, and grace may be low: Thus it was with the Church of Corinth, they were
enriched with utterance and knowledge, 1 Cor. 1. 5. and v. 7.
and they came behind other Churches in no gift; and yet the Apostle speaks of
these very Corinthians, that they were very low in grace: 1 Cor. 3. 1, 3
for so he taxes them, 1 Cor. 3 1. that they were not spiritual, but carnal
men, Babes in Christ, that by reason of their envying, strife and divisions,
they were carnal, and walked as men; thus the Church of Laodicea was rich, and
increased in gifts, and grew proud of it too, Rev. 3. 17.
and yet for grace was poor, and naked, and blind, and miserable. It is with
some Professors as it is with a well read Scholar, who having read many books
of Geography and the Description of places, can discourse of them very well,
but if he were to travel those countries, of which he has so often read, he
would soon be at a loss: -- So gifts may carry men far from matter of discourse
about Religion, but its only grace that inables a man to practice Religion. A
child of God that has but a little measure of gifts, may have for all that
much grace. Of all the seven Churches of Asia, it is said of Philadelphia, Rev.
3. 8.
that she had but a little strength that is but little strength of parts and
gifts, and yet that Church was very eminent for grace; for she with as much, if
not more faithfulness then the other Churches, did keep the word of Christ's
patience, and did not deny his name. 1 Cor. 12. 31
Judge not therefore they grace by thy gifts. It is good to covet earnestly the
best gifts, but the way of true grace (though but weak) is a more excellent way.

I shall conclude this point with some further consolation to the people of
God, that have but weak measures of grace.

Though thou art but weak in thy self, 1. Comfort.
yet thou have much strength from without thee, or rather it is in thee,
because of the Spirit of Christ that dwells in their hearts, that do believe the
devil does all he can to make a little faith fail, Luke 22 32
-- but Christ prays that it fail not. Great are the confederacies of the
world, the flesh and the devil against thy little grace, 1. Joh. 4. 4.
but be of good comfort. 2 Cor. 12 9
Ye are of God little children (says St. John) and have overcome them, Isa.
26. 4.
because greater is he that is in you, then be that is in the world: and the
weaker thou art, Jude 24.
the more advantage has God to magnify the glory of his power in thy
weakness. 1 Pet. 1. 5.


1. Comfort your selves ye weak Christians, for you have a strong God. Heb. 7.
25. (...) i. e. perfect and perpetuo -- (...). Non solum perpetui tatem
temporh significat, (...), sed omnimodem perfectionem.
In the Lord Jehoboah is everlasting strength. -- Your God is able to keep you
from falling, and to present you faultlesse before the presence of his glory
with exceeding joy. He is able through his Almighty power through faith to keep
you unto salvation. -- you have a strong God, fear not, his power will be
magnified in your weakness.

2. You have a strong Savior, though your grace is weak, yet he is able to
save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him. Camer. in Myr.
-- Christ is the 1 Cor. 1. 24.
Wisdom and the power of God to those that are called; Yea he is called a
strong Redeemer. Our Redeemer is strong, the Lord of hasts is his name -- Satan
is indeed the Prince of the power of the air: c Romans 6. 10.
for so he is called, Ephesians. 2. 2 but Jesus Christ is truly the great power of
God, who is able, because (...). po^.
stronger then the strong man armed, to bruise Satan under the feet of his
Saints.

3. You lie under a strong Word, which is able to carry on the work of grace,
which is begun in you. The Word of God, though it be foolishness to them that
perish, 1 Cor. 1. 18
yet it is the power of God to them that are saved; Romans 1. 16,
yea it is an Engine, mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds,
2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.
casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against
the knowledge of God, Act. 20. 32
and brings into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ;
wherefore the Apostle prays, Jam. 1. 21.
Now brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, 2 Timothy 3.
16. 17. (...)
which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance amongst all them
that are sanctified; so that cheer up, though faith be weak, yet the word of
God is strong; it is that ingrafted Word which is able to save your souls: 2 Timothy 2. 19.
yea, in a word, Singula verba ponddui haebent, certitud^ haec nititur primo
fundamento, secunc o non quocunque, sed firma, tertio non hominis, sed Dei,
quarto non vacillante, sed stante and obs^gnaro.
The Word of God is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be made perfect, and
thoroughly furnished unto all good works.

4. You are weak but you stand on a sure foundation. 1. It is a foundation. 2.
A sure foundation. 3. It is a foundation of God: And 4. it is the foundation of
God that cannot shake, but stands firm. Now the weak believer stands by the
immutable decree of God, which here the Apostle calls the foundation of God.

5. Weak believers are assisted by a strong spirit. Dr. Prideaux.
The spirit of God is not only a spirit of grace and supplication, but it is
also a spirit of power. Zech. 12. 10.
And therefore let weak believers cheer up themselves, 2 Timothy 1. 7.
though they have but little grace, In te sta^ and non stas. Aug.
yet that little grace is upheld and maintained by the great power of God unto
salvation.

The truth and essence of grace is not discerned so much by good acts, 2.
Comfort.
as by good affections. Cant. 4. 10.
-- How fair is my love, my sister, says Christ to the Spouse? God reckons of
our beauty by our love, and of our perfection by the sincerity of our
affections. Natural abilities, to which formalists and hypocrites may come up,
may and do resemble good actions, but they cannot come up to good affections.
A Painter may paint the color of the face, but his art cannot give heat unto
the picture. Good actions may give you the resemblance of a Christian. So what
Jehu did resembled a true Reformer; but they are good affections that do set
out the life and heat of true grace. Judge they grace therefore by thy
affections, and take comfort in this, though thou art little and low in
actions, if thou art warm and working in thy affections.

The third and last comfort is this, That little grace shall be lasting grace.
3. And last comfort.
Adam had perfection, but had not perserverance; and thou (poor soul!) have
imperfection of grace, but have perserverance in grace. The most violent and
impetuous flood of corruption shall not quench the least measure; the least
spark of true grace, the most boisterous blast of temptation shall not
extinguish this poor smoking flax, not one drop of his divine ointment shall
be spilt as water upon the ground. Comets may blaze a while, and then they
fall; Stella cadens non est stella.
to show that it was a Comet and not a Star. -- True Stars do not, cannot
fall. Oh then bless God, who though in his anger, he breaks the Nations like a
Potters vessel with an iron mace; yet such is his tenderness over weak
believers, he will not break the bruised reed and though he put out the candle
of the wicked, yet he will not quench the smoking flax. The seeming graces of
hypocrites shall perish and come to nothing, when true grace shall hold out. --
The painted face decays soon, but the natural complexion lasts. A child of
God may be tossed by reason of corruption and temptation in a troublesome sea,
but that ship shall never be shipwrackt, whereof Christ is the Pilot, the
Scriptures the Compass, the Promises the Tacklings, Hope the Anchor, Faith the
Cable, the holy Ghost the winds, and holy affections the Sails, which are
filled thus with the gales of the Spirit -- etc. Fear not therefore little
flock; for it is your fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom.

V. Sermon At Lawrence Jury, London. March 23. 1651.
1. KINGS 14. part of the 13. verse. -- Because in him there is found some good
thing toward the Lord God of Israel in the house of Jeroboam.
HAving finished the former part of the doctrine about little measures of
grace; I come now to the second part, which is this, That God does exactly take
notice, tenderly cherish, and graciously reward the least beginnings, and the
smallest measures of grace in the hearts of his people. Second part of the
doctrine.


In the prosecution of which point, I shall proceed in this method.

1. I shall prove the truth of it.

2. I will also endeavor to give you the grounds hereof, and then make
application.

First, that God does thus cherish the small beginnings of grace, will appear, if
we consider, 1. These Scripture-instances, Mat. 12. 10
Mat. 12, 20. He will not quenh the smoking flax, that is, by the figure
Meiosis, (as I have shown already) he will kindle it. -- He will not break the
bruised reed, that is, he will strengthen it. -- God regards not the flame only,
Cant. 2. 13.
but the smoking of grace; not the ripe fruit, but the tender buds. Christ
would have accepted of green sigs of the fig tree, though the time of ripe
fruits was not yet come; so some expound that place, Mar. 11. 13. Christ
accepts not only the honey, Mar. 11. 13
but the honeycomb too, that is, say Expositors, Cant. 5. 1. Trap. in loc.
not only the excellent services, but even the meaner services of his people;
God takes notice of the cries of our heart, even the desires of the humble,
Exo. 14. 15
even the most inward groanings of the soul; not a good word but God takes
notice of it; nay, 1 Pet. 3. 6.
God takes not only notice of the least good that is in his people, but he
eyes also the common good that is in such as have no grace; thus when the young
man came to Christ, -- though he had no true grace, yet it is said, Jesus loved
him. Mar. 10. 21
And he took notice of that discreet answer of that Scribe mentioned by St.
Mark, Mar. 12. 34
and said unto him, Thou art not far from the Kingdom of heaven.

2. The truth of this point, may be made out by those sweet and gracious
promises, God has made to grace though weak I will give you one instead of
many, mentioned by the Prophet Isaiah, Isa 40. 11.
He shall feed his flock like a Shepherd, he shall gather the Lambs with his
arm, and carry them in his bosom, and gently lead those that are with young.

3. By counsels that Christ gives to us, how we our selves should carry our
selves to those that are weak, viz. to use them with all tenderness. -- Now if
God would have others, then surely himself will deal with weak believers with
much tenderness.

1. God would have the strong to bear with Rom 13. 1.
the weak, Psa. 103. 6.
to bear with their infirmities, and not to please our selves, and surely then
God will bear with them, and forbear them. See Psalm. 103.

2. We are to receive them into our fellowship. -- Him that is weak in the
faith receive you. Romans 14. 1.
And surely God will not reject such out of Communion with himself and Son.

3. We must do nothing that will or may justly offend or grieve the weak. We
must not walk uncharitably, Romans 14. 15. 21.
and grieve our brother with our meat. 1 Cor. 8. 12
We must not make him stumble that is weak.

4. We should restore a weak Brother that is fallen, Gal. 6. 1. (...).
and put him in joint again, with the spirit of meeknesse^ you that are
spiritual, that is, strong Christians, help up such as are fallen through
weakness.

5. We must strengthen the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees, Isa. 35. 3.
and say to them that are of a fearful heart, be strong. Heb. 1^. 12 13.
We must help to lift up hands that hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees,
lest that which is lame be turned out of the way, but rather that it be healed.
We must not be like the Herd of Dear, who push away from them the poor wounded
Dear, but we must endeavor the healing of the wounded, 1 These. 5. 14.
and comfort the feeble-minded, and support the weak, be patient toward all
men: (...), sublevat infirma^ alia qui ruitures Beza.
Support the weak, i.e. Set your shoulder to bear them up, who will stand, but
are weak. -- Hold them up as a Crutch does a body that is lame: help to stand,
(...) proprie ni^entem, and con^ntem, sed non sufficient^m, nec sa^ virium
h^bentem adjuvare. C.A. Lap.
who is for weakness like to fall. -- Let your charity help to hold them up,
even as a beam holds up a house that is ready to fall. Now it God enjoynes us
to have all this care of those that are weak in grace, to cherish, support and
comfort them, then surely the God of Mercy and Compassion, will be very careful
to cherish the smallest measures of grace in the weakest Believers.

Why does God cherish the least measures of grace in his people? 2 Quest.


Because the least measure of grace is of a very great value; Answ. 1.
the least grace and least measure or degree of it, is the purchase of Christ's
blood, and the merit of his great sufferings. The smallest spark of a diamond
is precious; pearls and precious stones are but little for quantity, but great
for quality and esteem. The least degree of grace is the Work of God, and God
will not forsake his own Work. --

Little grace is of the same manner and excellency 2. Answ.
with the greatest degree of grace* for as the very filings of gold are of the
same nature with gold, so the least measure o^ of grace is grace. -- The faith
of all believers is the same faith specifically, though not the same gradually,
their faith is in all alike precious, but not alike strong. 1. Pet. 1. 1.


Because God is the Author of weak grace as well as of strong. -- Solomon gives
a good rule why the rich should not slight the 3. Answ.
poor. Prove. 22. 2.
Because God is the Author and maker of them both. And God will not slight the
poor in spirit, no more then those that are rich in grace; for he is the maker
of them both. It is an argument to us why we should not despise the poor,
because God made him; and therefore surely much more because the Lord made the
poor and weak Christian, he will not depise, etc. --

Job says, Job 31. 13.
He did not despise the cause of his man servant or maid servant, and he gives
a reason for it, Verse. 15.
verse. 15. Did not be that made me in the womb, make him, and did not be
fashion us in the womb? which holds as a very firm argument why the rich should
not despise the poor, and so why the rich in grace should not despise those
that are poor in grace; for God made and fashioned them both. Now what is a
reason unto us, God is also pleased to make a reason unto himself, That he will
not forsake what he has formed; for so the Prophet Isaiah, The Lord that
created thee O Jacob, Isa. 43. 1.
and be that formed thee O Israel, fear not; for I have redeemed thee; I have
called thee by thy name; for then art mine. And again, Thus says the Lord that
made thee and formed thee from the womb: Fear not O Jacob my servant, and thou
Iesurun whom I have chosen; yea though he be the worm Jacob, Isa. 44. 1.
yet God that made him will not crush him, but cherish him. See a gracious
promise made to those that have but little grace, upon this very ground, that
God is the Author of that little grace. Thy people also shall be all righteous,
they shall inberit the land for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my
hand, that I may be glorified. A little one shall become a thousand, and a small
one a strong Nation; Isa. 66. 21, 22.
I the Lord will hasten it in his time.

The Lord will perfect his work that concerns his People, Psalm. 138. 8.
i.e. He will perfect and encourage the least beginnings of grace, because
Grace is his work in his servants. It is a very good argument in Prayer, O
Lord, for sake not the work of thy hands. And though in respect of outward
things God may destroy him whom his hands have made and fashioned, Job 10. 8.
but it is otherwise in respect of grace. God will not destroy any measure of
grace which is the work of his hands. Property is the ground of love, care and
tenderness: as a man will look to a weak child, because it is his child, and
will repair a weak house, because it is the house wherein he dwells. And that
is the third demonstration of Gods tender care over his people, that the
meanest measure of grace shall not be deserted or forsaken, because God is the
Author of it.

A fourth reason may be drawn from the Covenant of grace, the nature and tenor
whereof, is to accept of sincerity in stead of perfection, desires for deeds,
purposes for performances, pence for pounds, and mites for millions; and
therefore God will accept and reward the least measure of grace, that is, in
truth and sincerity. God requires of Abraham, Genesis 17. 1. and 25. 1. (...) De
victimis perfect is and immaculatis dicitur. Use.
when he renewed with him the Covenant of grace; Be thou perfect, (i.e.
upright) and walk so before me, and I will be thy exceeding great reward.

To make some Application of this truth. We may from hence deduce these
inferences following: If God does cherish and will reward the smallest measures
of grace; 1. Inference.


Then it will follow, That God takes notice of the smallest sins to punish
them. He that graciously eyes the very buddings of grace, will also justly eye
the buddings of corruption in his own people. Exodus 4. 24
That he was ready to have slain Moses for his neglecting of circumcising his
son; and thus the Lord made a breach upon Vzzah, 2 Samuel 6. 7
when he put forth his hand and stayed the shaking of the Ark: Amos 3. 2.
You have I known (says God of his people,) only of all the Families of the
earth, therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities.

It is true, Numb. 23. 21.
it is said, The Lord beholds not iniquity in Jacob, neither sees perverseness
in Israel, -- but this is not, as the Antinomians gloss upon it, as if God did
not see sin in his people, and is never displeased with their sins: But the
meaning is, that God sees not sin in his people, so as eternally to punish it.
-- And moreover, the most proper sense of that place is this, That whereas
Balak hired Balaam to eurse the People of Israel, and that false Prophet for
the wages of unrighteousness was ready enough to have taken all occasions of
cursing them, yet he could not fasten any curse upon them at that time, because
there was no provoking sin amongst them; and therefore he gave Balak counsel to
tempt them to sin, and so by the stumbling block of the Midianitish women, Vid.
Gataker in loc.
he drew Israel to idolatry and adultery, and so made them fall. But God does
see sin in his own people, yea the least sin, yea he eyes their failings,
though not to damn them for them, yet to chastise them for them. God sees the
purposes of sin, as well as the purposes of grace. It is said of Balak, that he
arose and warred against Israel. Now we do not read that ever Baalak did
actually wage war against Israel, Josh. 24. 9.
only he did intend and purpose it, and for that end sent and called Balaam
the son of Be or to curse them, and yet the Holy Ghost reckons upon his wicked
purpose as if he had accomplished it.

Learn from hence, 2. Inference.
That the same mind should be in Christians of greater growth to the weak, as
was in Christ Jesus; who though he be higher then the highest, yet he looks
upon the poor and lowly without disdain, and so should we. The heaven is the
throne, and the earth is the footstool of the Lord, and yet this great God
will not despise the weakest Saint, but will look even to him that is poor and
of a contrite spirit, Isa. 66. 1, 2.
and trembles at his word. He will look on the poor, weak, trembling soul,
and shall we look off from such with pride and disdain, and set such at our
footstool? shall Christ give the Lamb i^ his Scutchion, and will thou give
the Lion shall he like a Lamb be meek and gentle, and thou like the Lion be
stout, haughty and stately, that contemns all the beasts of the Forest? Oh be
not you supercilious and contemptuous toward weak Christians, who are injured
and discouraged by strong Christians.

1. When they are put upon such austerities of Religion, as are far beyond
their strength and growth. When these poor, torn tottered and rent bottles are
put upon to hold new wine, alas poor souls, Mat. 9. 16, 17.
they are discouraged; wherefore Christ proportions his doctrine to their
capacities, and will not say that to them which they cannot at present hear,
and so proportions out their duties to their abilities, and will not out match
their strength with his commands. Fasting and suffering was a hard duty, and
therefore he will excuse them till they have had more time and more experience
in the ways of God, till the Holy Ghost come down upon them, and they have
more grace; which is a good rule for us, not to discourage young beginners in
the school of Christ, not to put them to read such Authors as are above their
capacities.

2. When strong Christians are too sharp and rigorous in bitter reproofs, for
the failings and infirmities of weak Christians. Young converts like young
twigges must be gently handled, else you will break them; you must excuse their
failings, hide their wants, commend their performances, cherish their
forwardness, resolve their doubts, bear their burdens, and by this gentleness
bring them into a love of Religion, that they may not distaste it as soon as
they know it.

3. By setting light by their gifts. Alas, how soon is the smoking flax
quenched, by the too much superciliousnesse of those that think themselves
bright torches? how easily is the poor spark of grace trod out by the foat of
pride?

4. By puzling them with doubtful disputes, contrary to that of the Apostle,
Romans 14. 1.
Him that is weak, in the faith receive, but not unto doubtful disput ations.

5. By giving them ill example. Weak Christians are more apt to be led by
example then by Precept: Gal. 2, 12, 13.
When Peter, who was a Pillar in the Church, and a strong Christian, for fear
of Persecution for sook the Gentiles, and separated and withdrew himself, then
others of the Jews, (which in all likelihood were weak Christians) dissembled
also. Thus Paul argues to abstain from giving ill example, about the eating the
Idolothyta; If any man see thee which have knowledge, i.e. who art a strong
Christian, sit at meas in the Idols Temple, shall not the conscience of him
that is weak, he imboldened to eat those things that are offered to idols?

And therefore let Christians learn from, God, to cherish the weak beginnings
of grace in the people of God. Look not on me, says the Church, because I am
black, because the Sun has looked upon me, i.e. look not on me with a lofty
and disdainful look, and with a coy countenance; and then the Church adds, My
mothers children were angry with me, that is, other Congregations and People
did disesteem and disdain me for my infirmity. Heb. 1. ult.
But this should not be amongst Christians, but the strong should cherish the
weak. Angels despise not the poorest Christians, but do minister unto them.

Learn from hence, 3. Inference.
how God does by leisure and degrees, carry on in the hearts of his people the
work of grace unto further perfection. Mushromes and such like worthless
things, like Jonas his gourd may spring up in one night; but things of most
moment, are of longest growth before they come to perfection. The Elephant
amongst the Beasts, and the Oak amongst the Trees, and Man amongst the
rational creatures, are longest before they grow up to their full and perfect
dimensions. And as it is in nature, so it is in grace; there is a progress
from less to greater: all this work is by degrees. The godly are called Trees
of Righteousness, Isa. 61. 3.
and yet this is by degrees. There is first the budding forth of the earth, and
then those things that are sown spring forth, etc. v. 11. And therefore let
young Converts learn from hence not to be discouraged. Gods works both of
nature and grace are perfected by degrees.

1. Though God regards the least measures of grace, 2. Use of Caution.
let not this make you regardlesse to grow in grace. In the first creation God
said to the creatures, Increase and multiply, and by virtue of that word the
earth brings forth to this day. Now it is so in the new and second Creation;
the Lord expects that our grace should increase and multiply.

2. Though you have but a little grace, 2. Caution.
yet do not despise it, or disparage it. -- Oh, do not despise the day of small
things in the soul. Do not tread upon the bunch of grapes, Zech. 4. 6.
upon the new wine in the cluster, but say, there is a blessing in it. Do not
despise a little grain of mustard seed, it will grow to a tree; true grace is a
spark of heaven, do not tread it out; despise not the least, and be not
satisfied with the greatest measure of grace.

1. Let this comfort thy poor soul (Oh weak Christian!) whose burden it is, 3.
Use of Comfort.
that thou have much corruption and but little grace. God will look over a
great deal of sin, and will take notice of the least grace. God will not in
refining his gold and silver lose one dram of grace, though it lie among a heap
of rubbish. Christ is said, to have his Fan in his hand, Mat. 3. 12.
he will thoroughly purge his floor, and gather his wheat into his garner. Now
the use of a Fan is to cast out the worst and keep in the best, to drive away
the chafe and save the wheat: so Christ, though he purge out the chafe of
corruption, yet he will save and preserve every grain of grace. It is otherwise
with the devils Sieve. Christ tells Peter, that Satan desired to sift him. Luke
22. 31
Now the use of the Sieve is contrary to the Fan, for that keeps the waste and
lets out the best. The devil does all he can to destroy our grace, and to
increase our sin. But it is otherwise, God will kill thy corruptions and cherish
thy graces, and if the least grace be in the soul, though with a mixture of
much corruption, God will not despise it.

God carries the most tender regard to those that are weak in grace; 2. Comfort.
the weak child is still carried in our arms, and the weakest of the flock the
good shepherd will carry in his bosom. Isa. 40. 11.
Christ gave Peter charge in the first place to feed his Lambs. Joh. 21. 15


1. Gods care over weak Christians is such that he will not suffer them to be
tempted above what they are able, but with the temptation will make a way to
escape, that they shall be able to ^^ar it. God does consider we are but dust;
and the wise Physician of our souls will mercifully weigh every grain of every
dose, and will not outmatch their strength whose strength is small.

2. God will not put them on difficult duties at the first. -- Christ taught
his disciples such doctrines as their weakness could bear.

3. God will bear with their infirmities; he teaches his children to go, Hos.
11. 1, 3
and holds them up by the arms.

VI. Sermon At Lawrence Ju^y, London. March 30. 1651.
2 TIMOTHY 2. 1. Be strong in the grace of God that is in Christ Jesus.
HAving lately handled the Doctrine of the small beginnings, and the least
measures of true grace, and shown you how God will accept and reward them, by
opening to you that passage in 1 Kings 14. 13. -- Concerning Jeroboam's son,
in whom there was found some good. -- And lest that doctrine should
accidentally (through the corruption of our deceitful hearts) beget in us
spiritual sloth, and satisfaction in weak degrees of grace; therefore I shall
prosecute my discourse concerning the degrees of grace, and show you, that
though God regards weak grace, yet we must all labor to obey this Apostolical
injunction, to be strong in the grace of God which is in Christ Jesus.

In the whole verse you have three parts.

1. A loving Compellation, My son.

2. A pressing exhortation, Be strong in grace.

3. The reason of it, in the illative, Therefore.

1. For the Compellation. Act. 16. 2.
Qu^^re, How Timothy could be Paul's son, Phil. 3. 5.
for his father was a Greek, 1 Timothy 1. 2.
but Paul was a Jew of the Tribe of Benjamin? Timothy then was not Paul's son in
the flesh, but in the faith. Now,

A further question is, Why is he called Paul's Son?

Baldwin gives this reason, Because (says he) Paul begat him to the faith, al
Iedging that in 1 Cor. 4. 17. 2 Cor. 4. 17 compared with Verse. 14.
compared with verse. 14. where Paul calls the Corinthians, whom he had
converted to the faith, his beloved sons, verse. 14. and so he calls Timothy,
verse. 17. But Timothy was not Paul's son in that sense: for as Estius shows, he
was converted long before Paul knew him, 2 Timothy 1. 5.
by the godly instructions of his Grandmother Lois, 2 Timothy 3. 15.
and his Mother Eunice.

The true reasons, why Paul called Timothy his son, were

1. Because Paul was aged, and Timothy young, and it was usual for the old to
call the younger sons.

2. Because he confirmed him in the faith.

3. Because he loved him as a son, and Timothy loved Paul as a father.

4. Because as a son with the father he served Paul in the Gospel. Phil. 2.
23.


Before I come to the main doctrines, let me observe something in the passage
to it; upon these reasons Paul calls Timothy his son: From the compellation, My
son, Observe

1. That Ministers should use loving insinuations toward their hearers, 1.
Observation.
to usher in useful instructions.

Soft words turn away wrath, and hard flints are broken upon soft pillows. This
was Paul's practice here and elsewhere* he gained their affections, the better
to reform their judgments.

2. And then in that he calls him My Son, 2. Observation.
in relation to himself as a father, Observe

That religion puts men into the nearest union and the most indeared relations.
They who are glued together in the blood of Christ, are knit together in the
strongest bonds.

Now from the reason of the duty, Sanguine Christi conglutinati. Salvian.
Therefore my son, etc. Expositors do vary what this illative particle has a
reference to: Some make it to refer to v. 7. of the foregoing chapter, and so
Estius, God has not given us the spirit of fear, but of power, of love, and of
a sound mind; and if so,

Then observe, -- That the receiving the first degrees of grace, 3. Observation.
should be a swaying reason to move us to grow in grace.

Others refer it to Paul's example, v. 8. or to the example of One siphorus, v.
16. from whence may be observed,

That the good example of good men, should be an argument to us to increase in
goodness. 4. Observe.


If it refer to the 15. verse. This thou know that all they which are in
Asia be turned away from me, of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes; and thus
Theodoret refers it: Then observe

That other men's Apostasy from the Profession of grace, 5. Observe.
should make the godly more careful to grow strong in grace. But I shall handle
the text without any relative consideration.

Be strong in the grace which is in Christ. Jesus.] Explication of the text*
Timothy may be considered in a double capacity, either as a Minister, or as a
private Christian; If as a Minister, then the force of the exhortation lies in
this: Romans 1. 5.
that he should increase in ministerial gifts and graces; Ephesians. 3. 8.
whence may be observed,

That Ministers of all men should grow in the truth, 6. Observe.
and in Ministerial gifts; because as they grow, so will the people grow under
their Ministry. Ministers do receive grace and Apostleship for obedience to the
faith among all Nations, Romans 1. 5.

And grace is given unto them, that they may preach unto others the
unsearchable riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3. 8.

2. If he be considered as a private Christian, 7. Observe.
then he is exhorted not to content himself with grace received, but to labor
after more strength of grace. --

Be strong in the grace which is in Christ Jesus.] Grace may be said to be in
Christ two ways: either

1. As the subject recipient of grace, or

2. As a fountain redundant and overflowing to his people.

Grace is in Christ in all fullness, from whence his people receive grace for
grace. Joh. 1. 16.


There are two observations which I shall note from the words, considering the
exhortation, without reference to what went before, or follows after.

That believers are not to rest satisfied in weak Doct. 1.
measures of grace already received, but to endeavor to attain greater
strength of grace.

That Christ is the subject in which all grace is, Doct. 2.
and the fountain from which believers must receive all their grace.

In the opening of the first doctrine, the first thing is to make it appear,
That believers must not rest satisfied with weak measures of grace received,
but must labor after more grace. And this I shall prove

1. By instances of two sorts. 1. That believers have grown from weak grace to
strong grace, who out of weakness were made strong. Heb. 11* 34.
There are expositors who refer this place to Hezekiahs recovery, 1 Kin. 20. --
but it may have a more general extent and application. The Psalmist speaking of
Gods people (says he) They go from strength to strength, every one of them in
Zion appears before God. Psalm. 84. 7.
It is true, the proper reference of these words is to the Jews going up to
Jerusalem to worship, when the males went thrice a year up to Jerusalem to
worship, according to the law, Exodus 23. 14, 17. yet Ainsworth understands it of
our growth in grace; so we are said to be changed from glory to glory, that is,
from little degrees of grace to greater; grace is but glory begun, and glory is
but grace perfected; true grace is still aspiring unto perfection, 2 Cor. 3. 18
and therefore says Paul, Phil. 3 11.
if by any means I might attain the Resurrection of the dead, his meaning is,
that I may attain that perfection of holiness which accompanies the state of
the Resurrection a Metonymie of the subject for the adjunct; he is still
pressing forward that he might attain further degrees of grace; and for that
end Paul, he forgot what was behind, and reached forth to those things that
were before, ver. 13. And though Paul, Ephesians. 3. 4. had very great knowledge in
the mystery of Christ, yet he still desired to know more and more of Christ.

2 By instances, wherein Gods people have prayed for the strength of grace.
Ephesians. 3. 16.
I how my knees ( says Paul) unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he
would grant unto you according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened
with might by his Spirit in the inner man. And speaking of the Romans, Romans 15,
13, 14.
Romans 15. 13, 14. he says, I am persuaded you are full of goodness and
knowledge; yet because the best and most learned know but in part, and see but
darkly through a glass, 1 Cor. 13 12. he prays that God would fill them with
all joy and peace in believing, that they might abound in hope through the
power of the holy Ghost. Phil. 1. 9.
So he prays, that their love might abound more and more in knowledge, Col. 1.
9, 10
and in all judgment; and that they may be filled with the knowledge of his
will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding, that they might walk worthy
of the Lord unto all pleasing, and be fruitful in every good work, increasing
in the knowledge of God. Thus Gods people have prayed for a further increase in
grace. Paul after his conversion increased more in strength, whereby he was
enabled to confound the opposing Jews at Damascus, Acts 9. 22.

2. By Commands. 2. Proof. Heb. 6. 1.
Leaving the first principles of the doctrine of Christ, we must go on to
perfection; 2 Pet. 1. 5. Ephesians. 6. 10.
we must give diligence to add grace to grace; 1 Cor. 16. 13.
so we are commanded to be strong in the Lord, 1 These. 4. 1
to stand fast in the faith, to quit your selves like men, and be strong, and
to abound more and more. 1. Cor. 15. ult.
Many such commands are scattered up and down the Scripture, which shows our
duty to grow more and more, and to attain unto greater measures of grace.

3. By promises, that Gods people shall do so. The path of the just is as the
shining light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day, Pro. 4. 18.
that is, they shall increase more and more in strength. Psalm. 18. 35, 36.
Gods gentleness makes his people great, and inlargeth their steps under them.
2 Samuel 18. 3. --
The feeble among them at that day shall be as David, Erit bic fortis fide and
spiritu qualis David praedicatur. Par. Adversar.
and the house of David shall be as God, as the Angel of the Lord before them.
Pareus in his short notes which he calls his Adversaria, says, He that is weak
in faith, shall be as David, strong in faith.

Why should believers not rest satisfied with the first beginnings of grace, ^
Quest.
but labor to be grown and strong Christians?

The reasons may be drawn, Answ.
1. Partly from the necessity of it, Why you must do it. And 2. From the
danger, If you do it not.

1. From the necessity of it, there are these reasons:

1. If you consider the strong temptations Reason 1.
you are like to meet withal from the devil. We are therefore commanded to be
strong in the Lord; Ephesians. 6. 10, 11. 12.
to put on the whole Armor of God, that we might be able to stand against the
wiles of the devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
Principalities and Powers, and against the Rulers of the darkness of this
world. Now shall the devil be strong and armed, and shall we be content to be
unarmed and weak Christians? it is worth your noting in the Epistle of John,
(says he) I write unto you young men, because ye are strong, and the Word of
God abides in you, 1 John 2. 14. Verse. 12.
and ye have overcome the wicked one. But when he writes to children, he says,
I write to you, because your sins are forgiven for his names sake; intimating
that though weak grace be sufficient to evidence to us the pardon of sin, yet
it is strong grace which is able to overcome the temptations of the devil. The
devil shall not overcome the weakest measure of grace, but the stronger our
grace is, the more able we are to rest and overcome that enemy of our
salvation. 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9
The devil is called a roaring lion, whom we must resist steadfast in the faith;
(...).
it is not weak faith which is able to grapple with the devil, therefore ought
we to be grown and strong Christians.

2. If we consider the strong opposition we are like to meet with from the
world; 2. Reason.
we may be put upon it as Paul, to fight with beasts; 1 Cor. 15. 32.
such manner of unreasonable men we may meet withal, and therefore we are
commanded to watch, and to stand fast in the faith, Chapter 16. 13.
to quit our selves like men, and be strong; and the reason is given, v. 9.
There are many Adversaries we are like to meet with; and therefore we had need
to pray with the Psalmist, Psalm. 138. 3, 7.
to be strengthened and saved by the right hand of the Lord. Weak faith, it is
not fit to be in a crowd of opposition; and therefore we should labor to grow
strong in the grace of God.

3. We have many strong corruptions in our hearts, 3. Reason.
which weak grace will never be able to mortify; strong passions, strong lusts,
and how shall weak grace be able to grapple with, and have a conquest over
these? If thy graces are weak when thy corruptions are strong, thou will be
miserably foiled by thy corruptions; therefore pray for strengthening and
assisting grace, whereby thou may be able not only to resist, but to subdue
and mortify the strongest lusts and passions in thy heart.

Another ground of the doctrine is taken from the danger, if you grow not
strong in grace^ As

1. Others that made profession of Religion after you, in time will go before
you in measures and degrees of grace: so it is said, Mat. 19. 30. compared with
Mat. 20. 12, 16.
That many that are first shall be last, and the last shall be first. Those who
were first in the profession of the Gospel shall be last in the degrees and
measures of grace, because they have not improved grace to a further increase
of it.

2. If thou do not grow strong in grace thou will be sure to decay, Non
pr^gredi, est regredi.
and to grow weaker: for not to go forward in grace, is to go backward. Grace
may be lost in some degree, and to its exercise and comfort, though not to its
being and therefore says the Apostle, If these things be in you and abound, 2
Pet. 1. 8. Re^. 3. 2. --
they make you that ye shall neither be barren, nor unfruitful. Intimating,
that you will be barren if you do not add grace to grace. Weak things, if
they be not watched over, and strengthened, will be ready to die.

3. Though thou can not lose the being of thy grace, 3
yet thou will lose the comfort of it, and thou may be in as much trouble
and perplexity as if thou had no grace at all. Its true, weak grace will
bring thy soul to heaven, but its only strong grace which will bring heaven
into thy soul. Little grace is like a little mote, which is not seen because
it is little. Little grace is as it were no grace, as that man in the Gospel,
he calls his faith unbelief; Mar. 9. 24.
Lord (says he) help my unbelief. Weakness of grace makes men's persuasions
of Gods love to be presumption, their zeal to be lukewarmnesse, their grace to
be but gifts, and (as here) their faith to be but unbelief. It is strong grace
which gives gladness of heart, and hope in God; therefore says Jeremy, My
strength, Lam. 3. 18.
and my hope is perished from the Lord. When strength in grace decays, there
hope and comfort decays also. It is the Apostles prayer in the Inscription of
many of his Epistles, that grace and peace may be multiplied: If therefore you
do not increase your graces, you will neither increase nor keep your comforts.
He that lacks these things is blind (says the Apostle Peter) and he cannot
see afar off; 2 Pet. 1. 9.
it is not meant of a total lack of grace, (as has been shown) for as after is
expressed, he is purged from his old sins, though he forgets it, having lost
the sense of pardon for want of adding grace to grace. --

4. Weak grace under great trials will expose a man to doubts and falls, as if
he had no grace at all; little grace will keep a man in small trials, but not in
greater. Little grace, as to the strait a man may be in, may be as good as no
grace; and therefore when the disciples were at sea, Mat. 8. 26. compared with
Mar. 4. 40.
and a great tempest arose, in so much that they were afraid; that which in
Matthew is said to be little, in Mark is said to be no faith. Intimating, that
as to that particular exigency and strait they were in, their little faith did
stand them in no more stead, then if they had had no faith at all. So Peter,
Christ calls him (...): Mat. 14 31.
Because though he began to walk upon the waves, but (...) When the wind grew
boisterous, Ver. 29.
he was (...) and began to sink. Peter did not sink into the sea, before his
faith began to sink in his soul. He that faints in the day of adversity, it
argues his strength is small, Pro. 24. 10
so says Solomon.

I should now proceed to a second particular, Use.
and that is to give some Scripture-notes of that man who is grown in grace; --
b^^ let me shut up this Sermon, with a sharp and just reproof of many
professors in our time, who go from one ordinance to another, and yet make
little progress or increase in Religion. They may be fitly compared to a
company of Ants, who are very busy about a molehill, and run to and fro, but
never grow great: Even so we have many Christians, they run from one Church to
another, from one Preacher to another, and it may be from one opinion to
another, but never grow up in the true grace, and in the true knowledge of
Jesus Christ. -- But I shall meet with such people hereafter in this discourse.
--

VII. Sermon at Lawrence Jury London. March 30. 1651.
2 TIMOTHY 2. 1. -- My son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus.
HAving in the former Chapter observed from this Apostolical injunction to
Timothy, Which is obligatory to all Christians:

That it is the duty of all believers not to rest satisfied in weak measures of
grace which they have received, Doct.
but they are to endeavor to attain unto greater strength of grace. --

This point we have proved both by Scripture-instances, as also by several
reasons. Now I proceed to answer this question, viz.

What are the notes the Scripture lays down of strong and grown Christians?
Quest.


We are to know there are marks in Scripture, both of the truth of grace, as
also of the strength of grace, and these must not be confounded but distinctly
considered. Our present question is about marks of growth in grace.

1. Such as are grown in grace, 1 Answ.
do ordinarily enjoy a grounded assurance, 1 John 4. 18 N^n ita pellitur timor
quin animo^ nestros sollicitet, sed it a pellitur ut non turbet, nequ^ impediat
pacem nostr^m. Calvin.
and comfortable manifestation of the love of God in Christ to their souls. So
St. John says, Perfect love casts out fear; The more perfect love is, the
less of tormenting fear is in the soul, and the reason of our fear and
doubting is for want of love. We cannot comprehend the great love of God in
Christ to our souls, till we are strengthened with might by his Spirit in the
inder man; which you will see in the Apostles Prayer for the Ephesians, Ephesians. 3.
16, 17, 18.
that God would grant unto them according to the riches of his glory, to be
strengthened with might by his Spirit: that Christ might dwell in their hearts
by faith, and that they might be rooted and grounded in love: and that they
might be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length,
and depth, and height, and to know the love of Christ, etc. So that the more
strength of grace is in the soul, the clearer is our comprehension of Christ's
love to the soul.

2. Strong and grown Christians are able 2 Answ.
experimentally to comfort others with the same comfort, 2 Cor. 1. 4.
wherewith they themselves are comforted of God; and when they are converted
they are able to strengthen their brethren, Luke 22. 33. expounded.
as Christ speak^ to Peter. By Conversion in that place, is not meant the first
work of grace wronght in the soul; for that was wrought in Peter before his
fall, but the meaning is, Peter, when thou art strengthened and recovered from
thy fall, when thou have recovered strength again, then see that thou be
careful to strengthen others, who perhaps may fall into the same weakness with
thy self. -- If any man be overtaken with a fault, Gal 6. 1. expounded.
(says Paul to the Galatians) you that are spiritual restore such a man in the
spirit of meekness. You that are spiritual, i.e. you that are grown and
experienced Christians, see that you do endeavor to recover such a fallen
brother. Paul prays for the Philippians, that their love may abound yet more
and more in all knowledge and judgment; Phil. 1. 9. expouuded.
that is, that they might have knowledge with judgment and experience, so as
they might use their judicious knowledge in love for the edification of others,
that were but weak in grace: and in the Epistle to the Romans, the same
Apostle lays down this Character of a strong Christian, Romans 15. 14.
-- I am persuaded of you my Brethren, that you are full of goodness, filled
with all knowledge, able also to admonish one another: from whence we may
gather the Character mentioned, that the more perfect any Christian is in
knowledge, or any other grace, the more able he is to admonish others for their
edification.

Grown Christians are such as understand 3. Answ.
the great and profound mysteries of Religion; they are not only such as use
milk, Heb. 5. 13.
and understand only the first and plain Principles, Verse. 14.
such as the Apostle calls Babes and unskilful in the Word of Righteousness:
-- but they are such as are able to digest strong meat, i.e. the deep mysteries
of the Gospel, they do in some measure understand, and have their senses
exercised to discern both good and evil, that is, to judge between true
doctrines and false. Strong and grown Christians have such an ear, as is able
to try words, (as it is in Job) even as the mouth tries meats. -- It is an
observation of the learned Mercer, Job 34. 3.
that the same word in Hebrew which signifies Job 12. 11.
an Ear, (...) Aurtum and staterae ide^^ est nom^n in Hebraeo, du^ enim aures
sunt quasi bilances quib^^ expenduntur quae audimus. Mercer.
in the duall number signifies a pair of balances, -- to note thus much, that
an experienced and judicious Christian will weigh whatsoever he hears, before
he believes it. For as the tongue of the balance stands as a Judge between
the two scales, so should the heart of every man weigh what he hears, and so
will every grown and judicious Christian. He will not take up truth upon trust,
but he considers first, and believes afterward. -- Nor will a grown
Christian take up with inferior knowledge but will like a grown Scholar,
(...) and (...), ut (...) ci^um, sic men's verba.
be searching after the deep things of God. Chrysostom. 4. Answ.


A grown, experienced and strong Christian, is most conversant and employed in
the most strict and severe exercises of Religion which tend most to
mortification: weak Christians are all for easy and ordinary exercises, as
hearing and reading good books; but a strong Christian is much in spiritual
watchfulness, secret prayer, frequent fasting, self-denial, and heavenly
meditation, and such like duties as have a special influence upon the
mortification of sin and corruption. A child whose parts and strength is weak,
Luke 5. 33, 34, 35, etc. 5. Answ.
is not conversant about such arduous and great undertakings as a grown man.

He can believe the accomplishment of Promises and Scripture Prophesies, though
Gods Providence seem to make against them, and though there seem no outward
probabilities for them. Thus it argued Abraham was strong in faith, Romans 4. 18,
19. 20. expounded.
who against hope believed in hope; and being not weak in faith, he considered
not his own body now dead. -- There were several things might have staggered
Abraham's faith, had it not been very strong.

1. There were fifteen years at least between the making of the promise of
giving him a son, and the fulfilling of it. Compare Genesis 15. 4. with Genesis 16.
16. and with Genesis 21. 5.


2. Abraham was about an hundred years old before he had a son, and so
unlikely to have children.

3. Sarah's womb dead, and no ordinary hope of Procreation.

4. And after the promised son was born, God calls upon Abraham to offer him
up, and yet notwithstanding all this, he staggered not at the promise ^of God
through unbelief, Rom 4. 20, 21.
but was strong in faith, giving glory to God, and was fully persuaded, that
what he had promised, he was able also to perform.

A strong believer can suffer as well as do for the sake os Christ. 6. Answ.
Greater strength of grace is required to suffer for the truth, then to
profess the truth; and therefore our Savior propounds this to the ambitious
suitors, the sons of Zebedee; Are ye able to drink of the Cup that I shall
drink of? Mar. 20. 22 23.
and to be baptized with the Baptism wherewith I am baptized withal? implying
thus much, that they did not well understand their own strength, that there was
more grace required to suffer for the name of Christ, then to believe on the
name of Christ, and accordingly as is our strength of grace, so is our courage
for the cause of Christ, less or more. Nicodemus when he had but little grace,
he came to Jesus, but yet in the night, John 3. 2.
by stealth; he durst not openly appear for Christ, but afterward as he grew
in grace and knowledge of Christ, so he grew in courage for Christ, And when
the cause of Christ was debated in the assembly of the chief Priests and
Pharisees, there Nicodemus boldly pleads the cause of Christ. John 7. 50.
-- Does our law judge any man before it hear him, and know what he does? Nay
we read afterward of a higher resolution of this once fearful Nicodemus, when
Christ was crucified and at the lowest. -- We find that Necodemus, which
(says the text) came at first to Jesus by night, Joh. 19. 39.
brought a hundred pound weight of mixture of Myrrh and Aloes for the Burial
of Christ. Ver. 38.
The like instance we have in Joseph of Arimathea, who was a disciple of
Christ, but secretly for fear of the Jews. -- But afterward, when he had got
more strength of grace, the Scripture tells us, He went in to Pilate boldly,
and craved the body of Jesus. Mar. 15. 43
To profess Christ boldly, in a time when dangers and difficulties attend that
Profession, argues a strong faith; a weakly Constitution dare not go out,
unless the weather be fair; But a strong body can endure the hardest weather.
A weak and young Convert is fitter to live in the prosperity of the Gospel; but
an old experienced Christian like an old tried soldier, will not shrink in the
hardest trials. -- If thou faint in the day of adversity; Prove. 24. 10.
it is because thy strength is small.

He is one that is able to govern his tongue, 7. Answ.
that though passion be in the heart, yet through the strength of his grace he
bridles it in, and restraines it, so as it shall not break into open railings,
revilings and clamours as others do. St. James gives this character of a strong
Christian; Jam. 3. 2.
If any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man; not legally but
Evangelically; He is a perfect man. i.e. He is grown strong in the grace of God.

He is one that dares trust Gods providence for outward things, 8. Answ.
however he is in straits; Mat. 6. 25, 30.
as it argues littleness of faith, to distrust Christ for food and raiment: so
it argues strength of faith, that though the vision tarry, and no deliverance
appear, yet then to live by faith, Hab. 2. 4.
as the just are said to do, this argues strength of faith.

He is one that labors for unity in the Church, Answ. 9.
as well as for purity in the Church. He will labor for his power that Christ's
coat shall be without rent, as well as with out spot. This character I gather
from that exhortation of the Apostle, Phil. 3. 15.
Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded, and if in any thing
ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you. Nevertheless,
whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same thing. It is a note
thou art weak, when thou make a stir in the Church about thy opinions; weak
children are most froward; when children are weak and sickly, nothing will
please them: so it is with some weak ones in the Church, their humor is such;
you know not how to please them; but a grown experienced Christian is sober and
wise, and very earnest to preserve unity in the Church of Christ.

Before I proceed to speak any more about strength of grace; Use 1.
I shall make some application of what I have delivered about the marks and
signs of strong grace, and the use I shall make, shall be to give you some
cautions about these foregoing characters, and there is need of a twofold
Caution.

1. Take heed you do not imagine your selves strong in grace, when you are
weak; this is a dangerous mistake.

2. Take heed of thinking and judging your selves weak in grace, when you are
strong in grace; this is an uncomfortable mistake. There is a man (says
Solomon) that makes himself rich, Prove. 13. 7.
and bath nothing; and there is a man that makes himself poor, and yet has
great riches. I would therefore caution you that you may neither live above nor
beneath what you have, that you may not proudly fancy you have what you have
not, nor discouragedly fear you want what you indeed have.

2. You are not to measure the strength of grace by the length of your
Profession. 1 Use of Caution.
Many who are long standers in the Profession of Religion, are but slow walkers
in the ways and practice of Religion; the souls Proficiency in grace, is not
the issue of length of time, but the fruit of free grace. There were those in
the Church for so long a time, that they ought to have been teachers of others,
Heb. 5. 12.
but they had attained but little growth or strength of grace. They that came
at the eleventh hour had their penny, as well as those that came early into
the Vineyard. The scope of which Parable is (as some interpreters say) to show
that those who come late to the Profession of Religion, Mat. 20. 16 expounded.
may yet out-go many in gifts and graces, who have been long before them in
Profession. How many amongst us, their years speak them eighty, but their
knowledge and grace not eighteen.

2. Measure not the strength of grace, by the strength of your affections to
some of the ways of God. The love of a newly married Couple may be more found
at first, afterward it is more solid. Women who are the weaker vessels are
usually more affectionate. Weak Christians are usually most affectionate. When
the Creeple was cured, we read that upon his first cure he leaped for joy; Acts
14. 10
it is likely he did not continue to do so: the newness of the change did much
affect him, and so it does young converts.

3. Measure not the strength of grace, by the abundance of the means of grace
which you enjoy. Alas, Laodicea had a glorious light shining amidst her; she
was one of the seven Candlesticks. And because she had such means of grace,
she mistook her self, saying, Rev. 3. 17.
I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing. But said
Christ, Theu know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked.

4. Measure not the strength of grace by the strength of your gifts. There is a
new disease amongst children called the Rickets, when children grow big in the
head, but weak in their limbs: this disease is spiritually upon the souls of
many our of Professors; their heads grow in respect of gifts and knowledge, but
they do not grow strong to walk in the ways of God; they are like the Moon,
increasing in light, but not in heat. In the days of the Schoolmen the gifts
of men were very high, and yet the power of godliness was at a low ebb in
those days; there were in those times many sublime notions, Seraphical
speculations, curious distinctions, subtle objections, and elaborate answers
to them, grave and weighty sentences; but alas, but a little of the power of
grace in the hearts of those men and them they taught.

2. Caution is, 2. Caution.
to prevent mistakes of those who are apt to judge themselves weak in grace,
when indeed they are strong in grace.

1. Because thou have not perfection of grace, do not therefore conclude thou
have not strength of grace. Truth of grace is one thing, and strength of grace
is another; so strength of grace is one thing, and perfection of grace is
another. You must stay for perfection till you come to heaven; it is there
only, where the spirits of just men are made perfect. Heb. 12 23
It is a witty observation that one has; In Grammar (says he) tbe Present
tense is accompanied with the Preter-imperfect tense, but the Future with the
Preter-pluterfect tense. Even such is our present state of grace, it is
accompanied with imperfections; -- but our future shall be more then perfect;
Ecel. 7. 20.
There is no Perfection here. There is not a just man on earth that does good,
Pro. 20. 9.
and sins not, (says Solomon) Who can say, I have made my heart clean? If I
wash my hands with snow-water, (says Job) and make my self never so clean; yet
shall thou plunge me in the ditch, and my own clothes shall abhor me. i.e.
Though I have by Regeneration some grace, yet all my defilements shall never in
this life be put away. In the Prophecy of Zechariah we have the Lord speaking
thus: I will refine them as silver, and well try them as gold is tried; and yet
in the Prophet Isaiah God says, Zech. 13. 9.
I have refined thee, but not with silver; Isa. 48. 10.
to reconcile both places, The meaning is, that though God begin to refine his
people, yet they are not perfectly refined.

2. Do not judge thy self weak in grace, because thou have not strong
affections. God does make up in the experience of old and grown Christians,
what is wanting of the great affections they had at their first conversion. Mr.
Greenham.
Holy Greenham often prayed that he might keep up his young zeal with his old
discretion. What is wanting in affections God makes up to thee in solidity of
judgment, clearness of knowledge, abundance of experience, and stablenesse in
the faith.

3. Judge not the strength of thy grace by the strength of thy comforts, the
fruit may grow strong, when the blossom is off. I have spoken of this before;
and therefore will add this, that heavenly joys and raptures are very
sparingly found among Gods people. They are Gods special indulgences to some of
his special children. I will conclude with a Saying of that godly and learned
Scotchman, Mr. Rollock.
Whilst I live (says he) I never expect to see perfect Reformation in the
Church, or feel perfect ravishing joys in my heart

VIII. Sermon at Lawrence Jury London. April 6. 1651.
2 TIMOTHY 2. 1. Be strong in the grace of God that is in Christ Jesus.
I Proceed now to answer some cases of conscience, which may be deduced from
the Doctrine I have laid down.

1. Whether strong temptations may be consistent with strong grace? Case 1.
This is a needful and practical Case, because the People of God, when tempted
by the devil, they do not only question the strength, but the truth of their
grace.

Before I resolve this Case, I shall premise these general positions.

1. It is certain, Posit 1.
where there is truth of grace, there may be strong temptations from the devil.
The devil is like a thief, which robs not outhouses, where there is nothing
but dung and straw; but the Cabinets that are in the Closet: so this great
thief of the world, he is not so eager to rob and spoil the outhouses, wicked
and ungodly men; but those who have the riches of grace in the cabinets of
their hearts, these he labors to rob and spoil: or as a Pirate, who sets not
upon an empty vessel, but upon a ship laden with rich merchandise; those who
are fraught with the rich gifts of grace, the devil by his temptations, will
labor to make prize of for himself.

2. Let the temptations of the devil be never so strong, Posit. 2.
yet they shall not be above the strength of grace, which believers have
received from God. 1 Cor. 10. 13.
God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are
able. He will proportion the burden to the back, and the stroke to the strength
of him who is to bear it; if temptations increase, our strength shall also
increase, whereby we may be able to grapple with them.

3. It is evident, Posit. 3.
that the temptations of the devil are always ordinarily most strong, after
Gods people have discharged some extraordinary duties to God, or have received
most discoveries of grace from God. In both these Cases the devils temptations
are usually great. You find that immediately after the Celebration of the
Lords Supper the devil desired to winnow the disciples; Luke 22. 31.
after they had performed that extraordinary service to God, the devil was
desirous presently to set upon them. So you find that after Christ had in an
extraordinary manner, Mat. 4. 2, 3
fasted forty days and forty nights, he was immediately after tempted of the
devil; Dr. Halls observations.
and so also after his baptism, no sooner was he out of the water of Baptism,
but he was in the fire of temptation. The Israel of God can be no sooner out of
Egypt, but this hellish Pharaoh pursues them. And Hezekiah had no sooner kept
the solemn Passover, but Senacherib comes up against him. All this is to show
us, that after we have put forth most grace in a duty, then the devil will
labor to play his aftergame with us, if he miss of his fore-game; if Satan
cannot keep us from duty and from inlargment in duty, he will flie-blow our
duties by pride and so mar them. And then after we have received the most
especial manifestations from Gods love and favor in Christ, then may we expect
to be assaulted by the devil: Thus Paul, after he had those heavenly raptures,
2 Cor. 12. 7.
and abundance of Revelations; the devil set upon him with vile temptations; he
had the messenger of Satan to buffet him, a thorn in the flesh; which is not to
be meant of any disease, but of some sharp temptation from the devil. So you
find that immediately after that voice to Christ, Mat. 3. 17.
This is my well beloved son, in whom I am well pleased, that then the Tempter
came to him. Hence you may gather from that connection between those two
Petitions in the Lord Prayer, Forgive us our trespasses, and lead us not into
temptation: to note to us, that no sooner can we get the evidence of our
pardon, but we may expect to be tempted of the devil.

4. That men who have the greatest strength of grace, Posit. 4.
are like to meet with the fiercest assaults, and the strongest temptations
from the devil; and this brings me to answer the Case, That strength of grace
may be consistent with strong temptations. To clear and confirm this, there are
these two particulars to be enquired into.

1. Wben temptations may be said to be strong?

2. How, and why such strong temptations may be consistent with strong grace?

1. When temptations may be said to be strong? Quest. 1.


1. Then may temptations be said to be strong, Answ. 1.
when the solicitations of the devil to sin are urgent with the soul, when
they are not weak and faint suggestions, but violent assaults, which will not be
removed until assented to; when the devil haunts a man so that he will not let
him alone, then may they be said to be strong. Thus it is said, Satan stood up
against Israel, -- i.e. He set himself to tempt David. And provoked him, 1 Chronicles. 21. 1.
i. e. He would not let him alone, but haunted him with hellish importunity, --
till he had numbered the people.

2. When they are frequent and continued. Small temptations often suggested
become strong. Small drops of water by frequent falling make hollow the hard
stone; which a few great and forcible blows will not do: so temptations, though
but to small sins, if they be continued, may have greater entrance into the
heart then a violent assault may.

3. When they are suited by the devil to a man's disposition or present
condition; so was that temptation by which the devil set upon Christ, after he
had fasted forty days and forty nights: Command, says he, that these stones be
made bread. Mat. 4. 3.
It was suited to his present condition, meat for his hunger. If you offer meat
to a naked man, he values it not, or clothes to a hungry man, because it is not
suited to his present exigence: but if the gift you offer be suited to the man's
necessity, clothes to him that is naked, and meat to him that is hungry, then
it becomes acceptable. The devil does not cast temptations at random, he is
more subtle then to row against wind and tide, he knows which way the stream
of our affections and dispositions runs, and he suits his baits accordingly.
Jam. 1. 14.
Every man (says the Apostle) is tempted, when he is drawn away by his own
lust and enticed. (...), -- Metaphora a Piscat^ribus, qui inescant, and h^me
captant. Beza.
It is a metaphor taken from Fishermen, who have this skill, that according to
the nature of the fish, so they will suit their bait, whereby they lie in wait
to deceive either the sight or the taste of the poor fish. The devil is the
great fisher of souls, and makes use of such temptations which are most likely
to take; he observes to what sins a man's Relations, Calling or opportunities
lay him most open and obnoxious, and accordingly he lays his snare, and spreds
his net. Though its true, that every man has a principle within him suiting to
every sin; yet it is as true that every man is not equally active for, or
disposed unto every sin. The devil sees what sin is most predominant in man,
and so he frames a temptation suitable; He sets a wedge of Gold before a
covetous Achan; Cozby an harlot, before an adulterous Zimri; a fair preferment
before an ambitious Absalom: he knows well, that a fit object presented is a
victory half obtained. In these three cases temptations may be said to be
strong.

How does it appear that temptations so urgent, 2 Quest.
so continued, and so suited, may be consistent with strong grace?

By instances, Answ. 1.
whereby it appears the best of Gods children have been most tempted. Job a
holy man, yet with what strong temptations was he assaulted? the devil
impoverished him in his state, and so would tempt him to distrust Gods
providence; took away the lives of his children, to make him question
providence; tormenting him with grievous diseases, to make him clamor against
providence; and above all this tempted him to curse God and die, by the
instigations of his wife; Job 2. 8.
and yet though Job was thus haunted by the devil, he was a believer strong in
grace, and the most eminent Saint in that age, and that part of the world at
that time, as God himself testifies of him, that there was none like him upon
earth, a perfect and an upright man. -- He was not only for riches the greatest
of all the men of the East, but for holiness the greatest upon the earth; yet
thus was he afflicted and assaulted by the devil.

Another instance there is of David, an eminent believer, and has this
commendation, that he was a man after Gods own heart, and yet how furiously was
he tempted by the devil? one while Satan moved him to number the people,
another time to defile another man's wife, another time to counterfeit himself
mad before Achish King of Gath, another time to judge all his holy duties to be
in vain, and at another time to question the faithfulness of God in his
promise to make him King. He said in his haste that all men were liars, even
Samuel the Prophet also. Mat. 16. 16 17. compared with 16. Chapter 22, 24.
Thus Peter an eminent Apostle of Christ, after he had made such a glorious
confession of his faith, and had discovered more grace then in all his life
time before, you find him suddenly after by an instigation from the devil,
begin to rebuke Christ, and counselling him to spare himself. And thus Paul
that had such high and heavenly raptures, such divine ecstasies, yet had he the
messenger of Satan to buffet him. But above all instances, you have Jesus
Christ, who though he had perfect grace, and was full of grace and truth; yet
this could not exempt him from the temptations of the devil. He was full of the
holy Ghost, yet was he forty days tempted of the devil, and that with strong
temptations; if you consider their continuance, their urgency one after
another, and suitability to that his present condition. So that it is plainly
manifest, that strong temptations may be consistent with strength of grace by
these instances given.

2. It appears also by reasons drawn,

1. From God, for the clearer illustration of the glory of his own Attributes:
Reason 1.
and therefore the Scripture is clear in this. Particularly to show how the
temptations of Gods people make his Attributes to be more illustrious. As
first, his Faithfulness: God who is faithful will not suffer you to be
tempted above that you are able. 1 Cor. 10. 13.
And then his Wisdom: 2 Pet. 2. 9.
The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation. He will by his
wisdom find a way for their escape. And then also hereby will his pity and
compassion be made glorious; Heb. 2. 17.
therefore Christ became like unto us, that he might be a merciful High Priest,
able to succor and pity those that are tempted. And then lastly, the glory of
his Power. In our weakness God will manifest his power, for his strength is
made perfect in weakness. 2 Cor. 12. 9
Thus it pleases God to exercise his people with great afflictions and
temptations; for the setting out of his own glorious Attributes, and magnifying
of his own name.

2. Another Reason may be drawn from Gods people themselves. Reason 2.


1. God in afflicting his children aims at their good. Thus when the devil
tempted David to number the people, 2 Chronicles. 21. 1.
and when he was sacrificing at the floor of Ornan the Jebusite, 1 Chronicles. 3. 1.
there did God tell him that the Temple should be built, this was the issue of
his temptation. So when Job was so tempted and afflicted, the issue of all was
for his good. Jobs graces had never been so illustrious, had not the devils
temptations been so furious. This is one end of Gods afflicting his people,
that their graces may become more orient.

2. Another may be to check pride. There is no greater temptation in the world
to pride, then eminency in grace. Pride it is that worst fruit, which grows
upon the best stock. It Is not so much the ornaments of the body, as the
endowments of the mind which stirs up pride; 2 Cor. 12. 9
and this was Paul's case, after his abundance of Revelations, there was a thorn
in his flesh, a messenger of Satan to buffet him, lest he should be lifted up.
God will suffer those which have strong grace to be strongly tempted, to check
the pride of their hearts.

3. The godly are more able to grapple with strong temptations then weaker
Christians are, and so God suits the service and sufferings of his people, to
the proportion of the strength of grace.

3. Another reason may be taken from the devil, Reason. 3.
from that malice which he bears to all the people of God, and especially to
those who have most grace; whom God loves most, the devil hates most. When the
voice from Heaven said to Christ, Thou art my welbeloved son, then came the
devil to assault and to tempt him; if you are the objects of Gods dearest love,
you will be the objects of the devils deepest rage: and though he cannot damn
thy soul, yet he will trouble thy conscience; if he cannot break thy head, he
will bruise thy heel.

2. It also proceeds from the devils knowledge, as well as his malice; he knows,
if he can but get those which are strong in grace to sin, he shall do the more
mischief, as

1. It will open the mouth of wicked men to blaspheme God and Religion, as in
the case of David, 2 Samuel 1^. 14.
By this deed thou have given great ^ecasion to the enemies of the Lord to
blaspheme. How were the mouths of Gods enemies opened to blaspheme his name?

2. It will imbolden the weak to sin with more freedom, when they shall see
those which are eminent to fall: and thus the example of Peter made the
Gentiles to Judaize. Gal. 2. 14.
When the strong shall abuse his liberty, he becomes a stumbling block to those
which are weak. 1 Cor. 8. 9.
When Phigellus and Hermogenes turned away from the faith how did all Asia turn
aside also? 2 Timothy 1. 15
Men of eminent gifts, when they shall apostatize, how do they draw others in
abundance?

3. It will provoke God to inflict heavy judgments on the places where you
dwell. Thus the devil knew that if he could get David to number the people, it
would procure a judgment upon them; and therefore it is not said, he stood up
against David, but against Israel, and provoked him to number the people; 2 Chronicles. 21. 1.
he well knew, if he could prevail with David, all Israel should suffer for it.
Thus we see, that where there is strength of grace, there may be and are strong
temptations. Object.


But here may an objection be raised from that of John, 1 John 5. 18
where it is said, He that is born of God sins not, 1 John 2. 18.
and keeps himself that the wicked One touches him not, and that they which
are strong have overcome the wicked one. And if this be so, how can that be
truth, that strong temptations from the devil, may be confistent with strong
grace in the heart?

When it is said, Sol.
the wicked one touches him not, it is not to be taken absolutely, as if the
devil did not tempt a man at all, therefore there must be a restriction of the
clause, he touches him not, that is, with a deadly touch; and so Cajetan, This
phrase exeludes not the kinds of temptations, but that we are not burt or
eternally dostroyed by them But I conceive rather that these words have a
peculiar reference to the 16 verse, where is mention made of a sin unto death;
the devil shall not prevail, or touch a man so, as to commit that sin which is
unto death. Though he may tempt, and will be continually assaulting a man, yet
he shall never prevail against him, so as to draw him to the committing of
that sin.

1. From hence we may learn the indulgence of God to weak Christians; Use 1.
whilst their graces are weak their temptations shall not be strong. God will
not put weak Christians upon such strong trials, as those (...) have obtained
greater measures of grace Not every man in David's Army was put (...) break
through the Army of the Philistin^ to fetch of the waters of the Well of
Bethlehem, but David's three Worthles. God will not put young Converts to break
through an Host of temptations, until they shall have obtained experience and
strength of grace to grapple with them.

2. Hence also learn, Use 2.
that men of the strongest and most eminent gifts and graces ought not to
presume upon their own strength. Consider thy self, lest thou also be tempted.
Gal. 6. 1.
Thou which art most spiritual, take heed lest thou be foiled. Some men's pride
may make them think they are above Ordinances, yet their own experience may
satisfy them that they are not above temptations; and certainly they which are
not above temptations, will still stand in need of Ordinances; now no man in the
world, either is or shall be above temptation; if any, surely Adam would, yet
he in Paradise, the best of places; and in In noeency, the best of states, was
not exempted from the temptations of the devil, and thereby fell; therefore let
no man presume upon his own strength.

3. Remember this for thy comfort, that though the devil tempt thee with strong
temptations, yet he shall never have his will against thee. It is true, a godly
man may fall into that particular act unto which the devil tempts him, yet as
to the devils general aim (the damning of thy soul) he shall never have his
will. It is a notable expression that of our Saviors to Peter, says he, Satan
has destred to have you, Luke 22. 31
that he may sift you as wheat: Satan has desired to have thee, that was the
devils general aim. Though he may have his will as to a particular act, and thou
may yield to his temptation, yet he shall never carry thee with himself into
Hell.

4. Remember to your great comfort, you who are the people of God, and
harrassed with the devils temptations; thou complainest that they are great for
kind, long for continuance, and the more dangerous because suited to thy
present condition. Remember, that thus the devil dealt with Jesus Christ, his
temptations were suited, continued, and for kinds gross, being to distrust
providence, to self-murder, and to blasphemy; and why was all this, but for thy
comfort? he suffered being tempted, that he might be able to pity,
compassionate, Heb. 2. 18.
and succor thee, being in the same condition.

IX. Sermon at Lawrence Jury London. April 6. 1651.
2 TIMOTHY 2. 1. -- My son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus.
WE proceed now to the second Case of conscience, concerning strength of grace,
which is this:

Whether strength of grace may be consistent with strength of lust and
corruption in the he art? Case 2.


In the answering whereof I shall speak to these particulars:

1. When may corruptions be said to be strong?

2. Why those that have strong grace, have many times strong corruptions?

3. What strong corruptions are they that those that are strong in grace, are
most subject unto?

4. In what cases, and with what limitations may strength of corruptions
consist with strength of grace?

1. When may corruptions and lusts be said to be strong in the soul? Quest. 1.


1. When sins are committed with complacency. Answ. 1.
Sin at first is like a snake that is almost starved by reason of the cold, and
is very weak and feeble; but if it be laid in the bosom, then it gathers
strength, and after a while sin revives and becomes a delight in the soul. If
thou were at first troubled at sin, and afterward take pleasure in sin, its
a sign that sin has a great hand over thee. Thus God complains of his
people, What has my beloved to do in my house? Jer. 11. 15.
-- When thou do evil then thou rejoycest. We may know the power and strength
of corruption in us, by sins activity in us, and by our chearsulness and
complacency in sin.

2. By the frequency of sin, as a relapse into a disease, Answ. 2
argues the strength of that peccant humor in the body: so reiterated and
multiplied acts of the same sin, argue the power and strength of that sin in
our hearts. Corruption gathers strength even as grace does by the frequent
acting and exercise of it.

3. When sin is persisted in against the cheeks of conscience. Answ. 3.
And it argues the strength of a stream that it bears down before it
whatsoever bank would check the course of it: So it also argues that there is a
strong current of corruption in thy soul, that bears down before it all the
warnings, checks and reproofs of conscience.

2. Why have those that have the strongest graces, Quest. 2.
many times also the strongest corruptions?

1. It arises from the natural temperature and constitution of the body, Answ.
1.
which does dispose men to some sin more then another, although they have such
eminency of grace; and hence it is, that those who are naturally and
constitutionally passionate, and given to anger, though they may have a great
measure of grace, yet what ado have they to bridle in their anger? what ado to
be greatly angry, and not greatly sinful? And so such whose temperature
inclines them to be lustful, though they have much grace, yet all little enough
to suppress lustful thoughts and wanton looks in them.

2. God suffers this to humble his People, Answ. 2.
and to keep them humble under their great measures of grace. It is observable
in nature, that those creatures which have the most excellency in them, have
something also of defect and deformity in them, as if the God of nature did it
to keep them humble. The Peacock has glittering feathers, and yet black feet;
The Swan has white feathers, but under that a black skin; The Eagle has many
excellencies, quick sight, and high flight, but yet very ravenous; The Camel
and Elephant are great and stately creatures, but of a deformed shape: So it is
in the state of grace, God does suffer some strong and unsubdued corruptions to
remain in them, who have not only truth, but strength of grace, and this is to
keep them humble. 2 Cor. 12. 7.
Thus Paul after his great Revelation, had a messenger of Satan to buffet him,
and a thorn in the flesh to afflict and keep him humble; the thorn in the
flesh did let out the impostumated matter of pride out of his heart; and the
considerations of their corruptions does much affect the hearts of the godly,
that they become, 1. More condescending and compassionate to the weak. 2. They
do depend less upon their own righteousness. They see it is in vain to think
of establishing their own righteousness, and that it is too weak a foundation
to lay the weight and stresse of their salvation upon: the Covering is too
narrow, and the Bed is too short for them to rest quietly upon. 3. They are
hereby brought to think better of others then of themselves, yea to judge
themselves the least of Saints, and the greatest of sinners.

3. This is from Satan's malice, Answ. 3.
who if he can draw out great corruptions from them who are eminent in grace;

1. He thereby aims to blemish Religion and to darken the honor of Profession,
and in this case usually fights against none, great nor small, but the King of
Israel, viz. such as are eminent for holiness. When David fell into those
great sins of murder and adultery, Satan had a main end granted him, to make
the way of true Religion stink and be abhorred. 2 Samuel 12. 14.


2. Hereby Satan has his end to imbolden those that are weak to sin. The sins
and great miscarriages of such as are great Professors are great stumbling
blocks in the way of the weak to make them fall. 1 Cor. 8. 10


3. Hereby the peace and purity of conscience is violated; the devil will play
at small game rather then at no game: and if he cannot prevail to damn thy
soul, yet he will endeavor to disquiet thy conscience.

3. What are those great corruptions and sins unto which strong believers are
incident? Quest. 3.


1. To lose those strong affections which they had at their first Conversion.
Answ. 1.
Holy Greenham complained, that it was very difficult to keep together his old
discretion and young zeal. -- Young Christians (as has been already observed)
have strong affections, and but weak judgments. Their heat is more then their
light. Their present apprehension and sense is great and high, their experience
little and low; And so also strong Christians, who may have much grace, yet tha
flood and flush of affections may be much abated, and it is the fault of old
professors, that they do not labor to maintain the primitive vigor and
vivacity of their first affections; Rev. 2. 3, 4.
they are too apt to leave their first love, yet we must know they do not decay
so as to be bankerupts, in grace. In the godly the decay and declining, though
it may be great, yet it is neither total nor final; though he may fail, yet he
is not a banquerupt, he has still a stock remaining which can never be quite
spent, a fountain which can never be quite dry. Joh. 4. 14.
He has in him a Well of water springing up to eternal life. The water of a
fountain may be mudded, but it will clear it self again. It may be damm'd up in
one place, but it will break out in another; so it is with grace. A tree, you
know, in Winter-season, the fruit and leaves fall off, and it seems as if it
were dead, but there is life in the root; so it is in Christians, their beauty
and blossom may fall off, their fruit dry up, their leaves drop off, the
beauty, the exercise and the fruits of grace may cease for a time, and yet the
root of the matter is in them. Job 19 28
It often fares with old Professors, as it did with old David, 1 King. 1. 1.
of whom it is said, that all the clothes he did wear, could not get or keep
beat in him: So they, all the duties they perform, and all the Ordinances they
enjoy, cannot keep up that youthful heat of vigorous affections which once they
had. Many of Gods children have not now as once they had, such complacency in
God, such fervency in prayer, such attention in hearing, such delight in
Sabbaths, such mournfulnesse and tenderness of spirit, such hatred of sin. Now
they have not such aggravating thoughts of sin, as in former times, nor the
occasions unto sin, so avoided as formerly. How many are there, who heretofore
looked on every sin as an heinous evil, but now do not so: time was when every
gnat seemed a camel, and every mote a beam, and every mol^hil a mountain, but
now they can extenuate and excuse their sin. Heretofore the most pleasing sin
was abominable, the smallest detestable, and the highest intolerable, but it is
otherwise now through spiritual decays and abatement in our affections. There
are many heretofore when they fell into sin, were wont to walk sadly, to ^igh
deeply, weep bitterly, pray affectionately: but now do not these things with
those warm and working affections as formerly. The time was when many
Professors of Religion, prepared themselves for holy duties with more care,
attended to them with more diligence, delighted in them with more complacency,
and gained more profit and edification by them then now they do. And that is the
first sin, that those who have grace, both in truth and strength, are apt to
fall into, viz. spiritual decay.

2. Such as are strong Christians are very subject to spiritual pride, Answ. 2.
and to be highly conceited of their own gifts, parts and graces. Spiritual
pride is a secret spiritual corruption, that is in the most spiritual and
gracious heart; it is a bad fruit that grows on the best root: there is
nothing better then grace, and there is nothing more abominable then sin, and
there is no sin so bad as pride, and there are none so apt to fall into this
sin of pride, as they that have much grace, and there is nothing weakens a
strong Christian more then pride, and nothing argues weakness more then this
boasting.

3. To behave themselves with contempt and superciliousnesse toward weak
Christians, Answ. 3.
is an ordinary fault of the strong. There is not any one thing in Scripture
more often mentioned then this, that we should not despise or discourage the
weak, which notes an aptness in the strong to be faulty herein. Romans 14. 1, 2,
3.
Let us not judge one another any more. The word (...) notes, Verse. 13. (...).
they were wont to do so before. Spiritual pride is a root of bitterness,
which bears these two bitter fruits. 1. An over-valuing of our selves. 2. An
undervaluing of other men's persons and gifts.

4. Strong Christians are apt to put too much duty and task upon the weak. --
John's disciples failed in this toward the disciples of Christ about fasting.
Mat. 9. 16, 17.
Strong Christians should deal tenderly with the weak, they should excuse their
failings, conceal their weaknesses, commend their performances, cherish their
forwardness, resolve their doubts, bear their burdens, and hereby make the way
of Religion to be lovely and amiable to them, whereas by their too much
austerity the weak are disheartened at their first entrance.

5. To be content with measures of grace. How apt are they that have grace to
say in one sense, as he said in another, Soul, take thine ease, Luke 12 19
thou have goods laid up for many years; and hereupon many grow slack and
careless in holy duties, and do not improve ordinances for the increase of
their graces. The best of Christians are apt to fall into this satiety, then
which nothing can be more prejudicial to the soul. The devil tempts those that
have but a little grace to think they have none, and those that have more
grace to think they have enough. The best are apt to mistake themselves in
this, to think that there is a just dimension and full growth of grace
attainable in this life: Whereas indeed the best improvement of having much
grace, is to desire more, and not to be satisfied with any measure of grace
till we come to a perfect man, Ephesians. 4. 13.
unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, and that is not
attainable in this life. Perfection is the aim of this life, but it is the
reward of another life. We should endeavor after Perfection in grace, but we
shall not attain it till grace be perfected in glory.

4. In what cases, Quest. 4.
and with what limitations may strength of corruptions consist with strength of
grace?

The resolving of this question is of very much use to the soul: for that soul
that is over-mastered with strong corruptions, may not only question the
strength of his grace, but the being of it. How may I then know, that I have
both the truth and strength of grace in me, though I am overpowered sometimes
by strong and prevailing corruptions?

1. If you maintain in you a strong opposition against your corruptions. Answ. 1
The flesh lusts against the Spirit, but does the Spirit lust against the
flesh? Gal. 5. 17.
though you cannot fully subdue sin, yet do you strongly oppose it? if so,
there is grace and strength of grace too, which is able to make and hold up
this opposition. An uncontrolled subjection unto sin, argues the strength of
sin; but an irreconcilable opposition of sin argues the strength of grace.
Strength of grace is not so much seen in those particular acts of suppression,
and actual overcoming of it, as in that constant and habitual frame of heart in
the opposition of sin.

2. Though sin be strong, Answ. 3.
yet grace may be strong too in thy soul. If thou have a strong measure of
humiliation, though thy sin be great, if thy sorrow be great too, it evidenceth
thy grace is so also. It was great grace in Manasseh, 1 Chronicles. 23. 12.
that he humbled himself greatly, though he had been a very great sinner.

3* If thou have strong cries to God against thy sins, this argues grate,
though it be ready to be d^flowered by thy corruptions. If when corruptions and
temptations prevail, thou prayest to the Lord with strong cry^ and tears,
Deuteronomy. 22. 26. 27.
this argues grace, yea and the strength of grace.

4. If thou have strong affections that carry thee to Christ, Answ. 4.
certainly thou have grace, though thy strong corruptions often carry thee from
Christ. Peter had more infirmities and corruptions and sins, then all the
disciples besides (excepting Judas.) He took Christ aside, gave him carnal
counsel, and said as to his sufferings, Mat. 16. 22
Far be it from the Lord, this shall not be unto thee; for which Christ said to
him, Get thee behind me, Satan. He dreams of merit, and boasts of what he had
done for Christ, at it is observed of him, when he said to Christ, Mat. 19. 27
Behold, we have forsaken all and followed thee, what shall we have therefore?
Peter of all the disciples was the most confident of his own strength; and
boasts what he would do and suffer for Christ; Though all men should be
offended because of thee; Mat. 26. 33 35.
yet will I never be offended. And if I should die with thee, yet will I not
deny thee. Nay and presently after this confident undertaking, Peeer denies
Christ, and swear: and curses that he knew him not. Some observe, that Peter's
cursing, was not only his cursing of himself if he knew Christ, but that he
also cursed Jesus Christ, that so he might appear to them to be none of his
disciples; and yet notwithstanding all this Peter had not only truth and
reality, but eminency and strength of grace: for though temptations and
corruptions did sometimes prevail, yet he had strong affections toward Jesus
Christ; he did and suffered that which few or none of the other disciples did.

1. He was the man, Mat. 26. 75
that of all the disciples wept most bitterly for his sins.

2. Peter was the first that ran to the sepulcher, Joh. 20. 5.
and went into the sepulcher to see what was become of Christ.

3. He was the man, Joh. 21. 7.
who hearing that Christ was risen and on the seashore, leap't into the sea
for joy.

4. He was the man that made the first Sermon, Act. 1. 15.
and first preached the Gospel after the Ascension of Christ.

5. He had that love to Christ which was as strong as death; for he suffered
death, and was crucified, (as say Ecclesiastical Writers) but would not be
crcuified, but with his heels upwards, deeming it too great an honor to be
crucified in the same manner that his Lord and Master was; so that the strength
of his affections, did argue notwithstanding his great failings, the strength
of grace in him.

To make application of what has been spoken in this case of Conscience. --
Applicatian. Use 1.


Though in the cases before mentioned, strength of grace may be consistent with
strength of corruptions; yet there are other cases wherein they are altogether
inconsistent.

1. When the strength and workings of corruptions are not clearly discovered to
the soul; for grace always, as a light set up in the soul, does discover the
darkness of corruption.

2. Where corruptions are not sensibly bewailed, it is to be feared that there
is not strength of grace.

3. Where occasions to those strong prevailing sins and corruptions are not
heedfully avoided. Certainly if thou have grace to make thee sensible of what
corruptions thou art incident unto, thy grace will make thee walk so
circumspectly, as to avoid all occasions leading thereunto.

4. If they be not strongly resisted, and the beginnings of each corruption not
diligently suppressed, in this case strength of grace and strength of
corruption are utterly inconsistent.

5. Though there may be strong grace and strong coriuption in the soul, yet the
reign of any one corruption is utterly inconsistent with grace and the strength
of it. Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies. Romans 6. 12, 14. expounded, and
compared with Romans 7. 23.
Sin shall not have dominion over you, for you are not under the law but under
grace; which is not to be understood in the Antinomisis sense, that believers
are not under the mandatory power of the moral Law: But the meaning of the word
(Law) as Beza interprets it, is the law of sin, and so the Apostle Paul, chap.
7. 23, mentions a law in his members that did war against the law of his mind,
and did hring him into captivity to the law of sin, that is; sin would have
swayed in him with the power and force of a law. And this argued grace and the
strength of grace in Paul, that though he was overborn by the strength of
corruption and sin, and taken Prisoner by it, yet he never yielded to it as to
a lawful Sovereign; for so he adds, verse. 29. So then with the mind. I serve
the law of God, Romans 7. 25.
but with my flesh the law of sin. It may be said of the corruptions in Gods
children, what was showed to Daniel concerning the beasts, They had their
dominion taken away, yet their lives were prolonged for a season. Dan. 9. 12.


6. When we say there is a consistency between grace and corruption; I would be
understood of spiritual and inward corruptions, as hardness of heart,
spiritual pride, deadness in duties: for into gross external, open acts of
evil, strong Christians do seldom fall.

7. We must also be further informed, that if we consider particular acts of
sin, some one lust may seem to be more strong in a godly Christian, then in a
mere moral man. As for instance, in the case of lust, when we consider how
David did abuse his neigh bours wife, and how Abimelech would not touch another
man's wife; one would have judged David the heathen, and Abimelech the believer,
and therefore the strength of grace or corruption must not be judged by any one
particular act when some impetuous temptation has prevailed.

8. Lastly, we are to know that a corruption may be really weak'ned when
sensibly strong. As a man in a Fever is seemingly strong, but is really weak:
so corruption may be then most enfeebled when in our apprehension it is most
enraged; it may rave and rage when it is in crucifying. As a cole glows most
just before its going out; a candle burnt't down in the socket gives a blaze a
little before it be extinct: so it is when corruption is ready to expire. As in
a mere moral man sin may be restrained when it is not subdued; corruption may
be quiet where it is not mortified: So in a regenerate person it may be subdued
and mortified, where yet it may rage as if unrestrained. A man's last gasp may
be the strongest breath: So when corruption is ready to give up the Ghost it
may seem to breath strongest. As a bird may flutter when his neck is broken: so
sin may seemingly resist grace, when the power, strength and life of it is
utterly broke.

X. Sermon At Lawrence Jury, London. April 13. 1651.
2 TIMOTHY 2. 1. Be strong in the grace of God that is in Christ Jesus.
WE have already handled two great Cases of Conscience about strength of grace,
about the consistency of strong temptations and strong cortuptions with the
strength of grace, and shall now proceed to a third Case, which is this,

3. Whether strength of grace may consist with the want of those strong
affections, Case 3.
which Christians have had at their first conversion?

In answering whereof I shall endeavor to show three things.

1. When a man may be said to lose his first affections?

2. In what Cases may a strong Christian want strong affections?

3. Whence it is that those that have strong grace may want such strong
affections as they had at their first Conversion?

1. When may a Christian be said to lose his first affections? Quest. 1.
Affections are fitly compared to the pulses of the soul, by which may
judgment be given of the state and temper of the soul; and that we may know
when these affections beat low and are decayed, we may make judgment hereof.

1. When we have not such eager desires after duties. Answ. 1.
It is very remarkable, that at a Christians first conversion, he is so earnest
and eager after holy duties, that he will hardly allow time for the duties of
his particular calling; nay how have men at first tied themselves to hear so
many Sermons, make so many Prayers, read so many Chapters, spend so many hours
in holy Meditation by our selves, and good conference with other Christians?
But alas, afterward this fervor begins to cool and remit, and men pray less,
and hear more seldom, and this is from the multitude of their wordly
occasions. Usually men at their first conversion, (which as Divines have
observed) ordinarily does fall out between the eighteenth and twenty eighth
year of their age (though God indeed be tied to no year) yet men at that age
have usually less of the world, and so it comes to pass, that afterward when
the cares and profits, and pleasures of the world steal away their affections,
that they grow much more remiss then they were at the beginning.

2. Affections may be judged to be decayed when men have not such ravishing
joys as we were wont to have. Answ. 2.
How many have been at first in David's frame of heart, Psalm. 122, 1
I was glad when they said to me, come let us go into the house of the Lord?
but afterward the overeflowing of this flood of joy by dogrees has abated.

3. When sensible profit by Ordinances is abated. Answ. 3.
A man may profit by Ordinances, and yet not be sensible of that his profiting.
A Christian may grow at the root in solidity of grace, though it may be not
shoot up so much in blossoms of affection.

2. In what Cases may a strong Christian want strong affections? Quest. 2.


1. In case you have less sin in duties, Answ. 1.
though less affections. A weak young convert has oftentimes much affection
in holy duties, but much corruption too. They are very subject to rashness and
precipitancy in their Prayers, and to be proud of any small measures of grace
in duty, and too apt to have carnal dependence upon their duties: But old
experienced Christians, as they have often less affection, so less sin in
duties. Papists have very much affection in the performance of their devotions:
but alas, they have the leaven of this error in their best duties, that they
think they merit by them: but grown and knowing Christians, though they may not
be so affectionate in duty, as the weak, yet they may exercise much more grace
then they do. And so also it is after duties are performed. Weak Christians are
apt to indulge their corruptions afterward, thinking they have made a
compensation for their sins by their duties: But an experienced grown
Christian, though not so affectionate in duty, yet he is careful afterward
that he do not by sin spoil all his duties.

2. A strong Christian may want strong affections, Answ. 2
in case he has strength of judgment to recompense the want of his
affections. Young trees are more sappy, but old trees are more solid; Wherefore
the Apostle prays for the Philippians, not only that tbeir love might abound,
but that their judgment might also abound. Phil. 1. 9.
As a man that is come to his full age, though he do not grow in bulk and
extension of parts; yet he grows intensively, and in the consolidation of the
parts of the body: so old and experienced Christians, though they have not so
much affection; yet they have more solidity and clearness of judgment, more
experimental knowledge in the profound mysteries of the Gospel, and more
distinct apprehensions of the deep things of Christ. A strong believer, what he
wants in affections he has compensated to him in a distinct and experimental
knowledge of the deceitfulness of his heart, of the vanity of the world, of
the sinfulness of sin, and of the transcendent excellency of Christ. New
converts are rash, inconsiderate, injudicious; and therefore we have a promise
made to new converts, that they shall proceed in grace. It is a promise made to
the Gentiles when the Kingdom of Christ shall come amongst them, that though at
the first they were rash, yet it is said, Isa. 32. 4.
The heart of the rash shall understand knowledge, and the tongue of the
stammerers shall be ready to speak plain. Affection without knowledge will be
but rashness, which (like metal in a young horse) will be apt to precipitate
him and make him stumble. An experienced Christian though he have not so much
seeming metal in his affection, yet shall rid more way to heaven by far then
a young Convert, and that without fear of stumbling. At the first kindling of
the fire, there may be more smoke, though afterward the flame will be clearer:
So when at first thou have much affection, afterward thou shall have a clearer
judgment.

3. A strong Christian may want strong affections in case it proceed from a
natural temper, Answ. 3.
and not from a sinful careless distemper. There are some persons that are
naturally of a soft and tender disposition, and these are naturally more
affectionate; nay the woman who is the weaker vessel, commonly her heart holds
most affection: And so likewise there are some who naturally are more bound up
in their affections, and are of a reserved temper, who naturally do not break
out into any great expression either of the passion of joy or grief. We read in
the Gospel, that they that expressed most affection to Christ at his death, and
made the most passionate lamentation for him, were the women, Luke 23. 27.
who naturally are of a more melting disposition. Some men's dispositions are
like ice, they will easily thaw and melt; others like iron, it must be a a hot
fire that will (...) them down: So it is, some men will be more affectionate
upon a small occasion then others upon a greater, and this is from natural
disposition. Melancthon was not so affectionate as Luther, but it is observed
that he was more judicious.

4. In case of sickness and old age, and bodily weakness, Answ. 4.
He that has strength of grace may yet want strength of affection. The
expression of our affection depends much upon the temperature of the body, if
bodily strength and vigor be impaired, our affections must needs flag. As the
ebbing and flowing of the sea depends upon the motion and influence of the
Moon: So our affections do ebb and flow much what, as the strength or
weakness of the body has an influence upon them. As a Musician when he is
grown old, cannot so dexterously handle an instrument, as when he was young,
though perhaps he has now more judgment and experience in music; so it is in
old age, that brings experience in the ways of God, yet may abate affections.
Old age and sickness makes the body like a tired horse to the active soul; an
active traveller would feign ride away to his journeys end, but his horse is
tired. An aged sickly Christian may have as much grace and more then ne had at
first, and yet not be so able to pray; and so a Minister not so able to preach
affectionately as before; and this from the indisposition of the body.

3. Whence it is that those that have strength of grace, Quest. 3.
may yet want those strong affections which they had at their first conversion?

1. Because at first conversion grace was but particularly employed, Answ. 1
which afterward was more diffused and generally employed. When much water
runs in one Channel it makes the stream the stronger; but when there are many
rivulets cut out, though there is as much and more water, yet there is not the
same strength of stream: So it is at our first conversion, all our affections
made but up one stream, and so our affections seemed the stronger. A new
convert has not so many duties to perform as a grown Christian has, because
he does not know so many duties. It may be at first all his affections run out
to pray, and hear the Word, and read good books, and whilst all the affections
run in this one channel they seem to be very strong; whereas a grown Christian
he has not only these general duties, but many particular duties of his
calling and relations to follow, he has many duties to perform to God and men,
which a new convert knows not, and therefore it is that though his affections
may seem weaker, yet his grace is as strong as before and stronger.

2. This is from the newness of the condition. Naturally we are much affected
with any new thing, Answ. 2.
as for example, for a man that has been many years in a dark dungeon, to be
suddenly brought into the light, the suddenness of the change would much
affect a man. This is the state of our souls at our first conversion; we are
therefore brought from darkness into light, and from the power of Satan unto
God. 1 Pet. 2. 9.
By the grace of conversion, God calls us out of darkness into his mavelous
light; and because it is so mavelous, therefore it does so much affect. The
change at first conversion is very great, a man be comes another man, and man
is so affected, that he is put into a kind of astonishment. Yet in this case
we must distinguish between solid affections, and floting and transient
passions, which do wear off presently, and vanish suddenly. The affections of
some Christians, especially young ones, are like those colors which are not in
grain, they will soon fade. It is with a young Convert as with a man going to
execution, while he is upon the ladder a pardon is unexpectedly brought, how
will this man be transported with joy? he will leap for joy, he will in that
case be all joy and exultation for the present, and it may be afterward the
flush and torrent of his joy is abated, though his life be as dear to him as
ever: So when the soul has been brought by the Law of God to a sight of its
lost condition, and then the Gospel has proclaimed a pardon, and the Spirit of
God has set on the comfort of that pardon upon his heart. Oh what ravishments
has that soul for the present! which perhaps he shall not long retain, the
violence of his joy is abated, but the solidity of it remains. The soul is
much affected with its first meeting with Christ, and though the flush of that
joy be over, yet the souls love to Christ is as much, and its prizing Communion
with Christ the same. The Creeple when he was restored to strength, Act. 3. 8.
went leaping and praising God, because the unexpectedness of the cure did
mightily affect his heart; and this is a second reason why those who are grown
and solid Christians, yet perhaps may not retain the same measure of affections
they had at their first conversion.

3. A third Reason may be taken from Gods indulgence to young Converts, Answ 3.
who usually gives in comfort according to the necessity of his people. It is
with God our heavenly Father as with natural Parents, they are most tender
over their newborn children. Luke 15. 22.
That parable of the returning Prodigal is very full to this purpose; his
father did not only receive him mercifully, but bountifully too, he gave him
more then was for necessity; not only sho^s, but a ring; not only clothes, but
the best robe; not only bread, but the fatted calfe, and music at this Feast,
and all this was for this newly converted and repenting son, though his father
did not entertain him so every day. So our God, at our first conversion
expresses much of his bounty and indulgence to his children, though afterward
we may have the same love of God, and the same love to God, though the
expressions may not be the same now, as formerly in those days of Gods bounty.

Let us from hence learn, Use.
that though we have lost those affections which we had, yet we must

1. Labor to be sensible of, and humbled for those decays. A decayed
condition is an uncomfortable condition; though thou have so much grace as will
bring thee to heaven, yet by thy decays thou will be very uncomtable here on
earth.

2. Labor to get those decays repaired. If thou have left thy first love, Rev.
2. 4, 5.
repent and do thy first works.

3. Make up the want of former affections in solidity of knowledge and
judgment; and if the candle give not so great a blaze, let it give a more
clear and constant light.

4 Labor to keep up the primitive vigor of your affections.

1. Remember you may lose that in a short time, which you may be a long time in
recovering. A man may lose more strength in one weeks sickness, then many
months will make reparation. A wound may be quickly made, but not so soon
cured. Philosophers will tell us, that the way from the habit to the privation is
far easier, then from the privation to the habit; it is far easier to make a
seeing man blind, then to make a blind man see; so it is far easier to lose our
holy affections, then it is to recover them.

2. Labor to keep up your holy affections: for the truth of grace is more
discerned by our affections then our actions. Acts of grace may be easier
dissembled then gracious affections. A Painter may paint the color, but not
the heat of the fire.

3. Labor to keep up affections as they were at first, because it is very hard
to retain them: it is hard to keep them wound up to any height. Flush of
spiritual joy is like the sea; the tide does not so flow, but the ebb does
fall as low. Bernard said of these strong gusts and great flush of these
spiritual joys and gracious affections, Rara hora, brevis mora.
They come but seldom, and stay but a short time. As in nature there is a
spring, and then the fall of the leaf, and one day is clear, and another is
cloudy: so it is with the best Christian, his affections are not always at the
same pitch, at the same height; but it should be our endeavor to cherish and
maintain in our souls our first flourishing affections, in and toward the
ways of God.

XI. Sermon at Lawrence Jury London. April 13. 1651.
2 TIMOTHY 2. 1. -- My son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus.
HAving dispatched three Cases of conscience concerning strength of grace; I
now proceed to a fourth, viz.

Whether a man that has strength of grace, Case 4.
may want the comfort of his grace?

I shall answer this question affirmatively; Answ.
A man that has the strength of grace yet may want the comfort of it: Strength
of grace (as you have heard) does not exempt a man from temptations from the
devil, nor from desertions from God. It is an undoubted rule, there may be
strength of grace, where there is not the comfort and evidence of it. A child
of light may walk in darkness for a time; and though he have the holy Ghost
working grace, and increasing grace in his heart, yet he may want the oil of
gladness, though he have received a precious anointing of grace. 1 John 2. 27
A child of God, as to his spiritual condition, may for a time be in the same
condition that Paul and the Mariners were in, who for many days had neither
sun nor stars appearing, Act. 27. 20
being under no small tempest, hopes of being saved being taken away: So it
fares with Gods dearest children, they may be in the dark and can see no light,
they may have the graces of the Spirit, and yet want the comforts of the Spirit.

In the opening of which point I shall thus proceed.

1. I will prove this from Scripture, that a child of God may be strong in
grace, and yet want the comfort of his grace.

2 I will lay down some reasons, why it is thus.

3. Some directions, how those that have grace, and yet do want the comfort of
their graces, should procure unto themselves the comfort of their graces.

4. And then I shall commend some comfortable considerations to such as have
grace, but want the comfort of it.

1. For the first, I shall give you instances both in the Old and New
Testament, that those that have been strong in grace have wanted comfort.

1. Job a man eminent for grace, a perfect and upright man, and one that feared
God and eschewed evil: and yet you have Job complaining, Wherefore hidest thou
thy face, Job 13. 24.
and hold me for thine enemy? nay, God did not only hide his face, but
handle him as his enemy; for he thus makes his moan, Job 16. 9.
He tears me in his wrat^, that is to be referred to God, and not unto the
devil, or to Jobs unmercifull enemies, or uncharitable friends. He teareth me,
that is, God teareth me. Who in my apprehension (says Job) hates me, and
gn^sheth upon me with his teeth, and as an enemy, sharpneth his eyes upon me.
And that these sad apprehensions were upon Job, that God was his enemy, see him
further lamenting himself, He has destroyed me on every side, Job 19. 10, 11.
and I am gone, and mine hope has he removed as a tree, he bath also kindled
his wrath against me, and counted me unto him as one of his enemies. Yea,
destruction from God was a terror to him. Job 31. 23.


2. Asaph, a holy man, yet thus complains, Will the Lord east off for ever, and
will he be favorable no more? is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his
promise fail for evermore? has God forgotten to be gracious? Psalm. 77. 7,
has he in anger shut up his tender mercies? These are the sad expostulations
of a troubled spirit cast down under deep dejections, and in the dark, by
reason of the suspension of divine favor.

3. David, a man after Gods heart, whose gracious breathings though the whole
book of Psalms, show that he was a man of an excellent spirit, and had much
grace. Yet David wanted the comfort of his grace, when his soul was cast down,
and his spirit was disquieted within him. And so

4. Heman, a man who for wisdom so eminent, that the Holy Ghost uses him as an
instance of wisdom, Psalm. 42. 5.
As wise as Heman, and yet in the 88. Psalm, quite through that Psalm, Psalm.
88.
was a strain of as sad a complaint as you shall meet withal in the whole
book of God. Thou have laid me in the lowest pit, in darkness, in the deep,
thy wrath lies hard upon me, and thou have afflicted me with all thy waves. So
little comfort had these holy men though they were eminent in grace. It is true
of many dear children of God, what was said of the Apostles and disciples of
Christ; Whither I go (says Christ) ye know, and the way ye know: John 14. 4,
5. expounded and reconciled. Aug.
To which speech of Christ, Thomas answers in the next verse, Lord, we know not
whither thou go, and how can we know the way? Augustine does thus reconcile
this, They did know whither Christ went, but they durst not once believe that
they had such knowledge, they did not know their own knowledge: The expressions
of Christ were different from those words of Thomas, the Lord Jesus spoke as it
was; and Thomas spoke as he thought. The Apostles had grace, and yet wanted the
comfort and assurance of it. I will not instance here of the Lord Jesus, who
though he was full of grace and truth, yet he wanted comfort when he was in
that bitter agony, and cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
Indeed in the new Testament there are not so many instances of those that
wanted the comfort of their graces, as we find in the Old Testament. And the
reason is this, Profession at the first publishing and promulgation of the
Gospel, met with so many and such sharp afflictions, that God did indulge them,
and made their inward graces to abound, as their outward sufferings did abound.
2 Cor. 1. 4.
These instances may suffice to prove that it is truth, believers who are
strong in grace, yet may want the comfort of their graces.

2. To give you some grounds of this, the reasons may be drawn, either 1. From
God, Or 2. From our selves. Or 3. From the devil.

1. Reason is from the Lord, to withold from them to whom he has given grace
the comfort of their grace.

1. To manifest his divine authority and absolute sovereignty over his people.
As the natural light of the day, and darkness of the night are at Gods
dispose; so also is this spiritual ligh of comfort, and the darkness of a
deserted and dejected spirit. God gives divi^e and spiritual consolations out
of the goodness of his will, and withdraws them, to show the absoluteness and
sovereign liberty of his Will.

2. To let his people know, that comfort is not essential to holiness, neither
inseparably and necessarily belonging to grace. Though there cannot be true
peace, where there is no grace; yet there may be true grace, where there is no
peace.

3. God in the dispensation both of grace and comfort, shows himself a free and
gracious Agent; and all our graces which God works in us, are merely from Gods
grace to us. He will give comfort when and to whom he pleases, but still as a
reward of his own free grace, the comfort of a pardon. The comfortable
knowledge of our pardon is as well from Gods free grace as the pardon it self;
and therefore God suspends the comfort of grace to make us look up to him for
it. When thou repentest, God gives a pardon, but therein he rewards his own
work in thee. To give a pardon or sense of a pardon is an act of mere
liberality in God.

4. God does this to put a difference between heaven and earth. Heaven is a
place for comfort, earth for duty: earth is for the getting of grace, heaven
for the rewarding of grace. Our Lord Jesus Christ, like the good Master of the
Feast, reserves the best for last. The sons of Nobles, when they travel into
foreign parts, have no more allowances then what will accommodate their
travels, the inheritance is reserved for them, when they come to their fathers
house: So believers, who are strangers and pilgrims here, they have so much
grace and comfort as befits their passage to heaven; but they have an
inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, that fades not away, but is reserved in
the heavens. God thinks it not sit to give constant comforts in an inconstant
world, nor full comforts in an empty world, nor lasting comforts in a
transitory world.

2. Reason may be taken from our selves, and that in many regards, that have
much grace, yet may have but a little comfort; and this may spring from a
threefold root in us;

1. From something that is merely natural in us.

2. From something that is spiritual and good.

3. From something that is evil in us.

1. This may arise from the prevalency of a natural melancholy in the body,
whereby the understanding may be darkened, the fancy troubled, reason perverted,
and the soul sadned. Melancholy is the mother of discomfort, and the nurser of
doubting. It was (as some think) depth of melancholy that prevailed upon
Nebuchadnezzar, that he did not know, whilst under the power of that distemper
whether he was a man or a beast: And in the like manner may this bodily
melancholy so far distemper thy soul, that th^^ who have grace, yet may not
know whether thou art a child of God, or a child of the devil. It is no more
wonder to see a melancholy man doubt and question his spiritual condition, then
it is to see a child cry when he is beaten, or to hear a sick man groan. You
may silence a melancholy man when you are not able to comfort him, and though
you may resolve his doubts and scruples by evident and convincing answers and
arguments, yet let but such a man retire alone, and brood over his melancholy
thoughts, by the prevalency of this perturbing humor, all is forgotten, and he
is as unsatisfied, as if you had said nothing to him. And you may perceive,
that it is the power of melancholy, that is the cause of a man's distemper, when
he is very much troubled, and yet can give no distinct account of any
particular thing that does trouble him.

2. This discomfort often arises from that which is good in us, viz. from that
holy jealousy and tenderness of conscience, which makes a child of God
suspect and inquire into his condition: and though he have true grace, and much
grace, yet he is afraid lest all be but a delusion; in such cases the soul does
so pore on sin and infirmities, that it cannot see its own evidences. A tender
conscience is more apt to be dejected in the sight of sin, then to be
comforted in the sense of grace, and the reason of this is, because sin does
more directly fall under the cognizance of our conscience, especially a natural
conscience. Gal. 5. 17.
The works of the flesh are manifest, but the fruits of grace and of the spirit
are not so easily discerned.

3. This discomfort usually springs from a root of bitterness, even in the
best of Gods children, and that whereby God does punish the sins of his people.

1. Their quenching the motions of the Spirit. Res delicata est, spiritus Dei
ita nos tractat, sicut tractatur,
If you grieve the Spirit of God, it is just with God to grieve your spirits:
you never send Gods Spirit sad to heaven, but God may make sad your spirits on
earth.

2. Sleightinesse and fearlessenesse of heart toward God. When children grow
saucy, peremptory and malapert before their parents, it is no wonder if a
fathers frown correct not their irreverence. Most of those who lie
uncomfortably under sense of displeasure of God, may thank themselves for it,
they have provoked God by their bearing them selves too much upon his love, and
growing secure and fearlesse to offend God. God loves to have his children come
near him in an holy confidence that he is their father, but yet to keep their
distance by humble reverence.

3. Another sin that God punishes in his children, by withholding comfort from
them that are strong in grace, is their superciliousnesse, contempt and
uncompassionatenesse toward others that are but weak in grace. God own people
are very much to blame herein, in rigor and unmercifulness toward those that
are weak in the faith, despising all that are inferior to them in gifts and
graces, whereby they often break the bruised reed, and quench the smoking
flax, and want bowels of pity and tenderness toward their brethren. To take
down pride, God often brings such, even his own people, to be low in comfort;
and it is but just that they should want comfort, who have neglected to comfort
and cherish those that were weak in grace.

4. A growing cold and lazy, and heedlesse in holy duties. If we put off God
without true service, God may justly put us off without true comfort. This rule
holds in spiritual affairs, He that will not work shall not eat. If we abate in
the sanctifying work of the Spirit, it is but just that God withhold the
comforting work of the Spirit. The sluggard says Solomon, has poverty enongh,
so if we grow lazy and sluggish in holy duties, it is just that our stock of
comfort do decay. Though holy duties do not merit comforts, yet comfort usually
rises and falls according to our diligence in duties. True grace is never so
apparent to, and sensible in the soul, as when it is in action; and therefore
want of exercise must needs cause want of comfort. As fire in the flint is
never seen or felt, till it be struck out by the Steel: so is grace and the
comfort of grace, never so sensible as when it is exercised much in holy duties.

5. Any one sin indulged by, or concealed in the conscience, is enough to mar
all your comfort. Concealed guilt contracts horror. The Candle will never burn
clear whilst there is a thief in it. Sin in the conscience is like Jonah in
the ship, which causes a tempest, that the conscience is like a troubled sea
whose waters cannot rest: or it is like a mote in the eye, which causes a
perpetual trouble while it is there: or like the wind gathered in the caverns
of the earth, makes earthquakes and terrible eruptions. It is just with God,
Jer. 2. 19.
that a man's own iniquities should correct him, and his backsliding should
reprove him. Concealed guilt, though it may not bring a child of God to hell,
yet for a time it may bring hell into his conscience. So that by all these
particulars we may see, Pro. 14. 14.
that if our comforts be abated, we may thank our selves for it.

3 Reason is taken from the restless rage and malice of Satan, who when he
cannot do the greater, will do the less: and if he cannot damn thy soul, he
will labor all he can to disquiet thy conscience. The devil aim^ principally
to make us walk sinfully, and if not so, then uncomfortably: if he cannot make
us live without God and Christ, and grace in the world, then he endeavors to
make us live beside the comfort of our grace. And hence it is, that many dear
children to God, who have truth and strength of grace in them, yet heark'ning
too much to Satan, live beside the comfort of their grace.

3. But what shall I do, Quest. 3.
that want the comfort of my grace, to procure it, that so I may have comfort
answerable to grace?

1. Live more in the exercise of grace; Answ. 1.
and and that is the ready way, not only to increase grace, but to obtain the
comfort of grace. It was the Apostolical salutation, Grace and Peace be
multiplied. If grace be multiplied, (and that it will by the exercise of it)
then peace will also be multiplied. Isa. 32. 17.
The work of Righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of Righteousness,
Psalm. 119. 165.
quietness and assurance for ever. Great peace have they which love thy law,
and nothing shall offend them.

2. Leave no sin unrepented of; Answ. 2
take heed of guilt of sin lying on the conscience; take away the thief out of
the candle, and it will burn clear. If iniquity be in thy hand, put it far from
thee, Job 11. 14, 15.
and let not wickedness dwell in thy tabernaoles; for thou shall then life up
thy face without spot, yea thou shall be steadfast, and shall not fear. Job 13.
18.
Behold now (says Job) I have ordered my couse, I know that I shall be
justified; the more ordered our ways are, the more steady and full are our
comforts, the more sin in the soul, the less comfort in that soul.

3. Call to mind former experiences that thy soul has had of God. Answ. 3.
Thus did David, when by reason of the discomfort of this soul, he cried out,
Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted in me? Oh my
God, my soul is cast down within me, therefore will I remember thee from the
land of Jordan, Psalm. 42, 5, 6
and of the Hermonites, that is, I will remember thee, and what thou did at
Jordan, when thou did dry up the river, and thy people passed on dry land
into Canaan. And I will remember the land of the Hermonites, that is, what thou
did unto Og King of Bashan, and to Sihon King of the Amor^tes, for Hermon was
part of the Country of those Kings. Josh. 12. 1.
So the Psalmist was under great discomfort, when he cried, Will the Lord cast
me off for ever? Is his mercy clean gone from me, etc. But he recovers himself
out of that sad case by remembering former experiences, for so he adds, Ps. 77.
6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12.
verse. 12. I will remember the works of the Lord; surely I will remember thy
wonders of old, I will meditate of all thy works, and talk of thy doings. Past
experience should be present encouragements.

4. Attribute to God the glory of his own grace, Answ. 4.
and this is the way to enjoy the comfort of our grace. Say with the Church,
Not unto us O Lord, Ps. 115. 1.
not unto us, but unto thy name give the glory. It will be just with God to
deny you the comfort of grace, if you deny him the glory of his grace. Want of
comfort is Gods Physic, to cure our souls of spiritual pride: and humble
thankfulness for the least grace, is the way to enjoy the comfort of all our
graces.

5. Spend more time in cherishing thy comforts then in questioning of them.
Answ. 5.
It is the fault of some Christians, to spend more time in fruitless
complaints of the want of comfort, then in faithful endeavors after comfort in
Gods way. There are those who are more inquisitive how they lost their
comforts, then careful how to recover them; and so indeed they weaken their own
hands, but do strengthen the hands of Satan.

A fourth general propounded in the solution of this Case, was this: What may
be the comfortable considerations which may be gathered from the truth
delivered, viz. That strong Christians may be but weak in comfort? Now the
handling of this last, will be an application of the other three particulars, by
way of consolation to those that may perhaps now have strong grace, but weak
comfort.

1. The godly are never without the ground of comfort, Consolat.
though they may be without the sense of comfort. Though they may be without
present feeling, yet they do not want real cause of consolation. They have an
undoubted right to comfort, though not a clear sight of comfort. A child may
have right to an inheritance, though he be not able to demonstrate and prove
his right. Perhaps a man cannot read his evidences for his land, and yet those
evidences give him a right to his lands: So it is with a child of God, he has
comfort sown, though perhaps he cannot presently reap it. Light is sown for
the righteous, and joy for the upright of heart. As it was with Hagar in the
wilderness of Beer-sheba, her water was spent in the bottle, and she cast her
child away from her, because she could not endure to see him die; she lift up
her voice and wept that she and her child should both miserably perish by
thirst, and yet there was a Well of water hard by her, Genesis 12. 16 17.
but she saw it not: so it is with many a poor soul, who are athirst for
comfort, and (as they think) ready to perish, and yet there is a Well of water
of life and comfort fast by, but they want the eye of faith to see it. And this
is a great comfort, that a child of God, though he may want comfort, yet he
has right unto comfort, in that he has truth of grace in him.

2. At that time when God withholds comfort from thee, yet he does really love
thee. Jesus Christ does sometimes serve his children, as Joseph served his
brethren. He spoke roughly to them, and he put them in prison, and yet Joseph
did dearly love his brethren, and his bowels did yern toward them. Thus Jesus
Christ, his real love is the same to his children at all times, though the
manifestation of it may not be always alike; Joseph knew his brethren, though
his brethren did not know him. The Lord knows who are his, though those that
are his perhaps do not know that they are so. Jesus knew Mary, though she did
not know him. Joh. 20. 15.


There may be as much mercy to us in withdrawing of comfort, as in the giving
of comfort. God many times in wrath lets a man be filled with the ungrounded
comfort of supposed grace. Oh (beloved) it is far better to want comfort then
grace. Many a man that has no true grace, yet has seeming comfort; but a
child of God is often without comfort, that he may examine and exercise his
grace, and so at last enjoy a wel-grounded joy, and a wel-bottom'd consolation.
Grace is the best foundation of spiritual consolation.

XII. Sermon At Lawrence Jury, London. April 20, 1651.
2 TIMOTHY 2. 1. Be strong in the grace of God that is in Christ Jesus.
I Have already handled four cases of conscience, concerning strength of grace,
viz:

1. Whether strong temptations may be consistent with strength of grace?

2. Whether strong corruptions may consist with the strength of grace?

3. Whether a man may be strong in grace, and and yet want those strong
affections which he had at his first conversion?

4. Whether a man may have strength of grace, and yet want the comfort of his
grace?

I shall proceed now to a fifth Case of Conscience, viz.

Whether a man may be said to have strength of grace, Case 5.
who has but weak gifts?

In the opening of which Case I shall thus proceed:

1. I will premise some propositions.

2. I shall positively resolve the Case.

3. And then give you some practical in reference, by way of Application.

I Will begin with the first, namely the Positions, and they are these four
following:

This first Position is this, Posit. 1.
That though all believers they have the same Spirit, yet God in his wisdom
thinks it fit they shalnot have the same gifts. 1 Cor. 12.
There are (says the Apostle) diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit. As it
is with flowers, there is not the same smell but different smells to different
flowers, and yet all their sents have the same influence from above; and as it
is with instruments of music, there are diverse sounds in the Organ, but the
same breath does cause the several sounds: So in the Church of God, though
there is the same influence of the Spirit of God, yet not the same measure of
gifts in each member of the Church.

The second Position is this, Posit. 2.
that diversity of gifts is not to be ascribed to man's industry, diligence or
education, but to the free pleasure and dispensation of God. It is true, much
may be ascribed to study, and industry, and diligence in a way of gifts, which
was the ground of the Apostles exhortation, Give attendance to reading, 1 Timothy
4. 13. Ver. 15.
to exhortation, to doctrine, etc. and meditate on these things, give thy self
wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear to all. The Apostle speaks there
of profiting in ministerial gifts: which gifts, diligence and study do much
advantage and promote: yet though we were all equal in study and diligence,
there would be a diversity in our gifts, lest men should vaunt of their
industry in acquiring gifts, and thereby exclude Gods bounty in bestowing them,
Psalm. 127. 1. Except the Lord build the house, Psalm. 137. 1
they labor in vain that build it. (says Hildersa^^) Suppose that two men
were to read the same books, and to study the same matter every day, yet the
one may be a dun^e, and a man of low gifts, and the other may have rare parts
and excellent endowments; this is to show who we are beholding to, that is God,
whose dispensation of gifts are many and variously bestowed. Hence it is the
Apostle tells us, That all these gifts works that one and the self-same
Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will; 1 Cor. 12. 11.
so that though one man differ from another in gifts, yet it is God that makes
him to differ.

The third Position is this, Posit. 3.
That a man may be excellent in one gift, and yet defective in other gifts, one
man shall not have all; this is very observable by instances you have in
Scripture. The first instance is between Paul and Barnabas; if you look unto
Paul, his gift was the gift of utterance, and freedom of speech, insomuch that
at Lyst^^ Paul was taken for Mercury the God of Eloquence, Act. 14. 11.
because he was the chief Speaker, and though it is said of Paul, that he was
rude of speech, that is, not as if it were so indeed, but in the opinion and
conceit of the Corinthians, who being seduced by false teachers, hearkened to
their disparagements of Paul. 2 Cor. 11. 6
Paul he was a most eloquent man, Act. 4. 36.
and had much of the gift of utterance, but now B^rnabas did excel Paul in
another gift, to comfort those who were troubled in conscience; he was a son of
Consolation, Act. 11. 24.
to comfort troubled consciences. So likewise in the case of Peter and the
other Apostles; Divines gather from Christ's commission to Peter, singling him
out, when he said, Peter, feed my Lambs; Peter, love thou me? Joh. 11. 15.
The Reason that some Expositors give, why Peter was singled out, was this;
because Peter had an excellent gift in preaching, and in feeding the Lambs of
Christ, that is, weak Believers. Moreover, it is said of James and John, that
they were called Sons of Thunder, Mar. 3. 17. Boan^rges.
as having a more powerful gift from God, to terrify and awake a sinners
conscience, then Peter and other Apostles had. So that though some of the
Apostles had most excellent gifts, yet some of them excelled others in some one
gift.

The fourth Position is, Posit. 4.
That there are Cases, wherein men may have great gifts, but weak grace. God is
pleased sometimes to carry men's gifts very high, when their graces have not a
proportionable elevation, and the reason is, because gifts are for the good of
others, for the edification of the Church of God, 1 Cor. 5. 7. compared with 1
Cor. 3. 1.
and not for the good of a man's self only; They were wanting in no gift, and
had all knowledge; and yet when he mentions their graces, he says, I could not
speak to you as spiritual, but carnal; They outstrip other Churches in gifts,
yet they came short of other Churches in grace. Such was the Church of
Laodicea, she was rich in gifts, Rev. 3. 11.
and poor in grace. Now there are four Cases wherein men may have strong gifts,
and yet but little grace.

1. When men's notions are clear and strong, Case 1.
but men's experiences and affections but low and weak, to have more expression^
then impressions; to be like the Moon, that though from the waine it grows big,
and increases to the full; yet it increases only in light, and not in heat: So
men when they merely increase in light of notions and speculations, and not in
heat of affection toward God, and the practical part of Christianity; and it
is to be feared, that much of the Religion of these times is of this stamp, it
is more in notion then motion, more in talking then walking, more in parts then
grace.

2. When thy gifts are not influential upon thy life. Case 2.
Look as it is in that disease of the Rickets, that children are liable to,
they may grow big in the head, and yet decay in the lower parts: So there are
some (as it has been shown) who have the disease of the spiritual Rickets,
they do grow big in the head, big in gifts, and yet decay in their vitals,
decay in grace and the exercise of it.

3. When their gifts do but tend to the promotion of division in the Church,
Case 3.
and pride in their own hearts. This was discovered in the Church of Corinth, 1
Cor. 1. 7.
they came behind in no gift; but see what he says in Verse. 11. For it has
been declared unto me of you (my brethren) by them which are of the bouse of
Cloe, Verse. 11.
that there are contentions among you. And then in verse. 12. Now this I say,
Verse. 12.
that everyone of you says, I am of Paul, I of Apollos, I of Cephas, and I of
Christ, they were carnal as to grace, and walked as men, though they were high
in gifts, and when gifts engender strife in the Church and pride in a man's own
heart, and when they do elevate and puff up the heart with vain and high
conceits; this is an argument they are but mere gifts. The Corinthians were in
every thing enriched by God; in all utterance and in all knowledge, so that
they came behind in no gift, 1 Cor. 15. 7.
they had abundance of knowledge, 1 Cor. 8. 1.
but knowledge puffs up, charity edifieth.

4. When gifts are increased merely by virtue of continual study and industry,
Case 4.
when gifts proceed merely from strength of natural parts, advantaged by
education, study and diligence; if gifts do merely proceed from that fountain,
there may be much gifts, but little grace. The greatest scholars are not
always the best men, the reason is, because their gifts are gotten by industry
and diligence; their gifts may be high, when their graces are low.

The fifth Position, Posit. 5.
there are cases wherein men may decay and be weak in gifts, and yet may be
said to have strength of grace.

1. If it proceed merely from a natural, Case 1.
not a sinful defect. If weak gifts proceed from sinful defects, it argues
grace is but weak, as if it proceeds from negligence, from sloth, from
carelessness to attend upon Ordinances, from idleness in not reading, in not
meditating, in not praying, not using holy conference, then grace decays with
gifts, these are sinful defects; but now if gifts proceed merely from natural
defects, as a man of a shallow capacity, of a slow speech, of a bad memory, of
a weakly body, that either through sickness or old age the body is weakened, in
that there are natural decays in the body, because the putting forth of gifts
depends upon the temperature and disposition of the body. As it is with an
instrument of music that is out of tune, it make^ no melody though the
instrument be good: So a body out of tune, has not that use of, or putting out
of gifts. As it is with an old Preacher, his gifts may decay when he is an old
man, that he may not have such freedom of speech, such clearness of judgment,
such strength of memory; as the body decays, the gift of Elocution will decay,
and his memory may decay, that he may not be so ready in delivering the Word,
but yet he may have as great ability in preaching, yea more experience, more
solid judgment, and more clear understanding in the mysteries of the Gospel,
then a young man can have: so it is with Christians, their gifts may decay, as
the temper of the body decays; as it is with a Musician, when he is a young
man his joints being more pliable, plays more nimbly and melodiously upon an
instrument of music, but when he comes to be an old man he cannot play so
nimbly and melodiously, his joints being stiff, but yet he has more skill
then a young man has. When this does not proceed from sinful defects, but from
natural defects, then may a man's grace be strong, though his gifts and parts be
weak.

2. If you want those external advantages to further and promote the growth of
gifts, Case 2.
as for example, A Christian that follows an ordinary trade, which carries a
Water-tankard on his shoulder, he may attain more brokennesse of heart, more
humility and self-denial, more experience of the goodness of God toward his
soul, and of the method of God, then he who perhaps is in some great,
honorable, and eminent employment: But that Christian who has this mean
employment, and such poor education, shall not attain those gifts, that others
have attained who have greater advantages. As it is with a Scholar that has
been diverse years at the University, he has those external advantages, as
education and literature, that his gifts and parts may be much increased; when
perhaps a poor man that follows the Plough, may attain to more grace, and more
acquaintance with the ways of God. Now if such a man have not so many gifts as
others, it is not his sin: God does not require more then he gives.

3. If you have not a calling to use or put forth the exercise of your gifts.
Case 3.
Your gifts may decay, though grace do not decay. Gifts are increased by
exercise, the less they are exercised the more they decay: if thou have not an
opportunity to exercise thy gifts as in former times, to pray in company, to
use holy conference, as in former times thou had; in such a case a Christian
who is strong in grace may grow weaker in gifts.

4. If what you want in gifts you make up in humility. Case 4.
Strength of grace is not to be measured by notions and speculations in the
head, but by humility in the heart; therefore if thy gifts be weak, if thy
humility be great, thou have strength of grace: the less blossoms there are
on the branches, the more sap there is in the root. He that has great parts,
and is proud of them, it is much to be feared has less grace, then that man
who has but few gifts, and low parts; but in the sense of their own weakness,
has low and self-denying thoughts of himself. Case 5.


5. Lastly, if what you want in gifts you make up in your practice, by a holy
and conscionable walking. That Martyr that said, I cannot dispute, but I can
burn for the truth, had more grace, then those that could dispute, but not burn.

The application of this Case is only for Caution, Use 1.
and I shall give you a threefold Caution.

1 Caution. Take heed ye be not proud of the greatest measure of gifts you
have; there is nothing in the world that a man is so apt to be proud of as his
gifts; a man is not so apt to be proud of grace, because he has a principle to
check his pride, but he is apt to be proud of his gifts; a man is not so apt to
be proud of outward endowments, as clothing, riches and the like, as he is apt
to be proud of his gifts. Expositors that do handle the prophecy of Ezekiel,
they say that Ezekiel is called ninety three times ( Thou son of man) in that
Prophecy; now there is no other Prophet that is mentioned in all the Bible,
but only one, which is called The son of man, Dan. 8. 7.
and that is Daniel. Now expositors give this reason why he is called by this
title, because he was a Prophet of the greatest gifts, and had the most
glorious visions of all the other Prophets. Compare this Prophecy with Isaiah,
Jeremiah, Daniel, Hosea, or all the rest, yet Ezekiels prophecy is a more
dark, mysterious, profound book. Now Ezekiel being a Prophet of the greatest
gifts; God takes this care to keep his heart low, Thou Son of man, Thou Son of
man, and all is to keep his heart low; which does teach us thus much, that
those that have great gifts, they ought to spend a great deal of time to keep
their hearts humble and low, because there is a flatuous humor in our nature,
whereby we are apt to swell and be puffed up in the sense of our own gift.

2. Caution. Prize a little grace before a great measure of gifts; ye will
prize a pearl though no bigger then a pea, more then a great heap of stones.
There is great reason why we should prize a little grace before much gifts.

1. Grace will last when gifts are withering. Blazing Comets will fall when the
Star never falls; Reason 1.
a falling Star is no Star but only a Comet: So the hypocrites may have a great
blaze of their gifts, and yet may fall like Comets that hover in the air.
Grace is like a Star that keeps fixed in its orb; there is a great deal of
difference betwixt a painted face and a natural complexion, the painted face
will not always last, but natural complexion that will always remain. Gifts
are put paint, the ornament of the creature, but true grace which is as the
natural complexion that will remain.

2. Prize a little grace before much gifts, Reason. 2.
because gifts will leave thee short of heaven. Christ told the learned Scribe,
that he was not far from the Kingdom of heaven, but alas, for all his gifts
and learning, he fell short of heaven. Many will say to me, (said Christ) in
that day, Mat. 7. 22.
Lord, have not we prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out devils, and
in thy name done many wondrous works. You see it is observable, these men might
pretend to high and great gifts, and yet they to whom God opened the sacrets of
his Kingdom, against them he shut the gates of heaven. A man may be a
Preacher, and have the secrets of heaven opened to him, and yet have the gates
of heaven shut against him. A man may attain the gift in Christ's name to cast
out devils, a great and a miraculous gift, and yet those men that cast out
devils were themselves cast to devils. We have done many wondrous works, they
that did wonders were made a wonder* they that had so much gifts came short of
heaven, yea they who may preach to others may themselves be cast-awayes.

3. Do not mistake strength of gifts to be strength of grace. 3. Cant.
Parents would not judge their children strong when their heads and breasts are
big, and their feet but feeble; so you may grow big in your heads, in notions
and speculations, in gifts, and yet feeble in practice of grace. Now that you
may not mistake your selves, and may not be deceived; I Will show you how you may
know the difference betwixt those that have strong gifts, and those that have
strong grace. In the general take this: As Art resembles nature, so gifts
resemble grace. Now there are four differences.

1. As grace strengthens, corruption weakens. 1. Difference.
It is with grace and lusts as it was with the house of Saul and the house of
David. As David's house grew stronger and stronger, so Saul's house grew weaker
and weaker. As the Ark was set up, Dagon was thrown down; the Dagon of
corruption will be thrown down before the Ark of grace, and the Ark of the
Covenant; But gifts may strengthen, and yet corruptions never the weaker.
Indeed gifts discover corruption, but we are not able to mortify and subdue
it. Gifts discover many corruptions, but mortify none. Gifts take a cognizance
of many a sin, but never put a period to any. Men that have gifts are resembled
to the Moon, and men that have grace are resembled to the Sun; the Moon has an
influence upon the water to make that move; to ebb and flow: the Moon sheds
light upon all creatures, but no heat, to make those creatures grow and spring:
So a man of gifts may have light, but no heat to those gifts to make grace to
grow, and make sin to fade and wither. Gracious men are like the Sun, that does
not only give light but heat, by the influence thereof things spring and grow
out of the earth; Surgunt indocti and rapiunt ^aelum and no^ cum doctrine
nostra perimus. Aug. 2. Difference.
the great parts of a gifted man, often occasionally strengthen his
corruptions, but do not weaken them, Augustine could say, Ignorant and
illiterate man, they take heaven; when others with all their Schollership go to
hell.

2. Where there is strength of grace, there the heart is more humbled under the
measures of grace received; the stronger the graces are, the more the heart is
humbled. But strength of parts in most men makes them proud and lofty. Empty
vessels make the greatest noise, and so do shallow streams: So men that have
great gifts are often empty of grace, 1 Cor. 8. 1. They are puffed up with pride,
who have more gifts then grace, and by the humility of the soul you may know
whether that soul be stronger in grace then in gifts.

3. He looks more after the supply of the grace he wants, 3. Difference.
then in a way of contentment in the grace he has. This argued Paul had much
grace, when he thus speaks, I do strive after more and more grace, Phil. 3.
13. expounded.
if by any means I might attain the resurrection of the dead, that is, I do
labor after perfection of grace, which those shall have that are raised from
the dead, and exalted in heaven, but now a man that has gifts, is more apt to
look what he has then what he wants. Men of gifts are more apt to look upon
their seize then their imperfections, they look upon their gifts in a
multiplying glass, more then they are; Munera non vulnera ostendit. 4.
Difference.
and upon their failings in an extenuating glass, less then they are.

4. The more grace any one has, the more communicative he is, that others may
be partakers of the same grace, When the Apostle speaks of the duties of
husbands and wives, he would have them further one another in the way to
heaven, considering they are heirs together of the grace of God. Christ also
speaks to Peter, 1 Pet. 3. 7. Luke 22. 32 33.
When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren. By Conversion is not meant
Gods first act in bringing Peter's soul home to Christ, but it is meant by an
establishing work of grace, as if Christ should have said, Peter, now thy
grace is weak, and it will be weaker by thy fall, but when thou art recovered
from thy fall, and denial of thy Master, then strengthen thy brethen, labor
to strengthen the graces of other men, when thy graces are strong, and thy
strength recovered, and this is a very good evidence that thou have not only
grace, but strength of grace thy self, when thou art careful to strengthen
others: but such as have gifts only, with little or no grace, they are loath to
communicate their gifts unto others, they would willingly monopolize their
gifts, and grudge to impart them to others, they would not have other men have
the like gifts with themselves, lest their glory should be darkened. They are
not of John Baptists mind, who cared not though he decreased, so as Christ
increased, but rather they are like to one Aspendius a skillful Musician, who
would never play on his instrument before any of his profession, lest they
should learn his skill. This is a notable discovery whether thou have strong
grace, or strong gifts only, which thou may know by thy willingness and
readiness to communicate unto others, what God has imparted unto thee.

XIII. Sermon at Lawrence Jury London. April 20. 1651.
2 TIMOTHY 2. 1. -- My son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus.
YOu have heard the first Doctrine opened, viz. That believers are not to be
satisgfied in weak measures of grace already received, but ought to endeavor
to attain greater strength of grace. I shall now proceed to the improvement of
this point by making some application of it; and I shall direct the use to two
sorts of Christians.

1. To such as are weak in the faith.

2. To such as are strong and grown Christians.

1. With weak believers I would leave these directions and consolations
following. Use 1.


1. It is your wisdom to look more after the truth of your grace, then after
the measure of it. It is an error in many Christians, especially young
Converts, that they bring their graces rather to the balance then to the
touchstone, Joh. 21. 1^.
they weigh them when they should try them. Peter being asked by Christ, Simon,
l^v^st thou me more then these? he answers not about the measure of his love,
but about the truth of his love, Lord, I love thee, and thou know that I
love thee. It is not the quantity or measure, but the nature and essence of
grace, which is mainly considerable. If thou have grace in truth and reality,
it will increase; be sure thy grace be right, and as the light shines more and
more to the perfect day, and as the nature of the leaven is, that it does
spread through the whole lump, so is grace, it is of a spreading and increasing
nature; and therefore be careful thy grace for nature and for essence be true,
and for the measure of it, it will then increase.

2. In sinding out the truth of grace, we must not measure it so much by
actions as affections and holy dispositions of the heart: the bent, frame, and
tendencies of the heart are the best discoverers of grace in the heart. When a
Christian casts up all the stock of grace he has, he will find that it does
consist more in desires then endeavors, and more in endeavors and attempts to
perform holy duties, then in performance it self. Natural life is more
discernable by the heat, then by the color: a Painter may counterfeit the one,
but not the other. When the Lord Jesus is describing the beauty of his Spouse,
he does not say, How fair are thy looks, but, How fair is thy love. Cant. 4.
10.


3. Be not discouraged, though men of glorious gifts fall away: for the poorest
Christian that has but the smallest measure of grace shall never fall away. The
gifts of a Formalist may quickly wither, for they have their root in nature:
but the graces of a true Christian shall never perish, because they have their
root in Christ, A Christians life is hid with Christ, hid in him as in a root,
Col. 33.
as in the fountain of life. A painted face may soon fade, so does not a true
and natural complexion; the varnish of a formal hypocrite is soon washed out,
but when true grace like a color in grain, has grown habitual in the soul, it
is not removeable; sooner will the Sun discard its own beams, then Christ will
desert and destroy the least measure of true grace, which is a beam from that
Sun of Righteousness.

3. Improve your little grace well; this is the way to have more. Luke 19. 1
To him that has shall it be given, i. e. more shall be given. God never gave
any man a talent to hide it in a napkin. The least measure of grace is
accountable for. God is improved,

1. When we ascribe all the glory of grace unto God; as he said right, Luke 19.
10
Lord, thy pound has gained ten pounds. Thy pound, and not my pains; We should
do all to the praise of the glory of Gods grace. If we give God the glory of
his grace, he will give us the comfort of our grace, and the increase of it.

2. When for the edification and building up of others in their most holy
faith: to do good to others is the best way to get more good our selves: The
more the Well is drawn, the more water comes, and the better the water is; so
the more thy grace is exercised, the more grace thou will have, and the sweeter
will the comfort be of thy grace.

5. To weak Chaistians. Do not deny the truth of grace in your souls, because
you cannot find the strength of grace in your souls. A poor weak man in a
Consumption cannot lift up such a weight, nor can he bear such a burden as a
man in strength and health can do, yet he has life as well as the strongest
man in the world. It may be day when it is not noon, thou may in respect of
spiritual estate, have the strength of a child, though not the strength of a
man. It is not only an act of untbank fullness to God; but also of
uncharitableness to a man's own soul, to conclude a nullity of grace from the
weakness of it.

6. Look not so much on your sins, but look upon your grace also, though weak
grace. Weak Christians look more on their sins then on their graces, yet God
looks on their graces, and overlooks their sins and infirmities: says the Holy
Ghost, Jam. 5. 13.
Ye have heard of the patience of Job. He might also have said, Ye have heard
of the impatiency of Job, but God reckons of his people, not by what is bad in
them, but by what is good in them. Mention is made of R^habs entertainment of
the spies, but no mention is made that she told the lie when she did so, that
which was well done was mentioned to her praise, and what was amiss is buried
in silence, or at least is not recorded against her and charged upon her. He
that drew the picture of Alexander with his scarre on his face, drew him with
his finger on his scarre. God lays the finger of mercy upon the scarres of our
sins. Oh it is good serving such a Master, who is ready to reward the good we
do, and is ready to forgive and pass by what is amiss; and therefore thou
that have but a little grace, yet remember God will have his eye on that little
grace. He will not quench the smoking flax, Mat. 12. 20
nor break the bruised reed.

7. Learn this for thy comfort, that though thou have but a little grace, yet
that little grace shall not be extinguished by thy strong corruption, but at
last it shall over-master your corruptions. What was said of Esau and Jacob,
Genesis 25. 23
the one shall be stronger then the other, and the elder shall serve the
younger, and so it came afterward to pass in the time of Jehosaphat, when
there was no King in Edom; 1 King 22. 47.
That may be fitly applied to the affairs of the soul, the elder shall serve the
younger; corruption in the soul is elder then grace in the soul, and corruption
is so opposite to grace, that it labors for the extinction of grace, but this
spark shall live in the midst of the sea of corruption, till at last that
great deep shall be made dry; and the house of David shall at last quite put
down the house of Saul, the Name of the Lord will perform this. And therefore
thou that art but a weak Christian, learn to stay thy self on the Name of the
Lord, till judgment be brought forth into victory.

2. Use of this doctrine is unto strong believers, such as have attained unto a
higher form of grace in the school of Christ.

2. Though you are strong in grace, yet remember it is not the grace of God in
you, but the free grace of God toward you, by which you are justified. It is
not our inherent righteousness, but the imputed righteousness of Jesus Christ
that is our Justification. Oh consider, you that have most grace, what would
become of you were it not for free grace? Free grace is the surest and only
refuge for a soul to fly unto. God can find matter of condemnation against
you not only for your worst sins, but your best duties. The best Christian has
no reason to venture his soul on the best thought that ever he conceived, nor
on the most holy duty that ever he performed, nor on the highest grace that
ever he exercised. A famous instance hereof we have in Nehemiab, who had much
grace, and did much for God, his people, his house, his cause, yet prays after
all this, Nehem. 13. 22.
Spare me according to the greatness of thy mercy. Intimating that God might
find therein matter enough to ruin him, if God did not spare him for his
mercies sake. So Paul in the discharge of his Ministry, proceeded with so much
uprightness, that he speaks thus of himself, 1 Cor. 4. 4.
I know nothing by my self, yet am I not hereby justified. He knew that all
the grace and excellency, and uprightness in him would not make him righteous
in the sight of God. 2 Chro. 11. 19.
We read of Iehosaphat, that when he had mustered up all his strength, which
was very great, 1 Chro. 11. 19.
for he had eleven hundred thousand men in his militia, yet he goes to God, and
prays, Lord, we have no might or power against these multitudes, 2 Chro. 10.
12.
and we know not what to do, only our eyes are up to thee: So when a Christian
has mustered up all the strength of his grace, and considers the great power
of his corruptions which do set themselves against him, he had best go to God
and say, Lord I have no power against these many and great corruptions, but my
eyes are to thy grace that thou may help me. As in a pair of Compasses, one
foot is fixed in the Center, whilst the other turns about the circumference: so
must the soul fix and stay it self on Christ, whilst it is exercised about
holy duties. Though Christ (as I formerly mentioned,) commended many parts of
the Spouse, yet not her hands, to teach us, that all the Spouse could do, Cant.
4. 1. to 8.
could not make her amiable in the eyes of Christ, nor the Spouses working for
Christ, but Christ's work in the Spouse made her beautiful. Oh it is very hard
through strength of grace to abound, in the work of the Lord, and yet keep the
heart humble: And therefore

2. Consider, they that have most grace, yet have great cause to be humbled,
and that in many respects.

1. Thou have not so much grace and perfection as once thou had: Once man was
beautified and bespangled with many glorious perfections before the fall, it
might have been said of man, that he was perfect as his heavenly father was
perfect, for God made man upright, that is, perfect, nothing was wanting then
to make man both an happy and holy creature; but alas, the image of God in us
is now obliterated and defaced.

2. He that has most grace, Phil. 3. 12, 13.
has not so much as he shall have in heaven. Not that I am perfect already,
but I forget those things that are behind, and I press forward unto those
things that are before, yea I press (says the Apostle) toward the mark of the
price of the High Calling of God in Christ Jesus. We read under the law of
several things that were to be a cubit and half high and broad, Ex. 25. 10.
it being an imperfect measure, The error of the Familisticall Perfectists
very pernicious.
it was to note, that no man in this life has an exactness and perfection,
the uttermost that is attainable by us in this life, is but imperfect. In this
life there is a plus ultra, Heb. 12. 23
something still to be attained in religion, 1 John 3. 2.
but in heaven men shall be perfect. We shall in heaven be like to Jesus
Christ, whom though we now see but darkly and in a glass, then we shall see
him as he is.

3. They that have much grace, yet should be humbled, for there are those that
have more grace then you, and yet have had less time and fewer advantages then
you have; there are those that have gone before you much for strength of grace,
and yet have come behind you for means of grace: there are those who were the
last and are first, Mat. 20. 16
and before you.

4 Be humbled under much grace; for ye have not so much grace as you should
have had, concerning the means of grace you have lived under. How many years
have you been in the school of Christ, and yet what little proportionable
progress have you made in the knowledge of Jesus Christ? we may all blush to
think what dunces we have been in the school of Christ. The trees of the garden
should bear nore fruit then the trees of the forest: Luke 13. 6, 7.
the Fig Tree therefore which was unfruitful, was the more intolerable, because
it was in the garden, in the vineyard. What the Apostle complains of the
Hebrews, we our selves may justly take up the complaint against our selves,
Heb, 5. 12.
that For the time we ought to have been teachers, and yet have need that one
teach us again what are the first Principles of the Oracles of God, and are
become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat.

5. They that have much grace, and are strong in grace, yet have cause to be
humble, because its likely they had more grace and did more good heretofore
then now; and who is there almost that is not decayed, that has not in some
degree or other left their first love? Rev. 2. 5.
have you not had (I speak to grown and experienced Christians) more love and
zeal to God, more hatred of sin, more grief for sin, more fear of offending
God then now you have? are there not many that have and do express less
desire after duty, less fervency, less frequency, less delight in holy
duties then formerly? Alas! how many through pride and spiritual improvidence,
through neglect of Ordinances, and worldly mindedness have much abated in
their spiritual estate!

6. Be humbled, that though you be strong in grace, yet you have many
corruptions in you more strong then many graces. More are our vain thoughts
then our meditations, and more are the things we are ignorant of then the
things we know. Quantum est quod nescimus.
Corruption is strong enough to keep grace low, but in the best grace is not
strong enough to bring corruption under. When we would do good, evil is persent
and powerful with us, Rom 7. 21.
to hinder us from doing of good: but when we are doing of evil, good is not
present to hinder us from that evil: we are more in sinning then in obeying.
Our corruptions are like Goliath our grace as David. We exercise more kinds of
sins then graces: as in a sield there are more briats and thorns then useful
trees, and in a garden more unprofitable weeds then roses and lilies; so in the
souls of the best there are whole swarms of vain, earthly and sinful thoughts,
when there are but very few holy and heavenly thoughts.

7. Another argument why strong Christians should be humble, is this, that
though they may have grace, yet they are subject to fall into that sin, which
is most contrary to that grace wherein they are most eminent. Abraham was most
eminent for faith; Romans 4. 20.
he is said to be strong in faith, he is called the father of the faithful.
Gal. 3. 9.
They which be of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham: and yet for all
this Abraham fell into distrust of Gods providence and power, when he spoke
untruly, and denied his wife. Genesis ^0. 2.
So Job was renowned for his patience, You have heard of the patience of Job,
(says St. James,) Jam. 5. 11.
and yet we read in the story of Jobs trials, Job 6. 9.
that his impatiency did break out in many rash speeches and wishes. So Moses
was eminently meek, it was said of him, The man Moses was very meek, above all
the men which were upon the face of the earth. And yet it is said of him, Number.
12. 2.
that his spirit was provoked, Ps. 106. 33.
so that he spoke unadvisedly with his lips: and you shall find meek Moses
thus expostulating with God himself, I am not able to bear all the people
alone, because it is too heavy for me, and if thou deal thus with me, kill me I
pray thee out of hand; and if I have found fovour in thine eyes, Number. 11. 14,
15.
let me not see my wretchedness.

8. This further consideration may also humble us, that in the highest and
greatest exercise of grace there is much mixture of sin. We may observe, that
even those good actions, for which many of the People of God are recorded in
Scripture, are yet blemish't with some notable defect R^hab's faith in
entertaining the Spies, was blemish't with this failing, in telling a lie
concerning them. It was also good the Midwives did when they refused to obey
that bloody decree of the King of Egypt, Exodus 1. 17, 19.
and would not kill the male-children of the Hebrews, and yet they miscarried
as some observe in their answer to the King, when they made their excuse. We
are apt to mingle sin with the best action we do, and so apt to plough with an
Ox and an Ass; and our corruptions are apt to discover themselves, even while
we are upon the exercise our grace.

3. Let the strong labor to be more strong, that so they may be strengthened
with all might, Col. 1. 11.
according to his glorious power, unto all patience and long-suffering with
joyfulnesse. And therefore it is that the Apostle prays for the Romones, that
they may be filled by the God of h^pe, Romans 15. 13, 14.
with all joy and peace in believing, that they might abound in hope through
the power of the Holy Ghost; and yet in the next verse he told them, I my self
am persuaded of you (my Brethren) that ye are full of goodness, and that ye
are filled with all knowledge. And as he prays for the Romans, upon the same
terms he presses the Thessaionians, of whom he thus speaks. 1 These. 4. 9 10.
Now as touching brotherly love ye need not that I write unto you, for ye your
selves are taught of God to love one another. And indeed you do it toward all
the Brethren which are in all Macedonia, but we beseech you, Brethren, that ye
increase more and more. The righteous (says Job) shall hold on his way, Job
17. 9.
and he that has clean hands shall be stronger and stronger.

To quicken you hereunto, consider

1. The more grace we have on Earth, the more glory we shall have in Heaven. As
God does unequally dispense his gifts in this life, Sicut Deus suae d^na in hac
vita inaequaliter c^mmunicat, sic coronat. Bucha.
so accordingly he crowns. There are degrees of torments in hell, the
hypocritical Scribes and Pharisees, who devoured widows houses, and for a
pretense made long prayers, are doomed by Christ himself to receive greater
damnation, Mat. 23. 14.
and that servant who knew his Lords will, and prepared not himself, neither
did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes. Now if there are
different degrees of torments in hell, then surely there are different degrees
of glory in Heaven, and those according to different degrees of grace here on
earth.

2. It is of the nature of grace to grow and increase; Luke 12. 47
and therefore if thou had grace, either in truth of it, or in strength of
it, it will certainly grow. Grace in Scripture is compared to a grain of
mustard seed, the least of seeds, which afterward sprouts and springs so, Mat.
13. 31 32, 33.
a^ that it becomes the largest of plants. In the same chapter grace is
compared unto leaven, which being put into the heap of meal, leaveneth the
whole: so grace (as I touched before) in the heart, is of a spreading nature,
and will diffuse it self into all the parts, powers, and faculties of soul and
body. Christians are therefore compared to the branches of a Vine, Joh. 15. 1.
which of all trees grows most, and brings forth most fruit. A Picture does not
grow, but a living child will grow.

3. Such as are strong Christians should yet grow more and more, because in
this world there is not stint and measure set for spiritual growth: the maximum
quod sic of a Christian, is this, he must grow in grace til his head reach up
to heaven, til grace be perfected in glory.

4. Shall worldlings set no bounds to their desires after wealth and land, and
yet will thou take up with poor measures of grace for Religion? The ordinary
answer of ignorant people is, What? must we be wiser then our forefathers? Si
dixisti sufficit periis^i.
and yet those people would be richer then their forefathers were, and those
that have great wealth left them by their forefathers, yet are not satisfied
with it unless they increase their estate: let this shame that slothfulness
and supine negligence of many, who content themselves with measures of grace.

5. And lastly, consider, that those who were eminent for grace, in what esteem
were they in the Church of God, and with what honorable mention are they
recorded in the Word of God; such are remembered to be of note in the Church of
God. Romans 16. 7. (...)
See what an Eulogium the Holy Ghost gives Job, that there was none like him in
the earth. Job 1. 8.
God loves those that are singularly and excellently good, and ordinary pitch
does not so please him. Mat. 5. 46.
What do ye more then others? Solomon was so renowned for wisdom, that it is
said, That amongst many Nations there was no King like him, (...). Nehem. 13 26.
that is, for wisdom. So Hezekiah was eminent for trusting in God, Who feared
not to break in pieces the broken serpent, but trusted in God, none like him of
all the Kings ^f Judah. 2 King. 18. 4, 5.
And so eminent was the zeal of good Josiah after a thorough reformation, that
he is also crowned with this commendation, 2 King. 23. 25.
And like him was there no King before him, that turned to the Lord with all
his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might. By all which
instances it is clear, of what honorable esteem have the eminent particular
graces of Gods servants been in the sight of the Lord.

XIII. Sermon at Lawrence Jury London. April 20. 1651.
2 TIMOTHY 2. 1. -- My son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus.
HAving in the last foregoing Sermons, treated of grace in its strength and
growth, I am come to speak to this additional clause in the text, viz, That is
in Christ Jesus: which passage is here inserted by the Apostle, that he might
let Timothy know to whom he was beholding, for all the grace he had received,
even unto Jesus Christ. In the tenth verse he speaks of salvation that is in
Christ Jesus; and here of grace that is in Christ Jesus: so note,

1. That Jesus Christ is the fountain and foundation, both of grace and glory.
Jesus Christ gives grace, and Jesus Christ gives also salvation, with eternal
glory, Ver. 10.

2. That those who receive grace from Christ Jesus, shall also receive
salvation by him, for there is an inseparable union between grace and glory.

The grace of God that is in Christ Jesus. Grace may be said to be in Christ

1. As a subject recipient, and so Christ is said to be full of grace and
truth; John 1. 14.
he had the Spirit without measure, it pleased the Father, that in him all
fullness should dwell. John 3. 34.


2. In Christ Jesus, Col. 1. 19.
as a fountain redundant overflowing and ever-flowing to his people, for of
his fullness we receive grace for grace. John 1. 16.


Again, when it is said that grace is in Christ Jesus, we must consider Christ

1. As God co-essential with the Father, and he is the Author and giver of
grace, and of every good and perfect gift.

2. Consider him as Mediator God-man, and so he is the purchaser and procurer
of grace, and of all the blessings of the New Convenant, for the blessing of
Abraham comes upon the Gentiles, Gal. 3. 14. (...), through Christ. Heb. 12.
(...), through Christ Jesus. So that by this phrase, In Christ Jesus, there
are three things implied.

1. That Jesus Christ is the Author and Giver of grace; he only is the Author
and Finisher of faith, and every grace in his people.

2. That Christ is the purchase of grace, so that all the grace that is
bestowed upon us by God, it is through Christ, and for his sake; Grace is from
Christ as a fountain, and by Christ as a Conduit.

3. That Christ is the preserver of grace, all the grace that is in us is in
Christ Jesus, he keeps all our graces for us: As the beams of the Sun may be
said to be the Sun, because they are preserved by their union with the Sun. Our
life is bid with Christ in God, Col. 3. 3.
hid as the life of a tree is hid in the root, and the being of a stream is hid
in the fountain. And herein is the comfort of believers, that their condition
is more stable and immutable and safe, then ever Adam was in innocence, for he
had all perfections of a creature, but they were in their own keeping; but now
all the grace that is in a believer is in Christ Jesus, by whom and in whom
grace is safely preserved, so as it shall never perish.

The point of doctrine I observe from these words is this:

That all those measures of grace, Doct.
whereof believers are partakers, they receive them in and from Jesus Christ.

In the handling of which point I will thus proceed:

1. Show you the truth of it.

2. Give you the reasons and grounds of it.

Now to prove that all grace is received in and through Christ.

1. I will show the truth of this by many resemblances, to which Christ is
compared in the Scripture.

2. By many types of Christ in the Old Testament.

3. By many express testimonies in the New Testament concerning this turth.

^. There are many resemblances in Scripture which do illustrate this, that all
grace is from Christ Jesus.

1. He is compared to a root. He is called the root of Jesse, Isa. 11. 10.
not only because he came of the stock of David, but that he gives grace to Jew
and Gentile that do believe: for to him shall the Gentiles seek, as it follows
in the next words. Now that the Prophet there speaks of Christ, is plain by the
Apostles express application of that prophecy unto Christ, Romans 15. 2.
calling him the root of Jesse, in whom the Gentiles should trust. And Christ
speaks of himself, Joh. 15. 1.
I am the Vine. As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self except it abide in
the Vine, no more can ye except ye abide in me; the life, sap, nourishment,
growth and fruitfulness of a branch is altogether from the root, with which
the branches have union and communion.

2. Christ is called the Head of his people; He is the Head of the body of the
Church. Now as sense and motion is derived from the head to the members of the
body; Col. 1 18.
so also is grace derived from Jesus Christ to every true believer, every
living member of his body.

3. Christ is called the Sun of Righteousness because as heat and light are
communicated by the Sun to things here below, Mal. 4. 2.
so there is a sweet influence of grace from Christ upon believers. Nisi
desuper.
As by virtue of the Suns influence the vegetable and sensible creatures
live, move and grow; so also the life and growth of grace in the soul is from
that divine influence which Jesus Christ does shed upon believers.

4. Christ is compared to a fountain, Zech. 13. 1.
even a fountain opened to the house of David, and to the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness. So that as water does stream forth in
the river from the fountain, so grace flows down from Jesus Christ upon
believers, who is a fountain, where all fullness of grace for ever dwells, and
from whence all grace is drawn and derived; and this is the first proof.

2. This truth may be demonstrated by the many types of Christ in the old
Testament which did shadow out unto us this, that all grace is from Jesus
Christ. I shall mention some.

1. Aaron the High Priest was to lay his bands on the People, and to bless
them. Lev. 9. 22.
And herein he was a type of Christ our great and heavenly High Priest, through
whom we are blessed with all grace. Ephesians. 1. 3.
God having blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places Act. 3.
2^.
in Christ. Jesus Christ is sent by God to bless his people, and to turn every
one of them from their iniquities. And therefore it is recorded by St. Luke
that a little before the Ascension of our blessed Savior, Luke 24 50
he laid his hands upon his disciples, and blessed them: and so he does still
bless all true believers with the spiritual blessing of grace.

2. Another type of Christ was Joseph, who in many things was a type of Christ,
Genesis 37. 3.
Joseph was the best beloved of his fathers children; Mat. 30. 17.
so was Jesus Christ, Col. 1. 11.
the son of his fathers love: Joseph was hated of his brethren, Genesis 37. 20, 21.
and sold for twenty pieces of silver; so was Jesus Christ, he came unto his
own, and his own received him not, he was rejected by them, and sold for thirty
pieces of silver. Joh. 1. 12.
Joseph was carried into Egypt; and so persection drove Christ into Egypt
presently after he was born. Genesis 37. 28
Joseph was falsely accused and condemned: Mat. 2. 20
so was Christ. Joseph's troubles ended in his advancement; Genesis 39. 20
so all the troubles of Christ, wrought for him a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory: Phil. 2. 9.
God having therefore highly exalted him, and given him a name above every
name, for now Christ is sat down at the right hand of the Father; But
especially in this, Joseph did type out Jesus Christ, that in that dreadful
lasting famine in Egypt, Genesis 41. 55, 56, 57.
Joseph had the custody of all the corn in the land, and he had the issuing
out of all the Provision for bread, in all the land of Egypt: So the Lord Jesus
is the Lord Keeper of all that store of grace, with which believers are
furnished, which grace is given to help them in time of need. Jesus Christ has
the Key of David, he has the Key of the treasury of grace.

3. Another type of Jesus Christ was Joshua, who gave unto Israel entrance and
possession of the good land of Canaan. Psa. 84. 11.
He will give grace and glory, and no good thing will be withhold from them
that walk uprightly. Heb. 4. 8, 9.
Our Jesus gives his people a better rest then ever Joshua brought Israel unto.

4. Another type of Christ was the Candlestick of the tabernacle, the seven
lamps whereof did give light unto the whole tabernacle. Now these seven lamps,
Exo. 25. 37
what did they type out but the graces of the Spirit of Christ, for so it is
said, that there were seven lamps of fire burning before the throne, Rev. 4. 5.
which are the seven spirits of God. Zech. 42.
The Holy Ghost and the graces of it, being so described by seven spirits in
this regard, because of the variety and protection of that grace which is in
the Lord Jesus, and by his Spirit communicated to all his members.

3. The third proof of this doctrine may be drawn from the consideration of
those clear testimonies of this truth in the New Testament. St. John speaks
thus of Christ that of his fullness we have received, and grace for grace. Joh.
1. 16. expounded. Plenitudo repletiva and dissusiva
In Christ there is not only plenty, but bounty; not only an abundance of all
grace, but a redundance of grace. Christians have the fullness of a vessel, but
Christ has the fullness of a fountain. Plenitude vasis Plenitudo fontis.
Take a drop of water out of a vessel, and it is not so full as before, but
draw as much water as you please out of the Well of the water of life, and
there is no want of water. From Christ we receive grace for grace, that is, say
some, the grace of the New Testament, added to that grace which was revealed
under the Old Testament. Perf^ctio partium, non graduum.
Or grace for grace, that is, say others, a perfection of grace according to
the Perfection that is in Christ. As in a natural generation, the child does
receive from his Father limme for limme, and part for part: so in this
spiritual regeneration, Jesus Christ (the everlasting Father) does give grace
for grace. Isa. 6. 9.
Or you may understand this expression grace for grace, that Jesus Christ is
not only the Author of grace, but gives grace for grace, that is, one grace
after another, grace upon grace; Gramati nova gratia cumulat^m.
the being of grace, and the increase of grace are both from Christ. This also
appears that Christ is the Author and bestower of all grace, by that ordinary
prayer wherewith the Apostle does usually close up his Epistles, 2 Cor. 13. 14.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. The like Prayer we have to
the Romans, Romans 16. 24
to the Galatians, brethren The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your
spirit. Gal. 6 18
So also in the close of the Epistles to the Philippians, Phil. 4. 23.
Thessalonians, 1 These. 5. 28.
and to Timothy, Grace be with thee. Amen. 1 Timothy 6. 21
All this is to note that Jesus Christ is the fountain from whence, and the
Conduit by whom all grace is conveyed unto believers. Zech. 4. 12.
As in the vision that the Prophet Zechary saw, There were two Olive Branches,
which through the two golden Pipes, did empty the golden oil out of
themselves: So Jesus Christ, that true Olive tree, does drop and distill grace
upon his Church, whereby they receive from his fullness grace for grace.

But in giving this honor unto Christ, 1 Object.
do you not derogate from God the Father, when you say that all grace is from
Christ?

1. It is no derogation to God the Father to ascribe this unto Christ, 1. Answ.
because it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell.

2. And beside, Christ and the Father are one. 2. Answ.
In saying all grace is from Christ, we also say all is from the Father too;
Col. 1. 19.
and in saying it is from the Father, Joh. 10. 30
we say it is from Christ too. Romans 1. 7.
And therefore it is an ordinary prayer prefixed in the beginning of most of
the Epistles; 1 Cor. 1. 3.
Grace be unto you, 2 Cor. 1. 2.
from God the Father, Gal. 1. 3.
and from our Lord Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 1. 2.
So that in the subscription, Phil. 1. 2.
and in the inscription of each Epistle, Col. 1. 2.
grace is ascribed to God the Son, 1 These. 1. 1, etc.
but so as not excluding God the Father, and to God the Father not excluding
the Son.

3. And then again, Jesus Christ is commissionated and designed by the Father,
to give out grace to his people: for so Christ speaks of himself, Joh. 64^^
I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent
me. Now it is the will of God, that from Christ believers should receive both
justifying and sanctifying grace. Our sanctification is Gods Will, 1 These. 4. 3
and Christ came to fulfill that will of God: for so speaks the Apostle,
Sacrifice and offering, Heb. 10. 9, 10.
and burnt-offerings, and offering for sin, thou would not, neither have
pleasure therein, then said I, Lo, I come to do thy will (Ob God;) by which
Will we are sanctified, through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once
for all. So that the Will of God the Father, and the Will of Jesus Christ are
the same in the bestowing of grace. Jesus Christ received a commission from God
the Father, to bestow grace upon his people; and will you see how that
Commission runs, you shall find it in the Prophet Isaiah; Isa. 61. 1.
The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to
preach good tidings unto the meek, he has sent me to bind up the breken
hearted, to proclaim liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the prison to
them that are bound. Christ had a Commission under his Fathers hand and Seal,
John 6. 27.
For him has the father sealed: Joseph received authority from Pharaoh, and it
was no dishonor to Pharaoh that Ieseph was commissionated to issue out all the
stores of corn to the Egyptians in the time of that famine: no more is it any
dishonor to the Father, that Jesus Christ does bestow and convey grace upon
believers.

But does not this put the Spirit out of office, 2. Object.
who is called the holy Spirit, and the Spirit of grace, because he does work
grace and holiness in the hearts of the People of God?

What Christ is said to work, Solution.
that the holy Spirit also does; because by the Spirit of God Christ works.
It is a good rule, that the works of the blessed Trinity ad extra are
undivided, Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisae.
all those works which are external, and relative to the creatures, as to
create, preserve, redeem, sanctify, etc. are in respect of the things wrought
equally common to all the Persons of the blessed Trinity. So that we may say,
John 5. 19.
whatsoever things that the Father does, those things do the Son likewise, and
those things also does the Holy Ghost; the work of Sanctification is equally
ascribed unto all the Persons. Jude v. 1.
God the Father sanctifies his people. God the Son does sanctify his members,
1 Cor. 1. 30.
for he is their sanctifications. He loved the Church, and gave himself for
it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it, with the washing of water through
the Word. Ephesians. 5. 25, 26.
And yet the work of Sanctification is most frequently ascribed to the Holy
Ghost; Goodness, Righteousness and Truth, Ephesians. 5. 9.
and indeed all grace being called the fruit of the Spirit; and the Spirit is
called the Spirit of grace and supplication, and the Spirit of holiness and
sanctification. Gal. 5. 22.
So our Regeneration is ascribed unto God the Father. Blessed be the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy, has
begotten us again to a lively hope. 1 Pet. 1. 3.
And so also we are the children of Christ by Regeneration, for in this respect
Christ is called the Father of Eternity. Isa. 9. 6.
Behold (says the Prophet in the name of Christ) I and the children which thou
have given me; Isa. 18. 8.
and that there the Prophet speaks of Christ, is clear from the application of
it to him in the Epistle to the Hebrews. Heb. 2. 13.
Behold I and the children which God has given me. Neither is the Holy Ghost
excluded from this working of grace and regeneration in us, for Christ tells
Nicodemus, that except a man be born again, except a man be born of water and
of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Joh. 3. 3, 4.
So it is said, that God the Father blessed Abraham; and yet the blessing of
Abraham came upon the Gentiles through Christ, that they might receive the
promise of the Spirit. By all which instances it does appear, Gal. 3. 14.
that though there are divers^ties of gifts, yet the same Spirit, and though
there are differences of administrations, yet the same Lord Jesus Christ, the
Author of all grace through the holy Spirit.

2. The reason and ground of this, why Jesus Christ is the Author, Purchaser
and conveyer of grace to his People, is,

1. Because God the Father has appointed Jesus Christ, as Mediator, to
transact the great work of sanctifying and saving his Elect.

2. Because by this shall the reproach be rolled away from Christ, who in his
life time was reputed the greatest of all Male-factors, and accordingly
suffered death. They were wont to say, can any good come (...) of Nazareth? God
has therefore given him a name above all names, that he should not only be
anointed with oil above his fellows, by his receiving the Spirit without
measure, but that the oil that was poured upon the head of our High Priest
should run down upon the skirts of his garments; and that grace which was
abundant in him, should also be redundant to his Church, and run down, and
diffuse it self to all his members.

3. To manifest that Jesus Christ was the second Adam, and came into the world
to repair the breaches which the sin of the first Adam had made. For by the
fall we did not only contract upon our selves the guilt of Adams sin, to take
off which we have need of the righteousness of Christ imputed, but we have
drawn upon our selves the filthiness and pollution of sin, to take away the
power whereof, only the grace, holiness, and inherent righteousness of Christ
imputed to us does avail: and as the first Adam was the Author and conveyer
both of the guilt, filthiness, and punishments of sin to his posterity; so
Jesus Christ the second Adam conveighs the life of grace into all his. As the
first Adam was the author to communicate natural life, as he was made a living
soul; 1 Cor. 15. 45.
so the second Adam did communicate the spiritual life of grace as he was made
a quickuing spirit. From the first Adam by natural generation and propagation,
we receive corruption for corruption; so from the second Adam we receive grace
for grace.

1. Use of this Doctrine is for Confutation.

1. Of the Socinians error, who say that all grace in Christ, whether his
active or passive righteousness, was only to qualify his person, and to merit
his own glorification, without any reference unto us, unless as an exemplar or
pattern. But this opinion is sufficiently confuted by this Doctrine, by which
has been shown, that as all our grace is from Christ, so that abundance of
grace that is in Christ is for us. As the woman has abundance of milk in her
breast, not for her self, but for her child; and the Sun has abundance of
light, not for it self, but for the world: So Jesus Christ is full of grace and
truth, but this fullness is in order to the filling of his members. As in the
natural body there are some special parts, that do stand as officers unto all
the rest; the stomach receives much meat, not for it self, but that it might
communicate it to all the members; the head has the senses seated in it, not
for it self, but for the whole body: So it is in the mystical body, whereof
Christ is the head; the abundance of grace, which is treasured up in Christ, is
in order to supply every member with grace. For their sakes (says Christ
himself of his elect,) I sanctify my self; Joh. 17. 19.
that they also might be sanctified through the truth. Some do refer this to
Christ, being set apart to the office of Mediator, that it was not for his own
sake, but for the sake of his members, and though there be grace enough in
Christ to qualify his person, yet also there is grace enough in him to
justify our persons too, and sanctify our natures.

2. This also reproves the error, pride and folly of the Pelagians, Papists
and Arminians, who derogate from God, and arrogate to themselves. These people
like Sampson, have lost their spiritual strength, but do not, will not know
that it is departed from them; They are poor, and yet are proud, Sub laudibus
naturae la^^nt inimici gratiae. Aug.
and while they are setting up the praeise of nature, they do prove themselves
the enemies of grace. Alas, while they boast of a liberum arbitrium, they have
cause to bewail a servum arbitrium, a^ Luther calls it. It is true, man by the
fall did not lose the faculty it self, but he has lost the rectitude of it.
And yet proud man will be like the spider, spinning out a thread of his own,
and thinking to climb up to heaven by threads spun out of his own bowels, but
let such who rejoice in this Mihi soli debeo, Job. 8. 14.
take heed at last, that his hope be not cut off, and that his trust become
like a spiders web. Alas poor proud wretch! who made thee to differ?
Grevincovius the Arminian makes this proud answer to the Apostles question, I
my self made my self to differ. This is Divinity much like that of the
Heathens. Seneca said, That we live, this is of God, but that we live well,
that is of our selves. And Cicero has also this saying, and he tells us it is
the judgment of all men, That prosperity and sccesse is from God, and must be
sought of God, but wisdom that is gotten by our selves, which gave Augustine
occasion to pass this censure upon him; ^icero in endeavoring to make men
free, he made them sacrilegious. But let us take heed of this proud leaven of
Arminianisme, and learn from hence to be convinced of the emptiness and
insufficiency of our nature to any supernatural good. For alas! We are not
sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves, but our
sufficiency is of God. We have no grace but what we receive from Christ, And
grace is no way grace unless it be every way free. We have little reason to
boast of the freedom of our will to any thing that is spiritually good,
because our will is not free til it be by grace made free. Voluntas libera
liberata. Aug.
We have no power to become the sons of God, till it be given us to believe on
his name, and such are born not of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of
God.

XV. Sermon At Lawrence Jury, London. April 27. 1651. This was the last Sermon
that ever Mr. Love preached.
2 TIMOTHY 2. 1. -- My son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus.
FRom the last clause in this text, viz. Grace that is in Christ Jesus, we have
gathered this observation, that

All those measures of grace whereof beli^vers are partakers, they do receive
them in and from Jesus Christ.

That this is so, we have proved, not only by the types of the Old Testament,
but also by the express testimony of the New Testament, and have also given
the grounds and reasons of this point, with some Application, by way of
reproof and confutation of the Arminian and Socinian errors. It remains we
make some further Application of this point, and so conclude the whole
discourse.

2. Use is by way of exhortation unto these duties following.

1. Do thou receive all thy grace from Jesus Christ, then labor to be humble
in the acknowledgement of this. Let the consideration and conscientious
application of this doctrine, quell all boasting in us of any excellency
received. Our wisdom, righteousness, and sanctification, 1 Cor. 1. 30 31.
and redemption, are all from Christ, and therefore he that gloryeth let him
glory in the Lord. Consider, who makes thee to differ from another? and what
have thou that thou did not receive? now if thou did receive it, why did
thou glory as if thou had not received it? 2 Cor 4. 7.
Who but a proud fool would magnify himself in that, which either another
gives him, or another has done for him. We count it an odious pride and folly
in a man to boast himself of that which another has done. And therefore the
Apostle professes, that he did not carry himself as those false teachers had
done, who were crept into the Church of Corinth. says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 10
15, 16.
We do not boast of things beyond our measure, that is, of other men's labors,
nor boast in another man's line of things made ready to our hand. Now all grace
is made ready to our hands, and is only the work of Jesus Christ in us, who
works all our works for us. Ammianus Marcellinus tells us of one Lampadius, a
great person in Rome, who in all parts of the City, where other men had
bestowed cost in building, he would set up his own name, not as a Repairer of
the work, Ego and (...).
but as the chief Builder. Such folly are they guilty of, who will set their
own names before Gods, over the work of grace in their own souls. Oh remember
that boasting is excluded by the law of faith. Faith is that grace which
emptieth the creature of all its conceited excellencies, Romans 3. 27.
and faith is that grace which will give God the praise of the glory of all his
grace. Shall the groom of the stable boast of his masters horses? and the
Stage Player of his borrowed robes? shall the mud wall be proud that the
Sun-shines upon it? We must say of all the good that is in us, as the young man
said to the Prophet of his hatchet, Alas Master, it was borrowed. The Church of
God is compared to the Moon. Now all the light which the Moon gives to the
world, 2 King. 6^5
she does but distribute what is lent her; Cant. 6. 10. Lucem acceptam refere.
all our graces and the shining of them, whereby our light is seen before men,
is but a borrowed light from the Sun of righteousness. David sets us an
excellent pattern, when he makes that humble acknowledgement: Blessed be the
Lord God of Israel our Father, for ever and ever. Thin^ (Oh Lord) is the
greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, 1 Chronicles. 29. 10, 11,
12, 13, 15, 16.
and the majesty, for all that is in heaven or in earth is earth is thine;
thine is the Kingdom (Oh Lord) and thou art exalted as head above all. Both
riches and honor come of thee, and thou reignest over all: and in thine hand
is power and might, and in thy hand is to make great, and to give strength unto
all. Now therefore our God, we thank thee, and praise thy glorious name. But
who am I, and what is my people, that we should offer so willingly after this
sort? for all things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee, Oh Lord
our God all this store that we have prepared to build thee an house for thine
own name, comes of thine hand, and is all thine own; which is an excellent
pattern of humility after enlargement in duty. David and the people had offered
both bountifully and willingly toward the house of God, the Lord had enlarged
both their hearts and their hands. Now all they did for God, is here ascribed
to Gods grace and bounty toward them. It is excellent humility to ascribe our
enlargement of Gods service, to the enlargement of Gods grace toward us; the
way to have grace increased, is humbly to acknowledge from whence we receive
every grace.

2. Ascribe unto Jesus Christ the glory of all the grace you have been made
partakers of. Thus did Paul upon all occasions, 1 Cor. 15. 10.
I labored more abundantly then they all, yet not I, but the grace of God
which was in me, and by the grace of God I am what I am. I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me, Gal. 2, 20.^
and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of
God. It was well done of that good and faithful servant to say, Lord, thy pound
has gained ten pounds; Luke 19. 16
he does not say, Lord, my pains, but thy pound has gained. When we give God
the glory of his grace, God will give us the comfort and increase of our grace.
Learn therefore to ascribe unto Christ, the initial, progressive, and
consummative work of grace in your souls, Jesus Christ only, who has begun a
good work in you, Phil. 1. 6^
will perform it until his own day. Heb. 12. 2.
Jesus Christ is the author and finis^er of our faith. Rev. 1. 8.
He is the Alpha and the Omega. And therefore the Apostle prays, The God of
all grace, who has called us unto his eternal glory by Jesus Christ, after
that ye have suffered awhile, make you perfect, stablish^ strengthen, and
settle you. 1 Pet. 5. 10.
Grace is rather like Manna that comes from heaven, then the Corn that grows
out of the earth. Grace is inspired from heaven. Gifts and parts are acquired
by industry and pains here on earth. What God said by way of comparison between
Canaan and Egypt, is very applicable to this purpose. For thus the Lord speaks
to Israel, Deuteronomy. 11. 10, 11, 12.
The Land whether thou go in to possess it, is not as the Land of Egypt,
whence tho^ came out, where thou sowest thy seed, and waterest it with thy
foot, as a garden of herbs, but the Land whither ye go to possess it, is a
land of hills and valleys, and drinks water of the rain of heaven, a land
which the Lord thy God cares for. Thus it is with grace and nature; nature may
be, and is improved with industry and pains, and is like Egypt, which might be
watered by the foot, i.e. with digging gutters and trenches, which is the
labor of the foot, to let in the streams of the river of Nilus, when he yearly
overflows his banks, but grace is like the rain from heaven, which only
falls where God does appoint, Amos 4. 7.
who causes it to rain upon one City, and not upon another, and one piece is
rained upon, and the piece whereupon it raineth not, withers.

3. Disclaim all merit and self-sufficiency, for so much as we arrogate to our
own merit, so much as we derogate from the free grace and mercy of God. If with
Ephraim God has enlarged his grace toward thee, that thou art like a green
fig tree, Hos. 14. 8.
yet let God have the glory of all thy fruitfulness, and let him say, from me
is thy fruit found. Oh consider, Romans 11. 18.
that thou bear not the root, but the root thee. Say, Not unto us, O Lord,
not unto us, but unto thy name do we give the praise. A gracious heart knows
his own inability, and his own insufficiency and imperfection, that he is
unable to overcome the least sin though never so small, to exercise any grace
though never so weak, to perform the least duty, though never so easy: and as
we have cause to acknowledge our inability, so also our sinful imperfections;
if God should enter into judgment with us, he might condemn us, not only for
our worst sins, but for our best duties.

4. Have an eye to Jesus Christ; Look up to him the author and finisher of our
faith. Heb. 12. 2. (...).
The word looking unto, signifies in the original, such a looking unto, as that
we look off those things which may divert our looking up to Jesus. Labor (my
beloved) to look still unto Christ as the author of grace, when you have the
greatest exercise, or increase, or comfort of your grace. Say when thou have
the greatest strength of grace, as Iehoshaphat did, when he had that great
strength of men 500000. Lord, 2 Chro. 20. 1^.
we know not what to do, only our eyes are upon thee. There are these three
things which we should eye in Christ's giving us grace.

1. How voluntarily and freely Jesus Christ does issue out his grace to his
people. Never did a mother more willingly give her child suck, when her breast^
did ache and were ready to break, then Jesus Christ does bestow grace upon his
people. Christ does not like a merchant sell his grace, but like a King freely
bestow^ all: see the tenor of the Covenant of grace how free it was, Isa. 55. 1.
Ho, every (...) that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no
money, come ye, buy and eat, yea come, buy wine and milk, without money and
without price. Let him that is athirst come, and whosoever will, Rev. 22. 17
let him take the water of life freely; nothing is so free as grace: it is
offered and is bestowed upon the freest terms imaginable. All that Christ
requires, Prove. 8. 31.
is but our receiving it. It is the delight of Christ to show mercy, and bestow
grace upon his people. It is the meat of Christ to do the Will of God that sent
him, Joh. 4. 34.
and to finish his work. Never was man more willing to eat his meat when he is
hungry, then Jesus Christ was to do good and bestow grace upon them that wanted
it. So also it is said of Christ in Psalm. 72. (which is clearly a prophecy of
Jesus Christ) that he should come down like rain upon the mowen grass, Psalm.
7^. 6
and as showers that water the earth. Now there is nothing comes down more
sweetly and freely, then the rain upon a dry and thirsty ground.

2. Secondly, look unto Jesus the Author of grace, how irresistibly he does
communicate his grace. I will work, and who can let it? It Is true, Isa. 43. 13.
not only of Gods eternal deliverances, but is as true of Gods working grace in
the hearts of his people. Who shall let?

1. Satan shall not, for though he be a strong man, and armed, and has got
possession, yet when Christ comes, he is (...), stronger then Satan.

2. Sin shall not be able to hinder Gods work of grace. Grace shall be too hard
for the strongest opposition, that is made against it. It is true, a man may
and does resist the grace of God, with a gainsaying and contradicting
resistance, but not with an overcoming resistance.

3. Thirdly, look up to Jesus the bestower of grace, how proportionably he
gives grace suitable, and answerable to thy temptations and need. 1 Cor. 12. 11.
God divides to every one his grace and gifts, severally as he will, and yet he
gives grace that shall be enough. My grace is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12. 9
said God to Paul, sufficient to quell corruptions, sufficient to repel
temptation, sufficient to make thee wait upon me, ^ill I give thee deliverance.

5. Be exhorted to have recourse to Jesus Christ for supply of grace. Go to
Jesus, and by the Prayer of faith approach to the Throne of grace, and beg
grace to help thee in time of need. Go unto God by Christ, and God through
Christ will supply all your wants. Phil. 4. 19. (...).
My God, says Paul to the Philippians, shall supply all your need, according
to his riches in glory by Jesus Christ. Go to this God, and express your
selves before his throne, with sensible complaints, and earnest requests, say,
Lord, seeing there is so much water in the fountain, why should my cisterne be
empty? such fullness of grace in Christ, and so little grace in my heart? Lord,
Psalm. 58. 18
have thou not gifts for men, yea for the rebellious also, and that is the worst
that can be said of me, and have thou not a blessing for me also?

3. Use of caution, though we say that all grace is in and from Christ.

1. This should not cut off our endeavors after grace: Cant. 1.
we should so earnestly labor to get grace, as if there were no way to have it
but by our endeavors, we should so strive to get heaven, as if it were to be
gotten by by our fingers, by our own pains. Gods promises and purposes of
giving grace should rather quicken, and greaten, then any ways slacken our
endeavors after grace. See how the apostle makes Gods working grace in us, a
ground why we should work: Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling,
Phil. 2. 12, 13.
for it is God which works in you both to will and to do of his good
pleasure. And again, I know the thoughts that I think toward you (says the
Lord,) thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected end; but see
also how God joins their duty with his promise, the means unto the end: Jer.
29. 11, 12.
Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go, and pray unto me, and I will
hearken unto you. So also in the prophecy of Ezekiel, the Lord had promised to
do great things for them, Ezekiel. 36. 37.
and then adds, Thus says the Lord God, I will yet for this be inquired of by
the house of Israel, to do it for them. Gods promise to David to build him an
house, did not at all slack his prayer to God for that purpose; for thus we
find David praying, Thou, O my God have told thy servant, 1 Chro 17. 25, 26,
27.
that thou will build him an house, therefore thy servant has found in his
heart to pray before thee. And now Lord (thou art God, and have promised this
goodness to thy servant) now therefore let it please thee to bless the house
of thy servant, that it may be before thee for ever, for thou blessest, O Lord,
and it shall be blessed for ever. 1 Cor. 15, 10.
Thus also did Paul, By the grace of God I am what I am, and his grace which
was bestowed upon me, was not in vain, but I labored more abundantly then
they all, yet not I, but the grace of God which was in me. See how he joins
Gods grace and his own endeavors together. Thou must then so endeavor after
grace, as if it were to be gotten by labor, and not bestowed by favor, yet
when thou have done all thou can, thou must acknowledge grace to be free, as
if thou had not labored at all.

2. Though there be abundance of grace in Christ, Cant. 2.
yet let all such as have no interest in Christ, take heed how they flatter
themselves into a conceit, that they shall receive grace from Christ; Interest
in the Person, gives communication of his grace. As it was in Christ's Person,
he could not have had those excellencies and attributes which were in God, had
not his two natures humane and divine been personally united in him. And
therefore it is said by virtue of the hypostatical union, Col. 2 9.
that in him, i. e. in his Person, dwells all the fullness of the Godhead
bodily. So unless there be that mystical union between Christ and us, we could
not be Partakers nor grow strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. Union is
the ground of Communion, Joh. 1. 12, 16. compared.
and therefore we read first of receiving Christ, and then afterward of
receiving of his fullness grace for grace. Though thou art near Christ by
Profession, yet if thou art not one with Christ by faith, thou can not
receive any virtue from him. If a man tie food to any part of his body, it will
not nourish him, because it is not received, concocted or concorporated; that
only nourishes, which becomes one and the same substance with us. So we receive
strength and increase of grace from Christ, as we are united unto him by faith
Take a graft, and tie it to a tree, and it brings forth no fruit, but let it be
united unto a tree by implantation, then the graft grows fruitful: so without
Christ, (or as it is in the Original) separate from Christ you can do nothing.
John 15. 5* (...). Romans 6. 5.
He that by faith is not planted together in the likeness of Christ's death,
shall never receive spiritual nourishment from him. He that does not abide in
Christ, is cast forth as a Branch, he was never a true Branch, Job 15. 6, (...).
only seemed to be one. Christ is a fountain of grace, but it is faith that
draws out of this fountain, Christ is a treasury of grace, but it is faith that
unlocks this treasury. By our communion with Christ we receive grace for grace.
We are made by love, meekness and patience like unto Christ, but by faith we
are made one with Christ; and that Union is the cause of communion, and
therefore Christlesse persons are graceless persons.

3. If men want grace, yet let them know, Caut. 3.
that not Christ, but themselves are to blamed. There is fullness in Christ,
there is grace enough in Christ, in him there is fullness of sufficiency, of
efficiency, and of redundancy; but if a vessel be stopped, cast it into the Sea,
and it will receive no water; and the fault is in the vessel which is stopped,
there is no want of water in the Sea. They that have the river-water or
conduit-water come into their houses, if no water come, you must not conclude
there is no water in the river or fountain, but that the Pipes are either stopped
or broken; So it is, if ever you are straitened, you are straightened in your own
bowels, and not straitened in your God. If a house be dark, it is not for any
want of light in the Sun, but for want of windows in the house: So if thou
want grace, it is not for want of grace in Christ, but for want of faith in
thy soul, to draw and derive more grace from Christ.

4. Envy not the grace of God in others. Caut. 4.
Though Christ should bestow more grace on others then on thee, yet thy eye
must not be evil, Mat. 20 15
because he is good. Thou should not have an envious eye, because Christ has
a bountiful hand. It is not only a fault in wicked men, to envy the grace that
is in good men, as Cain envied Abel, because his sacrifice was accepted, and
his own rejected, but also even good men are too apt to envy one another.
Joseph's brethren envied their brother, because he was beloved of his father,
John 21. 20, 21.
and Peter (it is thought) envied John the beloved disciple. But take heed of
envy, it is dishonorable to God, and often hinders us from receiving mercy and
grace from God. To envy Christ's dispensing of his grace, to whom and in what
measure he pleases, is unbecoming a Christian; to rejoice in others happiness,
is to do as the Angels of heaven; to envy others good is like the devils in
hell. Would a father take it well that his children fall out about their
portions, which their father has given them. God is absolutely free, to give
one or two, or five talents, as he pleases, and if another have more grace then
thou, yet be thankful for that grace thou have, and envy no man.

Lastly, Lessen not thy grace thou have received. Caut. 5.
As there is no sin small, because it is an offense against the great God: so
there is no grace little, because it comes from the great God. Unthankfulness
hinders this oil from running. As a man must not be contented with the greatest
measure of grace, so he must not be unthankful for the least measure of grace.
Consider, it is Jesus Christ that has begun the work of grace: that there is
some little good wrought in thee, is the work of Christ, and he that has begun
a good work will also finish it; he that has given grace a being in thy soul,
Psalm. 138. ^ 8.
will also strengthen thee with strength in thy soul, and perfect what
concerns thee. Do not thou thy self quench the flax that begins to smoke, nor
break the reed that is bruised, but be thankful to Christ that has handled
this smoking flax, Mat. 12. 20
and wait upon him, who will so accomplish his work, that he will send forth
judgment unto victory.

A Funeral Sermon preached by Mr Love at the Funeral of Mistress B. at Lowrence
Ju^y London. April 29. 1651. being the last Sermon that ever he preached
JOB 30. 23. For I know that thou will bring me to death, and to the house
appointed for all living.
IN the handling of these words it is needful I should dispatch these two
things.

1. Give you the scope.

2. The sense of the words.

For the first, the scope of the words, because they are ushered in with an
illative or causal particle (For) which carries a reference to somewhat that
goes before, and that you may distinctly take notice of the reference, you
must look back to the 18. verse of this chapter, there Job tells you of a
strong disease under which he labored, By the great force of my disease is my
garment changed, Verse. 18.
it hind^th me about as the collar of my coat. It seems the disease was so
strong upon him, it even strangled his breath, it was as a collar about his
neck, upon the sense of this his disease, he breaks out into this holy
meditation, For I know that thou will bring me to death, and to the house
appointed for all living. Now take a hint from the scope and context, that
sieknesses and diseases they should be remembrancers of us about our dying.
Sick men should always think with themselves they are dying men, and they that
die daily, need not fear dying suddenly. So I come to the sense of the words, I
know. It is not to be understood of a notional or speculative knowledge, Non
solum ^em notam' sed quasi peculiari experientia sibi persuasam, significa^.
Pined. Experio^^ Jun.
that does signify a bare and naked knowledge of a general truth; but such
kind of knowledge as is practical and experimental: and so also did Junius
translate it. This experimental knowledge wrought in Job holy preparations for
death I know, and by experience can tell, I have such a kind of knowledge,
that has practicalnesse and experience in it. (That thou will bring me to
death) This showed the holiness of Job in opposition to the doctrine of the
Heathens, who guest that all such events fell out by fate and fortune, and not
by the determinate decree and counsel of the most High. (And to the house
appointed for all living.) Though he does not speak here where this house is,
Job 17. 13.
yet it does in Job. 17. 13. If I wait, the grave is mine house, and I have
made my bed in the darkness. Now that which was his house, must be the house
of all living, that is, the grave. Now the grave is compared to an house. 1.
Alluding to the Egyptian Sepulch^es, which were made like a house with several
arched rooms. 2. Because there we dwell in silence. Thus ye have the words
briefly paraphrased unto you. Now I shall give you some practical deduction
from them, For I know that thou will bring me to death. These words are the
gracious speech of Job, touching his own mortality, and in them we have three
particulars.

1. The Rationality of this speech. He brings it in with an illative. For,

2. The Particularity of it. He draws a particular meditation of death, etc.
Me.^

3. The piety of it, he acknowledges Gods hand in bringing him to death. Thou,
and not chance or fortune.

For the first, the Rationality of it. Holy Job does not speak of his death
without some cause, but for the ground and reason foregoing. By the great force
of my disease is my garment changed, it binds me about as the Collar of my
Coat; and then he breaks out into this holy meditation, For I know thou will
bring me to death. From thence observe, That it is a very Rational thing in
weakness to have holy meditations about death. ^oct 1.
Job lay under a disease, that even was ready to choke and strangle him, and
then he breaks out into this holy meditation, For I know thou will bring me to
death, etc. It is observable, the Ancients take notice that David made three
Psalms, when he lay upon his sickbed, Psalm. 6 Psalm 30. Psalm 39. and in all
those Psalms there are divine raptures and holy meditations about death. Job.
17. 1. My breath is corrupt, my days are extinct, the grave is ready for me.
He does not mean an ill savor in his breath, but it was an obstruction and
stopping in his breath, that is, he was short-breathed, and straightened under a
violent disease. It is conceived that Job had that disease which is called the
Tissick, and the consideration of this disease, made him think that the grave
was ready for him. So Heman lay und^ a violent disease, Psalm. 88. 3, 4, 5. For
my soul is full of trouble, and my life draws nigh to the grave, Psa. 88. 3, 4
5.
I am accounted with them that go down into the pit, I am as a man that has no
strength, free among the dead, like the stain that lie in the grave, whom thou
numbrest no more, and they are cut off from thy hands. When sickness is in the
chamber, then death is at the window. Diseases are but the messengers,
harbingers and forerunners of death; in the Prophets phrase, Death is come up
into our windows: ler. 9. 21.
When diseases are in the house, then death is at the threshold. So Job
reckons, When I lie down, Job 7. 4, 5.
I say, when shall I rise, and the night be gone? and I am full of tossings to
and fro, unto the dawning of the day, and then he says, My flesh is clothed
with worms, and clods of dust. My skin is broken, and become loathsome.

First Use, Use 1.
is to condemn those, that when they lie on a sickbed, they hope for life, but
never think of death, their own guiltiness and their own wickedness of living
does so fill them with fear and horror, that the thoughts of death are irksome
and tedious to them. Just like Lewis the eleventh King of France, when he lay
sick of a dangerous disease, he charged his servants and attendants, that they
should not speak of death in his hearing. Many men's bodies are Magazines and
Hospitals of diseases, who when they are living never think of death, though
there is but little betwixt them and the grave.

Second Use, Use 2.
is to those that are healthful and strong; it is true, diseases are the
immediate harbingers and forerunners of death in an ordinary way, yet you may
soon dye though a disease seize not on you. As the fruits of a tree do more
perish by extraordinary winds and tempests, then do stay upon the tree, and
are gathered by the husbandman: So violent diseases may soon kill you, though
marrow be in your bones, and strength in your joints. Paracelsus a skilful
Physician, he gloryed, that if any man would follow his Physical Prescriptions,
he should not dye any violent death, but merely through age, and yet that
boasting man before he was forty years of age, he himself dyed of a Fever.
Thus I have done with the first consideration, the Reasonableness of this; I
am under a sore disease, and therefore I do think of death.

Secondly, the Particularity of Johs speech is to be observed. Job does not
stand upon that general conclusion, There is no man that lives but he shall
see death, Psalm. 88. 48. He does not speak in general so, but I know I must
die. From thence observe this point,

That general Conclusions about death, Dect. 2.
should be enforced upon the soul by particular applications. Beloved, we
should not only have general notions and empty speculations about death, but
practical and particular conclusions concerning our death, such as may lay an
awe upon the conscience. Thus in the case of the godly, Job 5. 26. 27.
said Eliphaz, Thou shall come to thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of
Corn comes in his season; and then he adds, verse. 27. Lo this, we have
searched it, hear it, and know thou it for thy good. General Conclusions that
all must dye, must be enforced upon the soul with particular applications, to
turn you from the world, to beget in you serious thoughts touching your future
and eternal welfare. General truths do not carry that force upon the
conscience, unless they are drawn by applicative inference; and therefore. Ps.
73. ult. The Psalmist says not only It is good to draw near unto God, but it
is good for me.

The third particular, is the Piety of J^bs speech, in these words, Thou will
bring me to death. Now there are three particulars in it which note Jobs Faith
and Piety.

1. He does not ascribe dying to fate and fortune, but to the Providence of the
most High. From thence observe,

That it is the property of the godly, Doct. 3.
to see Gods band in taking away men by death. It was but the dotage of the
Heathen that knew not God, to ascribe events to blind fortune, and it was the
corruption of the Chaldeans to overlook the Deity in all fatal events; Yet Job
he desired to see and submit to death, and to Gods hand in bringing it upon
him. Thou will bring me to death. Another thing observable is this, I know thou will bring me to death. It is not a notional and bare knowledge of the
understanding, but such a kind of knowledge that is considerate and practical,
which works upon the affections. From thence observe,

That though all men do know notionally they must dye, Doct. 4.
yet only godly men know it practically and considerately. To know practically
of your dying, consider before hand, how shall I do to launch into the eternal
gulf? what shall become of me in another world, when I leave this? Is my peace
made with God? Is my person justified? Am I in a state of grace? Now Jobs
speech has latitude in it, I know thou will bring me to death, that is, I do
so know it, that I will provide for it, and I will prepare for it, and I will
lay a foundation for eternal life. Solomon speaking of Funeral solemnity, Ec^l.
7. 2.
says he, It is better to go to the house of mourning, then to go to the house
of feasting, that is the end of all men, and the living will lay it to his
heart. I but all men that do do not lay death to heart, they may perhaps talk
of death at a Funeral, but the living they shall lay it to heart, (...)
lay it upon the heart, as the Hebrew, they shall lay it to heart, and lay it
upon their hearts, so Tremelius. Dabit ad Cor suum Ar. Mont. Inditur^^ est
istud anim^ su^. Tremel.
A wicked man lays it upon his tongue, but a godly man lays this truth upon
his heart. There is none but a godly man, that so knows any thing of dying; as
to know it so practically, affectionately and considerately, and so as to do
these three things.

1. None but a godly man considers of his dying, that he dies deservedly, he
tastes the bitterness, and feels the burden of sin; in his diseases and sense
of approaching death, he considers with himself, that it is not a disease that
will bring him to his grave, but the sins of his life that kill him.

2. None knows that he must dye so as a godly man, whose care it is to dye
preparedly. A godly man he knows he must dye, and this knowledge makes him
prepare for a dying time, to live every day as his last day. The Prophet he
spoke of death in the former part of Psalm. 90. Psalm. 90 11. 12.
that the days of man are threescore and ten. See what follows, So teach us
to number ^ur days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom; he does mean by
numbering our days, to live so exactly as to count the number of our days to
be so few, every day^ as if this were the last day; and this time as the time
of the coming of Christ to judgment.

3. None but a godly man knows of his dying, so as to consider that there is a
necessity that sin must dye in him before his body dies. (...) an Heathen could
say, Let thy vices dye before thee. (...) ant^ (...) viti^. Sen.
There must not be only a suspension, but a mortification of sin. A godly man
considers, though I live blamelesly, that men cannot say, Black is mine eye to
any outward practice, yet I must have my inward lusts and corruptions dye
before my body dye; and therefore they ought to be conversant in things that
tend to mortification^ this is to know death considerately and affectionately;
whereas wicked men consider of death notionally, their senses tell them that
all must die. They say all men, men, young and old, rich and poor must dye; but
this is but matter of discourse in them, but the godly know it with savoury
knowledge.

Thirdly, Jobs Piety was, in that he does represent death to himself, not in a
formidable and dreadful way, but under a comfortable representation; For I know
thou will bring me to death^ and to the house, etc. He does represent the grave
under the notion of a house, as he represents it elsewhere. From thence observe
this point.

That a child of God that has not allowed guilt upon his conscience, Doct. 5.
he may and ought to re-present death to himself in such familiar
representations, as may make it less dreadful and more desirable. Sometimes it
is represented as going to bed, They shall rest in their bed. A godly man when
he lies upon his deathbed, and by sickness is weary of his life, Isa. 57. 2.
tossing to and fro till the dawning of the day, let him think the grave will
be but a bed of rest unto him; so death is often styled a sleep. And many of
them that sleep in the dust of the earth, Dan. 12. 2.
shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting
contempt. Death is embalmed with sweet and comfortable language.

The grave is the house for all the living to be lodged in. Doct. 6.
If I wait, the grave is mine house, I have made my bed in the darkness. Job
17. 13.
The grave is the house that I must go to, as after a hard days labor in my
house I go to bed in a dark night: So we go to our beds, as into our graves for
a long night; going to bed is but for a short night, but going to the grave is
for a long night; death is sometimes represented with dreadful considerations,
but with amiablenesse too. There is an abhorrency in nature against death, it
is embalmed by Jesus Christ; he lay in the grave three days, to embalme the
grave to you, though your beds be cloudy and dark, yet ye rest in them till the
Resurrection-day. For the opening of the doctrine.

I shall dispatch these two Queries.

1. I shall show you, why the grave is compared to an house.

2. I shall show you, what kind of house the grave is.

For the first Query, Query 1.
why the grave is compared to an house?

1. This Reason some Authors give, because in ancient times, (as has been
hinted) among the Egyptians their graves and sepulchers, they were made after
the fashion of houses, with Arches, and such kind of superstructures; therefore
they say it is called an house.

2. Other Authors give this reason; because that as a man after a days labor
abroad, he comes to his house for rest, so a man after a life's labor in this
world, he comes to his grave, as to his house for rest.

The second Query is this, Query 2
what kind of house is the grave? Now I will give you these four properties of
this house. 1. It is a desolate and a lonesome house. 2. It is a dark house. 4
It is an old house. 4 It is a silent house. For the first, the grave is

1. A desolate and a lonesome house. Job 3. 14.
I shall be, said Job, with Kings and Counselors of the earth which build
desolate places for themselves, that is, they build tombs, and monuments where
they shall lie, and then they shall leave all their attendance. Ezekiel. 26. 20.
When I shall bring thee down with them that descend into the pit, with the
people of old time, and shall set thee in the low parts of the earth, in places
desolate of old, with them that go down into the pit, that thou be not
inhabited. Job 17. 14. I have said to corruption, Thou art my Father, and to
the worms, Thou art my mother and my sister: there is all the company you will
have, corruption and the worms; friends bring you to your grave, and there
they leave you.

2. Your grave is a dark house, I have made my bed in the darkness, that is,
in the grave. The grave is like the sleeping room in a house, not like the
dining room and working room. The dining room is to be light, and so the
working room, but the sleeping room is dark. It Is but the stopping of the mouth
of the grave, and it is but the drawing of the Curtains of the bed, where thou
shall lie in darkness till the Resurrection^ day. In the grave there is
neither the light of the body, which is the eye; nor the light of the air,
which is the Sun: the Sun it shall not shine there, nor the body see there;
Therefore Eccl. 11. 9. Rejoice, Oh young man in thy youth, and let thy heart
cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and
in the sight of thine eyes, but know thou that for all these things God will
bring thee unto judgment. And verse. 8. He had said remember the days of
darkness; for they shall be many. The meaning is this, The continuance in the
grave, which is the house of darkness, shall be long, even to the end of the
world.

3. The grave is an old house, as old as Adam, he dug his grave with his
own fingers; Romans 5. 12.
Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so
death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. The grave it is a lasting
house, a house where thou must stay a great while. Eccles. 11. 5. Also when
they shall be afraid of that which is high, and fear shall be in the way, and
the Almond tree shall flourish, and the Grasshopper shall be a burden, and
desire shall fail, because man goes to his leng home, and the mourners go
about the streets, It Is a long home, a kind of a house of eternity, a long
while till Christ's coming to judgment, our long home, in opposition to our
present houses, that is; our short home. Your houses are your short homes, but
the graves are your long homes.

4. The grave is a silent house, Psalm. 31. 17. Let me net be ashamed, Oh Lord,
for I have called upon thee: let the wicked be ashamed and let them be silent
in the grave. The Psalmist prays here for deliverance from his Persecutors,
here is nothing but clamor, persecution and opposition, and one shall not have
a good word from them. But as Job comfort^ himself in the grave, There the
voice of the Oppressor shall not be heard: Job 3. 18.
So may we, we shall be at rest and silence there, there the weary shall be at
rest, and there the Prisoners shall rest together. For the Uses of this point.

The first Use, is an use of comfort to the godly, they may be comforted upon
this doctrine. This doctrine is a doctrine that is dreadful to wicked men,
their graves are dungeons to them; but to Gods children the grave is an house.
Now you may be comforted upon these four consideratious.

1 That though the grave be an house, yet be comforted, it is a resting house,
Job* 3 17. There the wicked cease from troubling, Job 3. 1^, 1^.
and there the weary be at rest. He speaks here of the grave in verse. 13. For
now should I have lien still and been quiet, I should have slept, then had I
been at rest. There is no work to be done in this house, Eccles. 9. 10.
Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might, for there is no work,
nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go. Isa. 57.
2. They shall rest in their beds.

2. That though the grave be a house, yet be comforted, it is but a sleeping
house, it is not a house where thou shall be everlastingly. Beloved though it
be a house, yet it is but a sleeping house; it shall not always keep your
bodies; that is the meaning of Paul's exultation: O death, where is thy sting?
Oh grave where is thy victory? 1 Cor. 15. 57.
He refers it to the Resurrection; the grave though it compass us, yet it
shall not conquer us.

1. Though the grave be a house, yet be comforted, it is but a hiding house,
such a house as is but a hiding place for Gods people. Job. 14. 13. Oh that
thou would hide me in the grave, that thou would keep me in secret until
thy wrath be past, that thou would appoint me a set time and remember me.
Times may be so calamitous, that there may be more safety under ground then
above ground, they that have layen a long time in their graves, may be more
happy then those that are living, Isa. 26. 20.
Isa. 26. 20. Come my peeple, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy door
about thee, hide thy self, as if it were for a little moment until the
indignation be overpast. Though some refer this to a temporal deliverance, yet
others refer it to the grave, where God lodges his children, when he takes them
from the evil to come.

Though the grave be a house, yet be comforted it is a perfumed house, a house
imbalmed and perfumed by Christ's lying in the grave. All the acts that Christ
did, they were for our sakes. Christ died to save us by dying. Christ lay
buried in the grave, to make the grave a bed of rest, he rose again from the
dead to sanctify our resurrection, and by his presence there he has persumed
this bed; this house the grave.

Second Use for instruction. 1. Here is matter of meditation; when you are in
your own houses, bethink your selves thus, Now I am here walking in my house,
from chamber to chamber, but ere long my chamber shall be in the dust. Now I am
coming to my bed in a dark night, but ere long God will put out the candle of
my life, and will lay me in the grave, as in a bed of darkness. Now I am in my
own house, but ere long my house will cast me our to my grave, and that is the
house that will take me in.

2. Let it check in you all covetous and inordinate desires after worldly
things; Thou shall come from lying in the dark house in the womb, to lie in the
dark house of the grave. Oh what a vast company of inordinat and luxurious
desires are there in the hearts of men. In the womb one foot, in the cradle
three foot will content you, and in the grave six foot, but when thou live in
the world a whole world will not content you, there is such inordinate and
luxurious desires in men's hearts, when they have all affluence and confluence
of creature comforts; Now they must have their variety of Houses, a
Countrey-house, a Summer House, a Winter house, yet thou must exchange thy many
houses for one house, It Is worthy your notice that passage you read of in
Scripture, 1 Samuel 10. 24. Samuel when he had anointed Saul King, and the people
had chosen him; what signal does he give him to confirm him anointed, it was
to go to Rachels Sepulcher; now the reason is this, that he might not be
glutted with the preferments and honors he was entering upon. The Emperors of
Constantinople, in their inaugurations, on their Coronation days, Isa 57. 1.
Elige ab his saxis ex quo invictissime Caesaer ipse tibi tumulum me fabricare
velis.
had a Mason came and showed them several Marble-stones, and asked them to
choose which of those should be made ready for their Gravestone. And so we
read of Joseph of Arimathea, that he had his Tomb in his garden to check the
pleasures of the place. Now in thy house thou have superfluity and abundance. I
can go now to variety of houses; bu^ one day thou shall leave all thy houses,
and go to one house, and there leave all your company and your friends.

But how can this be true, Object. 1.
when the Scripture says, Joh. 8. 51. Verily, verily, I say unto you, if a man
keep my saying, he shall never see death.

To this I answer, that this Scripture intends not a natural and corporal
death, but a spiritual and eternal death, and it is said, John 11. 25, 26. I am
the resurrection and the life, he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet
he shall live, and whosoever lives and believes in me shall never die: That
is, though he die naturally, yet he shall live eternally.

But you will say, 2. Object.
Enoch was not buried, and Elijah was carried up in a chariot.

Particular examples do not frustrate general rules; Sol.
though they were not laid in their graves, yet they underwent something
equivalent to death. There was a particular reason why God translates Enoch and
Elijah, because they were to be types of Christ's Resurrection, and pledges of
ours.

But some will say, 3. Obj.
1 Cor. 15. 51. We shall not all sleep, but we shall be changed; therefore at
the last day they shall not be buried, and the grave not the house of all men,
but those that are then living shall be suddenly carried up to Heaven.

To this I answer, that at the last day, though men shall not come to the
grave, Sol.
yet they shall be taken up when the trumpet shall sound, and shall go through
the fire, and they shall in their translation undergo something that shall be
equivalent to a death, and to a burial.

2. Lastly, we are tied to this decree of death, though God be not tied, Romans
5. 14. and Romans 9. 27. By those places we are to understand, all men do
deserve to die, though God may exempt some, Romans 5. 13. De jure mortis in omnes
homines loquitur Apostol^^, licet Deus aliquos a morte pesset eximere. Rivet.
as those that live to see the end of the world, from a death as ours is. Death
is the end of all men, and the grave is the house appointed for all living.
Death has passed upon all men because all have sinned. All deserve to die; and
even those that are changed at the last day undergo something equivalent to
death it self.

FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Table.
A
ADmiration of men's persons page. 22 Affections rather then actions evidence
the truth of grace 54 Strong assurance 26 Strong affections 121 Why we should
be careful to preserve our first affections 126 Holy affections arguments of
grace 160 Our All to be ascribed to Christ 189
B
BAd company a snare 12 Good in bad places commendable 13 Misery to live in bad
places ib. We must shun bad company and places 11 Against boasting of our own
merit 189, 193 None blameable but our selves, if we want grace 197
C
GOod company 16 Be not content with measures of grace 25 Communion of Saints
29 Reasons why we must not content our selves with a little grace 33 Complaint
of our corruptions 41 Little comfort of much grace 49 God will cherish least
measures of grace 57 Comfort of grace may be lost 78 Experienced Christians
must comfort others 82 Cases of conscience about temptation 92 About
corruptions 104 Strong corruptions co^sistent with strong grace 105 Case of
conscience about affections 127 Case of conscience about the comfort of grace
128 A man may have grace and want comfort 131 A godly man has right to comfort
142 True grace is communicative 155 How grace is said to be in Christ 176
Christ is the author of grace 177 Christ commissionated by God the Father to
give grace 197
D.
BEst must die 4 Dependence on duty 19 Dependence on divine influxe 27 Why
there are different degrees of grace 28 Desires after more grace 43 Desires
supernatural and active, earnest after grace 44 Devils malice and knowledge in
tempting us 98 Devil shall never have his will on Gods people 101 Devil may mar
our comfort 139 Diverse Christians have diverse gifts 148 Of division in the
Church 150 Decay of gifts unexercised 151, 152 We must not despise the least
grace 199 Diseases should mind us of death 202 We should meditate on death 204
And on our particular death 205 Gods hand must be seen in Death ib. Sin cause
of death 206
E.
Vain excuse of wickedness 46 Evidences of the growth and strength of grace
differ 49 Good example 72 Exercise grace 139 Former experiences comfortable 146
One may excel in one gift, and not in another 148 Eminent for grace in great
esteem 175 We must have our eye on Christ 192
F
FAlling from First love 19 Precious Faith alike in all Believers 36 Frequency
in sinning 103 Men of great gifts may fall away 162 Christ a Fountain 179 All
fullness in Christ 178 God the Father and Christ one 179 Against Free Will 186
G.
SAving grace unloseable 12 Smallest measures of grace are cherished by God 16
Some of Gods children have but small measures of grace 18 Different degrees of
grace 19 A little grace not so useful, nor so evidential 34 True grace will grow
36 We must grow in grace 74 Commands and promises of growth 75 Not to grow
better, is to grow worse 78 Glory of Gods Attributes seen in succouring us in
great temptation 97 God a free agent in giving grace, or comfort of grace 134
Glory of grace due to God 141 Though believers have the same Spirit, yet not
the same gifts 147 Little grace better then great gifts 156 Difference between
gifts and grace 157 None have so much grace as they should 168 Glory in heaven
proportioned to our grace here 173 Its of the nature of grace to grow 174 Grave
is an house 218
H.
COrruptions are to humble us 104 Humiliation suitable to corruptions 102 They
that have much grace have much cause to be humbled 167 Christ a head 178 What
kind of house the grave is 220
I.
INjuries to weak Christians 64 Judgment and spiritual knowledge 119 Holy
jealousy 136 Indulgence to any lust marres our spiritual comfort 138
Improvement of grace 163 We are justified by Gods free grace, and not by grace
inherent in us 166 Joseph a type of Christ 182 Joshua a type of Christ 181
Christ gives grace irresistibly 193 We must endeavor to get grace 195 Interest
in Christ, and then in his grace 196
K
KNowledge of the mysteries of the Gospel 83 Weak in knowledge 23 Practical
knowledge 201 Considerate knowledge of death 204
L.
SPiritual light in the soul 40 Love of the Word, and of the Saints 46 Little
grace shall be lasting, and shall not be extinguished 54, 165 Loss of first
love, and first affections 106, 128 Spiritual laziness 138
M.
AGainst Popish merit 35 Of the least measure of grace 39 Ministers must use
loving insinuations 71 Ministers should grow in grace 72 Mistakes about
measures of grace 86 We must not measure our grace by our profession or gifts,
etc. 87 Natural melancholy, hinders comfort 135
N.
NEglect of our callings 21 Some affectionate by natural temper 121 All things
new at first conversion 123
O.
Old Age may make affections flag 9
P.
WE are not perfect at once 27, 66 Gods power can preserve weak grace 31
Purpose of soul to leave sin 40 Promises made to the desire after grace 43 We
must labor after perfection 47 Promises must be believed, though Providence
seem to cross them 82 Pride checked by temptations 98 Strong Christians must
not presume 101 Professors sins gratify Satan 105, 106 Spiritual pride 109
Pride in our gifts 153 Pride of Papists and Pelagians 185 Christ gives grace
proportionably 194 Preparation for death 206
Q.
OF quenching the Spirit 137
R.
Reign of lust 115 Christ a Root 178 Reproach rolled away from Christ 182
Socinians enemies to the Righteousness of Christ 183 Rest in the grave 212
S
A Note of sincerity to be good in bad places 12 Signs of weak grace 20
Spiritual failings and sins 21 A scrupulous conscience ib. God will not try us
beyond our strength 38 Christians have a strong God, a strong Savior, strong
promises 53 God sees the least sin in believers 62 Satan's Sieve, and Gods Fan
68 Why Timothy called Paul's son 70 How grace is said to be strong 72 Strong
grace because strong temptation and oppositions, and strong corruptions 76
Signs of strong Christians 81 Suffering for Christ a duty, as well as doing for
Christ 83 Sins of Gods people provoking 99 Superciliousnes toward weak
Christians 109 Gods Sovereignty to give or withhold comfort 133 Sleightnesse of
Spirit 137 Christ Sun of Righteousness 178 Neither Satan nor Sin shall hinder
grace 194 Go to Christ for supply of grace ib.
T.
MAny dare not Trust God for outward things 25 Government of the Tongue 84
Great and strong Temptations consistent with strong grace 90 Temptations shall
not exceed grace 91 Devils tempts best most, of which instances 93 95 When
temptations strong 93 Reasons why best most tempted 96 God by temptations aims
at our good 97 Jesus Christ was tempted 102 Natural temperature disposes to
some sins 104 Types of Christ 180, 181
V
REligion makes nearest Union 70 Unity in the Church 87 Uncompassionatenesse
138 Ungrounded comfort and joy 143 Christ gives grace voluntarily 192
W
Weak easily seduced 23 Weak in knowledge ib. Weak in judgment 24 Weak
Christians not bear Reproof ib. Weak Christians must not be discouraged 25
Gods wisdom seen in the variety of measures of grace 31 More weak then strong
Christians 32 How we must carry our selves to weak ones 60 Gods care over weak
Christians 68 Of weak gifts 144 Directions to weak Christians 163 Works of the
blessed Trinity relative to the creature, undivided 181
Y
COmmendable to good in Youth 6 Youth subject to temptations ib. Examples of
good young men 7 Sins of youth trouble us when old 8, 9 Gods indulgence to
young convers 125
FINIS.

