THE CHRISTIANS COMBAT OR, HIS True Spiritual Warfare.

Christ over-Love, that cannot be you will say,
But Christ above all others Love you may.


THE Christians COMBAT: OR, HIS True Spiritual Warfare;

Wherein is laid down the Nature, Power, and cunning Deceit of Satan, the great
enemy of our Salvation. With the means whereby every good Christian may
withstand his dreadful assaults.

By C.L. late Preacher of Gods Word in the City of London.

Ephesians. 6.11. Put on the whole armor of Gods Word, that ye may be able to
stand against the assaults of the devil.

London, Printed for Charles Tyus, at the three Bibles on London Bridge.

1664.



THE CHRISTIANS COMBAT.
Ephesians 5.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Wherefore take unto you the whole Armor of
God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all to
stand.

Stand therefore, having your Loins girt about you with truth, and having on
the Brestplate of righteousness, and your feet shod with the preparation of the
Gospel of Peace.

Above all things take the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to
quench all the fiery darts of the wicked.

And take the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit, which is the
word of God.


BEloved Christians, the Apostle Saint Paul having showed the mystery o^ our
Salvation and the caus^s ther^of; for the confirmation of our fait^ in the
three first Chapters of his Epistle (...), and after^^^^^ in the other chapters
having set down diverse duties, both generally belonging to all Christians: and
also particularly ^ppertaining to men of sundry conditions, that he might move
them to repentance and newness of life; in the next place like the Lords
sentinel, does discover and give us wa^ning of the approach of mighty enemies,
willing us to arm our selves in all points in our own defense, and courageously
to stand under the Standard of Christ Jesus, that we may be continu^lly in
readiness to endure the encounter; also he gives us to understand that as
^oon as we seek for assurance of Salvation in Christ, and endeavor to serve
the Lord in a holy and Christian life, we are to prepare our selves for a
Combat* unless we would suddenly be surprised* for the spiritual enemies of our
Salvation arm themselves against us as soon as we have given our names to God;
and taken upon us the profession and practice of Christianity. No sooner had
Abel off^red a sacrifice of sweet smelling savor unto God, ^ut Satan stirs
up Cain to become his ^utcher, Genesis 4. Whilst Moses was con^^nted to be reputed
the Son of Ph^^aohs ^aughter, he enjoyed all prosperity; but as (...) as he
joined himself to Gods people and Church, Pharaoh seeks his life: whilst Paul
persecuted the Church of God, Satan did not so much trouble him, either
outwardly in body, or inwardly in mind, but no sooner was he truly converted to
the Faith, and preached the Gospel, but presently he sets his wicked Imps at
work to take a way his life which the Lord not permitting, he moves them to
persecute him by imprisoning him, whipping and stoning him, and not content
with these outward afflictions, he sends his messengers to buffet him, that
he might be no less vexed inwardly in mind, then outwardly in body, 2 Cor. 12.

Yea he spared not our Savior Christ himself, but as soon as he began to show
himself to be the Son of God and Redeemer of mankind in performing the duties
of his calling, then especially he bends all his force against him, he
tempts and assaulteth him forty days together, and taking the foil himself,
he stirs up his wicked instruments to persecute him, and at length to take
away his life, Matthew. 4.

Whosoever therefore resolves to be God^ servant, must make account to be his
Soldier also, and whilst with Nehemiahs followers, with one hand they perform
the work of their callings and Christianity, the (...) the other (...) ^^ld
their weapons (...) their spiritual enemies, who con^^^u^lly ^a^our to hinder
the Lords buil^^^^^ for no sooner do we become friends to (...) presently Satan
assaulteth us as his enemies, no sooner do we receive the Lords press money* and
set ^oo^ into his Camp, but Satan advances against us his Flaggs of ^e^iance,
laboring both by secret treachery, and outward force, to supplant and overcome
us.

Here therefore is instruction for secure worldlings, and consolation and
encouragement* for Gods Children; worldly men instead of fighting the Lords
battles, spend their time in Chambering and wantonness, in Lust*s and
uncleanness, in covetousness, in idle^ess, as though there were no enemy to
(...) them, and as if Satan were some (...) Lamb, and not a roaring Lion ready
to devour them.

But now some may ask why God suffers his Servants to be tempted? why, I
(...): First, it is for his own glory. And secondly, for the manifesting of his
spiritual ^^ates in them; and as the Lord suffers Satan and his Imps to try
his Children for ^is own glory, so also it is for their spiritual (...)
everlasting good.

For first, Hereby he chastises them for their sins past, and recalleth them
to their remembrance, that so they may truly repe^ of them; and this Job speaks
of, in Job 1^. verse 26. Thou writest (says he) bitter things against me, and
make me to poss^ss the iniquities of my youth.

Secondly, He manifests unto us ou^ secret and hidden sins, which the blind
eye^ of our judgment would not discern, if the^^ sight were not quickened with
this sharp water of temptation, for so long as we live ^n peace, our secure
consciences never ^^mmon us to the bar of Gods Judgment: b^^ when we are
roused up by temptation, we come to a more strict examination of our selves:
and search what secret sins lies lu^king in the hidden corners of our heart^,
that so we may repent of them, and make our peace with God, without whose
ass^stance we can have no hope to stand in t^^ hour of temptation.

Thirdly, The Lord hereby prevent^^ our sins to come, for when we have
expe^^ence, that the most sharp weapons whi^^ Satan uses to inflict deep
wounds in (...) consciences, this will make us most ca^^*fully to abstain from
them, lest thereby ^^ strengthen him for our own overthrow.

Fourthly, The Lord suffers Satan assault us, that we may hereby come to a
sight of our own weakness and infirmities, when we have received many foils,
and learn to rely upon his help and assistance in all our dangers: for so
proud we are by nature, that before we come to fight, we think we can repel the
strongest assaults, and overcome all enemies which oppose themselves against us
by their own power, but when we see our selves vanquished by every small
temptation, we learn to have a more humble conceit of our own ability and
depend wholly upon the Lord, ^s you may see in Deuteronomy. 8.2. and 13.3.

Fifthly, The Lord permits Satan continually to assault us with temptations,
to the end we may continually buckle unto us the whole armor of God, that we
may be ready for the Battle.

Lastly, By this conflict the Lord strengthens and increases all his graces
in us, for as by exercise the strength of the body is ^^eserved and augmented,
and in short time decays through idleness and sloth; so the gift^ of Gods
Spirit, Faith, Hope, Patience, and the rest, languish in us, if they be not
exercised with temptations.

For Tribulation brings forth Patience, and Patience Experience, and
Experience Hope, and hope makes not ashamed, as you ^ay read in Romans 5.3, 4, 5.

I shall now proceed to give you some arguments or reasons to encourage us to
enter into the battle to fight against the spiritual enemies of our Salvation.

1 Reas. The first reason that I shall give you may be drawn from the justness
of our cause, the war is just; therefore proceed we may with boldness, for
though Soldiers be never so strong and well furnished, yet if their
consciences tell them they fight in a bad quarrel, it will much abate their
courage* and make them cowardly and timorous: but our cause is most just, and
our war most lawful, for God who is justice it self has proclaimed it by his
Heralds the Apostles, Ephesians. 6.10. Finally my brethren, be strong in the Lord,
and in the power of his might, James 4.7. Resist the devil and he will fly
from you, 1 Pet. 5.8. Be Sober, be Vigilant, for your adversary the devil, as a
roaring Lion walks about seeking whom he may devour, ver. 9. whom resist
st^dfast in the faith.

2 Reas. The cause of our war is of great weight: as namely, for the glory of
God and our own Salvation, for in all Satan's skirmishes he seeks to impeach
Gods glory, with false imputations, and to bring us to utter destruction, and
this may appear with the first conflict of his with our Mother Eve, Genesis 3. 4,
5. where he accuses God of a lie, who is truth it self, and of impotency and
envious dis^ain, saying that the cause why he did forbid them to eat of the
tree of knowledge of good and evil, was not (as he had said) because they
should die, but because he knew that when they should eat thereof their eyes
should be opened, and they should be as Gods knowing good and evil.

1. Where he seeks to dim the beams of Gods glory, by accusing him of a lie,
and to persuade them that he was not Omnipotent, seeing that he was able to
hinder them from being Gods, if they tasted of this fruit: lastly, that he
forbid them to eat thereof, because he envied them so glorious an estate.

2. He laboreth to destroy our first Parents both body and soul, by tempting
them to disobedience and transgression of Gods commandment, and therefore our
Savior Christ does ^^tly join those two together in the 8 of John 44. saying,
That he was a li^r, and a manslayer from the beginning. A liar, in that he
falsely accused God of a lie; a Manslayer, because he did it to this end, that
he might murder our first Parents, and all their posterity both body and soul.

2 Reas. The second reason to move us to undertake this fight, is the profit
which will accrue unto us thereby: for no sooner can we enter into the field to
fight against these enemies, but presently we shall have peace with God: ^ut if
we betray our trust, that is, Gods cause, to Satan, and our souls to sin, well
may we be lulled asleep in carnal security, but we shall never enjoy this peace
with God, and peace of conscience, For there is no peace says my God unto the
wicked, Esa. 57. But if we fight against these enemies and valiantly overcome,
the Lord has promised to give us to eat of the Tree of Life, which is in
Paradise, and the manna that is hid, and that he will write our names in the
Book of Life, Rev. 2.3.

3. Reas. The third reason to move us to this fight, is the honor which will
accompany this victory: if earthly soldiers will purchase honor with the loss
of life, which is nothing else but the commendation of the Prince, or applause
of the vain people; what hazard should we undergo in fighting the spiritual
Combat, seeing our grand Captain the Lord of Hosts, and infinite multitude of
blessed Angels look upon us, and behold our Combat, whose praise and
approbation is our chief felicity; what peril should we fea^ to obtain a Crown
of glory which is promi*sed to all that overcome, and to becom^ heirs apparent
to Gods Kingdoms?

4. Reas. The fourth reason to persuade us, is the necessity of undertaking
this Combat, there is no man so towardly that will not fight when there is no
hope in flight, no mercy to be expected in the enemy, no outrage and cruelty
which will not be committed; but such is our enemy that we cannot possibly fly
from him, his malice is unreconcileable, his cruelty is outrageous, for he
fights not against us, to the end he may attain sovereignty alone, abridge us
of our liberty, spoil us of our goods, but he aims at our death destruction
both of body and soul. The Apostle James in his Epistle, 1 chapter the 12
verse, pronounces them blessed that endure temptation, for when by trial he
shall be found approved, he shall receive a crown ^f life, which the Lord has
promised to them that love him.

Lastly, We may be encouraged to this fight, by certain hope of victory, for we
fight under the Standard of Christ Jesus who alone is mightier then all our
enemies that assault us, Ephesians. 6.12. Our Savior has spoiled principalities
and powers, and has made a show of them openly, and has triumphed over them
upon the Cross.

Let us not therefore fear to fight against ^eaten and conquered enemies, for
every one shall be a conqueror, that desires the conquest; for if we will be
the Lords soldiers, he will not suffer us to be so much disgraces, as to let
us be overcome by his mortal enemies. Having given you the reasons which may
encourage us to fight this Combat, I shall now come to the spiritual warfare it
self; and shall endeavor to lay before you the malice of our great adversary
the Devil: therefore in an enemy who proclaims war against us, we are to
consider two things. First, his will; secondly his power; If he have will to
hurt us and no power, he is not to be regarded; if power, and no
irreconcilable malice, he is not so much to be feared; but if his power be
great, and his will malicious, it is time then for us to look about us, and
muster up all our forces, that we may be ready to endure the encounter.

1. First therefore, touching the will of our grand enemy the Devil, if we
consider of it aright, we shall find him to be very maliciously bent against
us, so that there is no hope of reconciliation with him, though we could be
content to make a truce or a dishonorable peace with Gods and our e^^my: Satan's
malice to mankind is endless, the cause thereof, is namely the love and favor
of God to the faithful (whose estate he ^span;^) shall be endless and eternal.
As (...) malice of Satan is inveterate, so it is ^^o deadly, not to be
satisfied by taking a^^y our goods or good name, or afflicting us ^ith
sickness, no nor by taking away our ^^^^es, for nothing will satisfy him but
de^^ruction of soul and body, we may read in scripture that he is called a
murderer, a manslayer and our Savior tells us that he has bin so from the
beginning. You read in Peter that ^^ is compared to a roaring Lion, but in
truth Satan is far more cruel then a roaring Lion, (who if we may give credit
to Histories) spares those that fall down flat before him; ^hereas if Satan
get us at such advantage, ^e would proudly trample us under foot, and make us
sure for ever rising, and therefore (...) we should look for any mercy at his
hands, the Holy Ghost calls him the great red Dragon, Rev. 12.3. which beast
bears such ^^tural malice to mankind, that he devoureth them not only for
hunger, but also for sport or hatred, in satisfying whereof he takes great
delight; such a beast is our enemy, who is so fleshly in blood and cruelty, and
so overcarried with malice and hatred, that he esteems it his chief sport and
pastime to destroy us, as we may read in Matthew. 4.2. that he ^ath the name of a
tempter given him, he is a tempter to tempt us to sin, and not only so, but he
is an accuser after that we have sinned, requiring of God that he will execute
his justice upon offenders, who have des^rved punishment: of this there nee^s
no further proof then his own t^stimony as we may read in Job 1.7.

And as he is an accuser, so he is also a slanderer, thus wrongfully did he
slander J^^, that he served God for advantage, because he preserved and blessed
all he had, affirming that if he would take away his goods* and afflict his
body, he would blaspheme him ^o his face, Job 1.10.

Neither is Satan only a slanderer, but he is also an executioner or hangman,
ready with all cruelty to inflict the punishment the which the Lord adjudgeth
unto us, as we may see in the History of Job: This shows us the extreme malice
of our enemy; he is the father and author of all malice and envy, who laboreth
night and day to dishonor God, and work our destruction. Therefore let us
oppose against Satan's malice, Christian resolution, steadfastly purposing to
continue our fight in resisti^g Satan to our lives ends, how troublesome so^ver
it seems to flesh and blood: for what more honorable death is there then to
die in fighting the Lords battles? what death more profitable, seeing by dying
we shall overcome and obtain a final victory over all our enemies, and receive
the crown of Glory, everlasting happiness promised to all those who fight
valiantly in this Combat unto the end.

I might enlarge very much in showing you the power and strength of Satan our
great enemy.

First, If you consider it in himself.

Secondly, If we consider the great aid he has in the world.

And thirdly, If we consider our own flesh how frail that is, and what a great
help and advantage it is to Satan; but I shall wave it at present, and shall
come to the description of the spiritual armor which the textencourageth every
Christian to be armed withal.

1. The Apostle St. Paul describes the quality, and as it were the metal of
our armor, in which respect he tells us we must put on the armor of God,
which is spiritual, and that our weapons we fight withal must not be carnal,
for our enemy is spiritual, we wrestle against Principalities, and Powers.
Neither is it enough that we put on one piece of the armor, and like young
soldiers leave off the rest for lightness, we must not put on the Helmet of
salvation, and leave off the Brestplate of righteousness, nor take unto us the
girdle of Truth, and Shield of Faith, and cast away from us the sword of the
Spirit, but we are to pu^ on the whole armo^r of God, like valiant soldiers,
who mean indeed to stand to it; we are to arm our selves in all points in
complete armor of proof, which will keep us from fleeing, and our enemies from
overcoming.

And that we may be the rather stirred up with all care and diligence to
provide, and buckle fast to us the armor which he after describes he shows
the necessity thereof, by describing the dangerousness of our enemies, who
being not flesh and blood, but Principalities, Powers, Princes of darkness in
this world, and spiritual wickednesses, which are in high places, cannot
possibly be resisted by our own strength, and means, and therefore for this
cause he wills us to take upon us the whole armor of God, that we may be
able to resist in the evil day, that is, the time of temptation, which is
therefore called the evil day; partly because therein Satan tempts us unto
evil, and partly because it is a time of trouble, adversity, and affliction,
when Satan sisteth us with his temptations; and thus the evil day is taken in
Psalm. 41.1. The Lord will deliver him in the evil day, that is, in the time of
trouble: and thus also it is used in Ephesians. 5.16. Redeeming the time, because
the days are evil, that is, full of troubles and afflictions, or the time of
adversity.

I shall now come to the particular parts of our Christian armor, and shall
first begin with the girdle of truth: and show you what we are to understand by
it: the word Girdle it self, signifies a broad strudded Belt, used in wars, in
ancient times, where with the joints of the Breast plate, and that armor which
defended the belly, and loins, and thighs were cover^d, and by this truth is
resembled, whereby some understand the truth of Religion, and of the Doctrine
which we profess; others understand hereby truth and uprightness of heart, or
the integrity of a good conscience, whereby we perform all duties belonging
unto God* and our neighbor, in simplicity, without all hypocrisy, or
dissimulation; but I think we may take it in both senses, seeing the Apostle
does set down u^^er these metaphorical words, the chief virtues and graces,
wherewith we are to arm our selves against our spiritual enemies.

1. First, therefore here is required truth of our Religion, we profess.

2. And secondly, that we profess it truly, and with upright and simple hearts.

1. For the first, that our Religion must be grounded on Gods truth, it is the
foundation upon which all other duties to God or man are to be built, for if
they be not grounded on Gods truth, but devised by man's brain, they are but
human traditions, which the Lord will not accept, neither is it to any purpose,
that we show our selves earnest, and forward in religion, unless it be true and
agreeable to Gods holy word.

2. It Is not sufficient that we profess the truth, but it must be done in truth
and simplicity of heart; for how glorious soever our profession of the true
religion is before men, yet it is abominable in the eyes of God, if it be not
in truth, and from an upright heart, Joshua 24.14. Fear the Lord, and serve him
in uprightness, and in truth which if we perform in our serving of God; it will
be acceptable in his sight, though performed in great weakness, and mingled
with many imperfections; let us therefore with our Savior, pray unto God that
we may be sanctified with his truth, that not only whatsoever we do, may be
grounded on Gods truth, but that we may do it in truth and uprightness of heart.

I come now to the second part of our armor, which is the breast plate of
righteousness, and the excellency thereof; by which we are to understand a good
conscience, true sanctification, a godly life, which also we are to put on
according to the example of our grand Captain Christ Jesus, Isa. 59.17. He put
on righteousness as a breast plate, and an helmet of salvation upon his head.
Then shall not Satan's darts pierce us, so long as we are armed with a good
conscience, and a godly and innocent life, so long as our hearts and breasts
are armed with righteousness, though other members fall into sin, our wounds
shall not be mortal. True it is that Saints do receive wounds and foils* when
as Satan has drawn them to commit sin, but they are not wounded at the heart,
because they do not sin with full consent of the will, for they allow not that
which they do, neither do that which they would, but what they hate: and they
delight in the law of God, in the inner man, when the flesh leads them
captive to the law of sin, Romans 7.15.

And hence it is that St. Paul says, he did not transgress the law of God, but
sin that dwells in him, Romans 7.17. And the Apostle St. John affirms, that
they who are born of God sin not, 1 John 3.9. And that they who are in Christ
sin not, and that whosoever sins is of the Devil, verse 6 and 8. Not that
Gods Children are exempted from all sin, but because they sin not with the full
consent and swinge of the^ will, and when they do fall, their hearts are
defended with the breast plate of righteousness, that is, with an holy desire,
and endeavoring to serve God. David a man after Gods own heart, may be a
notable example hereof for even after he was endued with the knowledge of the
truth, and had this godly endeavor of serving God, he not ^ithstanding fell
grievously many times, and was wounded often with Satan's darts, but his wounds
were not mortal, neither did they pierce the heart, because he was armed with
the breast*plate of righteousness.

Come we now to a third part of our Christian armor, which is this, that we
have our feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace; that is, we
must be entertained with the knowledge of the Gospel of peace: for it is
therefore called the Gospel of peace, because it brings peace to our souls;
not only as it is the embassage of God, whereby we being reconciled unto God,
have peace with him, from the assurance whereof we have peace of conscience,
but also, because if we be armed therewith, we shall obtain a final victory
over our spiritual enemies after which shall follow everlasting peace, which
shall not so much as ^e disturbed with the attempts of any enemies.

It is not sufficient that we know and believe th^^ Gospel of peace, unl^sse we
be always prepared to make confession and profession thereof, though thereby
we incur worloly shame, losses, afflictions and persecutions: and this the
Apostle signifies by telling us that our feet must be shod with the
pr^paration of the Gospel of peace, that is as those who are well shod, are
ready to go through rough and unpleasant ways, so those that are endued with
the knowledge of the Gospel must always be in readiness to make profession
thereof, in the midst of affliction and persecution: for as with the heart man
believes unto righteousness, so with the mouth he must confess unto Salvation,
Romans 10.10.

But now if we lay aside this armor, we shall be as unfit to travel in the
afflicted way which leads to Gods Kingdom, as those soldiers who are
b^re-foot, are fit to march through ways that are full of briars and thorns.

We come now to the fourth piece of Christian armor, which the Apostle
exhorts us to put on, which is the shield of faith: which part above all
other parts is most necessary: because how weak soever we be in our self, it
does defend and protect us against all temptations of Satan. For he that
puts on faith, puts on Jesus Christ also, it being a property inseparable
of faith, to apply unto us Christ Jesus, and all his benefits; that is* his
merits, and righteousness, and everlasting life it self.

Let us therefore take unto us the shield of faith, that we may also put on the
Lord Jesus Christ, as the Apostle exhorts us, Romans 13.14. For having him, we
shall want nothing which may either defend our selves, or offend our enemies:
the Lord himself will be our shield and buckler, and therefore it will be
impossible for our foes to prevail against us.

Again, let us further consider the virtue and necessity of this shield of
faith, the virtue whereof appears by its repelling the fiery darts of Satan:
the Apostle says, that thereby we may quench his fiery darts, alluding to the
custom of Soldiers in ancient time, who maliciously poisoned their darts,
whereby the bodies of those that they wounded, were so inflamed that they could
hardly be cured or eased of their raging and burning pain; and such darts are
all Satan's temptations, whereby we are wounded with sin; for if they be not
repelled and quenched with the shield of faith, they will in flame our lusts to
sin, and one sin will inflame our hearts to anoth^r, till there be kindled in
us a world of wickedness.

This we may see in the example of David, who after that he gave himself to
idleness and sloth, and so was pierced with one of Satan's fiery darts, it
presently inflamed his heart to commit adultery, and having given place to
that, he was provoked to murder.

Therefore it behooves us to take unto us the shield of faith, whereby we may
quench these fiery darts, but why does the Apostle use this unproper speech,
seeing the shield of faith does not quench, but repel the darts that beat upon
it?

I answer: partly to show the nature of our enemies temptations; namely, that
they be f^ery, mortal, raging, and pernicious, and partly to set forth a double
virtue of faith.

For first thereby we repel and beat back his temptations, and so resist him
steadfast in the ^aith, 1 Pet. 5.9.

Secondly, if Satan's darts have pierced and wounded us, faith also does cool
the scalding heat of sin, by applying unto us the precious balm of Christ's
blood; so that our wounds are not mortal unto us.

The first of these virtues is signified hereby, in that he calls faith a
shield which repelleth Satan's temptations, as the shield does the darts that
are cast against it.

The second by the word (quenching) namely, as water quenches the fire, so
faith quench^th the fiery darts of Satan's temptations.

I proceed now to the fifth part of our Christian armor, which is the helmet
of Salvation, which is so called, because it brings Salvation to them that
wear it, for we are saved by hope, as it is in Romans 8.24. which we are to
understand by the helmet of Salvation, as it appears in 1 These* 5.8. where he
exhorts us to put on the hope of Salvation for an helmet.

As no man in his right wits, would sell his certain interest unto a goodly
inheritance, for a bright shining counter: so much less will any man who is not
stark-mad, sell his assured hope of the eternal kingdom of glory, by yielding
himself the slave of sin and Satan, to purchase for the present, the worlds
counterfeit shining excellencies, which are in truth, but mutable, or at least
momentary vanities.

And though he assault us on the one side, as he did St. Paul, with afflictions
and persecutions; yet we will with him for the hope of Israel, be content to be
bound in the chains of misery and affliction, for the heaviest cross will seem
tolerable, yea an easy yoke, and a light burden to those who do expect and
hope for a far more excellent and eternal weight of glory.

Now therefore if we do not put on this helmet we shall not dare to lift up our
heads in the day of battle; for as those who are encouraged with hope of
victory, and the spoil ensuing, do fight valiantly, so those who are quite
forsaken of hope, do forsake also the field, and cast down their armor and
weapons, and do either run away, or cowardly yield unto the enemy.

And so much for the defensive armor which we must put on, that which follows
is both defensive, and offensive, fit to defend our selves and repel and foil
the enemy: the first is the sword of the Spirit, the word of God, this the
Apostle calls the sword of the Spirit; because it is a spiritual and not a
carnal weapon, which the spirit of God has as it were tempered, made,
sharpened, and put into our hands, to repel all our spiritual enemies
whenever they assault us.

Now we are taught to imitate our grand Captain the Lord Jesus Christ, who
though he were able to have confuted Satan by other arguments, or to have
confounded him by his power: yet as he suffered himself to be tempted in all
things like unto us, so he used the same weapons which he has appointed us to
use in this spiritual Combat of temptation, to the end that we might be taught
how to handle them, having his example for imitation, and also may conceive
assured hope of victory, considering that our Captain subdued Satan with the
self same weapons.

Whenever therefore we are assaulted by Satan, let us draw out the sword of
the spirit, that we may defend our selves, and give him the foil, as being the
most fit weapon for the purpose: and seeing this sword is so excellent, let us
highly esteem of it, and manfully use it whenever Satan does assault us, and
tempt us to commit sin.

As for example, when he enticeth us t^ commit sin, and extenuates it, as
though it were but a may game and a trick of youth, which God regards not:
let us draw out the sword of the spirit, saying that all they are accursed who
continue not in all that is written in that book of the Law to do it, Gal.
3.10. They who live according to the flesh cannot please God. Romans 8.8. That
the burden of sin cannot be light, seeing it pressed out of Christ himself, a
bloody sweat.

On the other side, if he aggravate the hainousness of our sins, to the end he
may draw us unto despair of Gods mercies, let us say it is written, I will not
the death of a sinner (says the Lord) but that herepent and live, Ezekiel. 18.23.
And that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15.

And that he came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance, Matthew.
9.13. Joh. 3.16. If he tempt us to the love of the world, and to the service of
this unrighteous mammon, let us answer him that it is impossible to serve two
masters of such contrary dispositions, as it is written, Matthew. 6.24.

If we love the world, the love of the father abides not in us, 1 John 2.15.
That the amity of the world, is enmity against God, James 4.4.

Again, if by renouncing the world, and endeavoring to serve the Lord in
uprightness and in truth, he seeks to draw us from our integrity, by threatening
afflictions and persecutions, we are to strengthen our selves, and resist him
with the sword of the Spirit, remembering that they are blessed which suffer
persecution for righteousness sake; for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven, Matthew.
5.10.

All that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution, 1 Timothy
3.12.

That whosoever loses any thing for Christ's sake shall receive in recompense
an hundred fold more, and have everlasting life to boot, Matthew. 19.29.

If he tempt us to the neglect of Gods word, we are to tell him that all
Christ's sheep hear his voice, and follow him, John 10.27. That whosoever is of
God, hears Gods words, John 8.47.

They who know God, hear his ministers, whereas he that is not of God, hears
them not, 1 John 4.6.

Again, if he tempt us to content our selves with the bare hearing thereof,
neglecting obedience thereunto, we are to tell him, that not the hearers of the
word, but the doers thereof shall be justified, Romans 2.13.

And they that are hearers of the Word, and not doers also, deceive themselves,
Jam. 1.22.

Not every one that says Lord, Lord (that is, makes a goodly profession of
religion) shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of
the Father who is in heaven, Matthew. 7.21.

So when he tempts us unto pride, we are to say unto him, Satan, I may not
enter into thy temptation; for it is written, God resists the proud, but
gives grace unto the humble, 1 Pet. 5.5.

Thus may we repel the violence of all Satan's temptations, and give him the
foil, if we will take unto us the sword of the Spirit, and skilfully use the
same in the fight; for it is not sufficient that we have the sword lying by us,
if we do not draw it out in the dispute to fight the spiritual Combat, but let
it rest in the Scabbard. It behooves every poor Christian to come into Gods
School continually, that there we may learn how to handle the sword of the
Spirit, that may resist Satan in all his assaults, and give him no advantage in
the fight.

Otherwise he will use it to our own overthrow, for if he durst fight with our
Savior Christ with his own weapon, the word of God, whose knowledge was
e^quisite, and without measure; how much more will he be busied in using it
against us, who have not attained unto the least part of his skill?

First, then hereby appears the carnal wretchedness of many poor souls, who
as if they had no enemy to oppose them, and assault them, have not this weapon
in their houses at all, and if they have, yet they bestow more time in profane
exercises, then in study how to use this sword of the Spirit, which is the word
of God, for their own defense, and too many trusting to their own skill as
sufficient in it self, they seldom come to the Lords School, where they may
learn to use the weapon of Gods word for their best advantage.

Secondly, hereby appears the wicked practices of the enemies of Gods truth,
who take from Gods people, the sword of the Spirit, which the Lord has given
unto all for their defense.

Neither does the Apostle exhort only Ministers to take this weapon, but all
Christians whatsoever, who are assaulted with their spiritual enemies.

The last, and chief means whereby we may both defend our selves, and offend
our enemies; is fervent and effectual prayer, which the Apostle exhorts us
to, Ephesians. 6.18.

And pray always: the necessity and profit of which exercise, is very great in
this spiritual Combat; because thereby we do obtain all our strength to fight,
and victory also over our enemies.

For first, we cannot endure the least assault of Satan by our strength, unless
we be armed with the power of Gods might, and the Lords assistance, whereby
only we can overcome, is obtained by earnest and effectual prayer, Psalm.
50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble; so will I deliver thee, and thou
shall glorify me. And our Savior prescribes us the means to free our selves
from temptation, or at least, from being overcome by it, that we crave the
Lords assistance, saying, Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from
evil, Matthew. 6.13. so he exhorts his Disciples unto prayer, lest they should
enter into temptation, Luke 22.40.46.

Secondly, we cannot obtain the spiritual armor (before described) by any
means of our own, and therefore are to be begged at his hands, by earnest and
effectual prayer, we having his gracious promise, that if we ask, we shall
receive, Matthew. 7.7. And our Savior has assured us, that whatsoever we ask the
Father in his name, he will give it us, John 16.23. And to this his promise he
adds his commandment in the verse following, Ask and ye shall receive, verse.
24.

Now that our prayers may be effectual, there are diverse conditions and
properties required in them.

1. That we pray continually, which our Savior Christ injoyneth, Luke 18.1.
Not that we must neglect all other duties, and do nothing but pray, for there
is a time to hear the word, to do the works of mercy, and of our callings: but
his meaning is, that we be always ready to pray upon all good occasi^ns,
especially in the time of temptation.

2. The second thing required, is, that we pray with all manner of prayer and
supplication, that is, when we want any thing that is good, or would be
delivered from any thing that is evil, we must have recourse to God by prayer,
that we may obtain the one, and avoid the other; but more especially when we
feel the want or weakness of our spiritual armor, we are then to beg the
graces of Gods spirit, we are to beg them at Gods hand, that so we may be able
to withstand the encounter.

The third thing required, is that we may in, or by the Spirit.

The words may be taken both ways.

First, therefore we must pray in the Spirit, which is required that we pray
with understanding.

2. We must pray with attentive minds, joining our hearts with our lips.

3. We must pray with a pure conscience, and faith unfeigned, lifting up pure
hands to God without wrath or doubting, 1 Timothy 2.8.

Thus have I described the Christian armor, which every man is to put on
before he enter into the Combat, with our spiritual enemies, if we resist Satan
he will fly from us, Jam. 4.7. but if we give ground and betake our selves to
flight, he will pursue us swiftly, and deadly wound us, for we have no armor
on the back, to defend us from the violence of his blows, neither will* the
Lord protect such faint-hearted cowards as run away from his standard, not
daring to trust and rely upon his mighty power, and never failing assistance,
which he has promised to all that fight his Battle. Seeing therefore there is
no safety in flight, but assured victory to them that faint not, but endure the
brunt of the battle, let us manfully stand upon our guard, neither flying nor
yielding to our spiritual enemies; for where can we be more safe, then under
the Lords Standard? where can we be more honorably employed, then in fighting
his Battle? how can our state be more dangerous then when we fly and Satan
pursues us? how can it be more desperate then when we yield our selves captive
to Satan, to be bound in the fetters of sin, until the sentence of condemnation
be pronounced on us, in the general Sessions at the day of Christ's appearing?
From the which sad sentence the Lord of his tender mercies, grant that every
poor soul of us may be delivered.

Thus having given you an account of our spiritual armor, and laid down the
reason to encourage you to fight this spiritual warfare: I now come to give you
some motives to stir you up to this work, that we should not set our hearts on
this world and worldly things, because we are but Pilgrims and strangers here
on earth; as appears by the acknowledgement of the Saints and Servants of
God, in times of old, of whom it is said, that they confessed they were Pilgrims
and Strangers on the earth, Heb. 11.13. the which as it is manifest by the
Scripture, so it is demonstrated by evident reason: for that is to be esteemed
a man's country, where his chief friends and kindred remains, where his living,
and substance does lie, where he is to spend the most part of his life; where
he has most contentment, and best entertainment: but the faithful have all
their kindred in heaven, saving some few who are pilgrims with them on the
earth, there is their heavenly Father, and Christ Jesus their elder brother,
there are their chief treasures, even an inheritance undefiled that fades not
away* finally there they have best entertainment, and most contentment: because
there all tears shall be wiped from their eyes, and there they shall have
mansion-houses, inheritances, crowns of glory, and fullness of joy for evermore.

Now from this consideration, that we are not in our own country, but remain
upon the earth as pilgrims and strangers, should serve as an effectual reason
to wean our hearts from the love of the world and worldly vanities, and to
place them in heaven, and only in heavenly joys, which is our country, and
place of residence: therefore if we be pilgrims on earth, we must follow their
practice, and not set our hearts on worldly things; because the time we have to
enjoy them is very short, let him that has enjoyed worldly prosperity the
longest time, look back, and he shall see that all that is past is but as a
dream, or shadow, and as the twinkling of an eye, in respect of eternity: but
all our love and longing must be placed on our heavenly inheritance, where we
are for ever to enjoy an eternal weight of glory and happiness without end.

Now if we would thus esteem of the world and worldly vanities, learn then of
the (Apostle) to use them as though we used them not, not as places to rest in,
or things wherein we take our chief repose; but as a way to travel in, and as
necessaries to further us in our journey: who would seat his heart and
affections on those delights which he sees as he passes by? who in his right
wits will so dote on these things in which he has not any interest, as that he
should neglect far better and permanent delights in his own country?

Let us then like travelers refresh our selves with the things of this life;
and so again go forward on our journey, cast away every thing that presses
down, and the sin that hangs fast on, and let us run with patience the race
that is set before us: let us learn to imitate the Eagle, which seldom
lights on the earth, but when constrained with hunger, she stoopeth to her
prey, and when she has fed, mounteth again aloft above the clouds: so let us
not suffer our hearts and affections any longer to rest upon the earth, then we
are compelled with our present necessities, but like the Eaglets of Jesus
Christ, let us resort thither where the dead carcass is, and being fed
herewith, let us amount high in divine contemplations, having our conversation
in heaven, and let us like strangers and pilgrims abstain from carnal lusts,
which fight against our souls.

Again, the world is not simply a place of pilgrimage alone, but a place of
warfare, wherein we are assaulted on all sides, and by all possible means,
hindered in our spiritual voyage, and therefore seeing our time is but short,
and so full of trouble, let us seat our affections, and our hearts on the main
business which tends to our spiritual warfare: as Jacob says, the days of his
pilgrimage were not only few but evil also, Genesis 47 9. and Job affirms, that
man who is born of a woman is but of short continuance, and full of trouble,
Job 14.1. And therefore while we are here we had need to be always in the
complete armor of a Christian^, because we fight not only against flesh and
blood, but against Principalities, Powers, and worldly Governors, the Prince
of the darkness of the world, which are in high places, let us then with the
Apostle, so run that we may obtain, 1 Cor. 9. 24, 25.

Let us, being to wrestle with such mighty enemies, like him that proves
masteries, abstain from all things which might hinder us to obtain a crown is
incorruptible, let us come into the field against our spiritual enemies, not
loaded and encumbered with the burden of worldly trash, tied fast unto us the
bounds of carnal love, which shall but betray us into the hands of those foes
which seek our overthrow, but let us run armed with Gods spiritual graces, and
assisted with the power of his might. whereby we shall be enabled to obtain the
victory, that so we may say with the Apostle, I have fought a good fight, I
have finished my course, and have kept the faith, from henceforth is laid up
for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge shall give
me at that day, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. Seeing this is promised, as he affirms, not
to him alone, but to all them who obtain the victory in this spiritual warfare,
according to that gracious promise, in Revel. 3.27. to him that overcomes will
I gran^ (...) with me in my Throne, even as I overcame, and sit with my Father
in his Throne.

I come now to a second motive, to stir us up to look after heavenly treasure,
and not immoderately to love the world, and worldly vanities, because we are
pilgrims here, and therefore must leave them in our passage, so we are Citizens
of heaven, the new Jerusalem: the Apostle says, we having through Christ an
entrance unto the father by one spirit, are now no more strangers and
foreigners, but Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God: and
speaking of Abraham the father of the faithful, he says, That he abode in the
land of promise, as in a strange country, and as one that dwelt in tents,
because he looked for a City not made with hands, having a foundation whose
builder and maker is God; neither was this peculiar to him alone, but general
to all his Children, who followed him in the says: of whom it is said, that
they have here no continuing City, but seek one to come, Heb. 11. 6, 9, 10. And
the reason is apparent, for we are Citizens, and subjects of that Kingdom,
whereof our Lord Jesus Christ is King, but he himself has plainly told us,
that his kingdom is not of this world, but that he reigns and rules in that
kingdom of eternal glory: and therefore whosoever are subjects unto him, they
cannot be free denizons of the world, but Citizens of heaven.

It is no marvel that heretofore we living in ignorance, did not esteem of
those divine excellencies, but preferred before them these worldly vanities:
because they are subject to our selves, for there is no desire of that which is
not known, and that bright sunshine day is all alike to him, who is stark-blind
unto the darkest night. But now after that the grace of God which brings
salvation unto all men, has appeared, and taught us that we should deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we should live soberly, righteously,
and godly in this present world, looking for the blessed hope and appearing of
the glory of the mighty God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ, Titus 2. 11, 12,
13.

It were more then madness, if we should suffer our selves still to be
transported with worldly concupiscence, and prefer the present satisfying of
our carnal desires before the eternal fruition of our heavenly joys: we should
not be always children wanting wit and experience in heavenly affairs, it is
time now to put away childish things.

Whilst we remained in the state of slaves, and were the devoted vassals of sin
and Satan, our base desires did well agree with our base condition, whilst we
were Citizens of the world, and children of the earth, it might suit with our
calling to desire earthly commodities, and esteem the riches, pleasures, and
preferments of the place whereof we were inhabitants at high rates, but now
that God has dignified us with most royal privileges, and made us Citizens of
heaven; and of the slaves of Satan, has made us his own children by adoption
and grace, yea heirs apparent of his glorious kingdom: O let us, remembering
this high calling, for shame forsake our base desires, not suffering our hearts
to lie grobeling on the earth, wallowing in carnal pleasures, and worldly
delights, but raising them up to the height of our hopes, let us aim at no less
then crowns and kingdoms, and those not momentary, and of this world, seeing
they are vain and of little worth, but those which are most glorious and
eternal in the world to come.

Having showed you the privileges of the Citizens of heaven, I shall now give
you a hint of those ineffable and inconceivable joys of heaven: the Apostle St.
Paul seems to intimate that he was taken up into paradise, 2 Cor. 12.41. That
we may have some glimps of the glory, we are to know that the joys of heaven,
is nothing else but that chief happiness and supreme felicity, which the holy
Saints having served God in this life, shall eternally enjoy with God himself,
and his son Christ, in the life to come: the joys of heaven are called a
torrent of pleasures, a timely fountain, a majestical temple; it is called a
Crown, a Crown of righteousness, and lest it should be like the worldly crowns
that fade away and subject to change, it is a crown incorruptible, which cannot
be taken from us, a crown of life that cannot be lost by death: yea it is
called glory it self. Thus the ravishing joys of heaven are plainly noted by
those titles and similitudes, which are in the word of God ascribed to it; and
it is further denoted by way of a mansion, a dwelling house we are to remain
in, and not only so, but an inheritance that is immortal, and undefiled, that
passes not away, an incorruptible crown, which cannot perish: a fountain of
life, which is never dry, an eternal life which has no end.

A Kingdom which cannot be shaken by any violence, and eternal glory that has
no limits nor end. And thus we see in part the excellency of those heavenly
joys: There are two parts of those joys.

1. The absence of all evil.

2. The presence of all good: we shall have a freedom from all evils that may
trouble us, and have the fruition of all those things that can delight and
comfort us.

Here we are content to enjoy the victory over all flesh and blood: this is the
blessed conquest; this is the eternal mansion of glory, for which so many of
the Saints and holy Martyrs of God have fought manfully under Christ's Banner,
and have been found more then conquerors through Christ that loved them. Let us
therefore so strive and fight, that we may obtain a glorious conquest over the
spiritual enemies of our Salvation, and so obtain the crown of Victory, which
God has promised us; even that glorious felicity, the eternal happiness of his
heavenly kingdom, the which if it be the blessed will of Jesus Christ the
righteous to grant us, who has dearly bought it for us, to whom with the
Father, and his holy Spirit be ascribed to him; by all his Church, all honor,
glory, praise, and thanksgiving, obedience, and dominion, henceforth and for
evermore.

Amen.
Books printed for Charles Tyus at the Three Bibles on the Middle of
London Bridge.
A Learned Exposition on the Ten Commandments, by Mr. Dod. in 4. Susurium cum
Deo, Or, Holy Conferences of the devout soul, by Joseph Hall late Bishop of
Norwich. Comfort and Council for dejected Souls, by I. Durant. Sips of
Sweetness, or, Consolation for weak believers, by J. Durant. The Pilgrims
Port, or, The weary man's Rest in the Grave, by George Ewbanke. The Woman's
Labors, being the worthy works of the weaker Vessel, in Poetical Verses, upon
several places of Scripture. The Wise Virgin, or, A Wonderful Narration of the
various dispensations of God toward a child of eleven years of age, by Name
Martha Hat^ield, the daughter of Mr. Anthony Hatfield of Laughton in
Yor^^shire, how through the prevalency of her distemper, she was smitten dumb,
deaf, and blind, and at several times she did utter many glorious truths
concerning Christ, Faith, and other subjects, to the wonderment of many that
came far and near to see her.
These small Books following, being but 2 d. a piece, are likewise printed for
Charles Tyus.
Gods Call to Unconverted Sinners, by T.P. Now or never, work out your
Salvation with fear and trembling. by R.B. The School of Learning, being
Prayers for Morning and Evening, with a short Catechism for the instruction of
Children. The School of Patience, or, the benefit of affliction to the people
of God. The Virtuous Wife, or, a good Woman in her proper colors, set forth
for the benefit of young men in their choice of a Wife. The Scholars Winter
Garment, or, a garment of righteousness, wherewith every one is to be clothed,
by T.R. Man's chief Guide to Salvation, by T.R. The Sinners Warning Piece, or,
Heavens Messenger, by T.R. These with variety of Histories, are sold at the
three Bibles on the Middle of London- Bridge.
FINIS.

