THE SPEECH OF FRANCIS LOVELACE, Esquire, Recorder of the City of CANTERBVRY,
To His Majesty, King CHARLES THE SECOND.

Upon his Arrival to KENT, And coming to CANTERBVRY that day he landed, being
the 25th day of May, 1660. and in the twelfth year of his Reign over England,
etc.

Printed and Licensed according to Order.

LONDON: Printed by S. Griffin, for Matthew Walbancke at Grays-Inne Gate, 1660.

C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
THE SPEECH OF Francis Lovelace, Esquire Recorder of the City of CANTERBVRY, to his
Majesty King CHARLES the Second, etc.
sMAy it please your most Excellent Majesty;
Your loyal Subjects, the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commonalty of this your City of
Canterbury, by me present their hearty and sincere gratulations and Thanks to
God for your Majesty's happy Arrival to this your Kingdom of England, and in
that for your access to this City. This City of Canterbury (though much
decayed) was sometimes the Metropolitan City of this Kingdom, and had in it one
of the fairest and most resplendent Cathedral Churches, that for its beauty
and structure might have been compared to any Church in Europe: It was endowed
with great and plentiful Revenues; It was supplied with Grave, Learned,
Orthodox Divines; but all are gone and taken from her, and her Fabric ruined
and almost demolished, and the City impoverished, wasted, and defaced, and her
Gates of late torn from her Walls, and cut in pieces. This your Kingdom of
England is, and always was a Monarchy successive by inherent Birthright,
governed by Ancient known Laws that have been refined and perfected by the
wisest of men in all former Successions of Ages, and proved and approved by
continual experience to be good and profitable for this Nation; wherein Kings
and Queens, your Majesty's Royal Progenitors, and their Subjects have
flourished in peace and plenty: But in these later times, during your Majesty's
unhappy Absence, her Laws have been overgrown and choked up with weeds, and
her government usurped by bold ambitious self-seeking men, who like Beasts have
made a prey of your most Loyal Subjects, and trodden down and trampled our
Laws, Liberties, and Properties under foot, and exercised Tyranny,
Oppressions, and all manner of Cruelties, Things that our Laws never knew,
never owned: And what has been worse to us, and came nearest our hearts, have
too too long debarred us of the enjoyment of your most Sacred Majesty.

But Magna est veritas and praevalens; Truth though she may be impugned, yet
will she of her self ever prevail in the end, and flourish like a Palm Tree.
She may for a time be trodden down, but she can never be trodden out. The Laws
of England are Iura Coronae, Iura Regiae and though they have of late been
trodden down, they are not trodden out. Your Majesty's just rights has been
prevalent to restore you to your own who like the sun in the Firmament, with
those glorious Starts your now Parliament and his Excellency the Lord General
Monck, have dispersed and dissipated all those black Clouds, and will cause our
Laws again to bud out, spring up, and flourish more then ever. And now most
gracious Sovereign that it has pleased the great God of Heaven and Earth, the
King of Kings, out of his great goodness to preserve your Majesty, and out of
his infinite Wisdom and providence to restore you to the actual possession of
your most undoubted Birthright and Inheritance, and to vouchsafe to us your
Subjects this, the greatest blessing this World can afford, to enjoy your
Majesty, and to see your face here, which like the Sun arising in the East
has enlightened and enlarged our Hearts with Joy and gladness: May your Matie
enjoy all your Rights and prerogatives: May all the people of this Land render
to your Majesty all loyalty, faithfulness, love, and allegiance, and may the
Scepter and the sword never depart from your Majesty and your Royal family;
that Common peace may once more be settled and stated in all your Kingdoms and
Dominions in a calm and quiet order, like harmony in Music where all the
strings of an Instrument give several sounds and yet are all in one Tune. This
peace, this tranquillity of Order, this harmony of hearts and minds, may they
ever be and continue under your Majesty. And may your Majesty long live and
reign over us in all Felicity, Health and Tranquillity. These good wishes
together with this small present of Gold (their Mite) are all the offerings
this poor City is able to present; which bare essays of love and duty, may your
Majesty be graciously pleased to honor with acceptance, and in the largeness
of your royal breast to conceive and be assured, that this City and her
inhabitants do bear a great deal more of loyal duty, faithfulness, love, and
affection toward your Majesty in their hearts and minds then they are able to
express, or I in words to declare.

God bless and preserve King CHARLES the Second.

