DVBLIN Febr. 7. 1641. OR, The last true News FROM IRELAND.

WRITTEN In a Letter sent from Thomas Lancton, Chief Clarke unto Sir CHARLES
COOTE, chief Commander of his Majesty's Infantry in Dublin.

Consisting of these particulars, 1. How 200. Rebels attempted to Fire the
Ships in Dublin Harbor, Saturday Febr. 5. and how prevented. 2 Of two Aldermen
that escaped out of Dublin, and is supposed they are fled to the Rebels. 3 How
two Corporals and six Soldiers are Imprisoned about their Escape. 4 What it
is likely that the Rebels labor to effect, and how the English endeavor to
defeat them. 5 In what State and Posture of defense, Dublin is now in, what
strength within for us, and what force without against as, and what distance
from us.


By the Postmaster of England and Ireland, Febr. 15. 1641.

London, Printed for John Thomas, 1641.

True News from Ireland.
THe Rebels stomacking the loss of so fair a booty as that by Gods assistance
we laid hold on in the Castle of Eniskenning cast about to meet with us some
other way, and seeing that here in or about Dublin, or as far as either our
works or our fortifications stretch, we are not only God be thanked so well
provided, but so wary that little good is to be done upon us by Land, they
attempted to mischief us by Sea, and on Monday last, the last of this month,
between two and three of the clock in the morning. J suppose, hoping to have
found us, as fast asleep as we had them, two hundred of them, in a kind of
homely clouterly Shallop, made and contrived in have, as should seem only for
this design, came up with the Tide that then served in among our Ships, even to
the midst of them in the Harbor vndescryed, being well acquainted with their
Country Fogs, and how to make advantage by them, there were amongst others
three Ships lately come from ENGLAND two laden with Meal, one with Ammunition,
but see the goodness of God still continued toward us, for which we are more
deeply bound to extol and magnify his mercy toward us, the Ship with
Ammunition lay in the rear of the other, and was passed by of them either
unseen (it being a mighty Fogge, besides the darkness of the night) or
mistaken, not thought, or understood by them to be the Ship they looked for,
thinking as well they might, that she lay as near the Key as possible could be
for Covert and safeguard.

They coming in but that Sunday night late, and could not be unloaded possibly
till morning, had the Rebels made up with this Ship called the Draggon of
Chester, and plied her, with Fireballs; yea and with Grenades, as also with
little dry Willow Faggots, all daubd over with Pitch and Rozen, which flew
like Fire-Drakes into the said Ships, had they in this manner greeted that
Ship, as they did theirs, as it was the only sweet and merciful providence of
God that they should not, they had by all likelihood done us a mighty
displeasure, the Ship having in it 16. last of Powder, beside Bullets, Muskets,
Pikes, and other Ammunition, as also Pioners tools, viz. Spades, Shovels,
Mattocks, WheeleBarrowes, and the like Instruments, whereof the City stood in
great need but especialy of the Powder, there being not only a scarcity
thereof in the City at that time, but almost a want: Whilst the enemies were
thus busy about the Ships, the Masters and Mariners were not idle, playing
not only with their Ordnance, which indeed did little harm, or rather none at
all unto the Rebels, shooting over them, but likewise with their small shot,
whereof they had such store, and bestowed it so liberal amongst them, that the
Rebels durst not board them, which questionless was their intent, but plied us
hot with their Fire-worke, whereof we wondered at their plenty, this Bickering
in the Harbor which now had continued well nigh an hour, at last was heard of
in the City, and the state thought as well they might, that all was not well
there; whereupon the Alarm was all the City thorough, being so much terrible
for that it was night, my Master Sir Charles drew down unto the Key with 500.
foot, whether once come; we plainly heard what the matter was by the cries and
clamou^s from the ships. Sir Charles Coote conceiving the danger, and how, that
without doubt the Rebels had notice of the arrival of these three Ships, and
wherewith they were laden, thought there was no dallying, but present to work,
whereupon he commanded all the Ships and Barks about the Key, immediately to
lanch their Boats, which done; he caused as many Musketeers as could possibly
with convenience, man the Boats without let either to themselves, or to those
that should row forthwith to enter, which was done, and the Boats being in
number 11. we stowed in them 140 men, and into the Harbor amongst them we
came and in very good time, for the Rebels had boorded one of the Meal Ships,
being to strong in number for the Saylors who were in all but ten, and some
fifteen Soldiers we made bold to enter the Ship upon them, and we with the
Saylors help, and they with ours, made shift, and quickly quit the Ship of
them, sending them some alive and some dead, a breakefast unto the Fishes, the
Seamen in the Harbor perceiving that we were there, left their Ships, took
both their Boats, and courages, and in amongst us; with this supply the
Rebels were soon under water, whom we supposed by their attemps and tumult in
the Harbor, to have been a far greater number then we found them, for by
all descrie and guess, they could not be above two hundred, and by all
conjecture, their coming was to fire the Ships which brought over this last
supply of Ammuniton, and other Engines as is before rehearsed, as did
manifestely appear by the nature of the preparation they brought along with
them, but God be praised we are delivered of that fear now, the Ammunition on
Monday morning betwixt 10. and 11. of the clock being all safely Landed, and
conveyed into the Castle, yet it is not all so well as it should be, the sweet
of our success is again mingled with drugs of unexpected fears, and
suspicious dangers; for four Aldermen are again missing in Dublin, who are
gone without taking leave of some that I believe had they known of their going,
would not so easily have parted with their company, their names are Peter
Welsh, Dominicke Rutter, Rabert Mahun, Patricke Ovannian, who escaped on
Saturday night, it is said in woman's apparel, under pretense of Soldiers wives
or Trulls, to carry victuals to their husbands, or Servants upon their guards
in the out Works, for the other three I know not what correspondency they might
have with the Feminine gender in any particular, but for Rutter, in woman's
apparel, he might pass for one very well without mufling, for I believe his
beard and his eyes would come out together, being near threescore, and not a
hair on his face, being called the old woman of Dublin, they are gone with
head and hoof, having left nothing behind them valuable, that was portable,
which proves that they had good help, and fair time, to make such a cleanely
conveyance, the Lords Justices have seized their houses, and two Corporalls
with six common Soldiers, are in Prison close chopped up about their escape,
and pray God, good proof be not brought that they are foully guilty of it,
which if it shall, they shall all (Sir Simon Harcourt swears) fayrely trusse
for it, seeing the Rebels now lie round about the City, in all quarters, to
the number of fifteen or sixteen Thousands, these Aldermen may give light
unto the Rebels, where the City may be most seisable, it also puts the
Commanders both of State, and War, into a grounded jealousy that they have
strong intelligence in the City, which causes Sir Simon Harcourt to put upon
his out-Worke, none but his own Soldiers which he brought out of England with
him, whom he thinks he may boldly confide in, and lies himself in the out
Works, the Rebels near the City under another of the Bars, the Bastard
Orocke, and Perigrine Oneale, are no less then Nine or Ten Thousand strong
Eastward, their is another Power Westward, at the head of Hoath, under the
command of the Bastard Muskery, but of what number is not yet known.

That J shall go near to write at the next return, when J write you the
issue of the eight Soldiers, how they will come off about the escape of the
Aldermen, we have in Dublin some six Thousand men, able expetienced, and well
appointed: yea and well provided for by the State, and their Commanders, if
ever Soldiers were, wanting neither meat, drink, nor Clothes fit for men, yea
and for honest men, but indeed they are as hard put to it for devoir and
service, in watching and Sentinels, J think as ever Soldiers were, and indeed
it is but need as now the case stands, for questionless the Rebels shoot at
the getting of this City, by their drawing into so great bodies so nigh the
City in diverse places, and cutting us off from all succors by land, and were
it not that we have our Ships continually active in the Harbor, and have built
two good Sconces lately to better secure our entrance, and safe egresse into
it, they would have gone near to have raised them for us, wherefore we find
the benefit of being aforehand.

FINIS.

