

LUCASTA.

Posthume POEMS OF Richard Lovelace Esquire

Those Honors come too late,
That on our Ashes wait.
Mart. lib. 1. Epig. 26. LONDON. Printed by William Godbid for Clement Darby.
1659.

THE DEDICATION.
To the Right Honorable John Lovelace Esquire.
SIR,
LUcasta (fair, but hapless Maid!)
Once flourisht underneath the shade
Of your Illustrious Mother; Now,
An Orphan grown, she bows to you!
To YOU, Her virtues noble Heir,
Oh may she find protection there;
Nor let her welcome be the less
^Cause a rough hand makes her Address,
One (to whom Foes the Muses are)
Born and Bred up in Rugged War;
For, Conscious how unfit I am,
I only have pronounced her Name,
To waken pity in your Breast,
And leave Her Tears to plead the Rest.
SIR, Your most obedient Servant and Kinsman Dudley Posthumus-Lovelace.

POEMS.
To LVCASTA:
Her Reserved looks.
LVcasta frown and let me die,
But smile and see I live;
The sad indifference of your Eye
Both kills, and does reprieve.
You hide our fare within its screen,
We feel our judgment ere we hear:
So in one Picture I have seen
An Angel here, the Devil there,
Lucasta laughing.
Hark how she laughs aloud,
Although the world put on its shroud;
Wept at by the fantastic Crowd,
Who cry, One drop let fall
From her, might save the Universal Ball.
She laughs again
At our ridic^lous pain;
And at our merry misery
She laughs until she cry;
Sages, forbear
That ill-contrived tear,
Although your fear,
Does barricadoe Hope from your soft Ear,
That which still makes her mirth to flow,
Is our sinister-handed woe,
Which downwards on its head does go;
And ere that it is sown, does grow,
This makes her spleen contract,
And her just pleasure feast;
For the unjustest act
Is still the pleasant'st jest.
SONG.
1.
Strive not, vain Lover, to be fine,
Thy silk's the Silkworms, and not thine;
You lessen to a Fly your Mistress Thought,
To think it may be in a Cobweb caught,
What though her thin transparent lawn
Thy heart in a strong Net has drawn?
Not all the Arms the God of Fire ere made,
Can the soft Bulwarks of naked Love invade.
2.
Be truly fine then, and your self dress
In her fair Souls immac'late glass:
Then by reflection you may have the bliss
Perhaps to see what a True fineness is;
When all your Gawderies will fit
Those only that are poor in wit;
She that a clinquant outside does adore,
Dotes on a gilded Statue, and no more.
In allusion to the French-Song* N' entendez vous pas ce language.
Cho. THen understand you not (Fair choice)
This Language without tongue or voice*
1.
How often have my Tears
Invaded your soft Ears,
And dropped their s^lent Chimes
A thousand thousand times,
Whilst Echo did your eyes,
And sweetly Sympathize;
But that the wary Lid
Their Sluices did forbid^

Cho. Then understand you not (Fair choice)
This Language without tongue or voice?
2.
My Arms did plead my wound,
Each in the other bound;
Volleys of Sighs did crowd,
And ring my griefs alowd;
Groans, like a Canon Ball,
Battered the Marble Wall,
That the kind Neighbring Grove,
Did mutiny for Love.

Cho. Then understand you not (Fair Choice)
This Language witho^t tongue or voice?
3.
The Rheth'rick of my Hand
Wooed you to understand;
Nay, in our silent walk
My very Feet would talk,
My Knees were eloquent,
And spoke the Love I meant;
But deaf unto that Air,
They bent, would fall in Prayer.

Cho. Yet understand you not (Fair Choice)
This Language without tongue or voice?
4.
No? Know then I would melt,
On every Limb I felt,
And on each naked part
Spread my expanded Heart,
That not a Vein of thee,
But should be filled with me.
Whilst on thine own Down, I
Would ^^mble, pant, and dye.

Cho. You understand not this (Fair Choice;)
This Language ^ants both tongue and voice.

Night. To Lucasta.
NIght! loathed Jailer of the locked up Sun,
And Tyrant-turnkey on committed day;
Bright Eyes lie fettered in thy Dungeon,
And Heaven it self does thy dark Wards obey*
Thou do arise our living Hell,
With thee groans, terrors, furies dwell,
Until Lucasta does awake,
And with her Beams these heavy chains off shake.
Behold, with opening her Almighty Lid
Bright eyes break rolling, and with luster spread,
And captive Day his chariot mounted is;
Night to her proper Hell is beat,
And sc^ued to her Ebon Seat;
Till the Earth with play oppressed lies,
And draws again the Curtains of her Eyes.
But Bondslave, I, know neither Day nor Night;
Whether she murdering sleep or saving wake;
Now broyl'dith' Zone of her reflected light,
Then frose my Isicles, not Sinews shake:
Smile then new Nature, your soft blast
Does melt our Ice, and Fires wast:
Whilst the scorched shivering world new born
Now feels it all the day one rising morn.
Love Enthroned.
Ode.
1.
In Troth, I do my self persuade,
That the wild Boy is grown a Man;
And all his Childishness off laid,
E're since Lucasta did his fires Fan;
H' has left his apish Jigs,
And whipping Hearts like Gigs;
For the other day I heard him swear
That Beauty should be crowned in Honors Chair.
2.
With what a true and heavenly State
He does his glorious Darts dispense,
Now cleans'd from Falsehood, Blood, and Hate,
And newly tipped with Innocence;
Love Justice is become,
And does the Cruel doom:
Reversed is the old Decree;
Behold! he sits Enthroned with Majesty.
3.
Inthroned in Lucasta's Eye
He does our Faith and Hearts Survey;
Then measures them by Sympathy,
And each to the others Breast convey;
Whilst to his Altars Now
The frozen Vestals Bow,
And strickt Diana too does go,
A hunting with his feared, exchanged Bow.
4.
The Embracing Seas, and Ambient Air,
Now in his holy fires burn;
Fish couple, Birds and Beasts in pair,
Do their own Sacrifices turn*
This is a Miracle,
That might Religion swell:
But she that these and their God awes,
Her crowned Self submits to her own Laws.
Her Muffe.
1.
'T Was not for some calm blessing to deceive,
Thou did thy polished hands in shagg'd ^urs weave,
It were no blessing thus obtained,
Thou rather would a curse have gained,
Then let thy warm driven snow be ever stain^d.
2.
Not that you feared the discolo'ring cold,
Might, alchymize their Silver into Gold;
Nor could your ten white Nuns so sin,
That you should thus penance them in
Each in her course hair smock of Discipline,
3.
Nor Her^-like, who on their crest still wore
A Lion, Panther, Leopard or a Bore:
To look their Enemies in their Hearse,
Thou would thy hand should deeper pierce,
And, in its softness rough, appear more fierce.
4.
No, no, Lucasta, destiny Decreed
That Beasts to thee a sacrifice should bleed,
And strip themselves to make you gay;
For never yet Herald did display,
A Coat, where Sables upon Ermin lay.
5.
This for Lay-Lovers, that must stand at door,
Salute the threshold, and admire no more:
But I, in my Invention tough,
Rate not this outward bliss enough,
But still contemplate must the hidden Muffe.
A Black patch on Lucasta's Face*
DUll as I was, to think that a Court Fly,
Presumed so near her Eye;
When 'twas the industrious Be
Mistook her glorious Face for Paradise,
To sum up all his Chemistry of Spice;
With a brave pride and honor led,
Near both her Suns he makes his bed;
And though a Spark struggles to rise as red:
Then Aemulates the gay
Daughter of Day,
Acts the Romantic Phoenix fate:
When now with all his Sweets laid out in state,
Lucasta scatters but one Heat,
And all the Aromatic pills do^^weat,
And Gums calcined, themselves to powder beat;
Which a fresh gale of Air
Conveys into her Hair;
Then chaft he is set on fire,
And in these holy flames does glad expire;
And that black marble Tablet there
So near her either Sphere,
Was pla^^d; nor foyl, nor Ornament,
But the sweet little Bees large Monument.
Another.
1.
AS I beheld a Winters Evening Air,
Curled in her court false locks of living hair,
Buttered with Jessamine the Sun left there.
2.
Galliard and c^inquant she appeared to give,
A Serenade or Ball to us that grieve,
And teach us Alamode more gently live.
3.
But as a Moor, who to her Cheeks prefers
White Spots t'allure her black Idolaters,
Me thought she looked all ore bepatch'd with Stars.
4.
Like the dark front of some Ethiopian Queen,
Veiled all ore with Gems of Red, Blew, Green;
Whose ^gly Night seemed masked with days Skreen.
5.
Whilst the fond people offered Sacrifice
To Saphyrs 'stead of Veins and Arteries,
And bowed unto the Diamonds, not her Eyes,
6.
Behold Lucasta's Face, how't glows like Noon!
A Sun entire is her complexion,
And formed of one whole Constellation.
7.
So gently shining, so serene, so clear,
Her look does Universal Nature cheer;
Only a cloud or two hangs here and there.
To Lucasta.
1.
I Laugh and sing, but cannot tell
Whether the folly on it ^ounds well;
But then I groan
Methinks in Tune,
Whilst Grief, Despair, and Fear, dance to the Air
Of my despised Prayer.
2.
A pretty Antic Love does this,
Then strikes a Galliard with a Kiss;
As in the end
The Chords they rend^
So you but with a touch from your fair Hand,
Turn all to Saraband.
To Lucasta.
1.
LIke to the Sent^nel Stars, I watch all Night;
For still the grand round of your Light,
And glorious Breast
Awakes in me an East,
Nor will my rolling Eyes ere know a West.
2.
Now on my Down I Am tossed as on a Wave,
And my repose is made my Grave;
Fluttering I lie,
Do beat my Self and dye,
But for a Resurrection from your eye.
3.
Ah my fair Murdresse! do thou cruelly heal,
With Various pains to make me well?
Then let me be
Thy cut Anatomy,
And in each mangled part my heart you will see,
Lucasta at the Bath.
1.
IN the Autumn of a Summers day,
When all the Winds got leave to play^
Lucasta, that fair Ship, is lanch'd,
and from its crust this Almond blanched,
2.
Blow then, unruly Northwind, blow,
'Till in their holds your Eyes you stow;
And swell your Cheeks, bequeath chill Death:
See! she has smiled thee out of Breath.
3.
Court gentle Zephyr, court and fan
Her softer breast's carnation'd Wan;
Your charming Rhethorick of Down
Flies scattered from before her frown.
4.
Say, my white Water-Lilly, say,
How is it those warm streams break away?
Cut by thy chaste cold breast which dwells
Amidst them armed in Isicles.
5.
And the hot floods more raging grown
In flames of Thee, then in their own;
In their distempers wildly glow,
And kiss thy Pillar of fixed Snow.
6.
No Sulphur, through whose each blew Vein
The thick and lazy Currents strein,
Can cure the Smarting, nor the fell
Blisters of Love wherewith they swell.
7.
These great Physicians of the Blind,
The Lame, and fatal Blains of Inde,
In every drop themselves now see
Speckled with a new Leprosy.
8.
As Sick drinks are with old Wine dashed,
Foul Waters too with Spirits washed;
Thou greiv'd, perchance, one tea^ let'st fall,
Which straight did purify them all.
9.
And now is cleans'd enough the flood,
Which since runs clear, as does thy blood;
Of the wet Pearls uncrown thy hair,
And mantle thee with Ermin Air.
10.
Lucasta, hail! fair Conqueresse
Of Fire, Air, Earth, and Seas;
Thou whom all kneel to, yet even thou Will unto Love, thy captive, bow.
The Ant.
1.
FOrbear thou great good Husband, little Ant
A little respi^e from thy flood of sweat;
Thou, thine own Horse and Cart under this Pla^
Thy spacious tent, fan thy prodigious heat;
Down with thy double load of that one grain;
It is a Granarie for all thy Train.
2.
Cease large example of wise thrift a while,
(For thy example is become our Law)
And teach thy frowns a seasonable smile:
So Cato sometimes the naked Florals saw.
And thou almighty foe, lay by thy sting,
Whilst thy unpay'd Musicians, Crickets, sing.
3.
Lucasta, She that holy makes the Day,
And 'stills new Life in fields of F^eillemort:
Has back restored their Verdure with one Ray,
And with her Eye bid all to play and sport,
Ant to work still; Age will Thee Truant call;
And to save now, the art worse than prodigal.
4.
Austere and Cynick! not one hour t'allow,
To lose with pleasure what thou go^st with pain:
But drive on sacred Festivals, thy Plow;
Tearing highways with thy ore charged Wain.
Not all thy life time one poor Minute live,
And thy over labored Bulk with mirth relieve?
5.
Look up then miserable Ant, and spy
Thy fatal foes, for breaking of her Law:
Hovering above thee, Madam, Margaret Pie,
And her fierce Servant, Meagre, Sir John Daw:
Thy Self and Storehouse now they do store up,
And thy whole Harvest too within their Crop.
6.
Thus we untrifty thrive within Earths Tomb,
For some more ravenous and ambitious Jaw:
The Grain in the Ants, the Ants in the Pies womb,
The Pie in the Hawks, the Hawks in the Eagles maw:
So scattering to hord against a long Day,
Thinking to save all, we cast all away.
The Snayl.
WIse Emblem of our Politic World,
Sage Snayl, within thine own self curled;
Instruct me softly to make have,
Whilst these my Feet go slowly fast.
Compendious Snayl! thou seem to me^
Large Euclids strickt Epitome;
And in each Diagram, do Fling
Thee from the point unto the Ring,
A Figure now Triangulare,
An Oval now, and now a Square;
And then a Serpentine do crawl
Now a straight Line, now crook'd, now all.
Preventing Rival of the Day,
The art up and openest thy Ray,
And ere the Morn cradles the Moon,
Thou Art broke into a Beauteous Noon.
Then when the Sun sups in the Deep,
Thy Silver Horns e're Cin^hia's peep;
And thou from thine own liquid Bed
New Phoebus heav'st thy pleasant Head.
Who shall a Name for thee create,
Deep Riddle of Mysterious State:
Bold Nature that gives common Birth
To all products of Seas and Earth,
Of thee, as Earthquakes, is afraid,
Nor will thy dire Deliv'ry aid,
Thou thine own daughter then, and Sire,
That Son and Mother art entire,
That big still with thy self do go,
And liv'st an aged Embrio;
That like the Cubbs of India,
Thou from thy self a while do play*
But frighted with a Dog or Gun,
In thine own Belly thou do run,
And as thy House was thine own womb,
So thine own womb, concludes thy tomb.
But now I must (analys'd King)
Thy Oeconomick Virtues sing;
Thou great stayed Husband still within,
Thou, thee, that is thine do Discipline;
And when thou art to progress bent,
Thou mov'st thy self and ^enement,
As Warlike Scythians travayl'd, you
Remove your Men and City too;
Then after a sad Dearth and Rain,
Thou scatterest thy Silver Train;
And when the Trees grow naked and old,
Thou cloathest them with Cloth of Gold,
Which from thy Bowels thou do spin,
And draw from the rich Mines within.
Now have thou changed thee Saint; and made
Thy self a Fane that is cupula'd;
And in thy wreathed Clois^er thou
Walk thine own Gray friar too;
Strickt, and locked up, thou art Hood all ore
And never Eliminat'st thy Door.
On Sallads thou do feed severe,
And stead of Beads thou drop'st a tear,
And when to rest, each c^lls the Bell,
Thou sleep'st within thy Matble Cell;
Where in dark contemplation placed,
The sweets of Nature thou do taste;
Who now with Time thy days resolve,
And in a ^^lly thee dissolve.
Like a sho^ (...), which does repair
Upward, and (...) Air,
(...)
THe Cent^^ (...)
Those (...) too ^
Nor of the (...)
Nor the (...)
Behod, this (...)
Of Horses, Coa^^ (...)
That moverh (...)
And does (...)
Then when the S^^ the South does (...)
He bai^s him (...);
I heard a grave and ^^tere Clar^,
Resolved him Pilot both and Barque^
That like the famed Ship of Trever^,
Did on the Shore himself Lavere:
Yet the Authentic do believe,
Who keep their Judgment in their Sleeve*
That he is his own Double man,
And sick, still carries his Se^an:
Or that like Dames in the Land of Luyck,
He wears his ev^^^asting Huyck:
But banished, I admire his fate
Since neither Ostracisme of State,
Nor a perpet^al exile,
Can force this Virtue, change his Soil;
For wheresoever he does go,
He wanders with his Country too.
Courante Monsieur.
THat frown, Aminta now has drowned
Thy bright fronts power, and crowned
Me that was bound.
No, no, deceived Cruel no,
Loves fiery darts
Till tipped with kisses, never kindle Hearts.
Adieu weak beauteous Tyrant, see!
Thy angry flames meant me,
Re^ort on thee:
For know, it is decreed, proud fair,
I never must dye
By any scorching, but a melting Eye.
A loose Saraband.
1.
NAy, prithee Dear, draw nigher,
yet closer, nigher yet;
Here is a double Fire,
A dry one and a wet*
True lasting Heavenly Fuel
Puts out the Vestal jewel,
When once we twining marry
Mad Love with wild Canary*
2.
Off with that crowned Venice
'Till all the House does flame,
We Will quench it straight in Rhe^^sh,
Or what we must not name:
Milk ^ightning still asswageth,
So when our ^ury rages,
As the only means to cross it,
We Will drown it in Love's posset.
3.
Love never was Well-willer,
Unto my Nag or me,
Never watter'd us in the Cellar,
But the cheap Buttery:
At the head of his own Barrells,
Where broached are all his Quarrels,
should a true noble Master
^till make his Guest his Taster.
4.
See all the World how't staggers,
More ugly drunk then we,
As if far gone in daggers,
And blood it seemed to be:
We drink our glass of Roses,
Which naught but sweets discloses,
Then in our Loyal Chamber,
Refresh us with Loves Amber.
5.
Now tell me, thou fair Cripple,
That dumb can scarcely see
The almightinesse of Tipple,
And ^h' ods 'twixt thee and thee:
What of Elizium's missing?
Still Drinking and still Kissing;
Adoring plump October;
Lord! what is Man and Sober?
6.
Now, is there such a Tri^le
As Honor, the fools Giant,
What is there left to rifle,
When Wine makes all parts plyant.
Let others Glory follow,
In their false riches wallow,
And with their grief be merry;
Leave me but Love and Sherry.
The Falcon.
FAir Princess of the spacious Air,
That have vouchsafed acquaintance here,
With (...) below sta^^^,
That can r^^ch Heaven with naught but Prayers;
Who when our activ'st wings we try,
Advance a foot into the Sky.
Bright Heir to the Bird Imperial,
From whose avenging penons fall
Thunder and Lightning twisted Spun;
Brave Cousin-german to the Sun,
That did forsake thy Throne and Sphere,
To be an humble Pris'ne^ here;
And for a pirch of her soft hand,
Resign the Royal Woods command.
How often woul'st thoushoot Heavens Ark,
Then mount thy self into a Lark;
And after our short faint eyes call,
When now a Fly, now naught at all;
Then stoop so swift unto our Sense,
As thouwert sent Intelligence.
Free beauteous Slave, thy happy (...)
In silver Fetters vervails meet,
And trample on that noble Wrist
The Gods have kneeled in vain to have kissed:
But gaze not, bold deceived Spy,
Too much oth' luster of her Eye;
The Sun, thou do out-stare, alas!
VVinks at the glory of her Face.
Be safe then in thy Velvet helm,
Her looks are calms that do orewhelm,
Then the Arabian bird more blessed,
Chafe in the spicery of her breast,
And loose you in her Breath, a wind
Sow'rs the delicious gales of Inde.
But now a quill from thine own Wing
I pluck, thy lofty fate to sing;
Whilst we behold the varions fight,
With mingled pleasure and affright,
The humbler Hinds do fall to prayer,
As when an Army's seen in the Air
And the prophetic Spannels run,
And howl thy Epicedium.
The Heron mounted does appear
On his own Peg'sus a Lanceer,
And seems on earth, when he does hu^,
A proper Halberdier on foot;
Secure in the Moore, about to sup,
The Dogs have beat his Quarters up.
And now he takes ^he open air,
Draws up his Wings with Tactick care;
Whilst the expert Falcon swist does climb,
In subtle Mazes serpentine;
And to advantage closely twined
She gets the upper Sky and Wind,
Where she dissembles to invade,
And lies a pol'tick Ambuscade.
The hedg'd-in Heron, whom the Foe
Awaits above, and Dogs below,
In his fortification lies,
And makes him ready for surprise;
When roused with a shrill alarm,
Was shouted from beneath, they arm.
The Falcon charges at first view
With her brigade of Talons; through
Whose Shoots, the wary Heron beat,
With a well counterwheel'd retreat.
But the bold General never lost,
Has won again her airy Post;
Who wild in this affront, now fryes,
Then gives a Volley of her Eyes.
The desperate Heron now contracts*
In one design all former facts*
Noble he is resolved to fall
His, and his Enemies funeral,
And (to be ^id of her) to die
A public Martyr of the Sky.
When now he turns his last to wreak
The palizadoes of his Beak;
The raging foe impatient
Wracked with revenge, and fury rent,
Swift as the Thunderbolt he strikes,
Too sure upon the stand of Pikes,
There she his naked breast does hit
And on the case of Rapiers's split.
But even in her expiring pangs
The Heron's pounc'd within her Phangs,
And so above she stoops to rise
A Trophee and a Sacrifice;
Whilst her own Bells in the sad fall
Ring out the double Funeral.
Ah Victory! unhap'ly won,
Weeping and Red is set the Sun,
Whilst the whole Field floats in one tear,
And all the Ai^ does mourning wear:
Close hooded all thy kindred come
To pay their Vows upon thy Tomb;
The Hobby and the Musket too,
Do march to take their last adieu.
The Lanner and the Lanneret,
Thy Colors bear as Banneret;
The Goshawk and her Terc^l roused,
With Tears attend thee as new bows'd,
All these are in their dark array
Led by the various Herald-Iay.
But thy eternal name shall live
Whilst Quills from Ashes fame reprieve,
Whilst open stands Renown's wide door,
And VVings are left on which to soar;
Doctor Robbin, the (...) Pie,
And the (...) Swan shall dye,
Only to (...) Elegy.
Love made in the first Age: To Chloris.
1.
IN the Nativity of time,
Chloris! it was not thought a Crime
In direct Hebrew for to woe.
Now we make Love, as all on fire,
Ring Retrograde our loud Desire,
And Court in English Backward too.
2.
Thrice happy was that golden Age,
When Complement was construed Rage,
And fine words in the Center hid;
When cursed No stained no M^id^ ^lisse,
And all discourse was summed in Yes,
And Naught forbad, but to forbid*
1.
Love then unsti^ted, Love did (...),
And Cherties plucked fresh from the Lip,
On Cheeks and Roses free he ^ed;
Lasses like Autumn Pl^m^ did drop,
And Lads, indifferently did crop
A Flower, and ^ Maidenhead.
4.
Then unconfined each did Tipple
Wine from the Bunch, Milk from the Nipple,
Paps tractable as Udders were*
Then equally the wholesome Jellies,
Were squeezed from Olive Trees, and Bellies,
Nor Suits of Trespass did they fear.
5.
A fragrant Bank of Straw-berries,
Diaper'd with Violets Eyes,
Was Table, Table-cloth, and Fare;
No Palace to the Clouds did swell,
Each humble Princess then did dwell
In the Piazza of her Hair.
6.
Both broken Faith, and the cause of it,
All damning Gold was damm'd to the Pit;
Their Troth sealed with a Clap and Kiss,
Lasted until that extreem day,
In which they smiled their Souls away,
And in each other breathed new bliss.
7.
Because no fault, there was no tear;
No groan did grate the granting Ear;
No false foul breath their Del'cat smell:
No Serpent kiss poisoned the Taste,
Each touch was naturally Chaste,
And their mere Sense a Miracle.
8.
Naked as their own innocence,
And unimbroyder'd from Offense
They went, above, poor Riches, gay;
On softer than the Cigners Down,
In beds they tumbled off their own;
For each within the other lay.
9.
Thus did they live: Thus did they love,
Repeating only joys Above;
And Angels were, but with Clothes on,
Which they would put off cheerfully,
To bathe them in the Galaxie,
Then gird them with the Heavenly Zone.
10.
Now, CHLORIS! miserably crave,
The offered bliss you would not have;
Which evermore I must deny,
Whilst ravished with these Noble Dreams,
And crowned with ^i^e own soft Beams,
Enjoying of my sel^ I lie.
To a Lady withchild that asked an Old Shirt.
ANd why an honored ragged Shirt, that shows,
Like tattered Ensigns, all its Bodies blows?
Should it be swathed in a vest so dire,
It were enough to set the Child on fire;
Dishevelled Queen should strip them of their hair,
And in it mantle the new rising Heir:
Nor do I know ought worth to wrap it in,
Except my parchment upper-coat of Skin:
And then expect no end of its chaste Tears,
That first was rolled in Down now Furs of Bears*
But ^ince to Ladies't has a Custom been
Linen to send, that travail and lie in*
To the nine Sempstresses, my former ir^ends,
I su'd; but they had naught but shreds and ends.
At last, the jolli'st of the three times three,
Rent the apron from her smock, and gave it me
'T was soft and gentle, sub^'ly spun: no doubt*
Pardon my boldness, Madam; Here Is the clout.
SONG.
1.
IN mine one Monument I lie,
And in my Self am buried;
Sure the quick Lightning of her Eye
Melted my Soul in the Scabberd, dead;
And now like some pale ghost I walk,
and with another Spirit talk.
2.
Nor can her beams a heat convey
That may my frozen bosom warm,
Unless her Smiles have power, as they
That a cross charm can countercharm;
But this is such a pleasing pain,
I Am loath to be alive again.
Another.
I Did believe I was in Heaven
When first the Heaven her self was given,
That in my heart her beams did pass
As some the Sun keep in a glass,
So that her Beauties through me
Did hurt my Rival-Enemy.
But fare alas! decreed it so,
That I was Engine to my woe;
For as a cornered Crystal Spot
My heart Diaphanous was not,
But solid Stuff, where her Eye flings
Quick fire upon the catching strings:
Yet as at Triumphs in the Night,
You see the Princes Arms in Light;
So when I once was set on flame,
I burnt all ore the Letters of her Name.
ODE.
1.
YOu are deceived; I sooner may dull fair*
Seat a dark Mo^r in Cassiopea^^ chair,
Or on the Glowworms useless Light
Bestow the watching flames of Night,
Or give the Ro^es breath
To executed Death,
Ere the bright hiew
Of Verse to you*
It is just Heaven on Beauty s^amps a fame,
And we alas! its Triumphs but proclaim*
2.
What chains but are too light for me, should I
Say that Lucasta, in strange Arms could lie;
Or, that Castara were impure,
Or Saccaris's faith unsure:
That Chloris Love as hai^,
Embraced each Enemies air:
That all their good
Ran in their blood;
It Is the same wrong th'unworthy to in^hrone,
As from her proper spheret' have virtue thrown.
3.
That strange force on the ignoble has renown,
As Aurum Fulminans, it blows Vice down;
'Twere better (heavy one) to crawl
Forgot, then raised trodon, fall:
All your defections now
Are not writ on your brow.
Odes to faults give
A shame, must live.
When a fat mist we view, we coughing run;
But that once Meteor drawn, all cry, undone.
4.
How bright the fair Paulina did appear,
When hid in Jewels she did seem a Star:
But who could soberly behold
A wicked Owl in Cloth of Gold?
Or the ridiculous Ape,
In sacred Vest^s Shape?
So does agree
Just Praise with thee;
For since thy birth gave thee no beauty, know
No Poets pencil must or can do so.
The Duel.
1.
LOve drunk the other day, knocked at my breast,
But I, alas! was not within:
My man, my Ea^, ^old me (...) attest,
That without (...) had b^xed him,
And battered the Windows of mine eyes,
And took my heart for one of's Nunneries.
2.
I wondered at the ou^^g^ f^se returned,
And stormed at the base affront;
And by a friend of mine bold faith, that burned,
I called him to a strict Account.
He said, that by the Law the chal^eng'd might
Take the advantage both of Arms, and Fight.
3.
Two darts of equal length and points he sent,
And nobly gave the choice to me;
Which I not weighed, young and indifferent;
Now full of naught but Victory.
So we both met in one of's Mothers Groves,
The time, at the first murmuring of her Doves.
4.
I stripped my self naked all over, as he,
For so I was best armed, when bare;
His (...) pass did my Liver raze, yet I
Made home a falsify too near;
For when my Arm to it is true distance came
I nothing touched but a fantastic flame.
5.
This, this is Love we ^aily quarrel so,
An idle Don-Quichoterie:
We whip our selves with our own twisted woe,
And wound the Air for a Fly.
The only way t'undo this Enemy,
Is to laugh at the Boy, and he will cry.
CUPID far gone.
1.
WHat so beyond all madness is the Else,
Now he has got out of himself*
His fatal Enemy the Be,
Nor his deceived Artillery;
His Shackles, not the Roses bough
Never half so netled him as he is ^ow.
2.
See! at's own Mother he is offering,
His Finger now fits any Ring;
Old Cybele he would enjoy,
And now the Girl, and now the Boy,
He pro^^ers Jove a back Caresse,
And all his Love in the Antipodes.
3.
Jealous of his chaste Psyche, raging he,
Quarrels the Student Mercury;
And with a proud submissive Breath
Offers to change his Darts with Death.
He strikes at the bright Eye of Day,
And Juno tumbles in her milky way.
4.
The dear Sweet Secrets of the Gods he tells,
And with loathed hate loved heaven he swells;
Now like a fury he belies
Myriads of pure Virginities;
And swears, with this false frenzy hurld,
There Is not a virtuous She in all the World.
5.
Olympus he renownces, then descends,
And makes a friendship with the Fiends*
Bids Charon be no more a ^lave,
He Argos rigged with Stars shall have;
And triple Cerberus from below
Must leash'd to himself with him a hunting go.
A Mock-Song.
NOw Whitehalls in the grave,
And our Head is our slave,
The bright pearl in his close shell of Oyster;
Now the Miter is lost,
The proud Praelates, too, crossed,
And all Rome's confined to a Cloister:
He that Tarquin was styled,
Our white Land's exiled,
Yea unde^il'd,
Not a Court Ape's le^t to confute us:
Then let your Voices rise high,
As your Colors did fly,
And flour'shing cry,
Long live the brave Oliver-Brutus.
2.
Now the Sun is unarmed,
And the Moon by us charmed,
All the Stars dissolved to a Jelly;
Now the Thighs of the Crown,
And the Arms are lopped down,
And the Body is all but a Belly:
Let the Commons go on,
The Town is our own,
We Will rule a^one*
For the Knights have yielded their Spent-gorge;
And an order is taken,
With HONEY SOIT profane,
Shout forth amain,
For our Dragon has vanquished the St. George.
A Fly caught in a Cobweb.
SMall type of great ones, that do hum,
Within this whole World's narrow Room,
That with a busy hollow Noise
Catch at the people's vainer Voice,
And with spread Sails play with their breath,
Whose very Hails new christen Death.
Poor Fly caught in an airy net,
Thy Wings have fettered now thy feet;
Where like a Lion in a Toil;
Howere, thou keep'st a noble Coyl,
And beat'st thy generous breast, that ore
The plains thy fatal buzzes rore,
Till thy all-belly'd foe (round El^)
Has quartered thee within himself.
Was it not better once to play
IN the light of a Majestic Ray,
Where thou^h too near and bold, the fire
Might sindge thy upper down attire,
And thou in the storm to loose an Eye,
A Wing, or a self-trapping Thigh;
Yet had^^ thou fallen like him, whose Coil
Made Fishes in the Sea to broyl;
When now the ast escaped the noble Flame,
Trapp'd basely in a slimy frame;
And free of Air, thou art become
Slave to the spawn of Mud and Lome.
Nor is it enough thy self do dress
To thy swollen Lord a numerous mess,
And by degrees thy thin Veins bleed,
And piecemeal do his poison feed;
But now devou^'d, art like to be
A Net spun for thy Family,
And straight expanded in the Air
Hang'st for thy issue too a snare.
Strange witty Death, and cruel ill,
That killing thee, thou thine do kill!
Like Pies in whose intombed ark,
All Fowl crowd downward to a Lark;
Thou art thine Enemies Sepulcher,
And in thee buriest too thine heir.
Yet Fates a glory have reserved
For one so highly has deserved;
As the Rhinoceros does die
Under his Castle-Enemy,
As through the Cranes trunk Throat does speed,
The Aspe does on his feeder feed;
Fall yet triumphant in thy woe,
Bound with the entrails of thy foe.
A Fly about a Glass of Burnt Claret.
1.
FOrbear this liquid Fire, Fly,
It is more fatal then the dry,
That singly, but embracing, wounds,
And this at once, both burns and drowns.
2.
The Salamander that in heat
And flames does cool his monstrous sweat;
Whose fan a glowing cake, is said,
Of this red furnace is afraid.
3.
Viewing the Ruby-christal shine,
Thou take it for Heaven-Christalline;
Anon thou will be taught to groan,
It Is an ascended Acheron.
4.
A Snowball-heart in it let fall,
And take it out a Fire-ball:
An Icy breast in it betrayed,
Breaks a destructive wild Granade.
5.
It Is, this, makes Venus Altars shine,
This kindles frosty Hymen's Pine;
When the Boy grows old in his desires,
This Flambeau (...) light his fires.
^.
Though the cold Hermit ever wail,
Whose sighs do freeze, and ^ears drop hail,
Once having (...)
Another (...)
^.
The Vestal drinking (...) does burn,
Now more (...) funeral Urn;
Her fires, that (...) the Sun kept race,
Are now ex^inguish'd by her Face.
8.
The Chemist, that himself does still,
^et him but taste this Limbecks bill,
And prove this ^^blimated Bowl,
He Will swear it will calcine a Soul.
9.
Noble and brave! now thou do know,
The false prepared decks below,
Do thou the fatal liquor sup,
One drop alas! thy Barque blows up.
10.
What airy Country have to save,
Whose plagues thou wilt bury in thy grave?
^or even now thou seemst to us
^n this Gulphs brink a Curtius.
11.
And now the art fallen (magnanimous Fly)
In, where thine Ocean does fry,
Like the Sun's son who blushed the flood,
To a complexion of blood.
12.
Yet see! my glad Auricular
Redeems thee (though dissolved) a Star,
Flaggy thy Wings, and scorched thy Thighs,
Thou lie a double Sacrifice.
13.
And now my warming, cooling, breath,
Shall a new life afford in Death;
See! in the Hospital of my hand
Already cured, thou fierce do stand.
14.
Burnt In^ect! do thou reaspire
The moist-hot-glasse, and liquid fire?
I see! it is such a pleasing pain,
Thou would be scorched, and drowned again.
Female Glory.
Amongst the worlds wonders, there does yet remain
One greater than the rest, that is all those over aga^^
And her own self beside; A Lady whose soft Breast,
Is with vast Honors Soul, and Virtues Life possessed.
Fair, as Original Light, first from the Chaos shot*
When day in Virgin-beams triumphed, and Night was not*
And as that Breath infused in the New-breather Good,
When Ill unknown was dumb, and Bad not understood;
Cheerful, as that Aspect at this world's fi^ishing,
When Cherubims clapped wings, and th'Sons of Heaven did sing.
Chaste as the Arabian bird, who all the Air denies,
And even in Flames expires, when with her self she lies.
Oh! she is as kind as drops of new fallen April Showers,
That on each gentle breast, spring fresh perfuming flowers;
She Is Constant, Generous, Fixed, s^e's Calm, she is the All
We can of Virtue, Honor, Faith, or Glory Call,
And (...) (whom I thus transmit to endless fa^e)
Mistress oth' World, and me, and LAURA is her Name.
A Dialogue.
Lute and Voice. L. SIng Laura, sing, whilst silent are the Spears,
And all the eyes of Heaven are turned to Ears.

V. ^ouch thy dead Wood, and make each living tree,
Unchain its feet, take arms, and follow thee.

Chorus. L. Sing.

V. Touch. O Touch.

L. O Sing,

Both, It is the Souls, Souls, Sole offering.

V. Touch the Divinity of thy Chords, and make
Each Heart string tremble, and each Sinew shake.

L. Whilst with your Voice you Ratify the Air.
None but an host of Angels hover here.

Chorus. Sing. Touch, etc. V. Touch thy soft Lute, and in each gentle thread,
The Lion and the Panther Captive lead.

L. Sing, and in Heaven Inthrone deposed Love,
Whilst Angels dance and Fiends in order move.
Double Chorus. What sacred Charm may this then be
In Harmony,
That thus can make the Angels wild,
The Devils mild,
And teach low Hell to Heaven to swell,
And the High Heaven to stoop to Hell.

A Mock Charon.
DIALOGUE, Cha. W. W. CHaron! Thou Slave! Thou Fool! Thou Cavaleer

Cha. A Slave, a Fool, What Traitors voice I Hear?

W. Come bring thy Boat.

Chapter No Sir.

W. No sirrah why?

Cha. The Blessed will disagree, and Fiends will mutiny
At thy, at thy, numbered Treachery.

W. Villain, I have a Pass, which who disdains,
I will sequester the Elizian plains.

Cha. Woes me! Ye gentle shades! where shall I dwell?
He Is come! It is not safe to be in Hell.
Chorus. Thus man, his Honor lost, falls on these Shelves;
Furies and Fiends are still true to themselves.

Cha. You must lost Fool come in.

W. Oh let me in!
But now I fear thy Boat will sink with my oreweighty sin.
Where courteous Charon am I now?

Cha. Vile Rant!
At the Gates of thy supreme Judge Rhadamant.
Double Chorus of Divel^. Welcome to Rape, to Theft, to Perju^ie,
To all the ills thou were, we cannot hope to be;
Oh pity us condemned! Oh cease to woo,
And softly, softly breath, least you infect us too.

The Toad and Spyder.
A Duel.
UPon a Day when the Dog Star
Unto the World procl^im'd a War,
And poison barked from his black Throat,
And from his jaws Infection shot,
Under a deadly Hen-bane shade
With slime infernal Mists are made;
Met the two dreaded Enemies,
Having their Weapons in their Eyes.
First from his Den rolls forth that Load,
Of Spite and Hate the speckl'd Toad,
And from his Chaps a foam does spawn,
Such as the loathed three Heads yawn;
Defies his foe with a fell Spet,
To wade through Death to meet with it;
Then in his Self the Lymbeck turns,
And his Elixir'd poison Urns.
Arachne once the fear 'oth Maid
Celestial, thus unto her prayed:
Heaven's blew-ey'd Daughter, thine own Mother!
The Python-killing Sun's thy Brother.
Oh! thou from gods that did descend,
With a poor Virgin to contend,
Shall seed of Earth and Hell ere be
A Rival in thy Victory?
Pallus assents! for now long time
And pity, had clean rins'd her crime;
When straight she does with active fire,
Her many legged foe inspire.
Have you not (...) a Charact lie
A great Cathedral in the Sea
Under whose Babylonian Walls,
A small thin frigot-Alms house stalls;
So in his slime the Toad does float,
And the Spyder by* but seems his Boat;
And now the Naumachie Begins
Close to the Surface, her self spins:
Arachne, when her foe lets fly
A broadside of ^is Breath, too high,
That Is over-shot, the wisely stout
Advised Maid does tack about,
And now her pi^chy barque does sweat,
Chafed in her own bl^ck fury wet;
Lasie and cold before, she brings
New fires to her contracted S^ings,
And with discolored Spumes does blast
The Herbs that to their Center have.
Now to the Neighboring Henbane top
Arachne has her self wound up,
And thence, from its dilated Leaves,
By her own cor^age downwards weaves;
And does her Town of Foe Attack,
And storms the Ram^iers of his Back;
Which taken in her Colors spread,
March to the Citadel of's Head.
Now as in witty torturing Spain,
The Brain is vexed, to vex the Brain:
Where Heretics b^re Heads are armed
In a close Helm, and in it charmed
An overgrown and Meagre R^t,
That Peece-meal nibbles himself fat;
So on the Toads blew-checquer'd Scull
The Spider gluttons her self full,
And Vomiting her Stygian Seeds,
Her poison, on his poison, feeds:
Thus the envenomed Toad, now grown
Big, with more poison than his own,
Does gather all his powers, and shakes
His Stormer in's Disgorged Lakes;
And wounded now, apace crawls on
To his next Plantane Surgeon;
With whose rich Balm no sooner dressed,
But purged, is his sick swollen Breast;
And as a glorious Combatant,
That only rests a while to pant;
Then with repeated strength, and Scars;
That smarting, fire him to new Wars,
Deals Blows that thick themselves prevent,
As they would gain the time he spent.
So the disdaining angry Toad,
That, calls but a thin useless Load;
His fatal feared self comes back
With unknown Venom filled to crack,
The amassed Spider now untwin'd,
Has crept up, and her self new lined
With fresh salt foams, and Mists that blast
The Ambient Air as they past.
And now me think a Sphyn^'s wing
I pluck, and do not write but sting;
With their black blood, my pale inks blent
Gall's but a faint Ingredient.
The Pol^tick Toad does now withdraw,
Warned, higher in Campania.
There wisely does entrenched deep,
His Body, in a Body keep,
And leaves a wide and open pass
TO invite the foe up to his jaws;
Which there within a foggy blind
With fourscore firearms were lined;
The generous active Spider doubts
More Ambuscadoes, then Redoubts;
So within shot she does pickear,
Now gall's the Flank, and now the Rear;
As that the Toad in's own dispite
Must change the (...) o^ his fight,
Who like a glorious General,
With one home Charge, lets fly at All.
Chafed with a fourfold ven'mous Foam
Of Scorn, Revenge, His Foes and's Own;
He seats him in his loathed Chair,
New-made him by each Mornings Air,
With glowing Eyes, he does survey
The undaunted host, he calls his prey;
Then his dark Spume he gred'ly laps,
And shows the foe his Grave, his Chaps.
Whilst the quick wary Amazon
Of ^vantage takes occasion,
And with her troop of Legs Carreers,
In a full speed with all her Speers;
Down (as some mountain on a Mouse)
On her small Cot he flings his house,
Without the poison of the Elf,
The Toad had like to have burst himself,
For sage Arachne with good heed,
Had stopped herself upon full speed;
And's body now disordered, on
She falls to Execution.
The passive Toad now only can
Contemn, and suffer: Here began
The wronged Maids ingenious Rage,
Which his heart venom must Assuage;
One Eye she has spet out, strange Smother!
When one flame does put out Another,
And one Eye wittily spared, that he
Might but behold his misery;
She on each spot a wound does print,
And each speck has a sting within't;
Till he but one new Blister is,
And swells his own Periphrasis;
Then fainting, sick, and yellow, pale,
She baths him with her sulfurous Stale;
Thus slacked is her Stygian fire,
And she vouchsafes now to retire;
Anon the Toad begins to pant,
Bethinks him of the Almighty plant,
And lest he peece-meal should be sped,
Wisely does finish himself dead.
Whilst the gay Girl, as was her fate,
Does wanton and luxuriate,
And crowns her conquering head all ore
With fatal Leaves of Hellebore,
Not guessing at the precious Aid
Was lent her by the Heavenly Maid.
The near expiring Toad now rowls
Himself in lazy bloody Scrowls,
To the sovereign Salve of all his ills,
That only life and health distills.
But lo! a Terror above all
That ever yet did him befall!
Pallas still mindful of her foe,
(Whilst they did with each fires glow)
Had to the place the Spiders Lar,
Dispath'd before the Ev'nings Star;
He learned was in Natures Laws,
Of all her foliage knew the cause,
And amongst the rest in his choice want
Unplanted had this Plantane plant.
The all-confounded Toad does see
His life fled with his Remedy,
And in a glorious Despair
First burst himself, and next the Air;
Then with a Dismal Horred yell,
Beats down his loathsome Breath to Hell.
But what inestimable bliss
This to the ^a^ed Virgin is,
Who as before of her fiend foe,
Now full is of her Goddess too;
She from her fertile womb has spun
Her stateliest Pavillion,
Whilst all her silken Flags display,
And her triumphant Banners play;
Where Pallas she in the midst does praise,
And counterfeits her Brothers Rays,
Nor will she her dear Lar forget,
Victorious by his Benefit;
Whose Roof enchanted she does free,
From haunting Gnat, and goblin Be,
Who trapp'd in her prepared Toil,
To their destrnction keep a coil.
Then she unlocks the Toad's dire Head,
Within whose cell is treasured
That precious stone, which she does call
A noble recompense for all,
And to her Lar does it present,
Of his fair Aid a Monument.
The Triumphs OF PHILAMORE and AMORET.
To the Noblest of our Youth And Best of Friends, CHARLES COTTON Esquire.
Being at Berisford, at his house in Staffordshire. From LONDON.
A POEM.
SIR your sad absence I complain, as Earth (birth
^er long hid Spring, that gave her verdures
^ho now her cheerful Aromatic Head
^hrinks in her cold and dismal widowed bed;
Whilst the false Sun her Lover does him move
Below, and to the Antipodes make Love.
What Fate was mine, when in mine obscure Cave
(Shut up almost close Prisoner in a Grave)
Your Beams could reach me through this Va^^^ O* Night,
And Canton the dark Dungeon with Light!
Whence me (as generous Spahy's) you unbound,
Whilst I now know my self both Free and Crowned,
But as at Moecha's tomb, the Devout blind
Pilgrim (great Husband of his Sight and Mind)
Pays to no other Object this chaste prise,
Then with hot Earth anoynts out both his Eyes;
So having seen your dazzling Glories store;
It is enough, and sin for to see more?
Or, do you thus those precious Rays withdraw
To whet my dull Beams, keep my Bold in aw?
Or, are you gentle and compassionate,
You will not reach me Regulus his Fate?
Brave Prince who Eagle-ey'd of Eagle kind,
Were blindly damned to look thine own self blind!
But oh return those Fires, too Cruel Nice!
For whilst you fear me Cindars, See! I Am Ice;
A nummed speaking clod, and mine own show,
My Self congealed, a Man cut out in Snow:
Return those living Fires, Thou who that vast
Double advantage from one eyed Heaven have;
Look with one Sun, though it but Obliquely be,
And if not shine, vouchsafe to wink on me.
Percieve you not a gentle, gliding heat,
And quickening warmth that makes the Stat^a swea^;
As reverend (...) back-flung stone,
Whose rough o^^-side softens to Skin, anon
Each crusty Vein with wet red is supplied,
Whilst naught of Stone but in its heart does 'bide.
So from the rugged North, where your soft stay
Has stamped them a Meridian, and kind day;
Where now each a la Mode Inhabitant,
Himself and's Manners both do pay you rent,
And 'bout your house (your Palace) does resort
And 'spite of Fate and War creates a Court.
So from the taught North, when you shall return
To glad those Looks that ever since did mourn,
When men uncloathed of themselves you will see,
Then start new made, fit, what they ought to be;
Have! have! you that your Eyes on rare Sights feed,
For thus the golden Triumph is decreed.
The twice-born God, still gay and ever young,
With Ivy crowned, first leads the glorious Throng:
He Ariadnes starry Coronet
Designs for the brighter Beams of Amoret;
Then does he broach his Throne; and singing quaff
Unto her Health his pipe of Godhead off.
Him follow the recanting, vexing Nine,
Who, wise, now sing thy lasting Fame in Wine;
Whilst Phoebus not from The East, your Feast t'adorn,
But from the inspired Canaries rose this morn.
Now you are come, Winds in their Caverns sit,
And nothing breaths, but new enlarged Wit;
Hark! One proclaims it Piacle to be sad,
And the people called Religion to be Mad.
But now, as at a Coronation
When noise, the guard, and trumpets are oreblown,
The silent Commons mark their Princes way,
And with still Reverence both look, and pray;
So they amazed, expecting do adore,
And count the rest but Pageantry before.
Behold! an Host of Virgins, pure as the Air,
In her first face, ere Mists durst vayl her hair;
Their snowy Vests, White as their whi^ter Skin,
Or their far chaster whiter Thoughts within:
Roses they breathed and strewn, as if the fine
Heaven, did to Earth his VVreath of swets resign;
They sang aloud! Thrice, Oh Thrice happy They
That can like these in Love both yield and sway.
Next Herald Fame (a Purple Clowd her bea^s)
In an imbroider'd Coat of Eyes and Ears,
Proclaims the Triumph, and these Lovers glory;
Then in a book of Steel Records the Story.
And now a Youth of more than God-like form,
Did the inward minds of the dumb Throng Alarm;
All naked, each part betrayed unto the Eye,
Chastely, for neither Sex owed he or she.
And this was Heavenly Love; by his bright hand,
A Boy of worse than earthly stuff did stand;
His Bow broke, his Fires out, and his Wings clipped,
And the black Slave from all his false flames stripped;
Whose Eyes were new restored, but to confess
The days bright bl^^se, and his own wre^chednesse;
Who swelled with envy, bur^^ing with disda^n,
Did cry to cry, and weep them out again.
And now what (...) must I invade, what Sphere
Rifle of all her Stars t'inthrone her there?
No Phoebus by thy Boys fate we beware,
The unruly flames (...) 'firebrand, thy Carr;
Although she there once placed thou Sun should see
Thy day both Nobler governed and thee,
Drive on Boots thy (...) heavy wayn,
Then grease thy VVhee^ with Amber in the Main,
And Neptune, thou to thy false Thetis gallop,
Appollo's set within thy Bed of Scallop:
Whilst Amoret on the reconciled Winds
Mounted, and drawn by six Caelestial Minds,
She armed was with Innocence, and fire
That did not burn, for it was Chaste Desire;
Whilst a new Light does gild the standers by;
Behold! it was a Da^ shot from her Eye;
Chafing perfumes oth' East did throng and sweat,
But by her breath, they melting back were beat,
A Crown of Yet-nere-lighted stars she wot,
In her soft hand a bleeding Heart she bore,
And round her lay Millions of broken more;
Then a winged Crier thrice aloud did call,
Let Fame proclaim this one great Prise for all.
By her a Lady that might be called fair,
And justly, but that Amoret was there,
Was Prisoner led, th'unvalewed Robe she wore,
Made infinite Lay Lovers to adore,
Who vainly tempt her Resc^e (^adly bold)
Chained in sixteen thousand links of gold;
Chrysetta thus (Laden with treasures) Slave
Did strew the pass with Pearls, and her way pave.
But lo! the glorious Cause of all this high
True heavenly state, Brave Philamore draws nigh!
Who not himself, more seems himself to be,
And with a sacred Ex^asie does see;
Fixed and unmoved on's Pillars he does stay,
And Joy transforms him his own Statua;
Nor has he power to breath, or strength to greet
The gentle Offers of his Amoret,
Who now amazed at's noble Breast does knock,
And with a Kiss his generous heart unlock;
Whilst she and the whole pomp does enter there,
Whence Her not Time nor Fate shall ever tear.
But whether am I hurld! ho! Back! Awake
From thy glad Trance; to thine old Sorrow take!
Thus, after view of all the Indies store,
The Slave returns unto his Chain and Oar;
Thus Poets who all Night in blessed Heavens dwell,
Are called next morn to their true living Hell;
So I unthrifty, to my self untrue,
Rise clothed with real wants, 'cause wanting you,
And what substantial Riches I possess,
I must to these unvalued Dreams confess.
But all our Clouds shall be oreblown, when thee
In our Horizon, bright, once more we see;
When thy dear presence shall our Souls new dress,
And spring an universal cheerfulness;
When we shall be orewhelm'd in Joy, like they
That change their Night, for a vast half-years day.
Then shall the wretched Few, that do repine,
See; and recant their Blasphemies in Wine;
Then shall they grieve that thought I Have sung to free
High and aloud of thy true worth and Thee,
And their fowl Heresies and Lips submit
To the all-forgiving Breath of Amoret,
And me alone their angers Object call,
That from my height so miserably did fall;
And cry out my Invention thin and poor,
Who have said naught, since I could say no more.
Advice to my best Brother. Coll: Francis Lovelace.
FRank, will it live unhandsomely? trust not too far
Thy self to waving Seas, for what thy star
Calculated by sure event must be,
Look in the Glassy-epithire and see.
Yet settle here your rest, and take your state,
And in calm Halcyon's nest even build your Fa^e;
Prithee lie down securely, Frank, and keep
With as much no noise the inconstant Deep
As its Inhabitants; nay steadfast stand,
As if discovered were a New Foundland
Fit for Plantation here; dream, dream still,
Lulled in Dione's cradle, dream, until
Horr^^r awake your sense, and you now find
Your self a bubled pastime for the VVind;
And in loose Thetis blankets torn and tossed,
Frank to undo thy self why art at cost?
Nor be too confident, fixed on the shore,
For even that too borrows from the store
Of her rich Neighbor, since now wisest know,
(And this to Galileo's) j^dgement ow)
The palsy Earth it self is every jot
As frail, inconstant, waveing as that blot
We lay upon the Deep, That sometimes lies
Changed, you would think, with his b^^oms properties
But this eternal (...) wheel
Of giddy earth, ne'^ whi^ling leaves to reel
Till all things a^e inver^ed, till they are
Tu^n'd ^o that (...) state they were.
Who loves the golden mean, does safely want
A cobwebb'd Cot, and wrongs entailed npon't;
He ^ichly needs a Palace for to breed
Vipers and Moths, that on their feeder feed.
The toy that we (too tr^e) a Mistress call,
Whose Looking-glass and feather weighs up all;
And Clothes which L^rks (...) play with, in the Sun,
That mock him in the Night when is (...).
To (...)
That envy should^ not reach it with her eye*
Nay with a thought come (...) it, would (...) thou know
How such a Structure should be raisd? build low.
The blu^^^ing winds invisible rough stroke,
More often shakes the ^^ubborn'st, prop'rest Oak,
And in proud Turrets we behold withal,
^^is the Imperial top declines to fall,
Nor does Heavens lightning strike the humble Vales
But high aspiring Mounts batters and (...).
A breast of proof de^ies all Shocks of Fate,
Fears in the best, hopes in the worser state;
Heaven forbid that, as of old, Time ever
^lourish'd in Spring, so contrary, now never:
That mighty breath which blew foul Winter hither,
Can easily puff it to a fairer weather.
Why do despair then, Franck, Aeolus has
A Zephyrus as well as Boreas.
It Is a false Sequel, Soloecisme, against those
Precepts by fortune given us, to suppose
That cause it is now ill, 't will ere be so;
Apollo does not always bend his Bow;
But often uncrowned of his Beams divine,
With his soft harp awakes the sleeping Nine.
Instrictest things magnanimous appear,
Greater in hope, howere thy fate, then fear:
Draw all your Sails in quickly, though no storm
Threaten your ruin with a sad alarm;
For tell me how they differ, tell me pray,
A cloudy tempest, and a too fair day.
An Anniversary On the Hymeneals of my noble Kinsman Tho. Stanley Esquire.
1
THe day is curled about again
To view the splendour she was in;
When first with hallowed hands
The holy man knit the mysterious bands;
When you two your contracted Souls did move,
Like Cherubim^ above,
And did make Love;
As your un-understanding issue now
In a glad sigh, a smile, a ^ear, a Vow.
2.
Tell me, O self-reviving Sun,
In thy Perigrination!
Have thou beheld a pair
Twist their soft beams like these in their chaste air;
As from bright numberless embracing rays
Are sprung the industrious days;
So when they gaze,
And change their fertile Eyes with the new morn,
A beauteous Offspring is shot forth, not born.
3.
Be witness then, all-seeing Sun,
Old Spy, thou that thy race ha^^ run,
In full five thousand Rings;
To thee were ever pu^er Offerings
Sent on the Wings of Faith, and thou of Night
Curtain of their delight,
By these made bright,
Have you not marked their Coeles^ial play,
And no more peek'd the gayeties of day.
4.
Come then pale Virgins, Roses strew,
Mingled with Io's as you go;
The snowy Ox is killed,
The Fane with pros'lite Lads and Lasses filled,
You too may hope the same seraphick joy,
Old time cannot destroy,
Nor fullness cloy,
When like these, you shall stamp by Sympathies,
Thousands of new-born-loves with your chaste eyes.
Paris's second Judgment, Upon the three Daughters of my Dear Brother Mr. R.
Caesar.
BEhold! three Sister wonders, in whom met,
Distinct and chaste, the Splendors coun^erfeit
Of Juno, Venus, and the warlike Maid,
Each in their three Divinities (...)!
The Majesty and State of Heavens great Queen,
And when she treats the gods, her noble (...);
The sweet ^ictorious beauties, and desires
OF the Sea-born Princess, Empress too of Fires;
The sacred Arts, and glorious ^^wrels, ^orn
From the fair brow of the (...) Father-born;
All these were quarte^'d in each snowy coat,
With cantoned honors of their own (...)*
Paris by Fate new-wak'd (...) his dead Cell,
Is charged to give his doom impossible.
He views in each the brav'ry of all I Would;
Whilst one, as once three, does his Soul divide,
Then sighs! so equally they are glorious all,
What pity the whole World is but one Ball.
Peinture.
A Panegyric to the best Picture of Friendship Mr. Pet. Lilly.
IF Pliny Lord High Treasurer of all
Natures exchequer shuffled in this our ball;
Pincture, her richer Rival, did admire,
And cried she wrought with more almighty fire,
That judged the unnumbered issue of her Scrowl,
Infinite and various as her Mother Soul,
That contemplation into matter brought,
Body'd Idaea's, and could form a thought:
Why do I pause to couch the Cataract,
And the gross pearls from our dull eyes abstract,
That powerful Lilly now awakened, we
This new Creation may behold by thee.
To thy victorious pencil, all that Eyes
And minds can reach, do bow; the Deities
Bold Poets first but feigned, you do, and make,
And from your awe they our Devotion take.
Your beauteous Pallet first defined Loves Queen,
And made her in her heavenly colors seen;
You strung the Bow of the Bandite her Son,
And tipp'd his Arrows with Religion.
Neptune, as ^nknown as his Fish might dwell,
But that you seat him in his throne of Shell.
The thunderers Artillery, and brand
You fancied Rome in his fantastic hand.
And the pale frights, the pains and fears of Hell,
First from your sullen Melancholy fell.
Who cleft the infernal Dog's loathed head in three,
And spun out Hydra's fifty necks? by thee
As prepossessed w' enjoy the Elizian plain,
Which but before was flattered in our brain.
Who ere yet viewed Airs child invisible,
A hollow Voice, but in thy subtle skill?
Faint stamm'ring Echo, you so draw, that we
The very repercussion do see.
Cheat Hocus-pocus-Nature an Essay
OF th'Spring affords us, Praesto and away;
You all the year do chain her, and her fruits,
Roots to their Beds, and flowers to their Roots*
Have not mine eyes feasted in the frozen Zone,
Upon a fresh new-grown Collation
Of Apples, unknown sweets, that seemed to me
Hanging to tempt as on the fatal Tree;
So delicately limn'd I vowed to try
My appetite imposed upon my Eye.
You Sir alone, Fame and all-conqu'ring Rhyme,
Files the set teeth of all devouring time.
When Beauty once thy virtuous paint has on,
Age needs not call her to Vermi^ion;
Her beams nere shed or change like the hair of day,
She scatters fresh her everlasting Ray;
Nay, from her ashes her fair Virgin fire
Ascends, that does new massacres conspire,
Whilst we wipe off the numerous s^ore of years,
And do behold our Grandsire as our peers,
With the first Father of our House, compare
We do the features of our newborn Heir;
For though each coppied a Son, they all
Meet in thy first and true Original.
Sacred Luxurious! what Princess not
But comes to you to have her self begot?
As when first man was kneaded, from his side
Is born to's hand a ready made up Bride.
He husband to his issue then does play,
And for more Wives remove the obstructed way:
So by your Art you spring up in two noons
What could not else be formed by fifteen (...);
Thy Skill does an'mate the prolifick flood,
And thy red Oil assimilates to blood.
Where then when all the world pays its respect,
Lies our transalpine barbarous Neglect?
When the chaste hands of powerful Titian,
Had drawn the Scourges of our God and Man,
And now the top of the Altar did ascend,
To crown the heavenly piece with a bright end;
Whilst he who to seven Languages gave Law,
And always like the Sun his Subjects saw;
Did in his Robes Imperial and gold,
The basis of the doubtful Ladder hold.
O Charles! A nobler monument then that,
Which thou thine own Executor were at;
When to our buffling Henry there complained
A grieved Earl, that thought his honor stained;
Away (frowned he) for your own safeties, have
In one cheap hour ten Coronets I Will cast:
But Holbeen's noble and prodigious worth,
Only the pangs of an whole Age brings forth,
Henry! a word so princely saving said,
It might new raise the ruins thou have made.
O sacred Pei^cture! that do fairly draw
What but in Mists deep inward Poets saw;
'Twixt thee and an Intelligence no ods,
That art of privy Council to the Gods,
By thee unto our eyes they do prefer
A stamp of their abstracted Character;
Thou that in frames eternity do bind,
And art a written and a body'd mind;
To thee is Open the Iuneto of the Abyss,
And its conspiracy detected is;
Whilst their Cabal thou to our sense do show,
And in thy square paint'st what they threat below.
Now my best Lilly let us walk hand in hand,
And smile at this un-understanding land;
Let them their own dull counterfeits adore,
Their Rainbow-cloaths admire, and no more;
Within one shade of thine more substance is
Than all their varnished Idol-Mistresses:
Whilst great Vasari and Vermander shall
^nterpret the deep mystery of all,
And I unto our modern Picts shall show,
What due renown to thy fair Art they owe;
In the delineated lives of those,
By whom this everlasting Laurel grows:
Then if they will not gently apprehend,
Let one great blot give to their fame an end;
Whilst no Poetic flower their Hearse does dress,
But perish they and their Effigies.
To my Dear Friend Mr. E. R. On his Poems Moral and Divine.
CLeft, as the top of the inspired Hill,
Struggles the Soul of my divided Quill,
Whilst this foot does the watery mount aspire,
That Sinai's living and enlivening fire,
Behold my powers stormed by a twisted light
OF the Sun, and his, first (...) Sight,
And my lost thoughts (...) of day,
My right to the Spring of (...) pray,
Say happy youth, (...) ray
Of the first Flame, and (...),
Inform my Soul in Labor to begin,
(...) or Authems, (...) or a (...),
Shall I a Hecatombe on thy (...)
Or my devotions at thy Al^ar pay?
While which to adore the amazed World cannot tell
The sublime (...) or deep Oracle.
Hark ho^ the moving chords ^emper our brain,
As when (...)
Old Ocean (...) front,
And Nereids do (...) on it;
Whilst The Air puts (...) face;
And each does turn (...) Looking-glass;
^o by the sinewy (...)
unto soft calms all (...)
And former thundering and lightning Lines,
And Verse, now in its native luster shines.
How were thou hid within thy self! how shut!
Thy precious Iliads locked up in a Nut!
Not hea^ing of thee thou do break out strong,
Invading forty thousand men in Song;
And we secure in our thin empty heat,
Now find ourselves at once surprised and beat,
Whilst the most valiant of our Wits now sue,
Fling down their arms, ask Quarter too of you.
So cabin'd up in its disguised course rust,
And Scurs'd all ore with its unseemly crust.
The Diamond, from 'midst the humbler stones,
Sparkling, shoots forth the price of Nations,
Ye safe unridlers of the Stars, pray tell,
By what name shall I stamp my miracle?
Thou strange inverted Aesm, that leap'st ore,
From thy first Infancy into fourscore,
That to thine own self have the Midwife played,
And from thy brain spring'st forth the heavenly maid
Thou Staff of him, bore him, that bore our sins,
Which b^t set down to bloom, and bear begins.
Thou Rod of Aaron with one motion hurled,
Bud'st a perfume of Flowers through the World.
Thou strange calcined Seeds within a glass,
Each Species Idaea spring'st as 't was;
Bright Vestal Flame, that kindled but even now,
For ever do thy sacred fires throw.
Thus the repeated Acts of Nestor's Age,
That now had three times ore outlived the Stage:
And all those beams contracted into one,
Alcides in his Cradle has out done.
But all these flour'shing hiews with which I^dy
Thy Virgin Paper, now are (...);
For 'bove the Poets Heaven the art taught to shine,
And move, as in thy proper Christalline;
Whence that Molehill Parnass^i thou do view,
And us small Ants there dabling in its dew;
Whence thy Seraphick Soul such Hymns does play,
As those to which first danced the first day,
Where with a thorn from the world-ransoming wreath
Thou stung^dost Antiphons and Anthems breath;
Where with an Angels quil dipped in the Lambs blood,
Thou sing'st our Pelicans all-saving Flood,
And bath'st thy thoughts in everliving streams
Rench'd from Earth's tainted, fat, and heavy steams.
There move tra^lated youth enrolled in the Quire,
That only does w^^h wholly lays inspire;
To whom his burning Coach Eliah sent,
And the royal Prophet-priest his Harp h^th sent,
Which thou do tune in consort, unto those
Clap Wings for ever at each hal^ow'd close*
Whilst we now weak and fainting in our praise;
Sick, Echo ore thy Halleluiahs.
To my Noble Kinsman T. S. Esquire On his Lyrick POEMS composed by Mr. J. G.
1.
WHat means this stately Tablature,
The Balance of thy streins?
Which seems, in stead of sifting pure,
TO ext^nd and rack thy veins;
Thy Odes first their own Harmony did break,
For singing troth is but in tune to speak.
2.
Nor thus thy golden Feet and Wings,
May it be thought false Melody
TO ascend to heaven by silver strings,
This is Urania's Heraldry:
Thy royal Poem now we may extol,
And truly Luna Blazoned upon Sol.
3.
As when Amphion first did call
Each listening stone from's Den;
And with the Lute did form his Wall,
But with his words the men;
So in your twisted Numbers now, you thus*
Not only stocks persuade, but ravish us.
4.
Thus do your Ayrs Echo over
The Notes and Anthems of the (...),
And their whole Consort back (...),
As if Earth too would bless (...)
But yet the Spoaks by which (...)
Gamble has wisely laid of (...).
On the Best, last, and only remaining Comedy of Mr. Fletcher.
The Wild Goose Chase.
I AM un-ore-clowded too! free from the (...)
The Blind and late Heavens-eyes great (...),
Obscured with the false ^ires of His S^eme,
Not half those Souls are lightened by this Theme.
Unhappy Murmurers, that still repine,
(After the Eclipse our Sun does brighter shine)
Recant your false grief and your true (...),
Your bliss is endless, as you feared your Woe!
What fort'nate Flood is this? what Storm of (...)*
Oh who would live and not ore-whelm'd in it?
No more a fatal Deluge shall be hurled,
This inundation has saved the world.
Once more the mighty Fletcher does arise
Ro^b'd in a vest, studded with Stars and Eyes
Of all his former Glories; His last worth
Imbroidered with what yet light ere brought forth,
See! in this glad farewell he does appear
Stuck with the Consteilations of his Sphere,
Fearing we Numm'd feared no Flagration,
Has curled all his Fires in this one On^;
Which (as they guard his hallowed chaste Urn)
The dull aproaching Heretics do burn.
Fletcher at his adieu carouses thus,
To the Luxurious Ingenious.
As Cleopatra did of old outvie,
Th'unn-umbred dishes of her Anthony,
When he (at the empty board a wonderer)
Smilings he calls for Pearl and Vinegar;
First pledges him in's Breath, then at one Draught
Swallows Three Kingdoms off To his best Thought.
Hear oh ye valiant Writers, and subscribe;
(His force set by) y' are conquered by this Bribe.
Though you hold out your selves, He does commit
In this a sacred Treason in your wit:
Although in Poems desperately stout,
Give up; This Overture must Buy you out.
Thus with some prodigal Us'rer't does fare
That keeps his gold still Vayl'd, his Steel-breast bare*
That does exceed his Coffers all but's Eye,
And his eyes Idol the winged Deity:
That cannot lock his Mines with half the Art
As some rich Beauty does his wretched Heart;
Wild at his real Poverty, and so wise
To win her, turns himself into a prise.
First startles her with the Emerald Mad-lover
The Ruby Arcas, least she should recover
Her d^z'led Thought a Diamo^d he throws,
Splendid in all the bright Aspatia's woes;
Then to sum up the Abstract of his store,
He flings a rope of Pearl of forty more.
Ah see! the stagg'ring Virtue faints! which he
Beholding, darts his Wealths Epitome;
And now, to consummate her wished fall,
Shows this one Carbuacie that Darkens all.
To Dr. F. B. On his Book of Chesse.
SIR, now untravell'd is the Golden Fleece:
Men that could only fool at Fox and Geese,
Are new made Politicians by thy Book,
And both can judge and conquer with a Look.
The hidden fate of Princes you unfold;
Court, Clergy, Commons, by your Law controlled;
Strange, Serious Wantoning, all that they
Bluster'd, and clutter'd for, you play.
To the Genius of Mr. John Hall On his exxct Translation of Hierocles his
Comment upon the golden Verses of Pythagoras.
It Is not from cheap thanks thinly to repay
The Immortal Grove of thy fair ordered bay,
Thou planted'st round my humble Fane, that I
Stick on thy Hearse this Sprig of Elegy:
Nor that your Soul so fast was linked in me,
That now I Have both since'^ has forsaken thee:
That thus I stand a Swisse before thy gate,
And dare for such another time and fate.
Alas! our Faiths made different Essays,
Our Minds and Merits brake two several ways;
Justice commands, I wake thy learned Dust
And truth, in whom all causes center must.
Behold! when but a Youth thou fierce did whi^
Upright the crooked Age, and gilt Vice s^ip;
A Senator praeteat. t, that knew'^ to sway
The fasces, yet under the Ferula;
Ranked with the Sage ere blossom did thy Chin
Sleeked without, and Hair all ore within;
Who in the School could argue as in Schools,
Thy Lessons were even Academie rules.
So that (...)
At once (...).
At (...) we beheld!
That well might have the Book of Dogma'^ swelled;
Tough Paradoxes, such as ^ully's thou
Did heat thee with, when snowy was thy Brow,
When thy undown'd face moved the Nine to shake,
And of the Muse^ did a Decad make;
What shall I say, by what Allusion bold,
None but the Sun was ere so young and old.
Young reverend shade, ascend an while! whilst we
Now celebrate this Posthume Victory,
This Victory that does contract in Death
Even all the powers and labors of thy breath;
Like the Iudean Hero, in thy fall
Thou pull'st the house of Learning on us all.
And as that Soldier Conquest doubted not,
Who but one Splinter had of Cas^riot,
But would assault even death so strongly charmd,
And naked oppose rocks with this bone armed;
So we secure in this fair Relic stand,
The Slings and Darts shot by each profane Hand,
These Sovereign leaves thou le^^d us are become
Sear clothes against all Times Infection.
Sacred Hier^cles! whose heavenly thought,
First acted ore this Comment ere it wrought;
Thou have so spirited, eli^^r'd, we
Conceive there is a noble Alchymie,
That Is turning of this Gold, to something more
Precious then Gold we never knew before*
Who now shall doubt the Me^empsychosis,
Of the great Author, that shall peruse this?
Let others Dream thy shadow wandering strays
In the Elizian Mazes, hid with bays;
Or that snatched up in the upper Region
It Is kindled there a Constellation;
I have informed me, and Declare with ease,
Thy Soul is fled into Hierocles.
On Sanazar's being honored with six hundred Ducats by the Clarissimi of
Venice, for composing an Eligiack Hexastick of The City.
A SATYR.
TO Was a blithe Prince e^^hang'd five hundred Crowns
For a fair Turnip; Dig, Dig on, O Clowns!
But how this comes about, Fates can you tell,
This more then Maid of Meurs, this miracle?
Let me not live, if I think not St. Mark
Has all the Oar, as well as Beasts in's Ark;
No wonder it is he marries the rich Sea,
But to betro^h him to naked Poesy,
And with a bankrupt Muse to merchandise,
His treasures beams sure have put out his eyes.
His Conquest at Lepanto I Will let pass,
When the sick Sea with Turbants Night-cap'd was:
And now at Candie his full Courage shown,
That wain'd to a wan line the half-half Moon;
This is a wreath, this is a Victory,
Caesar himself would have looked pale to see,
And in the height of all his Triumphs, feel
Himself but chained to such a mighty wheel.
And now me thinks we ape Augustus state,
So ugly we his high worth imitate,
Monkey his Godlike glories; so that we
Keep light and form, with such deformi^ie,
As I have seen an arrogant Baboo^
With a small piece of Glass Z^ny the Sun.
Rome to her Bard, who did her battails (...),
Indifferent gave to Poet and to King;
With the same Lawrells were his Temples (...)*
Who best had written, and who best had fought*
The Self same fame they equal^y did feel,
One's style adored as much a^ the other's Steel.
A chain or fasces she could then afford
The Sons of Phoebus, we an Ax^, or (...)*
Sometimes a Coroner was her renown,
And ours the dear preroga^^^^ of a Crown.
In marble statu'd walks great Lucan lay.
And now we walk our own pale Sta^^a:
They the whole yee^ with roses crowned would din*
And we in all December know no wine*
Disciplined, dieted, sure there has bin
Ods 'twixt a Poet and a Capuchin.
Of Princes, Women, Wine, to sing I see
Is no Apocrypha, for to rise high
Commend this Olio of this Lord it is ^it,
Nay ten to one but you have part of it;
There is that justice left, since you maintain
His table, he should coun^^^-(...).
Then write how well he (...)
Straight there'^ a Bo^^le to you^ (...) rolled.
Or with embroidered wo^ds (...) French Suit,
Month hence it is yours, with his (...) boot;
Or but appla^d his (...) to non^,
But he most nobly does give (...)
Or spin an Elegy on his (...)
It Is well he cries, but living hair is dear;
Yet say that out of order there is one curl,
And all the hopes of your reward you (...)*
Write a deep epick Po^m, and you may
As soon delight them as the Opera,
Where they Diogenes thou^^^ in his Tub,
Never so sour did look, so sweet? club.
You that do suck for thirst you^ bl^ck quil's blood,
And chaw your labored papers for your ^ood,
I will inform you how and what to praise,
Then skiny' in Satin as young Lovelace plays.
Beware, as you would your fie^ce gaests, your lice,
To strip the cloth of Gold from c^erish'd vice;
Rather stand off with awe and reverend fear,
Hang a poetic pendant in her (...)
Court her as her Adore^^ do (...),
Though that as much of a (...) has,
Whilst all the gall from your wild ink you drain,
The beauteous Sweets of Virtues Cheeks to slain;
And in your Livery let her be known,
As poor and tattered as in her own.
Nor write, nor speak you more of sacred writ,
But what shall force up your arrested wit.
Be chaste Religion, and her Priests your scorn,
Whilst the vain Fanes of Iditos you adorn,
It is a mortal error you must know,
O^ any to speak good, if he be so.
Ray I till your edged breath flea your raw throat*
And burn all marks on all of g^n'rous note;
Each verse be an indictment* (...), not free,
Sanctity 't self from thy Scurrility.
Libel your Father, and your Dam (...)
The Noblest Matrons of the Isle L^^poon,
Whilst Aretine and's bodies you dispute,
And in your sheets your Sister prostitute.
Yet there belongs a Sweetness, softness too,
Which you must pay, but first pray know to who*
There is a Creature, (if I may so call
That unto a which they do all prostrate fall)
Termed Mistress, when they are angry, but pleased (...)
It is a Princess, Saint, Divinity.
To this they sacrifice the whole days light,
Then lie with their Devotion all night;
For this you are to dive to the Abyss,
And rob for Pearl the Closet of some Fish.
Arabia and Sabaea you must strip
Of all their Sweets, for to supply her Lip*
And steal new fire from Heaven for to repair
Her unfledged Scalp with Berenice's hair;
Then seat her in Cassiopeia's Chair,
As now you're in your Coach. Save you bright Sir
(O spare your thanks) is not this finer far
Then walk un-hided, when that every Stone
Has knocked acquaintance with your Anckle bone?
When your winged papers, like the last dove, nere
Returned to quit you of your hope or fear,
But left you to the mercy of your Host,
And your days fare, a fortified Toast.
How many battles sung in Epick strain,
Would have procured your head thatch from the rain?
Not all the arms of Thebes and Troy would get
One knife but to anatomize your meat,
A funeral Elegy with a sad boon
Might make you (hei) sip wine like Maccaroon;
But if perchance there did a Riband come,
Not the Train-band so fierce with all its drum;
Yet with your torch you homeward would retire*
And heart'ly wish your bed your funeral Pyre.
With what a fury have I known you feed,
Upon a Contract, and the hopes't might speed;
Not the fair Bride, impatient of delay,
Does wish like you the Beauties of that day;
Hotter than all the roasted Cooks you sat
To dress the fricace of your Alphabet,
Which sometimes would be drawn dough Anagrame,
Sometimes Acrostick parched in the Flame;
Then Pos^es stewed with Sippets, motto's by,
Of minced Verse a miserable Pie.
How many knots slipped ere you twist their name,
With the old device, as both their Heart's the same:
Whilst like to drills the Feast in your false ^aw,
You would transmit at leisure to your Maw;
Then after all your fooling, fat, and wine,
Glutton'd at last, return at home to pine.
Tell me, O Sun, since first your beams did play
To Night, and did awake the sleepi^g day;
Since first your steeds of Light their race did start,
Did you ere blush as now? Oh thou that art
The common Father to the base Pissmire,
As well as great Alcide^, did the fire,
From thine own Altar which the gods adore,
Kindle the Souls of Gnats and Wasps before?
Who would delight in his chaste eyes to see,
Dormise to strike (...) Lights of Poesy?
Faction and Envy now is downright Rage,
Once a five knotted whip there was, the Stage,
The Beadle and the ^xec^tioner,
To whip small Errors, and the great ones tear.
Now as er'e Nimrod the first King, he w^i^es,
That Is strongest, th'ablest deepest bites.
The Muses weeping fly their Hill, to see
Their noblest Sons of peace in Mutiny.
Could there naught else this civil war complete,
But Poets raging with Poetic heat,
Tearing themselves and th endl^sse wrea^h, as though
Immortal they, their wrath should be so too;
And doubly fired Apollo burns to see
In silent Helicon a Naumachie.
Parnassus hears these as his first alarms,
Never till now Minerva was in arms.
O more then Conqu'ror of the World great Rome!
Thy Hero's did with gentleness over come
Thy Foes themselves, but one another first,
Whilst Envy stripped, alone was left, and burst.
The learned Decemviri, it is true did strive,
But to add flames to keep their fame alive;
Whilst the eternal Laurel hung in the Air;
Nor of these ten Sons was there found one Heir,
Like to the golden Tripod it did pass,
From this to this, till't came to him whose 'twas:
Caesar to Gallus trundled it, and he
To Maro, Maro, Naso, unto thee;
Naso to his Tibullus flung the wreath,
He to Catullus thus did each bequeath,
This glorious Circle to another round,
At last the Temples of their God it bound.
I might believe, at least, that each might have
A quiet fame contented in his Grave,
Envy the living not the dead, Ov. El. 15.
does bite,
For after death all men receave their right.
If it be Sacrilege for to profane
Their Holy Ashes, what is it then their Flame?
He does that wrong unwee^ing or in Ire,
As if one should put out the Vestal fire.
Let Earths four quarters speak, and thou Sun bear
Now witness for thy Fellow-Traveller,
I was allied dear Uncle unto thee
In blood, but thou alas not unto me;
Your virtues, powers, and mine differed at best,
As they whose Springs you saw, the East and West:
Let me a while be twisted in thy Shine,
And pay my due devotions at thy Shrine.
Might learned Waynman rise, who went with thee
In thy Heavens work beside Divinity,
I should sit still; or might^ Fal^land stand,
To justify with breath his powerful hand;
The glory that does circle your pa^'Urn
Might hallowed still and undefiled ^urn;
But I forbear; Flames that ate wildl thrown
At sacred heads, ^urie back upon their own;
Sleep heavenly Sands, whilst (...) they do or write,
Is to give God himself and you your right.
There is not in my mind one sullen Fate
Of old, but is concentred in our state.
Vandall ore-runners, Goths in Literature,
Ploughmen that would Parnassus n^w manure:
Ringers of Verse that All-in chime,
And toll the changes upon ever^ Rhyme.
A Mercer now by th'yard does measure ore
An Ode which was but by the foot before;
De^ls you an Ell of Epigram, and swears
It is the strongest and the finest Wears.
No wonder if a Drawer Verses Rack,
If it is not his 't may be the Spir't of Sack,
Whilst the Fair Bar-maid strokes the Muses teat,
For milk to make the Posset up complea^.
Arise thou reverend shade, great Johnson rise!
Break through thy marble natural disguise;
Behold a mist of Insects, whose mere Breath,
Will melt thy hallowed lead^n house of Death.
What was Crispinus that you should defy
The Age for him, he durst not look so high
As your immortal Rod, He still did stand
Honored, and held his forehead to thy brand.
These Scorpions with which we have to do,
Are Fiends, not only small but deadly too.
Well might thou rive thy Quill up to the Back
And scrue thy Lyre's grave chords until they crack.
For though once Hell resented Music, these
Devils will not, but are in worse disease.
How would thy masc'line Spirit, Father Ben,
Sweat to behold basely deposed men,
Justled from the Prerog'tive of their Bed,
Whilst wives are pe^'vig'd with their husbands head.
Each snatches the male quill from his faint hand
And must both nobler write and understand,
He to her fury the soft plume does bow,
OPen, nere truly justly slit till now!
Now as her self a Poem she does dress,
And curls a Line as she would do a tresse;
Powders a Sonnet as she does her hair,
Then prostitutes them both to public Air
Nor is it enough that they their faces blind
With a false dye, but they must paint their mind;
In meeter scold, and in scanned order brawl,
Yet there is one Sapho left may s^ve them all.
But now let me ^ecal my passion,
Oh (from a noble Father, nobler Son!)
You that alone are the Clarissimi,
And the whole generous state of Venice be,
It shall not be recorded Sanazar
Shall boa^t enthroned alone this new made star;
You whose correcting Sweetness has sorbad
Shame to the good* and glory to the bad,
Whose honor has (...) into (...) tamed,
These Swarms that now so angerly I named.
Forgive what thus distempered Iindite,
For it is hard a Satyr not to write.
Yet as a Virgin that heats all her blood,
At the first motion of bad understood
Then at mere thought of fai^ chastity,
Straight cools again the Tempests of her Sea;
So when to you I my devotions raise,
All wrath and storms do end in calms and praise.
TRANSLATIONES. Sanazari Hexasticon.
VIderat Adriacis quondam Neptunus in undis
Stare Vrbem, and toto ponere Iura mari:
Nunc mihi Tarpeias quantumvis Jupiter Arces
Objice and illa mihi moenia Martis, ait,
Seu pelago Tibrim Praefers, Urbem a spice utramque,
Illam homines dices, hanc posuisse D^os.
In Virgilium. Pentadii
Pastor, Arator, Eques; pavi, colui, superavi;
Capras, Rus, Hosts; fronde, ligone, manu.
De Scaevola.
Lictorem pro Rege necans nunc Mutius ultro
Sacrifico propriam concrcmat igne manum:
Miratur Porsenna virum, paenamque relaxans
Maxima cum obscessis faedera victor in it,
Plus flammis patriae confert quam fortibus armis,
Una dom^ns bellum funere dextera sua.
De Catone.
Invictus victis in partibus omnia Caelar
Vincere qui potuit, te Cato non p^tuit.
Item.
Ictu non potuit primo Cato solvere vitam;
Defecit tanto vulnere victa manus:
Altius inseruit digitos, qua spiritus inge^s
Exiret magnum dextera fecit iter.
Opposuit fortuna moram, involvitque Catonis
Scires, ut ferro plus valuisse manum.
Item.
Iussa manus sacri pectus violare Catonis
Haesit, and inceptum victa reliquit opus.
Ille ait infesto contra sua vulnera vultu,
Estne aliquid magnus quod Cato non potuit?
Item.
Dextra quid dubitas? durum est jugulare Catonem;
Sed modo liber erit, jam put^ non dubitas:
Fas non est vivo quenquam servire Catone,
Nedum ipsum vincit nunc Cato simoritur.
Pantadii.
Non est, falleri^* haec beata non est
Quod v^s crediti^ esse, vita non est,
Fulgentes manibus videre gemmas
Et Testudireo jacere lecto,
Aut pluma latus abdidisse molli,
Aut auro bibere, aut cubare cocco,
Regales dapibus gravare mensas,
Et quicquid Lybico sec^tur arvo,
Non una positum tenera cella:
Sed nullos trepidum timere casus,
Nec vano populi favore tangi,
Et stricto nihil aestuare ferro:
Hoc quisquis poterit, licebit illi
Fortunam moveat loco superbus.
Ad M. T. Ciceronem. Catul. Ep. 50.
Disertissime Romuli nepotum
Quot sunt, quo^que fuere Marce Tulli,
Quotque post alios erunt in annos,
Gratias tibi maximas Catullus
Agit pessimus omnium Poeta,
Tanto pessimus omnium Poeta;
Quanto tu optimus omnium Patronus.
Ad Iuvencium. Cat. Ep. 49.
Mellitos oculos tuos Iuvenci
Si quis me sinat usque basiare,
Usque ad millia basiem trecenta;
Nec unquam videat satur futurus;
Non si densior aridis aristis,
Sit nostrae s^ges Osculationis.
De Puero and Praecon^. Catul.
Cum puero bello praecontem qui videt esse,
Quid credat? nisi se vendere discupere.
Portii Licinii.
Si Phoebi Soror es mando tibi Delia causam,
Scilicet ut fratri quae peto verba feras:
Marmore Sicanio struxi tibi Delphice templum,
Et levibus calamis candida verba dedi.
Nunc si nos audis-atque es divinus Apollo,
Dic mihi qui nummos non habet unde petat.
Senecae ex Cleanthe.
Duc me Parens celsique Dominator poli
Quocunque placuit, nulla parendi mora est
Adsum impiger, fac nolle, comitabor gemens,
Malusque patiar facere, quod licuit bono
Ducunt volentem Fata, nolentem trahunt.
Quin^i Catuli.
Constiter am exorientem Aurorem forte salutans
Cum subito a laeva Roscius exoritur.
Pace mihi liceat, coelestes dicere ves^ra
Mortalis Visu pulchrior esse Deo.
Blanditur puero Satyrus vultuque manuque,
Nolenti similis retrahit or a puer:
Quem non commoveat qnamvis de marmore? fnndit
Pene preces Satyru^; pene puer Lachrymas.
Floridi. de Ebrioso.
Phoebus me in somnis v^tuit potare Lyaeum,
Pareo praeceptis, tunc bibo cum vigilo.
De Asino qui dentibus Aeneidem consumpsit.
Carminis Iliaci libros consumpsit Asellus,
Hoc Fatum Troiae est, aut Equus aut Asinus.
Auso. lib. Epig.
Trinarii quodam currentem in littoris or a
Ante canes laporem Caeruleu^ rapuit;
At lepus! in me omnis terrae pelagique rapina est
Forsitan and coeli, si canis astra tenet.
Auso lib. Epig.
Polla, potenta, tribon, baculus, scyphus, arcta supe^^ex
Haec fuerant Cinici, sed putat hanc nimiam:
Namque cavis manibus cernens p^tare bubulcum,
Cur, s^yphe, te, dixit, gusto supervacuum?
Auso. lib. 1. Epig.
The sanro invento qui limina mortis inibat,
Liquit ovans laqueum quo periturus erat,
At qui quod terrae abdiderat non repperit aurum,
Quem laqu^^m inve^it nexuit and periit.
A la Chabot.
Object adorable et charmant,
Mes souspirs and mes pleur tesmoignent mon torment,
Mais m^s respects m' emp^che de parier;
Ah! que peine dissimuler
Et que ^e souffre de martyr
D' aimer et d^ n' oser le dire.
Theophile being denied his addresses to King James, turned the Affront, to his
own glory, in this Epigram.
Si Jacques le Roy du scavoir
Ne trouue bon de me voir
Voila la cause infallible,
Car ravy de mon escrit
Il creut que ^'estois tout esprit
Et par consequent invisible.
Ausonius.
Van^ quid affect as faciem mihi ponere pict^r
Ignotamque oculis solicitare manu?
Aeris and Venti sum filia, matter inanis
Indicii; vocem quae sine mente gero.
Auribus in vestris habi^o penetrabilis Echo;
Si mihi vis similem p^^gere, pinge sonos.
Auson.
Toxica Zelotypo dedit uxor maecha mari^o,
Nec satis ad mortem credidit esse datum;
Miscuit argenti lethalia pondera vivi
Ut celeret certam vis geminata necem.
Ergo inter sese dum noxiapocula certant
Cessit lethalis noxa sal^uiferi
Protinus in vacuos alvi petiere recessus,
Lubrica dejecti quae via nota cibis.
Quam pia cura D^um! prodest crudelior uxor,
Sic cum fata volunt, bina venena ^uvant.
Auson. Epig.
Emptis quod libris tibi Bibliotheca referta est,
Doctum and Grammaticum te Philomuse putas?
Quine iam Cytharas, chordas and b^rbita cond^,
Mercator hodie, cra^ citharoedus eris.
Avieni v. c. ad amicos.
Rure morans, quid agam, respondi pauca rogatus,
Mane deum exoro famulos post arvaque viso,
Part^usque meis justo, indico labores.
Inde lego, Phoebumque cio, Musamque l^cesso.
Tunc o^eo corpus fingo mollique palae^^ a
Siringo libe^^ animo g^u^^^sque ac ^oenore liber
Prandeo, poto, (...) ^udo (...) cae^o, quiesco.
Ad Fabullum, Catul. lib. 1. Ep. 13.
Caenabis been mi Fabulle apud me
Paucis, si dii ^ibi favent, diebus,
Sitecum attuleris bonam atque magnam
Caenam, non sine candida pue^^a,
Et vin^ and sale and omnibus cachinnis.
Haec si inquam attuleris Fabulle noster
Caenaebis been, nam tui Catulli
Plenus sacculus est aranearum.
Sed contra accipies meros amore^,
Seu quod suavius elegantiusve est:
Nam unguentum dabo quod me ae puella^
Donarunt Veneres C^pidinesque;
Quod tu cum olfacies, Deos rogabis
Totum te faciant Fabulle nasum.
Mart. lib. 1. Epi. 14.
Casta suo gladium cum traderet Arria Paeto,
Quem de viscer^bus traxer at ipsa suis:
Si qua fides, Vulnus, quod feci, non dolet, inquit:
Sed quod tu facies, hoc mihi, Paete, dolet.
Mart. Epi. 43. lib. 1.
Conjugis audisset fatum cum Portia Bruti,
Et substracta sibi quaereret arma dolor:
Nondum scitis, ait, mortem non posse negari,
Credideram satis hoc vos docuisse patrem.
Dixit, and ardentes avido bibitore favillas.
I nunc, and ferrum turba molest a nega.
Mart. Ep. 15. lib. 6.
Dum Phaetontea formica vagatur in Umbra,
Impli^uit tenuem succina gutta feram,
Dignum tantorum pretium tulit illa laborum:
Credibile est ipsam sic voluisse mori.
Mar. lib. 4. Ep. 33.
Et latet and lucet Phaetontide condita gutta
Vt videatur apis Nectare clausa suo:
Sic modo quae fuera^ vita contempta manente
Fun^ribus facta est j^m preciosa suis.
Mar. lib. 8. Ep. 19.
Pauper videri Cinna vult, and est pauper.
Out of the Anthologie.
(...)
(...).
In Rufum, Catul. Ep. 57.
Noli admirari quare tibi foemina nulla
Rufe velit tenerum supposuisse femur;
Non ullam rarae labefactes munere vestis,
Aut pellucidulis deliciis lapidi^.
Laedit te quaedam mala fabula* qua tibi fertur
Valle sub alarm tru^ habitare c^per.
Hunc metuunt omnes, neque mirum nam mala valde est
Bestia, nec quicum bella puella cubet.
Quare aut crudelem nasorum interfice pestem,
Aut admir ari desine cur fugiant.
Catul. Ep. 71. De Inconstant^a foeminei amor^s.
Nulli so dicit mulier mea nubere velle
Quam mihi, non si Jupiter ipse petat:
Dicit, sed mulier cupid^ quod dicit amanti,
In vento and rapida scribere oportet aqu^.
Ad Lesbiam, (at. Ep. 73.
Dicebas quondam solum te nosse Catullum,
Lesbia, nec prae me ^elle tenere Iove^;
Dilexi tum te, non tantum ^t vulgus amicam
Sed pater ut gnatos diligit and generos.
Nunc te cognovi, quare and impensius ur or,
Multo mi tamenes vilior and levior.
Qui potis est inquis? quod amantem injuria talis
Cogat amare magis, sed b^ne velle minus.
Odi and amo, quare id faciam fortasse requiris,
Nescio, sed fieri sentio and excrucior.
In Lesbiam Cat. Ep. 76.
Huc est men's deducta tua mea Lesbia culpa
Atque it a se officio perdidit ipsa suo;
Ut jam nec been velle queam tibi, si optima fias
Nec desistere amare omnia si facias.
Ad Quintium Cat. Ep. 83.
Quinti si tibi vis oculos debere Catnllum,
Aut aliud si quid carius est oculis;
Eripere ei noli multo quod carius illi
Est oculis, seu quid carius est oculis.
De Quintia and Le^bia. Ep. 87.
Quintia formosa est multis, mihi Candida, longa,
Recta est, haec ego si^ singula confiteor:
T^ta illud formosa nego: nam multa venustas;
Nulla in tam magno est corpore mica salis.
Lesbia formosa est, quae cum pulcherrima tota est,
Tum omnibus una omneis surripuit veneres.
TRANSLATIONS Sanazar's Hexastick.
IN Adriatic waves when Neptune saw,
The City ^^and, and give the Seas a Law,
Now in the T^rpei^n towers Jove rival me,
And Mars his Wa^ls imp^egnable, ^^id he;
Let Seas to Tyh^r yield, vie^ both their ods,
You Will grant that built by Men, but this by Gods.
In English.
A Swain, Hind, Knight; I fed, tilled, did command
Goats, Fields, my Foes; with leaves, a spade, my hand.
Englished.
The hand by which no King but Sergeant dies,
Mutiu^ in fire does freely Sacrifice;
The Prince admires the Hero, quits his pains,
And Victor from the seige peace entertains;
Romes more obliged to Flames, than Arms or power,
When one burnt hand shall the whole war devour.
Of Cato.
The World ore come, victorious Caesar, he
That conquered all; great Cato, could not thee.
Another.
One stabbe could not fierce Cato's Life unty;
Only his hand of all that wound did die;
Deeper his Fingers tear to make a way
Open, through which his mighty Soul might stray.
Fortune made this delay to let us know,
That Cato's hand more then his Sword could do.
Another.
The hand of sacred Cato bad to tear
His brea^t, did start, and the made wound forbear,
Then to the ga^h he said with angry brow,
And is there ought great Cato cannot do?
Another.
What doubt'st thou hand? sad Cato it is to kill;
But he will be free, sure hand thou doubt'st not still;
Cato alive it is just all men be free,
Nor conquers he himself now if he die.
Englished.
It is not, you are deceav'd, it is not bliss
What you conceave a happy living is*
To have your hands with Rubies bright to glow,
Then on your Tortoise-bed your body throw,
And sink your self in Down, to drink in gold,
And have your looser self in purple rolled;
With Royal fare to make the Tables groan,
Or else with what from Lybick fields is mown,
Nor in one vault hoard all your Magazine,
But at no Cowards fate to have frighted bin,
Nor with the peoples breath to be swol'n great,
Nor at a drawn Stil^tto basely swear.
He that dares this, nothing to him's unfit,
But proud of the top of Fortunes wheel may sit.
To Marcus T. Cicero. In an English Pentastick.
Tully to thee Rome's eloquent Sole Heir,
The best of all that are, shall be, and were:
I the worst Poet send my best thanks and prayer,
Even by how much the worst of Poets I
By so much you the best of Patrones be.
To Iuvencius.
Iuvencius thy fair sweet Eyes,
If to my fill that I may kiss,
Three hundred thousand times I Would kiss,
Nor future age should cloy this Bliss;
No not if thicker than ripe ears,
The harvest of our kisses bears.
Catul.
With a fair boy a Crier we behold.
What should we think? but he would not be sold.
Englished.
If you are Phoebus Sister Delia^ pr^y
This my request unto the Sun convay:
O Delphick God, I built thy marble Fane,
And sung thy praises with a gentle Cane,
Now if thou art divine Apollo, tell,
Where he whose purse is empty may go fill.
Englished.
Parent and Prince of Heaven O lead I pray,
Where ere you please; I follow and obey;
Active I go, sighing if you gainsay,
And suffer bad what to the good was law,
Fates lead the willing, but unwilling draw.
Englished.
As once I bad good morning to the day,
Of The sudden Rosciu^ breaks in a bright Ray;
Gods with your ^avour, I Have presum^d to see,
A mortal fai^er then a Deity.
With looks and hands a Satyr courts the b^y,
Who draws back his unwilling Cheek as coy.
Although of Marble (...), whom move nor they?
The Boy Even seems to weep the Satyr pray.
Of a Drunkard.
Phoebus a sleep for bad me Wine to take,
I yield; and now am only drunk awake.
The Ass eating the Ae^eids.
A wretched Ass the Aeneids did destroy,
A Horse or Ass is still the fate of Troy.
Englished.
On the Scicilian strand a Hare well wrought
Before the Hounds was by a Dog-fish caught;
Quoth she; all rape of Sea and Earth's on me
Perhaps of Heaven, if there a Dog Star be.
Englished.
The Cynicks narrow household stuff of Crutch,
A ^tool and dish, was lumber thought too much;
For whilst a Hind drinks out on's palms, o'th'strand
He flings his dish, cries, I Have one in my hand.
Englished.
A treasure found one entering at death's gate,
Triumphing, leaves that cord was meant his fate,
But he the gold missing which he did hide,
The Halter which he found, he knit, so died.
To the same Air in (...)
Object adorable of charms
My sighs and tea^s may testify my harms
But my respect forbids (...) reve^l;
Ah what a pain it is to (...),
And how I suffer wor^^ then Hell,
To love and not to (...) to tell.
Lineally Translated out of the FRENCH.
If James the King of wit
To see me thought not fit,
Sure this the cause has been,
That ravished with my merit,
He thought I was all spirit,
And so not to be seen.
In English.
Vain Painter why do strive my face to draw,
With busy hands a Goddess eyes nere saw:
Daughter of Air and Wind; I do rejoice
In empty shouts (without a mind) a Voice.
Within your ears shrill echo I rebound,
And if you will paint me like, then paint a sound.
In English.
Her jealous Husband an Adultresse gave
Cold poisons, which to weak she thought for's grave
A fatal dose of Quicksilver, then she
Mingles to have his double destiny;
Now whilst within themselves they are at strife,
The deadly potion yields to that of Life,
And straight from th'hollow stomach both retreat,
To th'slipp'ry pipes known to digested meat.
Strange care of the Gods! the Murth'resse does avail
So when fates please even double poisons heal.
In English.
Because with bought books, Sir, your study's fraught
A learned Grammarian you would fain be thought,
Nay then buy Lutes and strings so you may play
The Merchant now, the Fiddler the next day.
Englished.
Asked in the Country, what I did, I said
I view my men and meads, first having prayed;
Then each of mine has his just task outlay'd.
I read, Apollo court, I rouse my Muse
Then I anoint me, and stripped willing loose
My self on a soft plat, from us 'ry blessed
I dine, drink, sing, play, bath, I sup, I rest.
Englished.
Fabullus I will treat you handsomely
Shortly, if the kind gods will favor thee.
If thou do bring with thee a del'cate mess,
An Olio or so, a pretty Lass,
Brisk wine, sharp tales, all sorts of Drolle^y,
These if thou bringst (I say) along with thee
You shall feed highly friend, for know the ebbs
Of my lank purse are full of Spiders webs,
But then again you shall receive clear love
Or what more grateful or more sweet may prove,
For with an oi^tment I will favor thee,
My Venus' s and Cupids gave to me,
Of which once smelt, the gods thou will implore
Fabullus that they would make thee nose all ore.
Englished.
When brave chaste Arria to her Poetus gave
The Sword from her own breast did bleeding wave,
If there be faith, this wound smarts not said she,
But what you will make, ah that will murder me.
In English.
When Portia her dear Lord's sad fate did hear,
And noble grief sought arms were hid from her,
Know you not yet no hinderance of death is,
Cato I thought enough had taught you this,
So said, her thirsty lips drink flaming coals,
Go now deny me steel officious fools.
Englished.
Whilst in an Amber-shade the Ant does feast
A gummy drop ensnares the small wild beast,
A full reward of all her toyls has she,
It Is to be thought she would her self so die.
In English.
Both lurks and shines hid in an Amber-tear
The Be in her own Nectar prisoner;
So she who in her life time was contemned
Even in her very funerals is gemm'd,
In English,
Cinna seems poo^ in show,
And he is so.
In an English Distick.
A Fool much bit by fleas put out the light,
You shall not see me now (quoth he) good night.
To Rufus.
That no fair woman will, wonder not why
Clap (Rufus) under thine her tender thigh;
Not a ^ilk gown shall once melt one of the^,
No^ the delights of a transparent (...)
A scu^vy ^tory kills thee, which (...) tell
That in ^hine (...) dwell,
Him they all fear (...) of an ugly stinch,
Nor's (...) with a handsome wench;
(...) cursed plague first crush,
Or (...) ^onder why they fly you thus.
Female Inconstan^y.
My Mistress says she will marry none but me,
No no^ if Jove himself a Suitor be:
She says so; but what women say to kind
Lovers, we write in rapid streams and wind.
Englished.
That me alone you loved, you once did say,
Not should I to the King of gods give way,
Then I loved thee not as a common dear,
But as a Father does his children cheer;
Now thee I know, more bitterly I smart,
Yet thou to me more light and cheaper art.
What power is this? that such a wrong should press
Me to love more, yet wish thee well much less.
I hate and love, would thou the reason know?
I know not, but I burn and feel it so.
Englished.
By thy fault is my mind brought to that pass,
That it it is Office quite forgotten has;
For be'est thou best, I cannot wish thee well,
And be'est thou worst, yet must I love thee still,
To Quintius.
Quintius if you will endear Catullus eyes,
Or what he dearer then his eyes does prize,
Ravish not what is dearer then his eyes,
Or what he dearer then his eyes does prize.
Englished.
Quintia i^ handsome, fair, tall, straight, all these
Very particulars I grant with ease:
But she all ore's not handsome; here is her fault
In all that bulk, there is not one come of salt,
Whilst Le^bia fair and handsome too all ore
All graces and all wit from all has bore.


ELEGIES SACRED To the Memory of the AUTHOR: By several of his Friends.

Collected and Published BY D. P. L.

Nunquam ego te vita frater amabilior
Adspiciam posthac; at certe semper amabo.
Catullus. London, Printed 1660.

ELEGIES.
To the Memory of my Worthy Friend, Coll. Richard Lovelace.
TO pay my Love to thee, and pay it so;
As Honest men should what they justly owe,
Were to write better of thy Life then can
The assured'st Pen of the most worthy man:
Such was thy composition, such thy mind
Improved from virtue, and from vice ref^n'd
Thy Youth an abstr^ct of the World best parts,
Invr'd to Arms and exerci^d to Arts;
Which with the Vigor of a man, bec^me
Thi^e and thy Country, Piramid^ of (...)
Two glorious Light, to guide our hopeful ^^^th,
Into the path's of Honor and of (...).
These parts (so rarely met) made (...)
What man should in his full perfection be;
So s^rect a Temper into every sense
And each ^ffection breathd an (...)
As smoothed them to a Calm, which still (...)
The ruffling passions of untamed (...),
Without a Wrinckle in thy face, (...)
Thy stable breast could no disturbance know
In Fortune humble, constant in mischance
Expert in both, and both served to advance
Thy Name by various Trialls of thy Spirit,
And give the Testimony of thy merit;
Valiant to envy of the bravest men
And learned to an undisputed Pen,
Good as the best in Both, and great, but Yet.
No dangerons Courage nor offensive Wit:
These ever served the one for to d^fend
The other Nobly to advance thy friend,
Under which title I have found my name
Fixed in the living Chronicle of Fame,
To times succeeding; Yet I hence must go
Displeased, I cannot celebrate thee so;
But what respect acknowledgement and love,
What these, together when improved improve
Call it by any Name (so it express
Ought like a Tribute to thy Worthyness
And may my bounden gratitude become)
LOVELACE I offer at thy Honored Tomb.
And though thy Virtues many friends have bred
To love thee liveing, and lament thee Dead
In Characters far better couched then these
Mine will not blott thy Fame nor theirs increase,
'Twas by thine own great merits raised so high,
That Ma^gre time, and Fate, it shall not dye.
Sic flevit. Charles Cotton.
Upon the Posthume and precious Poems of the nobly extracted Gentleman Mr. R. L.
The Rose and other ^ragra^t Flowers smell ^est
(...) ^hey are pluckd and worn in ^and or ^rest,
So the fair flower of Virtue (...)
Of (...) smell now as fre^ as (...) stood;
(...) Posthume-Poems (...)
He on the (...) of Helicon did grow:
The beauty of his Soul did Correspond
With his sweet outside, nay, it went beyond;
LOVE^ACE, the Minion of the Thespian Dames,
A^ollo's darling-born with Enthean flames,
Which in his Numbers ^ave, and shine so clear
As Spark^ refracted in rich gemmes appear;
Such flam^^ that may inspir^, and Atom^ cast
To make new Poets, not like him in h^st.
Jam. Howell.
AN ELEGY, Sacred to the Memory of my late Honored Friend, Collonell Richard
Lovelace.
PArdon (blessed shade) that I thus crowd t. be
Among those that sin unto thy memory;
And that I think unvalu'd Relics spread;
And am the first that pillages the dead:
Since who would be thy mourner as befits,
But an officicus sacrilege commits.
How my tears strive to do th^e fairer right!
And from the Characters divide my sight.
Until it (dimmer) a new torrent swells,
And what obscured it falls my spectacles.
Let the luxurious floods (impulsive) rise
As they would not be wept, but weep the eyes,
The while earth melts, and we above it lie,
But the weak bubbles of Mortality;
Until our griefs are drawn up by the Sun,
And that (too) drop the exhalation.
How in thy dust we humble now our pride,
And bring thee a whole people mortified!
For, who expects not death, now thou art gone,
Shows his low folly, not Religion.
Can the Poetic heaven still hold on
(...) golden dance when the first mover's gone?
And the snatched fires (while circularly hurled)
In their strong Rapture glimmer to the World?
And not stupendiously rather rise,
The tapers unto these Solemnities?
Can the Chords move in tune, when thou do dye
At once their universal Harmony?
But where Apollo's harp (with murmur) laid^
Had to^he stones (...) elody conveyed;
They by some peb^le summoned would reply
In loud results to every battery;
Thus do we come unto thy m^rble room,
To echo from the music of thy tomb.
May we dare speak thee dead that would be
In thy Remove only not such a^ we?
No wonder the advance i^ from us hid,
Earth could not lift thee higher then it did!
And thou that did grow up so ever nigh,
Art but now gone to immortality:
"So near to where thou art thou here did dwell,
The change to thee is less perceptible.
Thy but unably-comprehending clay,
To what c^uld not be circumscribed gave way.
And the more spacious tennant to return,
Cracked (in the t^o restrained estate) its urn.
That is but left to a sucessive trust,
The Soul's first buried in his bodies dust.
Thou more thy self now thou art less confined
Art no^ concerned in what is left behind;
While we sustain the loss that thou art gone
Vn-essenc'd in the separation;
And he that weeps thy funeral, in one,
Is piou to the widdow'd Nation.
And under what (now) Covert must I sing
Secure as if beneath a Cherub's wing:
When thou h^s^ taken thy flight hence and art nigh
In place to some related Hierarchy,
Where a bright wreath of glories does but set
Upon thy h^ad an equal Coronet;
And thou above our humble converse gone,
Can but be reached by contemplation.
Our L^re^ (as thine was touched) were vocal by,
And thence received the soul by sympathy;
That did abo^e the threads inspir^g creep,
And with (...) broke ^he (...)
Which now no more (moved (...) the sweet surprise)
Aw^^e unto delicious R^psodies.
But with (...) silem Mistres^ do comply,
And fast in und'sturbed slumber^ lie.
How from thy first ascent (...) disperse
A blushing warmth (...) universe,
While near the mor^s (...) did glow,
And to the earth a purer d^wn did throw,
We ever saw thee in the Roll of fame
Advancing thy already deathless name;
And though it could but be above its fate,
Thou would however super-errog^^e.
Now as in Venice, when the wanton state,
Before a Spaniard spread their crowded plate;
He made it the sage business of his eye,
To find the Root of the wild treasury.
So learned from that Exchequer^ but the more
To rate his Mas^ers v^getable Ore:
Thus when the Greek and Latin Muse we read
As the but cold inscriptions of the dead;
We to advantage th^n admired t^ee
Who did live on still with thy Poesy:
And in our proud en^oyment^* never knew
The end of the unruly wealth that grew:
But now we have the last dear (...) gained,
And the free vein (however rich) is dr^in'd,
Though what thou (...) us no (...)
Of this worlds span of (...)
But as who sometime, knew not to (...)
Upon the waters strange (...)
Did to the Ocean himse^^ (...)
That it might compre^^^ (...)
Be swallowed up^wthin (...).
Thou ow art (...) up (...) pr^ciou cave,
And from the hollow space of thy (...),
We still may mourn in tune but must alone
Hereafter hope to quaver out (...)
No more the chirping (...).
Must benceforth ^olley from our (...).
But each sad accont must (...) well,
To the deep solemn Organ of thy Cell.
Why should some rude hand carve thy sacred (...),
And there incise a cheap inscription:
When we can shed the tribute of our tears
So long, till the relenting marble wears?
Which shall such order in their cadence keep.
That they a native Epitaph shall weep;
Until each Letter spelt distinctly lies,
Cut by the mystic droppings of our eyes.
El. Revett.
AN ELEGY.
ME thinks when Kings, Prophets, and Poets dye,
We should not bid men weep, nor ask them why,
But the great loss should by instinct impair
The Nations like a pestilential air.
And in a moment men should feel the Cramp,
Of grief like person^ poisoned with a damp:
All thing* in nature should their death deplore,
And the Sun look less l^vely th^n before,
The fixed Stares should change their constant spaces,
And Comets cast abroad their ^lagrant faces;
Yet still we see ^rinces and Poets fall
Without their proper pomp of funeral,
Men look about as if they ^ere had known
The Poets Laurel, or the Princes Crown;
Lovelace has long been dead, and we can be
Obliged to man for an Elegy.
Are you all turned to silence or did he
Retain the only sap of Poesy,
That kept all branches living, must his fall
Set an eternal period upon all:
So when a Springtide does begin to fly
From the green shore, each neighboring creek grows dry
But why do! so pettishly detract
An age that is so perfect, so exact,
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Has got a great train of Artillery,
Yet neither shall, nor can it blessed the Fame
And honor of deceased Lovelace Name,
Whose own Lucasta can support his credit:
Amongst all such who knowi^^ly have read it,
But who that Praise can by desert discuss
Due to those Poems that are Posthumous;
And if the l^st conception^ are the best,
Those by degrees do much transcend the rest,
So full, so fluent, that they richly (...)
With Orpheus Li^e, or with (...) Lu^e,
And he shall melt his wing that shall aspire
To reach a Fancy or one accent hig^er.
Holland and France have known his nobler part^,
And found him excellent in Arms* and (...)*
To sum up all, f^^ Men of Fame but know
He was tam Marti, quam Mercurio.
To his noble friend Capt. Dudl^y Lovelace upon his Edition of his Brothers
Poems.
THy pious hand pl^nting fratern^^ bays,
Deserving is of most egregious praise;
Since it is the o^gan does to us convey,
From a descended ^un, so bright a Ray.
Clear Spirit, how much we are bound to thee,
For this so great a Liberality,
The truer worth of which by much exceeds
The Western Wealth which such contention bre^ds,
Like the Infusing-God, from the Wellhead
Of Poesy you have be sprinkled
Our brows with holy drops, the very last
Which from your Brother's haypy Pen were cast;
Yet as the last the best, such matchless skill
From his divine alembick did d^still,
Your honored Brother in the Elyzian shade
Will joy to know himself a Laureat made
By your religious care, and that his Urn,
Does him on Earth immortal life return.
Your self you have a good Physician shown,
To his much grieved friends, and to your own,
In giving thi^ elixir'd Medecin,
For greatest grief a sovereign anodine.
Sir, from your Brother y' have conveyed us bliss;
Now, since your Genius so concurs with his,
Let your own quill our next enjoyments frame,
All must be rich that is graced with Lovelace name.
Simon Og^ell M. D. Coningbrens.
On the truly Honorable Coll. Richard Lovelace, occasioned by the Publication
Of his Posthume-Poems.
ELEGY.
GReat Son of Mars! and of Minerva too^
With what oblations must we come to woo
Thy sacred soul to loo^ down from above,
And see how much the memory we love,
Whose happy pen so pleased amorous Ears,
And lifting bright (...),
Her in the Star-be spangled or^ did set,
Above fair Ariadnes (...)
Leaving a pattern to succeeding (...)
By which to sing forth their (...)
Shall we bring tears awd (...) no, no, then w^
Should but bemone our selves for loosing thee,
Or else thy happiness seem to deny,
Or to repi^e at thy felicity:
Then whilst we chant out thine immortal praise,
Our offerings shall be only Sprig^ of Bays;
And if our tears will needs their brinks out-fly,
We Will weep them forth into an Elegy,
To tell the World how deep Fates wounded wit,
When Atropos the lovely Lovelace hit;
How the active fire which clothed thy generous (...),
Consumed the water and the earth (...),
Until a stronger heat by death was given,
Which sublimated thy poor soul to heaven.
Thou knew'st right well to guide the warlike st^ed,
And yet could court the Muses with full speed,
And such success, that the inspiring nine
Have filled their Thespian fountain so with brin^,
Hen^eforth we can expect no Lyrick lay,
But biting Satyrs through the world must stray.
Bellona joins with fair Erato too,
And with the Destinies do keep* do,
Whom thus she querie^; Could not you a while
Reprieve his life until another file
Of Poems such as these, had been (...) up?
The fates r^ply'd; that, Thou were taken up
A Sacrifice unto the Deities:
Since things most perfect please their ^oly eyes,
And that no other Victim could be found,
With so much Learning and true Virtue crowned.
Since it is so in peace for ever rest:
It Is very just that God should have the best.
Sym. Ognell M. D. Coningbrens.
On My Brother.
LOVELACE is dead! then let the World return
^o its first Chaos; Mus^ed in its Urn;
The Stars and Elements together lie
Drenched in perpetual obscurity;
And the whole Machine in confusion be,
As immethodick as an Anarchie;
May the Great Eye of Day weep out his light,
Pale Cynthia leave the Reg^ment of Night,
The Galaxia all in Sables Dight,
Send forth no corruscations to our Sight,
The Sister-graces, and the sacred Nine
Statu'd with grief, attend upon his shrine.
Whose worth, whose loss, should we but truly rate
'Twould Puzzle our Arithmetic, to state
The account of vertu's so transcendent high,
Number and Value reach Infinity.
Did^ pronounce him dead! no no* he lives,
And from his Aromatique Cell he gives
Spi^s-breathed Fume^ (...) Oderiferous scent
(In Zephre-^ales which never can be spent)
Does spread it self abroad and much out-vies,
The Eastern Bird in her self-Sacrifice:
Or Father-Phoebus wh^ to (...) World Derives
Such various and such multiformed Liv^^,
Took notice that brave LOVELACE did inspire,
The Universe with his Promethean Fire,
And snatched him hence before his Thread was spun,
Env'ing that here should be another Sun,
On the Death of my Dear Brother.
EPITAPH.
TRead (Reader) gently, gently ore
The happy Dust beneath this floor:
For, in this narrow Vault is set
An Alablaster Cabinet,
Wherein both Arts and Arms were put,
Like Homers Iliads in a Nut;
Till Death with slow and easy pace,
Snatched the bright Iowell from the Case.
And now, transformed, he does arise
A Constellation in the Skies,
Teaching the blinded World the way,
Through Night, to startle into Day:
And shipwrackt shades, with steady hand
He steers unto the Elizian Land.
Dudley Posthumus-Lovelace,
FINIS.

