THE French King's DECLARATION For Settling the General Poll-Tax: Together with
His EDICT, ORDERING

All Communities both Regular and Secular, and all particular Persons, (who
have any Water from Rivers, Brooks, Springs and Fountains, or otherwise,
whether for the Ornament of their Houses, or the Improving of their Estates,)
to pay such Sums as shall be imposed upon them in Council, in order to have the
Benefit of the said Waters confirmed to them for the future.

Given at Fountain-bleau, October. 1694. and Recorded in Parliament.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane,
1695.

THE PREFACE.
THE following Edicts being Extraordinary, both for the Matter and Manner, It Is
presumed that the Translation may not only be Grateful to the Curious, who
don't understand them in the Original; but useful to the Public, that they may
see the difference betwixt a Legal and Tyrannical Government. The disparity of
the Style in these two Edicts is very Remarkable. That for the Tax on Water,
demands it as a Royal Prerogative and Right; but for such Reasons as will
sooner move Laughter than Choler in any but his own Subjects, who have cause
indeed to be afraid of that severe Innuendo, that they are fineable for having
made use of the Water without his Royal License; when they consider, that he,
who has been so often guilty of breaking the most Sacred and Solemn Treaties
with his Superiors and Equals, will never be tied to keep Promise to his
Subjects, any longer than Opportunity or Necessity affords him a Pretense to do
otherwise. Then, as for the Edict imposing the Poll-Tax, it is every whitt as
sneaking as the other is haughty: He ushers it in with a flattering and
Romantic Prooemium, and to make his Subjects digest it the better, insinuates
that the Envy and Ambition of the Allies has occasioned this War, though it be
justly chargeable on his own Usurpations; and that their Obstinacy is the Cause
of its Continuance; whereas it is his own Pride and Injustice: but being
sensible of the Risk which he runs by continual Encroachments on his Peoples
Liberties, he finds himself under a Necessity to fawn sometimes, as well as to
Hector at others; and therefore hopes that his Nobility and Gentry, who are so
prodigal of their Blood, will not be niggardly of their Money, etc. He is sensible
of the Nobilities Pretensions to be exempted from this Poll, and what Reason
his Soldiery have to Grumble, that they, who spend their Blood in the War,
should also be taxed to maintain it; and therefore finds himself obliged to
give soft words, at least; such is the difference betwixt Dominion founded on
the Love of the Subject, and that maintained by Tyranny and Force. How great is
the odds betwixt the Authority of an Act of Parliament, and the Edict of the
most Absolute and Imperious Monarch! How cheerfully do Subjects obey the one,
and with what Regret are they forced to submit to the other.

How much greater Reason have we in England to pay what is charged on us by Law
for maintenance of our Liberties, than our Neighbors of France have to pay
that which is arbitrarily demanded to support one who tyrannizes over their
Souls and Bodies? And why should we repine at paying for our Beer, when our
Neighbors are forced to pay for their Water? This is judged sufficient by way
of Preface, the Edicts themselves being so plain, that he who runs, may read in
how much better Condition we are than the French, seeing no Money can be levied
upon us without our own consent: Whence it comes to pass, that we have not only
wherewith to maintain our selves at Home, but Money to spare to make us
redoubtable Abroad; whereas they have scarcely any thing left to be taken from
them, and cannot plead a Property in that poor Remainder, but must surrender it
at the Will of their Prince, whenever his Ambition or Necessity requires it:
And that the latter is very great, needs no better Demonstration, then that he
who never used to accost his Subjects in any other Dialect than We Will and
Command, is now forced to make use of Arguments and Entreaties to move and
persuade; which comes far short of that August Style, -- Be it enacted by the
King's most Excellent Majesty, with the Advice and Consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament assembled; and as it comes
short of the Authority, will come as short of the Effects.

THE KING of FRANCE HIS DECLARATION For the Establishing of a POLL-TAX.
LEWIS, by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarre;
to all whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
Since the Glory of Our State, and the Prosperities wherewith it has pleased
God to bless Our Reign, have excited the Envy of most of the Powers of Europe,
and engaged them to make a League, in order to wage an Injust War against Us;
the sincerity of Our Intention, and the Advantages We have Yearly got over
them, putting Us still in hopes of a speedy Peace, We have endeavored, in
order to repel the Efforts of the States in League against Us, to make use of
no other Means, but such as were least burthensom to our Subjects: In order
thereunto we have alienated Rents, of which we have assigned the Payment on Our
Ordinary Revenues; and Created Offices, the Sallaries of which are set down on
the Settlements of Our Finances. And if in the Sequel, We have been obliged to
make use of some other Means which have been more burthensom to Our People, it
was only because it was absolutely necessary to settle and fix such Funds as
were requisite for the weal of Our State. But the Obstinacy of Our Enemies, who
seem to be insensible of their Losses, and who, far from being concerned at the
Misery of the People, seem even to take an Advantage at the Inclination We
express toward a Peace, giving Us a Prospect of the Continuance of the War,
and obliging Us to prepare for it, We are in hop's to make all Europe sensible,
that the Forces of France are Inexhaustible, when they are well managed, and
that We have certain reserves in the Hearts of Our Subjects, and in their Zeal
for their King's Service, and for the Glory of the French Nation. Confiding in
this, We have resolved in order to put Our self in a Condition to maintain the
Expenses of the War, as long as the blindness of Our Enemies will incline them
to refuse a Peace, to establish a general Poll-Tax, to be paid during the time
of the War only, by all Our Subjects, without any distinction, by Hearths or by
Families: And We are the more inclined to look on this Mean as safe and
effectual, seeing that the most zealous and most knowing of Our Subjects of the
Three Orders which compose this State, seem to have prevented Our Resolution;
and moreover that the Estates of Languedoc being assembled according to the
usual Custom, after having granted the free Gift of Three Millions which We had
desired of them, and made Provision for the other usual Charges which the War
has considerably increased, by an Express Decree of their Assembly, of the
Month of December last, carrying their Foresight and the Testimonies of their
Zeal and Affection, beyond whatever We could expect from them, have proposed
this Aid to Us, and set down the Reasons, for which it ought to be preferred to
all the other Extraordinary Means which we might practice hereafter.

And indeed this Poll-Tax extending generally over all Our Subjects, will prove
no great Burden to every one in particular, and being joined to Our usual
Revenues, will raise sufficient Funds, which being Collected without Charge or
Delay, will render the said Aid the more Speedy, Easy and Effectual. We do
moreover believe, that in case the said Collection succeeds, as We have reason
to think it will, it will enable Us for the future, to lay aside the
extraordinary Affairs, to which the necessity of the Times has obliged Us to
have recourse; promising upon the Faith and Word of a King, to annul the said
General Poll-Tax, within Three Months after the Publication of a Peace. For
these Reasons, and other Considerations Us thereunto moving, of Our certain
Knowledge, Absolute Power, and Authority Royal, We have by these Presents,
Signed under our Hand, Said and Declared, do Say and Declare, Will, and it is
Our Pleasure, That, to reckon from the First Day of this Month, a General
Poll-Tax be Established, Raised and Levied throughout Our whole Kingdom,
Countries, Lands and Lordships under Our Command, as well as in the Countries
and Cities Conquered by Us, since the Declaration of this present War, by
Hearths, or by Families, payable Yearly during the present War only, and not to
be Continued or Exacted under any Pretense whatever, Three Months after God's
having granted Us a Peace: That in order thereunto, the Intendants and
Commissioners sent forth in each of the Generalities, Provinces, Countries and
Districts, the Syndics of the Dioceses and of the Estates; and the Gentlemen,
who are to act jointly with the said Intendants according to this present
Declaration, do agree about the Rolls of the Division of the said Poll-Tax,
conformably to the Bill of Rates agreed on in Our Council containing the
Distribution of Our Subjects, in Two and Twenty Classes, which shall be fixed
under the Counter Seal of these Presents. Willing that none of our Subjects of
what Quality or Condition soever, whether Ecclesiastics, Secular or Regular,
Noble, Military or others, should be exempted from the said Poll-Tax, Excepting
only such of our Subjects as are assess'd on the Taille, or other Common
Impositions under Forty Pence, the Mendicant Orders, and the Poor Mendicants,
whereof the Curates of every Parish shall give a List Signed and Certify'd by
them, upon their Honor and Conscience. We are persuaded that the Ecclesiastics
will the more cheerfully submit to this Contribution, seeing that besides that,
the Interest of Religion, and the Zeal which they have always expressed for our
Service Ingages them to it; their Profession hindering them from serving us in
our Armies, where most of them should be called by their Birth, they have no
other way on this occasion to contribute toward the defense of the State of
which they make up the first Body: But in as much as the General Assembly of
the Clergy of our Kingdom is to be held this Year, and that the Testimonies we
have ever received of the Zeal of that Body, makes us presume that they will
continue to give us Proofs of the same; granting us by a Voluntary Gift, Aids
proportionable to the Necessities of the State, and that it would not be
reasonable at the same time to oblige them to Contribute toward the Poll-Tax;
It is Our Will and Pleasure, That at this Time, the Clergy, and the Members
which have a dependence on them, be not comprised in the Assessment which shall
be agreed on in Our Council, nor in the Rolls which shall be made by the
Intendants for the Collection of the Taxes of this present Year. Neither do We
question, but the Nobility of Our Kingdom, who daily Expose their Lives, and
Spill their Blood generously for Our Service, and for the Support of the State,
will as freely Sacrifice so small a portion of their Revenues, as that to which
the Tax which will be laid on Gentlemen will amount. And whereas the Product of
the said Poll-Tax is designed to supply the Expenses of the War, it is
necessary for us to be in a Condition to make use of it during the next
Campaign: Therefore we do Require and Command all those who are liable, to pay
their Assessments in two Terms and Equal Payments; the first on the First day
of March, and the second on the First day of June following. That Our Subjects
who are liable to the Taille, do pay the said Tax into the hands of the
Receivers of the Taille of every Election, or to the Collectors employed by
them, who shall thereupon remit the Fund of their several Collections, to the
Receiver-General of the Finances of their Generality: And the Citizens and
Inhabitants of free Towns, which are not liable to pay the Taille, into the
hands of the Receivers of the Public Stock of the said Towns, who shall
afterward remit the same to the Receivers General of the Finances of the
Generality, and the said Receivers-General to the Keeper of Our Treasure Royal.
That in such Countries in which Estates are held, the Roll of the Assessment of
the said Poll-Tax be made and settled by the Intendants and Commissioners
appointed in order thereunto, Jointly and with the Approbation of the ordinary
Deputies or Syndics of the said Estates, and that all Persons so Assess'd, do
pay their Tax into the hands of the Collectors and Receivers in ordinary of
Free Gifts, Subsidies, Subventions, and other Impositions in Use in the said
Countries, who will afterward remit the Fund of their Collection to the
Treasurers, or Receivers General of the said Estates, and they to the Keeper of
Our Treasure Royal. That the Roll of Assessment upon the Citizens and
Inhabitants of Our good City of Paris, be made and signed by the An Officer in
the Nature of a Lord Mayor.
Provost of the Merchants, and the Sheriffs of Our said City, and that the
Product of the said Imposition, be paid to the Receivers by them appointed, who
shall remit the same into the hands of the Receiver-General of the City, and he
to the Keeper of our Treasure Royal. That the Rolls of the said Poll-Tax,
payable by the Ecclesiastics Secular and Regular, be Signed by the Intendants
and Commissioners appointed, Jointly with and by the Approbation of the Syndic
of every Diocese, and the Money thereby arising paid into the hands of the
Receivers, who shall be appointed by the Intendant or Commissary of the
District, and by the Syndic of every Diocese; Which said Receiver shall
afterward remit the Product of his Receipt into the hands of the
Receiver-General of the Finances, and in the Countries which hold Estates, into
the hands of the Receiver or Treasurer-General of the said Estates, who will
remit the same to the Keeper of our Treasure Royal. That the Rolls of the said
Poll-Tax payable by the Gentry and Nobility, be made by the Intendants and
Commissioners appointed, Jointly with and by the Approbation of a Gentleman out
of every Bailiwick, who shall be chosen and nominated by Us to that Effect, and
the Sums arising from the same paid into the hands of the Receiver appointed by
the Intendant or Commissioner, and by the Gentleman by Us nominated, and the
said Receiver shall remit the Product of his Receipt into the hands of the
Receiver-General of the Finances, and in the Countries which hold Estates into
the hands of the Treasurer or Receiver-General of the said Estates, who shall
remit the same to the Keeper of our Treasure Royal. That the Rolls of the said
Poll-Tax payable by the Officers, Soldiers, Troopers, Dragoons, and by the
Officers, Soldiers and Seamen, as well of Our Men of War, as Galleys, be
settled by the Intendants of Our Provinces, and by those of the Navy, and of
the Galleys, within the District of which the said Forces, both for the Land
and Sea Service, shall happen to be at the time of the said Imposition, and
that the Product thereof be paid into the hands of the Treasurer-General of the
Extraordinary of the War, and of those of the Navy and Galleys, who shall remit
the Fund of their Receipt to the Keeper of our Treasure Royal. That the
Officers of Parliaments and other Courts, who receive their Sallaries by the
hands of a Play Master, do pay their Taxes into the hands of the said
Pay-masters, who shall remit them afterward into the Treasure Royal. And as to
the Princes, Dukes, and Marshals of France, Officers of Our Crown, and other
Officers mentioned in the two first Classis of the Bill of Rates agreed upon in
Our Council, and the Knights and great Officers of the Order of the Holy Ghost,
they shall pay their Tax directly into the hands of the Keeper of Our Treasure
Royal: And the Officers of Our Household, and others Employed upon the
Settlements of Royal Houses, shall pay their Tax according to the Roll agreed
upon by Us in Our Council, into the hands of the Receiver, who shall be by Us
appointed to that Effect. All the Receivers, both General and Particular, who
shall receive the Collection of the said Poll-Tax, either in the whole, or
part, shall, instead of a Sallary, retain the Taxations by Us Imposed upon them
upon the Product of their Receipts: And as to the Method of Accompting, Fees,
and manner of Accounts they shall follow the Regulation by Us made: Prohibiting
their Exacting, or receiving any Duty of Acquittance, or other Penys upon any
pretense whatever, on pain of being convicted of Extortion: We do also hereby
Empower them to compel those who shall delay their Payments, according to the
usual Method practiced in these Cases, excepting the Ecclesiastics, whose
Temporal Estate only they shall be allowed to seize, according to the 15th.
Article of the Seizures and Executions of Our Ordinance of the Year 1667.
Moreover, We do allow the Rolls, Extracts of the said Rolls, Acquittances,
Warrants, Assignations, and all other Expeditions and Proceedings which shall
be made for the Imposition and Recovery of the said Poll-Tax to be made on
Common Paper, and without a Seal, all Edicts, Declarations, and Decrees to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. And to prevent the Disputes which
might arise about the Imposition and recovery of the said Poll-Tax, It is Our
Will and Pleasure, That those who have many Places, Titles, Dignities or
Qualities, and who upon that account might be comprehended in several Rolls,
shall only be obliged to pay once, according to the highest Tax, which they are
liable to upon the account of all those Qualities. That the Sons of Families
being Married, or having Offices, shall be assessed apart in the Rolls, tho
they live actually in their Father or Mother's House. That the Children of
Families, of Age or under Age, enjoying the Estate acquired by their Father or
Mother's decease, shall be Taxed at the Rate of the Fourth part of what their
Father should have been obliged to pay, according to the Bill of Rates agreed
on in Our Council. That Widows shall only be comprised in the said Rolls, for
the Moiety of the Tax to which their Husbands should have been Assess'd. And
that Women parted from their Husbands shall be Taxed in their private Capacity
to half the Sums to which their Husbands shall be Taxed. And whereas it might
happen that several of Our Subjects would pretend to be comprised in none of
the Twenty Two Classis mentioned in the Bill of Rates fixed under the
Counter-Seal of these Presents; We do declare, that all those who shall not be
particularly comprehended in one of the said Classis, shall be Assessed by the
said Intendants and Commissioners appointed, alone, or by the said Intendants,
jointly with the Deputies and Syndics of the Countries in which Estates are
held, the Syndics of Dioceses, and Gentlemen by Us nominated, if they are
Ecclesiastics, Nobles, or inhabiting in a Country in which Estates are held, at
the Rate of that Classis, to which their Profession, Condition or Quality has
the greatest Relation. And whereas several Alterations may happen from Year to
Year in the Condition of the Persons liable to the said Poll-Tax: It is Our
Will and Pleasure, That upon Notice given thereof to Our said Intendants and
Commissioners appointed, they shall have the Power alone, or Jointly with the
Syndics of the Estates, of the Dioceses, and with the Gentlemen by us
Nominated, to rectify their Rolls, to increase or diminish their Taxes in that
of the following Year, sending an Account of the said Augmentations or
Diminutions by them made, to the Comptroler General of Our Finances. And
whereas it is very material for the Good of Our Service, and for the Ease of
Our People to prevent whatever might retard the Raising of the said Poll-Tax,
or put the Persons assess'd to Charges: It is also Our Will and Pleasure, That
all Disputes which might arise upon the Account of the said Imposition and
Recovery, shall be Judged summarily and without Charges by the said Intendants
and Commissioners appointed, and in relation to Our good City of Paris, by the
Provost of the Merchants, and the Sheriffs, whom we do hereby appoint to be the
sole and absolute Judges thereof; so bidding all our other Courts and Judges to
take Cognizance of the same: It is also Our Will and Pleasure, That whatever
shall be ordained by them, shall be Executed by Provision, allowing them
however an Appeal to Our Council. We do also declare, That by these Presents,
and by the Establishment of the said Poll-Tax, We do no-wise design to derogate
from the Privileges, Prerogatives and Rights of any of the Orders of Our
Kingdom, which We will maintain and preserve. Therefore We do Command Our
Trusty and Well-beloved Counselors the Persons holding Our Court of
Parliament, Chamber of Accounts, and Court of Aids of Paris, to cause these
Presents to be Read, Published and Registered, and the Contents thereof
carefully and exactly to observe, and execute, according to the Form and Tenor
thereof, putting a stop to all Troubles and Oppositions thereunto Contrary:
Willing also, That Credit be given to the Copies of these Presents, Compared
and Examined by one of Our Trusty and Well-beloved Counselors and Secretaries,
as much as to the Original; for such is Our Pleasure: In Witness whereof, We
have caused Our Seal to be affixed to these Presents.

Given at Verfailles, on the 18th. of January, of the Year of our Lord 1695.
and of Our Reign the 52d. Signed Lewis, and lower by the King, Phelypeaux, and
Sealed.
Registered, and Ordered, upon the Motion of the King's Attorney General, to be
Executed according to the Form and Tenor thereof.

At Paris in Parliament, on the 21. Jan. 1695. Signed, Dongois.


Registered in the Chamber of Accounts, and Ordered, upon the Motion of the
King's Attorney General, to be in force and to be Executed according to the
Form and Tenor thereof.

The Offices being Assembled, on the 22d. of January 1695. Signed,


Registered in the Court of Aids, and Ordered, upon the Motion of the King's
Attorney General, to be Executed according to the Form and Tenor thereof, on
the of January 1695.

Signed,



TARIF, OR A Bill of Rates,
CONTAINING The Distribution of the Classis, and the Regulation of the
Assessments of the General Poll-Tax, Ordained by the King of France' s
Declaration.
The first Classis. 2000 Livres.
THE Dauphin. The Duke of Orleans. The Duke of Chartres. Madam de Guise. The
Prince of Conde. The Duke of Bourbon. The Princess Dowager of Conti. The Prince
of Conti. The Duke du Maine. The Count de Toulouze. The Duchess of Verneuil.
The Lord Chancellor. The President of the Royal Council of the Finances. The
Ministers of State. The Secretaries of State. The Comptroller General of the
Finances. The Keepers of the Treasure Royal. The Treasurer of the Extraordinary
of the War. The Treasurers of the Navy. The General Farmers.
The second Classis. 1500 Livres.
THE Princes. The Dukes. The Marshals of France. The Officers of the Crown. The
first President of the Parliament of Paris. The Governors of Provinces. The
Counselors of the Royal Council of the Finances. The Intendants of the
Finances. The Treasurers of the Casual Revenues.
The third Classis. 1000 Livres.
THE Knights and great Officers of the Order of the Holy Ghost. The Judges of
Provinces. The Vice-Admirals. The first Presidents of the Superior Courts of
Paris. The Presidents a Mortier of Paris. The first Presidents of the
Parliaments of the Provinces. The Secretaries of the Council. The Receivers
General of the Finances. The Treasurers of the Countries in which Estates are
held. The Treasurers of the Gallys. The Receivers of the Exhibitions of Paris.
The fourth Classis. 500 Livres.
THE Counselors of State. The Attorneys and Advocates General of the
Parliament of Paris. The Register in Chief of the Parliament of Paris. The
Presidents of the Chamber of Accounts, Court of Aids of Paris, and Grand
Council. The Provost of Paris. The Lieutenant Civil, or Judge in Civil Causes.
The Lieutenant de Police. The Provost of the Merchants. The Captain-Lieutenants
of the Companies of Gens d'armes, and of the Chevaux Legers. The Receivers
General of the Clergy. The Great Audiencers. The Keepers of the Rolls. The
Comptrollers General of the Great Chancery. The Treasurers of the Seal. The
Treasurers of the Artillery. The Commissioners of the Real Seasarers of Paris.
The fifth Classis, 400 Livres.
THE Masters of Requests Titular and Veteran, and the Counselors of Honor of
the Parliament of Paris. The Attorney General of the Chamber of Accounts of
Paris. The Attorneys and Advocates General of the Grand Council, and of the
Court of Aids of Paris, and the Registers in Chief. The first Presidents of the
Chambers of Accounts, and Courts of Aids of the Provinces. The Intendants, of
the Navy, and of the Provinces, who are not Masters of Requests. The Governors
of Frontier Towns. The Registers of the Council, and the Keeper of the Minutes
of the Council. The Register in Chief of the Chamber of Accounts of Paris. The
Treasures of the Fortifications. The Treasures of the Buildings. The Treasures
of the Switz Forces. The Custodes of the Treaties agreed on in Council.
The sixth Classis, 300 Livres.
THE Lieutenants General of the King's Armies. The Lieutenants General of the
Navy and of the Galleys. The Lieutenants General of the Artillery. The King's
Lieutenants of the Provinces, whose Places are Hereditary. The Governors of
Garrisons, etc. within the Kingdom. The Sub Lieutenants of the Gensd'armes, and
Chevaux Legers. The first Presidents of the Superior Councils of the
Provinces. The Presidents a Mortier of the Provincial Parliaments. The
Presidents of the Inquests, and Requests of the Parliament of Paris. The
Particular, Criminal Judges, and the King's Attorney of the A Prison so called.
Chatelet of Paris. The Registers in Chief, Civil and Criminal of the Chatelet
of Paris. The Treasurers of the Mace of Gold, or Golden Bullion. The General
Farmers of the Posts.
The seventh Classis, 250 Livres.
THE Marquesses, Earls, Vicounts and Barons. The Provost of the Isle, The
Lieutenant Criminal of the Short Robe, and the Captain of the W^^cle.
Chevalier du Guet. The King's Attorney, the Register and Receiver of the
Townhouse of Paris. The Registers appointed for the Registry of the Grand
Chamber of the Parliament of Paris. The Pay-Masters of the Rents. The Receivers
of the Tailles. The Receivers of the Demain. The Receivers of Fines, Receivers
of Fees and Vacations, Receivers of Exhibitions, and the Commissioners of the
Real Seizures of the Cities in which there are Parliaments, Chambers of
Accounts, or Courts of Aids. The Treasurers of Bridges and Causey's. The
Receivers of the Admiralties. The Comptrollers of the Posts. The Comptrollers
of the Switz Forces. The Pay Masters of the Sallaries of Superior Courts. The
Directors of the Farms. The Cash-keepers of the Aids and Gabelles. The Sub
Farmers.
The eighth Classis, 200 Livres.
THE Marshals de Camp of the King's Armies. The Flag Officers of Men of War and
Galleys. The Quarter Masters General of the King's Camps and Armies. The
Ensigns, Cornets, and Guidons, of the Gens d'armes, and Chevaux Legers. The
Counselors of Superior Courts of Paris. The Grand Bailiffs of the Sword. The
Masters of the Chamber of Accounts of Paris. The Advocate General of the
Chamber of Accounts of Paris. The Attorney General of the Requests de L'hostel.
The Judge of the Marble Table. The Great Masters of Waters and Forests. The
King's Secretaries of the Great Chancery. The Presidents and Treasurers of
France, of Paris. The Register of the Presentations and Affirmations of the
Parliament of Paris. The first Clarks of the Secretaries of State, of the
Comptroller General of the Finances, of the Treasure Royal, and^^^^al Revenues.
The ninth Classis, 150 Livres.
THE Brigadiers of the King's Armies. The Marshals General of the Horse. The
Majors General of the Foot and Horse of the King's Armies. The Captains of the
King's Ships and Galleys. The Masters of the Chambers of Accounts of the
Provinces. The Correctors and Auditors of the Accounts of Paris. The
Counselors, Knights of Honor, Attorneys and Advocates General of the
Superior Courts of the Provinces. The Registers of Extraordinary Commissions.
The Clerks of the General Comptrollers Office of the Finances. The Comptrollers
General of the Navy and Galleys. The Comptrollers General of the Gabelles. The
Clarks of the Secretaries and Registers of the Council.
The tenth Classis, 120 Livres.
THE Colonels of Foot, Horse and Dragoons of the King's Armies, and other
Officers having the Rank of Colonels. The King's Lieutenants or Sub Governors
of Frontier Towns. The Colonel of the Arches of the City of Paris. The
Gentlemen Lords of Parishes. The Advocate General of the Requests de L'hostel.
The Sheriffs and Counselors of the City of Paris. The Notaries and Secretaries
of other Superior Courts of Paris. The Vshers of the Council and of the Great
Chancery. The Presidents Treasurers of France, the King's Advocates, Attorneys,
and Registers of the Offices of the Provinces. The King's Advocates of the
Chatelet of Paris. The Comptrollers of the Mare of Gold, or Bullion. The
Director General of the Mint. The Notaries of the Chatelet of Paris. The
Expeditionary Bankers at the Court of Rome. The Bankers and Agents of the
Exchange. The Book-keepers, and the Comptroller General of the Remenants of the
Chamber of Accounts at Paris.
The eleventh Classis, 100 Livres.
THE Commissaries of the War. The Commissaries of the Navy. The Comptrollers
General of the Ordinary and Extraordinary of the War. The Correctors and
Auditors of the Chambers of Accounts of the Provinces. The Particular, and
Criminal Judges, the King's Attorney, and Registers in Chief of the Baliwicks,
and Seneschalships under the Jurisdiction of Parliaments. The Knights of Honor,
and the Counselors of the Chatelet of Paris. The Mayors of Cities in which
there are Parliaments, or other Superior Courts. The King's Secretaries in the
Little Chanceries. The Receivers of Fines, Fees and Vacations, the Receivers of
Exhibitions, and the Commissaries of the Real Seizures of the Cities in which
there is an Officer of the Finances, or a Presidial Court. The Clerks of the
Secretaries of State, and Comptroller General of the Finances. The Comptroller
of the Pay-masters of the Sallaries of Superior Courts. Wholesale Dealers.
The first Vshers of the Parliament, and other Superior Courts of paris.
The twelfth Classis, 80 Livres.
THE Knights of Honor, King's Advocates and Attorneys, and Registers in Chief
of the Presidial Courts of the Provinces. The Wax-chafers, Coffer-Carriers and
other Inferior Officers of the Great Chancery.
The thirteenth Classis, 60 Livres.
THE Sub-Governors and Majors of Garrisons. The Engineers-Directors of
Fortifications. The Presidents and Lieutenants Criminal of the Elections and
Salt Lofts. The Judges of the Constableship, and of the Admiralties. The
Sheriffs, King's Attorneys, Registers, and Receivers of the Common Bank of the
Cities in which Parliaments, or other Superior Courts are held. The Mayors of
the Cities of the second Order. The Judges keepers of the Mint of Paris. The
Substitutes of the King's Officers of the Superior Courts of Paris. The
Comptrollers of the Pay-masters of the Sallaries of Superior Courts. The
Clarks of the Intendants of the Finances, of the Treasure Royal, and Casual
Revenues. The Receivers General of the Gabelles. The Inhabitants of Large
Cities, living on their Estates.
The fourteenth Classis, 50 Livres.
THE Lientenants of the Artillery. The Comptrollers of the Ordinary and
Extraordinary of the Wars. The Substitutes of the King's Officers in the
Superior Courts of the Provinces. The Commissaries of the Chatelet of Paris.
The Sub Farmers of the Posts.
The fifteenth Classis, 40 Livres.
THe Provosts of the Marshals. Gentlemen Possessing Fiefs and Castles. The
Quarter Masters of the Gens d'armes and Chevaux Legers. The Lieutenant of the
Archers of Paris. The Substitutes of the King's Attorney of the Chatelet of
Paris. The Comptrollers of the Rents of the Townhouse of Paris. The Registers
of the Presidial and other Royal Courts of Justice. The Aldermen of Paris. The
Clarks Receivers of the Farms. The Inhabitants of the Cities of thy second
Order, living on their Estates. The Intendants of Private Affairs and Families.
The Farmers of Lands and Estates the Rents of which exceed 3000 Livres. The
Farmers of Mills, the Rents of which exceed 2000 Livres.
The sixteenth Classis, 30 Livres.
THE Professors in Law. The Grand Masters, Bursers, and Heads of Colleges. The
Officers of Royal Baliwicks, of Elections, Salt Lofts, of Waters and Forests,
of the Constableship, of the Admiralties, and the Judges of Transportations.
The Judges, Attorneys, Fiscals and Registers of Dutchies, to which the Title of
Peer is annexed. The Sheriffs, King's Attorneys, Registers, and Receivers of
the Common Stock of the Cities of the second Order. The Substitutes of the
King's Attorneys in Cities in which there are Parliaments, or other Superior
Courts. The Mayors of small Cities. The Pay masters and Comptrollers of the
Sallaries of Presidial Courts. The Advocates of the Council. The Officers of
little Chanceries. The first Vshers of the Superior Courts of Provinces. The
Vshers Audiencers of the Chatelet of Paris. The Great Shopkeepers. Merchants
dealing in Corn, Wine and Wood. The Secretaries of the Counselors of State,
Masters of Requests, Intendants, Governors of Provinces, Marshals of France,
Generals of Armies, Lieutenant Generals by Land or Sea, Judges Civil, de
police, Criminal, of the King's Attorney in the Chatelet of Paris, of the
Provost of the Merchants, and of the Attorneys and Advocates General of
Superior Courts. Ordinaries. The Messengers of Cities in which there are
Parliaments, or other Superior Courts. Part of the Farmers and Husbandmen.
The seventeenth Classis, 20 Livres.
THE Lieutenants and Esigns of the King's Ships and Galleys. The Colonels and
Majors of the Train-bands. The Commissaries of the Artillery. The Exempt of the
Archers of the City of Paris. The Professors of the College Royal of Paris, and
others as well of Paris as other Provinces, who receive Pensions and Sallaries
from the King. The Physicians, Surgeons and Apothecaries of Paris. The
Notaries of Cities in which Parliaments on other Superior Courts are held. The
Judges, Keepers of the Mint of Provinces. The Advocates of Superior Courts. The
Attorneys of the Parliaments, Superior Courts, and Requests of the Palace. The
Reporters of Causes in Superior Courts. The Vshers of the Superior Courts, and
Requests of the Palace. The Cryers de Corpse and de Vin of Paris. The Particular
Directors of the Mint Part of the Vintners of Paris. Part of the Farmers and
Husbandmen.
The eighteenth Classis, 10 Livres.
THE Captains and Lieutenants of the Train-bands. The Commissaries of the
Musters. The Captains and Majors of Horse and Dragoons. The Enginiers of
Gamion. The Aid Majors and Captains of Gates. The Rectors, Chancellors,
Attorneys of Nations, and Deputies of Universities. The King's Attorney's
Substitutes in Presidial Courts. The Physicians, Surgeons, and Apothecaries
of Cities of the first and second Order. The Advocates and Attorneys of the
Chatelet of Paris. The Comptrollers of the Taxes of Costs of Councils,
Parliaments and other Superior Courts. The Comptrollers of Writs in Cities, in
which Parliaments or other Superior Courts are held. The Notaries of Cities of
the Second Order. The Comptrollers of the Patrimonial Revenues and Grants of
the Cities of the first Order. The Vshers of the Rod on Horseback, and a la
douzaine of the Chatelet of Paris. The Overseers of the City of Paris. The
Artists and Registers of the Scrutore of Paris. The Sworn Architects. The
Meeters of Wood, Coals, Brokers, Gaugers, and other Officers of the Policy, and
of the Ports. The Barbers and Periwig. Makers of Cities of the first and second
Order. Handy-crafts Men of great Cities keeping Shops and Journey-Men. Part of
the Vintners of Paris. Part of the Farmers and Husbandmen. Part of those who
labor in Vineyards.
The nineteenth Classis, 6 Livres.
THE Captains and Majors of Foot. The Gentlemen who have neither Fiefs nor
Castles. The Regents, Beadles and Messengers and of the Universities. The
Sheriffs, King's Attorneys, Registers and Receivers of the public Stock of
little Towns. The Mayors of the Walled Towns. The Receivers of Exhibitions and
Fines, and the Commissaries of the Real Seizures of Royal Courts of Justice.
The Notaries of small Towns. The Comptrollers of Patrimonial Revenues, and
Grants of Cities of the second Order. The Vshers Audiencers of Presidial
Courts. The Roll-keepers of little Towns, living on their Estates. Part of the
Vintners of Paris, and those of the Enclosed Towns. Small Ordinaries. The
Handycrafts-Men of the Cities of the Second Order, keeping Shops and
Journey-men. The Messenger of little Cities and Enclosed Towns. The
Post-masters.
The twentieth Classis, 3 Livres.
THE Lieutenants, Sub-Lieutenants and Ensigns of Foot. The Cornets of Horse and
Dragoons. The chief Clerks of Ships and Galleys. The Quarter Masters of Horse
and Dragoons. The Lieutenants and Exempts of Marshalsees. The Store-Keepers of
the Artillery. The Keepers of the Navy. The Archers of the Town house of Paris,
of the Provost of the Isle, and of the Lieutenant of the short Robe. The Judges
of Seignerial Courts of Justice. The Advocates and Attorneys of Presidial and
other Royal Courts of Justice. The Reporters of Causes in Presidial and other
Royal Courts of Justice. The Comptrollers of the Taxes of the Costs of the
Presidial Courts, Baliwicks, and other Royal Courts of Justice. The Sheriff's,
King's Attorney's, Registers, and Receivers of the common Stock of small Cities
and Enclosed Towns. The Physicians, Surgeons, and Apothecaries of Little
Cities and Enclosed Towns. The Treasurers Collectors in Languedoc. The
Registers of the Rolls of Tailles, and other Impositions. The Attorneys,
Fiscals, and Registers of Seignerial Courts of Justice. The Vshers, Attorneys
and Sergeants of Royal Courts of Justice. The Cryers de Corpse and de Vin, of
the Provinces. The sworn Aulnagers of Linen Clothes, and the Warder of the
Linen Cloth-Hall at Paris. The Comptrollers of the Farms. The Artists and
Register of the Scrutore of the Provinces. The Gaugers of Waters and Forests.
The Notaries and Pleaders of Towns and Villages. The Comptrollers of the
Patrimonial Revenues and Grants of Little Cities and Enclosed Towns. The
Substitutes of the King's Attorneys in small Cities and Communities. The
Sergeants Keepers of Waters and Forests. The Essayers and Ingravers of the
Mint. The Clerks of the Mint. The Tole Gatherers. The Handicrafts-men of little
Cities and Enclosed Towns, being House keepers. The Innkeepers, and drinking
Houses of Enclosed Towns. The Millers, whose Rents are under 2000 Livres. Part
of the Farmers and Husbandmen. Part of those that work in the Vineyards.
The one and twentieth Classis, 2 Livres.
THE Gens d'armes and Chevaux Legers, Kettle-Drums and Trumpeters of the said
Troops. The Sergeants of Infantry. The Archers of the Marshalsees. The
Sergeants of Seignerial Courts of Justice. The Handycrafts-men of Towns and
Villages. Part of those that work in Vineyards.
The two and twentieth and last Classis, 1 Livre.
Soldiers, Troopers, Dragoons, Seamen, Trumpeters, Kettle-Drummers, Drummers
and Hautboys. Laborers and Journey-men. And generally all the Inhabitants of
Towns and Villages rated 40 Pence on the Taille and upwards, who are not
comprised in the preceding Classis.
Done and agreed upon at the Royal Council of the Finances, held at Versailles,
on the 18th of January, 1695. Signed, PHELYPEAUX.

THE French King's EDICT, ORDERING All Communities both Regular and Secular,
and all Particular Persons (who have any Water from Rivers, Brooks, Springs and
Fountains, or otherwise, whether for the Ornament of their Houses, or
Improvement of their Estates) to pay such Sums as shall be laid upon them in
Council, in order to have the Benefit of the said Waters confirmed to them for
the future.

Given at Fountain-bleau, October. 1694. and Recorded in Parliament.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane,
1695.

THE French King's EDICT, ORDERING A TAX UPON All RIVERS, BROOKS, SPRINGS,
FOVNTAINS, etc.
LEWIS by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarre,
To all who are present and to come, Greeting.
The Distribution, Conducting and Ordering of the Waters derived from Streams
and Rivers Navigable or not Navigable, and others which run either through the
Jurisdiction of Our Demain, or through the public Roads within the Extent of
Our Kingdom, being one of Our principal Rights of Royalty or Demain, the Kings,
Our Predecessors, took a particular care to prevent their being Usurped: In the
mean time, We are informed, that diverse of Our Subjects have in Contravention
to our Orders, let out or turned off the Water of Navigable Rivers and Streams,
and have moreover taken the Liberty to convey the Waters of the said Rivers
Navigable and not Navigable, Brooks, Springs, Fountains and others, through the
great Roads, Streets and public Places, the Property of which belongs unto us;
which occasions a prejudice so much the more considerable, that by these
Enterprises they alter the Course of Navigation, and deprive the Public of the
benefit which they might reap from the same, and that they do many times also
render the Ways unpassable, by overflowing of the same; which does also oblige
Us to be at the Expense of Ditches for maintaining the Canals, and augments Our
Yearly Charge, for keeping up of Our Bridges and Causeys. We are also informed,
that diverse particular Persons or Communities, have let out, turned off, or
stopped the Waters of Rivers Navigable or not Navigable, and Brooks, Springs and
Fountains, in the Extent of those Lands, whose high Jurisdiction appertains to
Us, without having obtained any Permission from Us. These Considerations
prevailed with Henry II. to enquire into such Usurpations, and for that effect
did expedite his Letters Patents in 1549, by which amongst other things, it is
expressly forbid, that any particular Persons should have Water, except the same
be alienated for their Use, on consideration of a Rent agreed on by the
Commissaries deputed thereunto. There was also an Act of our Council,
prohibiting the same, dated October. 24, 1687, betwixt the Farmer of our Demains,
and the Consul and Community of our City of Arles, which contained the like
Prohibitions. In such sort, that, according to the Tenor of those Letters
Patents, and that Act, We have Right to declare, That all those who have Water,
have incurred a Fine for enjoying the same, contrary to the said Declaration,
and the Acts issued for Execution of the same. Nevertheless, having taken into
Consideration, that this Fine joined to the Sums which We may pretend to
against the said Possessors for time past, would much diminish the Value of
their Stocks and Estates, We have judged it more convenient to confirm and
maintain them in the Possession of the said Waters, on paying of a Moderate
Sum, in consideration of which, they may enjoy the same as in time past:
Whereunto We are so much the more inclinable, that by securing the public
Roads and Navigable Rivers from such Attempts for the future, We do in some
measure make up the Losses of Our Demain, and procure unto Our selves a present
Supply from many Persons who have not hitherto contributed any thing to the
extraordinary Charges of the State. For these Causes, and others Us thereunto
moving, and from Our own certain Knowledge, full Power, and Royal Authority, We
have by this Present, Perpetual and Irrevocable Edict, Said, Statuted and
Ordained, and Say, Statute, Ordain, Will and Please, that in the space of one
Month at farthest, from the Day of the Enrolling of this present Edict, and the
Publication thereof in the Baliwicks, Senesohalships and other Royal Courts,
all Communities Secular or Regular, and all particular Persons of what Quality
and Condition soever, who have Waters derived from Navigable Rivers within the
limits of Our Kingdom, or Countries, Lands and Lordships subject to Us; As also
those who have Waters derived from Rivers that are not Navigable, Brooks,
Springs and Fountains, or otherwise, which they stop or retain about the Roads,
or bring it across the Streets, Ways and Public Places for their own use,
whether it be to Water their Lands, Embellish their Houses, or what other Use
soever; Also those who have let out, or turned off the Waters throughout the
High Jurisdictions which belong to Us, and in those by Us Mortgaged; shall be
obliged to give unto him whom We shall entrust with the Execution of the
present Edict, his Proctors, Deputies and Substitutes, exact Declarations of
the Quantity of Lines of Water which they enjoy, from whence they flow, the
Houses and Edifices bettered or beautified by them, the Places, Streets and
Ways through which they pass, and what Acres of Land belonging unto them, are
thereby watered, on pain of being fined in 500 Livres, which shall neither be
remitted nor moderated upon any Pretext whatsoever. We Ordain, That upon those
Declarations, it shall be forthwith Enacted in the Rolls of our Council, in
which the said Communities and particular Persons shall be Taxed, that is to
say, those of Our good City, Provostship, Vicounty, Presidial and Province of
Paris, at the Rate of 150 Livres per Line. Those who enjoy any in other Cities
of Our Kingdom, where there is a Parliament Chamber of Accounts, Courts of
Revenue, Provostships or Baliwicks of the same, at the rate of 100 Livres per
Line: Yet so, nevertheless, that the said Taxes may not exceed the Sum of 1000
Livres for each Grant, for what Quantity of Lines soever. Those of other Cities
of our Kingdom at the rate of 50 Livres per Line; yet so as their Taxes may not
exceed the Sum of 500 Livres. The Proprietors of Watered Lands, at the rate of
3 Livres per Acre. And those who serve themselves of the said Waters for what
other Use soever, whether for Profit or Ornament, without the Extent of the
said Cities and other Places designed as above, at 25 Livres per Line, yet so
as their Taxes may not exceed the Sum of 250 Livres; which Sums shall be paid,
as also the 2 Sous per Livre of the same, the one half within a Month after the
signification of the said Rolls, and the other half in the Month following, to
such Person as we shall name, to recover the same, his Proctors, Deputies and
Substitutes, viz. the Principal upon their Acquittance, bearing a Promise to
furnish them with a Discharge from the Keeper of Our Royal Treasury; and the 2
Sous per Livre, upon their bare Receipt. By means whereof, it is Our Will that
they be confirmed in their Right, Possession and Enjoyment, from the Grant of
the Mayors and Sheriffs, without being liable to be dispossessed for any Cause
or Pretext whatsoever, nor obliged to pay unto Us, by reason thereof, any
Annual Sum; and in case of Default, and not payment of the said Sums, within
the time above specified, that they shall be Constrained thereunto, as for our
proper Revenues and Affairs; And in case that the Houses, Goods and Estates
where there is Water, shall come to be really seized, It is our Will, that the
Sums for which they shall be Comprised in the Rolls, shall be paid out of the
Money arising from the Leases so seized, or that which shall be made by the
Sale of the said Goods preferrable to all other Creditors. We don't however
comprehend in this present Enquiry, the Canals, Aqueducts, and other Works,
which serve for the Conveyance of Waters of Public Fountains, Hospitals, or
Almshouses of Lay administration. In case of opposition to the Execution of
the said Rolls, It is Our Will that they should not be received until the said
Persons from whom they shall be due do in the first place consign the Third of
their Taxes. We Command all Our Officers, also those of Lords, and all Mayors,
Sheriffs, Clerks, and other Municipal Officers of Cities, Towns and Parishes of
Our Kingdom, Countries, Lands and Lordships, under Our Jurisdiction, to furnish
him who shall be employed by Us for the Recovery of the said Taxes, Extracts of
the Grants which they have made to any for the Enjoyment of the said Waters;
for each of which Extracts, they shall be paid Four Sous for all Charges, the
Stampt-Paper being therein included. We do expressly discharge all those who
shall find themselves Comprehended in the Rolls, enacted in the Execution of
Our present Edict, to oblige any of those who grant them, the enjoyment of the
said Waters, to Vouch or make good the Grant, in order to the Re-demanding of
the Sums which they shall have paid unto us. We give it likewise in Commandment
to Our beloved and faithful Counselors, those who hold Our Court of
Parliament, Chamber of Accounts, and Court of Aids at Paris, That they cause
this Our present Edict to be Read, Published and Recorded (even in the Vacation
time) and the Contents thereof to observe and execute, according to the Form
and Tenor, ceasing from, and making to cease, all Letts and Impediments which
may be brought or given, any Edicts, Declarations, Regulations, and other
things to the Contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding, from which we have
derogated, and do by these Presents derogate. To the Copies whereof, collated
by one of Our beloved and faithful Counselors and Secretaries, it is Our Will,
that Credit be given as unto the Original, for such is Our Pleasure.

Given at Fountainbleau in the Month of October, and the Year of Grace 1694.
and of Our Reign the 52d. Signed Louis, over against it Boucherat, and
underneath, By the King, Phelypeaux, and feal'd with the Great Seal of Green
Wax.
Recorded and Heard, at the Instance of the King's Attorney General, that it
might be executed according to the Form and Tenor; and the Collated Copies sent
to the Courts, Baliwicks, and Seneschalships of Jurisdiction, there to be
likewise Read, Published and Recorded, the Substitutes of the said King's
Attorney General being commanded to give their Assistance thereunto, and to
Certify the Court thereof in a Months time, according to the Act of this Day.

At Paris in Parliament 17 November. 1694. Signed Du Tiller.



FINIS.

