A ROYAL LETTER SENT FROM THE KING OF FRANCE TO THE KING of ENGLAND.

Wherein is expressed, 1. His Royal solicitation for the Kings Majesty's
security in his kingdoms. 2. His Affection to his Sister the Queen. 3.
Concerning the proceedings of the Parliament of England. 4. A brief relation
of the Queen Mother. 5. Touching the Fugitive delinquents (as the Lord Finch
and others) who Fled into France. 6. Concerning his resolution about the Irish
Affairs.


L R
royal French blazon or coat of arms

First printed at Paris by Peter de Boys, and now reprinted in London for Roger
Garthwaite. 1641.

The Copy of a Royal Letter, sent from the King of France to the King of
England.
ROYAL BROTHER,
ALthough the Imperial Diadem has crowned each of us by the omnipotent
providence of the Almighty, and those once dis-united, might exasperate Our
princely mind against the British Nation, yet the Noble lenity of your
Clement Nature, and the propitious consideration of those impendent and
intricate perils, wherein your Kingdoms are dangerously involved, have
respectively induced me to declare our good exortations and wel-wishes to you.
And whereas we maid rely understood and with credible information received
intelligence of the rebellious insurrection of Ireland, We did respectively
sympathize with your sollicitous deploration of their disastrous proceedings,
and will (as shall be perspicuously declared hereafter) vindicate their furious
rebellion; But your Majesty (as has been prou^d (...) by report) has been
misinformed of diverse particulars, which not only casts an indigne aspersion
on our royal Name, and Monarchical Throne, but highly derogates from Our
Imperial Prerogative and innocuous intention. It has been publicly
divulged, That we always made a ludi^^ious dirision at the perilous
distractions of your Kingdoms, and did not only rejoice at the d^sloyalty of
Ireland, but also instigated those rebels with a calumnious suggestion to
proceed in their bloody Tyranny, as if they should depend in expecta^ion of
our anxiliary assistance. But we do utterly defy and detest this sc^^^^lous
and treacherous imputation reflected on Us. and do withal desire that the
Authors of this ^^^entitious Fable fathered on us, may suffer exemplary
punishment: For We royally protest and ^nfirme with our cordall all (...) on
that whereas the doleful intelligence of the British distractions came to Our
first audience; We were so far from entertaining any de^isive al^ ^^ly, that
We seriously rather deplored the preposterous condition of the same; And as for
the reb^llion in Ireland, it did so stimulate Our Just indignation, that We
always disaffected the same, and did not only (...) Our Subjects from
presuming to conioyne with them, but also did publish a Proclamation to the
Epidemicall Aspect of all in disswasion, from that (...) Wherefore in this
(...) We are infinitely ^^^sed, and our royal Clemency blasted with the
infamous tongue of audacity, for rather a reciprocal sympathy of those
grievances, did concur in our Princely lenity, then a contradictory antipathy
of vindicative resolution found any entertainment of Tyrannical habitation in
Our commoted Ire. Although many fugitive Delinquents (as Finch and others)
escaping from Impartial Justice supposed to find their Asylum in our realm,
yet impute not so vicious a connivance in our unspotted Innocence, for we will
never protect them from impunity. First then the fraternall concatenation of
Brotherhood (which by the legitimate bond of Nature We are enjoined unto) does
foment a sollicitous Indulgency in Our Princely, mind to concord and co-union,
and not to inmate the precipitious demolition or at the least extenuation of
each others Crown. Secondly, the singular love of our Sister (which likewise by
the respective injunction of Nature we are induced unto it does by a sweet and
delicious compulsion injoyne I Will to corroborate, and not to precipitate each
others Throne. Lastly, the Firm League made between us (which by the national
Law of Kingdoms we are bound to observe) does propitiously instigate us to
preserve each others Imperial Diadems. All these unitely concurring together
to the plausible composition of mutual tranquillity did respectively injoyne us
in a reciprocal coaction to declare Our Royal Intents, and indulgent desires
for the flourishing prosperity of England. We applaud you for the royal
entertainment of our Mother (although We have little cause, in regard of her
intestine Stratagem against Us) yet We conceive had she continued longer in
England, she would have suddenly brought the State to a destructive ruin:
notwithstanding all the sinister deprecations which we wish her, are, that in
what Climate soever she resides in, at length she may peaceably consummate her
days in an happy period. We now involve our intentions to the dangerous
affairs of Icland, whose barbarous insolency We will sedulously endeavor to
cohibit in the limited termination of Loyalty and Obedience to you their dread
Sovereign. What I now implore, and desire more is contained in these concise
subsequent Declarations: First, that your Majesty would be graciously pleased
to expedite and animate your Parliament to deliberate things in a conclusive
confirmation, that as they have begun Nobly, they may conclude with more
fortunate success to the future security of the Realm: for procrastination in
State matters does either discourage some in the same Nation, whose imminent
grievances, are not easied, or at least does animate foreign Enemies to
perfect any conspiracy against a Kingdom; but a sudden conclusion does both
create alacrity in the Joyful minds of Subjects, and also prevent what
stratageme may be in agitation. Secondly, We desire that your Parliament would
correspondently accord with your Majesty without any opposition on either
sides, that thus unitely concurring together the weighty affairs of the
Kingdom may be determinated with more facility. Lastly, what we desire more,
is, that you would expedite your consultations for the more propirious relief
of Ireland: And for our self we royally protest, that we will confirm our
former resolution to curb the Tyrannical insolency of those Rebels, which
shall be a sufficient testimony of our indulgent affection to your Majesty's
prosperous (...), and the undoubted security of your (...).

^ 1641.


