THE French King's Declaration To prevent the Assemblies of the NEW CONVERTS,
In the Provinces of his KINGDOM.
HIS Majesty having had Notice of several Assemblies and considerable
Commotions that have been made in his Provinces of Dauphine and Vivarez, from
the First till the Twentieth of the Month of February last, by the new Converts
of the said Provinces; and meaning to put a stop to the Continuation of
suchlike Disorders, and hinder that the like may not happen for the future,
either in the said Provinces of Dauphine and Vivarez, or in the other Provinces
of his Realm, His Majesty has Ordered, and does Order, Wills, and Commands,
That Process be immediately entered and perfected against all and every such
Person and Persons, as well of the said Provinces of Dauphine and Vivarez, as
of others of his Realm, who have been present, or shall hereafter be present in
the said Assemblies. And that such of the said Criminals as have been, or shall
be caught in the Fact, be punished with Death, conformably to what is directed
by His Majesty's Edict of the Month of October, 1685. and his Declaration of
the First of July, 1686. And that as for others who could not be seized upon
the Spot, but who, nevertheless, shall be known to have assisted at the said
Meetings, that they, by the Orders of the Governors and Lieutenant-Generals
for His Majesty in his Provinces, or his Commanders in the same, or in their
absence, by the Intendants in the said Provinces, be sent immediately, and
without other form of Process, to His Majesty's Galleys, there to serve as
Galley-Slaves during Life.

His Majesty Orders and Commands the Governors and his Lieutenant-Generals in
his Provinces, Commanders in the same, Intendants, and Commissaries appointed
in the said Provinces, Bailiffs, Senechals, Provosts, Judges, their
Lieutenants, and all other his Justices, and Officers, to whom it shall belong,
to see to and Assist, each within his Jurisdiction, to the exact Observation of
these Presents, which His Majesty will have Published and Affixed in all Places
that shall be needful, that so none may pretend cause of Ignorance.

Given at Versailles the Twelfth of March, 1689. Signed LOVIS.

And lower, Le Tellier.

Printed at Paris: and Reprinted at London, for Richard Baldwin near the Black
Bull in the Old-Bailey. 1689.


