Exceeding Joyful News FROM IRELAND. OR, A true Relation of a great and happy
Victory, obtained by Colonel David Douglasse and Sir James Carr, two Scottish
Commanders, with the help of the Scots planted in the North of Jreland,
against the Arch-Rebels Philemy Oneale, the Earl of Delvin, and Sir Denis
Butler.

Where there was 6. or 7000 of the Rebels slain upon the place, 4000 Arms
taken from them, and 4. Fieldpieces. Within 9. Irish miles of Knockfergus,
February, 16. 1641.

Written from Dublin, Febr. 18, by Tho. Lancton, Secretary unto Sir Charles
Coote, and received by the last Post, Febr. 23. 1641.

LONDON, Printed by T. F. for J. Thomas, 1641.

Joyful News from IRELAND.
THough I can write nothing of mine own personal knowledge as being there
present. Yet the matter being such, as that the whole State and Council here
at Dublin is undoubtedly informed of the truth and certainty of it, and public
thanks openly given in the Cathedral Church of St. Patrick here in Dublin in
that behalf you may without scruple embrace it as for good so credible
tidings: Victory has not only shined diverse ways lately upon the English
Banner hereabouts, but God has also granted a most successful day to our
friends and Brethren, the Scots in the Northern parts, within 9. miles of the
Town called Knockfergus, on the 16. of February last betwixt 3. and 4. of the
clock in the afternoon, as we are here credibly informed by diverse Letters
and messengers that are here arrived by Sea from those parts, which Victory was
obtained under the conduct and command of two Scottish Commanders, Colonel
Davie Duglas, and Sir James Carre Colonel, with the aid and assistance of all
the Scottish Inhabitants in those parts, which Scottish Victory very great and
glorious, was occasioned as follows.

The Arch-Rebels Philemy Oneale, the Earl of Delvin, and Sir Denis Butler,
having intelligence that great aides and forces, are with all speed making
ready in Scotland, under the Command of General Lasley, and the other three
Lords, Commissioners, to be transported into that part of Ireland viz. the
North where their Countrymen are already planted, thought it their chiefest
play to be aforehand, and to attempt the the utter extirpation of the Scots:
before any farther strength would join with them from Scotland, being assured,
as well they might, that what good success we for our parts might wish them
in heart, yet being so encumbered by their fellows almost at Dublin gates, we
could afford them little help by hands, seeing our Supplies with the Lord
Lieutenant, are not yet arrived out of England, hereupon these foresaid Rebels
to the number of 12. or 14. Thousand as well armed for this Country, and for so
great a number as ever was seen in Ireland, drew directly into the North to
accomplish their design: the Scots for certain hearing of their coming, and
that they were within 5. and thirty Miles march of them, and that with so great
a Power, began at the right end, and considering the danger so great and so
eminent, Proclaimed a Fast, and General Humiliation the next day, through out
all their Quarters, and the next day after, under the Command of the two
Commanders aforesaid, Colonel Duglas and Sr. James Carr, old Soldiers that
ha^ served long in the Swedish War, they mustered all their Infantrie, and
Cavallarie, which consisted of 4. or 5. Thousand Foot, and about Nine Hundred
and Fifty Horse, some three Thousand Muskets, and about as many Pikes, and
halfe-Pikes, their Horsemen had their Swords and Lances, some 200. their
Pistols such as they were, and this was sent ^^on (...) Council, the chiefest
of the Armor they had was their Courages, (being the chiefest thing that did
it) their greatest number being armed with such things as their Country would
afforde, being Tools rather then Arms, and fitter to make tillage withal
then to fight a pitched Battle, as Pick-Axes, Forks, great long Clubs Iron
B^tes, long Poles, but God says Solomon, does not always give the day unto
the strongest and likeliest Army, as will appear by the ensuing discourse,
the Scottish Colonels had sent out Spies to see the behavior of the Irish
Rebels, and by them had tidings that their Horse, which they judged in number
to be about 14. Hundred, marched, and began to plunder the Scottish Cabins, and
drive away their Herds, being before in distance as they deemed, at least 2.
Irish Miles from the Gross of their Foot, the Scottish Commanders, old
Soldiers, were not a whit sorrowful to hear that News, hoping as it fell
out, the next day to take their Horse at that distance on the morrow, and to
entertain them a part from the Rebels Infanterie, for by their own report
they feared most the Irish Cavallerie, as being better Armed, and more in
number, whereupon Duglas, with Fifteen Hundred of his best shot, and but Five
Hundred Pikes, clapped at three of the clock in the morning, into a Wood
called the Bower of St. Patricke, without Drum or any Warlike musical
Instrument, councelling Sir James Carr to keep his station, and to suffer the
Enemy, to come to him if he pleased: not to stir a Foot to meet him.

About 8. in the morning Oneals Horse set (...) as cock sure, and therefore
careless of their (...), and advanced all along the brough of the Bower, e^^n
within half a Mile of Carr, whom they espying to stand still, and not to move,
thinking he had been danted, forgetting how far their own Gross was
behind, put Spurs to horse, and fiercely charged upon him crying all is ours,
all is ours, Carr soberly and sadly received them, and made them stand, out
came Duglis just behind them playing most furiously with his shot, the Scottish
horse though but weak and few, in respect of them, seeing them thus coopt in,
thinking what was to be done, was to be done before their Foot came near,
gave them a furious charge in the Flank, as Duglis did not omit to do his
part in the Rear, as Carr in their Vanne, the Irish thus seeing themselves
hemmed in and cast off their Foot, were uttely quel'd in their courages, and
casting about to retire, but seeing no way, presently plundered in their Order,
and were immediately confounded, slain and cast to the ground, now drew on
their Gross of Infanterie, who seeing the overthrow of their Horse, and the
Scots reunited into a maine Gross again, and in posture to charge made a
stand, which the Scottish Colonels peerceiving, Duglis commanded Andrew
Steward who had the charge of the Horse, to pass over a shallow Brook, and
under shelter of that wood called the Bower, to round the Rebels, and upon
signal given to charge behind.

When Steward was gone upon this command, Oneale construing the Action in
worser sense then it was meant, beat a charge with his Drums, an^ shocked
Gross to Gross, where was a hot and cruel fight Fortune perceiveable
enclining to neither party, the Scots behaved themselves very valorously, and
it is hard to say, whether the men were more active in performance, then the
women, of whom there were no small number, in emboldening and crying upon them,
at last Steward broke out of the Wood upon them in the Rear, whose unexpected
charge breaking in upon them that were slightest Armed, and expecting no hurt
from that end of the World) so both amazed, disheartened, and routed them, that
they supposing that there was some not dreamed on power of foot as well as
horse behind them, betook themselves to a plain flight, shifting here and
there every man for himself, casting down their weapons, and abandoning their
4. pieces of Artillery unto the dispose of the Scots, who made no scruple of
the leisure; here the Irish were to swear for the Scots not in only standing
to it, but in flying from it, for the Scots followed faster then they could
fly, being as ably disposed in that point as the Irish, in the battle and
pursuit were slain between 16 and 17000. but no man of note as the State and
course are informed save Sir Denis Butler, Bastard brother unto the Lord Mount
Garret, who was shot with a Musket through the right eye, there was sufficient
Arms, for betwixt 3. and 4000 men was there left upon the ground, for those
that would take it up, which by Gods mercy happened to be the Scots, for one
especial gift is observed among the Irish, if they chance to loose the day,
they love to go as light away as they can; the wing of this field I hope will
so humble the Rebels, that the State shall little fear to give any other
answer unto the peremptory Demands of their associate Rebels, that by the
means of a Letter were presented unto them, February (...). Signed with the
Seal of Arms of diverse of the Rebels Lords, of whom with their Impudent
Demand, I have here sent you a list, the State I say shall have little cause I
hope to answer any such Demands, save with Shot and Powder, I trust that this
great overthrow has passing well cooled their fiery cruel Spirits. *

FINIS.

