ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT Concluded between His Most Christian Majesty, And the
Republik of GENEVA.
I.
THat the Duke and four Senators shall by the last of March, or First of April,
come to Versailles, or any other part of France, which his Majesty shall
appoint, and in their Ceremonial Habits be admitted Audience; That the Duke
shall, in the Name of the Republic, express their hearty Sorrow for offending
his Majesty* and used such submissive Language as may continue his Majesty's
good Inclinations to them for the Future.

II.
That the Duke and four Senators at their Return shall enter upon the same
Dignities they were before Invested with; and, during their Absence, the one
shall Act therein, but the same shall remain according to Custom.

III.
That within a Months time they Disband all the Forces of other Countries which
they have entertained in their Service; Also make Void all other Leagues
contracted with Foreign Princes since the 10th. of January, 1683.

IV.
That they have no more Gallyes Fitted out, than they had three Years ago, and
Disarm all others since Equipped.

V.
That they make Restitution of all Damage the French have Sustained by Land and
Sea: And since they offer the French Effects, as they were entire, his Majesty
accepts thereof, provided the Republic repair all the Churches Damnified by
his Bombes, at the time perfixt by the Pope.

VI.
That they Pay to the Earl of Fiesque 100 000 Crowns, and his Majesty obliege
himself not to Asist the said Earl, but that he take his Course at Law.

VII.
That his Majesty receive very Kindly the Duke and four Senators, and after
their return, make no further Demands; as also during the present Government.

VIII.
That upon the Signing of these Articles, all Hostilities cease by Land, and
within two Months by Sea; and Prisoners Released on both Sides.

IX.
That these Articles within three Weeks be Exchanged by each other.

The abovementioned Articles were Signed by the Popes Nuncio and Genouese,
Envoy, on behalf of the Republic, at the French Court, February the 18th. 1684.

LONDON, Printed by George Croom, at the Sign of the Blue-Ball in
Thames Street, over against Baynard 's-Castle, 1685.


