The French King's DECLARATION, That the CHILDREN of those of the Pretended
Reformed Religion may change their Religion at the age of Seven years: with a
Prohibition that those of the said Religion may not send their CHILDREN to be
bred in Foreign Countries.
Registered in Parliament the 8th of July New Style, 1681. and Printed at Paris.

LEwis by the grace of God King of France and of Navarre:
To all those that shall see these present Letters, greeting.
The great successes which it has pleased God to give to the spiritual
excitations, and the other reasonable means which We have hitherto used for the
Conversion of Our Subjects of the pretended Reformed Religion, do oblige Us to
second the motions which God has given to many of Our said Subjects to
acknowledge the error wherein they were born; We therefore have resolved to
Repeal some things in Our Declaration of the first of February, 1669. by which
the Children of that Religion were in some sort hindered to convert themselves
to the Catholic Apostolic and Roman Religion after the age of Seven years (in
which they are capable of reason and choice, in a matter so important to them
as is that of their Salvation) till the Males were of the age of Fourteen
years, and Females of the age of Twelve; though in the Edict of Nantes, and in
the other Edicts made in favor of the pretended Reformed Religion, there is no
such provision made. And this being a thing of which it is necessary for Us to
take care, For these Reasons, and for other Considerations moving Us thereunto,
We have said and declared, and do say and declare by these Presents signed with
Our Hand, And it is Our Will and Pleasure, that Our said Subjects of the
pretended Reformed Religion, both Males and Females, having attained to the age
of Seven years, may lawfully embrace the Catholic Apostolic and Ronan
Religion. And to that effect they shall be admitted to make abjuration of the
pretended Reformed Religion, so as that their Fathers or Mothers may not give
any hindrance to it upon any pretense whatsoever. And to that effect, We repeal
so much as concerns this point in Our said Declaration of the first of
February, 1669. Besides, We Will that the said Children that shall be converted
after the age of Seven years complete, shall enjoy the effect of Our
Declaration of the Fourteenth of October, 1665. And that according to it, it
shall be left to their choice, after their Conversion, either to return to live
and be bred up in the same house with their Fathers and Mothers, or to go
elsewhere; and to demand of them a Pension for their Subsistence proportionably
to their condition and abilities; which Pension their said Fathers and Mothers
shall be bound to pay to their Children quarterly: And in case they shall
refuse to do it, Our Will is, that they shall be compelled to it by all due and
reasonable ways. And We being informed that many of Our Subjects of the said
pretended Reformed Religion, have sent their Children to be bred in Foreign
Countries, by which they may receive Maxims contrary to the State, and the
Fidelity which they owe Us by their birth, We do require them most expressly to
recall them without delay under the following pains, that those who have Estates
in Lands shall forfeit their whole Revenue during the first year, and a moity
of their said Revenue during all that time that they shall keep their Children
in foreign Countries. And for those who have no Estates in Lands, they shall be
obliged to recall their said Children under the pain of a Fine, which shall be
determined proportionably to their Goods and Abilities. And they shall be
obliged to make payments of their said Revenues and Fines every year, till they
have recalled their Children. We prohibit Our Subjects of the said pretended
Reformed Religion to send for the future their Children into foreign Countries,
to be educated in them, before they are Sixteen years old, without Our express
leave, under the pains abovementioned. We do also Give in Charge to our
beloved and faithful Counselors that constitute Our Court of Parliament of
Paris, that they make these Presents to be read, published, registered, and
executed according to their Form and Tenor, without suffering them to be
contravened in any sort or manner whatsoever: for such is Our pleasure. In
witness whereof, We have put Our Seal to these Presents.

Given at Versailles the 17th of June, in the year of Lord 1681. and the 39th
year of Our Reign. Signed LEWIS.
In the Counterpart, by the King Colbert. And sealed with the Great Seal in
yellow Wax.
Read, Published, and Registered at the instance of the King's Attorney General,
that they might be executed according to their Form and Tenor, according to
the Judgment made the said day at Paris in the Parliament the 8th of July 1681.

Signed James.



An Order of the Council of State.
THe King being informed in Council of the progress made in the Catholic
Religion in many places of the Lower Poictou, and that several of the
Inhabitants that were seduced by error do reunite themselves to the Church.
And His Majesty likewise considering that the chief motive of the Edict of
Grace, granted by the late King of glorious Memory, in the year 1629. to his
Subjects of the pretended Reformed Religion, was to deface the memory of what
was past, in hopes that his said Subjects, devesting themselves of all
passions, might be more capable to receive the light of the Gospel, and to
re-enter into the true Faith in which this Kingdom had continued above 1200.
years. And whereas the Ministers of the pretended Reformed Religion, do
endeavor by all sorts of Artifices to obstruct so good a work, which is
contrary to his Majesty's intentions; He having thereupon considered the Edict
of 1629. together with the whole affair, His Majesty in Council does most
expressly forbid all Ministers, Elders, or others of his Subjects, professing
the said pretended Reformed Religion, to use any Menaces, Intimidations,
Artifices, or any fact whatsoever to hinder the Conversion of those of the
pretended Reformed Religion. And forbids all Ministers and Elders to enter
their houses either by day or by night, except it be to visit the Sick, and do
other functions of their Ministry, under the pain of Corporal punishment. And
His Majesty ordains that he be informed of the violations of the said Edicts,
and of this present Order, by the diligent care of his Attorneys; and that
process be made against the guilty who shall violate the same, by the Judges to
whom the Cognizance of it ought to belong.

Given at St. Clou the 19th of April, 1681.
Signed le Tellier.

Some Particulars extracted out of a Letter of the 29th of June.
WHile our Enemies are every where pulling down our Churches, they procure an
Edict, that our Ministers may not visit us in our houses; and so they intend to
take from us the exercise of our Religion both in private and public. I need
not acquaint you with the slight pretenses that serve to procure a condemnation
of our Churches; how weak soever it is in Law, and how weakly soever it is
proved, yet every thing alleged against us is sufficient. Every complaint
made of our Ministers is believed. We have no more any humane confidence to
depend upon: We are imprisoned, and kept there without any thing objected to
us. Our Enemies will not be so kind as to make us feel all their rage at once,
and make us die a single death, but intend to famish us, and make us die of
hunger; and that not only of the Word of the Lord, by depriving us of our
Churches and Pastors, but even of our daily bread. In all these our sufferings,
we cannot be accused of one act of rage against our Enemies, or of disloyalty
to our King. And now our miseries increase upon us, for an Edict is coming out,
that our Children at Seven years old may change their Religion. We know what
will follow upon us; and that our busy Enemies will be every where tempting
our little ones; so that we dare no more reprove or chastize them for their
faults, lest we thereby drive them to renounce our holy Faith at an age in
which they cannot distinguish truth from falsehood, nor good from evil. We have
nothing left us but to fly to God by Fasting, Mourning, and Prayer; and who
knows if he will turn these evils from us? In which we humbly beg the
assistance of all our Brethrens Prayers.

Printed at London for Andrew Forrester in Kings street Westminster. 1681.


