PERSECUTION detected in all his new FORMS: OR, A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Nimrod
Policy, and Nathanael Innocence.

WHEREIN Persecution is followed and detected in his chiefest Tabernacles;
being packing apace out of his old Garbs of Presbytery into his swept and
garnisht Forms of Independency and the Water-way: Wherein is showed the
Original, and name, and Interest of Policy, with many of his Assistants; and
also of Innocence: With the Epitome of a true Christian:

Also several considerable Queres touching God, his Word, his Essence; and
Christ, and his Works in man; as touching Heaven, and Hell, and Sin, and the
Sabbath etc. of Moses; touching the true Rest and Center of a CHRISTIAN.

By John Lane, late Quartermaster to Sir Hardresse Wallers Regiment.

Gal. 4. 29. But as then he that was born after the flesh persecuted him that
was born after the Spirit, even so it is now. These. 2. 15. 16. Who both killed
the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and have persecuted us: and they please
not God, and are contrary to all men. Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles,
that they might be saved, to fill up their sins always: for the wrath is come
upon than to the uttermost. London: Printed for the Author, and are to be sold
at the Black-Moore near Fleet-bridge. 1652.

To all my Friends and Enemies, of what Opinion soever they be.
Dear Hearts,
THis is the first time I have appeared a fool in print, (although very often
other ways) ye suffer fools gladly. I might have been thought otherwise, had I
held my tongue; For silence is more safe then speech, when enemies be auditors.
I shall not go about by rhetorical phrases to beg thy good opinion of the
ensuing Dialogue: For if I were able to do it, I would not; for the more
Writings are so dressed, the less they savor of true meaning. All that I
desire is, that you read, consider, and (moderately) judge; and wherein I am
too prolix, abridge it in your thoughts; and wherein I am too short, enlarge it
in your thoughts; for they are not so chargeable as words, neither so
dangerous. My intentions in this (promiscuous) Pamphlet were not to offend any
that are conscientious* (if it be of an idol) for I have been blinder then I
am, but to detect that subtle enemy of the Creations peace, Persecution; as
also the violent humors of some of his tabernacles, and their designs, (...)
All that I shall say to you more at present is, to desire any that may be
offended, to do as some have formerly said (if so it must be) only to hate my
opinions, but not my person; the same that I used to reply unto them (when I
suffered under Presbyters for Water Baptism) I shall now unto you, viz. If my
opinions be that which you so hate and would persecute, those I will give you
either in paper or parchment, and do with them what you please, imprison, hang
or burn them, but let my person alone* and then I shall believe you only hate
my opinions: But if a(...) Sycophant, or Crocodilian, or Cameleon Pharisee
(that is a fault-finder, who sees not the beam in his own eye) shall cast dirt
in my face by reason of my affliction the Almighty has suffered me to undergo
in the world, let all such know (that although I must confess I have much gone
astray from truth) yet I am able to cast off any dirt that envy has or may
cast on me, and to appear, if I would, with as large a menstruous garment (of
my own righteousness) as some others, although I had rather glory in my
infirmities and sufferings for God, -- in whom I have peace (though in the
world I may have trouble) and rest,

Yours, J. L.

A Dialogue between NIMROD POLICY, AND NATHANAEL INNOCENCE.
Policy. SIr, you are well met; your grave feature, and contemplative gesture,
invites my desire to have some discourse with you, whilst our time will permit.


Innocence. Sir, J am willing to discourse, but very unable, besides Sir, by
your Mars-like physiognomy and habit you to be a soldier, and therefore J
shall be cautious of speaking what otherways J might very freely, -- because J
have heard that many soldiers are notable Politicians, and are very cruel to
any that differ from them, if it be but in opinion, and have used many very
cruelly for it: besides J do hear there are many Decoys go abroad, who have all
the dimensions of speaking allowed them, on purpose to catch others, and to
make them offenders for words; but Sir, if you will engage to me to take no
advantage against me for words, J shall discourse with you so far as J am able,
and may with safety.


Policy. Sir, J shall engage to you my honor, that J will not take any
advantage of you for words, be they what they will J can bear them, only J
advise you, for your own sake to speak no treason or blasphemy.


Innocence. Sir, that I shall, although J scarce know what treason or blasphemy
is: it is no treason (is it Sir) to say, when Christ has put down all Rule,
Authority, and Power, he will surrender the Kingdom to the father, and God
shall be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.


Pol. Sir, J have nothing to say to that, because it is Scripture; but pray Sir,
give me your name, Country and interests (in these promiscuous (...)stracted
times) for (for ought J know) you may be more a Decoy, ^hen J.


Inno. To avoid your suspicion of me, I shall (because time is short, and I
believe you affect brevity) give you my name and Country, but my interest you
shall know another time, when we have more leisure.


Pol. Well Sir, go on, what is your name and Country? etc.


Innoc. Sir, my name is Innocence, of kin to that which Scriptures report to
have been in the primitive estate of man, in which estate he was upright, and
knew no good nor evil, and was then free from all that either internally, as
to conscience, or externally, as to bondage, oppression, or wrath, has seized
on the Creations peaceful natural harmony, propriety, which now they groan
under, and will not be eased of; but when they shall attain the glorious
liberty of the Sons of God -- and the first Resurrection -- viz. above, and
from all -- that is sin, death, hell, devils or darknesses (the effects of man's
vain imaginary work) or torments mental, etc.

But Sir, as touching my Country, it is Sion, (not Sina, wrath, smoke,
darkness) the City of the living Jehovah, which is the center of the first
born, that have ceased from their own work of menstruous righteousness, and
superficial holiness, and have resigned up their wills into the Divine Will,
where they truly see God to be all, and in all, the spiritual perfect ones
(only living there in that life) who walk with God, and are not as to any
fleshly serpentine glory, or wisdom of this world; the world to come, being in
subjection to them in Christ, and Christ in them the hope of greater glory,
where none that is a sinner (or defiled therewith* can approach, it being a
life, that only such as are born of God (and cannot sin) live in, they only
seeing the Emnity slain, and the handwriting of a(...) formality blotted out,
and that which did let, fully taken out of the way and the partition wall
broken down: they also seeing Christ the second time, without sin (unto
salvation) and the only doer away of sin, and the bringer in of everlasting
righteousness (his own) where sin shall be no more, the Inhabitants of this
Sion can sing Halelujah, Halelujah.


Pol. Sir, your name and your Country, if it be as you say, are paradoxicall
unto me; it is to me like the terra incognita, or at best, but Utopian Anarchy:
be pleased to be more plain, and not to be elevated i^ to such high notionall
supercelestiall things, as those of your Country which you say is Sion, etc.
but Sir, if you shall please to speak of su^ thing as are in the sphere I move
in, viz. the terrestiall world, and the things thereof, I am for you.


Inno. Well Sir, I shall conform to your desire (only for discourse) (...)ping
for more opportunity with you, to speak touching the premises: but Sir, before
we go on, I shall entreat you, to give me your name, Country, and interest
(but as briefly as you may) for that you did desire the same of me, and then I
shall the more freely speak, as I know you.


Pol. Sir, your request seems but rational, and no other then what I did
desire of you, and therefore I shall give you my name, Country, and interest
(so far as I have time at present:) my name I am not ashamed of, although it be
Policy, I was never in more repute then now; for most persons endeavor to
serve me, either for fear or Love: but because there be many of that name, I
shall tell thee which of them I am, viz. I am Christian policy, for lawful
propriety, and civil Society, and for that godliness which has the promise
of this life, etc. and is great gain: I am also for toleration of the true
Religion, but for the punishment of sin and blasphemy: besides, I Will tell you,
that I am not all that call themselves Christian Policy, for I am not a Papist,
or Episcoparian, or Presbyterian.


Inno. Oh Sir, are you Mr. Policy, you shall not need any further to tell me
what you are, or what you are not, or what your Country and interest is, for
(if I am not much mistaken) I know you, ( a summo ad imum) from the top to the
bottom, and could (if I might) detect and dissect you to the purpose, from your
original parents, as also where you have abode ever since you were: as also
who, and what interests have been, and are, and will be engaged for you, that
like those Merchants, Revel. 18. 11. will cry, Alas, alas, when you fall: but
Sir, are you a Christian Politician? I do not find that word Politician in
those sayings of Christ, which he left as precepts, except that it be where he
says, The Kings of ^he Gentiles exercise lordship, etc. but ye shall not do
so, for the greatest amongst you shall be the servant.

But Sir, it seems (by your words) you are not Mr. Policy of Asia, Africa, or
America, with great part of Europe; wherefore we shall not ^uch meddle with
those parts at present: but Sir, be pleased to pardon my oldnesse with you (as
also my digression from what I suppose you have mind to speak of) are not you
Mr. Policy, whose foundation was laid ^n the head of the Serpent, viz worldly
wisdom, which has been, and enmity to the universal designs of the Father,
viz. of peace, love, joy, -- in the Creation, are not you he that (by depriving
creatures of their ^aturall propriety) does make the Creation groan and travel
in pain to^ether, and miserably destroy one the other, to keep you; dominion
over them? and Sir, pray tell me, was not Mimrod that mighty (man) Hunter, your
first Father, that laid a foundation for you, in invading his fellows natural
rights, and then began to defend himself, and offend his neighbors, by
Mars-like force (and as Josephus the Jewish Historographer reports) then
began weights and measures, and then says he, began knavery -- a strange
saying, that those things, ( viz. weights and measures) which we measure that
little honesty we have by, should be called so.

Beside Mr. Policy, were not Mr. Devil (God bless us) Mr. Antichrist, Mr.
Sin, Mrs. Babylon, Mr. Beast, Mr. Dragon, with the false Prophet, all of them
your near relations, or near friends, with that great Whore that r^d^th on many
waters?

And is not Mr. Honor, Mr. Pride, Mr. Gain, Mr. Cruelty, and Oppression, with
Mr. Mars, and Mr. Jupiter engaged for you, and your cause; as also Mr. Buyer
and Seller, and also many powers Military, Ecclesiastique and civil (so
called) with Mr. Scholar, Mr. Wit, Mr. Wisdom, Mr. Art?

And Mr. Policy, is it not for you, that many Cains, Esaus and Caesar's have
engaged many millions of poor harmless creatures, to destroy and murder one
the other, for little else then to help you, and keep themselves miserable
slaves; and also to keep up the Imperial, Monarchical humors and wills, and
honors, and profits of those that oppressed them.


Policy. Sir, your many questions that you ask of me do not concern me to
answer, and therefore I shall forbear to do it; you may suspect me to be what
you please, and also think many of those you name to be my friends and
assistants; but Sir I shall assure you in the word of a gentleman and a
Christian, that although I am Policy, yet am I only Christian Policy, and no
other: but Sir, to wave this kind of critical discourse, and to fall to some
other is my desire (for the former needless Genealogies may gender strifes,
etc.) or else I must be silent.


Inno. Well Mr. Policy, you may excuse the matter as well as you can but I do
much suspect you to be of kin to those before named; but Sir, because I am
willing to have a little further discourse with you, J shall willingly proceed
to some other things (although you know Sir we must (...) brief) what is the
next thing you will speak to?


Pol. Sir, My next question is touching new things; when do you thing all
things will become new? but more particularly the P-.


Inno. Sir, if (you mean spiritually) J think all things will become new when
all the old things are passed away, etc. but touching the P.- being new; I
think it will not be so long as the old corrupt interests of Malignant humors
remain unpurged (in some bodies) there be sometimes members that purging will
not cause the dissolving and evacuation of many (earthly) humors, especially if
they be of the nature of


Sol. But Sir, I can assure you people do much desire new things, and to be
free from all old oppressions in body and mind, and they do hope some old
skillful Physicians will cure, purge and cut off, if need be (rotten members
that have gangrene humors in them) there be many that pray for life
everlasting, but very few for an everlasting P -- but Sir, I do not desire to
meddle in these things, you should know more of them then I, and I am persuaded
if you are a soldier, that you may say more then I dare; I shall say this, the
whole needs not the Physician: ut fi^t justitia rua^ mundus.


Pol. Well Innocence, I am willing to pass that question by at present,
believing that you can say more to it; but that there are so many words about
it a ready, and I believe you do not affect so much verbosity; besides you must
not say all you can, although it be never so true, for all truth may not be
spoken at all times -- time is the herald of truth -- truth is a virtue that
scaleth heaven, illuminateth earth, maintains Justice, governs
Common-weals, kills hate, nourishes love, and discovers secrets, -- and yet
may not at all times be declared -- where there is Law against it.


Inno. Sir, If you are so willing to pass that preceding question, and to go
to an other, pray do: (for I believe if all truth should be spoken, it would
extremely torment the earth) what is your next question?


Pol. My next question to thee is, what interest thou art for in these
distracted and divided times? art thou a Protestant, or a Presbyter, or an
Independent, or one of the Water way -- or one of those called Seekers, of
which there be many sorts?


Inno. Sir, I am for neither of those interests singly, other then they serve
to enlarge the Commonwealth of the Creation, and so I am for all of them
(although differing one from an other in opinions) but Sir, it is like you may
make use of all of them to serve your ends on them (although you be of neither
of their opinions) for so policy can do, and will seldom do more then be for
either of them, as they are useful to him, or for all of them together, if the
spirit of people be that way.


Pol. Well Innocence, if you are neither of them, then I hope you will deal
plainly with me in your thoughts of some, or all of them, if J shall desire it,
(in our further discourse) because I perceive you are unbiassed as to either of
them, I shall leave the old Protestants (so called) because we will be brief at
present, and begin with some Presbyters, what think you of them? are they
likely to do the world that good they now generally expect, viz. ease to their
persons, estates and minds?


Inno. Sir, as to your desire of plain dealing from me, (touching those persons
and interests hinted in the premises) I shall so far as I may for you --
although I may die a beggar for it, but I shall but epitomize them and their
designs, etc. a word may serve you, you being wise; besides I know you do not
affect prolixity.


Pol. Well Innocence, go on as briefly as thou will to thy opinion of them,
what think thou of Presbyters?


Inno. Sir, I think many of them are going down the wind, nay almost all of
them (except some that have of late turned GIBEONITES) for their spirit viz.
persecution for opinion is going from them apace into another form, which some
of the wisest of them go along with, and think to use them again in another
garb, then that of Presbytery, for they think to sweep and garnish another
dwelling for that unclean spirit, which if they do, for ought I know their
latter end may be worse then their beginning, for these are searching times.

But Sir, in few words I shall tell you, they of the Presbytery were so
violently eaten up for the zeal of the Lords House, and have so whin'd, and
pined, and fasted, etc. that they have made that seeming pampered Palphray as
poor as a Scotch Galloway taken at Worcester, that so now very many of them
have very small trading, and have little to do, except it be to receive Tithes,
and read the Directory, and spend some of those estates they have gained, if
they have much left, out of their late contributions, to the CHARITABLE USES OF
LOVE: -- but Sir, I tell you many of the Presbyters have great hopes of a
Resurrection of their cause for they use all the skill and power they have to
do it, especially in the Committee of Divines, where if they can help it, none
shall pass to preach that are friends to the Commonwealth, but rather such as
can speak pure Scotch, and are railers against Sectaries of all sorts: this,
with many other great influences they have elsewhere, does make them hope, and I
think yet whine forth their many invectives, in parobolicall sayings against
the Commonwealth; but Sir, I shall leave them at present, what is your next
question?


Pol. I see you have known the spirit of Presbytery, and although you say you
will leave them, were you in their power they would not so leave you, I shall
say little of them at present, save that I well know them: but go on to the
next form, viz. that of Independents (so called) and tell me thy thoughts of
them.


Inno. Sir, I shall tell you what I hear of many so called, viz. some say there
went but a pair of sheers between them and their elder Brethren the Presbyters,
the one going a little backwards, and the other going a little forwards, to
make up the Brotherhood with LOVE: -- besides, some call many of these Norfolk
Independents, because, say they, such of them are for a toleration of the true
Religion, which is, as they say, that only which they believe and follow, viz.
the form of Congregationall Churches, the Pope was always for such a
toleration, viz his own way of worship: besides Mr. Policy, many think that Mr.
Persecution does intend to dwell a while in that swept and garnished form, when
he is wholly departed from Presbytery, as if the Pithagorian Doctrine of
Transmiguration were true, he always leaps from one form to an other, and
usually appears most in the form that is in most repute in the world,
although it be that which (when he dwelt in Papacy and Episcopary) he
persecuted, but have a care thou that have said it was not good to persecute
for difference in opinion, do thou persecute? who art thou that judge thy
Brother, do thou not know that every one shall give an account of himself to
God? will thou not see how that arch-enemy to the Creations peace, Persecution,
has served his old Tabernacles of Episcopacy and Presbytery, he may do as much
for thee that art a persecuting Independent, it is good for thee to be moderate
in this day of Gods strange workings, although he make thy ears tingle at the
Clouds he appears in; do you not know that Gods way has been to do his
greatest works by the most contemptible and base means, to stain the pride of
all glory, and to bring into contempt the honorable of the earth, that no flesh
should glory?


Pol. But all Independents are not so, for I am persuaded there are many of
them very godly, and would tolerate any opinion but blasphemy and sin.


Inno. Sir, I do not say all Independents are such, for they are no true
Independents that are such persecuters: besides, I believe many of them are
pretty moderate men, etc. especially if they be not drowned in Calvinisme: but
touching many things that some call blasphemy and sin, etc. do you think the
Bishops did not say as much of some that now think they are in the highest
form, and did or do they think the Bishops, etc. were infallible in their
censure of them?


Pol. Well Innocence, J perceive thou know what is the spirit of many
Independents, prithee go on a littie further to give me thy o servations of
those of the Baptized way, as also of the Seekers, and J shall promise thee,
that I will not injure thee for any words that have, or shall pass between us.


Inno. Sir, I do pretty well know much juggling amongst them, and J do also very
well know you, and could say more of and unto you, if J might, but J hope to do
that at some other time; but I shall go on to give you some hints touching some
of the Baptized way first, and then of those called Seekers afterward, hoping
w(...)hall, that when J have done touching them, you will give me liberty to
propose something else to you, either touching a true Christian, or else some
quaeries for you to answer at your leisure.


Pol. I shall willingly hear thee touching other things at some other time; but
go on to give me your thoughts of some of the baptized way.


Jnno. Sir that J will; J think many in that form are pretty conscientious well
meaning people, that would not be made a stalking horse to persecution, if they
were aware on it; but many others of them do think that way to be the only
infallible distinguishing garb of Christians, and none saved (as they call it)
but such as are, like Noah, saved by water, but that is not all Mr. Policy, for
some of their leaders are as it were the quintessense of Presbytery, and may
prove the veriest persecutors for Opinion, that ever the Church or world bred;
for some of them did not stick to say in public, that such as lived above
Ordinances as they called them, were worse then lepers, and unfit for any
Society; the most rigid Presbyter Edwards never said more: these be they that
in the dregs of Episcopacy, and the beginning of Presbytery did plead for
universal toleration of opinion: nay Sir, some sober people say, that if you
Mr. Policy should in many places cloth your self in that form, for the garb of
your worship to God, it might easily be made the greatest engine of persecution
that ever you were clad with in your life, some think those garbs of Papacy,
and Episcopacy, and Presbytery, were nothing to this of the water-way, for
there Mr. Persecution thinks himself sa^e, being under WATER, but the searching
God may drive him from his liquid formality also, when Christ's fire-baptisme
appears more to consume and burn up all the wood, and hay, and stubble of
man's selfish maginary works (that are the only snares and bonds that poor
creatures groan under, which all the water in the world will never wash away)
nor will it quench this fiery Princple of universal love, joy and peace, that
Christ in men is bringing forth abundantly: nay Sir, some think this Water-way
may prove tenfold worse then rigid Presbytery, although I hope the contrary:
because if one did but say as they would, and look like them superficially, one
might have lived amongst them but now (say some) except ye repent and be
baptized with Water, ye shall perish, and not only for the future (as they say)
but in the present world; if many of them had power suitable to their waspish
will, and if they bark so already, how would they bite if their teeth were
swords!


Pol. I did not think any Anabaptists would ever have turned persecutors for
Opinion, they have pleaded so much against it in others, but it may be they
think themselves the Saints that shall judge the world: bit prithee Innocence
let me have some of thy thoughts touching a sort of people called Seekers,
because I have heard there are many wise men amongst them, that may do me much
service.


Inno. Sir, that I shall also, because you so much desire it (although I
believe you know them already very will) but I hope we shall have some
discourse touching a true Christian, when I have done with them also: but Sir,
if I shall fail in my Opinion of them, you must pardon me, for I fear I shall
want words to express their worth (compared with many in the times:) but Sir,
touching those that are called Seekers, so far as I have found them, they do
appear to be very wise, solid, conscientious, honest, public spirited persons,
that are not wedded to any formal Idol, as knowing there is none; they are
such (many of them) that are of penetracious judgments, and can see the
insides of many juggling self-ended ones, that under specious pretenses do
oppress the poor and miserable, they can foresee the effects of things from
their causes, and can dive into the bottom of most Politic designs, and are
such as well know the spirit of people, and do know what would be most pleasing
unto them, they know what men-groan under externally, and also mentally; they
know the temper of the people is generally for true liberty to their minds,
bodies, and estates, they are such as do not affect much verbosity and jangling
about Opinions, but (they say) they would have persons to be sober, moderate,
and temperate to all, and not have more the name of Christians then they
practice, viz. that sure Maxim in Christianity, of doing as they would be done
unto in all things (conscience being judge) they are such as well know the
Lawyers and Priests -- and do not affect Tithes, etc. -- and I think many of
them are for toleration of Opinion.


Pol. Well Innocence, I thank thee for thy pains in what thou have said,
touching many things relating to those several interests we spoke of in the
Premises, I shall offer a few words touching some of them, I tell thee
Innocence, I do love many Independents, and Anabaptists, and Presbyters very
well, because many of them have been very active for me, and therefore I must
be civil to them, I could wish they were not so rigid, and so wedded to their
forms as they are, if they were not, many of them would be very pretty men, but
people will not beat many of their injunctions and censures: but I Will tell thee
Innocence, I most affect men (like some Seekers) that are weaned from Idols,
and are wise, solid, moderate, well principled men, whether they be of any
Church or not, such as know the spirit of the people, and can conform unto
them, these I affect most, if I might have my will, such men as are for
toleration of Opinions, for I see the people generally affect true liberty, and
to be free from all oppressions -- and besides, I tell thee plainly I have been
in some straights touching formality, how to please many fiery spirits, for
many of them are very confident in their way, although I see little Scripture
or reason for their forms, for I see throrough them all, for as they are used,
they serve only to beget envy and strife amongst men. and do hinder universal
love: I Will tell thee Innocence, now I do suspect M. Persecution to be an
Impostor, and I fear he may do by me (if I should use him) as he has done by
his former Tabernacles, viz. miserably distract me, if not destroy me, by
serving me almost as bad as the Devil was said to do by the hogs.


Inno. Well Mr. Policy, I am glad you are so moderate of late, you have not
long been so, I am glad you begin to open your eyes a little, you may see your
self more e're it be long, for truth and innocence may be more owned, for God
does shake both the earth and heavens of man's building, which are laid in the
serpentine principle: -- but Sir, I thank you for your patience in hearing my
verbal imbecility, I hope you will not make me an offender for a word; and
Sir, if I might not be further tedious to you, I should desire we might
epitomize a true Christian, that is so in power, and not in word and show only.


Pol. Well Innocence go on to show what such a Christian is.


Inno. Sir, that I shall briefly, and where I am short, I desire you to enlarge
in your thoughts. 1. A right Christian is one that is one with Christ, as
Christ is one with the Father, Joh. 17. 21. Heh. 2. 11. 1 John 4. 17.

2. From this Union he is reconciled to God in all things, and in all the
variety and multiplicity of appearances, he sees but one God, and sees all the
varieties of things in their several species, be they of rationalls, animalls,
and vegetables, or celestial, or terrestiall essences, with their several
complections; constitutions, and degrees of heat, cold, drought, or moisture,
with their several actions (that are of God) features, motions, and gestures,
to be the productions of the Unity, whether sinister (so called) or direct,
with all their altitudes and profundities, and latitudes, and longitudes, if so
I may speak, the Ens entium, omnipotent over all, through all, and in all
things: -- besides, he sees all dispensations, administrations,
manifestations, and operations, are to bring to the perfect Unity of the Son,
Ephesians. 4. 13. 1 Cor. 12. 4. 27. 14. he seeing that the several members are but
one body; besides he cannot see any vacuity between Creator and creature, not
understanding what should be betwixt them, to speak after the manner of men.

3. He is one that through Christ dwelling in him, does see the Enmity slain,
and has gotten victory over all that did torment him mentally (and also over
much corporal slavery) having conquered the old man Sin, with Antichrist,
Hell, Death, etc. and sees no let in the holy mountain Sion.

4. He being one, that so far as he is born of God does not sin, nor can sin, 1 John 3. 9. Heb. 9. 14. 10. 22. he is in conscience purged from sin, he sees
Christ appearing the second time, without sin unto him, Heb. 10. 26. 28. and
the Lamb that takes away the sin of the world (for else he must have less
power then the scapegoat under Moses, Deuteronomy. 16. 20. 24. that ran away with the
sins of Israel once a year) and the bringer in of everlasting righteousness
Dan. 9. 24. (his own) where sin shall be no more, he being the finisher of it:
besides, he sees that Law made nothing perfect, as to conscience, but the
bringing in of a better hope, by, and in Christ, did -- by which he is nigh
unto God, having his heart sprinkled from an evil conscience, being innocent
as a dove.

5. He is one that ( Col. 2. 20. v. 1.) is dead with Christ to the rudiments of
the world, and therefore does not live in them, as subject to Ordinances in
will worship -- being risen with Christ, and set together with him in heavenly
places, far above Principalities and Powers, and Might, etc. and Dominion, at
the right hand of the high Majesty.

6. And Sir to be brief, a right Christian, after he has been acted through
the variety of appearances, and has been led through the several gradations
of Christ's Kingdom, viz. of love, joy, peace, etc. and when Christ (in him)
has put down all Rule, Authority, and ^ower, and slain all devision and
distinction of the wrath and beastial principle, then the Kingdom and Dominion
is surrendered to the Father, and then the creatures will is wholly resigned
into the Divine Will, and is only acted by it, it being then in it is own
center, the end having found the beginning, he being merely passive, neither
willing, nor desiring, not joying, nor sorrowing, but has then found all (and
for ought I know may do all) when he is centricall; but this few attain unto,
the beastial principle is so predominant.


Pol. I should let thee go on further to character a Christian, as to his
spiritual interest, but that I fear there are some (who like the Jews Paul
spoke of, 1 These. 2. 15. 16. who please not God, and are contrary to all men,
may persecute such appearances of Christ in any, and call it blasphemy --
therefore prithee leave such high things, and speak something to a Christians
practice amongst men in the world.


Inno. Sir, I thank you for your Caution, for though I would be as innocent as
a Dove, yet I may be as wise as a Serpent, especially if I meet with such
pharisaical Foxes; -- therefore I shall hint some things that are practiced to
the world by a Christian (and if you shall please afterward, J shall propose
some Questions unto you as a ground for further discourse at some other time:
but Sir, J shall go on) A Christian does make that sure Christian Maxim in
Christianity ( viz. of doing as they would be done unto in all cases) his rule
and practice, conscience being the chief Arbitrator.

And he does really practice this rule in doing well to any in misery, whether
they be of any Church or not, so long as he has it.

He does also practice this rule in all matters of sin against himself, whether
it be anger, wrath, malice, strife, debate, envy, slander, or what ever -- and
does put conscience to the test, does any one thus abuse me, and do I the same
to them again? then says conscience, you do but as you have been done by, and
not as you would be done by; if you should so offend against others, sinners do
love such as love them, and hate such as hate them.

But Christians do bless them that curse them, and do good to such as
despightfully use them, and speak all manner of evil of them: besides, a
Christian is truly enlarged with bowels of meekness and compassion to all
under oppression, or wrath, or darkness, and is acted to the full in that love
Paul speaks of, 1 Cor. 13. 4. to 7. he vaunteth not himself above his fellow
creatures, he envieth not any for any thing, he thinks no evil, he rejoices
not in iniquity, or in the disparity or inequality that is in the world: (that
some are mighty, and others miserable) that is for sinners; he believes all
things, bears all things, hops all things, endures all things, is far from
persecuting any for Opinion, or delivering them to the devil (as they call it)
for it, or into his prisons and dungeons.

He is one that uses the world, as though he used it not, and buyeth, as if he
possessed not; and although he be married, it is as if he were not, he being a
child of God, and so a child of the Resurrection, and one that is worthy to
obtain that world (that is in subjection to man) they can die no more, death
has no more dominion over them, Luke 20. 3. 4. 35. 36.

He will not be found doing that which Christ says he shall find the world
doing, viz. as they did in the days of Noah, when he should appear in power
and spirit, Luke 17. 24. 26, 27, 28. Mat. 24. 38. the children of this world
only doing so, Luke. 20. 34. the Christian sees, that in Christ there is no
distinction of Jew nor Greek neither bond nor free, neither MALE NOR FEMALE,
for ye are all ONE in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3. 28. Col. 3. 11. Christ is all, and
in all.

But to conclude, Mr. Policy, because I will not weary your patience with this
kind of discourse, a true Christian has for his further direction pure
innocence, as the Scripture says (as a Dove) his eye being single, his body
being full of light.


Pol. Innocence, though many of thy characters of a Christian be strange to me,
and may prove dangerous to worldly wisdom, with all it is interests and
relations, and protectors, yet J cannot but say there are very gallant truths
in thy words, J wish the world were able to bear them as J am; but J must
desire thee to draw toward a conclusion at the present, and J shall gladly
have more discourse with thee at some other time, for now J am in have, having
many public matters in hand.


Jnno. Mr. Policy that J shall; and J must tell you J am very much engaged to
you, that you have so patiently heard me all this while, your moderation will do
you no hurt, but I entreat you to take some Quaeres from me, touching some
particulars (that J should be glad you were rightly satisfied in) which J shall
leave you to consider of against our next meeting.


Pol. Innocence, that I shall willingly entertain, but prithee be brief,
because I have much business? what are thy Quaeces?


Jnno. My first is touching the Father.

1. Quaere, whether the Almighty Jehovah be not omnipotent, omnipresent
uncircumscribed, and omniscient?

2. Whether all the several kinds of things are not (in all their varieties
and multiplications) the productions of the Unity?

3. Whether there be any enterval, emptiness, or vacuity between the Creator
and creatures, and if there be any thing between them, then what it is for
matter, form, substance, or shape

4. Whether that which is called the Spirit of God in Scriptures, be not truly
of the essence of God?

5. Whether that called the Spirit of God in men, be not of his essence?

6. Where the essence of God is circumscribed -- if it be -- so?

Secondly, Touching Christ.

7. Whether Christ, as a manifestation of the Father, according to number, be
not him that was, is, and is to come, the yesterday, to day, and for ever, the
beginner and terminator of time, the Alpha and Omega, the principium and finis,
the primus and ultimus; that is the beginning and end, the first and last, the
all, and in all, the only Champion of the Father, the doer of all his saving
work, and the reconciler of all things to God, and also that which was manifest
to destroy all diabolicallnesse, darkness, sin, hell, death, or whatever lets
in his Kingdom of love, joy, peace, etc. that are the effects of man's own vain
knowing, imaginations, Eccl. 7. 29.

8. Whether all Christ's work were completed in his humanity at Jerusalem?

9. Whether Christ has not destroyed ever since the serpent has built, or
whether the evil has been longer then Christ the Unction.

10. Whether Christ had not enemies, before he appeared in the humanity at
Jerusalem?

11. What appearance of Christ that was that Scriptures speak of, to have been
in the days of Noah, 1 Pet. 3. 19. and to be that rock the Is*raelites
followed, that they eat and drank of, 1 Cor. 10. 4.

12. What Christ that is, that is said to be in men the hope of glory and to be
formed in them, and to be in them, except they be Reprobates -- Col. 1. 27.
Gel. 4. 19. 2 Cor. 13. 5.

Thirdly, Touching the Word of God.

13. Whether there be any thing in Scripture called the Word of God, but God
himself that made the world, that is spirit and life, and only quick and
powerful, and able to divide between joints and marrow, or whether any thing
be the essential Word, but God? 1 John 1. 2.

14. Whether the (Word) God be not the only truth that needs no interpreter but
himself, that in himself is the only determiner of all controversies amongst
men, that in his time will show who is the only King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, and to be that truth that shall make us free, not like that called
truth, which is made the only bond?

15. Whether the letter of Scriptures be of any advantage to men, except the
quicking word of power be (like the day Star) arisen in them, where by they
experiment those teachings of God in themselves, that was in them that write
the Scriptures?

16. Whether the Scripture misunderstood, has not been made the instrument of
the murder and oppression of many millions of poor harmleste creatures, and
the engine of all the tyranny in Europe, etc.

Fourthly, Touching the Devil, and Hell.

17 Whether the Devil (God bless us) be a corporeal and elementary essence,
(yea or no) with great claws and eyes, as many country people have believed?

18 What and where the Hell and torments (so much feared by sinners) are;
whether it be in any local place on the superficies of the terrestrial world,
or in the center of it, or in the consciences of sinners -- under wrath and
darkness?

Fifthly, Touching Heaven, etc.

19 Whether there be not Heaven to be had in man, that is quickened together
with Christ, and set together with him in heavenly places? -- Ephesians. 2. 5, 6.

20. What are meant by the clouds that Christ appears in, whether it be meant
of elementary clouds that are exhaled from the earth, or clouds that the wise
world will not think he will appear in? Rev. 1. 7.

Sixthly, Touching Sin.

21. Whether Sin be any thing else but the effects of man's vain imaginations,
Eccles. 7. 29. being darkened with wrathful Jdolatry, against the light of in
them, although there is nothing in it self an Idol? whether sin be of
necessity, that the Creation cannot be without it, or whether it be
accidental, or contingent, (since it must be destroyed?)

Seventhly, Touching the Sabbath.

22. Whether any Gentile, if he had lived within half a mile of Moses power,
should have participated of the Jewish privileges, except he had been
proselited, and if not, then whether he was to conform to their Laws, if it
were when Moses lived, especially that of keeping their Sabbath in that manner
as they did it?

23. Whether any Gentile living without Moses power, were punishable, for
breaking any of the Mosaicall Laws, in the form they were in, or were to be
done to death for not keeping the Sabbath, and if not, why any Gentiles now
should be tied to keep it, or one like it? whether Gentiles had any other
direction to worship, then the teachings of God in nature, J mean without their
own inventions, and before they became vain in their imaginations, and if they
had not, then although they were directed in nature to adore a superior
entity, yet where were they tied to time, as such a day, or place, or to do
this, and leave the other undone, or else you shall die the death?

24. Whether or no a Christian that is entered into his rest, and ceased from
his own works, does esteem any day above another; or rather, whether a true
Christian does not keep seven Sabbaths every week?

25. Whether or no, if one should keep a true Christian Sabbath of resting in
God, and from all man's own works, of what nature soever, and should do the
works that a Christian may freely do, then whether one may not be put to death
for it, by many pharisaicall ones that wear Philacteries of commandments in
their foreheads, only, being within full of rottenness.


Pol. Innocence, thy Quaeres will ask Oedipus skill to unfold, they are many of
them so parabolicall, but: I shall give you my thoughts on them the next
opportunity, in the mean while I must be forced to take my leave of you, with
thanks for all your pains, only desiring you to make use of me when you have
occasion, and you shall find me your ready friend,

Nimrod Policy.


Innocence. Well Sir, I shall draw to a conclusion; I should have been glad if
your time had been longer, but I know you are so full of worldly businesses: I
shall be glad to have some further discourse with you (touching your own
country, interests, and assistants) when I may -- and to show you how dangerous
much of the worlds wisdom is unto the universal design of God, viz. of
peace, love, joy, freedom and ease to the Creation; But Sir I shall not trouble
you more at present, but that I AM

Nathanael Innocence.


THe night does pass,
The day makes have,
The Clouds do fly away;
The glory bright
Of innocent light
Comes forth like the Star of the day.
Good and evil are going,
Heaven Saints none-knowing;
'Cause conscience is purged from sin,
By the life of Christ,
The love of the highest,
That has brought his own righteousness in.
For sure it is true,
The man born new,
He cannot sin at all,
Being born of God,
Which down has trod
All that might him inthrall.
If Christ do not
All sins out-blot,
And clear the conscience from guilt,
The shadows before
They could do more,
With the blood of Bulls that was spilt.
For once a year
The people was clear,
The Goat with their sins away run,
But Christ for ever
All sins does sever
From man, who else were undone.
From Sina have,
Those clouds do wast,
Gods life in Zion is:
Conquer all sin
By Christ within,
And come up to man's primitive bliss.
When Jnnocency
With a single eye
Was his impartial law,
No good he knew,
Nor evil could do,
No hrror his mind did awe.
Then was man free
From all that we
And creatures (now) groan under*
And all did see
Come from Unity,
Which to the (wise) world's a wonder.
How man may be
Again set free
From all that is good or evil,
And live in the rest
Of the firstborn blessed,
And fear no sin, hell, Devil.
The second Part.
IF sin be no more,
'Twill plague the Whore
That on many waters does ride;
'Cause sins are her gain,
With the creatures pain,
Are her temple where she does abide.
And were it not for sin
Which she keeps the world in,
This Whore would pine away:
Priests and Lawyers might sterve,
And all Nimrods, that serve
Her Holiness to display.
For the Man of sin
Is the chief Engine,
The Antichrist has left,
And expel him from man,
The Whore is then,
With all Devils, of power bereft.
Wherefore many say,
Although the Whore pray,
And holiness much pretend,
Yet sin is her life,
With division and strfe,
But God-living her gory will end.
For many see plain,
The Enmity's slain,
Sins, Devil, and Hell do quake,
The Serpent is crossed,
And the Beasthe is cast,
With the Whore, into the Lake.
Where the fire of God,
With his rightous rod,
Their powers does make to reel:
Their basis is known,
And God in ill one,
The Lambs w(...)th does make them feel.
The third Part.
FOr, (...)love, joy, with peace,
In the world do increase,
The wise ones would be mad,
'Cause 'twill set high
Natures property,
Which will make all Nimrodians sad.
For Christ the true
Will have all new,
^^d now again will detect
The disparity great
That the poor does cheat,
He does abhor and reject.
And principle highs
Of true parity
He will in man promote,
The Gentiles, says he,
Love lordly to be,
But Christians have no such thought.
For, he that is greatest
Among you, shall be least,
Of men no honor receive,
But be right kind,
And pure in mind,
And of God you the glory shall have.
And unto all do
(As J you show)
As you would be done unto,
Your conscience is judge,
(At it do not grudge)
It Is your rule equally to do.
Another on the Virgin-Life.
THe Virgin-life
Is free from strife,
The will it is resigned,
Into its center
It does enter,
With the Fathers will being joined.
And what he wills
The Virgin fills
With the rays of glory bright,
She has communion
With God in union,
And lives alone in his light.
The Beastiall principle
Is not the Temple
Where the Sophia resides,
She Is over all passions,
And beast-like fashions,
And passive in God she abides.
The kingdom of Christ
Esteemed the highest,
The Virgin-life a above;
All rule and power
In her that hour
Are swallowed up in God-love.
The Virgins actions innocent are,
The seamlesse coat it is for her,
She all things now does know
Now she does see
All fig leaves flee,
All clouds from her do go*
FINIS.
Errata.
Page 1. line 5. for you to be a soldier, read you seem to be a soldier, etc.


