The LOYAL SCOT; An Excellent New SONG.
To an Excellent New SCOTCH Tune.
^ BRead of Geud! I think the Nation's mad, And nene but Knaves and Perjured
Loons do rule the Roast; And
^ for an Honest Karl ne Living's to be had; Why sure the Deel is Landed on the
English Coast. I have never been here sin'
^ Forty Three, And now through Scotland gang to'l see our Gracious King; But
Wunds a Geud, instead of Mirth and Merry
^ Glee, I find and Sniveling Presbyter is coming in.
[2]
For they talk of Horrid Popish Plots, and Heaven knows what,
When all the wiser world knows well what they would be at;
For with sike like Sanctity the Geudest King
They did to Death and Ruin bring.
When on the Civil Broils they first did enter in,
(As well ye ken) with Popery they did begin;
And with Liberty and Public Geud was muckle din,
When the Deel a bit they meant the Thing.
[3]
That Machine of Monstrous Policy,
I mean old S -- for Loyalty so famed;
The voice of all the Geudly Rabble Mobile,
The falsest Loon that ever Envy destined Damned.
Heaven sure never meant so sou a Thing,
But to inform the World where Villainy did dwell:
And sike a Traitor both to Commonwealth and KING
The muckle Deel did surely never hatch in Hell.
[4]
For, like Roman Cataline, to gain his Pious Ends*
He pimps for all the Loose Rebellious Fops in Toon;
And with Treats and Treason daily crams his City-Friends,
From the Link-man to the Scarlet-Goon.
And with high Debauchery they carry on the Cause,
And Geudly Reformation is the Sham pretense;
And Religiously defy Divine and Humane Laws,
With Obedience to their Rightful Prince.
[5]
Then a SPEAKER to this Grand Cabal,
Old Envy Tony seated at the Head of the Board,
His Learned Oration for Rebellion makes to All,
Applauded and approved by every Factious Lord,
Cully Jemmy then they Vote for KING,
Whom Curse confound for being sike a senseless Loon;
Can they who did their Lawful Lord to the Scaffold bring
Be just to him that has no Title to a Croon.
[6]
But they find he is Blockhead fitted for their Use,
A FOOL by Nature, and a KNAVE by Custom grown;
A Gay-Fop-Monarch, whom the Rabble may abuse;
And their business done, will soon Unthrone.
But Jemmy swears and vows, began he can get the Croon,
He by the Laws of Forty Ene would guided be;
And Profane Lawn-sleeves and Surplices again must down*
Then hey for our Old Presbytery.
[7]
B -- a Statesman would be thought,
And reason geud that he should bear that Reverend Name
Since he was one of them that first began the PLOT,
How the King might Banter, and Three Kingdoms Sham.
All the Malcontents His Noble Grace
To this Rehearsal did invite, to hear and see
But whilst he wittily contrived it but a Farce,
The busier Noddles turned it into Tragedy.
[8]
And now each Actor does begin to play his Part,
And too so well he cons his Geer, and takes his Cue,
Till they learn to play the Rebel so by rote of heart,
That the Fictitious Story seems as true.
And now, without control, they apprehend and hang;
And with the Nation all is Gospel that they Swear;
Then Bonny Jockey prithee back to Scotland gang,
For a Loyal Lad's in danger here.
LONDON: Printed for ALEXANDER BANKS, Anno Domini, MDCLXXXII.


