A LOYAL NEW YEARS GIFT. Or an Acrostick on the Prayer of every true SUBJECT.
God Bless King JAMES the Second And let him live long and Hapily.
GReat, Good and Just, are seldom to be found
Atoned together in the same Compound:
Only Great JAMES these Epithetes as due
(Nature and Heaven conspiring to allow
Double, what to an ordinary Mortals Lot
Devolves to him) has by just Title got:
By Birthright, Great, Just in his Conversation,
Loving what is Good, has gained Good Commendation.
Let every Soul, since every Soul within
Each of Three Kingdoms has partaker been,
Even to Extremes, of Goodness most Divine,
That like Sunbeams, from him the Fountain, shine;
Sing forth his Praise; let all join in one Chorus,
Heaven to beseech, that he may long before us
Sway Britain's Scepter. May auspicious Jove
Initiate this Year with his propitious Love.
Kings Rule by him; they by his Order are:
May he Protect our JAMES in Peace and War.
In The Heavens whilst Sun and Moon endure to shine,
Let us be Blessed with him, or with his Line.
No Revolution may bright Phoebus make,
In which he may not of fresh Joys partake.
' Against Foes Defend him Lord; Destroy them all
Vainly who seek the Lord's Annointeds Fall.
Increase his Friends; Establish sure his Throne,
Even till this fleeting World's Decayed and gone.
All Blessings this or the next World afford
Let them be poured on him from the Lord.
May thou great Hero! long persist to be
Our Faiths Defender and our Liberty.
Each Tongue must now confess, even Rebels say
Never did our Land see such a New Years Day.
So happy we, who Blessed are with a King
Given us from Heaven; and with him each good thing.
The base disturbers of our Peace he will Quel;
And be a Father to all that do well.
He all just Rights and Privledge Maintains
Nor suffers any that Unlawful Gains.
Exact: He our Religions purer Streams
Does vindicate from innovating Dreams.
Strange Nations see and wonder at our Bliss
How we enjoy such happiness as this.
Envy they may, but cannot disturb our Peace
A Gracious Prince makes us secure at Ease.
Cease then, O cease, strange Fools that would Rebel
Perfideous Wretches, know when ye are well.
Our too abundant Happiness 't must be
If ought disturd our great Tranquillity.
No happier People did the Sun ever View
Let Us thankful be, O King; it is by you.
Desist we never from pouring out our Prayers
You may great Sir, see many happy Years.
This may be Printed.

R. P.

LONDON, Printed by George Croom, at the Sign of the Blue-Ball in Thames Street
near Baynards'-Castle. 1685.


