ALARVM TO POETS.

IN DOMINO CONFIDO
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON. Printed in the Year, 1648.

Aeolus Trumpet to his Four Winds.
Go Triton, calm all storms of turbulence,
From turning up side down both sea, and shore,
Triton, proclaim silent obedience,
That they henceforth shall dare to break no more;
For dread Astreaes Sign, amid the Line,
Erected has her seals for true, and just;
Whereto all virtuous projects shall confine,
So that her calm, no more shall be combust:
But that her Poets now may sing of peace,
And all cromatick descant harsh surcease.
Poetries Complaint.
THough I Poesy grow out of request,
As a sad mendicant unwelcome mate,
Yet this me joys, the Muses me invest,
Amid their gracious classis Laureat;
With whom, (selfe-faring) I alone descrie
All my malignants end in obliquie.
Where all their crancks I trace with little thanks,
And go invisible, yet see their prancks,
That parable so open, and shut the same,
As Truth, Art, Wit, praised for their friendly blame:
Else over-openly foul faults to tell,
Would kindle hot blood (as gravity knows well)
But for th'ideal Anagoge, whereby,
The mark shot at, is hit ingeniously,
Scurrilitie abhorred, and flattery,
Hiss off the stage by fair morality.
Alarm to Poets.
WHen Jove spread his convexed Canopie
Of constant azure, arched low and high,
Did twinkling tapers infinitely set,
Where cloud, nor freckle, could their luster let,
But that those seven great Lamps which ever turn,
Might every where fling light as round they journ,
Forced by that wheel which moves all the rest,
With, and against each other, to contest,
In that long dance of number, tune, and time,
Which by proportion does join, and dis-joyne,
Of friendly hatred, loving so, and hate,
As wisdom knows to reconcile the bate
Of these strange combatants, which rise, and fall,
In their continual battle cubicall,
Which to the circular well reconciled
Makes, that to unity they gladly yield.
Which when he saw so good, and well agree,
He bid the whole Choire sound out their harmony,
Whereof the seven tones to that one of eight,
Sent whole, and half tunes by measure and weight,
Yea fifths, and thirds, and so a fourth did sound,
A second, and a sixth, so well compound,
As thereof rang the sweetest melody,
That rule, and order breed, to amity.
Wherefore the Chorus 'mid th'etheriall Hall,
Diffusing all those concords musical,
Did so rejoice all kinds, each sex and age,
(Invited guests unto that middle stage)
As vouched on all sides, truth t'own self conformes,
As virtue demonstrates by all her normes;
Whence not to fall, stands where the first belonged,
Still to that mystery to correspond.
Wherein Jove stood rapt, since this unisone
Merely derived but from one radick tone,
Deigned for it self, it self to glorify,
Into that multiplying Euphonie,
That never ceasing, warbled in that frame
That can none other do then still the same.
O noblest consonance! O excellence!
In which truth breeds love, justice, innocence.
Now to concomitate this Musicks feast,
Made to the middle, high, and lowest guest,
Jove of those three called one out, at whose cry,
Averdi came (his daughter) instantly;
A Lady truly whiter then the snow,
More humble, meek, and mild, then Doves below;
More pure, subtle, acute, then clearest air,
More swift then sight, of kind most debonaire.
Go candor (said he) make thine ayrie flight,
Down through the fiery Region, and enlight
With notion general some above the rest,
But thereto make choice of the lowliest,
Select of Nations, th'acies of whose mind,
Shall to my limits stand by me confined;
So as though they in part do know the right,
Yet future ages shall receive more light;
When Me list some more special ones inspire
With knowledge; whilst others shall delire,
Til one particular much more shall know,
For knowledge but successively shall grow.
Averdi thus dispatched with science rare,
Her purport of three Regions to declare,
The winged Graces (fly she low, or high)
Her ways enlightened with their radij;
So did the Classick Virtues lovingly
Amid them all still bear her company.
When lo, D^lfisa to prevent her, lay,
If possibly by any wile she may;
About whom, Phantasmes infinite did swarm,
Dreams to intoxicate with windy barme,
Vain apparitions, strong imaginations,
Conceits, opinions, mad inaugurations,
Forms, fancies, figures, fables improbable,
Untopicall, unsalted, fond, unstable,
Such as the Spirits of the air (loosed to elusion)
Have to confound with (making their intrusion)
Where, soothly false suborne in steed of true,
To be imbibed by the phanatick crew;
And now to bob Averdies negotiation,
She featly coined an art of emulation,
By stealing to her self Averdies shade,
Which from the ground did off her light evade,
In which she strove her to assimilate,
Yet but as shades true bodies imitate;
Still plotting her but so to counterfeit,
As truth's name, form, gain hers be by excheat
Of contradiction: which opposing ever,
No mean has to assign to own endeavor,
But that malengin (woven into faction)
Might profit wring out b'others raised detraction;
For envy never cease to deprave,
Till others properties she seize and have.
Yet when Auroraes calm serenitie,
Had burnished Titans rosy visnomie,
And so set up her glass, as might appear,
All tamskipp prospectives, both far, and near;
Down soared Averdi by her winding staire,
On wings displayed, (composed of fire, and air,)
Which bear her on that mild amenitie,
That all inferiors viewd with singlest eye,
All longilatitudes, altitudes eke,
Degrees, and what else reason has to seek;
Each peopled Nation, climate, hot, cold, mean,
Th'intemperate, and the temperate, foul and clean,
Where, after her made universal slight,
As well around the globe, mid, cross, and right,
She did over Caldie, then over Egypt soar,
Where, did on some her meek, elixir pour,
Whereof, a gentle, meek, mild flame, did tine
That furor, which their spirits up rapt divine,
To contemplate in singlest ecstasy,
Hid speculation from the proudest eye,
As yet Astronomy recordth well,
And Geometry, who first did them revell,
Yea sowed the first seeds of Philosophy,
By some, with pain, and cost, sought far, and nigh,
Their candle to illumin at that light.
But this the more enraged Delsisaes spite,
Who, coasting near Averdi, as her shade,
On wings of all mixed colors, fraud had made,
Did there her malarts phiols drench out pour,
On such as would become her Paramour;
Whereof, arose most noisome pestilence,
Which soon infected scient sapience;
A worser pestilence was never known,
Then science turned into opinion*
To croaking frogs, whose tongues shall never rest,
While stood suborned Aver^^'s Anthagonist,
And therefore barring them her quintassence,
Left all those mutinous to own insolence.
To find out Gaul, (far hotter of desire)
The s^oner caught of one intestine sire,
Inconstant libertines, ires rendezvous,
At sodaines, esteemed most dangerous,
Immoderate, rash, giddy, turbulent,
Has but to counterfeit the continent;
Albeit insinuates humilianist,
Most slily plays proud opinionist.
On this, perceiving Delsis had beset her,
Averdi soon resolved from thence to get her;
Impossible it finding, Gaul, Almaine,
Should her, on those conditions enetrtaine;
And therefore pawned, her w^ndring wings to rest,
While limbs more strength ger, as they are releast*
Till sweaty Phoebus, wending from her sight,
Her, with a ruddy co^gey bode goodnight:
Which grace, as it prelag'd next morning gray;
So promised, to perfor^^^ a golden day.
But when Night, blacks had doff't, and put on blew,
Blew, mixed with white, compounding a gray hew,
Most fit for Phoebus when him chaires in State,
All far off prospectives to speculate;
Averdi, still as meek, as calmest day,
Then soaring for discovery, every way,
Intended her rath Muses to bestow,
On some more meet, discreet, and grave below:
Far kenning from an high point, Faiery Land,
Which sounds increase, and nourishing, if scanned,
Did there reign her Elixir, which so wrought,
As that folk, rapt in love, this Dame most sought,
Whose very light, them struck with admiration,
To trace her steps from Nation, into Nation,
And Land, to Land, where so she chose to alight,
Although it be in Fairy I and she pight.
On top of whose sharp Promontore, her voice
Them called, who did ascend with merry noise;
The chiefest Spire whereof Oneida hight,
For beauty famous, strength, and steeples right;
Built on a rock, which had on it an hill,
That stood for Land mark, after Sea-mans skill;
The Holt whereof, on which Averdi keeps,
Belsoma Castl'is watered round with deeps,
Where, while alost, in prospective she sat,
Whole chirmes of Poets thither congregate,
To serve that sovereign Beauty, which had power,
To ravish each observing Paramour:
Whose lovely radij so the men disuought,
As they were lost, and found in her they sought;
So could not but thus her ofright desine,
O Essence appetible, and O Divine
Form! causing our beginning, being, end,
Therefore, thine honor we shall still defend.
Thus stood they rapt into her observation,
Time, habit, place, resounding th'approbation,
Them gave to meditate the Deity,
Expressed in the'xercise of piety;
Then plainly sinding, all herparts agree
With her own self, when they converted be;
She like power having, hers to unite so in one,
As all their tones resound her unisone:
Like so, how ever any species grows,
Its every property meets one in close,
As simple virtue knows to desine,
Which of all demonstrations is the prime
Now all these Laureats standing at her gate,
Own offices did, and her love dilate,
Averdies Love for Guerdon, is not small,
Besides, a Poe^s Laureat Coronal;
Which earning, out will sing the Victors praise,
And sound loves triumph to these latter days,
With blessed peace, that welcomes in the bringer,
And cheeres up every sad rejoicing singer.
But first, ought sing a song of twelve months long,
Next, noblest Guy, (righted on others wrong)
Then Chaucers Squires lost tale, on his conditions,
The second last part of Poetic visions.
For in this order ought the legend be,
According to the Muses own decree.
Now then rapt Poets, what have ye to say?
To Dame Averdies key, (the Muses way?)
If ye deign answer her Alarm, rise!
And arm your verse, to win from prose the prize,
Sing swans of Thames, that all the world may know,
Ye win the golden wreath, from silver Poe;
Whose learned Schools, though have not to give wit,
Yet wondrous curiously, they polish it:
But high Ichouh, down through his stars distills
What his employed Philomela thrils,
In April blithe, and May, but ends in June,
That other monthly birds, in kind, may tune,
But that another Turtle sing before ye,
Assures to your inheritance, the glory.
At that, Delsisa fell into a rage,
Till every other hissed her off the stage,
And kick her often, after her own intent,
Then merrily, as from a banquet, went.
J. L.

FINIS.

