Loyalty Rewarded; OR, A POEM UPON THE Brace of BUCKS Bestowed upon the Loyal
Apprentices, by His Majesty.
Written by an APPRENTICE.
WHAT more can man expect from Majesty,
Than Thanks, acknowledging their Loyalty?
The best of Subjects have been still content,
Without Reward, with the Acknowledgement;
And Thanks alone have been an Obligation,
To keep Men firm unto their Loyal Station:
But when a Prince does condescend so low,
And on his Subjects THANKS and GIFTS bestow,
What Obligations then on Men do lie,
To be his Loyal Subjects till they die,
And value Lives less than their Loyalty?
TO oppose all Faction, and to stake their Lives,
As constant Guards to his Prerogatives,
And let not Threats deterr, nor Promise bribe*
From Loyalty, to serve the Factions Tribe.
For did not Sacred Writ and Laws decree,
Yet this Great Favor binds their Loyalty:
This is our Case, and thus we ought to be:
For whilst with humblest Thoughts and Hearts no less,
We to Great CHARLES presented our Address,
Hoping that Heaven's Vicegerent bore the Nature
Of God, the World, and Greatest Kings Creator;
Humbly imploring that he would accept,
Instead of pay, the Acknowledgement oth' Debt:
And to his Sacred Years did humbly call
For Patience, till we could discharge it all;
And though our poor Address came late, however,
We did imagine, better late than never;
And since we could not in the Front appear,
We Are humbly content to bring up the Rear;
Though others may be Abler, Wiser, and more Free*
Yet none alive are Loyaller than We;
Who still are ready to lay down our Lives
In vindicating his Prerogatives:
Hoping that he, like Heaven, would requite
With equal Hand the Treasure and the Mite:
For though our poor Abilities were small,
Yet with Sincerity we gave our ALL.
And on our Bended Knees we did implore,
To find Acceptance, and durst ask no more;
Which to our Joy, just as we did believe,
In hopes we waited, and did Thanks receive,
Being prostrate at His Feet, He did command
Us to arise, and offered us his Hand,
Which each one humbly kissed, and on it swore
To the Contents read in the Address before.
Thus being Honored in the Council Room,
Full fraught with Joy we came rejoicing Home;
Telling our Fellows of our Great Respect,
Being more by far than any could expect:
Yet our Good Prince being willing to advance
Our Loyalty and firm Allegiance;
And that our Joy the Greater might appear,
Has on us now bestowed a Brace of Deer:
And nothing's wanting now but Dialect,
TO express our unexpressible Respect;
We Would willingly surround the World's Vast Banks,
To find a Language to express our Thanks;
But it is in vain, the Honor is so Great,
It only runs us farther in that Debt,
Which to our Grief we are never like to pay,
Yet will acknowledge till our Dying Day:
But since we cannot; that Heaven will requite,
Shall be our constant Prayers both Day and Night;
And as Acknowledgements the Gifts shall be
The Hieroglyphics of our Loyalty.
The Deer's Majestic Carriage still shall be
The Lively Effigies of MAJESTY.
His Srong Courageous Horns still represents
Bold Hearts, Strong Arms, Courageous Intents,
To Guard the Royal CHARLES from Malcontents.
His hasty Steps, and swifter Feet still shows
Not how to shun, but to pursue our Foes.
In short, each part shall fully put to View,
Great CHARLES, the Duty that we owe to You;
Who, like strong Guards, Your Person will surround,
To keep You safe from each Malicious Hound.
Our Swords, when e're Occasion serves shall be
Like Horns to Push and Gore the Enemy.
Whilst of Your Bounty we will make Good Cheer,
And drink Your Health over the Slaughtered Deer,
Humbly imploring Heaven to shower down
Perpetual Joys upon Your Sacred CROWN,
Still Glorious, like the Sun, may CHARLES appear,
Till Heaven removes Him to a Nobler Sphere.
LONDON, Printed for R. W. 1681.


