LOOK UNTO JESUS, OR An Ascent to the HOLY MOUNT, TO SEE JESUS CHRIST IN HIS
GLORY.

WHEREBY The Active and contemplative Believer may have the Eyes of his
Understanding more enlightened to behold in some measure the Eternity and
Immutability of the Lord JESUS CHRIST: I. In his Divine Generation. II. In his
Power over the World. III. In his Power over his Church in her twofold estate:
I. MILITANT. II. TRIUMPHANT.



As the List of CONTENTS which follows next to the PREFACE, does more
particularly declare.

At the end of the Book is an APPENDIX, showing the certainty of the Calling of
the JEWS.

Written by EDWARD LANE, M. A. Vicar of Sparsholt, etc. in the County of South,
alias Hamshire.

London, Printed by Thomas Roycroft for the Author, and are to be sold by
Humphrey Tuckey at the Black spread-Eagle in Fleet Street, and by William
Tailor near the Checquer Gate in Winchester. 1663.

Imprimatur Liber ut eo magis imprimatur JESUS.

December. 6. 1663. M. FRANCK. S. T. P. Reverend. in Christo Patr. Dom. Episc.
Land. a Sacris Dom.

OPTIMO MAXIMO (...), (...) DEO DOMINO DOMINI DEI Patris Omnipotentis Filio
Unigenito, omnisque Creaturae (...), hoc est, and Primo-Parienti and
Primogenito, Necnon Inter Deum and Homines Mediatori Unissimo and Fidelissimo,
Catholicae etiam Ecclesiae Militantis and Triumphantis Capiti unice colendo,
(Ad cujus Nomen supra omne Nomen flectendum est omne Genu Celestium,
Terrestium, ac Subterraneorum) Tractatum hunc de Aeternitate and Immutabilitate
Nominis sui Praestantissimi (...) susceptum, Protractum, and Peractum EDOVARDUS
LANE in domo ejusdem Domini Servorum (...) and Inutilissimus Cum humili
Indignationis ob multas Infirmitates Deprecatione, and ardenti Benedictionis
Supplicatione Meritissimo Consecravit Voto.

Reverendo in Christo Patri ac Domino, Domino GEORGIO Episcopo WINTONIENSI
Vigilantissimo, Aureae Periscelidis Praesuli Clarissimo, Domino suo Dioecesano
Summopere Observando Incrementum Gratiae apud JESUM CHRISTUM (...), perinde ac
Honoris apud Homines in Translatione sua ad hanc (...) Provinciam Bona Fide and
Toto Cord Precatur EDOVARDUS LANE.

Annos nunc plus minus 27. Ecclesiae Paroechianae in Villa SPARSHOLT in agro
SOUTH. Vicarius: Quinetiam una cum ABRECH Congratulationis, Librum hunc ad
Celelebrandum JESU CHRISTI Nomen Honorandum in Saecula Praeparatum, eidemque
Supremo Nomini, Perpetuae Gratitudinis ergo, Consecratum Ad Gravem and
Religiosam ejusdem Reverendi Patris Inspectionem and Disquisitionem lubente
dicavit Studio.

JESUS SIT TIBI JESUS. A PREFACE To the Pious and Judicious Reader.
GOOD READER,
HEre is a Treatise presented to thy view, wherein through the guidance of Gods
grace, and the conduct of his word, is attempted an assay to set forth the
honor of the great Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to make his praise
glorious. A Design doubtless very acceptable to all that are Christians indeed,
who cannot but rejoice in any thing that may tend to the Exaltation of our dear
Crucified and Glorified Redeemer, who is the Rock of Ages, the eternal
excellency of his Church, the joy of all Generations. A work it is wherein all
the company of Heaven is to be exercised unto all eternity. And albeit
whatsoever is undertaken by Men or Angels in this kind will come infinitely
short of his Merit, yet it is but fit that what any one has here seen of his
glory, either in his word or works, he be free in the communication thereof.
Possibly there have been sundry attempts made already of the like nature, and
such, that this may seem to some at first sight to be superfluous: However Let
not the day of small things be despised by us: If some new materials, which
will endure the searching fire of Gods spirit be here added to the gold and
silver which others have before built upon this foundation, there can be no
just offense taken thereat; Sure I am they will not be disallowed by the Master
of the house, and therefore ought not to be rejected by those that are employed
and salaryed by him to be Co-workers with me in the building.

It was not (God knows) any vain ambition or self-seeking that did first put
me, the meanest of the Lords Servants, upon this work, which is indeed Opus
Dei, the work of God; neither is it any such sinister aim, that makes me rush
upon the censure of the judicious in the enlargement and completing of it:
Only if Jesus Christ may hereby be magnifyed, and his Church edifyed, I have
my desire, and it shall be the Crown of my rejoicing.

I confess notwithstanding there was an occasion offered that did first induce
me to this Undertaking, and it will not be amiss here to make a short mention
of it. Thus it was, In the heat of the late Schism, it fell to my lot to
preach a Sermon in the Cathedral Church at Winton upon the 26 day of December;
wherein because I said, An Dom. 1654
I would not judge those people in the liberty of their Consciences, who did
observe the Feast of our Saviors Nativity to the Lord (though withal I then
Which is here also inserted in its proper place.
spoke severely against the profane abuse of it) I was accounted a
superstitious person, and a malignant (such was the discriminating term that
was then used) and reported far and near, that I had done more hurt by that one
Sermon then other Ministers that were employed in that Lecture could be able to
repair again by many. Which reproachful slander was so great a trouble unto me,
though I was then justified by Persons of very good quality that were both wise
and godly, that I was often minded, being persuaded by those persons, and
sundry others that heard of it, to publish in print the Sermon that I then
preached, to the end the World might see how causelessly I was traduced. I did
nevertheless forbear the said publication, not out of fear of the persecutions
of those evil days; for I did my self observe that Anniversary Festivity in my
own Parish, preaching and administering the Sacrament of the Lords supper, when
very few durst adventure to do the like. But having begun upon this occasion to
prepare it for the Press, and finding in the pursuance of it my Meditations
enlarged to other matter then I at first delivered, I slighted the Calumny
wherewith I was asperst, as not worthy to be so much heeded, and breaking
through many difficulties and hindrances, have by degrees extended that very
Sermon to this length which is now before you. The greatest part whereof I have
for some years kept by me without further additions; but of late I must confess
I was as the Apostle (if I may so say) pressed in spirit to finish what had
begun, and to publish the whole for the sake of Christ and his Churches.

And now give me leave to premise an Apology for some things in this Treatise,
against which especially there may seem to lie some exceptions. First, I may
possibly be adjudged too inconsiderate in fixing the Epistle to the Hebrews
upon St. Paul's account, because it does not clearly appear (as it is commonly
conceived) that he was the Author thereof. Secondly, It may be said that here
are sundry things inserted which have no natural co-incidency with the
principal subject that is pretended.

As to the first of these Exceptions, I know well there has been some doubt
made concerning the Author of this Epistle; for it has been much controverted
a long time whether it was Barnabas or Clemens Romanus, or Saint Luke, etc. But
for Saint Paul few were inclinable to entitle him unto it: their reason was,
The style and idiom hereof seems to vary much from that which the Apostle
ordinarily used in his writing, neither does he own it himself, by setting his
mark upon the front of it, as he does in all the rest of his Epistles, but
chiefly because the Writer of this Epistle acknowledges, Heb. 2.3.
that he had learned the Doctrine of Salvation from others, which, says he,
was confirmed unto us by them that heard it; Whereas the Apostle with very
great confidence professes that he never received if of men, nor was taught it
but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ (which last exception is indeed the most
material, Gal. 1.12.
but answered sufficiently by a late Writer as may appear in the margin.
Doctor Hammond, The word (...), us, is not to be restrained to the writer
only, but so as to comprehend those to whom he writes, uti patet Tit. 3.3.
Ephesians. 2.5. Neither is it any new or strange thing for St. Paul to confirm the
truth of the Gospel by the testimony of others, and tradition from them which
saw and heard. See 1 Cor. 15.3.
) Hereupon it seems that doubts have risen concerning this matter: And it is
further conceived by some that it would savor of too much curiosity to resolve
such doubts; For so long as we believe the Holy Ghost to be the Enditer, what
need we perplex our selves about the Writer? As When a Prince will vouchsafe to
send a Letter to any of his Subjects, it would ill become them to be
inquisitive with what pen it was written; rather we should say of this Epistle,
as once it was said of the Book of Job, Ipse scripsit, qui haec feribenda
dictavit, Ipse scripsit, qui and illius operis inspirator extitit, He writ
these things that dictated them unto the Writer, etc.

Nevertheless though it be granted that it may not be of absolute necessity to
make too curious inquiry after all those Penmen and actuaries, whom the Holy
Ghost employed in that excellent service of being the perpetual Registers of
the great Council of Heaven, yet neither are they to be quite neglected. We
rejoice in the message of good tidings that is brought unto us, yet that
hinders not, but that we may make the messenger welcome, and if he be missing,
though his presence should not add to the Authority of the message, yet we
would seek him out, that we might gladly know him. Here in an Epistle sent unto
us from God, and the messenger is supposed to be missing: Let now the name of
God be magnified, and his will herein revealed be embraced by us (as it is
meet) with all acceptance: But if the knowledge of the instrument by whom it
is handed to us, may any whit conduce to Gods glory in the removal of
prejudices against the truth herein revealed, or in the conviction of the
enemies of the Lord Jesus Christ (such as were the Arrians of old, and the
Socinians of late) it is not fit that we should balke it, especially when it is
hinted unto us by the spirit it self in the holy Scriptures. To say nothing of
the Title prefixed. to the Epistle, it being no part of the Canon, neither
having been generally used by the Churches of Christ, therefore not
argumentative, though it must be confessed it has Antiquity to plead for it.
To let pass also the Salutation in the close, which as the Apostle Saint Paul
says, 2 These. 3.17. is his token in every Epistle, so he writes (which might
be more material, but that it may be said, Others in imitation of him do use
the same Valediction too) we have a more sure word of testimony, whereunto we
should do well to take heed, and that is this. Saint Peter the Apostle of the
circumcision in his second Epistle which he writes unto the scattered Hebrews,
who were of his peculiar charge, though dispersed into sundry remote Regions,
calling them therefore Strangers in regard of the places of their abode, far
distant from their own Country, has by a singular providence of God positively
testified, that his beloved Brother Paul, and no other, was the Writer hereof.
And to this purpose he gives us a plain demonstration* 2 Pet. 3.15. Where he
speaks of an Epistle of Paul written unto these scattered Hebrews; which
Epistle was it seems at that time extant, and in high estimation among the
faithful, and which with other of Saint Paul's Epistles he commends as of
equal Authority, being, as he says, written by him according to the Wisdom
given unto him. Now this Epistle there mentioned, is very probably the same,
which in the Scripture goes under the Name of the Epistle to the Hebrews;
otherwise how is the Church the pillar and ground of truth in holding out all
the Oracles and whole Counsel of God, if she has been negligent in so eminent
a part of her Depositum commended unto her by the Authority of two chief
Apostles, or, as one says, lose Paul's Epistle and keep Peter's that makes
mention of it, which is not with any color of reason to be imagined? We may
therefore hereupon conclude that it evidently appears Saint Paul was the writer
hereof.

But for that he here alters his style, and does not put his Name unto this,
as he does unto the rest of his Epistles, there are sundry probable conjectures
commonly for it given. First the Jews had conceived against him a very great
prejudice, and least they should thereupon have rejected his writing with
indignation, he changes his wonted style, and omitteth his usual Introduction
of Paul an Apostle, etc. Not regarding himself, so that the word of God might
run and be glorified. Moreover he was designed to be Apostolus Gentium, the
Apostle of the Gentiles, as appears Gal. 2.7, 8. Therefore thought it best here
to conceal his Name, and to waive his ordinary title, least he should (...)
assume to himself also the Title of Apostolus Hebraeorum, the Apostle of the
Hebrews, which properly belonged to another. And therefore though he might in
an extraordinary way be employed by the Holy Ghost in writing this Epistle to
the people of that Nation (as Saint James also did.) yet withal he is very
cautious herein to put them in mind of their duty to their own peculiar Guides
that had the rule over them, which we see he does once and again in this 13
Chapter verse. 7.17.24. But the truth is (as it is said) these reasons are but
conjectural, that which is to satisfy us in this point is this, even so it
seemed good to the Holy Ghost.

And thus I have given a large and clear resolution of this doubtful matter,
which indeed was but fit to be done, because I do here oftentimes speak of the
said Apostle, as the sure and certain Author of that Epistle.

Secondly, Whereas there are sundry branches of this Treatise, which do seem to
have no affinity with the sense of the Apostle in the Text, and consequently
not to be connatural with the main Doctrine that is here insisted upon, I
answer, First, As Jesus Christ himself is (according to the Apostles word) All
and in All, Col. 3.11.
That sea of living waters by whom all springs and rivulets of divine truth
have their rise and original, and unto which they must return again; so is this
Text, as it is here interpreted, not only comprehensive of the whole mystery
of Christ, but also of the whole duty of man toward him: And therefore that
which is here written in order thereunto should not be accounted as an
impertinent digression.

Secondly, it is no new thing to find corollaries and collateral intersertions
superadded in a way of subserviency to the principal subject handled in
Tractates either of a Theological or mere Humane Alloy: For it is with Books
(as one very well makes the resemblance) as it is with Trees, these have some
Masters and chief Branches in which the main Sap of the Root is carried, but
they have also some under-spriggs and water-boughs, which by the vegetation of
the principal Shootes do prosper the better, and are made to serve both for
ornament and fecundity to the whole Body; Those have commonly some eminent
subject into which their whole strength and stream runs, but they have likewise
sundry Parerga of less consequence annexed thereto, which though abstractedly
considered may seem to be at a wide distance, yet being Methodically linked
together, have a coalescency, imparting each to other both illustration and
confirmation. So is it here, sundry resultancies and inferences do occasionally
spring up in this Book, as there do in all our Sermons that we undertake, when
the blood and juice of it runs chiefly into the Apostles sense of the Text,
viz. the Doctrine of the Eternity and Immutability of the Lord Jesus Christ,
which gives life unto all the rest. So that what the Evangelist Saint John
spoke of his Gospel which he wrote the same may I say of all that is contained
in this Book, These things are written that you might believe that Jesus is the
Christ, and that believing you might have life through his name.

But I hear what is further objected, as, that I multiply Quotations, borrow
the help of sundry Authors, and do but actum agere, bring the same crambe of
words, repeating what has sufficiently been imparted to the World by others,
who have at large, and with much perspicuity and serenity of spiritual Wisdom
wri^ten of this subject. Now though I have hinted at this before, yet I
conceive a necessity is laid upon me to rejoyn unto this Charge a full and
clear Vindication.

First then, this I say, I know not of any that has written of this subject so
largely before me; But this I know, that both for the matter and manner of
handling it, as it is grounded upon that foundation, which is precedaneous unto
it, I am alone without any competitours or pretenders whatsoever.

Secondly, I do yield that I have in the carrying on of this Work consulted
with Writers both Ancient and Modern; and have thereupon, not without good
cause been the bolder to offer my conceptions to public view (though possibly
in some places they may not be well resented) finding them confirmed by those
that have been worthily reputed burning and shining Lights of the Church in
their several Generations, who have born the burden and heat of the day in the
Lords Vineyard, and upon whose Labors we are now happily entered. Yea more, I
have not only consulted them, but frequently made use of their Testimony,
rendering it in their own words, sometimes to put by Imputations of Collusion,
otherwhiles for the Conviction of Adversaries, always to give full
satisfaction to those who shall diligently apply themselves to a religious
perusal hereof. Nor am I at all ashamed to acknowledge what I have done in this
kind, nor need I fear to be taxed with any Plagiary superinducements of other
men's Labors, though indeed as I have gone thorough my Neighbors Fields (the
Owners whereof I do for the most part signify by name) I have here and there
plucked some Ears of Corn, and fitted them for my purpose (which by a natural
propriety is challenged of all as a common right) yet I have no where put in my
Sickle, and so can plead a justification in that particular. Howbeit this I may
without arrogance make my Plea: viz. My borrowing, whatsoever it has been, is
fully counter-ballanced with my lending again, which though it be to be
reckoned but as a poor Mite cast into the Lords Treasury, yet it is secundum
mensuram donationis Christi, ac moderationem Spiritus dividentis singulis prout
vult, and may through Gods blessing be to the furtherance of the Gospel,
especially in regard of those interpretations of Scripture, which I have here
given, to which no Expositors of Holy Writ, nor any Authors whatsoever could
lay any claim, nor any of their Assertours can at this day for them: All which
I do humbly commend to the Churches Examination, a List whereof I conceive fit
here to present unto you, though the Table at the latter end of the Book will
give directions by Asterisks to the places where they are to be found.

Exodus 33.18. I beseech thee show me thy Glory. Exodus 33.19. And he said I
will make all my goodness, etc. Exodus 34.6. And the Lord passed by before him
and proclaimed, the Lord, the Lord God, etc. Deuteronomy. 32.7. Remember the days of
old, consider the years, etc. Deuteronomy. 32.8. When the most high divided to the
Nations, etc. Deuteronomy. 32.12. The Lord alone did lead him, etc. Deuteronomy. 33.5. And he
was King in Jeshurun, etc. Psalm. 2.7. I will declare the Decree, etc. Psalm.
8.3. When I consider thy Heavens, etc. Psalm. 74.12. For God is my King of old,
etc. Daniel 9.24. Seventy Weeks are determined, etc. Amos 5.18. Woe unto you
that desire the day of the Lord, etc. Amos 5.19. As if a man did flee from a
Lion, etc. John 1.10. He was in the World, and the World was made, etc. John
1.11. He came unto his own, and his own, etc. John 1.14. The word was made
flesh, etc. Acts 1.6. When they therefore were come together, etc. Acts 1.7. It
is not for you to know the times, etc. Romans 8.19. For the earnest expectation
of the Creature, etc. Romans 8.20. For the creature was made subject to vanity,
etc. Romans 8.21. Because the creature also it self shall be delivered, etc. Romans
8.22. For we know that the whole Creation groaneth, etc. Romans 8.29. The
firstborn among many Brethren, etc. Romans 11.25. Blindness in part is happened to
Israel, until, etc. Romans 11.26. And so all Israel shall be saved, etc. Romans
11.27. For this is my Covenant with them, when, etc. Gal. 4.5. To redeem them
that were under the Law, that we, etc. Col. 1.15. Who is the Image of the
invisible God, etc. 1 Timothy 2.5. For there is one God and one Mediator, etc.
Tit. 1.5. For this cause left I thee in Crete, etc. Tit. 1.7. For a Bishop must
be blameless, etc. 1 Pet. 4.17. For the time is come that judgment must begin,
etc. 1 Pet. 4.18. And if the righteous scarcely be saved, etc. Rev. 1.11. I am
Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, etc.
The Interpretation of these Texts of Scripture (Gentle Reader) as they are
rendered in this Treatise, I do leave unto thy most serious consideration: Not
but that there are besides these, sundry Expositions of other places of
Scripture here also given that are not usual, yet nevertheless may well be
conceived to be according to truth, without condemning those that have been
commonly received. These likewise you will meet with as you go along in your
reading, and will require your most ponderous meditations. Only I do desire
that when you meet with an interpretation of the Holy Scripture which may seem
somewhat strange unto you, not to be hasty in passing censure upon it, till you
have found the whole discourse about it to be fully finished.

Again, it will perhaps be objected unto me by some, that I do here take but a
slight occasion to be very large and vehement in maintaining the honor of our
Church against her Adversaries, by justifying the Order which she observes in
the Public Worship of God, and Ecclesiastical Government: Whereto it may well
be answered, Is there not a cause? When not only the Church which is our
Mother, the most eminent Pillar and Stay of Divine Truth has been miserably
rent and torn by Schisms and Divisions, but our Lord Jesus Christ himself also
was very much dishonored thereby, being made by a sort of wretched people the
very Author and Fautor of their Divisions; as if he had not been, and were not
still to be to his poor Church what the Text here insisted upon, proclaims him
to be, viz. (...), the Same? Cause enough then there is for every true Son of
the Church to spend his Zeal in this Contrast upon all occasions, and to mark
them as the Apostle advises, who cause these Divisions and Offenses, that they
may be avoided.

It must be confessed, the late Schism, while it grew more and more prevalent
in this Kingdom till it pleased God to reduce us to our pristine order by a
merciful providence never to be forgotten, did bring us especially of the
Ministry into such a low despondency and pusillanimity of spirit, that we had
almost lost that Christian Valor, yea and English courage pro aris and focis,
for which our Church and Nation have in times before us been so much renowned:
But since the Lord God has spoken, who can but prophecy? when deliverance has
been sent unto us by the outstretched arm of an Almighty Power, who can
forbear to rejoice in it? And when God has showed us our Error, in suffering
our selves to be deluded by a spirit of seduction, who can but lament his
backslidings, and appear with his utmost strength in the vindication of that
Truth and Church, which have been so treacherously forsaken? For my own part I
do here in the truth and uprightness of my heart solemnly protest before God
and men, as I have been ashamed of my credulity in giving heed for some time to
the cunning insinuations of those who pretended they were for the cause of God,
but were found Liars, so now (though possibly it may be said of me, as it was
of Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 10.10.
that my bodyly presence is weak, and my speech contemptible, and therefore it
is but little that can be expected from me that may be for the advantage of the
Church in any kind (all which I will not deny) yet) I do and must account it
my duty with that little strength that I have, to endeavor what I can by all
ways and means the undeceiving of those poor seduced people, who, being
bewitched with the like sorceries, do yet continue in their perverseness
against the Lord and against his Anointed. What else should I do after so woeful
a defection that has been among us, when, to my apprehension, I hear often the
word of our Savior to his Apostle Saint Peter sounding in mine ears, Luke
22.32.
tu conversus confirma fratres, when thou art converted strengthen thy
brethren: Let no man therefore blame me for my forwardness and vehemence in
this matter upon any occasion, for I cannot but speak the things which I have
seen and heard, as the same Apostle also said; yea let my tongue cleave to the
roof of my mouth, and my right hand forget her skill (how poor and slender
soever it be) if my tongue and pen both be not now ready for the Churches
service, to fill up the acclamation at the setting on the Head-stone of this
great Work of Omnipotency in the re-establishment of Order among us, both in
point of Divine Worship, and of Civil and Ecclesiastical Government, with
Grace, Grace unto it.

Lastly, I should now also be loath to be so far mistaken, as that by giving new
experiments of rendering the sense of Scripture otherwise then it has been
generally taken, I should thereby incline to favor that upstart Sect of
holders-forth of new Lights, and new Truths, against whom I have always
protested my dislike with much loathing and abhorrency, and do still account of
them no better then the smoke that comes out of the bottomless pit, which would
in time darken the light of the Gospel, as much as the foggy mists of Popery
ever did, where it prevails. Deplorable is their estate, and accursed be
their attempts whosoever they are that set up any of their pretended Lights in
competition with the Holy Scripture, and are not contented with that truth
which has already been revealed to the Church in those things that are
necessary to salvation. The bed of divine truth is green all the year long,
Cant. 1.16.
no filthy weeds of spotted Error so much as once appearing therein, nor no
room at all to be found for any more seeds to be sown in it, the smell thereof
is so acceptably fragrant to every true believer, that the scent of all things
else in this world, how pleasing soever to flesh and blood, is of no value with
him, but noisome in comparison. If we therefore (to use the Apostles words) or
an Angel from Heaven should trample upon this bed, or deface the beauty of it
by scattering in it any other seeds, which (of what nature soever they be) will
prove in effect to be nothing else, but the Tares of the Enemy, let him be
Anathema. But to uncover this bed, and to show what a delectable variety there
is in the sweet nature of it, to the end that those who take pleasure in
beholding it, may more and more affect it, will I hope be adjudged, by those
that have judgment to discern, to be no faulty compliancy at all with new
fangled Opinionists, who pretending to novel discoveries of truth, root up the
foundation. There is certainly, as in Plants many secrets of nature that are
yet unknown, so, in the Scripture much of the mind of God that former Ages
has not been acquainted with, which they that come after may understand more
perfectly, especially in the sense of those Prophecies which are to have their
full accomplishment in the last Times. Truth is not now barren, as one
observes well, although she was prodigal in teaching our Ancestors (Etiam
quicunque fuere mortalium sapientissimi, multa scisse dicuntur, non omnia) she
has a reserve laid up in her Cabinet for her friends and followers at this
day, and will ever have, till she opens all her treasures unto them at the last
day.

I say therefore, as countenance is not to be given to those Masters of
Novelties and new-Light Mongers of these days, who frequently and confidently
from the light within them vent most damnable Opinions, expressly contrary to
the Written Word (as the Gnostics of old did, whose Disciples they are, though
they know it not) so should encouragement be given to those, who taking along
with them the Analogy of Faith, and the Analysis of those Places of Scripture
which they fix their Meditations upon, are so happy as to find out other
interpretations thereof then were before known, which may occasion more light
also to spring up in the Church to the glory of God, and advancement of the
Gospel.

To which glorious ends that all whatsoever is here written in this following
Treatise may happily tend, has been, and shall constantly be the hearty Prayer
of the poor unworthy Author thereof, who is

(Dear Christian) Thy Souls friend, and The Churches Servant, E. L.

A POSTSCRIPT TO THE READER.
THE Method that is here used is (I confess) according to the ordinary mode,
plain and homely, without those Logical curiosities, florid and subtle
insinuations, or rhetorical transitions and cadencies, Wherein the accurate
Writers of these Times do abound (which things nevertheless in their right use
and genuine appearance, no man that is wise will at any time condemn) but for
their sakes, whose Conversion from Sin, Conviction of Error, and Corroboration
in the Faith, this Treatise especially aims at, is this order observed; Which
as it has not been found altogether unsuccessful to such ends and purposes, so
may it now also, through Gods blessing, be still useful therein, being suited
for the most part according to their mind and expectation; Wherein I do but
follow the Apostles Example, who became all things to all men, that by all
means be might gain some: Yet if they should chance to meet with some things
here Hard to be understood (as even Saint Paul's Epistles, which required that
all things should be done to Edification, had in them* by the Testimony of
Saint Peter, things surpassing the capacity of the unlearned) it will be easy
for them to pass them by, and to spend their time and thoughts upon that, which
they will find to be within the ken of their apprehension.

One thing more I must premise, with which I shall conclude this Address. In
regard I have here presumed to render the sense of some places of Scripture
otherwise then they have been commonly interpreted least should thereupon be
censured for affecting too much a Digression from the grave and profound
Judgment of others that are or have been before me, it is thought very
requisite to add hereunto a Synopsis of the Names of sundry Authors both
Ancient and Modern that have been, as I said before consulted with in the
pursuance of this Subject, to whom for the most part, as it was meet, I have
with due reverence yielded a ready and willing compliancy in their sense of
Scripture, and other their Religious and Orthodox Determinations, which I hope
will suffice not only to take off the imputation of a Paradoxal Singularity,
but free me also from a charge of offering violence to Sacred Theology, though
Philology lead me sometimes into her private Retirements, and put me therein
upon new Explorations.

The Names of some Authors mentioned in this Treatise.
Alstedius Saint Ambrose Amesius Doctor Lancelot Andrews Lord Bishop of Winton
Saint Athanasius Saint Augustine Beda Saint Bernard Beza Brentius Bruno Bucanus
Calvin Centurists Saint Charles the First of Famous Memory King of Great
Britain, etc. Saint Chrysostom Doctor Collins Saint Cyprian Doctor John
Davenant Lord Bishop of Sarum Master Deering Saint Dionysius Areopagita Doctor
Downham Master Dyke Epiphanius Eusebius Doctor Featley Master Fox his Martyrol.
Gerard Bishop Godwin Comarus Saint Gregory H Grotius Doctor Hammond Doctor
Harris Ward. of Wint. Col. Doctor Joseph Hall Lord Bishop of Norwich. Hospinian
Saint Jerome Bishop Jewel Irenaeus Junius Doctor John King Lord Bishop of
London Doctor Henry King Lord Bishop of Chichester Peter Lombard Ludolphus
Luther Peter Martyr Mercer Doctor George Morley Lord Bishop of Winton Doctor
Richard Mountague Lord Bishop of Norwich Musculus Nicephorus Origin Paraeus
Pelargus Perkins Philo Judaeus Piscator Polanus Doctor John Prideaux Lord
Bishop of Worcester Ravanellus Doctor Edward Reinolds Lord Bishop of Norwich
Septuagint Socrates Sozomen Tertullian Theodoret Doctor Twisse Master Vines
Master Nathaniel Ward Master Thomas Wilson Zanchy, etc.
Things most remarkable contained in this Treatise.
I. THE Divine Generation of Jesus Christ is in some poor measure declared. II.
The Restoration of the Creature after the final Judgment proved. III. The
glorious estate of the Saints in the life to come described in a way and manner
that is not commonly thought upon. IV. How the Office of Christ's Mediatorship
was exercised by him and made effectual from the beginning. V. How Jesus Christ
shall be the Head of his Church Triumphant after he has delivered up the
Kingdom to God the Father. VI. The certainty of the Conversion of the Jews
cleared, and a demonstration of the fixed time, wherein they shall be called,
gathered from the Holy Scriptures. VII. The Blasphemy of Socinians discovered.
VIII. Civil Government vindicated. IX. The folly of Fifth Monarchists and
Millenaries made manifest. X. Episcopal Government in the Church proved by
Scripture to be of Divine Right. XI. The Liturgy of the Church of England
cleared from Superstition. XII. The Church of Rome justly charged with Novelty.
XIII. A Remedy prescribed to cure the Distempers of our Nation and Times about
Order and Church Government.
The Contents more particularly, and more punctually described.
THe Apostles intent and scope in the words of the Text ( viz. Jesus Christ the
Same yesterday, to day, and for ever) is rendered page 1. A threefold
interpretation given of the Text p. 4. 1. With a respect to the Divine Nature.
2. With a reference to the whole Creation. 3. With a more especial respect to
the Church.
An Apology for these several interpretations ibid.
The first Interpretation.
Proved by Scripture, and the concurrent Testimony of sundry Authors p. 5.
Objections answered. First taken from Prove. 8.22, etc. p. 11. Second taken from
Luke 1.35. p. 13. Third taken from Col. 1.15. ibid.
Instructions deducted, viz. First, Though Christ took upon him our nature, yet
he continued still to be the Same p. 19 Secondly, We must give unto Christ the
glory due unto his Name p. 21. 1. In worshipping him with Divine Adoration p.
21. 2. In a zealous appearance for him against his enemies p. 23. Of whom there
are two sorts especially in these times that must not be spared, viz. Those 1.
Who raise up men above their proper sphaere, equallizing them with Christ p.
24. 2. Who level the Lord Jesus with poor dust and ashes p. 25.
3. In the ready hearkening to the voice of his Word p. 28. Corroboratives of
this Argument. 1. The Father will have Christ to be thus honored p. 29. 2.
Christ himself expects of us the same service ibid. 3. The Eternity of Christ
is a clear evidence of his Wisdom and Gravity ibid. 4. A necessity lies upon
us to hearken to this his infallible Wisdom p 30. How else shall we escape the
snares of Satan. What improvement can we make of our Talents in our masters
service p. 31.
5. He has highly honored us ibid.

Thirdly, how God has been wont to make manifest his sore displeasure against
those that have been the professed enemies of the eternal Deity of his beloved
Son the Lord Jesus Christ p. 33. A particular Application p. 37.

The second Interpretation. p. 41.
Wherein it is observed how Christ is the Same. 1. In the work of Creation. 2.
In the work of Preservation. 3. In the work of Restoration.
How in the work of Creation p 42. Though Jesus Christ be (...) therein, yet
the Father and the Holy Ghost are not excluded. 1. Christ is equal with the
Father in that eternal Counsel and Decree, from whence all things had their
first rise and origination. 2. The Same in the execution of that Decree. 3. The
Same without any Coadjutor. 4. The Same without any variableness in the
creating of all things.
Inferences from hence. First this may lead us to a further knowledge of Jesus
Christ p. 47. When we consider the Heavens p. 48. When we consider the Deep p.
49. When we consider the Earth ibid. When we consider our selves p. 50. We must
say, O Lord, our Lord, How excellent is thy Name?

Secondly, we are to let Jesus Christ enjoy peaceably, without any repining,
his absolute Sovereignty over all the earth, to dispose of it as seems good
unto him p. 50. How Jesus Christ is the Same in the work of Preservation and
Government of the world p. 52.
An Objection answered, viz. If this Power belongs unto Christ to guide and
govern the world, What need is there at all of any other government? p. 54. In
answer hereunto three things are largely proved, First, Government by men is an
Ordinance of Divine appointment p. 57. Secondly, Government is ordained to be
subservient unto Christ p. 62. Thirdly, Christ will have this subservient
government and order to be continued so long as the world endures p. 66 The
folly of Fift-Monarchy men is made manifest p 70. A conviction of those that
look no further then secondary causes p. 71. They who applaud their Fortune in
their successes are reproved ibid. They also who consult with Astrologers p.
72. And that run to Witches for their help ibid. That when extraordinary
tempests are raised, are apt to impute the cause thereof to Conjuring p. 73.
Such as murmr at the happy change which the Divine Providence has brought
upon this Nation p. 74. A conviction of sundry others who in effect disclaim
Christ's Sovereignty over them p. 76. viz. The Covetous. The Ambitious. The
Proud and Vainglorious. The Profane Politician.
An Instruction to all that fear God not to be dismayed at the appearance and
apprehension of death p. 78. Nor at the troubles that come upon the world, or
that may befall themselves. p. 80. A lesson to incline us to a constant
dependence upon Divine Providence p. 81. We are nothing without Christ ibid.
How Jesus Christ is the Same in the Restoration of all things p. 82.
In order hereunto the Apostles words in Romans 8.19.20.22.23. are at large
expounded p. 83. Where is to be seen, how 1. The creature is subject to vanity
p. 84. It has lost a great part of its primitive beauty and goodness p. 85. A
necessity lies upon it to serve the enemies of the Creator ibid It is still
declaring the glory of God, but man regards it not ibid. It is troubled at the
inverting of the order which the Creator at first established p. 86. It is
instrumental in man's sin. ibid.
2. The creature waits and groaneth to be delivered p. 87. 3. When this
Deliverance shall be p. 89. viz. When the Son^ of God, that is, the Angels are
manifested ibid. Which manifestation shall be both active and passive p. 90.
Active four several ways, They shall break open the chambers of Death 90 They
shall manifest the Saints from the wicked ibid. They shall manifest the
judgment pronounced ibid. They shall be employed in the manifestation of the
Son of man p. 91.
Passive, two ways, In respect of their Nature p. 92. In respect of their
Number ibid.

4. The manner of their deliverance p. 93. An Objection out of 2 Pet. 3.10.
concerning the dissolution of all things by fire, answered p. 95. Fifth
monarchists and Millenaries reproved p. 103. See the excellency of our
Creation p. 105. A light to guide us in the first resurrection p. 106. A light
to show unto us somewhat of the glory of the second p. 107. Wherein may be
seen, 1. How the new heaven that shall be is resembled unto Canaan p. 109. 2.
How the new earth that shall be is also so resembled p. 112.


The third Interpretation, viz.
Jesus Christ is the Same yesterday, to day, and for ever, with a more especial
respect unto his Church p. 116. First of yesterday that is, p. 117. All the
time of the old Testament. A Doctrine here-hence derived, viz. The time of the
Old Testament with all the legal Ordinances attending upon it, is a day that is
set and expired, being yesterday, and therefore not to be brought into our
account, neither are we to walk in the light of it p. 118. Proved by sundry
instances ibid. Whereupon follows The conviction of those who in this day
will grope after the obscure light of yesterday, these are First the Jews p.
121. Secondly they that seek to be justified by the works of the law p. 126.
Thirdly, the Papists p. 128. Fourthly, they that nowadays pretend to Oracles,
and wait for Miracles p. 129.

Where is to be seen What we are to judge of the pretended Visions and
Revelations of these times ibid. And what Miracles are now to be regarded in
the time of the Gospel p. 132.

A second Doctrine propounded, viz. Jesus Christ was the Savior of his Church
in the time of the Old Testament, even as n^w in the time of the New p. 134.
Proved ibid. A Question resolved. How Christ could be a Savior, before he was
in a capacity to suffer death, by taking our nature upon him, for the expiation
of sin? p. 135. Jesus Christ was a Prophet from the beginning p. 136. Jesus
Christ was a King from the beginning p. 138. Jesus Christ was a Priest from the
beginning p. 149. A difference observed in respect of the dispensation and
manifestation of Christ to the Fathers and us p. 155. Examples of sundry of the
Fathers believing in Christ, Adam, Abraham, Job, Daniel, etc. p. 156. Moses's
intercourse with Jesus Christ upon the Mount p. 159.
Whereupon follows 1. An exhortation to the Jews, to look unto Jesus p. 164.
2. A warning to take heed of despising the ages before us p 166. 3. Our
religion proved to be the only true Religion p. 169. 4. The Limbus Patrum of
the Church of Rome proved to be an absurd forgery p. 170. 5. To hold that the
object of the faith of the Patriarchs of old was not Jesus Christ, is a gross
error p. 175. 6. And as gross is it to maintain that we are not now justified
by the Object, but by the Act of Faith p. 176.


Of the second course or computation of time, viz. To day. Wherein first this
Doctrine is propounded, viz. The time of the Gospel is a time of light p. 180.
It is a true light p. 181. It is a great light ibid. It is a mavelous light
ibid. It is an invincible light p. 182.
Whereupon follow The duties of those who are the children of this day. 1. To
rejoice and be glad in it p. 184. An Objection. But this day is a day of
trouble, of rebuke, and blasphemy p. 186. Answered ibid.
2. To let the light of this day shine in upon their souls p. 188. A Question
put, viz. What is this light? p. 189. Answered 1. It is the light of Life ibid.
2. It is the light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ p. 190. 3. It is the
light of the knowledge of the glory of God ibid.

3. To walk in this light p. 191. A twofold walk 1. Walk in the Commandments
of the Lord ibid. Motives hereunto,
1. It is the great design of Almighty God this day to save his people from
their sins p. 192. 2. We are to walk worthy of our calling p. 194. 3. Consider
the length of our way p. 195. 4. This day will have an end p. 196.
2. Walk in the Ordinances of the Lord p. 199.


Let then the world be awakened that lies asleep in the darkness of sin and
ignorance p. 202. Let the Ignorant be roused p. 202. Let the profance be
alarmed p. 203.
A Question put, viz. How comes it to pass that woe and misery falls so
inevitably upon profane people this day p. 207. Answered, 1. The sin of such
persons is found out by the light of this day ibid. 2. Their sin does find out
them p. 208. Application p. 209.

Another Doctrine propounded, viz. Jesus Christ is the Same to his Church now
in the time of the Gospel, which he was before under the Law p. 212. Proved by
Scripture p. 213. An Objection, But we see there is a change to day from what
was yesterday in the form of Divine worship, How then can Jesus Christ be the
Same? p. 215. Answered ibid. Inferences thereupon. First, the Imputations of
Novelty upon those Churches which adhere to this foundation, charged on them by
the Church of Rome, cannot be just p. 217. The said Imputations justly retoried
upon the Romish Church ibid. Secondly, an Exhortation to let the same mind be
in us which was in Christ Jesus, that is, to be the Same in things pertaining
to God p. 220. An Application hereof to us of this nation, with a free and
plain discovery of our late inconstancy p. 222.
An Objection. Shall we then be the Same, which we have been in profaneness and
superstition p. 227. Answer, God forbid ibid. 1. The bad Old Cause did not
preserve us from either p. 228. 2. The League and Covenant, though contrived to
strengthen the said Cause, yet as it was illegal in it self, so was it
treacherously carried on p. 229.
It is objected. But is there not a return to Superstition, when the Lyturgie,
Ceremonies and Episcopacy are restored p. 233. It is answered ibid. Where 1.
The Lyturgie and Ceremonies are vindicated p. 234. Particularly, 1. Our bowing
at the name of Jesus p. 235. 2. Our bowing at our entrance into, and departure
from the Congregation p. 236. 3. Our Lyturgie and Ceremonies are acknowledged
to be a will worship, which is plainly manifested to be in some respects lawful
p. 238. But that they are extracted from Romish Missals is a slanderous untruth
p. 242.
2. Episcopacy is clearly proved by the Scripture to be of Divine Right Sensu
Primario p. 248.
An Exhortation to the Jews p. 262. Matter of rejoicing to the Gentiles p. 268.
An Application hereof to our own Nation p. 270. A serious Expostulation with
Anabaptists ibid.

Of the third course or computation of Time, viz. For ever p. 273. A Doctrine
propounded. In the midst of the various changes and chances that may come upon
the Church to the end of the world, Jesus Christ will be unto it still the Same
Ibid. Proved by Scripture p 274. Inferences from hence, 1. Assurance may be had
of the Churches perpetuity p. 275. 2. A remedy to cure the sad distempers of
our Church about Order and Church Government p. 276. 3. An Exhortation and
Christian Advice given to those who pretend they cannot for conscience sake
submit to Church Government by Bishops p. 277. 4. Comfort to all who live goldy
in Christ Jesus, both in respect of themselves and their posterity. p. 281.

Another Doctrine propounded, viz. Jesus Christ will be the Same unto his
Church in her Triumphant and Glorious estate in heaven unto all Eternity p.
282. Wherein first The full sense is given of (...) p. 283. Secondly, how Jesus
Christ w^ll be the Same in the world to come, is in part declared, with a
Caution premised p. 284. 1. He will continue to be the Same for ever in the
Hypostatical union of his two Natures, Divine and Humane p. 285. 2. He will
continue to be the Same for ever in his mystical Union with his Church p. 286.
Where is to be seen First, How Christ will be over his Church then as a Head.
1. As a Head alone without any subordinate power Celestial or Terrestrial ibid.
2. As a Head he will preserve and uphold the members of his mystical Body in
their glorious Being p. 287. 3. As a Head he will keep the members of his said
mystical Body in a perfect Union ibid. 4. As a Head he will show unto them
those glorious mysteries, which in this life are beyond their reach and
capacity ibid.
Secondly, Jesus Christ will then be in his people by love p. 288.
The Doctrine proved by Scripture p. 290. And by the Testimony of Divines,
Ancient and Modern ibid. An Objection taken out of the Apostles words, 1 Cor.
15.24.28. concerning Christ's delivery up of the Kingdom to God even the
Father, etc. Answered at large p. 291.
An Exhortation to look unto Jesus p. 295.

In the Appendix these following Scriptures proving the certainty of the
Calling and Conversion of the JEWS are Quoted and Expounded.
Deuteronomy. 4 30, 31. p. 300. Esaiah 11.11, 12. p. 301. Esaiah 43.5, 6. p. 302.
Jeremiah 3.18.23.4. p. 303. Jer. 30.3.31.1.4. ibid. Ezekiel 37.21, 22. ibid.
Daniel 9.24. p. 306. Hosea 1.10. p. 316. Hosea 3.4, 5. p. 318. Luke 21.23, 24.
p. 319. Acts 1.6, 7. p. 324. Romans 11. p. 328.
An Objection answered, viz. The Calling of the Jews shall not be till the very
instant of the Consummation of all things p. 342. Another Objection answered,
viz. Their Pertinacy in despising the Gospel makes them the Object of Gods
perfect hatred p. 344. Another Objection answered, viz. They are enemies unto
God not only in a Passive sense, but in an Active also p. 3^^. Another
Objection answered, viz. The Jews are now so embodyed with other Nations, that
it is impossible they should ever any more become a Nation distinct from the
Gentiles p. 350. Another Objection answered, viz. To maintain this Doctrine of
the Jews Restoration, is to put the world into a careless security concerning
the end p. ibid. A word of Exhortation to all the Churches of the Gentiles, to
pray earnestly unto God for the conversion of the Jews, and to eschew those
sins among our selves, which may probably be a hinderance to the bringing on of
so glorious a work p. 352.
AN ASCENT TO THE HOLY MOUNT, To see JESUS CHRIST in his Glory. OR, A
PERSPECTIVE to help the Weak Sight to behold the Eternity and Immutability of
the Lord Jesus Christ. Taken out of the words of S. Paul, Hebr. 13.8. (...).
Jesus Christ the same Yesterday, to Day, and for ever.
Adsis O JESV.
JESUS CHRIST whom we still preach unto you, and in whom you do believe (else
our preaching is vain, and your faith is also vain.) The Lord Jesus Christ, I
say, as he is the Object of your Expectation in this Service we are now about;
So is he, you see, by my Text, the subject of my intended Business at this
time. When my Discourse therefore shall answer your expectation, you will, I
hope, afford your diligent attention thereunto.

The words at first sight seem to be the sudden efflux of the Spirit, added
here in the close, as the result of that which had been said before, and as the
Total Sum of the Epistle, shutting up the whole as in a Parenthesis; implying
that all that was written amounted unto this: viz Jesus Christ the same
yesterday, to day, and for-ever.

Or else they are inserted as a reviving Cordial to the poor Hebrews, who might
(seeing the Gentiles were received into Covenant with God) fear themselves to
be quite cast off from Grace, because their Nation had so generally with much
pertinacy refused that great Salvation, which was brought unto them: Upon which
account the Apostle infers this short and sweet Epiphonema to comfort them
with now at parting; Jesus Christ is the sams yesterday, to day, and for ever.
As much as to say, Jesus Christ is the same to you, as he was from the
beginning: who, as he was at first sent to seek and to save the lost sheep of
the house of Israel; so now also (notwithstanding former unkindnesses, and
though his grace is not to be confined as it has been, but must extend to all
Nations, yet) he abides still a Savior unto you; if you abide in the faith,
and he will be so likewise to the end of the world.

Thus may this Verse seem to carry this sense within its own Verge, not having
any intercourse with the Contexture bordering upon it. But it is generally
conceived by Expositours, that these words are coincident with those
immediately before-going, where an Exhortation is given to the Hebrews, to be
mindful of their Guides, who had taught them the way of God truly, not
according to the Mosaical, but Evangelical Pattern, and to imitate them in the
holiness of their lives, and in their constancy to the faith which they sealed
with their death. The words are these: (...).
Remember them which have the rule over you (or are your Guides) who have
spoken unto you the word of God, whose faith follow, considering the end of
their conversation.

The force of example we all know is very great to induce likeness of Manners,
and the greater the example is, the greater power it has to draw to
similitude. It was wont to be said, Facile transitur ad plures, We are easily
moved to go after a Multitude: but it may well be added, Facile transitur ad
majores, It is no hard matter to make us imitate great Authorities, be the
patterns good or bad; for the vices of Rulers are commonly the rule of Vices:
and the virtues of Leaders will also lead unto Virtue.

Hereupon it is that the Apostle proposes unto the Hebrews the example of
their Leaders, to the end that they might not, as he says, V 9. be carried
about with diverse and strange Doctrines: where they had their instruction,
there also they might receive establishment by their imitation: in whose
example, Quiddam memorabile designat Apostolus, says Calvin; the Apostle
notes some memorable matter, worthy of their saddest thoughts: implying thus
much, that their Teachers had in defense of that Word which they had spoken
unto them, gone through much affliction, not loving their lives unto death, for
that was the (...), the issue and Exit of their Conversation, which the Hebrews
should consider; that when they saw how steadfast and invincible their Leaders
were in the faith, their example might the better move them.

And now to set an edge upon this Exhortation, the Apostle shows in the words
of my Text, that the ground and foundation of their faith to which they did so
constantly adhere, was no novelty, nor yet such as did fail them, or expire
with them; but being the rock of Ages was coequal with the Church from the
beginning and would be also the only sure foundation for all the faithful to
the end of the World: and that is, Jesus Christ the same yesterday, to day, and
for ever. Understand it thus: It is as if the Apostle should have said, They
well knew whom they believed; and you may also know him too, if you will do as
they did; for Jesus Christ who is the unchangeable God blessed for ever, as
they made him their strength and their support, so he never failed them. Be you
therefore followers of them, looking unto Jesus, who, as he led them into all
truth, and preserved them in it, so will he likewise do the same unto you, and
to all others that shall come after you who believe in his Name; for he is the
same Yesterday, to day, and for ever.

We may now glean up by the way some Doctrinal conclusions, which shall be but
named, that so we may come without any further protraction to taste of the
sweetness that springs abundantly from the Fountain of the Text.

1. We learn hereby, That people ought to be followers of their Teachers, as
they follow Christ, and no otherwise. 2. The way to abide steadfast in the
faith, is to stick to the Foundation, that is, Jesus Christ, who is still the
same. 3. Whosoever they be that make a sincere profession of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, shall never be ashamed of it; for Christ will constantly without
any change, own and maintain that faith which has once, and but once, been
delivered by him to his Saints, being first and last like himself.
This was Preached, December. 26.
These things premised, let us now come to the Text, whereof if I should
undertake to speak any thing in order to this time of Solemnity, which
yesterday, to day, and some days following is held up and continued among us,
as if it had reference unto it: I should then indeed declare myself to be but
of yesterday, and to know nothing; at least, to know nothing of my Text, as I
ought to know. But the words in their genuine sense will not lead us unto any
such matter.

It is Insignis locus, as Mr. Calvin calls it, a most excellent and remarkable
Scripture, speaking out the Lord Jesus Christ in his due Altitude, making the
World and every creature in all Ages subject unto him. It is the Argument of
both the Testaments: and (to use the words applied by a Religious and Reverend
Bishop of our times to another Scripture like unto this: Dr. John King Bishop
of London.
) It is the staff and supportation of Heaven and Earth, they would both sink
and all their joints be severed, were it not that Jesus Christ were (...), The
same yesterday, to day, and for ever. And what shall I more say? as the Apostle
said, Hebr. 11. When he had spoken much, and there was much more behind, but
that time failed him? Rather what should I not say? For our Theater at this
time is not only within the narrow bounds of the World, but extends beyond it;
and our Meditations in handling of this Subject, are to reach from Eternity to
Eternity. Let us then duly poize it, and with the good blessing of God make use
of it for our Edification.

A threefold interpretation may be given.

First, Jesus Christ may be said to be, The same yesterday, to day, and for
ever, in respect of his Divine Nature. Secondly; This may be applied unto him
with a reference to the whole Creation. Thirdly, It may so likewise with a more
especial respect unto his Church and People.
And here, because it may seem strange that I should give so many several
interpretations of this Text: Give me leave to premise an Apology for my
understanding herein. I would not be too vehement in forcing a Text to carry a
sense, which is not directly, or by warrantable deduction to be found within
the compass thereof. And it is a great wrong that is done unto Divine Truths,
when Scriptures are produced for their foundation that are not Homogenial with
them. As for this threefold interpretation which I have here given of this
Text, though the last be commonly accounted the most proper, as being consonant
to the scope of the Apostle; yet the other two are not to be rejected as
inconsistent with the sense of the Holy Ghost therein. Nay, is there not a
greater latitude then ordinary to be allowed unto it, when it is propounded as
a Divine Theorem, cutting asunder the thread, as it were, of the former
Discourse, that the eyes and thoughts of all men that read it, may in a
singular manner be fixed upon it; as on a general Sentence or Proposition
comprehensive of more then might alonely have reference to the preceding Verse?
Surely there is somewhat extraordinary to be found in it: Therefore as I have
already prescribed my Method; so (...), I shall now prosecute it.

The first Interpretation of the Text.
THe first sense then, or interpretation that is given of the Text is this:
Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, in respect of his
Divine Nature, that is, as he is God equal with the Father, begotten of him
from eternity to eternity.

And herein I am not alone, but I find the Text so rendered both by Modern and
Ancient Expositours. Francis Junius writes of it to the same purpose. Hoc
quarto (ut Logicis l^quamur) medo proprium Deitatis est. This is a most
transcendent property of the Godhead, to be the same yesterday, to day, and for
ever. And from this very Text (says the same Author) do the Primitive Fathers
in the purest times prove Jesus Christ to be the true and eternal God, (...),
consubstantial and coessential with the Father, and the Holy Ghost: (some
instances of whom shall be given in the prosecution of this point.) Having then
the concurrency of others that are sound and Orthodox, whose Works praise them
in the gates: Let us consider how this Text may represent this great Mystery
unto us in the several parts of it.

It is a most certain truth, that the Divine Generation is that which gives
unto the Son of God his personal Being; which Generation is acknowledged by all
that are sound in the faith to be from all eternity. This is that which in the
Text, if it refers at all to the eternal personality of Jesus Christ (as it
undoubtedly does, and will be here made to appear) must be understood by
Yesterday: Jesus Christ is, (...), The same, or, The only He yesterday: that
is, begotten of the Father from all eternity. As the word Hodie, to Day, Psalm
2.7.
Psalm. 2.7. is by Expositours truly rendered, not only for the Day of Christ's
Resurrection, but also for God's Eternity: so may the word Heri, Yesterday,
when it is spoken of God in this manner, be taken in the same sense likewise:
for the eternal God is not to be conceived by us in any thing that concerns his
Essence or Relation under any Notion of time properly, as some have impiously
conceived.

It is said, Es. 30 33.
Es. 30.33. That Tophet is ordained of old; that is, from Yesterday (so the
Marginal Note also renders it.) Now consider if Tophet be there to be
understood of Hell (as it is usually taken) and as the word (...), often
mentioned in the New Testament does imply) though the place has had a Being in
time, yet surely God ordained it in his eternal Decree, before ever Time was:
And that I take to be the meaning of the Prophet's word Yesterday, viz. That
God had ordained Hell for his enemies from all eternity. So here in the Text
may the word be taken in the same sense.

But that it may not at all seem strange unto any, that Eternity be spoken of
with terms appropriated unto Time, we do find frequent expressions of
Scripture in a tendency hereunto, and that in this very particular, concerning
the eternal Being of the Son of God. The Lord (says Wisdom, i. e. Jesus Christ
who is the Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24.) possessed me in the Beginning of his
Way. Prove. 8.22
Pro. 8.22. A Beginning of a far more ancient date then Moses his Beginning,
mentioned Genesis 1.1. For it is interpreted V. 23. to be from everlasting. It is
said also of Christ, Mich. 5.2.
Mich. 5.2. That his outgoings have been of old, as Initio, says S. Hierom,
from the Beginning, i. e. from everlasting, as it is there added by the
Prophet, which signifies the Days of Eternity, as the Marginal Note there
likewise renders it. So that to ascribe Days unto Eternity, even as unto Time,
though not in such a propriety of speech, is no novelty. Rev. 1.8.
Again Christ says of himself, Rev. 1.8. that He is the Beginning and the
Ending, which is, and which was, and which is to come. A place not much
differing from our present Text, describing the Eternity of Jesus Christ, even
in the same manner, as 'twere, in a Parallel under the same notions of Time.
And the words there, as here, signify that Christ is, was, and ever shall be a
most perfect, simple, and absolute substance and Essence, being all one with
our (...), He who is yesterday, to day, and for ever. We must howsoever confess
that these words, Erat, Est, Erit, was, is, and shall be; and so also,
yesterday, to day, etc. are but discriminating terms; and, as I may say,
several feathers springing forth from the wing of that voluble and mutable Time
which hovereth upon the Creation, and therefore utterly incompatible with the
most perfect Eternity of the Creator, whose whole Being is entire and complete
in it self, without any the least vicissitude or variation whatsoever: yet
notwithstanding, such is the gracious condescension of the most High, they are
commonly by the Holy Ghost in Scripture attributed unto Eternity: As humane
Actions are unto God, of Descending and Ascending, etc. and humane passions of
Grief, Anger, etc. together with the parts and lineaments of a humane body, to
the end, that poor mortal creatures might have some Illapses of that great
Glory slide into their minds, according to their narrow capacities, which
otherwise they could never be able to discover, no nor endure. Hence it is that
Christ calls himself, Rev. 1.11.
Rev. 1.11. The Alpha and Omega, the first, and the last: whereby I conceive is
meant, that he is the only begotten Son of the Father, and before him there was
none, and after him there should not arise any that should be so begotten.
Lastly, the Apostle calls him, The first born of every creature: signifying
thereby, says Bishop Davenant, Quod genitus fuit ante ullam rem creatam. That
is, that he was begotten of the Father before any thing was created. Col. 1.15.


So that still we see, Prius and Posterius, that is, these terms, former and
latter, which have reference unto Time, used by the Holy Ghost in this high
point of the eternal Generation of the Son of God; from whence it appears
clearly, that the word (Yesterday) here in the Text, may be taken not only for
all time past, but even for Eternity, in a reference to the said Divine
Generation; other places of Scripture where the same Doctrine is asserted,
speaking it out in the same language too.

We may therefore, I believe, proceed on without any Hesitancy in grounding it
upon this Text, which I acknowledge has not been in this sense commonly
understood, and therefore have I been the larger in laying the foundation; in
regard also of the great usefulness of it amongst us in these times: I shall
endeavor to speak the more freely of it.

A Doctrine it is which the Churches of Christ have constantly maintained; in
the vindication whereof the Saints have not counted their lives dear unto them.
A Doctrine not to come under the scrutiny of Reason, it being infinitely above
it. Dei Generatio silentio honoretur, magnum tibi dedicisse quod genitus sit:
said one very well, The Generation of the Son of God is to be honored with
silence, and poor creatures must acknowledge that they have learned much, when
they know the Son to be begotten.

If any man yet shall enquire de mode, that is, concerning the manner of this
Generation, he should be answered (says reverend Davenant) with S. Ambrose,
Credere tibi jussum est, non discutere permissum est: Thou art commanded to
believe it, not allowed to examine or discuss it: Es. 53.8.
for that question of the Prophet Es. 53.8. (which though it bear other
significations, we may make use of here) will put to silence both Angels and
Men; Who can declare his Generation?

If indeed we were able to search the Records of Eternity, we might happily
find out what was done in H^sterno, in those days of Eternity. But, such
knowledge is too wonderful for us, it is high we cannot attain unto it. Phil.
4.7.
The Apostle tells us ( Phil. 4.7.) That the peace of Christ is above all
understanding. Surely then his Eternal Generation is above all understanding
too: let us therefore content our selves with what is revealed, not suffering
our poor homespun Reason to lash out into this transcendent Mystery, any
further then the Spirit of God in Scripture is pleased to lead us.

This I conceive we may with modesty assert; the first Person being Father from
Eternity, the Son must be coeternal with him, otherwise the Relation falls:
And there being nothing in God but Essence and Relation; if the Relation be
taken away, what the Consequence would be, is easy to judge. But doubtless
this Divine Relation between the Father and the Son, was from all Eternity;
otherwise we may argue further: if the first Person be not Father from
Eternity, there must arise in time a change in his Personal Denomination, which
is incompossible with the Father of Lights, in whom there is no variableness.
Yea more, if the Son of God be the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God (as 1
Cor. 1.24.) then surely he must be coeternal with God. Pet. Low.
Constat ergo qui semper habuit sapientiam, semper habuit and filium, i. e.
Manifest therefore it is, that he who is eternally Wife must have the Son
coeternal with him.

But to contract what might be multiplied hereupon, a very pregnant proof we
have to this purpose given us, Heb. 1.1, 2, 3.
Hebr. 1.1, 2, 3. where the Apostle most elegantly does set forth the whole
Mystery of this Divine Relation in some remarkable Resemblances. And albeit (as
Bishop Andrews, that Magazine of Learning observes well; whose words it will
be no offense here to rehearse) there be not any resemblance translated from
the Creature, though never so excellent, that will hold full Assay, yet withal,
this we are to think, that what terms the Holy Ghost has made choice of, they
are no idle speculations that are drawn from them. Three several Titles are by
the Apostle ascribed unto Jesus Christ in the said Scripture, every of which
have their proper luster to guide us into the knowledge of this Mystery, which
are these; Son, Brightness, Character. In Son there is a true Identity of
Nature, upon it is grounded (...), being of one substance even as the S^n is
with the Father. But if any shall say, the Son comes after the Father in Time,
amends is made for that in the next term, Brightness; for it is not to be
imagined, that there ever was, or ever could be a Light Body, but in the very
same instant there must stream from it a Brightness. So upon this is grounded
Coeternal: But there is some inequality between the Light Body it self, and the
beam or brightness of it; the Beam not being full out so clear, shows an
imperfection in the term Brightness: but that is supplied in the next,
Character; for that is ever just equal, neither bigger, nor less then the Type
or Stamp that made it. Upon this then is grounded Coequal, and like, per omnia,
(...): So like, as show us the Father ( says Philip) Why? he that sees the
Character, never desires to see the Stamp: if ye see the one, ye see the other:
He that sees me sees the Father, whose express Form I am. Agreeable to these
three (says the same Author) we believe of Jesus Christ, that he is
consubstantial as the Son, coeternal as the Brightness, coequal as the
Character: Against the new heads of that old Hydra sprung up again in our
days, of whom more shall be said hereafter.

Devout Bernard goes along likewise in the same Tract: Genuit Omnipotens
Omnipotentem, Altissimus Altissimum, Aeternus Aeternum. The Omnipotent, says
he, has begotten the Omnipotent, the Highest the Highest, and the Eternal the
Eternal. Sermon 1. De Adven. Domini.
Neque fas est Dei filium degenerem suspicari, sed equalis fateri necesse est
Altitudinis, and ejusdem penitus Dignitatis, nam and filios Principum Principes
and filios Regum Reges esse quis nesciat, i. e. Neither is it meet to imagine
the Son to be of a Degenerate Nature; but we must necessarily acknowledge him
to be of an equal Altitude and Dignity with the Father: for who among us
knows not the Sons of Nobles to be Nobles, and of Princes to be Princes? We
may conclude therefore the Son of God to be God also from Eternity, being
begotten of the Father from Eternity.

All which if we look back into the Womb of Eternity, do clearly demonstrate
the relation of the Son to be ever inseparable from the Father.

And so does it if we look forwards; for that ineffable Generation which is the
ground of this Divine Relation, is never past; but as the Schole-men call it,
is, Actus commensuratus Aeternitati; just of the same s^ze with Eternity: and
therefore it follows in the Text, Jesus Christ is the same to day, which
yesterday, and will be also for ever.

This eternal Generation of the Son, though it be not iterated, yet it is
continued, even as Reason is the continual emanation of the Soul of man, which
also was coequal with it: Men's gignens nunquam desinit giguere (...) r^tio
genita nunquam desinit gigni. Dr. Collins Reg. Pr^f. Theol.
Though I confess still there be a great dissimilitude in Comparisons of this
nature: And as Regeneration in the Saints is a continual act of the Spirit of
God upon them (for Quotidie Renati sumus, was the word of a sound Divine, We
are every day regenerated.) So is this Divine Generation of the Son of God a
permanent and everlasting Generation; which as it had no beginning in time, so
it has no end, being Actus Aeternus in God; but with this difference, Christ's
Generation is perfect from Eternity, though it be still in Esse, (not being
like our Generation of one from, or by another, but, as that whereby the Sun
begets his Beams, which are always begotten, yet always perfect) whereas
our Regeneration is gradual, growing up still toward perfection. And from
hence it is, that Christ is said by the Apostle, Col. 1.15.
Col. 1.15. to be the Image of God: an Image not accidental, or artificial,
such as is of a King in his Coin, or money; but the essential and natural Image
of the Father, such as is of a King in his Son, being of the same nature with
him, and so not a vanishing transient shadow, but express and permanent Image.
Polanus.
To this purpose says one, Haec Divina Genitura non est transiens, sed
permanens and perpetua, unde Pater Aeternus non de sinit giguere filium, and
filius non desinit gigni a Patre. That is, the Divine Generation is not
transient, but permanent and perpetual: for the eternal Father does uncessantly
beget the Son, and the Son does not cease to be begotten of the Father.

And thus far with the Clew of the holy Scriptures, and the help of Orthodox
Writers upon them, have we entered into this Labyrinth; where we see the Lord
Jesus Christ to be the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, in respect of his
Divine Nature.

Here now before we come to make use of this Doctrine, and to bring it home to
the Conscience of the Believer, for his Edification and Consolation; we might
arraign all the enemies unto it, Jews, Arrians, Samosatenians, and others; and
examine what Arguments they have been wont to produce against it, which, I
doubt not, but we should find to be of no force; but that they are not worthy,
and therefore needless to be at large insisted upon.

Nevertheless, that the malice and subtlety of the Devil against Jesus Christ,
and the vain Sophistry of such as are seduced by him, may somewhat appear; it
will not be amiss to answer two or three Objections, which among many other
have been forged in Hell against this comfortable and fundamental Doctrine.

Solomon, Pro. 8.22. etc. is much perverted by them, to the derogation of
Christ's honor, and their own destruction. It is indeed as the Centurists tell
us, the foundation whereon the Arrians and other Heretics would build their
Blasphemy, but that it proves a burthensom stone unto them, and grinds them to
powder: for the words of the Holy Ghost in that place do fully prove the
co-eternity of Christ with the Father, as it shall here evidently appear.

Wisdom (that is the Lord Jesus Christ, as the Arrians themselves do confess)
is there pleading her Pedigree and Extraction to the sons of men, Pro. 8.22.
which might demonstrate her Antiquity, to the end, that she might the better
incline them to give ear to her instruction The Lord (said she) possessed me in
the beginning of his way. (What that way is, is not for us to search into: for
look how high the Heaven is in comparison of the Earth, so are his ways far
above our ways, Es. 55.9.
Es. 55.9.) Before his Works of old I was set up from everlasting, from the
beginning, or ever the earth was, etc. etc. The meaning whereof in short is
this: I (the Son) was with the Father before the Creation and in the Creation
of the world, when he formed this great Fabric with all the parts of it in his
eternal purpose, according to the good pleasure of his will, and when he framed
it likewise and gave it a being, rearing up this glorious and beautiful
Structure, answerable to the pattern which I had seen with him in the Mount.
Now therefore (having laid down the premises, she brings her inference) V. 32.
Hearken unto me Oye children, etc. This being the proper sense of the place,
what can our Adversaries make of it to the maintenance of their error?

To pass by what the Jews and Samosatenian Heretics say of it; the former
conceiving most absurdly, that by Wisdom in that place is understood the Law,
which as they say was ordained two thousand years before the World was made, to
be the beginning of God's ways: because they find in the 30. Verse, two words
which signify two days, which they interpret to be two thousand years,
because a day with God is as a thousand years.

But this is such a dotage, that the very reciting of it carries with it a
Refutation. The latter affirming that this Scripture is not to be understood of
Christ, but of the Virtue of God, whereby all things were in the beginning
created, and ever since uphold and sustained. In which Assertion they discover
nothing so much as their impotent malice against the Lord Jesus. For what is
that Virtue or Wisdom of God, but Christ the Son of God, Luke 11.49.
as appears, Luke 11.49. 1 Cor. 1.24. And if Satan had not blinded their eyes
they might have seen that the very same operations which are by Solomon
ascribed to the wisdom of God, are elsewhere attributed to Christ the Son of
God, Heb. 1.2. Col. 1.17.

But the Arians a more subtle Generation, acknowledging the words (as has been
said) to be spoken of Jesus Christ, yet took hold of this very Scripture, using
it as their Argumentum Achilleum, to undermine the eternal Godhead of Christ:
for upon all occasions, would they still resort unto this, even as the Papists
do for their Transubstantiation, to the words of our Savior, Mat. 26. And
accordingly would the Orthodox appear in the vindication of it. Cem. 4. cap. 10.
From whence arose many sore troubles to the Church, and frequent fierce
controversies in those elder times.

If it be demanded, Q
how this Scripture which is so clear against them, can be so much perverted by
them?

I answer, A.
It is very well known that the word in the 22. Verse, which is rendered in our
Translation, Possessed me, was by the Septuagint translated (...), that is,
Created me, making the Verse to run thus; The Lord created me in the beginning
of his way. And thereupon did these wretched Heretics with open mouths most
impudently proclaim to the World their cursed error, which was, That Jesus
Christ, who is here called Wisdom, is a creature, and not the eternal begotten
Son of God the Father.

This in short was the rise of this Cavil, which may easily be removed by these
following Answers.

First, That Translation of the Septuagint, though it be of great Antiquity,
and much account in the Church; yet it is not Authentic, not being given by
the immediate Inspiration of God: and therefore too weak a foundation to bear up
an Opinion, in a point of faith, which is not warrantable from the word of
Truth.

Secondly, It is possible that that Greek Translation might be right enough at
first, but might since, either of purpose, or casually, by reason of the
affinity of words, be depraved: that is, that whereas they had rendered it (...)
(with an Eta from (...) possiden) that is, Possessed me: it was afterward
either by some deceitful or inconsiderate hand turned to (...), with an Iota
from (...)) that is, Created me.

Thirdly, If it were so, or not so, is it not a thing much to be lamented, that
poor worms of the earth should so presumptuously descant on the Dignity and
Prerogative Royal of the Son of God, yea, depose him from the Throne of his
Glory, upon the account of a small Title only, which it not of any moment
whether it be taken one way or other; for the Original word, as it seems, had
anciently both significations, viz. To Possess and to Create.

Fourthly, Some Writers both Ancient and Modern, do give an answer hereunto in
this manner. The Eternal Generation of the Son of God, is sometimes called
Generation, and sometimes Creation, because it is so ineffable, that it cannot
fully be expressed by any one word; for Generation signifies a Production in
the same substance, but with a certain mutation in the Begetter: but Creation
signifies a Production of another substance, yet without any mutation of the
Creator. Now the Son of God is so produced, as that he receives the substance
of the Begetter, and therefore in that respect he is said to be Begotten: but
he receives it without any mutation or alteration of the Begetter, and
therefore in that respect he may be said to be Created: not that his Eternity
should thereupon be called in question; or that he should be thought to be a
Creature: but that from both these words, we might receive what was fitting,
and reject what seems to be unfit in the right understanding of this
unexplicable Mystery. This Answer being pertinent to the matter in hand, I have
been willing to insert, to give full satisfaction to those that are Scepticks
in this point, and for the confirmation of their faith that are sound and
orthodox.

Mary, Luke 1.35. The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the
Highest shall over-shadow thee; therefore that Holy Thing that shall be born of
thee, shall be called the Son of God. Therefore also say they, he was not the
Son of God before his Incarnation.

Unto this also we may answer sundry ways.

Non Gene r^t one ^ed (...) and benedictione.
was not after the similitude of the Nature and Essence of the Holy Ghost (for
Christ was not conceived of the substance, but through the power of the Spirit)
we may conclude infallibly that Christ had not this denomination of the Son of
Ghost first given him at the time of his Incarnation.

Secondly, Qui pascun ter ex Aqua and sp. sancto non ided aquae filios eos
recte quispiam dixcrit. Pet. Lom.
If it were so, the Holy Ghost should by a proper right be called the Father of
Christ, which he never is in Scripture, neither indeed did ever any that truly
professed the Christian Faith, acknowledge him in any respect to be: for he is
not the principle of the subsistence of the second person in the Trinity, and
therefore not the cause of the Divine eternal Sonship; neither was there a new
person conceived at his unconceivable over-shadowing of the Virgin, and
therefore he could not be the Father of Christ in respect of any inferior
filiation: so that we must seek out some other sense of the Angels words, then
that which these Dreamers have foolishly imagined.

Thirdly, The words therefore of the Angel may well be conceived to have
reference to the Prophecy of Isaiah, unto which he seems to have respect in the
31. Verse of this first of S. Luke, the words of the Prophet are these; Es.
7.14. Mat. 1.23.
Behold a Virgin shall conceive, and bare a Son, and shall call his name
Immanuel: which Immanual is being interpreted, God with us; Implying, he shall
be called both the Son of God, and the Son of man; and though the Angel makes
mention only of the first of these Denominations, V. 35. yet it is not to be
taken exclusively of the other, for he said before, V. 31. Thou shall call his
name Jesus: whereby he means, that he should be called also the Son of man.
In a word, the Particle ( Therefore, Luke 1.35.) wherein the stress of this
Objection lies, is not to be referred to the conception of Christ by the Holy
Ghost, as the cause of his Sonship; but to the Prophecy that went before both
of the Mother and the Son, wherein they were both concerned, viz. That that
should be fulfilled.

Fourthly, Whereas it is said, He shall be called the Son of God; it is to be
understood after the manner of the Hebrews, Pro vere manifestabitur, He shall
be truly manifested and declared to be the Son of God: as where it is said, He
shall be called Immanuel; it is not meant, He shall be called by that name, but
declared to be such as that name imports, and acknowledged to be so among his
people: so by these words (He shall be called the Son of God) is meant, he
should be acknowledged to be the Son of God, when he was born into the World*
not implying a Beginning of what he was not, but that then he should begin to
be manifested and acknowledged what he was.

Or else lastly, He which was ever the Son of God in respect of his Godhead,
should now be called the Son of God existing in the Manhood; or, God manifested
in the flesh, as the Apostle phraseth it, 1 Timothy 3.16.
1 Timothy 3.16.

Col. 1.15. where Christ is called (...), The first born, or first begotten of
every creature. Whence they will infer, that he must needs be a Creature: for
as the first begotten, say they, amongst brethren is to be reckoned one of
their number, and of the same nature with them; so the first begotten of every
creature must also be connatural with the creatures, and therefore cannot be
begotten from Eternity, but is a creature having a temporal beginning of
existency, even as they.

Thus do these Christomacho, fighters against Christ show their teeth, though
they cannot bite, and shoot out their bolt, wherewith they let fly nothing but
their own folly. But let them if they will, Marcion,
enjoy their privilege to be of his brotherhood, who deservedly was called
Primogenitus Diaboli, the first begotten of the Devil. In the mean time, that
their folly may be made manifest unto all men, as his also was, and that all
who love the Lord Jesus Christ may have their faith confirmed, and their
affections enlarged toward him, let these following answers be taken into
consideration.

The first Created, as it should indeed be rendered, if their sense should pass
for current; but (...), that is, The first begotten of every creature, which
signifies that he was begotten (...), that is, Before all the Creation, as
appears by what is presently added by the Apostle, V. 16. For by him were all
things created; which clearly distinguishes him from those things that are
made, giving him also the priority before all things, V. 17. which must
conclude his Generation to be Eternal.

Secondly, If the Apostle must be taken in such a sense, as that his words here
should make Christ and the Creature Correlatives each to other, it will not
necessarily follow that he from his original was a creature too. And now to
make it clear, that the Apostles meaning is of a higher aim and strain; I shall
undertake with all due reverence and sobriety to speak of this great Mystery,
according as God has dealt to me the measure of faith, and the Lord give us a
right understanding therein. Saint Paul seems here to be raised up by the Holy
Ghost into a spiritual rapture, setting forth the Glory of the Lord Jesus
Christ, as I may say, in all its Dimensions, the height, and length, and
breadth, and depth thereof: The height, in that he is the uncreated everlasting
Image of the invisible God (for in that sense it must be taken, in regard he
was before the Creation) thereby settling him upon the Throne, making him
coeternal with God, and to be of the same nature with him, and the first
begotten of every creature: by which words, he puts the Crown upon his head,
giving him the Sovereignty and Dominion over the whole Creation. The length, in
that he is before all things, and that by him all things consist. The breadth,
in that he is the head of the body the Church, extending his Influences,
Wisdom, Care, and Providence (as the head uses) toward all his Members. The
depth, in that he became in time the first begotten also from the Dead; that as
he was the Creator and Lord of all Living, so when poor Creatures had by their
rebellion against him, brought themselves under the power of Death, even then
did he by his dying and triumphant rising again, become their Restorer and
Deliverer also, that so in all things, says the Text, he might have the
pre-eminence.

Now then when the Apostle is in so high an elevation, taken up with such a
glorious description of the Lord Jesus, ascribing unto him his several
Excellencies, according to his several Relations, wherein he stands, to his
Father, to his Church, to the whole Creation: is it fit for low-spirited men,
laden with lumpish thoughts of the creature, to force him to stoop unto them,
by obtruding a sense upon him, which never entered into his thoughts once to
imagine? Yea, which would make him contradict himself, as we say, in the same
breath: for to be the uncreated everlasting Image of the invisible God, and to
be a Creature in one and the same Nature, are teto Coelo, directly opposite
each to other, as the East is to the West.

But without controversy, there is truth in the Apostles words, and no lie at
all. Whereas therefore he says of Christ, That he is the Image of the
invisible God, the first begotten of every creature. He makes the latter Clause
the consequent of the former, connecting the whole in this manner; The right of
Primogeniture is in Christ, because he is the Image of the invisible God: and
in that regard do all Creatures visible and invisible derive their Being from
him, some having more noble impressions of his Image upon them then others,
according to their rank and order in the Creation, as it has been contrived
and established by the wisdom of the most High. For example, such as have life
in them by an internal principle of Nature, are in a higher degree of honor by
their conformity unto Christ, then those Creatures that are without life; for
life in whatsoever subject it be, whether intellectual, rational, sensitive, or
vegetative, is a Rivolet springing from that divine Fountain that is in Christ:
amongst which sorts of living creatures, there is also a gradual Propinquity to
the Fountain; according to which propinquity, they have all their several
quicknings and vital operations. The Evangelist S. John intimates so much, when
he says, In him was life, and the life was the light of men. John 1.4. Haec
vita est lux non Brutorum, etc. ad quae il^a non pertinet sed hominum. Sic
Musculus.
That is, that Christ had a special care and respect toward Mankind and that
the life which is in him is not so gloriously manifested toward the other
creatures that are inferior to man.

And now to speak freely my poor judgment concerning this Primogeniture of
Jesus Christ by way of instance, as it has respect to Angels and Men. Whereas
Christ is called the first born, does it not imply that he is, Intellectus
Primogenitus, the first begotten Intellect in reference to the Angelical
Nature, becoming thereby the first Mover thereof, and giving it a Being
according to the counsel of his own Will? Does it not signify also that he is,
Ratio Prin ogenita, the first begotten Reason in order to the Rational (in
which respect it may be probable, he is called by the Holy Ghost in Scripture,
(...), the Reason, rather then the Word) displaying his Beauts in every
particular Soul, as seems good unto him? (...). John 1.10.14.
Which Intellect and Reason were indeed originally of the Essence of God,
derived unto Christ by an eternal and unconceivable Generation, the Image
whereof was from him devolved upon Angels and Men, though not in that manner as
was upon Christ himself; the Essence of God being that way incommunicable to
any creature: for as he is the first begotten of every creature, giving unto
every Species his proper portion of Entity; Romans 8.29. John 1.18.
and the first begotten among many brethren, giving them the privilege of
Children; so is he the only begotten of the Father, reserving to himself his
own natural Interest and peculiar Prerogative.

According to this sense which I have here given, the Apostle is, I conceive,
to be understood in the forecited place of the Epistle to the Colossians; to
which, I confess, I do the more willingly incline, because the Original word
(...), is not only to be rendered first born, or first begotten; but by a
transposition only of the Accent, as appears here in the Margin, which is
allowable: it does signify also, The first Bringer forth of every creature;
(...), a (...). Pario.
making Christ thereby, as he is indeed, the Ens entium, the Original of all
Beings in the world, and to be, as he is called, Rev. 3.14. (...), The
efficient Principle or Author, as the word also means, of the Creation:
whereof more shall be said hereafter.

And now to conclude, let that which has been said suffice to show the
invalidity of this Objection also drawn from the mis-construction of the
Apostles words, concerning the Primogeniture of Jesus Christ. I grant there are
some Writers both ancient and modern, who, to avoid this Objection which has
been here alleged, maintain it to be meant of Christ's Humane Nature: but the
truth is, it is not so to be understood, as it has been here made to appear,
but of the Divine; for Christ is not properly the Son of God according to the
flesh, and therefore never in that sense said to be begotten: and yet
notwithstanding the aforesaid Heretical Cavil over-thrown likewise.

Thus briefly as I was able (poorly enough, God knows, yet according to the
grace given unto me) have I insisted upon this great Mystery: Let us now
improve it for our edification.

A threefold improvement may be made of this Doctrine; considering it, 1. With
a reference unto Christ himself. 2. With a reference unto his People. 3. With a
reference unto his Enemies.


First, In respect of himself; it concerns us to be very wary and to keep our
distance, not presuming to speak of what we have not seen. Therefore as for
Yesterdaies work, what was done before the foundations of the World were laid,
it is not expedient doubtless to search into. Clouds and thick darkness are set
about the Pavilion of God; Ps. 18.11.
he therefore that presses to it will lose himself for ever. We read indeed of
his outgoings that have been from everlasting: that is, as is conceived, his
eternal Generation, Mich. 5.2.
together with his Purposes and Decrees which should in time be accomplished;
but for his in-goings with the Father and the Holy Ghost, they are laid up with
God, (...), in the Revestries of Eternity, the knowledge whereof is infinitely
beyond the reach of any Creature. It is fit for us to be contented with what
Christ himself has been pleased to declare concerning this secret; As that he
was his Fathers delight, Die Die, in all those days of Eternity, rejoicing
always before him, Pro. 8.30, 31. John 17.5.
in that excellent Glory, which he says, He had with him before the world
began. But if vain man who is born like a wild Asses colt, will be wise above
what is written, enquiring what Christ did yesterday before the Creation; he
must be answered with that saying of old, He prepared Hell for such bold
Intruders, who will so audaciously busy themselves in searching into the
secret and eternal Counsels of the most High.

Yet notwithstanding albeit in this sense, we are not of Yesterday, and
therefore neither can nor ought to know any thing; this Doctrine may instruct
us concerning Jesus Christ, that though he took upon him our Nature, yet he
continued still to be (...), the same what he was from Eternity: Quod erat
permansit, quod non erat assumpsit, (...); He ceased not to be what he was, and
what he was not he assumed. Thou art the same, says David (speaking of Christ,
Ps. 102.27.
as appears, Heb. 1.12.) and thy years, viz. of thy Wisdom, thy Power, and
other thy glorious Attributes, as well as of thy life, have no end, but endure
throughout all Generations. Though the Heavens shall be changed, and wax old
like a Garment, and the faithful Witness that is therein shall witness to all,
that all things in this world are unfaithful: yea, though Christ himself, who
in the fullness of Eternity dwelt in that Light that is inaccessible, was in the
fullness of time made flesh, and dwelt among us, yet he was still (...), the
same God manifested in the flesh, but continuing notwithstanding to be God
still. This was the Weapon wherewith the Orthodox of old did strike through the
loins of the Arians, Verbum caro factum est, sed non mutatum, The Son of God
was made flesh, but not changed into it: and they gave it an edge from this
very Text which we are now upon, Cent. 4. cap. 5.
Jesus Christ the same yesterday, to day, and for ever.

True it is, Phil. 2.7.
he emptied himself, as the Apostle speaks, Phil. 2.7. (for so the word there
s^gnifies) and that secundum Deitatem too, in respect of his Godhead: But what
emptying was this? Not a total devesting himself of his Eternal Power and
Godhead, for then he had not been (...), the same; but the meaning is, as the
word is well rendered in our Bibles, He made himself of no reputation. That is,
as it follows, He took upon him the form of a servant, which form of a Servant
could not (surely) obliterate the form of God. Non deposita, sed seposita
Majestate, as one says well, not by cancelling, or laying away, but, as it
were, by concealing or laying aside for a time the most glorious appearance of
his Divine Majesty. In a word, the Godhead in Christ was not laid aside at his
Incarnation, considered as it is in it self, common to the three Persons,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, but only (...)(an approved distinction among the
Learned) by a gracious dispensation, in that he was pleased to condescend so
low, as to assume our Nature, and to join it unto his, yet not confounding the
properties of either; and therefore he still abides immutably the same: even
as a Prince when he marries a poor Beggar, may in a sense be said to make
himself of no reputation, and to have no regard to his great Dignity, though
nevertheless he continue still in the same state wherein he was before.
Athanasius gives the reason very clearly, Corpus non vim habuit absolvendae
Divinae Hypostas^os; The body which was ordained for Christ was not able to
dissolve his Divine Subsistence.

Now therefore because he made himself of no reputation, should we make light
account of him? God forbid: when we consider his Birth here in this world how
poor and homely, let us withal remember his Eternal Generation how Glorious and
Divine. When we look upon his poor Mother, a despised Woman (though indeed the
glory and flower of her Sex) let us then also think upon his Eternal Father,
the God of Glory; when we see him rejected by men, in a worse condition for
house-room in the world then the Foxes of the earth, and the Fowls of the air:
let not our Lord thereupon be despised in our eyes, but call to mind how he
inhabiteth Eternity, is in the bosom of the Father, upholding all things by the
word of his Power, and all the Angels of God worshipping him.

And thus are we fallen upon the second Result that arises out of this
everlasting Truth, considering it with a reference unto the people of God.

Whose duty it is upon the account of Christ's Eternity and Immutability to give
unto him the glory due unto his Name. And how can we indeed do otherwise? John
1.14
When we see his Glory as the Glory of the only begotten Son of God: When we
find by comfortable experience upon our Souls the blessed effects of his
eternal and immutable Wisdom, Power, Goodness; how can we choose but say, Lo,
this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us: this is the Lord,
Es. 25.9.
we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation. Yea,
this is our faith and confidence, and hope, and triumph; here alone we will
fix, and here alone we desire to be found: to be found in Life, to be found in
Death, and to be found after Death. For whither else should we go? With him are
the Words, and with him are the Works of eternal life. Such a Savior it
behoved us to have, and such a Savior he has approved himself to be; who did
not only begin, but thoroughly accomplish our Deliverance. The pleasure, desire,
and purpose of the Lord has prospered in his hand: Es. 53.10
And the salvation of his people has been a salvation to the uttermost. So
that we may say with Moses, He is the Rock, and his work is perfect. Deuteronomy. 32.4


Give unto him then the Glory due unto his Name. And if it be demanded how it
should be done, as it is fit indeed we should be still inquisitive after it; I
answer, 1. In worshipping him with Divine Adoration. 2. In a zealous appearance
for him against his Enemies. 3. In a ready harkening to the Voice of his Word.


First, We must yield unto him Divine Honor, putting no difference in that
respect between him and the Father; for as the Father has sworn, that unto him
every knee shall bow, Es. 45.23. Es. 45.23. Phil. 2.10.
So must every knee bow in like manner to the Lord Jesus Christ, Phil. 2.10.
Neither did Christ who was ever zealous for his Fathers glory, ever refuse this
Divine Honor when it was given unto him. He never said as the Angel, See thou
do it not, Rev. 19.10. But approved, Rev. 19.10
commended, blessed those that did it: as we might instance in the Leper, Mat.
8.2. The Ruler, Mat. 9.18. The blind man, John 9.38. His Disciples, Mat. 28.17.
and many more. If it had not been his due, what a derogation had these things
been unto his Fathers Honor? for which he had been justly liable to his
displeasure, even as Herod was when he took unto himself the glory due unto
God. But Jesus Christ is the same with the Father yesterday, to day, and for
ever. And therefore is to have the same honor ascribed unto him. Heb 1 6.
Let then all the Angels of God worship him; and let men of what rank soever,
bow the knee, Abrech. John 5.23.
and cry before him, Tender Father: for this is the will of God, that all men
should honor the Son as they honor the Father. I shall conclude this Branch
of my Exhortation with a remarkable Story very well known, and very pertinent
to our purpose, confirmed by the concurrent Testimony of many Writers of great
and eminent fame in the Church of God.

In the Reign of Theodosius there was a Toleration granted to the Arians,
giving them liberty free from any molestation, not prohibiting them to argue
publicly against the Godhead of Christ; insomuch that they grew thereupon
extremely impudent, venting their Blasphemy to the great dishonor of the Lord
Jesus Christ: neither could any man prevail with the Emperor to retract that
Toleration, which he had with too much indulgence granted unto them. At length
one Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium, a holy man, not being able to endure the
dishonor that was so frequently done unto Jesus Christ, was willing to expose
himself to a great hazard for his sake. Entering therefore into the Court with
some other Bishops, and seeing the Emperor and his son Arcadius (whom he
lately created Joynt-Emperour) standing together, he did very low obeisance to
the Father, but none at all to the Son: Theodosius imagining the omission of
Reverence toward his Son to proceed rather from simplicity and ignorance, then
from any wilful neglect of the Bishop, advises him to salute his Son also as
became his Imperial Dignity: Amphilochius answered boldly in these words, Satis
est quod honorem ipsi habitisset; It was enough that he had given him that
honor which he did: and withal coming up close to the Son, in a familiar
manner he stroaketh him on the head, saying, Salve mi Fili, God save you my
Child. Whereupon the old Emperor being much displeased, gave commandment that
the Bishop should be punished severely for his insolency, which being ready to
be executed, he having now obtained what he expected, very freely speaks
forth his mind in this manner; Siccine O Imperator tam graviter fers contemptum
filii tui? Revocat tibi in mentem quaeso odisse and Deumcos qui honoris aliquid
adimerent unigenito Filio suo, etc. Is thy rage, O Emperor, so great against
me, for not regarding thy Son? Remember I beseech thee, that they are odious
unto God, whosoever they be, that take away from his only begotten Son the
glory that is due unto him, etc. The Emperor upon these words bethinking
himself better, acknowledged his fault to the Bishop, and asks him forgiveness,
immediately issuing forth an Edict against Arianism, whereby all, whosoever
they were, that were found guilty of that Heresy were brought to a condign
punishment. A memorable example, in which we may see, how Divine Providence
has in those elder times wrought in the hearts of men a reverend awe of the
Lord Jesus Christ, when possibly convictions from the holy Scriptures, through
the prevalency of carnal compliancies could not be regarded.

Which example let it lead the way also to our second particular of giving unto
Christ his due honor, viz. By a zealous appearance for him against his
Enemies, who in these our days lay violent hands upon his Glory: cursed
Heretics, I mean, professing open Hostility against the Lord Jesus, seeking by
all means they possibly can to snatch his Crown from off his head, by
undermining the very Foundation of his Honor, that is, his Divine Nature.

And surely too many there are of that pestilent Brood in these times of Error
and Vanity: an evil Spirit wanders about, not only in our Nation, but in other
parts of the world (pretending to Holiness, yet doubtless an Emissary sent from
the Prince of Darkness) that beguileth unstable Souls, by infusing into them a
lower esteem of Jesus Christ, then has been commonly held up amongst the
people of God; to the end, that this diminution of his Glory might in time
bring on with it an annihilation also of his Merit: Numine sordidius nihil est
cum sidit^n Imum.
for as the powers of the Earth when they are brought low, are trampled upon,
and made very despicable; so will it certainly be with the Dignity and Honor
of the Lord Jesus, if it be brought down to the dust, there it will be buried
and come to nothing.

It does therefore highly concern all the faithful people of God to appear in
this Quarrel; and notwithstanding all the glossing insinuations and pretensions
of men willing to be deceived (who as they are themselves of a lukewarm
indifferency in many points of Religion; so they would persuade all others to a
sinful silence with them) yet does it, I say, behove all that truly love the
Lord Jesus Christ to proclaim and maintain an irreconcilable War with all
those, whosoever they be, that march under the Banner of that evil Spirit
against him.

And to afford some help herein, let us a little sound the depths of Satan, to
the end, that we may lay open some of the stratagems of Hell, which have been
of late contrived and acted against the Lord Christ and his Glory. Two ways it
is clear, does this Spirit work to bring about this mischievous Design.

First, By raising up men beyond their due (...) their proper Sphere, making
them equals with Christ, and Competitours with him in Glory. Secondly, By
bringing down the Lord Jesus, the Lord of Glory, from the Throne of his
Majesty, making him nothing else but a poor Compeer with the sons of men.
As to the first of these, consider what a fearful delusion that is which
haunteth some persons, putting them upon this Blasphemy; that they (poor worms)
are as well and as truly God, as Jesus Christ: And why? Because they have their
Being in God, Act. 17.28. are partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. and
are one with Christ, John 17.21.22. etc. Now if this were admitted, what a
sordid profession would Christianity be? What in time would become of
Satisfaction for Sin, Imputation of Righteousness, the Purity, Dignity, Royalty
of the Blood of God? How ridiculous and contemptible would the pretended
terror of the great Day seem unto the World? For a Contest might possibly
arise who should be the chief Judge at that time, and according to the person
and quality of the Judge, so would the Judgment be.

But to these deluded ones, we may well say as Moses did to Korah and his
Accomplices, Number. 16.9, 10. Seems it a small thing unto you that God has
separated you, Numb. 16.9, 10.
and brought you near unto himself; but you will seek the Priesthood also?
What, is it nothing to be, as you pretend your selves to be, advanced to the
knowledge of the true God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, to have the
Image of God consisting in Righteousness and true Holiness, 2 Pet. 1.4.
to be repaired and renewed in you, which is the participation of the Divine
Nature; but that you will aspire like the Devil, 1 Timothy 3.6.
to be equal with God, speaking after the language of him who said in his
heart, I will ascend into Heaven, Es. 14.13, 14.
I will exalt my Throne above the Stars of God, I will sit upon the mount of
the Congregation in the sides of the North. I will ascend above the heights of
the Clouds, I will be like the most High? Is the iniquity of our first Parents
too little for you (from which we are not cleansed until this day) but that you
will rise up and rebel against the Lord, even after the same manner as they
did? What? have you been coeternal with Jesus Christ, and immutable like unto
him? Can ye say, You are the same yesterday, to day, and for ever? Where were
you then, Job 38.4.
when God laid the foundations of the earth? Declare if you have understanding.
When he prepared the Heavens, when he set a compass upon the face of the Depth:
when he established the Clouds above: when he strenghned the Fountains of the
Deep. Were you then by him, Pro. 8.27.
as one brought up with him; rejoicing always before him? Have you known the
mind of the Lord? Or have you been his Counselors? Were you joined in
Commission with Jesus Christ to be his Co-agents in the great Work of
Redemption? Es. 63.3.
Did you help to tread the Wine Press in the discomfiting of his Enemies? Or to
establish a Church, so as the Gates of Hell should not prevail against it? Look
then now on every one that is proud, and bring him low, and tread down the
wicked in their place; hide them in the dust together, and bind their faces in
secret. Then will I confess to you that you are free from those Delusions that
are charged upon you, and unjustly taxed with Blasphemy: whereof otherwise you
cannot but be deeply guilty. But enough of this.

The other Project of Hell which is now on foot against Jesus Christ in these
our days, is to level him with poor dust and ashes, not allowing him a
pre-eminence above the sons of men; unless it be such as has been devised by
the Devil, for the more close conveyance of his inveterate malice. I do not
say, it is an Egg lately hatched by that Cockatrice; for it is of an old brood,
and did exceedingly infest the Church in former times (as has been said
before) but though it was smitten through and through with the two-edged Sword
of Gods word, yet there are now again sprung up new Heads of that old monstrous
and malicious Hydra, who with the faces of Sodom and Gomorah dare publicly
tell us, that our great Redeemer of whom we make our boast, is no other then a
mere man.

I am prone to believe, that such as love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity,
do find their hearts shivering within them at the very mentioning of this
horrid Blasphemy: but behold yet greater Abominations.

What an amazement must it be to all the Churches of Christ, to read or hear
that, In A. B. his Exposition of the 17th Chap. of S. John.
which I have read of Socinus? In the reciting whereof there may be some doubt
(as one said in another case) whether you should be desired to open, or to stop
your ears; the speech being so horrible, as it is a wonderful patience of God,
that the Earth opened not her mouth to swallow him up quick: yea, it may seem
strange that the dumb and dead paper did not stand up, refusing to take that
Ink wherewith such an abominable Blasphemy should be either printed, or
written, which is expressed in these words, viz. This Doctrine of Christ's Deity
is so absurd, that the Christian World will one day be ashamed of it; and that
the word Trinity may be in time as much abhorred, as Transubstantiation and the
Mass.

What shall we say to this? but as the Angel spoke to the Devil; Increpet
Dominus, Es. 6.1.3.5.8. John 12.40, 41. Psalm. 102.19. 22, 23.26, 27. Heb. 1.10,
11, 12.
Let the Lord rebuke them, whosoever they be that have their Tongues thus set
on fire of Hell against Christ and his Glory. The Apostle tells us, Phil. 2.6.
That being in the form of God he counted it no robbery to be equal with God.
Yet these wretches do in effect say, that he is a Thief and a Robber, if he
shall lay claim to such an equality.

What? Is he the great Jehovah, Eternal, and Immutable, the same yesterday, to
day, and for ever, and all this while but a mere man? Could a mere man be able
to wade into the vast Ocean of the wrath of the Almighty, and not be swallowed
up everlastingly therein? Could he be able to enter into a Plea with Divine
Justice, and put her to a Nonsuit? To undertake by his own Righteousness to
justify so many Myriads of Saints, and not find to his shame, his covering
infinitely too narrow to hide the deformities of so great a multitude? To
encounter with Death and Hell, and overcome them in their own Den? Surely we
must needs say with him in the Gospel, If this man were not of God; Nay, If
this man were not God, he could do nothing, nothing. I mean in these great,
noble, and glorious Achievements: For, admit that he was perfect in himself,
both in his birth and in his life; the power of the most High, when it came
upon the Virgin in her Conception, stopping up the Current of original sin,
that it could not pollute him, and his own proper power preserving him all his
lifetime from the least spot of any actual sin: yet alas, wherein could this
single finite Righteousness of his be efficacious toward others, if he had not
been God as well as Man? It was his Godhead that did put an infinite worth upon
all that he did, and upon all that he suffered, and made his Righteousness to
be of so diffusive a nature, that it was enough to justify all the World: for
the obedience of God to the rule of the Law, and the blood of God given up to
the sentence of the Law, are infinitely comprehensive, far beyond what either
men or Angels are able to conceive.

Had it not been for this, might not Divine Justice have justly rejected him as
an Offender, yea, as the greatest of all other? For his undertaking to justify
others would have been the greatest sin that ever was committed in the World,
as being the absurdest mockery, and most insolent affront that ever was offered
to the grand Majesty of God: And would not Death and Hell likewise have still
kept them in their clutches with triumphant Insultations trampling upon him,
making him to know, that his Arm was too weak to subdue their Kingdom, and that
it would cost more to redeem those Souls they gaped for, then such a poor man
as he was ever able to compass?

But blessed for ever and ever be his Name; as he happily began this noble
Enterprise for his poor people: so to his eternal honor, and their everlasting
salvation, he did victoriously, as became the Almighty God, prevail therein.

Now therefore away with that cursed Anthropolatry of Socinians, let it for
ever be trodden under foot as unsavory Salt, having no relish in it acceptable
either to God or man. And let the consideration of what has been here said,
provoke all that bear a sincere affection to the Lord Jesus, to cry out and
say, It is time for the Lord to arise, for they have made void thy Glory; thy
Crown and Dignity is despised, thine Honor is laid in the dust, and what can
thy Servants do? Awake, awake therefore, put on strength O Arm of the Lord;
awake as in the ancient days, in the Generations of old, smite all thine
Enemies in the hinder parts, and put them to a perpetual shame, make them to
know themselves to be but men: But make them also to know that thou art the
Eternal, and the immutable God, yesterday to day, and the same for ever.

Thus much for the second Branch of this Result of the Doctrine of Christ's
eternal Generation.

Thirdly, Let all the people of God give unto Christ that honor which is meet,
by a ready harkening to the Voice of his Word; submitting cheerfully to his
commands, silencing all corrupt Reasonings that are apt to exalt themselves in
the heart against the knowledge of his Will, and captivating every thought to
the obedience of his Gospel: A service this is which is due unto him, because
even because he is the eternal begotten Son of God.

And this way of glorifying Christ must be joined to the former, otherwise in
vain will it be to spend our zeal in vindicating the Name of the Lord Jesus
against his Enemies; if in the mean time we should dishonor him by our
disobedience unto him, and resuse to give him the hearing* An honor which we
find sometimes given unto men: Unto me, says Job, Men gave car, and waited and
kept silence at my counsel: Job. 29.21, 22.
after my words they spoke not again, and my speech dropped upon them. Now what
alas are the words of poor Job (put Noah and Daniel, Moses and Samuel together
with him) but saltless and absurd, words of folly and vanity, unless they
receive and Acumen and savor from Jesus Christ, Eccles. 12.10.
to make them Verba desiderii, acceptable words, words according to his own
form, sound and wholesome? For he (says Solomon) gives wisdom, P^o. 2.6.
and out of his mouth comes knowledge and understanding. He is, (...), the
ancient standing and everlasting Oracle of Heaven, who alone is to be consulted
upon all occasions, and whosoever speaks not according to his word, it is
because there is no light in them; Es. 8.20.
his life alone being the light of men, John 1.4. He, John 1.4.
as has been said, is that Ratio Primogenita, the first begotten Reason, from
whence springs all the Reason in the world, of what nature soever it be,
whether in things Spiritual, or in things temporal: and therefore even in
Reason there should be a cheerful Acquiessency in him, as in our Center,
without any the least Contradiction, Tergiversation, or Deviation whatsoever.
Shortly then, seeing it is he that gives such a Mouth and Wisdom unto some of
his peculiar Servants, that the Wisdom and Spirit by which they speak is become
irresistible: Mat. 13.19.
shall not his own Word which is the Word of the Kingdom, not a foreign
Exotic word, as the words of men are; but the pure, proper, native, genuine
Language of Heaven, be worthy of all acceptance, and of all veneration too?
since by the confession of his Enemies, even when he was upon Earth, clothed
with skin and flesh, John 7.46.
he spoke as never man spoke, and by the testimony of the people that heard
him, when he taught them it was with authority? But of this more may be said
hereafter, when we come to the third Interpretation of the Text, considering
the Lord Jesus in his relation to his Church, to which this Subject will be
also very suitable.

For the present, let this word of Exhortation be received upon the account of
Christ Eternity, as he has relation to the Father; for in that respect he is
(as has been made to appear) the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. Hearken
therefore to his word, because he is eternal.

And here give me leave to strengthen this Argument with some few
Corroboratives, that it may effectually bring the consciences of men under the
power thereof.

First then let it be remembered, the Father will have him to be thus honored,
even upon this consideration of his eternal Relation unto himself; as appears
by that Voice which came from the excellent Glory, saying, This is my beloved
Son, Mat. 17.5.
hear him.

Secondly, Christ himself upon the same terms expects of us the same Service;
for when he had ( Pro. 8.) declared his co-eternity with the Father; what is
the inference that he makes thereupon, but this, V. 32, 33, 34. Now therefore
hearken unto me O ye children of men, hear instruction and be wise, and refuse
it not: Blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily at my Gates, waiting
at the posts of my door; for who so finds me, finds life, etc.

3. Add hereunto, this Eternity of Christ is a clear evidence of his wisdom and
gravity; for if it be true which Job says, With the Ancient is wisdom, and in
length of days understanding. Job 12.12.
It must be also most true, that with him whose years have been before all
Generations, is surpassing wisdom, and of his understanding there is no number,
Ps. 147.5.
as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm 147.5. Hear how Christ lays claim unto Wisdom
as his peculiar Prerogative, and a chief Gem in his everlasting Diadem, Pro. 8.
Counsel is mine, says he, when he was about to plead his Eternity, and sound
wisdom; Pro. 8.14.
not such as is to be found amongst the children of men, corrupt and hollow:
yea, I have strength too, such wisdom as never decaies; And therefore it would
be man's wisdom, whosoever he be, old or young, to lay his hand upon his mouth
and to hold his peace, Job 13.5.
when Wisdom it self is about to put forth her Voice: for if Days must speak,
and multitude of years teach wisdom, who is fitter to teach then he; and of
whom are we all fitter to learn then of him, who is the same yesterday, to day,
Es. 9.6.
and for ever? He is the everlasting Father of his Church; His head and his
hairs, Rev. 1.14.
as he appeared unto John, were white like wool, as white as snow: betokening
his wisdom and gravity; If then he be a Father, where is his honor, if his
counsel be not regarded? It is a commandment given in the Law, which the Gospel
has not disanulled, but confirmed rather; Lev. 19.32.
Thou shall rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face of the old man:
Which rising up, as it expresses a respectful posture of the body toward such
a person; so it implies a reverend attention unto his Counsel and Instruction.
As it is written of Constantine the Great, that he used to rise up and stand,
when he heard the Gospel faithfully and convincingly preached: And Theodosius
finding on a time Arsenius his Sons Tutour to stand, and his Sons to sit while
he read unto them, he could not with patience suffer so prepostrous a sight,
but made him to sit, and the other to stand. Yea, Judge. 3.20.
even Eglon the Heathenish King of Moab, when he heard Ehud tell him, he had a
message unto him from God, he rose up from his seat reverendly to attend the
Tenor thereof. Jesus Christ therefore being the express Image of the Ancient
of Days, who might much rather then Paul have that reverend denomination given
him of Christ the Aged (though not in the vain sense of the Anthropomorphites;
Phil. 1.9.
far be from us such a dotage, but in a spiritual sense of Divine Eternity far
beyond our shallow conceptions) In whom also are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge: Col. 2.3.
He I say, is to have this honor ascribed unto him above all others, viz. To
consult his wisdom, and humbly to attend to his grave and righteous commands. I
name no gesture either of rising or falling down prostrate before him, though
both at times may well become us, according as he is pleased to make himself
known unto us.

4. And indeed a necessity lies upon us to hearken to this his infallible
wisdom, and to follow it as our only Guide and Conduct in all our ways; how
else alas shall we be able to escape the snares wherein Satan seeks to entangle
us from day to day? For our own parts such is our extreme folly, we are apt
like children still to be running into harmes-way, and to be catching at every
Toy: and for Satan's part (such is his profound subtlety and indefatigable
malice) that he has laid his Trains for us even in those ways, wherein we may
think our selves most secure; and though we may and do sometimes through mercy
escape them, and otherwhiles by the same good hand of God upon us, unwind our
selves out of them, yet his Budget is never empty, but one project or other he
will still produce to draw us to his Lure: So that were it not for the wisdom
of Christ, which checks our folly, and goes beyond all the policy of Hell, we
should certainly perish without any remedy.

5. Besides, what improvement can we make of our Talents in our Masters
service, which (we may well think) is expected from us, unless we listen after
his counsels, and have a respect unto his rules, which he has set us? When our
minds are perplexed with various thoughts concerning our eternal estate,
hovering between Hope and Despair, not knowing what to do; here then is Wisdom,
whereto if we resort, we may be thoroughly resolved without any fear of
delusion. When Controversies arise in matters of Religion (as this present Age
is full of them) and we consult with some on the right hand, but they cannot
help us; we betake our selves to others on the left, but they involve us more
and more in disorder and confusion: Here is the Oracle that will and must put
an end to all such differences. And oh that we were so wise as to submit to his
infallible Determinations! But alas, alas, this is the misery of many people in
these days, who are too like unto foolish Rehoboam, Refuse the Counsel of the
Ancient, and follow after a new Recent upstart Light, a light that has grown
up with them, which Solomon, yea, a wiser then he, Jesus Christ never knew; a
very Ignis fatnus that leads them into fearful Precipices, where nothing is to
be expected unless this Eternal Wisdom prevent it but inevitable ruin.

And now to close up this second Consideration, let us, I say, give unto Christ
the Glory due unto his Name in the several Branches thereof, as they have been
laid before us; because even because, he is the Eternal Begotten Son of God,
the same yesterday, to day, and for ever.

Or if that be not enough, let us consider we have reason thus to honor him,
because he has highly honored us, in that he being the eternal begotten Son
of God, was pleased to become the Son of man, advancing our Nature above the
Nature of Angels, whereby we who were at first made a little lower then they,
are now made a great deal higher, they adoring our Nature in the personal Union
with the Deity; from whence also has ensued a great alteration in that
intercourse that is betwixt us and them: for before this exaltation of our
Nature, they could and did (it is the observation of Bishop Andrews) suffer a
prostration of men in their presence. 1 Chronicles. 21.16.
But now they do in effect acknowledge the case is altered, and will no more
assume to themselves any such superiority, Rev. 19.10.22.9.

Neither is this all the honor that Christ has done us, but as he has raised
up our Nature to the highest elevation above every name that is named; so he
has made us by his Spirit partakers also of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.
2 Pet. 1.4. And what more is there that can be desired? What honor or
happiness can poor Creatures in this world be capable of beyond this which the
Lord Jesus Christ has conferred upon us? If the Sun in the Firmament should
attract a humane body, and incorporate it into it self, where it should not
only live a life Celestial, but to have power to transmit the Influences of the
Sun into other Corporeal Substances here upon Earth, it would surely make the
whole Creation to stand amazed and applaud the happiness of Mankind, that it
should be exalted to so great a dignity. But behold here a greater wonder in
Heaven, a humane body is actually taken up into the Throne of Glory, Crowned
with Divine Majesty and Honor, hypostatically united to the Divine Nature; by
virtue whereof the Holy Spirit drops down abundantly into the hearts of men,
making them all wheresoever it comes like unto God in Wisdom, Righteousness,
and true Holiness, and fruitful in all good works. No wonder indeed that the
Angels stoop down, 1 Pet. 1.12 (...), not in respect of his personal being, but
quoad essentiam absolutam, because the Essence of the Son is the very same that
the Essence of the Father is.
desiring to look into the Gospel, when they have such a blessed and glorious
Pattern of it there before them in the Mount of God. But this, I say, is the
honor that Christ has done unto us; and therefore surely a mighty engagement
lies upon us, to give unto him also what honor we possibly can: he sought not
to dignifie himself, or to make himself in any respect better, when he took
upon him our Nature, for he was from everlasting God in the best and highest
degree, (...), very God in all the days of Eternity; so high that he could not
be higher, so great that he could not be greater, so good that he could not be
better: but for our sakes he was made flesh, and dwelt among us, that we poor
dust and ashes might dwell with him in Glory.

Ascribe we therefore unto him the excellency of his Merit, let us be thankful
unto him, and speak well of his Name, for his Name indeed is excellent, and his
praise above Heaven and Earth; his Name also is wonderful, therefore to be had
in reverence by all them that are round about him; wonderful in his Essence
yesterday, to day, and for ever: And having also done wondrously well for us
(as has been said.) Now then let all the people praise him, let all the people
praise him, by worshipping him with a divine Adoration, by a zealous appearance
for him against his Enemies; by a ready harkening to the Voice of his Word. And
thus have we done with this second Consequent of this Doctrine, viz. With a
confideration of it in reference to the people of God.

Lastly, Seeing it is so, that Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, to day, and
for ever, in respect of his Divine Nature; Then let all the Enemies of this
Eternal Son of God, cover their faces with shame, who have not only called into
question this his Honor, but with the Sophistry of Hell in the sight of all
the World, and before the Sun have most impiously and impudently argued against
it. Such were Cerinthus, Ebion, Sabellius, Samosatenus, Arius, Photinus, and
all those Alogi of old; such have been Servetus, Socinus, Valentinus, Gentilis,
and their followers of late; all of them professed and open Enemies against the
Godhead of Christ.

It has been already said, that it is a duty incumbent upon all the faithful
people of God, zealously to vindicate the name and Dignity of the Son of God
against all his Enemies. But we shall now see how he himself does marvellously
appear in his own vindication; for it may well be said of him, as it is in Job,
He is wise in heart, Job 9.4.
and mighty in strength, to maintain his own Glory; and therefore whosoever
they be that harden themselves against him shall not prosper. They shall
perish, but he shall endure; they shall consume, into smoke shall they consume
away, but he is the same, and his years shall have no end. We use to say
proverbially of the Moon, which is called the faithful Witness in Heaven, that
she will still keep on her course, Ps. 89.33.
though all the Dogs upon earth should stand barking at her. Assuredly the Lord
Jesus Christ will be (...), yea, (...), The same God still yesterday, to day,
and for ever; though the foolish man reproacheth him daily, and the tumult of
those that rise up against him ascends continually. But will he indeed be the
same? Ps. 74.22, 23.
We may then conclude upon it infallibly, that he will, as he has ever done,
make all his Enemies (the Spawn of the old Serpent his inveterate Adversary) to
lick the dust. Not to speak here of those who are Enemies against Christ, as he
is Mediator, of which sort I believe the World is full, and it is to be feared
that too many, who even eat of his bread, Ps. 41.9.
do lift up the heel against him. Let us consider how his hand has been
stretched forth against those that have denied his Godhead.

Cerinthus the first that we read of that vomited out this Blasphemy, viz. That
Christ was but a mere man, and not coeternal with the Father; against whom the
Evangelist S. John (as Irenaus reports it) was inspired by the Holy Ghost to
write that Gospel which goes under his name. See Doctor Featly in his Dipper
dipped.
) This Cerinthus (as some Historians write) resorting to a common Bath, where
he met with the said Evangelist, was crushed to death by the fall of the house,
as soon as the beloved Disciple, who made have to shun him, was got out of the
door.

Julian the Apostate, whom all Generations shall call cursed, being wont in a
scoffing manner to call the Lord Jesus the Galilaean, and the Carpenters Son,
gave out threatenings, that upon his return from the Parthian War, wherein he
was then engaged, he would utterly destroy all those that believed in Christ:
But he was before his return cut off in a most eminent manner, Vengeance not
suffering him to live; wounded he was mortally in the said Battle, uncertain
whether by an Angel, or man, which when he perceived, he filled his hand with
his own blood, and threw it into the air, uttering these words; Vicisti
Galilaee vicisti, Thou have overcome Galilaean, thou have overcome: Eusebius,
etc. etc.
And when his filthy Soul was about to disgorge it self out of his body, he
grumbled out with a hollow voice (the Devil then, as it is like, ceasing upon
him) this horrid Blasphemy; Saturato te nunc Nazarene, Now satisfy thy self O
Nazaren. A little before the death of this bloody wretch, Libanius, Julian's
Teacher in Paganism, scoffingly asked a Christian Scholemaster, what the
Carpenters Son was then working for his Disciples; he Prophetically answered,
Parat Juliano Loculum, He prepares a Coffin for Julian, who was about that
instant time smitten by the just hand of the Almighty.

Julian Uncle to the aforenamed Julian, used commonly the like blasphemy
against Jesus Christ, and being willing in what he could to vent his malice
against him, rushed presumptuously into a Christian Oratory, and there with a
most abominable profanness pissed upon the holy Table Consecrated for the
Sacrament of the holy Eucharist: But he was suddenly pursued by a just judgment
of God, and taken with a terrible disease, his Bowels rotting within him, the
Excrements no more went from him by their natural passages, but that cursed
mouth which had been the Trumpet of blasphemy, was the passage of them.

Arius that arch enemy of Jesus Christ, even when by the strength of his
Faction he had so far prevailed, that he was ready to make his Triumph over the
truth of God, concerning the Deity of Christ; in the public Court of the
Emperor was forced to withdraw himself, as some think, by reason of a terrible
affrightment that then fell upon his Conscience (so the Centurists relate it)
whereby thinking to recollect himself by hardening his heart: or as it is
generally reported, endeavoring to disburthen Nature, his inward parts (which,
as I may say, were very wickedness) and all his Bowels gushed out, so fearfully
perishing with a kind of death fitting for such a blasphemous and filthy wretch.

Nestorius his Tongue rotted in his mouth, being eaten with worms, Cent. 5.
cap. 5.
wherewith he had blasphemed Christ. He held that the honor of Christ's Godhead
was conferred upon him as a compensation of his Merit.

Valens also that Neronical Tyrant was exceedingly mad against Jesus Christ; of
whom Histories record, that in favor of Arianism he executed most horrible
cruelty upon the Orthodox Christians, persecuting them from Country to Country,
giving liberty to all sorts of people to profess what Religion they pleased,
excepting such who maintained the Doctrine of the Eternal Deity of the Son of
God, resolving by all ways and means to root it out of the World: and when he
could not prevail, Cent. 4. cap. 7.
he forced a great multitude of those that professed that Doctrine into a Ship,
causing the Ship to be set on fire in the midst of the Sea: Cent. 4. cap. 10.
So furiously was he enraged in his cruelty toward the faithful Servants of
Christ. But behold how visibly the just judgment of God did appear against him
sundry ways: His Son being desperately sick, was by the earnest prayer of
Basil the Great, that faithful Bishop of Caesarea, restored to health beyond
expectation. Valens thereupon being convinced of his impetuous malice against
Christ, renounced his Heresy, and seemed to repent of his cruelty, Cent. 4.
cap. 4.
quietly submitting himself to the truth, as it was preached unto him by that
good Bishop: but within a short time after he returned again to his former
Biass, endeavoring also to persuade Basil himself to be an Arian, whose
consent when he saw he could not obtain, he commanded an Order to be drawn up
for his banishment, whereto being about to affix his name, suddenly was his Pen
in a miraculous manner shivered to pieces, yet still persisting in his
resolution, he called for another, and a third, to both which happened the like
remarkable Accident; a fearful horror at length seizing upon him, he was
forced against his will to retract that banishment: His rage nevertheless
increasing still more and more against the poor Church of Christ, upon the
account only of Christ's eternal Godhead, the revenging hand of God in the end
overtook him: for being engaged in a War against the Goths, and wounded with
an Arrow, he betook himself into a poor Shepherds Cottage, which being set on
fire by the Goths, he there miserably perished.

The like judgment also befell one of his Attendants, who threatening a certain
holy man called Aphraates, for his zeal and faithfulness in advising the
Emperor to forsake his Arianism, was in a very signal manner pursued by the
vengeance of God; for the Emperor willing him to go and make ready for him his
Bath, whilst he was preparing it, suddenly being stricken with madness, he
leaped into the Caldron of scalding water, and with fearful howlings woefully
died, his former Menaces so falling deservedly upon his own Pate.

In a word, the Persecution that was in those times only for this Cause of
Christ, raged so much through the whole Eastern parts, especially
Constantinople, that scarce was there any of the Heathens, Nero, Domitian,
Decius, or others that did or could in their greatest fury show greater cruelty
then the Arians did: But the jealous and the righteous God, who has said, his
Glory he would not give unto another, did not then suffer with impunity his
Glory to be taken from him by sinful men; for a miraculous hail was sent from
Heaven upon those parts of an extraordinary bigness, like stones in hardness,
which destroyed multitudes, both of men and Cattle, overthrew Cities, and with
a great Famine was Phrygia then utterly ruined.

Thus has the Lord from Heaven with his outstretched arm, appeared visibly in
the vindication of his great and glorious Name, and will surely do the like
again whenever it shall seem good unto him, (for he is the same still without
any change at all) so that the World may say, This has the Lord done, and it
is mavelous to behold; verily he is a God that judges the Earth.

And now briefly to make some Application of this: There has been and still is
a Generation of men in these times, of whom it may be said, as it was of
Belshazzer, Though they know all this, Dan. 5.22.23.
viz. That God has most remarkably manifested his displeasure from Heaven upon
the World, for this great rebellion against the Crown and Dignity of Jesus
Christ, yet do lift up themselves against the Lord of Heaven, and the God in
whose hand their breath is, and whose are all their ways they will not
glorify. And, oh that England would look about her, that this Treason against
the Lord Jesus Christ be not sound therein; for if this Iniquity should be
marked before the Lord, as an indeleble blot upon our Church and State, it
would undoubtedly be the forerunner of an over-spreading Desolation: The time
has been, not long since, when Socinianism grew to a very great height among
us (not that it was publicly professed, God forbid, we should ever be guilty
of such a Racevian Impudency) but it had taken such degrees, that he who was
most skilful to maintain it, and could propose doubts most Sceptically about
the Deity of Christ, Satisfaction for sin, and Imputation of Righteousness, was
amongst a sort of unstable Athenian Novelists, who were the Ringleaders of the
late Sect of Seekers, best accounted of for subtlety and acuteness of Learning;
yea, and Books also too many were printed and prepared for the Press,
containing most damnable blasphemy against the Son of God, insomuch that high
time it was to put a stop to the current of this pestilent Heresy: And
therefore was there a Canon expressly set forth against it in the year 1640.
confirmed by the Kings Authority. But afterward when a purer. Reformation was
cried up, and great pretensions made to rectify all things amiss amongst us in
a better way, to the credit and furtherance of the Gospel then ever had been
before; yet even then was there not instead of purging the Land of these
damnable Heretics, a more favorable indulgence given to some wretched
Desperado's of that Crew then was formerly, who in the face of the World both
pleaded and printed against the Divine Honor and Dignity of the Lord Jesus?
And albeit after too long a deliberation in determining Businesses of that
nature (for as Cyprian said in another case, so may we in this, In re tam
Sancta deliberatio non habet locum, Away with all deliberation in the high and
weighty Points of Faith.) Albeit, I say, there came forth at length some kind
of disowning of such persons, and their Fry of corrupt Tenets; yet was there
not a condign punishment inflicted upon them, according to their Demerits, that
others might hear and sear, and do no more such wickedness. And why? Liberty of
Conscience must be given, and a Latitude allowed unto men in points of
Religion; for a free People must not be beaten into the Faith, but rationally
convinced and persuaded unto it. By this Trick it was that a Politic Interest
was promoted, and by this Craft did the Devil gain upon the poor Church of
Christ. But I ask; Does God command in his Law that the Blasphemer be stoned to
death, Lev. 24.16.
and shall it be debated now, whether any punishment at all should be laid upon
such under the Gospel? Did he ever totally repeal that Law? Is not the matter
of it agreeable to the Dictates of Nature, and the Reason of it immutable? Is
not the Authority of the Law giver the same under both Administrations Old and
New? Are not the Consciences of Christians as well as Jews subject to his
Sovereign and perpetual Jurisdiction? Shall the clearer Light that we enjoy,
lead us to deal more favorably with such Miscreants, whose whole endeavor and
design is to obscure our Light? And because Christ has brought with him more
abundant Grace, should we therefore for his sake spare those that are open
enemies against him, pretending that we must express all meekness now under the
Gospel? Job 13.7.8.
What I beseech you were this but to speak wickedly for Christ, and to act
deceitfully for him? To accept the Person of the Mediator, and to contend for
him, unto the great dishonor of the Son of God? Yea further, shall a word
spoken against the Person or Authority of a Prince be accounted, Crimen laesae
Majestatis, a Crime of the highest nature, and be adjudged worthy of death (as
it does well deserve) and shall a black mouth with a virulent Tongue utter
blasphemous reproaches against the Person of God himself, and escape with
Stocks and Whipping? (As a horrid Blasphemer did in the City of Winchester, in
the time of the late Wars, whereof I my self with thousands more were
eyewitnesses.) Nay, was there ever any punishment at all laid upon that
blasphemous Best, Paul Beast
or Beast, I know not well which, but beast he might well be called) who openly
before those that then sat in the Commons House of Parliament, avowed his
heretical Tenet in denying the Godhead of Christ; which matter was to the grief
of many a faithful heart held in suspense a long time, yea so long, that
whereas there was much doubt then made concerning the Public Faith of the
Kingdom, it might rather have been questioned, whether the Christian Faith it
self should have been established in the Land, yea or no. And what became of
that abominable Fry, a Member of that Convention which was unduely called the
Parliament, who (as one tells us) had then blown his Blasphemy about the Nation
with his own Bellows: What befell him, I say, but only an Ejectment (so far as
I could learn) out of the house, wherein he with others had too long continued?
whereas he well deserved to be cast out of the Society of all the faithful
people of God.

I confess we do not at present hear so much of the croaking of these Frogs
that have crept out of the mouth of the Dragon, etc (for the Scene is now
changed, and the Devil has vomited out of the bottomless Pit, a sort of
quaking Locusts to act their part also against Jesus Christ) but I hope and
pray that the Lord will still incline the heart of his Majesty, our religious
King and Sovereign, Locustae sunt meticulosae. Job. 39.30.
whom he has hitherto preserved (blessed be his Name) and substituted under
him for that end, to be zealous for his Glory, and to be very vigilant in
suppressing such bold Insurrections against his Crown and Dignity, that none of
these his arch Enemies may be suffered to abide in the Land, least for their
sakes his jealousy (as it has done in former times) smoke against the whole
Nation. And for us, we have been long talking of Antichrist, Antichrist, how he
has grown upon us, and threaten much to root him out, and not to leave a ragg
remaining: But if in the mean time we should suffer Anti-Trinitarians,
Anti-Scripturists, and Socinians (who are Antichrists to purpose) to continue
amongst us, what are we in effect but mere Anticks in Religion? and our
pretended zeal for Reformation will indeed prove nothing else but talk.

But what the Consequents will be which undoubtedly will follow upon such a
perfidious Connivance, let the lamentable miseries that lately overspread the
Country of Poland declare unto us. It is well known that in Cracovia the
Metropolis of that Kingdom, Satan had erected his Throne, for there has this
abominable Heresy been revived, published and defended: And we have heard how
God did visit them in his sore displeasure, though he be now for a while gone
and returned to his place, till they acknowledge their offense and seek his
face. The Lord in mercy open their eyes that they may look into the bottom of
their Afflictions, and cast out from among them that accursed thing, with other
their Abominations, unto which they have been too inclinable, before Wrath
return again upon them to their utter destruction.

And let us and all Christian Kingdoms in this World take warning by them, for
assuredly God will not be mocked, but will have a Controversy with those
Nations, who assent unto this Doctrine of the Eternal Generation of the Son of
God, and yet out of a Supine negligence, or lukewarm indifferency will spare to
testify their zeal for the suppression of those blasphemous Heresies that are
contrary thereunto.

I shall conclude this first Interpretation of my Text, with the Exhortation of
the Prophet in the second Psalm; Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, Psalm. 2.10,
11, 12.
be instructed ye Judges of the Earth. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice
with trembling. Kiss the Son, least he be angry, and ye perish from the way;
when his wrath is kindled but a little: blessed are all they that put their
trust in him.

The second Interpretation of the TEXT. Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, to
day, and for ever; In a reference to the whole CREATION.
Adsis O JESV.
HEnce it is that Christ calls himself the Alpha and Omega, Rev. 1.11.
the first and the last: Being so in this sense, as well as in that
beforementioned. The first, because he is before all things, and by him all
things consist ( Col. 1.16.) The last, Col. 1.16.
in that he is after all things: Or, He shall stand the last on the earth, as
that place of Job may be rendered; or, with the last, Job 19.25. Es. 41.4. Col.
3.11.
as the Prophet phraseth it, that is, continuing with, or ruling this whole
World to the end of it. He is All, and in all, says the Apostle, in point of
eternal salvation; all meritoriously, all efficiently, all sufficiently: so
likewise is he All, and in all, in respect of the World, and the Creatures
therein: for all had been nothing without him, and all would fall to nothing
without him; the same good hand of his Power running constantly without the
least Retractation, or Interstitium through the whole from first to last, which
clearly demonstrates him what the Text proclaims him to be, viz.

The same yesterday, to day, and for ever. That is, The same in the work of
Creation. The same in the work of Preservation. The same in the work of
Restoration.


According to this triple Distribution of Time here in the Text, Yesterday, to
day, and for ever.

Let us therefore now consider these distinctly by themselves, that we may so
far as God shall be pleased to enable us, take an exact view of the
unchangeable power of the Lord Jesus, in order to the Creatures.

CHAP I. How the Text is Applicable to Christ in the work of Creation.
JEsus Christ is (...), the same mighty God, or the only He (as the word
signifies) in the work of Creation: he is that great Jehovah, as it has been
made to appear, that Ens entium, The beginning of the Creation of God; Rev.
3.14.
Not in a Passive sense, but Active, that gives a Being to all Creatures.
Therefore when this Jehovah says of himself ( Es. 48.12.) I am he, Es. 48.12.
I am the first, I am also the last: He presently infers, Mine hand has
laid the foundations of the earth, and my right hand has spanned the Heavens;
when I call them they stand up together.



Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa.
Talis agendo, qualis existendo, The same in working as in their existency one
with another; the Father is of himself, the Son is of the Father, the Holy
Ghost is of the Father and of the Son: so first the Counsel and Decree of the
Father precedeth, then the Son produces that Decree into Act, P.R. the Jesuit
in his Treatise of Mitigati on against Dr. Morton, tells us, that Bellarmine,
Valentia, etc. Charge Calvin with Arianism, for holding that Christ as he is
the second person of the Trinity, cannot properly be called the Creator of
Heaven and Earth; for that, say they implies that he is not God, nor equal to
his Father. Heb. 1.2.
then the Holy Ghost makes it effectual to all those ends and purposes, for
which it was ordained; not as if there were any priority among them, either in
respect of Dignity or Time: but the only wise God, being the God of Order, and
delighting therein, this Order is held in all proceedings amongst those three
Heavenly Estates (as it were) who are not, either in their Actions or
Existence, subordinate one to another, but only coordinate one with another.

Excellently therefore according to this Rule is this Order in the work of
Creation described by Arnobius, an Orthodox Writer of the Fourth Century: Ipse
dixit and facta sunt, hoc est, per verbum Dei facta sunt, Patre loquente, Filio
creante, and Spiritu Sancto animante: He spoke and it was done, that is, By the
Word of God were the Heavens and the Earth finished, and all the Host of them
by the Breath of his Mouth; the Father decreeing, the Son creating, the Holy
Ghost quickening. Or as Basil the Great at the same time sweetly interprets it,
In creatione cogita principalem causam little quae fi^nt Patrem, conditricem
Filium, perfectricem Spiritum Sanctum, In the work of Creation ever conceive
the first Mover thereof to be the Father, the working cause to be the Son, the
perfecting to be the Holy Ghost.

True it is, the Father is said to work by the Son (for by him, that is, the
Son, says the Apostle, Heb. 1.2. God made the World) yet that will not
necessarily imply (as the Arians impiously construe it) that the Son is only
ministerial or instrumental to the Father herein, as a Servant is to his Lord:
for this Preposition (Per) does sometimes also signify the very primary
efficient cause of a thing that is acted or done, v.g. A man may be said per
liberum arbritrium, by his free will to undertake a Design, his will though
cannot be counted as his Instrument in the matter he undertakes, but it is the
efficient Mover of his undertaking: And when a workman per rationem and Idaeam
Artis; that is, by his skill does perfect some rare artificial Piece, we do not
say, that his Reason or Skill was either his Tool or his Servant that he used
in his Work, but the very Spring or Principle from whence the Work received its
full and whole composure and formality; which is so far from being an
Impeachment of the Work-mans credit, that it rather tends to his greater glory.
So when the Father is said by the Son to create the World, the Son is not
thereby subjected to the form of a Servant unto the Father (as he was when he
undertook to redeem the World) but is declared thereby to be in all points
(...), a Co-worker with him, as the efficient cause of the Creation to the
glory of the Father, 1 Cor. 1.24
he being the wisdom of God, and the power of God, as says the Apostle.

And yet to make this clearer, we shall find that the said Preposition is in
Scripture sometimes used with a reference also even unto the Father, v.g. 1
Cor. 1.9. God is faithful, 1 Cor. 1.9.
(...), by whom ye were called into the fellowship of his Son. 2 Cor. 1.1.
And 2 Cor. 1.10. Paul calls himself an Apostle of Jesus Christ, (...), by the
will of God. Whereby surely is not meant that the Father is subservient in
either of these respects, but the first Mover and efficient cause in both: so
is the Son also in the work of Creation, though the Father is said to work by
him, for he says, John 5.17. My Father works hitherto, and I work: John
5.17.19.
And what things soever the Father does, these do the Son likewise, V. 19.

As the Father therefore is the sole Creator of all things, so in like manner
is the Son, John 10.30.
because the Father and the Son are both one, the Father by the Son, and the
Son from the Father, excluding only all Creatures in Heaven or in Earth from
having any concurrency herein. To conclude, Peter Lombard's sense concerning
this Point, or rather S. Chrysostom's quoted by him, will give us some clear
light in this Mystery; and it is indeed well worthy to be remembered by us: The
Father, Lib. 2. Did. 13.
says he, works by the Son, Quia tum genuit omnium opificem, Because he
begat him in that ineffable and eternal Generation the Creator of all things;
and if the Father be the cause of the Son, secundum quod Pater est, As he is
Father, much more is he the cause of those Creatures which are created by the
Son.

Hence it appears, John 5.26.
that as the Father has life in himself, and has given to the Son to have
life in himself; so the Father has this honor, so modo and ordine, In his
glorious Rank and Order to be the Creator of all things: and he has given to
the Son in his order likewise to be the Creator too; the like we may say also
of the Holy Ghost in his Order.

Since then it is the privilege of the Son by virtue of his Divine Generation
to be entitled to this Honor in an equality with the Father; let him be as
the Apostle calls him, (...), The Bringer forth of every Creature: Col. 1.15.
And (...), The Author, the Beginner, Rev. 3.14.
the Prince of the whole Creation, the (...), he, and none but he.

He it was that stretched forth the Heavens alone, Es. 44.24. Psalm. 104.9. Ps.
147.4.
and did spread abroad the Earth by himself; he made his Angels Spirits, and
his Ministers a flaming fire. He tells the number of the Stars, and calls
them all by their names: or, as it is rendered, Gives names unto them. He
prepared the Light and the Sun, Ps 74.16. Ps 104.19 Job 38.28, 29. Job 38.22.
Ps. 135.7 Ps 33.7. Ps. 24.1.
the Moon also he appointed for seasons. And what Father has the Rain but he?
Or who but he has begotten the drops of Dew? Out of whose Womb came the Ice?
And the hoary Frost of Heaven, who but he has gendred it? He created the
treasures of the Snow, the Hail and the Wind, and he laid up the Depth in
Storehouses. The Earth is his, and the fullness thereof (whether it be in the
Surface or in the Bowels of it) the round World, and they that dwell therein.
In fine, the Apostle sums up altogether, Col. 1.16. By him were all things
created that are in Heaven and that are in the Earth, visible and invisible,
Col. 1.16.
whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers, all
things were created by him, and for him. And the Evangelist agrees in the same
account, saying, All things were made by him, John 1.3.
and without him was not any thing made that was made.

Thus was Jesus Christ Yesterday, that is, in the beginning, (...), the only he
in the work of Creation: He himself undertook it without the assistance of
Angels, whom Saturnius, Basilides, Cent 2. cap 5.
and other Heretics of old would obtrude upon him, to be his Co-agents in the
Work.

And he was likewise the same in carrying on his work; there was no
variableness in him, whilst he continued in it, exercising his Divine Artifice
and Dexterity in the Magnitude, Variety, Multitude, Distinction, Order, Harmony
of his Creatures, which he produced one day after another till all was
finished. At which time he looked upon all with much complacency and delight,
beholding the Travel that he had gone over, and was satisfied therewith, not
retracting the least thing that had passed through his fingers (for he was not
ashamed of his Work) but set his Seal unto the whole, giving this Testimony of
it, That it was all very good. Genesis 1.31.
With men indeed there is a mavelous mutability in their Works, either they
are not able to perfect what they begin, and so are not the same when they have
wearied themselves about their work, as they were at first entrance upon it,
ashamed and vexed to see their expectations frustrated: As it was with Solomon,
after he had stretched forth his uttermost Abilities, (which in truth surpassed
all others) to extract the most exquisite Spirits and purest Quintessence for
his delight, which the variety of the Creatures could afford; how miserably
(alas) was he deluded? I locked (says he) on all the works that my hands had
wrought, R^. 2.11.
and on the labor that I had labored to do, and behold all was vanity and
vexation of spirit. Or else they are not wise enough to carry on their
Enterprises to such a progress and maturity, as may probably produce any
desirable Issue, being fain to sit down many times, re infecta, even as wise as
they began: or out of envy, they are not willing to impart their Experiments to
others; Plutarchus in vita Alex.
As Alexander would not have Aristotle to publish his Acroamatical Sciences:
for wherein (says he) shall we excel others, if those things which thou have
secretly taught us be made common to all? O! but the Lord Jesus Christ is the
same all along in his Works, showing forth the immutability of his Wisdom,
Coodness, and Power therein: for by his Wisdom he made the Heavens, and by his
Wisdom he made the Worms ( Genesis 1.25.) which though they may be generated by
corruption, Ps. 136.5. Genesis 1.25.
yet they had their Original by virtue of the Principles of the first
Production, caused by that Omnipotent Fiat which gave Being to all things; and
the smaller the Creature is, the more is the Divine Workmanship to be admired,
both in the shaping and in the using thereof. The Hebrews have an opinion (as
it is observed) that Enchanters cannot show their skill in little things, if
they be less then a Barley-corn; and therefore the Sorcerers of Egypt failed in
producing Lice. Exodus 8.18
But the Wisdom of the great Creator is the same in the smallest Creature of
the World, as in the greatest: the organical body of a little Ant is no less to
be wondered at then the huge body of Behemoth. His goodness also is the same
shining clearly throughout the whole Creation: It was not out of any need that
he began this Work, as if he could not have been perfect without his Creatures
(for he was from all Eternity' (...), sufficiently pleased with his own
Perfection) but willing he was that other things might have a Being, to the
end, he might communicate his Goodness unto them: And as he began this Work for
that end, so he continued still the same, for his Goodness extended over all
the World. He is good unto all, says David, and his tender mercies are ever
all his works, Ps. 145.9.
Psalm. 145. His Power in like manner was the same from first to last without
Diminution or Augmentation, without weariness or fainting, he rested not; that
is, He ceased not till he had finished all, and then pleased himself upon the
Sabbath Day, rejoicing in all the Works that he had made.

And now to sum up this whole matter, Jesus Christ we see is (...), the same in
the work of Creation.

First, The same with the Father in that eternal Counsel and Decree, from
whence all things had their first Rise and Original.

Secondly, The same with the Father in the execution of that Decree, framing
and fashioning every Creature in his Rank, placing them all in their several
Stations, exactly according to the primary Pattern and Tenor of that Decree.

Thirdly, The same without any Coadjutour in the mighty Work that he undertook,
his own and only Omnipotent Fiat gave a Being to the World, and all the parts
of it, without which they had never been.

Finally, The same from first to last, without any variableness or shadow of
turning, exercising his Divine Wisdom, Goodness, and Power throughout the whole
Creation.

Many are the Inferences that might be derived from this Consideration; but we
shall not extend our Discourse beyond the due boundary of the Text: Only
somewhat we will observe that may be for further edification.

First then this Doctrine may lead us to a further knowledge of our Lord and
great Redeemer JESUS CHRIST; for says the Apostle, Romans 1.20. The invisible
things of him from the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood
by the things that are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead.

Walk we therefore about this Creation, go round about it, tell the parts
thereof, mark well the beauty of the Frame, the admirable Order of this great
and goodly Fabric, consider the several Palaces that are set therein, for
Angels, for Men, and the various luster which the Lights do transmit; there
being one glory of the Sun, another of the Moon, and another glory of the
Stars, that we may know it for our selves, and tell it to the Generations
following, that Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised, his Greatness is
unsearchable. Ps. 145.3


It is indeed unto all the faithful people of God, whose hearts are raised up
to a spiritual elevation, a most pleasing kind of Geography (as a reverend
Bishop of our Church calls it) in this large Map of the created World, Bishop
of Chi.
in the Celestial and Terrestrial Globe, to contemplate the Creator: for, the
works of the Lord are great (says the Psalmist) sought out by all them that
have pleasure therein. Ps. 111.2.
But when in their search they happen to light upon the soot-steps of the
Creator by the whisperings of his Spirit (which is very frequent and common
unto them) O what an incomparable pleasure is it then to pursue the Tract, Hos.
6.3.
and to follow on to know the Lord? So does the Psalmist in the forecited
place, His work (says he) is honorable and glorious: Ps. 111.3.
and then follows, His righteousness endures for ever.

Which way of Divine Speculation through the Creatures, whereby we may ascend
in our Meditations above every name that is named, Ps. 83.19.
to the knowledge of him whose Name alone is Jehovah, has God himself caught
us: As when he instructed Job and would convince him of his rashness and folly
in his peremptory Argutations, making him also sensible of his own Almighty
Power, he brings the work of his Creation into remembrance before him, Job 38,
39, 40, 41.
viz. Things in Heaven, things in Earth, and things in the Deep.

When we shall now therefore consider the Heavens, not only this lower Heaven,
which in some sense may be called our Heaven, wherein we and other poor mortal
Creatures do breath, which we may feel with our hands, and wherein the Arm of
the most High is many times stretched forth in mighty Winds, and roaring
Thunders, and blazing Comets, able to make the very Pillars of the World to
tremble, yea, and to cool the courage and daunt the Spirits of all Atheistical
Caligula's: But those above especially which we see with our eyes at a greater
distance, so great, that it is a wonder (says a Contemplative Divine) we can
look up to so admirable a height, Bishop Hall
and that the very eye is not tired in the way (ascribed unto God by David as
his Peculiar, with this distinguishing term of Appropriation, Ps. 8.3.
Thy Heavens, Psalm. 8.3.) Those which are the curious and exquisite
Masterpieces of God's fingers; Amos 9.6.
for there (says the Prophet) has he built his Stories, that is, his Spheres
or Ascentions, from the Moon which is the lowest to the Stars, which is the
highest that can be discerned by men on Earth: in which regard (it may be,
though it be commonly taken for David's Night-meditation) these two are only
mentioned ( Ps. 8.3.) comprizing all the rest.

When we consider further the wonders of God in the Deep, wherein, says the
Psalmist, Ps. 104, 25, 26.
are things creeping innumerable both small and great Beasts: There go the
Ships, those moving Islands, which bring the several Nations of the World into
acquaintance one with another, which suck the abundance of the Seas, Deuteronomy.
33.19. Es. 23.3.
and Treasures hid in the Sand, which reap the Harvest of the Water far
surpassing the harvest of the Ground (the artificiallest Wonder that ever was
framed.) There goes that Leviathan (the wonder of that Nature, the King over
all the children of Pride) made to play therein, Job 41.
whose wonderful parts and comely proportion is admirably described by the
Tongue of the Learned, Bishop King upon Jonas.
even the learned Tongue that the Holy Ghost had (as one skilful in
Scripture-learning sweetly expresses it.) Yea, there are the goings of the
great God himself, whose Name is Wonderful; for the Sea is his, and he made it,
Ps. 95.5.
and his Spirit still moves upon these waters, as it did formerly: For, as a
King he sits upon the Water-floods, says the Psalm; his power and
providence walking constantly in state upon the Surface of them. Ps. 29.10.
And though the proud Waves do rage (that the very Mountains shake at the
swelling thereof) because they are stinted in their Current, Job 38.10, 11. Ps.
104.9
and cannot with a full carrere turn again to cover the Earth, yet he still
keeps them under his command, shutting them up with Bars and Bolts within their
decreed place, Jer. 3.22.
giving a charge to the poor inconsiderable Sand to be a boundary unto them;
and though they roar all like Bears and Lions, yet they are not able to pass
over it.

When we consider also the Earth the Center of the World, as it may be called,
how steadfast and immovable; That though it be founded on the Seas and
established on the Floods, Job 38.6. Ps. 104.5. Ps. 104.24.
yet the Cornerstone should be so surely laid, that the Foundation shall not be
removed for ever, How vast and inexhaustible the Treasures thereof are, it
being full of the Riches of God, How excellent and glorious the Attire
wherewith it is every year adorned, How fertile her Womb, from whence such a
numerous multitude of living Creatures do derive their Pedigree and Extraction,
Her uberous Breasts also still sending forth millions of streams to feed, as
with milk, both her young and old Fruit, In a word, How that from it is
ministered matter to defend or offend, feed or famish, cherish or starve, make
blind or receive sight, to overturn or build up, to procure health or sickness,
soes or friends, peace or war, pleasure or pain, sorrow or mirth, sleep or
watchfulness, sores or soundness, barenness or fruitfulness, life or death, and
what not?

When, I say, we consider these things, and amongst them all, in a more
especial manner, our selves, made indeed a little lower then the Angels, Ps.
8.5, 6.
but crowned with glory and worship, having dominion over the works of Gods
hands. How can we choose but be filled with admiration, and say, O Lord our
Lord, how excellent is thy Name in all the World? How glorious is thy Majesty?
How infinite is thy Power? How incomprehensible is thy Greatness? Thou who art
the great Jehovah, Exodus 15.11. Ps. 89.13.
the first born of every Creature, the (...), and the (...), that give a
Being to this All: Who is like unto thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in
praises, doing wonders? Surely thou have a mighty Arm, strong is thy hand, and
high is thy right hand. Let therefore all the Earth fear thy Name, Ps. 33.8.
yea, let all the Inhabitants of the World stand in awe of thee, and yield
their homage unto thee: And whatsoever is excellent in them, let them lay it at
thy feet, and say, Worthy art thou, Rev. 4.11.
O Lord, to receive glory and honor and power, for thou have created all
things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created.

Secondly, Since it is so, let then the Lord Jesus Christ enjoy that absolute
Sovereignty which he has (as his Peculiar) over all the Earth, to dispose of
it as seems good unto him: for it is the greatest right that possibly can be
in the world imagined, to have a peculiar Title to those things that are of
one's own making. Poor Creatures will stand much upon their Privilege herein:
Has not the Potter power over the Clay, of the same lump, when he has
prepared and fitted it for his use, to make one Vessel unto honor, and another
to dishonor? And has not the Gardener likewise liberty, when he has
contrived his Plat, in stretching forth his Line, and treading out his Beds and
Borders according to his mind, to dispose of them for his delight, planting and
transplanting, where and when, and as often as he pleases? Is it not lawful
for me, said the Master of the Vineyard, to do what I will with mine own? This
liberty is justifiable even by the Law of Nature. Seeing then that Jesus Christ
is the Creator of all things, and that therefore the Earth is his, and the
fullness thereof, having received from him both matter and form (which no
Creature in the world can contribute to the work of his hands) it is but very
meet and requisite that his power should be paramount at all times, in giving
of it to whomsoever he will; and that all men of what Rank soever, and to what
Right soever they do pretend, to be Paravale unto him.

In vain it is to make a flourish, and according to the fashion of the world,
in a proud insolent manner, to boast of our Pedigree and Ancestors, and that
such an Estate is derived unto me, through the prudence and providence of my
wise and careful Progenitors, whereby I have a Propriety in it, and therefore
to be perpetuated to me and my Posterity for ever. Alas, alas, these words are
but wind, empty and foolish, only they carry with them an arrogant encroachment
upon that supreme Right which belongs unto Jesus Christ; as if their present
possession (notwithstanding their frequent forfeitures by their multiplied
disobediences) did settle upon them such an entailment, as that it lay not in
the power of the Lord of the whole Earth, to make a re-entry whenever he
pleased, and to pass a new Grant unto others that are not of their House and
Lineage. But the wind shall blow no man to preferment, out of what quarter
soever it may arise: for the Prophet tells us, Psalm. 75.6. Promotion comes
neither from the East, nor from the West, Ps. 75.6.
nor from the South or Wilderness (as the word is rendered, containing both
North and South, Neque a desertis montibus says S. Hierom.
Canaan being on both side begirt with Deserts.) But God is the Judge in this
case, as well as in any else; He puts down one, and sets up another, V.
7. which he can and does justify very well, to the silencing of all
contradiction, even upon the account of his Creatourship: I have, says he,
Made the Earth, the Man and the Beast that are upon the ground by my great
power, and by my outstretched Arm, Jer. 27.5.
and have given it unto whom it seems meet unto me.

And thus have we seen how Jesus Christ is, (...), the same mighty God, or the
only He, as the word signifies, in the work of Creation.

CHAP II. How the Text is Applicable to Christ in the work of Preservation.
JEsus Christ is, (...), the same to Day in the work of Preservation and
Government of the World, which he was Yesterday in the work of Creation.

For, Non minor est virtus, quam condere, facta tueri, There is as much need of
power and wisdom to Preserve, as to Create. What avails it to plant a Garrison
without a Captain to defend it? To Rigg a Ship for the Sea without a Pilot to
guide it? To throw Seed into the Ground with an expectation of an increase at
Harvest, unless means be used to preserve it from the Incursions of wild
Beasts, which would utterly destroy it? So unless the Lord Jesus Christ be the
Preserver of that which he has created, be is not the same to Day which he was
Yesterday; his years are expired, that is, his Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, in
order to the Creatures have their period and determination. But who is he, and
where is he, that dares put this indignity upon the eternal and immutable
Jehovah? Will not common experience convince him, that the same good hand which
created all things has been ever and still is stretched forth in Upholding and
Preserving? Whence is it else that amidst such Variety, there is such excellent
Order still continued? Yea, that in such Contrariety, Confusion does not break
in, to the ruin of all.

Much might here be added, to show the constancy and immutability of Jesus
Christ in governing and preserving the World: But we shall now contract what
might be enlarged. The holy Scripture is clear in this matter, ascribing unto
Christ the power and sovereignty in ruling and preserving the whole Creation.
By him, says the Apostle, Col. 1.17.
does all things consist, visible and invisible: And the reason as I conceive
seems to be there annexed in the former words, viz. He is before all things;
like a Captain in the head of his Army, without whom they would be of no force,
but consume to nothing, like a Basis or Foundation in a Building, which as it
must have a priority in time before the Building, so being first laid, it
upholdeth all that is built upon it. To which also the Apostle alludeth, Heb.
1. when having made mention of the Worlds being made by Christ, he adds, That
he upholdeth all things by the word of his power: that is, his powerful Word;
which word is very emphatical, Heb. 1.3.
implying that in the things themselves there is no power, no virtue at all for
their own preservation, but that it is his Rule, Order, Wisdom alone, that
keeps the World upright. For as in a Structure, the stones and other materials
cannot subsist in the Building by any qualities or inherent virtues of their
own, but only by the subsistence which they have upon the Foundation; So is it
in the World, the several Creatures that are therein could never of themselves
hold together with that exact Symmetry, Comeliness and order, that appears
amongst them, but would certainly run headlong to ruin, were it not for the
mighty Word of command that ruling Virtue which constantly issues out from
Jesus Christ, whereby they are upheld and sustained.

His mighty Power it is alone that upholdeth the Earth, that stretches out the
Heavens, that sends forth the winds, that raises up the high and great Waves
of the Sea, and again says unto them, Peace and be still. Yea, in the very
smallest things is his Power and Providence in governing and ordering the World
exercised, and made known: He it is that makes the Feather to move, Mat.
10.29, 30.
his mighty hand leads the Fly in her way; yea more, the same force which now
shakes a Leaf, if he had sent it against a Mountain, it would have turned it
up from the foundations: and the same strength that blows up the Dust, if it
came against the whole Earth, it would shake the bottoms of it. For it is not
the natural (...), as the Philosopher calls it, that is, as some interpret it,
the continual progressive Agitation, or perfect Adeption of the Creatures that
makes them run on in their course. But it is that Omnipotent Arm that gave a
Being to all things, that orders and disposes the motion of them all, as
seems good unto him. And for their parts, they are willingly subject unto his
commands: When he says, Go, they go, when he says, Come, they come, when he
says, Do this, they do it (as cheerfully as ever the Centurion's Servant did
what his Master appointed him) though many times they be put upon Services
contrary to their ordinary course, and those natural Instructions which they
received in the Creation; for they are sensible of the power of their Lord, and
in order to his Glory, and their own preservation, do unanimously agree that
his Wisdom must not be controlled.

To conclude, Ps. 36.6.
He it is (says the Psalmist) that preserves Man and Beast; for he having
created all, all things therefore must be under his Inspection and Care: yea,
it is his glory and honor to be the (...), the only He, in guiding and
governing and preserving the World, as well as in creating it; which honor we
find given unto him by the Prophet, Ps. 40.26.
He that created these things brings out their Host by number, he calls
them all by names, by the greatness of his might, for that he is strong in
power, not one fails: And when he calls them, Es. 48.13.
they, like dutiful Servants, stand up together, Es. 48 13.

We shall not proceed any further in the confirmation of a Point so clear, only
answer a Cavil conceived and produced in these times through a
misunderstanding of the Sovereign power of Christ over the Creatures. In which
mistake (since he did, as it is manifest give a Being to the World, and
thereupon had free liberty to order and govern it, as seemed good unto him) we
shall make it appear, they do not only strike at the Mediatory Scepter of the
Lord Jesus, but at his Wisdom also in the management of his natural Dominion.
Which being done, we shall come to derive some inferences from what has been
said concerning this matter for our further edification.

Moses) not able himself to bear all the people alone? Is he not wise in heart,
and mighty in strength to manage his own power? Does he govern the whole Host
of Heaven by his immediate Scepter, and must he have Coadjutours in Office with
him to rule over men? Far be it from us to judge so meanly of this great
Preserver of Men. Away therefore with Kings, and all the Powers that are upon
Earth: Down with Magistracy what ever it be, that is of a Humane Constitution
set up in Competition with him; we have no King but Jesus, for in him we live
and move and have our being: To him then alone be Glory for ever, Amen.

Witness himself; he says it once, yea, twice; once in the Law, and a second
time in the Gospel without Retractation, that Power and Dominion belongs unto
him; and whosoever they be that say the contrary, That they will not have him
to reign over them, let them be executed in his presence for Rebels and
Traitors. So then a hearty Concurrency is readily yielded to the exalting of
the Lord Jesus; neither shall there be any Name whatsoever in heaven or in
Earth, named by us at any time to the derogation of Christ's Honor. We will
call no man King upon Earth, as we are to call no man Father, or Master;
because one is our King. Father, Master in Heaven, that is, Christ, Mat. 23.9,
10.
Mat. 23.9, 10

Sed appellamus Christum, We appeal notwithstanding unto Christ himself,
whether that be to be judged any encroachment upon his Natural Sovereignty; or,
if they will, any Diminution of his Donative Power, which is according to his
own appointment in a way of subordination unto him: And such is that Magistracy
and Government which has been, is, and I doubt not (what ever Phantasticks do
dream) but shall be in the world over men unto the end of the world.

Had this absurd Paralogism against Magistracy been vented by the professed
enemies of Jesus Christ, it had been no strange thing: but it may well be
accounted the firstborn of wonder and astonishment, that people pretending to
knowledge, piety, zeal, and who are said in some measure to order their
Conversations according to such pretensions, yet should suffer themselves to be
so strongly deluded, as to disclaim the present dispensation of Christ's power
in governing the world, which is concordant with what is written, and to wait
for another which is not clearly revealed; yea, which is utterly inconsistent
with the safety of mankind.

Admit though Magistracy be in respect of it form (...), a humane Creature;
nay, I will say more, Though it may be in respect of the abuse, (...), a
devilish Creature, yet it is (...), for the Lord. 1 Pet 2.13 Romans 13.4.
The Magistrate of what form soever he be, has his Commission from Heaven: He
is the Minister of God (says the Apostle) to thee for good. And as Jeheshaphat
spoke of Judges, so may we say of all in Authority, They Judge not, at least
they ought not to judge, pro arbitrio, or pro populo, 2 Chronicles. 19 6.
either to please themselves or the people, but for God, that is, they are in
Gods stead, Vices Domini Gerentes, as Junius glosseth it, Gods Vicegerents,
doing his work, representing his person, and executing what he himself commands.

Now though this that has been said, might be sufficient to stop the mouth of
this Cavil, and put to silence the ignorance of those that will insist upon it;
yet since this matter of Civil Government is of so great Import, that the
Honor of the Lord Jesus Christ himself, as he is the Creator and Governor of
the world, together with the preservation of the peace, safety, and prosperity
of all Mankind, is interwoven therein; And seeing there are risen up in these
times a sort of people, who under a pretense of making way for a fifth Monarchy
(as they call it) despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities; and in regard
that the Constitution and Conservation of Government amongst men, is a most
eminent product and Emanation of that Divine providence that rules and guides
all things, I shall upon this occasion of giving an answer to the said
Objection, without any impertinent or unprofitable Deviation from the matter in
hand, demonstrate at large the undoubted verity of this following Proposition,
Viz.

Government is an Ordinance of Divine Appointment, Proposition
made to be subservient unto Christ in his great work of Preservation, and for
that end, to be continued so long as the world endures.

True it is, as Mediator, Christ has this Paramount Authority, and in that
regard all Government in the world is subordinate unto him. But it is as true,
this supremacy in the ordering of the world, is more eminently in him, as he
gave a Being to all things. And therefore they that would take away Magistracy
and Government among men (which we shall prove (Ab Origin) to be of his own
Institution) do more especially sin against the Godhead of Christ: This being
premised, let us proceed.

And for our more orderly handling of this Proposition, let us consider it in
the several parts thereof, which are three.

1. Government is an Ordinance of Divine Appointment. 2. It is ordained to be
subservient unto Christ. 3. Christ will have this subservient Order to be
continued to the end of the world.
First, That Government is an Ordinance of Divine Appointment, 1. Branch
is testified both by the written and unwritten word of God, that is, by
Scripture and Nature.

The holy Scripture does give abundant witness hereunto. Not to multiply
places, consider we that of Prove. 8.15.16. where Wisdom, that is, Christ
utters his voice in this manner; Pro. 8.15, 16.
By me do Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice, by me Princes rule and
Nobles, even all the Judges of the earth. From Christ then it is, that they
have their power, so that they may say, It is he that has made us, and not we
our selves, he, and not others, no, not the people; for it is not in the
peoples choice, whether they will have Government or no, no more then it is in
their choice, whether they will make use of their ordinary food for their
preservation.

Again, It is an Ordinance of God, says the Apostle, Romans 13.1, 2.
Romans 13.2. And, there is no power but of God, V. 1. where we are to know, that
to be of God in the Apostles sense, must not import, as some will have it, a
merely permissive Counsel or providence, but a divine Approbation,
Authorization and Vocation, otherwise the Apostle had said no more for
Magistrates in this Charter, then the Scripture elsewhere says of Plagues,
Famines, and other judgments, yea of the sins of men, which in the first and
larger sense are said to be of God too, 2 Samuel 24.1. 2 Chr. 25.20. Add hereunto
those honourary Titles which the Holy Ghost gives unto Magistrates, calling
them Gods, Ex. 22.28. Ps. 82.1.6. John 10.34, 35. Angels of God, 2 Samuel 14.17.
2 Samuel 19.27. Ministers of God, Romans 13.4. Nursing fathers, etc. of the Church,
Es. 49.23. Saviors, Judge. 3.9. Neh. 9.27. The shields of the earth, Ps. 47.9.
etc. etc. All which do plainly argue a divine Authorization and Approbation of
Magistracy, and that the Office, Order, Institute of it is of God.

Besides this testimony of Scripture, Nature does likewise witness the same
unto us; For even that also is a Teacher sent of God, 1 Cor. 11.14.
therefore the teachings thereof are not to be slighted. Does not Nature it
self teach us, that Government and Order in the world are appointed by God
himself, being observed by the Creatures, without the imposition of any written
Law? For we find not only men (yea even the most barbarous among men) to have
this Principle engraven upon their Spirits, That a people without government
are in the ready way to ruin; and therefore do in their practice with one
consent. and with much complacency submit themselves thereunto, but even the
glorious Angels above us, and those Creatures below us, are not, nor ever were
without Order; Order being (as the Philosopher says most truly) the very Soul
of the World, without which it would be nothing but a deformed Lump, no more
active to the glory of the Creator, then a dead body is to any vital
operations. The Angels are called the Heavenly Host, which implies, that there
are Degrees amongst them; Luke 2.13.
for we know if Order be withdrawn from an Army, it has no good composition;
And if there be Order among the reprobate Angels, much more surely is there
among the Elect. Mat. 12.24, 26, 27. Mat. 25 41
The Creatures likewise in their kind exercise Authority, and have their
Superiors and Inferiors in every several Species (even upon this account,
Nature teaching every thing to seek its own preservation.) If we search into
the Deep, Hab. 1.14.
though the Fishes there have no Ruler (that is, as may be conceived, Humane,
as the Creatures on Earth have) we shall find among the Inhabitants there a
Leviathan, as being the Prince of the rest, of whose parts and power and comely
proportion (implying his excellency and superiority above others) we may read
at large, Job 41. If we survey the Earth we may see the Lion which is the
strongest among Beasts, and turns not away for any, Pro. 30.30
to have obtained the pre-eminence, majesty sitting enthroned in his very
looks, and when he roars all the Beasts of the Forest do tremble. Behold the
princely Eagle, making his Nest on high, Ales Jovis.
for quickness of sight, and swiftness of wing, and nobleness of nature,
advanced above other Birds: Yea, the Cranes, Birds of a subordinate feather (as
the natural Historians writes of them) choose out among themselves a Leader,
whom they use constantly to follow. Even among Trees has Nature put a kind of
order, some by a sympathy flourishing most when they are contiguous; others by
an antipathy not prospering at all when they are planted together: some not
enduring to stand under the shadow of others, as being contrary to that order
which was at first prescribed unto them, Annosae Quercus. The ancient Druides,
etc. great Admirers of the Oak.
and others choosing to thrive best under the shadow of their Superiors.
Amongst them all, the Royal Oak has most right to the Precedence, for
largeness, strength, and long continuance.

But especially to instance in the Bees, who, though they may seem to be but
almost the shadow, rather then the substance of a very small living Creature
(so Pliny calls them) yet may be exemplary to the world both in their order and
industry: Of them we may say, inverting the words spoken of the Locusts, Pro.
30.27.
They have a King and go forth all of them by bands, to whom they yield a most
exact obedience. It has been observed by experience, that if by his voice he
bids them go, they immediately swarm; if being abroad he dislike the weather or
lighting-place, they quickly return home again; while he cheereth them to the
battle they fight; when he sounds a Retreat, they retire into their Castle:
while he is well, Rege mortuo maret Plebs, non Cibos con vehit, non procedit.
Tristi tantum murmr Glomeratur circa corpas ejus.
they are cheerful about their work: if he droop and die, they will never
after enjoy their home, but either languish there until they be dead with him,
or else yielding themselves to the Robbers fly away with them. In their work
every one has his office, some trimming the Honey, some working the Wax,
diverse watching at the Gates to keep out enemies, others correcting the Drones,
some hew, others polish, and that so artificially, that as one says, Daedalus
could not with greater art or excellency, better dispose the orders, measures,
proportions, distinctions, joints, and circles. In the night they take their
rest, and when the day is sprung, Noctu qui^s in matutinum donec una excitat
gemino ant Triplies Bombo ut Buccino aliquo Pliny.
they have an Officer to call them up with humming twice or thrice, as with the
sound of a Trumpet. All this and much more does Pliny in his Natural History
report of these little Birds. We may then go to the Bees, consider their ways
and be wise in this particular, viz. That God has appointed government and
order to be amongst his Creatures for their preservation.

But I have gone too far with this admirable Creature, though indeed such is
the excellency and sweetness of it, that if a man undertook to go with it a
mile, I cannot see how he could choose, but he must go with it twain. A
Digression I confess, but I hope no transgression, unless it be in transcribing
a little of what some Authors have written, and possibly somewhat out of their
own experience and observation. To return therefore from whence we have
digressed; if both Scripture and Nature, which I call the written and unwritten
Word of God, do so clearly dictate unto us, that Government and public
Authority is an Ordinance of Divine Appointment: men had best beware how they
trample upon it, least they be found fighters against God.

Yea, we may moreover from hence also infer, that that form of Government which
is most honorable ought to be best esteemed, and chiefly desired by men to be
set up over them even upon this account, that the Ordinance of God might have
its due luster, and that the Divine Wisdom in the establishment thereof, might
be the more magnified before the Sons of men. Meet it is that God should be
honored with the best, as the purest Oil, the finest I lower, the fattest
Cattle, were of old the fittest for God. So in like manner is the best
Magistracy. And if the Powers that be, are not only ordained of God, but are
his Representatives also to the people (as undoubtedly they are) then surely
that which is the highest and most honorable is the most proper representation
of his glorious Majesty that can be of that nature in the World.

The Regal Power is without all question the most eminent in the World, yea it
is so in the account of the Holy Ghost himself; for when the Lord in the 16 of
Ezekiel, had reckoned up many blessings wherewith he had enriched his people
(which though they may carry in them a spiritual sense, yet they do withal
plainly express that outward splendor and dignity which they had among other
Nations) at length he brings in that which he judged to be the height of their
glory in these words, Ezekiel. 16.13.
And thou did prosper into a Kingdom. Implying that beyond this they could
not aspire, neither had he himself ordained for a people upon earth any higher
honor.

Add unto this that Promise which God made unto Abraham, viz. That there should
be Kings of his Race, Genesis 17.6.
which no sober minded man will deny but that it was intended for him as one of
the greatest temporal blessings that he could be capable of.

Briefly (to insist upon no more, because this Point has of late been
sufficiently cleared by others. Mr. Prinn, etc.
) Is not the Lord Jesus Christ called the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, as
being his honor to have those that are of the highest estimation to be
Subjects unto him? Which being so, it should be the desire and ambition of all
the people in the world to be ruled by those persons who are entitled to this
subjective Regality: And when Divine Providence shall with a strong hand and a
stretched-out Arm lead them unto it (as it has done us here in this Kingdom
and the Nations of our Vicinity for many Generations) it will certainly be
their sin, if they should not submit cheerfully unto it, as it was the sin of
the people of Israel, when they out of a diffidence of Gods care and protection
of them, and out of an Apish imitation of other Nations would in an
unseasonable, preposterous, and tumultuous manner be catching at it.

And now all this considered, how can a people with any serenity of Conscience,
profess Godliness, and yet speak reproachfully of the Kingly Office, yea
account it Antichristian, as some have done, proclaiming open Hostility against
it? Were it indeed Heterogeneous to the Divine Ordinance of Civil Government,
or incongruous to the times of the Gospel, or prejudicial to the interest of
the Saints, as it is said to be, or an impeachment in the least degree to the
Dignity and Prerogative Royal of the Lord Jesus Christ himself, either in
respect of his Natural or of his Donative Kingdom, such persons might proceed
upon warrantable grounds to proclaim their dislike in that kind; But it may now
appear to all the World, that the clamor which is raised against Regal Power
upon any of these before-named accounts, is altogether causeless and of no
moment. It will not be expedient here to examine them severally (for in so
doing we should make too large a digression) happily we shall meet with them
obiter, in our way, wherein the inadvertency, or to say truly, the Seditious
frowardness rather then the godly zeal of the Authors and Abettors of these
Complaints, will be made manifest unto all men.

In the mean time I cannot but protest against that pernicious Paradox which
has been vented by a leading Divine, as he was accounted in these late times
of Error and Rebellion amongst us, J. O.
who in a Sermon preached at S. Margarets Westminster, and afterward Printed,
says thus; The Lord had of old erected a Kingly Government in the House of
David, not for any eminency in the Government it self, or for the Civil
Advantage of that people, but that it might be a Type of the Spiritual Dominion
of the Messiah, and so was a part of their Paedagogy and Bondage as was the
residue of their Types every one of them; and consequently this form of
Government not to be of any use in the time of the Gospel.

Were this true, we then who are now of the Church of God, as that people were
before us, acknowledging this Messiah to be come according to the Promise, may
indeed have just cause to say of that kind of Government, as the Apostle does
of Circumcision, If we should allow of it, Christ shall profit us nothing, the
substance being come, what should the shadow of a King do unto us? But I hope
that those who have through the subtlety of Satan been misled into this
Opinion, will hereafter find cause to retract it, when they shall remember that
the rule of the Gospel (to which they pretend an exact Conformity) requires
them to pray, and to give thanks for Kings, which as the Apostle says, is good
and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3.
1 Timothy, 2.1, 2, 3. However seeing that Wisdom puts forth her Voice, crying at
the Gates, at the entry of the City, at the coming in at the Doors, saying, By
me Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice; by me Princes rule, and Nobles,
even all the Judges of the e^rth. Seeing, I say, this sound is heard from
Heaven every day in the Consciences of men, Wisdom will herein be justified of
all her children. And let this serve to terminate the first part of my
Proposition, viz. Government is an Ordinance of Divine Authorization.

Secondly, It is ordained to be subservient unto Christ in the dispensation of
his power and providence toward the preservation of Mankind. 2. Branch.


For though Christ be All in all, Col. 3.11.
as the Apostle speaks, Col. 3. yet to show himself to be the Lord of all, he
has ordained means to be subservient unto him in all the works of his
Providence, and has accordingly made use of them. To this purpose says the
Son of Sirach very pertinently; Ec. 38.2, 3, 4, 5.
Of the most High comes healing, yet the Physician must be honored with that
honor that belongs unto him: The Lord also has created Medicines out of the
Earth, and he that is wise will not abhor them: He has given skill unto men
that he might be honored in his mavelous works; with such does he heal men,
and takes away their pains, of such does the Apothecary make a Confection,
etc. Hence it is, as the Prophet Jeremy speaks, Jer. 23.25
That his Covenant with Day and Night, and the Ordinances of Heaven and Earth
concerning their disposition, motion, order, influences, virtues, and
operations, are inviolable. They continue this day, says the Psalmist,
according to thine ordinance, Ps. 119.91
for all are thy servants; not as if his Paramount Authority and power were
thereby any whit diminished (rather it is advanced) nor as if he were
necessitated thereunto for want of power in himself (for we may see the course
of Heaven, etc. has sometimes been inverted by him, Indulgentiae est, non
indigentiae, non efficaciam quaerit sed congruentiam.
Ex. 14.16. John 3.16. 2 Reg. 10.1. Dan. 3.25.) But of his own free will in the
abundance of his goodness it is, that he governs and preserves Creatures by
Creatures, using the ministry of second Causes; for in their present poor
estate wherein they are in this world, his own immediate hand and power would
soon prove intolerable unto them. Who alas among us here can dwell with
devouring fire? Who among us can dwell with everlasting burnings?

Goodness then and mercy it is, that is the ground of this Dispensation from
Heaven toward poor creatures of all sorts; but there is no creature under the
Sun, unto whom the Lord has so much respect, as he has to Mankind: all other
indeed have their being, and their well-being (whatsoever it is) from him, as
has been said before. But Man is his Favorite, the Masterpiece of his wisdom,
power, and goodness, the work of his Faciamus, not barely of his Fiat, as other
Creatures were: in him he challenges a special propriety, accounting him his
own in a peculiar manner; for in that sense I conceive that place of the
Evangelist, John 1.11. He came unto his own, John 1 11.
etc. is to be understood, viz. with a reference not unto any particular people
(as it is commonly interpreted of the Jews, the Context about it utterly
excluding that Interpretation) but unto Mankind, that is, to his Rational
Creature, whereof he being (...), The man, per excellentiam, 1 Timothy 2.5.
1 Timothy 2.5. as being the Original of the whole Species) that is, the Spirit
and Life) he therefore like a good Father makes provision for his own, that
they may live under him quietly and peaceably one with another.

In order hereunto did this great Jehovah himself in the beginning rule over
man, exercising his absolute Sovereignty, as seemed good unto him, keeping
Court, as we may say, and proceeding against Delinquents, Adam, Eve, Cain, the
old World, and there was none in a political Subordination unto him; for God
gave Sovereignty to Adam over Fishes and Birds, Genesis 1.28. Pastores pecorum
magis quam Reges gentium. Genesis 11.25.
etc. not over Creatures made to his own likeness: And the first Righteous men
we read of were rather Shepherds and Herdmen over Beasts, then Kings over
Nations, the name of Servant never imposed in Scripture, till Noah bestowed it
upon his accursed Son, saying Cursed be Canaan, a servant of servants shall he
be unto his brethren. (Remarkably not Cham, though the Offendour, possibly
because he was one of the old World, not to be brought under such a censure)
whereupon it is probable, as one makes the Collection, Nomen illud culpa
meruit, non Natura, it was not Nature that brought that Denomination into the
World, but sin.

So that it appears The Lord alone, as says the Psalmist, was our King of
old, and for a space the justice that was done upon earth he did it himself. In
those days (to speak of this matter in the words of Moses) In those years of
many Generations, when the most High (not Adam, Deuteronomy. 32.7, 8.12.
Seth, Enos, or any of the rest) divided to the Nations their Inheritance, when
he separated the Sons of Adam, the Lord alone was at that time the Leader, and
there was no strange God with him. But in that golden Age there rose up a
Generation of. Rebels, the Progeny of that Renegado Cain, who would not submit
themselves to that incomparable Government, which was then established in the
World; but contrary to the Crown and Dignity of Heaven, Genesis 6.11, 12, 13. of
Jesher, signifying righteousness or uprightness. Genesis 6.3.
corrupted their ways and filled the whole Earth with their Violence, Genesis
6.11, 12, 13. This Jeshurun whom God made upright, Ec. 7.29. grew lawless and
unruly, and like a fatted Bullock kicked against his Ieeder. Now therefore
because God would not have his Spirit always to strive in that way and kind
with man who was but flesh, Genesis 6.3. He was pleased (after he had made himself
known by the Judgment which he executed upon the World of the ungodly) to
constitute a subordinate Power in his stead, giving out his Decree for the
confirmation of it in these words; Who so (hereafter) sheddeth man's blood, Genesis
9.6.
by man shall his blood be shed. The judicia^y form of Gods proceeding against
Man-slayers before, was not it seems to transmit them over to men to be
punished, nor himself to punish them with death, Genesis 4 15.23.24.
as may be seen in the case of Cain and Lamech. But now man is ordained to be a
Servant unto God herein, and to execute upon those of his own kind the Judgment
written; yet not every man neither (for there is an express Law to the
contrary, Thou shall not kill) this honor has the Magistrate, who under God
has Jus vitae and necis, Power to punish and to preserve, according to the
laws and orders given him by his Superior, that is, Jesus Christ who is King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

Irenaeus a holy and peaceable Servant of the Church in the Primitive times,
gives us his judgment concerning the Introduction of this subordinate Power
into the World in these words; Because man would not know the fear of the Lord,
therefore did God, put upon him the fear of man, that so fearing humane Laws,
men should not devour and consume one the other, as the manner of Fishes is.

Clearly then, the Powers that be are ordained of God; and not only so, but he
who exercises the power, let him be of what form soever in respect of the
power, or of what profession soever in respect of Religion, or by what lawful
way soever he came at first to be vested in his Authority, whether by Conquest
or by Contract, or by Election or by Inheritance; he, I say with the Apostle,
is the Minister of God: yea and more then so, he is the Minister of God to man
for good, (...), Romans 13.4. Rom 13.4.
The Article there added is very emphatical, noting the good which it attends
upon, to be very remarkable.

If it be demanded, what is that Good? I answer, much every way. Look what good
the Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ was to bring unto the Sons of men, if he
himself had still continued his Personal Reign among them, the same (I say, not
in a gradual sense, but Analogical) is to be and undoubtedly shall be, if the
sins of men do not hinder it, the blessed effect of those subordinate Powers
that are now under him throughout the World.

If any shall desire to see this General branched out into particulars, they
may take notice of a fourfold good that under Christ accrueth unto men by
Government, viz. Natural, Moral, Civil, Spiritual.

Natural; Is it not good to have our Lives, and the Lives of our Posterities
preserved and secured against the rage and fury of unreasonable men, whose feet
are swift to shed blood, as Solomon speaks, Pro. 1.16.
Pro. 1.16? This is the fruit of Government.

Moral; Is it not good to have Wickedness suppressed, and Righteousness
encouraged and advanced? For Righteousness (says Solomon) exalts a Nation,
but sin is the shame of any people. Pro. 14.34
This also is the fruit of Government.

Civil; Is it not good that Laws and Ordinances be established? (for where no
Law is (to invert the Apostles word) there will be all kind of Transgression)
Laws, I say, by virtue whereof men may sit quietly and safely under their Vines
and Figg-trees, and enjoy the good of all their labors, live peaceably
together, Mich. 4.4.
holding society one with another, thereby preserving the honor of Mankind,
which of all Creatures under the Sun is the most lovely and most loving one to
another, if the malice of Hell did not mingle with them. This again is the
fruit of Government.

Spiritual; It is very good doubtless that true Religion should prosper and
flourish in a Nation, that the Ordinances of Divine Worship be set up in their
purity; for this is the glory of a people. But what alas would become of this
Glory, were it not for Government? Authority maintains Piety, Government
preserves Christianity: And therefore may we say, that the fifth Commandment
which establishes Authority in the world, is very well placed in the midst of
the Decalogue, to be, as it were, a Guard to all the rest.

It was well noted by one, Mr. Nath. Ward.
that where Dominion fails, Religion also fails with it; it fails Officially,
it fails Theorically, it fails Practically: It fails Officially, 1 Chr 23. 1
Chr. 24.19. Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Reg. 12.31.
David divided the Priesthood into their Courses and Offices, and as it is
said, 1 Chr. 24.19. These are their Orderings. Christ has done the like in the
Gospel, Ephesians. 4.11. But when Authority failed, these Orderings failed. In the
time of Jeroboam the lowest of the people were made Priests, such as were not
of the Sons of Levi; who ever would might be Consecrated: And has not sad
experience proved this to be too true in the Churches of Christ too frequently
in latter times? It fails Theorically, In the times of those lamented Kings,
when there came such overturnings one upon the neck of another, Ezekiel. 21.25,
26. Zeph. 3.4.
Ezekiel. 21. The Law of God was prevaricated, They offered violence to the Law,
says the Prophet, Zeph. 3.4. So in the time of the Maccabees, the Law gathered
so much corrupt dross and false glosses, that Christ takes much pain to refine
it. It fails Practically, In the time of the Judges when Authority declined,
Piety degenerated, Judge. 17.6
There was no King in Israel, and what follows? Every man did what was right in
his own eyes: they took what Gods, what Priests, what Concubines, what
Heritages, and undertook what War they pleased.

So then we see what good does arise by Government in a way of subserviency to
Jesus Christ. And let this suffice to be spoken of the second Particular, viz.
That Government is ordained to be subservient to Christ in the dispensation of
his power, for the good of Mankind. And if it be so good, as it has been made
to appear, it must needs be very bad to profess enmity against it, or to take
it away: But taken away it shall not be, notwithstanding the vain surmises of
men of corrupt minds; for it follows in the third place which comes now to be
considered. 3. Branch.


Christ will have this subservient Order to be continued so long as the World
endures.

An Assertion that may be maintained against the World, if the World should be
so mad as to hold the contrary: and indeed a necessity there is to appear in
the maintenance of it.

Because a sort of Antimagistratical Spirits have been conjured up in these
times, who, under a pretense of setting the Lord Jesus Christ in his Throne,
would bring in Anarchy and confusion, destroy all Order and Government among
men, and as their Song is, Overturn, Overturn, Overturn. Inconsiderate persons
that weigh not the Consequents of their misguided zeal, how much disservice
they do unto Jesus Christ, and how much they gratify that Antichrist of Rome,
against whom yet they will not spare to proclaim an irreconcilable fiend.

First, That instead of honoring the Lord Jesus Christ in subjecting the World
under his immediate Government, they do a very great Disservice unto him, is
manifest in that they would vest him with a power which is inconsistent with
his present Economy, and which he in that respect as he is Mediator, utterly
disclaimed, When he said, My Kingdom is not of this World; If any shall reply,
It is true, it was not then, but it shall be before the end comes. John 18.36.
The words of our Text will rise up with full strength, contradicting this
Reply, viz. Jesus Christ is the same Yesterday, to Day, and for ever. And
whether we should give heed to this Recent Opinion, concerning Christ's
Monarchy upon earth, which implies a change in the Administration of his
power; or to the words of the Holy Ghost, which tell us there shall be no such
change at all, judge ye.

I deny not but the Divine power may act more vigorously in the hearts of those
that are in Authority toward the end, then it has done formerly: But that
there should be any immediate Act thereof continued without a humane
subserviency since he has in wisdom ordained this as a Mean to exercise his
Sovereign power amongst the children of men, is not to be granted. And if
Christ were to have such a Dominion, as these foolish people imagine, it will,
I hope, be agreed upon, that it must be for the carrying on of the same
Interest, which he has already undertaken, otherwise he would not be (...),
The same. And what that Interest is, is apparent, viz. The enlargement of his
Peoples happiness, and the subduing of his Enemies; both these in a way of
Subordination to his Fathers Glory, yet neither of them to be obtained in the
exercise of such a Dominion, as is by these ascribed unto him. As for his
people, their desire is, or at least ought to be, that they might follow his
example, as he already led them the way without intangling themselves (more
then needs must) in the things of this World, which would rather be a
hinderance unto them then a furtherance. They are not, nor will not be taken up
with the muddy vanities of this present life; all their minds are upon home,
and their Fathers house is that which they long after, and for the present, the
happiness which they court and desire here, is to find the Kingdom of Christ
more enlarged within them, and the spreading of the Gospel more and more in the
Nations, which are things that they prefer before any outward glory by many
degrees; But how these may be furthered by such a Monarchical Government, the
holy Scripture shows not. Neither are his Enemies to be subdued thereby. That
Almighty power which shall bring them down, is not so straightened, but that
they may be made to lick the dust, though the Lord Jesus Christ be the same
that he is for the present even to the end of the world. He that has done
wondrous works in the Land of Ham, and fearful things by the Red Sea, that
could send his Angel, who in one night could destroy in the Camp of the
Assyrians a hundred fourscore and five thousand men, can ease himself still of
his Adversaries, and avenge himself upon his Enemies as seems good unto him.
The Lord said unto him, as he is in his present Station, Rule thou in the midst
of thine enemies. Ps. 110.2.
And while he sits at the right hand of the Highest in heavenly places, his
foes shall be made his footstool, says the Psalmist; which the Apostle tells
us very notably to this purpose: (Not that he shall come to erect a Monarchical
Power of his own to bring it to pass, but) that he is in expectation of, from
henceforth expecting till his enemies be made his footstool, Heb. 10.13. Heb.
10.13
and therefore is not to be engaged in it self by such a government over men as
is here pretended. Add unto this his Office of Mediatourship, he must not
relinquish (with reverence be it spoken) till he has finished his whole work,
that is, brought the righteous God and poor man together again, who were set at
a distance through the Interposition of the Devil. In order whereunto he did
assume the Humane Nature, and in his own person join it to the Divine, that so
by virtue of this Union, and in the execution of that Office, which was annexed
unto it, he might ( Malgre all the malice of Hell) bring many Sons unto glory.
But now to lay down this Office by leaving the holy place, where he is once
entered, before he has perfected the Atonement, which will not be till all the
Elect be delivered out of the reach of Satan, would be so great a dishonor to
the Divine Majesty, that it could not well be repaired by Wisdom it self.
Perhaps it will be said, these are great words; be it so, but they are also
most true: And therefore that disservice that is done unto Christ by these
Fifth Monarchy-men (as they are called) in ascribing unto him such a power, as
they have fancied (for it is but the corrupt fruit of their own Imagination, as
will appear in the end) must needs be very great likewise.

That they do promote the Design of Antichrist is also clear, though they
perceive it not; For has it not been the Masterpiece of Rome in the setting up
of the Popes Vicegerency under Christ, to make all the Powers of the Earth
stoop unto him, yea, to render them in time altogether useless, save in what he
shall ex Cathedra, dictate unto them? It was said of him by one, who knew well
what spirit he would be of, That he opposes and exalts himself above all
that is called God. or is worshipped. So that to despise Dominion, 2 These. 2.4
and to speak evil of Dignities, much more to overturn Order and Civil
Government, which in infinite Wisdom and goodness has been established by God
in the World, must needs be an acceptable Service done unto Antichrist, as very
much conducing to the carrying on of his pernicious Design, and it will sooner
be preparatory thereunto, then any whit to the advancement of Christ's honor.

But to let this pass; If the word of Truth, the Will of the faithful God
revealed in holy Scripture, be constant and perpetual, then may we safely say,
That this present way which is now in being, of the dispensation of Divine
Power and Providence in the government of Mankind, shall never be changed The
Apostle advises that every Soul be subject to the higher Powers, enforcing it
with a Reason that must ever prevail upon the Consciences of men; for, says
he, the Powers that be are ordained of God, Romans 13.1. He exhorts also that
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks, Romans 13.1.
be made for Kings, and for all that are in Authority; 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3.
adding also such a Reason that will undoubtedly overruled the hearts of those
that fear God, for says he, This is good and acceptable in the sight of God
our Savior. Again, Put them in mind, says he to Titus, to be subject to
Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates, etc. Implying, that though they
would be apt to forget (man's nature being, ever since it was depraved by our
first Parents Ambition, wondrously inclinable to an irregular exorbitancy) yet
they should know this was their duty, as well as any other that was given them
in charge, by the Gospel.

And now I appeal unto all that are not willing to be deceived, whether all
this does not clearly imply the perpetuation of these Powers; for if they
should not continue unto the end, this word of command and exhortation would be
altogether useless and impertinent, which is an Imputation not to be put upon
the words of the Wise, yea of Wisdom it self. If any shall say, yea, there
shall be a Government to the end, but not of a Humane Constitution; the Apostle
S. Peter will presently stop the mouth of this Objection with that express word
of command which he gives, saying, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of
man for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.
whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that
are sent by him.

All this then being the undoubted Verity which the Lord Jesus Christ by his
Apostles and Servants has made known unto his Church, and which whosoever will
peremptorily deny, let him expect a Conviction with a manifestation of Gods
displeasure, what is it that will be objected hereunto? What? Rather then fail,
the holy Scripture shall be forced to furnish men with Evasions, and Truth
shall be set in opposition against in self. But, O man, who art thou that
make this jangling between the words of Truth? That turnest the Rule of the
Righteous God into crookedness and deformity? Is it meet to say to the Eternity
of Israel, Thou art not the same? Fie upon such Blasphemy! Let God be true, and
every man a Liar: His words are not Yea and Nay, but Yea and Amen, pure words
as silver tried in a Furnace of earth, without any the least dross of falsehood
or prevarication, purified seven times: It must surely therefore be some strong
delusion that puts men upon this Satanical Sophistry to make Truth contradict
it self. And what is it that is alleged, but some obscure Prophetic places of
Scripture, the Interpretation whereof will be better known by a patient waiting
for the Accomplishment (if they be not already fulfilled) then by a rash and
hasty determination, to the dishonouring of the holy Spirit in the invalidating
of other places that are plain and clear without any shadow of Ambiguity
whatsoever. And let these Fifth Monarchy-men themselves judge, whether it would
not be safer, and become them better to submit to the express Commands of the
Holy Ghost in Scripture, then tenaciously to lean to their own understandings
in giving a peremptory sense of some dark and dubious Prophecies to the
contradicting of those Commands.

But to close up this whole matter, I suppose that now after all the pretended
challenges that have in these times been made by parties to promote the
Magistrates Interest; it will begin to appear unto all men (who are willing to
see) whose Principles are and have been notwithstanding all their flattering
Pretensions, Antimagistratical.

Having thus removed the before-named Objection that lay in our way, and made
manifest the truth of that Proposition, which tended to the clearing and
illustrating of our Solution of that Objection, viz. That Government is an
Ordinance of Divine Authorization, made to be subservient unto Christ in his
great work of Preservation, and for that end to be continued so long as the
World endures. Let us now come to make use of this Doctrine concerning the
Immutability of the Lord Jesus Christ, in order to the preservation of his
Creatures.

A Doctrine it is that is profitable for Conviction, for Encouragement and
Instruction; For conviction of many sinful practices too frequently appearing
in these times, to the great dishonor of Christ, and his Government over the
World; and for the encouragement and instruction of all the faithful people of
God, who desire to walk worthy of that preservation which they enjoy under his
Government.

First then, this plainly lays open the gross blindness that has come upon
many, who notwithstanding think they see clearly. When men will freely
acknowledge this great Jehovah, the Lord of all, to be the sole Fountain of
Being unto all Creatures both in Heaven and in Earth, And yet in the several
changes and revolutions that come upon the World, have their thoughts fixed
upon second Causes, or such it may be, as they have framed to themselves, not
at all regarding the work of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands, as if he
were now no more then a mean Spectatour, and had nothing to do in the various
Transactions of his Creatures about him.

How impiously do some after the manner of the Heathen ascribe unto Fortune
that good or ill success which attends upon their undertakings? It was my good
fortune, says one, Si fortuna volet, fies de Rhetore Conful si volet haec
eadem, fies de Consule Rhetor
that brought me to this Honor, to this Estate, wherein now I am; It was my
hard hap, says another, that I met with such a cross, and that I am fallen
into this misery, even as the Poet once said;

If Fortune Will, thou may of Poor be Consul made,
And if that will, thou must unto thy former Trade.
This you will say, is not as becomes Christians, but behold yet more
Abominations; some there are, yea too many, who when they go about a matter of
any great Import, either to free themselves from some sad disaster, as they
call it, or to enterprise a Design, which they conceive may be for their
advantage, will usually like unto Heathens, (for the Scripture notes it as a
part of their Infidelity) consult with Astrologers (a sort of people who if
they will keep themselves within their own Sphere, would have the Approbation
of all that are wise; but being excentrick, they are the very Pest of a
Commonwealth) and when the success appears, their Stars, forsooth, must be
Idolized, as the cause of that which does befall them. And how unworthy alas is
this of that Faith which we do profess? But behold yet greater Abominations.

It is an Abomination souc'd in the very dregs of Heathenism, when people will
in time of any loss, danger or distress of what kind soever it be, not look up
to him who is and always was the great Preserver of men, and upholdeth all
things by the Word of his Power; but consult with Witches and Conjurers for a
supply and preservation. And this alas is too commonly found amongst those that
call themselves Christians. As for the Heathen they were not ordinarily wont,
unless it were the ruder sort, in plain downright terms, Acheronta movere, Ab
Aves Aspiciendo
that is, to seek to the Devil for help. They had their Auspicium, which was by
flying of Birds, to divine of their successes; And they had their Aruspicium,
by looking into the Entrails of Beasts appointed for Sacrifice, Ab Aras
Inspiciendo Ezekiel. 21.21.
to the same purpose (as it is said of the King of Babylon, that he looked into
the Liver, Ezekiel. 21.21. when he took up a Divination for Jerusalem.) They had
also their Tripudium, taking a conjecture of what should befall them by the
rebounding of Corn thrown upon the ground to Chickens, Quasi terripudium, seu
terripavium.
from whence the Southsayer was called Pullarius; And their Augurium, which was
a Prediction from the chirping or chattering of Birds, as also by the founds
and voices which they heard they knew not whence. Ab Avium Garritu
All which and many more (though abominable enough) yet were not so bad as
knowingly and willingly to seek for a remedy or supply so directly from the
Devil, which they do that consult with those, who they are assured have for
such ends and purposes made a compact with him. To all whom it may be said, is
it because there is not a Divine Providence that orders and governs the
World, nor a power in Heaven to help and to deliver? Or rather is it not,
because you are faithless, and have no confidence in this great Preserver of
men, that you betake your selves to the Devil and his Angels for help? A most
wicked and Atheistical Generation, who deny the Lord that bought them, and run
a whoring after Satan to worship him with a most execrable Idolatry: For it may
well be said, such persons they revolt from God to the Devil, howsoever they
plaster up their impiety with untempered Mortar, as that they seek Gods help,
though by the means of the Magician. But terrible is that threatening which the
Lord has denounced against these wretched people, Lev. 20.6.
The Soul that turueth after such as have familiar Spirits, and after Wizzards,
to go a whoring after them, I will even set my face against that Soul, and will
cut him off from among my people.

Bishop King upon Jonas.
Add unto this that common foolish Opinion (as a reverend Bishop of our times
has well observed, and I shall render it in his own words) If ever Tempest
arise more then common experience has enured us unto, especially with the
havoc and loss either of life, or limb in our Selves, our Cattle or Housings,
forthwith the judgment is given (as if the Lord of Heaven and Earth were fallen
asleep and minded nothing) there is doubtless some Conjuring. And what then is
Conjuring? A pestilent commistion, convention, stipulation betwixt men and
Devils: Men and Devils, what are they? Look upon the Sorcerers of Egypt for the
one, they cried in the smallest Plague that was sent, and past their cunning to
remove, this is the finger of God; their power is limited therefore: Look upon
the Martyrings of Job for the other, for though the Circuit of Satan be very
large, even to the compassing of the whole earth to and fro, yet he has his
days assigned him, to stand before the presence of God, for the renewing of
his Commission; And besides Oviculam unam auferre non potuit, He could not take
one poor sheep from Job, till the Lord had given him leave, saying, Put forth
thine hand: Nor enter into the Herd of Swine ( Matt. 8.) without Christ's
permission. To conclude therefore with the same learned Writer; Whether Men or
Devils be ministerial Workers in these Actions, all comes from him who is the
Judge of all, as from the higher Supreme Cause, whose Judgments executed,
thereby no man can either fully comprehend, or reprehend justly. He professes
no less of himself, Es. 45.7.
Es. 45. I form the Light, and create Darkness, I make Peace and creat Evil, I
the Lord do all these things. And in the 54 of the same Prophecy, Behold I have
created the Smith that blows the Coals in the fire, Es. 54 17.
and him that brings forth an Instrument for his work, and I have created the
Destroyer to destroy. Destruction comes from the Instrument, the Instrument
from the Smith, the Smith and all from this great Wise and Almighty Governor
of Heaven and Earth, who rides upon the Heavens as upon a Horse, and by his
power rules the raging of the Seas, the noise of his Waves, and the madness of
the people?

Away therefore with these Abominations, let them not be once named amongst us,
as becomes Saints; That they should indeed be found among the Heathen, it is
no marvel: But alas, alas, that such as make their boast of Jesus Christ, and
are ready always by a verbal profession, to ascribe unto him the Governance of
the World, should be thus besotted, so impiously by their practice to derogate
from him, and that under so clear and glorious a Light as now shines! What
Tongue or Pen can express it without a bitter Lamentation?

Again, are not the great Repinings and Murmurings which are to this very day
found amongst factious Separatists against the most remarkable and reiterated
Dispensations of Heaven in the Restoration of our Civil Government, according
to the ancient Constitution of this Realm, a great dishonor unto Jesus Christ?
As if he were to be directed by such poor Worms how to sway his Scepter, and to
manage his Power? It was an Atheistical word of that wretched Alphonsus King of
Spain, who said, That if he had stood by Christ when he created the World, he
would have showed him how to order it better, then now it is: And is it not
now, I beseech you, a sin of a high nature, by continued grudgings at these
Revolutions that have come upon us, in effect to spurn at Divine Providence,
and to quarrel the Government of Christ, because it is not according to some
men's humors and expectations? Princes of the earth we know do usually love to
maintain their unlimitedness and Prerogative which is due unto them, and do not
like it that any should make a Scrutiny into the secret of their Sovereignty:
How much more should poor dust and ashes beware of prying into, or descanting
upon the Prerogative of Heaven? The Lord Jesus Christ will certainly,
notwithstanding all the unkind Recalcitrations of sinful men, continue still
to be the same in guiding and governing and preserving the World, according to
that wise and holy Decree which has been enacted from all Eternity, he will
shake and over-turn, root up and pull down, and build and plant again as
seems good unto him, and that by such ways and means and instruments, which
(though they may seem strange and harsh unto flesh and blood) shall serve in
the end to make the Beauty of his Providence the more glorious.

Here therefore give me leave a little to treat with these discontented people:
Do ye well to be angry? And will you be angry still? Will you draw out your
anger to all Generations? Surely it will be folly and shame unto you, for Anger
rests in the bosom of fools, Ec. 7.9.
says Solomon: And what alas are you angry for? Is it (as it is to be seared
it is) because you are crossed in the promoting of such a temporal Interest which
you had contrived, which yet, according to your own principles, is not of an
absolute concernment to the Kingdom of God? Or whom are you angry with? Is it
the persons of men that have been instrumental in bringing to pass this great
Alteration that is come upon us? A small matter it seems will make you angry:
and as vain and fruitless will the success of your anger be unto you.

There was, as it has been observed, a certain people in Afric, who being
troubled with the North Wind driving heaps of Sand upon their fields and
dwelling places, they gathered an Army of men to fight against it, but with so
ill success, that themselves were also buried under Hills of sands. Xerxes the
Persian Monarch, having received a loss by the rage of Hellespontus, himself
more mad then the Sea, caused Fetters and Manicles to be cast into the waters
thereof, as if he would make it his prisoner, and bind it with links of Iron
at his pleasure: Darius did the like upon the River Gynde, when it had drowned
him a white Horse, he threatened the River to divide it into so many streams,
and so to weaken the strength of it, that a woman great with child should go
over it dry-shod. It is not unlike (as the said Author makes the Comparison)
to the folly of our days; some people must not be crossed, but will fall to
murmuring and repining: But as God asks Sennacherib, Whom have thou railed
upon? or whom have thou blasphemed? So may these be asked, Whom are ye angry
with? who has displeased you? Are you angry with the Saw, or with him that
lifts it? What is Aaron that you murmr at him? And for a conclusion hereof,
consider well that place of the Prophet, Es. 40.22. etc, Es. 40.22, 23.
It is he (for in the sequel you shall find that your anger reaches at him)
that sits upon the Circle of the earth, and the Inhabitants thereof are as
Grasshoppers, That stretched out the Heavens as a Curtain, and spreads them
out as a Tent to dwell in, That brings the Princes to nothing (much more
Usurpers) he makes the Judges of the earth as vanity (who says, and who shall
contradict him?) Yea, they shall not be planted, yea, they shall not be sown,
yea their stock shall not take root in the earth, he shall also blow upon them,
and they shall wither away, and the whirlwind shall take them away as stubble.

Let therefore the advice of the Prophet prevail with you, who says, Ps.
75.5.6, 7.
Lift not up your horn on high, speak not with a stiff neck, for promotion
comes neither from the East nor from the West, nor from the Desert; but God is
the Judge, he puts down, and sets up another. And say not any more, how
comes it to pass that God has brought this turn upon us, that our Mountain
which was made so strong, and from which we thought never to be removed, is now
utterly overthrown, that destruction comes upon destruction? Where is that
Providence that rules all things? For you do not enquire wisely concerning
these matters: Stand still rather, and see the Salvation of God; Surely
Destructions are come to a perpetual end, their memorial shall be perished with
them. For why? Jesus Christ is the same still in guiding, governing, and
preserving the whole Creation, and will so continue unto the end.

Besides these beforementioned, there are sundry others also who disclaim
Christ's Sovereignty over them; Such are the Covetous, the Ambitious, the
Proud, the Worldly wise and carnal Politician: What subjection do all these
yield unto this great Preserver of men? Though in him they live and move and
have their being, though they be under his protection every day, Act. 17.28.
yet they will not be subject unto him, the God in whose hand their breath is,
and whose are all their ways, Dan. 9.23.
they will not glorify.

The covetous Earth worm grovels upon his Dunghill, saying to his Wedge of Gold,
Thou art my confidence, and as Riches increase, so is his Soul more and more
prostituted to his Mammon, Job 31.24. Pro. 10.22.
never considering that it is the blessing of the Lord that makes rich; nor
remembering that the earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, and that he
gives it to whomsoever he will.

Does the ambitious man that hunts greedily after honor acknowledge Christ's
absolute Sovereignty, when he will not content himself with that Station
wherein Divine Providence has put him; but breaks over all bounds, Civil,
Natural, Spiritual, aspiring still higher and higher beyond his proportion of
strength and ballast of wisdom, for the management of his acquired Interest,
which undoubtedly will either involve him in a Snare to his eternal perdition,
or else precipitate him here into many woeful miseries?

As for the proud and vainglorious man who exalts himself like the Pharisee,
proclaiming his Merits to the World, Luke 18.11, 12.
and brow-beating others with overly looks of contempt and disdain; he (I say)
not closely and sliely disclaimeth Christ's Sovereignty, but above all others
is most guilty of an impudent and arrogant encroachment upon his Prerogative
Royal, Ps. 138.6.
and accordingly does the Lord look upon him afar off, in his due time giving a
check to his folly, making him to know his distance, and that wherein he deals
proudly, Ex. 18 11.
he will be above him.

In fine, the profane Politician also that has been trained up in the Schole
of Machiavel, and is become a professed and perfect Disciple of his great
Patriarch Achitophel, is very busy in his contrivances, carrying on his
unrighteous projects with much confidence and security, as if Providence it
self were blind, and that he who formed the Eye could not see, and he that
teaches man Knowledge were altogether ignorant.

And thus do poor Creatures make bold with the Lord of the whole Earth,
withdrawing from him their subjection, though they could not one moment subsist
without him. But O what a sad account will such presumptuous wretches make at
the great Day, when they shall come to stand before the Tribunal of this great
Lord of Heaven and Earth! They shall then find that their preservation here
has been but a reservation, they flourish and prosper awhile, but it is that
they may be cut off for ever.

Secondly, In that Jesus Christ abides continually the Governor and Preserver
of the World, here is matter of Instruction to be learned; which Instruction
shall be branched out into Three Particulars.

First, It may teach all the faithful people of God not to be dismayed at the
appearances and apprehensions of Death, or of the troubles that come upon them
here in this World.

Secondly, It is a Lesson and inducement to draw poor Creatures to a constant
dependence upon Divine Providence.

Thirdly, It may let all sorts of people see their own nothingness in respect
of a Spiritual standing in Grace and Holiness.

First then, 1 Branch.
seeing that the Lord Jesus Christ takes a constant care of the World, is the
same yesterday, to day, and for ever, in preserving the Work of his own hands,
what need they, who may be well assured of his everlasting love unto them, be
afraid of death? Or be daunted at the troubles that may sometimes come upon
them, or the World about them?

Concerning the first of these, we may for our comfort know, that Death was
none of those Creatures that received a being from this Prince of the Creation,
Wisd 1.13.
whose design was ever to uphold and maintain his own Workmanship against
whatsoever might be destructive unto it: But the Apostle tells us which way
Death came in, It entered, says he, Romans 5.12.
into the world by sin. This Thief and Robber then came not in at the door, but
foolish man lets in sin, which came creeping upon him by a Serpentine
Insinuation, Et sicut mors intrat per peccatum ^a peccatum exit per moriem
and Sin like a false Traitor makes way for this Cutthroat, the Devils
Emissary, who no sooner in, but he shows himself a Tyrant, thrusts Life and
Immortality into Darkness, Plays Reakes, and makes what havoc he pleases,
all the whole Race of Mankind being in danger for ever to be swallowed up by
him. But when the Lord Jesus Christ who is the beginning of the Creation of
God, the firstborn of every Creature, finds this pragmatical Intruder so
busily trampling upon the Work which he had made, Genesis 1 26. Ps. 139.14 Es. 9.6.
especially that Work, which with such infinite Wisdom and power was
wonderfully formed after his own Image, whose Name is Wonderful, he cannot
suffer this Stranger thus to spoil his Labor, but as he began it in Wisdom, so
he will in Mercy preserve it: And therefore out of pure love to his own
helpless Creatures, he undertook to vindicate it against the Assaults of Death,
sending forth his Challenge with Indignation as hot as fire, in these words, O
Death, I will be thy death; Hos. 13.14.
O Grave, I will be thy destruction: And not only speaks it, but acts it too,
enters into a Combat with him.

And here may poor Creatures stand amazed to behold this admirable Duel, a Duel
of so great Import, that the Victory which attends thereupon must carry with it
the perpetual Monarchy of the whole World.

First then, Christ has a body prepared for him, Heb. 10 5.
that so he might be a fit Combatant with Death. In this Body he appears Armed
with the Breast plate of his own Righteousness, though indeed laden also with
the sins of all the Elect; 1 Pet. 2.24.
for he bore our sins in his own Body. (...), both to the Tree, and on the
Tree, which was the field where this Combat was fought, and carried them with
him also to the Grave, yea to Hell, which is that Land of separation appointed
for them, mentioned Lev. 16.22. and there left them with the Devil from whom
they had their first Original. Lev. 16.22.
Death on the other side being set on by the Devil (for the Apostle says, Heb.
2.14.
He was under his command) finding a Body in his way, ready to give him the
Encounter, and finding sin also upon it, wherein his great strength was wont to
lie, makes use of his old Plot and stratagem, which never before failed him,
lays hold upon Sin, and with it mortally wounds the Lord Jesus Christ.

Where alas is now the hope of the Creatures being rescued from under the power
of that insulting Enemy? May it not seem to vanish? No, no, stay awhile, and
mark the issue. The Lord Christ, the Captain of our Salvation, yields himself
unto his Adversary, who drags him into his Den, to triumph over him. Never
surely was innocence so trodden under foot, Never did that Region of Darkness
and that Valley of Death receive such a Booty, nor swallow down so precious a
Morsel before. O how did the Devil now applaud himself, in that he has so
notably brought to pass his Masterpiece of Malice against the God of Heaven?
Yea nothing shall now hinder him, but that he will enlarge his Dominion over
all the World, by throwing the whole Posterity of Adam into the dust of Death,
and after that, by entangling them all in the Snares of the second Death.

But Quanta de spe, etc. How much is this Prince of Darkness, and the Powers of
Hell disappointed in their expectations? They have gotten the Prince of Life
into their clutches to their own destruction: For in the midst of all their
Triumph, Behold, The Breastplate of Christ's Righteousness begins to shine, and
the Sin wherewith he was wounded appear to be none of his own: the Venom
therefore of that Sting leesing its force, he is by the judgment of Divine
Justice it self, which sat as Umpire in this Duel, restored to his Pristine
Estate, the Palm of Victory is put into his hand, and the virtue of his
sufferings transmitted to all those for whom he undertook this Combat: Death
also is disarmed (for he left his Sting in the sides of Christ) and is become
his Captive; Principalities and Powers that were in a Conspiracy against him,
being divested of all their strength, made to wait upon his Triumph; and the
Devil that great (...).
Apollywn has his Kingdom utterly subdued.

Now then, seeing the Lord Jesus Christ has so victoriously prevailed in the
behalf of all the faithful people of God, and abolishing Death, has, as the
Apostle speaks, brought Life and Immortality to light again, offering it unto
them, and estating them in it, in a more perfect manner then our first Parents
were, while they kept their Integrity, why should you now at any time be afraid
of Death? much more reason surely have you to triumph with the Apostle, and
say, O Death, where is thy Sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory?

And as Death is not to be feared (unless it be by those who voluntarily by
their sins metamorphose themselves into the workmanship of the Devil, thereby
putting themselves out of Christ's protection) so neither are the troub^es that
come upon our selves, or fall upon the world in our days, so to be heeded by
us, as that we be dejected with any despondency of mind at the appearances
thereof. Whatsoever they be, they are ordered by him who rules and guides all
things, Yesterday, to Day, and for ever, yea they are ordained by him to make
his Glory shine the brighter in the preservation of his Works. Job. 5.6.
For Affliction comes not forth of the dust, neither does Trouble spring out
of the ground; but Gods hand sends it, and man's sin brings it, and being thus
sent and conveyed, it is by the powerful Art of this skilful Opifer per Orbem
(as Ovid speaks of the Physician) this great Preserver of men, the Lord Jesus
Christ, quite turned from its Nature, and become a wholesome Antidote to keep
the World from more dangerous Paroxysms whereto it is every day inclinable.

Let Wisdom then be justified of her Children by a quiet submission to
whatsoever troubles come upon themselves or the World about them, because Jesus
Christ is constant and unmovable in the exercise of his power, The same
yesterday, to day, and for ever, in this great Work of preservation, though the
course that is taken in the pursuance thereof may seem to our shallow
Apprehensions to tend rather to ruin and destruction.

In the next place, 2. Branch
what a sure Foundation is this for every true Believer to build his Confidence
upon? Jesus Christ bears up the pillars of the World, without whom the whole
Creation, Ps. 75.3.
and all the Inhabitants thereof would certainly be dissolved. All things have
their dependence upon him, yesterday, to day, and for ever. What a blessed
estate then is this of a Believer? What an impregnable Fort is he immured in?
Nothing can reach him to do him any hurt. For why? Jesus Christ has him under
his Wing, Ps. 91.1.
in the secret place of the most High, where no evil thing can find him out,
because his lodging is under the shadow of the Almighty. And as Christ has the
Believer under his care, so he has all his Enemies too under his power,
insomuch that without him they cannot move a foot, and if they go beyond their
Tether, he has a Hook for their Nose, Es. 37.29.
and a Bridle for their Lips, to order them according to his pleasure; yea, he
upholds his very Enemies. And can we think then that he will bring up Birds to
pick out his own Eyes? Or foster Vipers to eat out his own Bowels?

Let then your Confidence, O Believer, be fixed upon this Rock, wherein alone
true safety is to be found; rely upon this Providence that will never fail you.
As for Creature-supports, they will certainly fail. Pro. 27.24.
Riches or Strength (the like may we say of all things else in this World) are
not for ever, for they make themselves wings, (if none else will do it for
them) and flee away. Pro. 23.5.
Neither does the Crown endure to every Generation. A very great uncertainty
has always appeared in the most plausible Refuge that the Creature could
afford, and he that betakes himself to it shall never be safe: When he thinks
to be most secure, even there he shall be liable to the greatest hazard. It was
once a notable saying to this purpose of Augustus Caesar, Metuendum est esse
sine Custode; sed multo magis a Custode metuendum est: It is a dangerous thing
to be without a Guard, and yet a Guard is the greatest danger. So uncertain is
the estate of those people, who trust unto an arm of flesh, and build their
Tranquillity upon such a tottering Foundation: It is therefore better to trust
in the Lord, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength, his compassions
fail not, Es 26 4. Lam. 3.23. Ps. 36.5. Ps. 100.5.
his faithfulness reaches unto the Clouds, and his truth endures to all
Generations.

Lastly, 3. Branch.
This may let us see our own nothingness without Christ in Spiritual things,
how poor and weak and mere Idiots and Nullities we are; for if we be not able
the least minute of time to hold up our heads in this world, so as to continue
our Natural being, without his manutenency and conserving power, how shall we
without him abide steadfast in the Faith, which is our Spiritual being, and
above the sphere of our poor Nature?

And thus have we done with the second part of my second Interpretation of the
Text, viz. That Jesus Christ is (...), the only He in the great work of
Preservation.

I shall only add a word or two of Apology in the closure hereof. I confess
this latter Corolary in the Branches of it, may for the most part seem to have
a more proper reference to the third Interpretation of the Text that follows,
as being a Consequent that might arise upon the consideration of Christ's
Immutability toward his Church. Nevertheless I conceive it does not bear the
guilt of an unpardonable Incongruity to insert it in this place. However if it
be misliked by any, they may, if they please, in their thoughts transfer it,
and make use of it accordingly.

CHAP. III. How the Text is Applicable to Christ in the work of Restoration.
THe third Particular in this second Interpretation of the Text, viz. With a
reference unto the Creatures, is this, Jesus Christ is (...), in the work of
Restoration, the same from first to last, exercising the same Wisdom,
Goodness, Power, as in the Creation and Preservation; Rev. 21.5, 6.
so in the Restoration of the World, for he shall restore all things.

That which the first Adam had and lost by sin, shall be restored again by the
second Adam Jesus Christ, because he is immutably the same, not to be diverted
from his course, either by Sin or Satan. The Apostle S. Peter ( Act. 3.) tells
us of times of refreshing, Act. 3.19.21.
and of restitution of all things, which shall be at the last; yea, and not
only he, but (as he says) God has spoken it by the mouth of all his Prophets
since the world began: As much as to say, God is very constant in the
Asseveration of this Doctrine, and if God has spoken it, and spoken it so
unmovably without Retractation, first by his Prophets, his holy Prophets, yea
all his holy Prophets since the World began, and again asserted, ratified it by
his Apostles, what ever men do deem of it, it will be found to be a Truth,
built upon a sure Foundation; and therefore we are not to be shy in the
profession thereof.

That well known place of the Apostle, Romans 8.21.
Romans 8.21. runs with a full strength in a tendency hereunto; The Creature,
says he, shall be delivered from the bondage of Corruption, into the glorious
liberty of the Children of God. That is, as our Reverend Bishop Reynolds
renders the sense, Upon the Creatures shall be conferred a Glory, which shall
be in the proportion of their Natures a suitable Advancement unto them, as the
glory of the Children shall be unto them. And of this Advancement the Apostle
in the same place says, The Creature is in hope and expectation; which hope
and expectation Christ will not suffer to be frustrated, he being the beginning
of the Creation of God, and therefore (co nomine) in point of his own honor so
engaged unto it, as not to slight the fervent desire thereof, in any thing
that may really tend to its well-being.

But before we proceed any further, it will not be out of our way a little to
take into consideration, according to our poor measure, that obscure and
intricate Scripture in its whole latitude, that we may see from thence, what
just cause we have to extol and magnify the Lord Jesus Christ in this, as
well as in any thing else that has been spoken in order to the Creatures. The
words are these;

For the earnest expectation of the Creature waits for the manifestation of
the Sons of God, for the Creature was made subject to vanity, Romans 8.19.
not willingly, but by reason of him who has subjected the same in hope; 20,
because the Creature it self also shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption, 21,
into the glorious liberty of the children of God, 22.
for we know that the whole Creation groaneth and travelleth in pain together
until now.

Four things are especially to be taken notice of in these words, upon the
discussion whereof we may (through Grace) come to discern somewhat of the Mind
of the Spirit of God therein. And they are these.

First, The Creature is subject unto Vanity, and under the bondage of
Corruption.

Secondly, The Creature waits and groaneth to be delivered from this Vanity
and Bondage.

Thirdly, The time of its Deliverance is, when the Sons of God are manifested.

Fourthly, The manner of the Deliverance, It shall be into the Glorious Liberty
of the Children of God.

First, The Creature is subject to Vanity, etc.

The Creature? What Is that? Much Controversy there is amongst Writers, who
this Creature should be. But it is not my purpose to enter into the many
tortuous and oblique Maeanders of that Debate, as to tell you what some
conceive of the Angels in order hereunto, Nor what others say of men
indefinitely, Others of the Godly only, Others of the Gentile World in
opposition to the Jews, Dr. Hammond.
etc. For in so doing, I should but lead you into doubtful Disputations which
the Holy Ghost forbids, Romans 14.1. and perplex the present Doctrine with
more difficulty and obscurity. Better it is to lay down the sense plainly,
which I humbly conceive, and that is this.

By the word (...) which is here rendered Creature, and afterward V. 22.
translated the Creation, is to be understood Mundi Machina, the whole Frame,
Engine, and Fabric of the World, consisting both of Celestial and Elementary
Regions, not troubling our selves with any inquiry after those Creatures that
have their Being in this Elementary part, Whether they shall be interessed in
that glorious Deliverance that is to come, or no, though they be subject unto
Vanity, and under the bondage of Corruption, as the place of their Habitation
is. And this, I believe, will be the sasest way for us to take in this
Difficulty, wherein also we shall not leave the Apostle, who is our Guide and
Conduct in this Labyrinth, but have his concurrency with us.

This Creature, says the Apostle, is subject unto Vanity, under the Bondage of
Corruption: This Creature so beautiful, so excellent, as has been before
described, in the forming whereof the Omnipotent God has shown forth his
Wisdom, Power, Goodness, is now struggling under a miserable Thraldom; and that
which aggravates the Misery, is, that i^ should be brought into this woeful
plight, by one who was taken out of its own Bowels, and advanced to the Rule
and Dominion over all the rest of her Offspring round about him; whose folly
as it began this mischief, so it is still laying on more and more load,
insomuch that unless the great and wise Creator interpose his powerful Arm by
removing this Tyrant, or altering his Nature, that Work, whereby he sought for
ever to Glorify will in time come to nothing.

But let us more particularly observe the great Misery that this poor Creature
is involved in.

First, It has lost a great part of that Beauty and Goodness which the
Creator put upon it in the Beginning, it being by the sin of man much dulled
and disabled to Act and Communicate its Virtues, as it did at the first
Creation. And though Nature does not (according to the Vulgar Opinion) merely
through the length of time, as she grows in years, fall into decay; yet it
cannot be denied, but the Primitive vigor of the Creature is much impaired,
and that she has lost much of that Comeliness which was upon her before the
Curse came forth from God for Man's Disobedience.

Secondly, There is a necessity lies upon the Creature to do Service unto the
Enemies of the Creator: The Sun must shine not only upon the Good, but also
upon the Evil; and the Rain must fall upon the Just, and on the Unjust. The
Influences of Heaven make fruitful the Field of the Wicked, as well as the
Field of the most Righteous man in the World; the Earth gives out of her
fullness to one as to another, and is forced to receive into her Bowels the
Ungodly, as well as the Godly. And this a sore Bondage unto it, that makes it
to be still groaning till the time comes, wherein it shall vomit up again the
Carcasses of the Reprobate, as a Morsel that it could not well digest.

Thirdly, Whereas the Creature is still proclaiming the Glory of God, being
unto Mankind (as it is observed) God's Leiger-book, By Dr. Henry King now
Bishop of Chich.
wherein his mavelous Acts are fairly written, every Species a Line in that
Book, and every peculiar Work a Character for Man to read his Maker. And when
the curiosity of the Style, and variety of the Story therein contained, might
in reason invite all eyes to run it over, to the end, that the invisible things
of God, even his eternal Power and Godhead might be clearly seen by the things
that are made, when the Creature, I say, is thus industrious in her kind to
teach man the knowledge of God, must it not needs be a vexation unto her to see
him so stupid and indocible that he will not learn?

Fourthly, It is a misery to the Creature that there is through the sin of man
such a preposterous inverting of that Order which the Creator has in his
wisdom established, and such a Hysteren Proteron to be found in the Creation,
viz. That he whom she gloried in at first to be her Lord and Governor, in
regard of those excellent Abilities that were in him for that end, should now
so far degenerate as to be in many respects inferior to brute Beasts. For very
clear it is, that diverse Beasts surpass man in many Virtues, as the Dove in
simplicity, the Ant and the Be in diligence and industry, the Stork in
humanity, the Dog in love and fidelity, the Lamb in meekness, the Lion in
magnanimity, the Serpent in wisdom, the Ox and the Ass in a thankful
acknowledgment of benefits, and all of them in sobriety and contentment: But
which is worse, as touching Vice, therein Man surpasses all Beasts, being more
treacherous and cruel then a Wolf, craftier then a Fox, prouder then a Peacock,
more voluptuous and unthankful then a Hog, and more dangerous then a Viper:
Yea, to fill up the measure of his Evils, those pestilent and noxious
inclinations, which are alone and particularly in diverse Beasts, are oftentimes
found to be altogether Concatenated (or at least a great part of them) in one
man; for there are many men courteous, proud, cruel, envious, unthankful, and
Oppressors all at one time. And this is a sore Evil with which the poor
Creature is much grieved, seeing and beholding her Darling who was so Divinely
qualified in his first Instalment for that Dominion which was granted unto him,
to be now eccentrick from his Honor, destitute of Understanding, and to be a
Companion, yea to be inferior to the Beasts that perish.

Fifthly, Add unto this that which is indeed an Addition to the former Misery,
and a great aggravation of it; This Creature so excellent in her first
appearance, so industrions and indefatigable in promoting the Glory of her
Creator, so tenderly affectionate toward Mankind, as has been said, yet is
put to a most vile Drudgery, being made (though unwillingly) the Instrument of
Man's sin, which is in truth, the most sordid kind of slavery, that it could
possibly be exposed unto. Yea, it is never at rest being continually made to
dance Attendance after a hard Master: for there is not any sin that can by man
be likely produced into Act, but the Creature must in some respect or other be
serviceable thereunto. Ps 19 5.
The Sun (says the Psalmist) rejoices like a Giant to run his Race: But alas
what a check is it unto his joy, when he is taken up every hour by the way to
be a Guard and Convoy unto sinful men in the pursuance of their ungodly Lusts?
The Earth in like manner lies under this Servitude, for though we hear often
of her Childrens Tripudiations and Exultations, the little Hills rejoicing on
every side, and the Valleys when they stand thick with Corn, that they do laugh
and sing; yet sure we are, she is not without her Trepidations neither, and
that because of man's sin, wherein she is also involved whether she will or no.
It was once spoken by Nabal in a churlish manner against good David, but the
Earth may speak it out of a just Indignation against a sort of riotous
Unthrifts, whom it fosters every day, Shall I take my Bread and my Water and my
Flesh, and give it to such a Crew? Alas poor Creature it is indeed sore against
thy will, to pour out Drink to fill the Drunkard, to provide Meat to cram the
Glutton, to expose thy Territories to the boundless desires of the Ambitious,
to empty thy self to yield choice of Pleasures to the Voluptuous: But what
remedy? If wretched man will Lord it imperiously, and make thy Service more and
more insupportable, through his sin and folly, who can help it? It is an
Affliction that is not to be avoided, imposed upon thy shoulders by the just
hand of the Almighty God, because of thy Propinquity with him who consented to
the Devil in a plain Rebellion against the Majesty of Heaven.

And thus we see some particulars of the Creatures misery, though more might be
added, and what Vanity and Bondage it is made subject unto.

Secondy, This Creature notwithstanding is in hope to be delivered, and
therefore waits and groaneth and travelleth in pain till the time of her
Deliverance comes.

In which words our Apostle uses a certain Figure called Prosopopaeia, whereby
humane Actions and Affections are ascribed unto that Creature to whom they do
improperly belong. Which figure we find often made use of by the Prophets,
when they bring in the Floods clapping their hands, the Hills skipping, the
Mountains leaping, the Heavens speaking, the Land mourning etc. Not that any
should from thence infer that these Creatures have either an Articulate Voice
to utter, or hands or feet to act really that which is so Rhetorically
predicated of them: But that poor man may be affected with the Elegancy of the
Spirit of God in Scripture, and observe the excellency of that Nature which
moves constantly in the Creature to the praise and glory of the Creator. So
the Apostle here writes of the Creature as of a humane person, hoping and
expecting and groaning, not as if there were any of these Desires and Groans
audibly expressed to the sense and apprehension of man, but only to show that
natural Propensity that is in the Creature to be freed from those evils that
lie upon it. For as it is said of a Servant, that if he may be made free he
should choose it rather, so does the Creature also according to the nature
thereof, 1 Cor. 7.21
manifest such a kind of Option, because indeed it can take no pleasure in
that Misery and Bondage as has been before prescribed.

The words of the Apostle, whereby the Creatures desire of deliverance is
expressed, are very emphatical; First, he makes mention of the expectation of
the Creature, and that not a naked careless supine Oscitancy, but a vehement,
greedy, longing, earnest waiting and looking out. The Original word here (...),
being as Pererius calls it, Verbum Sesquipedale, a word of an extraordinary
Size; It is a double Compound word, viz. of the Preposition (...), which
signifies of, from, or afar off, and of (...), an old word in use among the
Greeks, put for the Head, and sometimes the whole Face and Countenance, and the
Verb (...) or (...), or both, which signify to see, observe, conceive, expect;
So that the sense hereof seems to be this, Though the Deliverance that the
Creature longs for, be somewhat afar off, and though it be consigned to a hard
Service, yet does she Quasi porrecto capite, as't were with a frequent
stretching out the head, wait and look for that Relief which in due time shall
surely come. And if there were not some eagerness in the Creatures expectation,
the Apostle would have made use of another word, viz. (...), which would have
been sufficient for that purpose, as it is in other places, Luke 21 26. Act.
28.6. etc.

Again, the earnest expectation of the Creature waits (says the Apostle)
which words joined together carry in them a Pleonasm, says Paraus, adding the
more weight, making the expectation the fuller of desire. Furthermore, it
groaneth and travelleth in pain, V. 22. In which words is a Metaphor, taken, as
it should seem, from Women with Child, expressing the exceeding sorrow and
earnest desire to be delivered.

And now we may with others from hence collect, seeing the Holy Ghost uses in
this Scripture so many and such significant words, we may be bold to say, that
he does it not in vain; but rather that he would give us thereby to understand
that though the Creature waits not, nor hops as we do, yet that there is in
it some certain earnest desire to look for its Restoration. If any man think
this strange, let him consider the nature of the Loadstone, we see by
experience that if we touch with the same stone the Pin or point of a Dial or
Compass, and set the Needle or Compass upon it, it will not rest till it cause
it to stand directly North and South; And this is generally observed in all
places of the known or habitable World, whether a man be upon the Sea or upon
the Land, if on this side the Line, it will forcibly point toward the North,
if on the other, toward the South, because the Iron has contracted the nature
of the Loadstone unto it, wherewith it was touched, and yet has not the said
stone any reason, neither the Point of a Dial or Compass any sense: Now then if
this be true (as it is past all contradiction) that the Needle or Compass
through the virtue of the Loadstone, is by a certain affection and sympathy so
carried, that it slays not till it has attained that Rest which Nature has
appointed it, Shall we think it strange that the Creature here mentioned,
though void of Reason (having yet a greater Instinct given it from God) should
be carried forward to desire its own Restitution, as the Holy Ghost affirms
in this place?

The third thing to be considered is the time of its Deliverance, viz. When the
Sons of God are manifested, that is, as I humbly conceive, (and let others that
have their Conceptions free, give me therefore leave also to conceive) When the
holy Angels shall appear in their Glory at the last Day: For they are so called
in Scripture by way of excellency, The Sons of God, Job 1.6. and 38.7. Heb.
1.14. Dan. 4.23.
and these Sons of God have their several Offices assigned unto them in order
to the Creatures, both in the time of their Misery, and of their Deliverance.
They are Ministering Spirits, says the Apostle. Sent forth to minister for them
who shall be heirs of salvation. And they are Watchers too, as they are called,
Dan. 4 23. appointed by God to preserve that Order which he has set in the
Creation against the Machinations of Satan, Quod sane negari non potest. So
Ravanellus. Dan. 10.11.
who is still seeking to disturb it. Hence it is conceived that they have the
guiding of the Celestial Orbs, and the conservation of the Elements in their
due order, temper, and moderation. But very probable it is that God makes use
of their Service and Ministry in the establishment and protection of Kingdoms
and Commonwealths in the World; And therefore, Ephesians. 3.10 Col. 1.16.
says Pasor, are they called by the Apostle (...), that is Principalities,
Quod Deus eorum ministerio utatur in Regnorum Gubernatione, Because of the
employment which they have from God in the Government of the Nations. And as
these Sons of God have this care of the Creature committed unto them in this
time of Servitude and Bondage, so shall they in a most eminent manner be set on
work in its Manumission and Deliverance; For their peculiar Office it will be
one day to sever the Wicked from among the Just, and to take away every thing
that does offend, and them that work Iniquity, and to cast them into the
Furnace of sire, which shall undoubtedly for ever put an end unto the Creatures
misery; for, Sublata causa tollitur effectus, Take away the Cause, and the
Effect will follow. But this must not be yet, for indeed it is not meet that
the Creature which is but the Servant should go out free, and enjoy a Jubilee,
till all the Children of the Family have had their due Service, at least, not
so long as any of the Children are in a capacity to know more and more sorrow;
Job. 14.14
The Creature therefore must wait all the days of their appointed time, until
their change come. Now the time when this shall be, is here very significantly
called the Manifestation or Revelation of these Sons of God, which word of the
Apostle is in Travel (as Rebecca) with a Twin of Interpretations; (...).
for it may be taken not only in a Passive sense (as some will have it) but
also in an Active.

Consider it first Actively; These Sons of God, that is, The Angels shall be
sent forth by Jesus Christ, and employed in an eminent Work of Revelation four
several ways.

First, They shall break open the Chambers of Death, and bring out the naked
Bodies of the whole Race of Mankind, that have been there shut up, and laid to
sleep from the beginning of the World, not one shall be missing. Secondly, They
shall gather all the Saints, which are God's Jewels, together, Mal. 3.17.
and leave the Wicked, which are the dross and dregs of the World by
themselves, thereby manifesting the one from the other, each side to receive a
Sentence from the Righteous Judge according to their Works. Thirdly, That
Righteous Judgment which shall then pass must also have its manifestation
according to the Apostles word, Romans 2.5
Romans 2.5. And who but these Sons of God shall be the Messengers and
Instruments of Justice at that day? So says Jesus Christ himself in the
Parable of the Tares, the Reapers, that is, Mat. 13.30
the Angels have their charge given them, not only to gather the Tares
together, but to bind them in bundles, to burn them; and as for the Wheat,
they must bring that safely into the Barn. Fourthly, and above all, these Sons
of God shall be employed in the manifestation of the Son of man, when he comes
in his Glory; for they shall in effect proclaim the Name of the Lord before him
unto all the World, as once it was, when he passed before Moses, being in a
Cleft of the Rock, Exodus 34. The Lord, the Lord God, Ex. 34.6, 7
merciful and gracious, long suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth,
keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin, and
that will by no means clear the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the fathers
upon the children, and upon the childrens children, Ps. 50.3.
unto the third and fourth Generation: A fire shall devour before him, and the
Lord shall descend from Heaven, as the Apostle speaks, 1 These. 4.16.
with a Shout (a Shout that will make the Earth to quake, and the World to
ring) and with the Voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God. And what
does this imply, but that these Sons of God shall minister unto Jesus Christ at
that day, in the manifestation of his Glory? The Scripture we know speaks
often of the Manifestation and Revelation of Jesus Christ and his Glory, 1 Cor.
1.7. 1 Pet. 1.7.13. 1 Pet. 4.13. etc. And though it be most true, that the Lord
will then make himself known by the Judgment which he then executes, and by
his appearing in his peculiar Glory; yet doubtless the innumerable multitude of
the Heavenly Hosts that attend upon him at his coming, will also make his
Praise glorious, else would not the Wisdom of God have so contrived it, that
his Appearance should be also made solemn and formidable by reason of his
Attendants that wait upon him. And to this purpose the Apostle speaks expressly,
2 These. 1.7 So Beza renders it, Act. 14.27. and 15.4
2 These. 1.7. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, But how? With his
mighty Angels in flaming fire, or, by his mighty Angels, as the Preposition
there (...), does also signify.
And thus we see how these Sons of God shall be Active in the great Work of
Manifestation at the last Day. But then secondly, the word (...) is also, as
has been said, to be rendered in a Passive signification, Thus, these Sons of
God shall themselves be manifested, and that in two respects, first of their
Nature, secondly of their Number.

First, Their Nature shall be made manifest to the World; for though they have
appeared often under several Forms, sometimes in the shape of Men, sometimes
like unto flaming fire, for the comfort of the Godly, and terror of the
Wicked; yet does it not clearly appear thereby what they are: Spirits indeed
they are, Glorious and Heavenly and Immortal Spirits, created after the Image
of God, of mavelous Agility, excellent in Strength, able to do Wonderously,
beyond the power of all other Creatures in the World: Yet this and all else
that we know of them does not argue, but that there will be a more perfect
knowledge of them at the time of their Manifestation; then shall it appear
plainly what Relation they stand in unto God, how they come to have cognizance
of things done upon the Earth, how they have been present in the Assemblies of
the Saints, and assistant unto them in the solemn duties of Divine Worship and
Service; 1 Cor. 11.10.
then shall it be known and manifested how and wherein they have been a Guard
to the people of God, to keep them in all their ways; and to conclude, then
shall they more freely and familiarly converse with men, not keeping themselves
at a distance, as he did, who reproved Maneah, Judge. 12.18.
saying, Wherefore inquire thou after my Name, seeing it is secret? So that a
clear manifestation there will be of them in this regard.

Secondly, Mat. 25.31
Their Number or whole Multitude shall then be also manifested, For the Lord
Jesus shall come with all his holy Angels, not only with his Legions, Mat.
26.53 Judge. 5.14 Es. 40.26.
Mat. 26.53. but his holy Myriads attending upon him. He will bring out his
Hosts by number (says the Prophet) calling them all by Names, as a General
does his Soldiers on a Training day, not one of them shall fail. Well may it
therefore be called, the Manifestation of the Sons of God, when there shall be
such a general Appearance of them, The Lord among them as in the Holy Place,
Ps. 68.17.
Psalm. 68.17. Thousand thousands ministering unto him, and ten thousand times
ten thousands standing before him.

And thus have I given my sense of this Particular also (which I submit to the
examination of the Church) it being I confess somewhat singular, the Place
being taken generally (so far as the narrow extent of my poor Reading does
reach) for the manifestation of the believing Saints, of whom indeed the
Evangelist speaks after the like manner, 1 John 3.2
1 John 3.2. (which has inclined Expositours to give the same Interpretation
here) Now, says he, are we the Sons of God, (it should rather be rendered,
(...).
the Children of God) and it does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know
that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him, as he is.

But, I hope, I may without offense give in my poor Judgment as I have done
concerning this Scripture, considering, it is not inconsistent at all with the
scope of the Holy Ghost therein, and being guided hereto by some certain
Probabilities: First, They are Angels we know, and a great multitude of them,
who did at the Birth of Jesus Christ proclaim Peace to the Creature, as well as
Good Will toward men; the Creature therefore may be in expectation of the
manifestation of the Angels, that this Promise or Salutation given by them
might be made good and perfected. Secondly, It is not without some reason that
the Holy Ghost does use the different terms of Sons and Children in this
Scripture, viz. (...), Sons, in the 19 Verse, and (...), Children in the 29
Verse, especially considering that that which is predicated of each, carries
with it also a great difference too; for the manifestation of the Sons of God
answers the expectation of the Creature: But the Deliverance of the Creature is
not there to be terminated, but only by the liberty of the Children of God.
Now there seems to me to be some probability that the varying of the terms
should imply also in this place a varying of persons, viz. The first to be
understood of the Angels of God, and the latter of the Saints, the latter word
also being comprehensive of the first, and not the first, in a true propriety
of speech, of the latter, considering withal what has been before said, that
the Creature must have the Angels employed in working their Deliverance, but
not the Saints. Sons being also fitter then Children in the bringing to pass so
great a Work, as delivering the Creature out of Bondage is like to be.

More might be added, but this shall suffice for the third Observation from
this Scripture, viz. The time of satisfying the Creatures expectation, that is,
at the manifestation of the Sons of God.

Fourthly, That which is next offered to our View, is the manner of the
Deliverance of the Creature, or to what it shall be reduced at the expiration
of its Bondage, it shall be delivered into the Glorious Liberty of the Children
of God.

For it is but subjected says the Apostle, (...), in hope, or under hope of a
happy change to a better Estate; and though this hope deferred makes the poor
Creature to faint, yet the patient abiding thereof shall not perish for ever,
For hope makes not ashamed, especially when it is fixed upon such a sure
Foundation, Romans 5.5.
as Gods Eternal Purpose which cannot be disanulled. A Deliverance therefore
shall undoubtedly arise unto the Creature, even as there shall be to the
Children of God; for as in this corrupt estate, wherein they are involved for
the present by the first Adam, they are both together fellow sufferers: so
shall they together in their several Capacities be set at liberty, and have
their Pristine Excellencies restored, yea, much more enlarged unto them by
Jesus Christ, the second Adam, who being the Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and
the End of the Creation, the same yesterday, Rev. 21.5, 6.
to day, and for ever, is of power sufficient to make all things new.

It is indeed upon the Childrens account that the Creature shall be Interessed
in that glorious Deliverance, for as the Apostle speaks in another case, Does
God take care for Oxen? So may we say, does God so respect the Creature, that
is, the frame of Nature, that he will vouchsafe for its own sake to beautify
it when it is deformed? Or, does he altogether for our sakes that are his
Children? For our sakes no doubt shall this glorious Work be accomplished, that
even the Creature it self also may in a free and liberal manner (which is
earnestly desired by it) be subservient unto his Glory. And thus we find the
Preposition here (...), which is translated into, is taken by some as carrying
the force of another, viz. (...), that is, Propter, which signifies for, so
reading the word thus, The Creature shall be delivered from the Bondage of
Corruption for the Glorious Liberty of the Children of God, that is, That the
Childrens Liberty might by their service be the more Glorious. For as God made
the Creature in the beginning for Man, and because of him subjected it likewise
unto Vanity, that so it might not even in the days of Vanity be superior to
him for whom it was created: So will he deliver it again for Man's sake, that
is, for the Accumulation and Illustration of his childrens Glory; Though I
confess upon the Creature also it self (as it is said before) shall be
conferred a Glory, which shall be in the proportion of its Nature a suitable
Advancement unto it, as the glory of the children shall be unto them.

And this I conceive in short to be the sense of the Apostle as to this
Particular, whereby we may see clearly that there shall be a Restoration of
the Creature, that is, as says S. Peter, 2 Pet. 3.13.
Now Heavens and a new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness. Which words of
new Heavens and new Earth, as they are used in a certain place by the Prophet
Isaiah, being spiritually understood, Es. 65.17.
are I confess appliable to the state of the Church in the times of the Gospel,
under the Kingdom of Christ, when it should be so renewed, that it should seem
to be, as 'twere a new World, old things being done away, 2 Cor. 5.17
Types and shadows removed, yea, the whole Service of the former Tabernacle
abolished, and all things made new, 2 Cor. 5.17. So that in this sense this
Prophecy is already fulfilled. Nevertheless though the words of the Prophet may
be so taken, yet we are not to confine the Spirit of God thereunto, especially
when he has declared his meaning elsewhere to be of a larger extent, as he
has done in this very particular; for the Apostle S. Peter in the forecited
place, Commenting upon the Prophet, speaks of the new Heavens and the new
Earth, as not so much to be seen in this World, as in that which is to come,
his whole Scope in the said Chapter tending thereunto.

Let then the spiritual sense be acknowledged by us, yet that hinders not, but
that the other sense ( viz. That there shall really be new Heavens and a new
Earth at the last Day) may be acknowledged also; even as Glory is said to be
begun here in those Graces that are shed abroad by the Holy Ghost in the hearts
of the Elect, which shall notwithstanding shine forth in its full Splendor in
the Kingdom of Glory.

viz. That in the Day of the Lord, 2 Pet. 3.10
The Heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and pass away with a great
noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth also and the
works that are therein shall be burnt up, which implies a total Abolition of
the Heavens and of the Earth; How then can there be such a Restoration?

For answer to this Objection, if a late Writer may be heard, he will tell us,
that this place of S. Peter is to be understood of the Destruction of Judaea,
and not of the end of the World. Which suggestion of his I shall not for my
part insist upon, it being an unwarrantable Interpretation, differing not only
from the Prophet before, and the Apostle himself after him in the 7th Verse,
where he clearly expresses presses his meaning to be of the general
Conflagration, as it were, of the Heavens and of the Earth at the Day of
Judgment. That which I have to say unto the Objection shall be folded up in a
twofold Reply.

1 Reg. 8.27. Es. 63.15. Heb. 12.28.
as to be no more; then we must conclude also that even the Heaven of the
Blessed, which is the Heaven of Heavens, the Habitation of Gods Holiness and
Glory, shall be altogether taken away likewise: But that is a Kingdom which
cannot be moved, therefore surely it is not so to be understood. Coelum a
subcoelestibus nihil patitur, that is, Heaven cannot fall under the power of
any thing that is below it self; for being next unto the Angels, the prime
Agent in Nature, it cannot possibly be Passive: And if it were subject to any
such Consumptive fire, then should that fire, which is a far more ignoble
Creature, have a Being in its greatest height and glory, when the Being of the
Heavens is under a Decay, which is too great an absurdity to be imagined by any
that take pleasure in searching into the great Works of the Almighty: Yea more,
considering that the constant Product of such fire is nothing else but Ashes,
it will follow that when the Heavens and the Earth are consumed, the Ashes
thereof must remain in the presence of God, as if he favored only the Dust of
the Creatures. But doubtless in stead of Ashes, there shall be a glorious
Beauty upon the face of Nature at that Day; which beauty even that very fire
that shall then visibly flame out, shall also be a means through the mighty
working of the most High to bring forth. We will not too curiously search into
the nature of that fire, possibly it may be such as that wherein God appeared
unto Moses in the Bush, but consumed it not, Ex. 3.2.
and connatural with that which took up Elias into Heaven, not destroying his
body, but changing it into a glorious estate: 2 Reg. 2.11.
In both which Apparitions, as in many more, the Ministry of Angels was
employed, whom, as the Psalmist speaks, God makes a flaming fire. And
therefore when the innumerable multitude of these Angels shall appear at the
last Day, waiting upon the Lord Jesus when he comes in his Glory, well may
Heaven and Earth be then said to be in a flame, and, as it were, all on fire.
But let the Nature of that fire be as it is, ordered by the Wisdom of the
Creator, far surpassing our shallow Apprehensions, being sparkles of those
everlasting Burnings that are in himself: This fire at that day shall put a new
Form and Quality upon the Heavens and the Earth; But how? Or what? I say again,
we know not, neither is it indeed fit for us to know, while we are in this our
present estate. This we know because God has promised it, there shall be new
Heavens and a new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness, that is, it may be
such Heavens and such Earth at least as there was in the beginning, wherein
Adam dwelt when he was in his Innocence. This also we know that the Angels who
are this flaming fire, as they are now employed by God in the Ordering,
Guiding, and Governing the Heavens and the Earth which now are, so they shall
in the end be instrumental in making all things new; for they shall take away
every thing that does offend, and like unto fire separate the Precious from the
Vile, which will necessarily bring on a perfect Renovation: and this Renovation
is that which will surely be the Dissolution of the former both Heavens and
Earth, so as they shall not be remembered, nor come into mind, according to the
word of the Prophet. Es. 65.17.
Add unto this the melting of the Elements, which the Apostle also mentions,
(a plain Metaphorical expression) what does it imply, but that they shall be
brought into a new form, even as Metal when it is melted, loses not its
substance, but only the faeculency and dross is taken away, and the Metal
transformed into another shape then it had before.

And thus in like manner the Prophet David, when he had spoken ( Ps. 102.26.)
of the perishing of the Heavens does declare what his meaning thereof was in
the words immediately following, viz. All of them shall wax old like a Garment,
Ps. 102. 26.
as a Vesture shall thou change them and they shall be changed. He speaks not
of other Heavens, but the old changed into better: The wrong side of the
Vesture is for the present only discernable; but the day shall come when it
shall be seen in all its Glory.

Unto this we have the concurrent assent of Expositours both Ancient and
Modern, whose words because they are so clear and pregnant in the confirmation
hereof, I judge it fit to intersert them at large as I find them.

Holy Hierom upon Isaiah writes thus, Extrema illa Coelorum mutatio, erit
tantum renovatio, and illorum promotio in meliorem statum; That is, The change
which shall be of the Heavens at the last Day, will be nothing else but their
Renovation, and a promotion of them to a better estate. And in his Commentary
upon the 102 Psalm, writing on these words, They shall perish and wax old as a
Garment, gives his judgment thus, Coelorum iste interitus, non erit abolitio
little, sed reformatio and redintegratio, that perishing of the Heavens shall
not be their Abolition, but their Reformation and Redintegration.

So likewise S. Augustine on the same place renders the sense thereof thus,
Peribunt Coeli in fine seculi, sed non peribunt ut animalia, ita ut esse
desinant; sed quia in alium statum transformati, omnibus quae nunc exercent
ministeriis, and functionibus and effectibus carebunt, ut quibus tum non erit
opus homini facto jam incorruptibili, cujus gratia ministeria illa exercebant
Coeli. The Heavens shall perish in the end of the World, yet not as other
Creatures, so as to cease to have any being; but being transformed into another
state, they shall not have those Operations, Influences and Effects, which now
they have; because Man, for whose sake they were employed in such services,
being made incorruptible, has no need of them.

The asoresaid S. Hierom illustrates his meaning by a similitude, v. g. Infans
cum in Puerum creverit, and puer in juvenem, and juvenis in virum, and vir in
senem, nequaquam per singulas aetates homo perit; idem enim est qui prius fuit,
sed paulatim immutatur and aetati priori videtur periisse, sic etiam and Coeli,
etc. When an Infant grows up to childhood, from childhood to youth, from
youth to mans-estate, and from thence to old age, we do not say, in his growth
and progress through these several Ages, that he perishes from what he was
essentially; no, he is the same person, which he was at first, but by degrees
changed, so as to the preceding Age wherein he was, he may seem to perish. Thus
is it with the Heavens, they shall be changed, which change shall be a kind of
perishing, as to their former estate, and a dissolution of that Frame wherein
they stood before, but yet nevertheless continue in the same substance still,
which they were from the beginning.

Of the same judgment was Gregory surnamed the Great, Quaeri potest, says he,
etc. It may be demanded seeing the Scripture speaks one while of the eternal
duration of the Earth, how it comes to pass that another while it speaks of a
general Dissolution: Hoc tamen facile discutimus, etc. This, says he, we can
easily discuss and resolve, if we consider how, and after what manner Earth and
Heaven shall pass away, and how they shall continue; Vtraque enim haec per eam
quam nunc habent imaginem peribunt, sed per essentiam tamen sine fine
subsistunt. They both pass away in respect of their present Form, but their
essential Being shall never fail. And again, Scriptum est, etc. It is written
there shall be new Heavens and a new Earth, Quae quidem non alia sunt condenda,
sed haec ipsa renovabuntur, Not as if other distinct from these shall come in
their stead, but even these that are now in being shall be renewed. Coelum
igitur and transibit and erit, quia and ab ea quam nunc habet specie, per ignem
tergitur, and tamen in sua semper natura servatur; Heaven therefore shall pass
away, and yet shall continue, because by fire it is purged from that outward
appearance and shape, which it now has, but in its own proper nature shall
stand for ever. Vnde and per Psalmistam dicitur, mut abis eos and mutabuntur,
quam quidem ultimam commutationem suam ipsis nunc vicissitudinibus nobis
nunciant, quibus nostris usibus indesinenter alternant, etc. And hence it is
said by the Psalmist, Thou shall change them and they shall be changed; which
ultimate change of theirs they do in effect themselves significantly
demonstrate unto us by those interchangeable Vicissitudes wherewith they do
incessantly vary in order to our use and service: for may we not at every turn
of the year behold the Earth through the Winter-frosts dis-robed of all her
gorgeous Attire, and when the Spring appears, to flourish in as much beauty as
she did before? The Heavens in like manner to be covered every day with the
darkness of the Night, and again to be renewed by the days Brightness. And
thus by the continual repair of these obvious Defects, we may take some guess
of the future perishing of these things at the last Day, and also of their
refreshing again by a Renovation.

In the next place let Peter Lombara be heard, Lib. 4. Did. 47.
who says, Peribit Coelum and Terra, non secundum subst antiam, sed secundum
speciem, quae immutabitur, Heaven and Earth shall perish, not in their
substance, but in their outward Form which shall be changed.

Many more of the Ancients might be alleged, who do unanimously consent unto
this Opinion. So that, whatever some people may judge of it now, it is no
Recent Device, but a Doctrine that has been received, as a most Genuine Truth
in former Ages, yea, and now also in these later times it has been Asserted by
Modern Divines. I shall instance in some few amongst a multitude that give
their suffrage hereunto.

Thus Calvin, Hoc unum de mundi elementis notandum est, consumptum iri tantum
ut novam qualitatem induant, manente substantia. This one thing is to be noted
concerning the Elements of the World, that they shall be consumed only by
putting on a new Quality, their substance remaining still the same. And
Commenting upon these words of the Apostle, viz. The Creature is made subject
to Vanity, he thus writes, Dubium non est quin vanitatem opponat integrae
naturae, etc. It is not to be doubted but that S. Paul opposes the present
Vanity of the Creature to that perfect Nature which shall appear in it
hereafter.

Thus Polanus, Erunt Coeli novi quia renovati, sed novis qualitatibus, non
substantia. There shall be new Heavens, because they shall be renewed; but how?
Not with a new Substance, but new Qualities.

Thus Bucanus, Post judicium seu restaurationem omnium rerum seeds and locus
beatorum erit non solum in Coelis, sed etiam in terra. After the Judgment, or
the Restoration of all things, the seat and place of the Blessed shall not
only be in the Heavens, but also in the Earth.

Thus Amesius, Ignis purgando and innovando mundo deftinatus, non antecedet
judicium, sed sequetur, That fire ordained for the purging and renewing of the
World shall not precede the Judgment, but follow it. And again, Elementa non
erunt sublata sed mutata, The Elements shall not be quite taken away, but
changed.

Gomarus after many Arguments that he produces to this purpose, concludes,
Mundus non in nihilum, sed in meliorem statum est redigendus, The World in the
end is not to be reduced to nothing, but into a better estate.

H. Grotius in like manner, Libertatem a vanitate sive interitu accipiet tunc
(...), cum filii Dei ad gloriam illam aeternam pervenient. Solent boni patres
in honorem filiorum etiam servos eorum ornare. The Creature shall be delivered
from Vanity and Destruction, when the Children of God have attained to that
Eternal Glory, even as good Fathers are wont for the honor of their Children
to put some Ornaments upon their Servants.

Piscator also upon the same place writes thus, Romans 8.
Coelum and Terra inn vabuntur, quum Pat^fiet Gloria filiorum Dei; Heaven and
Earth shall then be renewed, when the Glory of Gods Children shall appear.
Ravanellus likewise a late Writer in his Bibliotheca Sacra, says, Etiam Terra
quoad substantiam erit Eterna, Yea the Earth in respect of its substance shall
be Eternal.

Lastly, To name no more; Brentius Hom. 53. in Luc. thus argues, Number Coelum
and Terra transibunt ita ut nihil eorum omnino maneat? Minime omnium, non
transibunt omnino, sed mutabuntur, abjicient vestimentum corruptionis, and
induent novam vestem incorruptionis. Futura quidem Coeli ac Terrae mutatio, non
autem in totum abolitio: Shall Heaven and Earth so pass away that nothing of
them shall remain? No verily, they shall not altogether pass away, but they
shall be changed, they shall cast of the Garment of Corruption, and put on a
new Robe of Incorruption. There shall indeed be a change of Heaven and Earth,
but not a total Abolition.

I have not here mentioned any of our own Writers (who notwithstanding) many of
them Grave, Learned, and Reverend Divines, whose Works praise them in the
Gates; do unanimously Assert the same Doctrine.

And thus we see the concurrent Judgment of Writers both old and new inclining
this way, viz. That it is the (...) only, as the Apostle's word is in another
place (1 Cor. 7.31.) and which some construe to this very purpose) The Figure,
the Habit, the Form and Fashion of the World that shall hereafter pass away,
not the Substance, Nature and Essence of it; for that shall be purified and
perpetuated in Glory to all Eternity. And though the Scripture speaks of a
Conflagration, Dissolution, and Preterition, which they, who are of a contrary
judgment in this Point, do much insist upon; yet since they speak no where of
an utter Abolition or Annihilation, we may with safety abide by what we have
declared.

But here take this Caution, it behooves us in these matters to be wise
according to so briety, and in all humble mod esty to content our selves with
this general discovery of the renovation and restoration of the World; for we
see the Apostle speaks of it in the general term of the Creature, meaning the
frame and sabrick of the World, (as has been said) consisting of Celestial and
Elementary Regions. Now if we should enter too curiously to search what
Creatures else of the World shall be restored, what place shall contain them,
what actions they shall have, what properties they shall be endued with,
wherein they shall be serviceable and useful to the Glorified Saints, etc. If
we should, I say, launch out to venturously into this Deep, we shall not have
the Cynosure of the word to guide us, and so shall certainly fall upon the
flats of our own foolish Imaginations, or run desperately upon the Rocks of
most dangerous errors, such as Cerinthus and the Chiliasts have done. It is
enough for us that we have this general discovery made of the Mind of God
herein, viz. That the Creature shall be restored and delivered from the bondage
of corruption into (or for) the glorious liberty of the Children of God; and
that a reparation shall be made by Jesus Christ of that which sin has so much
defaced and disordered.

And now to conclude; Does not all this evidently speak out, that Christ will
not fail in the exercise of his power over the World? But as he began to
manifest it in the Creation, and to continue it in the preservation; so he will
perfect it in the restoration of all things, declaring himself thereby
mightily to be the Son of God, Yesterday, to Day, and the same for ever.

But before we dismiss this Point, Let us as we have done with the former,
bring in some few Corolaries to wait upon it; for it is not fit that a doctrine
of so noble a sublimity should be without Attendants that may some way be
useful for the Church of God.

The first then that appears comes with a rule or a rod to rectify an old
error newly revived: For if this truth be admitted, as it must unless we will
shut out the Lord Jesus Christ from a most eminent part of his Glory, that is
then an Error to be exploded and repented of, which is very confidently
maintained by many in these times concerning that outward Glory, made up of a
temporal peace, safety and happiness, with an affluence of all good things,
which they have imagined the Saints shall here in this life be Partakers of
before the end of the World, grounding their opinion upon such Places of
Scripture which make mention of this restoration that we have insisted upon.
But if this Restoration shall not be till after the general Judgment (as has
been made to appear) I hope such Persons who have been of that erroneous
persuasion, will find cause hereafter to be of another Mind. I will not deny
but that upon the downfall of that Man of Sin, the Church may shine forth in a
more beauteous luster in respect of spiritual Glory before the end comes,
then now at this present, can be discerned in her: but whatsoever that may
prove, it shall certainly be attended with much trouble from the World, and
from the Devil; for the promises that are made to the Church while she is
Militant, Mor. 10 30 2 Timothy 3.12.
are accompanied with this Proviso, viz. That she must look for Persecution.
And therefore to look for a Kingdom of Saints here which shall continue a
thousand years free from troubles, is so Vain a thing that methinks without a
strong delusion of Satan, it should not enter into the hearts of any that
pretend to be acquainted with the Counsels of God in his Word. It is not meet
that the Spouse should find her way through Ease and Pleasure, when her Lord
is gone before through much Labor and Sorrow. The Disciple is not to be above
his Master, nor the Servant to be above his Lord: It is enough for the Disciple
that he be as his Master, and for the Servant that he he as his Lord: If the
Master of the House was rejected and despised by men, yea made a Man of Sorrows
while he was here upon earth; Es. 53.3.
how much more should the same Lot befall those of his household? It will
assuredly be the Glory of the Church, while she is in her warfare to be still
in the field, fighting the Lords battles, and to resemble the Captain of her
Salvation who went through Water and Blood and was made perfect by sufferings.
For him, Luke 24.26 2 Timothy 2.12 Mat. 30.23.
He ought (as he said of himself) to suffer and so to enter into his Glory: And
surely the Church must follow the same way, if ever she will be Glorified with
him. She shall indeed drink of the same cup with him, and be baptized with the
baptism that he is baptized with: but to sit together with him in his Throne of
Triumph, this undoubtedly shall not be till all the enemies of them both shall
be subdued, nor till his Testimony be given of her constancy and fidelity to
him before his Father, and before his Angels, nor till the final sentence be
pronounced, which shall be her solemn admission and instalment into her
Triumphant Glory.

And this Order must and shall be held and continued, whatsoever vain Persons
do deem or dream of a preposterous inverting of it; which inconstancy though it
be common amongst Men, Rev. 19 9. Ludolphus
yet would be very uncomely for the God of order. The Marriage feast that is to
be kept betwixt Christ and his Spouse is by the Spirit of God sweetly called a
Supper, And why? Eo quod est ultima refectio, says one, because it is the last
refreshing, wherein all labor and travel being ended, and care laid aside the
Church shall enjoy everlasting quietness. But when is it, that the people of
God shall rest from their labors? Surely not till such time as they die in the
Lord, Rev. 14.13. And then when all the Guests are meet together, the Lamb and
his Bride taking their fills of love each with other, then and not before is
every evil removed, all tears wiped away, the righteous Souls of the Elect
shall be no more vexed with the wickedness of impure Sodomites, then shall they
complain no more of the thorn in the flesh, nor the body of death, nor sing any
more that jarring and lugubrious Song, Why art thou cast down O my Soul, and
why art thou disquieted within me? For their Souls at his Supper are satisfied
as with marrow and fatness, then shall there be no more wily Serpent to beguile
them, no wrestling with temptations, no struggling with flesh and blood, the
only exercise then will be to rejoice, to triumph, to sing Hallelujah's to the
Lamb, who has invited and brought them to this Supper, which shall be a
continual Feast unto them to all Eternity,

Let then Pift Monarchy Men and Millenaries go and learn better to construe the
meaning of the Spirit of God in those scriptures, wherein they have hitherto
been grossly mistaken: as in that concerning the Stone cut out without hands
in the Prophecy of Daniel, and that concerning the Thousand years in the
Prophecy of the Evangelist; Dan. 2.34. Rev. 20.4.6.
for that Stone is already become not only the Head of the Corner, but a great
Mountain also, and has filled the whole Earth; and the thousand years, if not
already Expired and Superannuated, yet of too narrow Limits to be a Boundary
for that Kingdom which shall stand for ever; and the restoration of all things
which is to come is not within the compass of their Reckoning, but shall
certainly be when time shall be deplumed of all his feathers of years and
months, etc. and return again into the Womb of Eternity.

The Second Resultancy holds out a Mirroir wherein we may see the Excellency of
our Creation. Though we be now brought very Low, being in respect of our
frailty like unto the Beasts that Perish, yet (fuimus Troes) we had a Glorious
Dominion given us of God over the works of his Hands, as they were in their
purest Being, when none of the Works of the Devil were Mingled with them, and
as they shall be again, when they have passed through the Fire, cleansed from
all the Dross, which now Hangs upon them; A Dominion to which the Creature was
willingly Subject, which was their Glory, and as it will be also hereafter,
when it shall delivered from the Bondage of Corruption: A Glory in some respect
like unto that which the Saints whom the King of Heaven delights to honor,
shall enjoy after the general Judgment unto all Eternity; for, so much does
that Restitution which the Apostle mentions imply: A Life (not much Inferior
to the Angels) wherein there was a Familiar Converse with God himself, the
Light of God's Countenance shining clearly without the least Eclipse upon Man,
and Man beholding (not as in a Glass, but with open Face) the Glory of God, was
(not changed) but stood firm in the Image of God with Joy unspeakable and full
of Glory.

Excellent indeed was the Estate, and admirable was that Honor in which our
first Parents stood for a time; I will not, nor cannot say how long, but
probable it is, that it was longer then it is commonly conceived to be: For
besides that the sixth Day is concluded by Moses with these words. And God
beheld all that he had made, Genesis 1.31.
and lo it was exceeding good, so the Evening and the Morning was the sixth
Day. And besides the variety of things done after their Creation, which
required some Tract of time for their performance, Besides these
Considerations, I say, which are not to be slighted, that liberty which God
gave unto Adam, grounded upon a Command, freely to eat of every Tree in the
Garden (excepting only one) was made use of by him, Genesis 2.16, 17.
as the words of Eve to the Serpent do import, before their tampering about the
forbidden Fruit: We may (says she) or we do eat, as it is commonly read
Vescimur, of the Fruit of the Trees of the Garden, but of the Fruit of the Tree
which is in the midst of the Garden, we eat not: And what is the meaning of We
eat? but this, we are wont to eat, or we have according to God's Command, and
his gracious Indulgence and permission, tasted of every Fruit of the Garden
besides this. Which being so, I demand how this could be done in that short
time of the latter part of that day wherein they were Created? Surely the
tasting of all so soon could hardly be justified from Luxury and waste, of
which they were not guilty in that their innocent and sinless estate; and it
seems to be very unlikely that they would offer to taste of the Fruit so,
bidden, until they had tasted of the rest: Then also it might be supposed, they
were well prepared for Satan's temptation; for then and not till then, the
commendation of the forbidden Fruit, as of a more excellent kind then any of
the rest of which they had formerly eaten, might the better allure them both to
touch and taste. The consideration whereof may be a ground for this Conjecture
(wherein I have the Concurrency of a late learned Divine) viz. Dr. Twiss.
That they continued some while after the day of their Creation in that
excellent Glory. Which I note the rather, because God's goodness to his
Creatures, which he had so beautified with his own Image, should have as large
an extent, as possibly can be upon good terms imagined by us: And why we should
limit it to a shorter time, then is revealed, I see not; yea, and the greater
was our sin, that after we had some large experience of this great Glory,
wherein Divine Goodness had put us, we should through our absurd folly deprive
our selves of it.

This for the second Consideration arising from the said Doctrine.

The third brings a Light in her hand to guide us in the first Resurrection,
and to show us the Glory of the second.

First, we are hereby taught to fit and prepare our selves against this time of
Restoration, viz. By raising up our dull, heavy, and carnal hearts from this
present evil World, where they are too apt to lie grovelling; and by setting our
Affections on things above, and upon this Comfortable time of Refreshing,
wherein the Lord Jesus will freely and fully manifest his love and faithfulness
unto his beloved people. And indeed seeing that these things shall be dissolved
and again restored, What manner of persons ought we to be in all holy
Conversation and Godliness? Scarce any among us, I dare say, but do look for
new Heavens, and new Earth, that is, expect Salvation in the Day of the Lord.
But can we be so deluded as to think that the old Adam should bring us thither?
A Delusion notwithstanding it is, wherewith multitudes are miserably deceived.
But beloved Brethren let it be remembered that the flaming Sword which keeps the
Way to the Tree of Life, will never suffer any to enter there under such a
Conduct. There must dwell nothing but Righteousness, neither shall there in any
wise enter into it any thing that defiles, Rev. 21.27.
nor whosoever works Abomination or makes a Lie. If therefore we carry our
sins along with us, we shall certainly stand without amongst Dogs, and never be
admitted.

Rouse up thy Soul therefore, O poor Sinner, and with Indignation shake off
whatsoever it be that may hinder thee from having a part in that Glory that
shall be revealed: For be assured the Lord Jesus Christ will never suffer his
new Creation to be sullied with the least spot or stain of Uncleanness; He will
not have his poor Creature to be ever groaning: and when he has once freed it,
it shall be freed for ever; none but the new Creature shall be the Inhabitant
of his new Creation. Let all old things then be done away both in our hearts
and in our lives, and let all things become new. I shall conclude this first
Branch with that excellent Gloss of Mr. Calvin upon that of the Apostle, 2 Pet.
3.10. Non subtiliter de igne and procella, etc. Disputare voluit Apostolus, sed
tantum inde elicere exhortationem (quam mox attexit) nempe ut enitamur nos
quoque advitoe novitatem. The Apostle's design is not subtlely to argue about
the sire, etc. that shall be at the last Day, but from the consideration of the
change that shall then be, to draw forth an Exhortation to persuade men to
newness of life. So say I, let us not busy our selves about too curious an
inquisition after the manner of that change that shall be made of the Heavens
and of the Earth, rather it should be our care according to the advice and
warning of the Apostle, that seeing we look for such things as new Heavens and
new Earth, 2 Pet. 3.14
to give all diligence that we be found of him, who is the faithful Author of
this Change, in peace without spot and blameless. And thus are we guided by
this Doctrine to the first Resurrection.

Secondly it will show unto us somewhat of the Glory of the second: For
according to the Power and Wisdom of the Workman, so is the Work to be expected
that comes out of his hands; if he be able and expert in his Art whatsoever it
be, his Work will be answerable, Now it is to be presumed that Jesus Christ who
is the Wisdom of God, and the Power of God, will like himself produce a most
glorious Work in his Restoration of all things: for herein also he will be the
same which he was from the Beginning. What therefore the Prophet spoke in a
certain place, may very well be applied to this purpose, Es. 64.4.
Since the beginning of the World (for in the beginning there was some kind of
resemblance of that Glory which shall be) Eye has not seen (as the Apostle
renders it) nor Ear heard, 1 Cor. 2.9.
neither have entered into the heart of man the things which God has prepared
for them that love him. The Eye of man has seen much, the Ear perhaps has
heard more, but the Heart conceives more then Eye has seen, or Ear heard; but
Eye, Ear and Heart are all too narrow to comprehend or describe the exceeding
weight and superlative Greatness of that fullness of Glory. It may suffice that
it is of his wise and powerful ordering, who is the same yesterday, to day, and
for ever. In the 14 of S. John, the Lord speaks to his Disciples in these
words (which have a measure that reaches unto all Believers) I go, John 14.2.
says he, to prepare a place for you, a place with himself, that where he is,
there also may his people be. Being then, I say, of his preparation, who is the
Lord of Glory, and of his Prepossession too, how can it possibly be but
exceeding Glorious? Kings do not use to erect Cottages, but set forth their
Magnificence in sumptuous Buildings. How stately then shall that place be which
is prepared by Jesus Christ the King of Glory? It was (as he himself faith
elsewhere) prepared from the foundation of the World; Mat 25.34
Yet after some thousands of years, he says again, I go to prepare a place for
you. (Once more behold here by the way how Jesus Christ is still (...), The
same) that excellent Work which he made and prepared at first, and which was
afterward lost and forfeited by manned Disobedience, he will now prepare it
again for all those that believe in him; for in him there is no variableness,
nor ever shall be.

That Preparation therefore that is to be made, will be it seems in part the
Reparation of that which was made in the Beginning: In part, I say, for it will
not become us to mete out, or to set Bounds to this great Work of Christ by any
Topographical Delineations, otherwise then we have the Word to guide us;
neither indeed can we positively determine what it shall be: 1 John 3.2
It does not yet appear, says the Evangelist, what we our selves shall be,
though for the present we be the Children of God; And what the Glory was of our
first Creation, we are not able in this our low estate to find out, much less
do we know what that Glory is which Christ is preparing. But notwithstanding,
this is certain (because it is revealed) there shall be new Heavens and a new
Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness; and where Righteousness dwells, there
must needs be great Glory: For if Righteousness here, where she is but a
Forreiner, and meets with many checks, Pro. 14.34.
exalts a Nation (as Solomon tells us) much more will she Adorn and Beautify
the place of her own Habitation, where she shines without any Eclipse, and
where she rules without any Disturbance or Resistance whatsoever.

A most Glorious Provision doubtless it will appear to be, which will also
abundantly satisfy. When God was about to bring his people into the Land of
Promise, he tells them what was prepared for them, viz. Great and goodly Cities
which they builded not, Deuteronomy. 6.10, 11.
House full of all good things, which they filled not, Wells dug which they
dug not, Vineyards and Olive Trees which they planted not, all should be
made ready to their hands against their coming thither; so shall there be a
preparation made by Jesus Christ for the Saints in the life that is to come, of
all things whatsoever their Souls can desire.

And since we have made mention of this Land which the Lord promised to give
unto his People, when he brought them up out of Egypt, and which is indeed a
Symbol of the Eternal Inheritance, let us proceed a little further in this
matter, confining our Mediations to a short Parallel between that Land and the
Celestial Canaan, which shall be given to all that are Israelites indeed for
their everlasting Possession.

In the third Chapter of Exodus, Ex 3.8.
God tells Moses that he would bring his People unto a good Land and a large,
unto a Land flowing with Milk and Honey, unto the place of the Canaanites, and
the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the
Jebuzites. Now since that Heaven and Earth, as they are prepared by Jesus
Christ, shall be the Receptacle of the Saints hereafter, let us in a short
Survey see how they will both answer their Type in the several parts thereof.

First, for Heaven, It is surely a good Land (to speak of it by way of
Allusion, the Holy Ghost in Scripture leads us herein, and that in this very
Particular, Heb. 11.16.
calling Heaven a Country) Good in respect of Vicinity; for where there are
good Neighbors, the place is commonly by those that are good the better liked.
Now in Heaven there dwells Goodness it self, a good God, and a good Savior,
good Angels, and good Souls, All very Good. As it is therefore a part of the
Torment which the Damned suffer in Hell to be ever in the Company of evil
Angels and ugly Devils: so surely is it a great happiness to be ever in the
sweet Society of Saints and glorious Angels, nay, of God himself. Good then in
respect of good Neighborhood; good also in respect of the abundance of good
things that are there: flowing, I say, not with Milk and Honey, but with Joy
unspeakable and full of Glory.

There are good things for the Soul, and good things for the Body (which being
largely laid open by others, we shall not insist upon them here) There is the
Tree of Life, and the Tree of Knowledge of Good, but not of the least Evil
whatsoever. How good is it to behold the King in his Beauty, Es. 33.17. 1 John
3.2.
to see God as he is in his Glory? This is the Ne plus ultra of the Soul,
hitherto she aspires and no further; For in his presence is fullness of joy, and
at his right hand are pleasures for evermore. This is the Privilege of that
place alone, and therefore surely it is very good; so good, that it is
impossible it should be better, and impossible also for us that are so evil, as
yet fully to know it. Well was it therefore sung in that Anthem of old, Quis
Chalcedon? Quis Jacinthus? Norunt illi qui sunt intus; When once we come to
taste of this Goodness, and to drink of the River of these Pleasures, we shall
then see that clearly, which now we can see but through a Glass darkly.

It is also a large Land, so large that no hand but his that stretched it forth
can be able to mete it out; though there have been some who have too vainly
busied themselves in calculating the Dimensions of it. Some have undertaken to
set out the extent of it thus: As the Element of Water is ten times bigger then
the Earth, the Air ten times bigger then the Water, the Fire ten times bigger
then the Air: So with the like proportion each Heaven bigger then another: And
thus do the Grasshoppers of the earth skip beyond their Line, Es. 40.22.
who because they can, as they think, bestride the Molehil of their own Element
from whence they were extracted, will presume also to take the length of the
span of God's right hand. But away with this Arrogance, far unbeseeming those
that dwell in houses of Clay, rather indeed should our thoughts be swallowed up
with astonishment, when we take into our consideration the largeness of the
Place; and our affections likewise should be enlarged toward it, remembering
what our Savior calls it, John 14.2
His Fathers House, wherein, as he says, there are many mansions: Therefore it
must needs be very great. We see how it is here in this life, according to the
greatness of persons, so commonly are their houses enlarged: Luke 12.18.
Even the rich Tool in the Gospel, when he perceived the world coming in fast
upon him, he presently concludes to pull down his Barns, and to build up
greater: And when Nebuchadnezzar grew to be Great in the earth, Oh how he
prides himself in the sutableness of his Neast? Dan. 4.30.
Is not this great Babylon, says he, that I have built for the honor of my
Majesty? Thus do filly men stand like Cocks crowing upon their Hillocks,
applauding themselves in the largeness of their Train and Elbow-room, which
they have obtained in the world, answerable forsooth to the height and
greatness of their Spirits; when yet notwithstanding, poor Creatures, they are
but walking pieces of earth; and a small Ell possibly of that ground which they
tread upon, will one day be big enough to hold them. Well then if this be the
manner of men to have House and Land here agreeable to their little Greatness,
how great and large is that place, where the great God himself dwells? And
where he will gather his Children together into their Mansions ordained for
them? Surely it is beyond all expression, beyond all admiration. We shall
indeed come to see and know it in that day when we walk the Round with Jesus
Christ who will certainly then show unto us all the Glory and Beauty of his
House, which yesterday, that is from the beginning, he built and created, and
now again in his faithfulness is gone to prepare for us, but till then we must
not be too busy in our shallow apprehensions of it.

Thirdly, As it is a good Land and a large, so it is the place of the
Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the
Hivites, and the Jebuzites, that is, the place of the Angels that sinned, and
which kept not their Principality, Jud. v. 6. (...). 2 Pet. 2.4.
but left their own habitation, as the Apostle S. Jude speaks, whom God threw
down into Hell, delivering them into Chains of darkness to be reserved unto
Judgment. I do not, nor dare not say as some, that one ground of God's election
of men unto life was to fill up that place in his Presence, which was made void
by casting out the reprobate Angels, and that such a number of elect Saints
shall come in their stead, and no more. These are but the froathy Conceits of
men of corrupt minds, who will be wiser then Daniel, Ezekiel. 28.3.
and no secret must be hidden from them. But this I say, that in this
particular also, as well as in the former, the Parallel holds between the Land
of Canaan, and the Celestial Inheritance; for as God did plant his own chosen
people in that good Land, Deuteronomy 7.1.
from whence he drove out the Heathen, that were the Inhabitants thereof,
Nations greater and mightier then they: So will he surely bring his Saints into
that heavenly Country, which he has promised to give unto them, from whence
those Angels (whose height was like the height of the Cedars in comparison of
such a poor shrub as man is) were for their Rebellion driven into perpetual
banishment. Amos 2.9.


Moreover, as Heaven, which God will give unto his people at the last day
(being purchased and prepared for them by Jesus Christ) may in some respect be
likened unto Canaan, such as has been mentioned; so that new Earth, which is
also to come, may in like manner be resembled unto it. It is not safe to speak
of what we have not seen, nor to make other discoveries concerning this matter,
then such as the Holy Ghost has already made. This we may say, seeing there
shall be a new Earth wherein dwells Righteousness, we may affirm it shall
undoubtedly be a good Land: Abounding, I say not again with Milk and Honey, but
with such store of Delights, as are proper for Glorified Saints, who shall
stand in no need of any bodily sustenance from the Creature, as they do here in
this life. And what a good Land will this be, when there shall be nothing in it
that does offend, all the Carcasses of the Reprobate purged out of it, and that
Curse which God laid upon it at the beginning quite taken away.

It shall also be a large Land, even the whole compass of the Earth, shall, at
that day to the uttermost parts of it, be the Saints Inheritance, that promise
being then perfectly fulfilled, Ps. 37.11. Mat. 5.5.
viz. That the meck shall inherit the earth. That which is now the place of the
Canaanites, and of the Hittites, and of the Amorites, etc. That is to say, of
all the Wicked and Unbelievers in the World, shall be unto the Godly for an
everlasting Possession, and that in a more noble and more excellent way, then
it is now unto any, whom for the present Mammon dandles upon his knee, as his
most beloved Darlings.

Nay further, when there shall be no more Sea, as it is said, Rev. 21.1. (which
place according to the concurrent judgment of sundry Divines, is to be
understood literally, as well as figuratively) That fire (whatsoever it may be)
at the Worlds end possibly drying it quite up, this earthly Inheritance will
certainly be then much more enlarged far beyond the narrow extent of what has
been before possessed by the Sons of men. Behold then, O ye Children of men,
what a Glory is prepared for you by Jesus Christ at that great Day of
Restoration! Glory in Heaven and Glory in Earth, Glory for your Souls and
Glory for your Bodies, wherein you will have the advantage of the glorious
Angels in a special resemblance of Jesus Christ, whereof they are not capable;
Phil. 3.21.
for your Bodies though they be vile for the present in regard of their
Original, shall then be made like unto Christ's glorious Body; and your Bodies
and his also being Originally taken out of the earth, the earth also shall be
given you as a measure of Glory above that of the Angels for your Inheritance.
Go up now to Pisgah, and in a Spiritual Rapture take a view of your Inheritance
before you enter into it. An Inheritance glorious and honorable, wherein you
shall be Coheirs with the Lord of Glory; an Inheritance safe and sure, free
from all Intrusions and Encroachments of the World, the Works of the Devil
being all destroyed, 1 John 3.8 2 Pet. 3.10.
and the Works of the Earth utterly burnt up, that is, all the Oppressions,
Pollutions, Snares, Insinuations, Persecutions of wicked men and Devils, which
formerly troubled you, come to a perpetual end; an Inheritance Durante vita, to
hold so long as Eternity it self lasts, where there are many Mansions, common
to all those that are accounted worthy to obtain that World; for Meum and Tuum,
these terms Mine and Thine (which make such a strife in this World) shall not
then be once named amongst them, as a Language out of use, and improper for
that Country which is a place of Glory. What shall be mine, shall be then Yours
that now read what is here written, and what shall be yours, though you be now
Princes of the Earth, shall then also be mine, though I be now of a lower
degree; for we shall be all of a Society in this Inheritance, Fellow-heirs and
Fellow-citizens together, and of the Household of God, united according to a
most perfect Pattern by an indissoluble Bond, even as the Father is in the Son,
and the Son in the Father, John 17.21.
yea more united together in them, as our Center, wherein all the Lines of our
Union and Fellowship do meet, for so much does the same Text witness unto us.

What shall we then say to these things? If Heaven and Earth with all that is
therein desirable will satisfy us, we shall be fully and perfectly happy. And
now let us admire and adore the Lord for this his constant and unchangeable
Goodness, and for his wonderful Works, which he has done from the Beginning,
and will also do to the Worlds end, even unto all Eternity, for the Children of
men: Certainly who so is wise amongst us will observe these things, and ponder
this Superlative exceeding weight of Glory that is prepared for them; which
whosoever does with a quiet and holy dependence upon God for it, they shall
understand more of the loving kindnesses of the Lord, far surpassing that which
is here but poorly and with a narrow and straightened Spirit revealed unto them.

But as for the Tools of the Earth that will not leave their folly, but most
unthankfully (like the people of old who despised that good and pleasant Land,
Ps. 106 24
that Land of Desires, Psalm. 106.24.) will suffer themselves to be bewitched
with this present evil World, and putting away from them their own Mercies,
choose Death rather then Life, they shall most assuredly reap the fruit of
their own Option in the latter end, unless they will learn betimes to be wiser,
and make a better choice. For what else can be expected, when Christ has
prepared so Glorious an Inheritance for men, in whom he professes to have a
peculiar Interest, John 1.11 Mat. 25.41.
and they shall lightly regard it? And when there is a fire, an everlasting
fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, whom his Soul abhors, and men
shall wilfully plunge themselves into it? O foolish people and unwise who has
deluded you? A wretched Covetousness you will undoubtedly find it to be in the
end, to be intruders upon the Devil; a wosul ambition to be Usurpers upon
Damnation; and a folly not to be paralleled unless it be by the reprobate
Angels, to leave your own Habitation so Gloriously repaired for you by Jesus
Christ (who not only Created you but Bought you at a dear Rate) everlastingly
to dwell in. Surely it were much better for you to stand your ground, and to
preserve your Interest with all your strength, preparing your selves against
the time, when an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into that
everlasting Kingdom, Romans 8.23.
waiting for the Adoption, a Glory above the Creatures expectation, viz. The
redemption of our body, when Body and Soul shall be reunited again, and all
things shall be ours in their perfectest Beauty, purged thoroughly from that
dross and corruption which now sticks upon them.

This, I say, should be our chiefest Ambition next unto God's Glory; and if we
were wise, would be our utmost endeavor: for then shall we be with Christ
which is best of all, then shall we experimentally find the blessed effects of
his immutable love toward us unto all eternity, then shall the Creature yield
unto us not a groaning Subjection, but a willing and a cheerful Subjection,
rejoicing that it has somewhat in it that shall conduce to the advancement of
our Glory. O let the consideration hereof work in us a holy Indifferency
toward the things of this present life. What though some be poor and of low
account in the eyes of the world? yet let not the hearts of such be troubled at
it; for our Lord when he comes if he find them doing his will, will make them
as well as others who abound in wealth, Rulers over all that he has. If Riches
increase, Ps. 62.10. Pro. 23.5.
let us not set our hearts upon them: Or if they decrease and take to
themselves wings and fly away, let us not be guilty of such folly, as to let
our hearts fly after them: Bishop King upon Jonas.
but as Fabritius the Roman (a late learned and laborious Bishop made the
Comparison) told King Pyrrhus, who one day tempted him with Gold, and another
day terrified him with an Elephant which he had never seen before, Plutarchus
in vita Pyrrhi. Vtimur mundo fruimur Deo. Aug.
Yesterday I was not moved with thy Money, nor to day with thy Beast: So
whether we be tempted with gain, or terrified with the loss of these worldly
Commodities, we do not trouble our selves either way, Knowing that we have in
Heaven a more enduring substance, Heb. 10.34.

And thus have we done with the second Interpretation of our Text, viz. That
Jesus Christ is (...), the same in reference to the whole Creation.

The Third Interpretation of the TEXT is this: Jesus Christ is the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever, With a more especial Respect unto his Peculiar
People.
Adsis O JESV.
JEsus Christ is the same unto his Church from first to last, that is, from the
first man that was created, to the last that shall be born in this World, or,
from the first Evangelical Promise given in Paradise, viz, The Seed of the
Woman shall break the Serpents head, unto the last Sentence that shall be
pronounced at the great Day, Genesis 3.15.
viz. Come ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from
the foundation of the world. Mat. 25.34.
The same King, and the same Priest, and the same Prophet of his Church
throughout all Ages, the same in his Power over them, the same in his
Satisfaction and Intercession for them, the same in his Doctrine unto them:
Semper idem, always the same.

And now that we may understand more fully the Sense of the Holy Ghost in this
excellent Scripture, according to this Third Interpretation of it, let us
confider distinctly the several Courses or Periods of Time here specified, viz.
(...), that is, Yesterday, to Day, and for ever. And in them all observe the
Immutability of the Lord Jesus Christ toward his Church from Generation to
Generation.

By (...), that is, Yesterday, must according to this sense be meant all the
time of the Old Testament.

By (...), that is, To day, is understood the time of the New Testament.

By (...), for ever, the continuance of that time unto the end, and that
Eternity in order to the fruit and benefit of Christ's Immutability toward his
Church, when Time shall be no more.

CHAP I. Of Yesterday, and the Benefit that the Church enjoyed by Christ's
Economy therein.
TO begin then with Yesterday, which as it is said, must in this sense which we
are now upon, be taken for all he time of the Old Testament, that is, from the
Minority of the Church in her first springing, unto her maturity in that
fullness of Time when Christ came into the World: In which long Tract of time
notwithstanding he was the same in the Exercise of his Mediatory Office toward
his selected People, which he is to Day in the time of the Gospel, when he was
made Flesh, and visibly appeared among us.

Two things are here to be considered by us;

1. The Denomination of the Time, (...), Yesterday. 2. What is predicated of
that time, viz. Christ, (...).
The only He, or the same Yesterday.

Both which will afford unto us their several Instructions. From the first we
may learn that which will be of some use for us to know, and that is this.

The Time of the Old Testament with the Legal Ordinances attending upon it, is
a Day that is set and expired, being Yesterday; and therefore not to be brought
into our account, neither are we to walk in the light of it.

I say not, that the Old Testament it self, Quoad scripturam vel spiritualem
veritatem, as it is a part of God's Revealed Will unto his Church, is now at
this time quite out of date; for even Jesus Christ who is the Sun that shines
gloriously in this our Day, was the Doctrine of the Prophets, as well as of the
Apostles: and he commands us in the New Testament to enquire of him in the
Old, Search the Scriptures; John 5.39. Luke 16.29.
that is, enquire into Moses and the Prophets, They are they that testify of
me: But Quoad dispensationis modum, etc. The Manifestations of God's Presence
with his People are not now after the same manner, as in the time of old, and
the outward form of his Worship which he has prescribed is not the same with
us, as it was with the Fathers: yet nevertheless this does no more impeach the
Immutability of the Mediator by whom the change is made, then a Covenant
written and expressed more plainly with a distinct form of words from what it
had before, does put an imputation of Inconstancy upon him that granted it. Of
which more shall be said hereafter.

The Scripture is very clear for the confirmation of the proposed Doctrine.
Even Yesterday was the setting of that Day foretold, for Daniel prophesied of
the putting out of the Light thereof ( Dan. 9.27.) viz. Dan. 9.27. Jer. 31.31.
Mal. 1.11.
of the cessation of the old Sacrifices: and Jeremy foretells of a new
Covenant, Jer. 31.31. etc. and Malachy of a new Oblation; and the Jews
themselves acknowledge (according to these Prophecies) that when Messiah shall
come, he shall turn their Day into Night, and change their Laws. Answerable
hereto is that of our Savior, Luke 16. The Law and the Prophets were until
John, Luke 16.16.
which John was indeed the true Janus, who saw both days, the Concluder of the
former, and the Beginner of the latter. There will be no great need to insist
much upon the proof hereof; the Epistle to the Galatians is in a manner wholly
spent upon this Argument: let us single out some places wherein the Apostle
gives very pregnant testimonies concerning this matter.

We (says he, Gal. 4.3.
Gal. 4.3.) when we were children, that is, before we had that true manly
knowledge and wisdom, whereto we have now in the fullness of Time attained, were
in bondage under the elements of the world. Heb. 9.10.
Carnal Ordinances which were the Abecedarian Rudiments of the Paedagogy of the
Law, were the Light of that Day; but these Elements are now utterly destitute
of their former Influence, Luster, and Vigor, being become but weak and
beggarly, Gal. 4.9.
Gal. 4.9. of so mean account are they now, even in the judgment of him, who
says of himself, When he was a child, he spoke as a child, making his boast
of them, 1 Cor. 13.11.
verily thinking with himself that he ought to do many things according to
those Rudiments; but when he became a man, he put away all those childish
things. True it is, they had as one says well, been Elements in their time,
and God had used them as the first Letters of the Book to schole his People
with; but their Office was ended, that fullness of Time which brought Christ
into the World, and that fullness of Knowledge and Grace which Christ brought
with him, was their Diminution. The Light which they gave though Glorious in
that Day, is by reason of a more excellent Brightness that now shines, quite
extinct and of no value; even as the poor light of a Candle is of no use, when
the Sun appears in his full strength.

Again, the same Apostle tells us in the same Epistle, Gal. 3.23. Gal. 5.18.
Romans 6.14.
Gal. 3.23.5.18. and so also Romans 6.14. that we are not under the Law: And what
is the privilege that we have hereby? Surely very great, for we are not only
not under the Curse of the Law, but not under the guidance and conduct of the
Law, as it was in the hand of Moses. John 1.17
He indeed gave the Law, that is, the Letter of it, and that was all the light
that he could give, and the Veil upon his face did then shadow out the Veil
upon the peoples hearts, which was not taken away in the reading of the Old
Testament; 2 Cor. 3.14. 2 Cor. 3.6.
but the Ministry of the New Testament is not the Ministry of the Letter, but
of the Spirit; and the Veil which was of old under the Law in the reading of
the Old Testament, is now under the Gospel done away by Christ. So that I say
again, we are not under the Law in the Letter of it, as they of old were,
neither can the Veil of Moses hinder us as it did the people formerly.

As here, so likewise in other places of Scripture does the Apostle bear
witness to this truth, Col. 2.14.
v.g. Col. 2.14. Or De crees. Deleto quod adversum nos erat Chirographo
Doctrinis.
Christ has blotted out the Handwriting or Obligation of Ordinances; whereby
is principally understood the Law of Ceremonies, which was an Act of Yesterday:
Or, Christ has by his Doctrines, that is, new Statutes of the Gospel, blotted
out the Handwriting, viz. of the Law which was against us; (for so the words,
(...), may be rendered without the least perverting of the Apostles sense) Let
it be construed either way, it plainly demonstrates that the Obligation which
was of Yesterday in the time of the Old Testament in full force and virtue, is
now utterly cancelled, made void, and of none effect. And least some might cast
out a scruple, that though it be blotted, yet still it may be legible, the
Apostle further says, He has taken it out of the way; yea, and that it may
not be suspected that it should be afterward brought to light again, it is
added for the removal of all fears and jealousies whatsoever, that he nailed
it, for our greater security, to his Cross, that is, to die with him, and so
rent it in pieces.

Again, Col. 2.17.
Col. 2.17. having spoken of certain Customs and Rites, proper to the Time of
the Old Testament, he says of them, They were but, (...), a shadow of things
to come: And what things were those? Such things as many Prophets and Kings
have desired to see, Luke 10.24.
but could not. A Complication of all which glorious things, the Apostle there
ascribes unto Christ, calling him, the Body, which when it is come, there is
no more use at all of the shadow, but it must give room thereto, and vanish
away. Types are to endure but till the time of Rectifying, Heb. 9.10. that is,
Heb. 9 10.
the Evangelical Jubilee, which sets all in their due Order and Station.

Lastly, To insist upon no more, in Heb. 1.1, 2. there is set down a plain
difference between Then and Now; observe, God who at sundry times and in diverse
manners spoke in time past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last
days spoken unto us by his Son. To them at sundry times, (...), by many parts,
as the word imports, now a part of his will, and then a part, the Lord was
then in the way only of revealing his Mind to his Church, letting forth Light
by little and little, till the Sun of Righteousness Jesus Christ arose, he had
not told his whole Will. And so (...), in diverse manners and troops, not
revealing his Will after one manner, but sometimes by a lively Voice, sometimes
by Visions, sometimes by Dreams, by inspiration, by Urim and Thummim, by Signs
from Heaven, by Types and Ceremonial shadows, etc. One while making known his
Grace under the Promise of the Seed of the Woman, breaking the Serpents head
(which in all likelihood was the constant Doctrine that the Patriarchs those
Preachers of Righteousness in the first Age of the World insisted upon; So
Luther speaking of Enoch, says, Summa fiducia prae aliis Patriarchis Satanae
and Cainitarum ecclesiae se opposuit, confitendo semen mulieris and praedicando
de conterendo capite Serpentis.) Another while entituling himself, The Lord God
of Shem, Genesis 9.26, 27.
who first of all Men upon Earth had God entailed unto him in a special
reserved sort of peculiar Appropriation: and Noah prophecies concerning him,
that God should dwell in his Tents, that is, So Musculus. Meo judicio
simplicius est ut intelligamus loqui Noc de Deo, qui fuerit habit turus in
Tabernaculis Shem, i e. Omnia illius and posteros quoque benedicturus and in
omnibus illi adfuturus, etc. Ita etiam Mercer. Ex. 3.15. Mat. 19.28 John 15.15.
2 Cor. 3.18. 2 Cor. 4.6.
that his presence should peculiarly be confined to him and his Lineage.
Afterward, Ex. 3.15 The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, professing that this
should be his Name for ever, and his Memorial to all Generations, that is, till
the time of Regeneration should come, spoken of Mat. 19.28. Thus diversely did
the Light of that Day break out and shine forth: which various Light is now
vanished, and another more firm and steady, more resplendent and glorious,
displaies his Beams over our Horizon: for in these last days God has spoken
unto us by his Son, and that not in part, but this Messenger of the Covenant
has made known the whole Counsel of God; nor obscurely, for with open face we
may behold as in a Mirroir, the Glory of the Lord, and the light of the
knowledge of the Glory of God shines now clearly to us in the face of Jesus
Christ. Now the kindness and love of God toward man has appeared more
plentifully, more clearly then ever before, being now discovered unto the
Church under the Title of the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom
he has opened all the Treasures of his bounty, in whom his Name is more
magnified, and his Grace more exalted, then Yesterday, in all the Ages that
were from the beginning. From all which it appears, that the time of the Old
Testament with the whole Order and Institute of it, is a Day that is past,
being Yesterday, and therefore not to be recalled.

Which being so, this serves then for the conviction of all those who in this
Day will be still groping after the obscure Light of Yesterday.

The first sort that come under this Censure, are the Jews, who are still of
Yesterday, and will know nothing of the Light of this present Day. Poor people,
what wait you for? Let me speak unto you in the words of truth and soberness,
Your Fathers of old did well to take heed unto that sure Word of Prophecy
(gi^en unto them by the holy Spirit of God) as unto a Light that shined in a
dark place, whereby they did foresee and acknow^edge the expiration of their
Day, even in the same manner, as it has already come to pass, and did discern
afar off this present Day which the Lord has made, Rejoicing in it: Oh that
you would now also in this Day, when the Sun of Righteousness has gotten up
into the Meridian of his full Strength, take Counsel of the same Word too!
possibly your eyes may then be opened, so as you may plainly perceive the
Change that has been wrought, how the great God (who has the Times and
Seasons in his own Power) has concluded the Light of Yesterday, not only in
Demolishing your Temple, and Depriving you of all your Glory, but in the full
Accomplishment of all whatsoever was written in that Word concerning the
Messiah, who is the Light of this our Day.

If you have not Faith to believe this, let the faith of the Gentiles convince
you of your Unbelief: Is it not a clear demonstration without all controversy,
seeing Light is sprung up to the Gentiles who sat in Darkness, that the former
Light is vanished, and utterly destitute of its Brightness? I speak not of a
few Proselytes that might be gathered unto you from among the Nations; but that
whole Nations and Kingdoms should so Unanimously join together to believe in
the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and with one voice to cry out, as they did
of old, 1 Reg. 8.39.
Jehovah is the God, Jehovah is the God. What can it argue, but that God has
taken them into Covenant with himself, even as he has done you? Time was
indeed when you were his peculiar People, Deuteronomy. 4.7 Ps 147.19 20.
and there was no Nation how great soever, that had the true God so nigh unto
them, as you had, in all things that you called upon him for, He made known
his Word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel, He did not
deal so with any Nation, and as for his judgments we did not know them. But now
every Nation that works righteousness and fears God, is accepted of him,
now may we make our boast of Abraham as well as you, if we walk in the steps of
the Faith of our Father Abraham; for we find it by experience to our Comfort,
that God has made him according to his Promise, the Father of many Nations.
Genesis 17.5
God does not now limit his Presence to an Ark, as he did before; but as it was
Prophesied by Malachi, from the rising of the Sun even to the going down of the
same, Mal. 1.11
his Name is great among the Gentiles and in every place (for no place is now
Unclean) Incense is offered unto his Name, and a pure offering, for the Lord of
Hosts had said it, (and his Word must stand) that his Name should be great
among the Heathen.

Yea and the Prophet Esaiah likewise tells us Es. 11.10. that In that day
(that is, another Day distinct from that wherein the Prophet lived) there shall
be a root of Jesse, that is, a sprig sprouting out, and springing up from
Jesse, as from a Root which shall stand up for an Ensign of the people, To it
shall the Gentiles seek, that is, repair and flock together, as to their
Sanctuary and Refuge, wherein they shall trust.

Now what have we Gentiles to do with Jesse, were it not for Jesus? this Root
should for ever have lain hid in the Earth, and we should have joined with
those, who once said, Look to thine own House David, were it not for the Son of
David, in whom we trust. Alas alas your continued Contempt of us Gentiles was
no prevailing Inducement to us, to take your God to be our God; we were as
willing to keep our Distance in those times of our Ignorance, as you your
selves could possibly desire we should; but such has been the exceeding
goodness of your God and our God, as to make himself known unto us in this our
day, as clearly and fully (to say no more) as he did unto your Fathers
Yesterday: and as he was pleased to make a Promise, that the time should come,
Es. 11.1 Jer. 23.5
when this root of Jesse should shoot forth a Branch, Whose name should be
called the Lord our righteousness, whom he would give to be a Covenant to the
people, and a light to the Gentiles, and that in him should the Gentiles trust;
Es. 42.6
so has he made good his word unto us, blessed be his Name, unto us, I say,
who were a foolish people, a people that did neither understand, nor seek after
him, He has brought us into the bond of the Covenant, avouching us to be his
People, and we have avouched him to be our God, yea and He shall be our God for
ever and ever, and we will have no other God besides him.

If then there be such a blessed Change in us, must there not be a Change in
the divine dispensation of Grace? if we own your God for our God, Is it not
clear that there has a Light appeared which was not of Yesterday? And whence
comes it, that we who were sometimes Darkness are now Light in the Lord? surely
flesh and blood has not revealed it unto us, but we have received it by the
hand of that true Light which lights every man that comes into the World, A
Light that lightens the Gentiles, as says your Prophets, and which alone must
be the glory of Israel

Now therefore O ye Jews, I beseech you, be as we are; for in the knowledge of
the true God, according to the Scriptures, we are as you are. You have not
injured us at all, rather your I all has been to our advantage, neither will
our Breaches be made up among one selves, but by your conjunction with us. O
consider it is the purpose and decree of the Almighty to make you instrumental
in bringing to pass his great Work, which is the perfecting of his Church in
these latter days; for as your Fathers were not to be perfect without us, so
neither shall we be Perfect without you: Behold this is that will make you as a
Crown of Glory in the hand of the Lord, Es. 62 3
and as a royal Diadem in the hand of your God; which when it is come to pass
(as it will surely come) Oh how shall we flock together unto you, Zech. 8.23
and hang upon you, Ten of us taking hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew,
saying, we will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you: Since
therefore this honor is reserved for you, What? will you be still groping in
the Dark? will you be ever poring upon Yesterday? shall the Day be almost
spent, before your Eyes be opened to see the Light that now shines, and the
Glory that waits for you? And if ever through the good Providence of God this
paper may come to your perusal, O let the good hand of God go along with it to
rouse and quicken you. This is not spoken to you with Disdain, but with a
hearty desire of your Restoration; nor with any contempt or abhorrency at the
appellation of Jew, but with Pity. For though the Name and Title of your Nation
carries with it a reproach among us Gentiles, because you Crucified the Lord
of Glory; yet we know it has been a Title of the greatest dignity and honor
upon earth, and shall be so again, unless (as it is said by the Prophet) you be
called by a new name which the mouth of the Lord shall name. Es. 62.2
Yea so far is any shadow of scorn from this address unto you, that I do here
in the behalf of all the Churches that profess the Faith of Christ crucified,
declare unto you, that upon your return unto that great Messiah, whom you have
hitherto rejected, and besides whom it is in vain to seek for any other, we
will yield unto you that Pre-eminence which is your due: for though we were in
Christ before you, yet we must ever acknowledge you to be the First born, the
excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power: and as we have been first,
so we shall be contented (according to the order and appointment that is given
us) to be Last; and as you have been the Last, so shall it be your lot and
honor to be First again In the mean time we must confess that we poor Novices
are grown up to be a wanton Generation, quarelling and wrangling one with
another oftentimes about trifles (God knows) to the blemishing of our holy
Profession among those that are without, and greiving of that good Spirit of
the Lord that dwells in us and among us. All which would undoubtedly be
remedied, if we had your Brotherly assistance to make us Wiser.

We know well what honorable Privileges God has of his abundant love
granted unto you. Our great Apostle Saint Paul an Hebrew of the Hebrews (who
as you have heard was at first a bloody Persecutour of the Disciples of the
Lord Jesus, yet afterward even in the heat of his Fury was miraculously
converted to the Faith which he before sought to destroy) even he in his
Epistles has set us an Example to give you the Pre-eminence, speaking in this
manner, once and again, the Jew first, and also the Gentile, the Jew first, and
also the Gentile; he has also given us a Synopsis of your Prerogatives which
we with gladness of heart are willing to look upon.

He has told us that you are Israelites the noblest Generation in the World,
Romans 9.4.5.
a People that were wont to prevail like Princes with God himself, even as
Jacob your Father did, whom therefore God was pleased to honor with the name
of Israel, which name was also by a special indulgence from God devolved upon
you as the greatest blessing: To you pertained the Adoption, being the First
born Exodus 4.22 upon whom the name of the Lord was called, when we poor
Strangers were not under his rule and governance, neither were then called by
his name Es. 63.19. You had the Glory, the Ark of the Covenant of your God, the
Symbol of his glorious presence in the midst of you: You had the Covenants even
those Tables written by the Finger of God: To you was the Law given by the
disposition of Angels, that is, the Oracles of God both Moral and Judicial: The
service of God was committed unto you, which consisted in a Holy Typical use of
Divine Rites and Sacrifices prescribed in the Ceremonial Law: The Promises also
were yours, both Legal and Evangelical, of this life and that which is to come:
You are the Posterity of Abraham the friend of God, and of Isaac and Jacob,
Heirs with him of the same Promise and Grace: And in fine, as the Complement
of all the rest, From among you was the Messiah to come. And in the fullness of
time did come the Incarnate Son of God, taking his flesh of you, that he might
(though he be God blessed for ever) be the Mediator between God and Man, yea
suffer Death for you, and us likewise that believe in him.

All this we willingly yield unto you: nay more, we will be confident of your
Restoration, because the Lord has said it, and he will not Repent; concerning
which we shall God willing speak more largely hereafter in the following parts
of this Treatise, because our Text, which is the ground of the whole Matter,
has a special respect unto you above all others.

Come then in the name of God, let us join together, and go up to the Mountain
of the Lord, Es. 2.3, 4, 5.
to the House of the God of Jacob, He will teach us his ways, and we will walk
as Brethren in his Paths; for out of Sion shall go forth the Law, and the Word
of the Lord from Jerusalem, He shall judge among the Nations, and shall rebuke
many People, They shall beat their Swords into Plow-sheares, and their Spears
into Pruning-hookes, Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation, neither
shall they learn War any more. O House of Jacob come ye, and let us walk in
the light of the Lord.

But as for those wretched Apostata's, who were once enlightened, but now turn
their Backs upon this Light, denying the Lord that bought them, and so Crucify
to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open Shame, pretending
to join themselves to you in walking in the Light of Yesterday, Woe unto them,
it had been good for them, they had never been born, and I doubt not but when
you shall come to look upon him whom you have Peirced, and to Mourn for him
(according to the Prophecy of Zechariah) as one mourns for his only Son,
Zech. 12.10.
that you your selves will abhor them, as a People most accursed, and so I
leave them.

Another sort that grope after the Light of Yesterday, are those that seek to
be justified by the Works of the Law; who do but lose themselves in the Dark,
and shall never be able thereby to see the Light of Life. True it is, the Law
was once such a Light which, if it had been exactly followed, would have been a
sure Conduct into the Presence of God; but being not observed, as it ought to
have been, it seemed good to the Father of Lights to remove it, so as that it
is now totally and finally Eclipsed in respect of any Influence in that Point
of Justification, which was the glory of it in the Beginning. And whosoever
they be that will now pretend to walk in the Light of it, so as to be justified
thereby in the Sight of God, they shall most assuredly find it to be a
dreadful Blazing Comet that portends nothing, but inevitable Ruin and
Destruction unto them. And yet alas how inconsiderate are many People in fixing
their Confidence hereupon? Though they cannot but know that Do this and live
was the Voice of God Yesterday, But Live and do this, is the Command of the
Lord to Day; so expressly contrary is the Light that now is (in the
manifestations of it) to that which was formerly: yet such is the Crossgrain'd
perverseness indeed of us all by nature, whereby we are wont ruere in vetitum,
that we are apt still to thwart God in his Dispensations toward us, And
because we mist of the Tree of Life, by not doing that at first which God
commanded, therefore being led on by that Appetite which is still in us by
Nature after that first Estate, wherein we were Created, we do, contrary to
Gods express Inhibition, foolishly Endeavor by our own Righteousness to
recover it again wherein (as has been said) we loose our selves utterly, God
having now propounded another way to Life.

But it may be Objected, was not the Law given since upon Mount Sinai? and if
we must not be justified by the works of the Law, wherefore was it revived?

I Answer with the Apostle Gal. 3.19. the Law was added because of
Transgressions, that is, Gal. 3.19
not only for the restraining of them (as it is commonly conceived) though
that be a chief end of giving the Law, but because Transgressions so much
abounded in the World, when the grace of God had so much appeared. In which
regard God seeing Men so Unworthy of his Grace, he revived the Old Covenant
again in giving the Law, which was, says the Apostle, to continue till the
Seed came to whom the Promise was made, that so men might thereby as by a
Schole-Master be whipped out of their old Form, which being come, if any will
yet hanker after that old Covenant, the Law shall no more be revived for that
end as formerly, but the Condemnation thereof shall be added for the Contempt
of the Gospel.

Away therefore with all this Homespun Inherent Righteousness, let it be
accounted in the matter of Justification before God, even as in truth it is,
but a filthy Rag; and when we have done all that we can, given all our Goods to
the Poor, and our Bodies to be burned, let us say, we are unprofitable
Servants, etc. And for the Law, let it be a Guide unto us, as it ought to be,
in the way of Holiness and Righteousness all the Days of our Lives, but we
must not make it our Guard to preserve us at any time from Incensed Justice of
the Almighty mighty, for therein it will certainly fail: a good Tutour it is to
instruct and admonish us, but an idle Advocate to plead for us before God's
Tribunal, its only Exercise there, being to Accuse and Condemn.

A Third sort that Unseasonably busy themselves with Yesterday* are the
Papists, who have a long time set up the Ceremonial Law of Moses in the Worship
and Service of God, who are it seems, and still will be Children, led on by
weak and beggarly Elements, which notwithstanding at this time are not any Help
unto them at all, but rather a Hinderance in respect of any Spiritual
Edification: and whereas they pretend to promote the Gospel, and to advance the
Honor of Christ, they do in effect by their Conformity to the Mosaical
Paedagogy, deny and forsake them both. To what purpose are their Altars, their
Priests, their Sacrifices, their Washings, Unctions, Shaving, Sprinkling,
Purifying, etc. To what End, I say, are these many other the like beggarly
Ceremonies, but to bring a Vail over the Gospel, and to call back Yesterday, to
which the Lord Jesus Christ has pronounced a consummatum est? And if they be
not finished, Christ himself has not yet finished his Work for which he was
sent into the World; and then where are we?

There need not much be said concerning this matter. The affront that is hereby
put upon the Lord Jesus Christ is so notorious, that it is discernable by all
that are not given up to strong Delusions.

To conclude therefore, it is very well noted by one who has a long time been
a laborious Workman in the Lord's Vineyard, that the Lord by Burying the dead
Body of Moses in an unknown place, did in a kind, signify that he has so
abolished the Legal Ordinances, that they must be buried in eternal Oblivion,
and never to be looked after, nor minded any more. Whosoever therefore shall
now go about to revive any of those Ce^emonies of the Law, as the Papists do,
their Work is no other in God's eyes then the raking up of Moses's Dead Body
which the Lord has concealed. Such a Censure likewise gives Saint Augustine,
when he had spoken of the Jewish Ceremonies, that they were to have a Solemn
Funeral, which would require some time (upon which account were the Apostles
excusable for their temporary connivence at them) He adds, Quisquis nunc etc.
Whosoever shall now use them, as it were raking them up out of their Dust, he
shall not be pius deductor corporis, sed impius violator sepalturae) A pious
Helper in the Burial, but an impious and sacrilegious Wretch that ransakes the
quiet Tombs of the Dead.

In the last place, such who now-a-dayes Pretend to Oracles, that is, Visions
and Revelations, and wait for Miracles, may by this Doctrine be convinced of a
woeful Delusion wherewith they are Haunted; for it will appear, that even these
also were the Light of Yesterday. Indeed when God was letting forth Light by
little and little, now a part of his Word, and then a part of his word, he did
at that time, as has been said before, reveal his Mind sundry ways: but now,
when the Day is not only Dawned, but the Sun of Righteousness is come forth
out of his Chamber, appearing like a strong man in his Race, God does not use
to interpose Heterogeneous Flashes of Light, differing from that which he has
in his Wisdom and Goodness set forth to be the Fountain of Light to all the
World. The Firmament of Heaven cannot endure two Suns, yea horrid Confusion
would seize upon the Face of Nature, if such a thing were; even the Parelii,
that is, Resemblances of the Sun in the Air, usually called Mock Suns, are
Praemonitours of fearful Prodigies like to ensue: and these new Lights
differing from the ordinary Light of our Day, have not only Portended, but
brought on Dismal and Lamentable Disasters upon the poor Church of God.

Visions and Revelations were the Light of Yesterday; and though there were
some such Manifestations of it now and then, Ps. 89.19
when it was in Occasu, in the instant of Setting in the Primitive Times, as
there were Prophecies and Jewish Ceremonies, of which we find some, though
very rarely, were taken up and made use of (for after a Shower will come some
Drops:) yet to expect them now, or to pretend any need of them at this time,
when with open Face we do behold the Glory of the Lord, and this Glory of the
Lord likewise shines clearly unto us, in the Face of Jesus Christ, what were
this but shameful ingratitude? It is as if a man should exclaim against the
Light of the Sun, and call for a Candle to be set up at High-noon Day.



Jer. 31.34. Jer 31.34.
For Example; particular mercies to some of God's special Servants, or
particular Judgments on his Enemies whether particular Men or whole Kingdoms
were often revealed to Godly Men in those Days: but Salvation by the Messiah.
And the manner how the Messiah should save his Church, is more fully and plainly
plentifully revealed now, then it was in those Days. Besides we have the
Substance of their shadows, and the performance of their Promises. In which
respects it must be acknowledged our State is far more excellent then theirs.

From whence we may Collect with a late Writer, Mr. Perkins.
who in his Generation labored much in the Lord, That Revelations of God's
Will to be expected now under the Gospel, are ordinarily nothing else but these,
viz. The true Sense and Meaning of Holy Scripture and a discerning of True
Scripture from Forged, of True Sacraments from Supposed, of True Doctrines from
False, of True Pastors from False Prophers; these and such like as far forth
as they are necessary to Salvation, all true and faithful Believers (which out
of an humbled Heart, do seek it by devout Prayer at God's hand) are sure to
have revealed unto them from God Ps. 25.14. Ps. 25.14.
But as for other Purposes of God viz. of Personal and particular matters, or
what shall be his blessings, or what his Judgments to these and these Men,
Families, Cities or Kingdoms, or when, or how he will change States or
translate Kingdoms, or by what extraordinary means he will have his Gospel
propagated, or a declining Church or State upholden, these we are not now to
expect nor easily to believe any that shall say, such things are revealed unto
them.

And yet as the said Author says well, we do not hereby limit the Almighty,
or tie the Lord in such strait Bonds, but he may sometimes extraordinarily
reveal his Purpose in some such Cases to some of his selected Servants,
provided that that Revelation be examined and allowed of by the Church. Thus he

And the truth is, it is but necessary that such restrictions should be in this
Case, which undoubtedly God does allow of; it being a most certain rule, Deus
non deficit in necessariis, God is not wanting in things necessary. Now surely
this is needful. For though the Holy Scriptures are not to wait upon the
allowance of the Church, rather let the Church stand or fall to the infallible
Judicature of the Scriptures; yet this Power has the Church given unto her of
God, to judge of extraordinary Revelations, whether they be of God or no;
neither are they to be of any account with the people of God, till they have
passed the Scrutiny and Censure of the Church: otherwise what dangerous
Consequences would follow hereupon, it is not any hard matter to foresee.

Here we shall have one cry out (...), I have Dreamed, I have Dreamed, as those
Impostours did Jer. 23.25. Jer, 23.25
And his Dream must pass for Current without a Scripture-interpretation, though
notwithstanding it may proceed from a filthy Dreamer.

There another will come and pretend Impulses of Spirit (as some of late have
impudently done in this Nation) for the justifying of his coursel, though the
unwarrantableness of it, be made so plain to his Face, that it is past all
Gainsaying.

Yea, seeing that Satan transforms himself into an Angel of Light, what means
shall we have to distinguish between Diabolical Delusions, and the Infusions of
the Spirit of God, if every man may obtrude upon us what he pleases for a
Divine Revelation.

But we have a more sure word of Prophecy (as the Apostle writes 2 Pet. 1.19)
my meaning is, we have the Holy Scripture, 2 Pet. 1.19
whereunto we should do well to take heed, and to have a standing Word to be a
constant Light unto us, which is the Light of this our Day, is far better then
to have the several glimmerings of Revelations, which were the Light of
Yesterday; and if we will not believe Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his
Apostles, our Faith will be little furthered by Visions and Revelations.

Say not therefore, who shall ascend into Heaven? that is, to bring Christ down
from above, even to pull the Sun of Righteousness out of his Orb; or who shall
descend into the Deep? that is to bring up Christ again from the Dead, this
were to overturn the Series of thy Salvation; the Word is nigh thee, and
therefore content thy self with it, and seek not to call back Yesterday, which
does not belong unto thee (This Scripture viz. Romans 10.6, 7, 8. Romans 10.6 7, 8.
I only in this place make use of by way of allusion, and no otherwise.)

O but may some say, if there were Miracles wrought now amongst us, as there
were formerly, would not this conduce much to our Confirmation in the Faith.

I Answer this also was Yesterday's Light, therefore of no use unto us: and
though it did continue also a while at the Dawning of our Day, yet it served
only for the manifesting of Christ unto the World, and the Propagating of the
Gospel in those Primitive Times. To this purpose says Peter Martyr, fuerant
miracula ut buccinae and praecones, quibus Evangelium commendabatur, Miracles
were as Trumpets and Harbingers whereby the Gospel, at its first appearance,
was proclaimed and made glorious.; which being done the Trumpets became
useless, Non nunc ut olim sunt necessaria miracula. Priusquam crederit mundus,
necessaria fuere ad haec ut mundus crederet. St. Aug.
and therefore fit to be laid aside. As the Law of Moses obtained Authority
among the people by the Miracles done upon Mount Sinai, and in the Desert,
which afterward ceased upon the entrance of the Israelites into the Land of
Promise; so likewise Miracles being ordained to be subservient to the Gospel
for the same End, are now also to cease when the Gospel has spread far and
wide about the World: in so much that we may well say, if any man, who lives
under the Light that now shines, should wait to be converted by a Miracle, it
would be a Miracle indeed if he were converted.

Nevertheless to satisfy such amongst us, who are too like unto those of whom
our Savior speaks in the Gospel except ye see signs and Wonders, Joh. 4.48.
ye will not believe; Be it known unto you that the Heavenly Oracles by which
we are guided in this our Day, are accompanied with continued and standing
Miracles, though Miracles of a more spiritual nature: what is the demolishing
of the Fortifications of Flesh and blood, and casting down of strong Holds,
mortifying the Old Man, which is our corrupt Nature, and ejecting the strong
Man, which is the Devil out of the Hearts of Sinners, whereby the Arm of Lord
is made Bare, and the Spirit of Christ in the Gospel exercises its Virtue and
Vigor more abundantly, then ever (it being as the Psalmist speaks, the day
of the Lord's Power) More Devils being Cast out since Christ's Ascension, then
were before, what I say, are these but Miracles? The Miracles which the Lord
wrought, when he was upon Earth, were indeed the Product of an Almighty Power;
yet he himself tells his Apostles, that they, and not only they, but others
that should be employed in the same Ministry after them, Joh. 12.14
should do greater things then those, whereby he seems to mean the Conversion
of Men to the Faith by the Preaching of the Gospel: to this purpose says Saint
Austin who himself was a Miracle both in his Conversion and Conversation, Mundi
ad Christum conversio per Apostolos and alios facta, omnium miraculorum maximum
est miraculum, the Conversion of the World unto Christ is of all Miracles the
greatest. Neither is this an Hyperbole, considering (as it has been observed)
that by so inconsiderable, so despicable means, against so implacable, so
powerful enemies, Truth should triumph, and so mightily prevail, as that the
Conquered should command, subdue, and at length give Laws to the Conquerours,
till almost the whole World became her Convert, Reason cannot conclude less,
then non hac sinc Numine, this must needs be the Lord's doing. A Miracle well
worthy of Admiration, that by the Foolishness of Preaching, so many Millions
have been Converted, and made Wise unto Salvation. To open the Eyes of the
Mind, is without all question more then to give bodily sight; to make the Deaf
to hear, and the Dumb to speak, were indeed great things: But to pronounce
Ephatha to the Heart and Mouth of a Wretch desperately set against Christ and
his Gospel, and he thereupon Immediately to rise up, and give Glory to God,
what can it argue but a mavelous Work and a Wonder? It was a Wonder
heretofore to hear of Saul amongst the Prophets, insomuch that it grew to a
Proverb, 1 Samuel 10 12
Is Saul also among the Prophets? and is it not as great a Wonder, to hear of
Saul among the Apostles? That he who persecuted the Saints in time past, should
after preach the Faith, which he once Destroyed? Gal. 1.23


Now if such Changes and Conversions were in other material or sensible things,
as from Water to Wine, from Iron to Gold, or a Transition from one Species to
another, what astonishment would arise thereupon? whereas in Spirituals, this
Changing is more Wonderful, though less discernable.

So then Miracles there are also in these times sufficient to evidence the
Truth and Power of the Gospel, and to confirm the Faith of those that do
believe; though not such as were of Yesterday, which is past, with all the
Appurtenances of it, and must not be recalled, as has been said; and therefore
Men had best beware how they quarrel at the present Dispensations of Grace, by
a pretended Zeal, after the Light of Yesterday, least that of our Savior be in
the end Charged upon them, viz. That Light is come into the World, Job. 3.19
but they love Darkness rather then Light.

Nevertheless albeit that Yesterday be past, and of no account with us in the
Time of the Gospel; yet it was of some account with Jesus Christ, for he was
even then (...), the Same, which is the Second thing to be observed in order to
this first Period of time here mentioned in the Text.

(...) Jesus Christ the Same, or the only He Yesterday.
BUt what means the Apostle here by the Same, or the only He Yesterday? what
I say, but this according to the sense of the Text, which we are now upon, and
which is the Doctrine that falls into our present Consideration, viz.

Jesus Christ the Savior of his Church in the time of the Old Testament, even
as now in the time of the Now.

A Common Savior to them and us, like as the Salvation wrought by him is
called a Common Salvation. Jud. v. 4.
Then did the Faithful People of God believe that through the grace of the
Messiah, they should be saved even as we; As we now believe that through the
same Grace, we shall be saved even as they. Act. 15.11
For both They and We are fixed upon one and the same Foundation, besides
which, never was there any other laid from the Beginning of the World. To this
purpose does ^aint Paul join the Prophets of old with the Apostles of late in
laying of this Foundation, 1 Cor. 3.11 Ephesians. 2.20
which is Jesus Christ, the chief Corner Stone, insinuating thereby what a
sweet Harmony and Agreement there is between them in the Doctrine of Salvation,
both intending one and the same thing. Hence it is that the Apostles do
frequently intersert the Testimony of the Prophets, that the World might know
it was no Novelty which they Preached, but a Doctrine professed and maintained
in all Ages, which was, That the way of Salvation was ever the same from the
beginning viz by Faith in Jesus Christ and not by the Works of the Law.

But I hear a Question that must be resolved before we proceed any further,
least it should stick in the Minds of any to the Prejudging of that which may
follow. The Question is this

Gal. 4.4.
could he be a Savior to any, before he was in a Capacity by taking upon him
our Nature, to suffer Death for the Expiation of Sin?

viz. in the Acceptance of the Father, and in the Application of the Faithful.
The Father gave his Approbation of him, in that he did acquiesce in all those
Sacrifices of old which had their Tendency unto him: in which respect he is
called the Lamb slain from the beginning of the World. Rev. 13 8
The Faithful also according to that Paedagogy which led them, did ever look
through all those Mystical Types unto Christ alone, expecting Salvation through
him; for else they were of no use at all unto them. Heb. 10.4
The blood of Bulls and Goats not being able to take away Sin (which was
indeed the only Property of the blood of the Lamb) nor any other of those
carnal Ordinances making them that did the Service of the Tabernacle perfect,
as pertaining to the Conscience (which was also the Property of the Spirit that
should afterward be poured out abundantly in the Time of Reformation) but of
this their expectation more may be said hereafter.

Secondly, Jesus Christ did in all the offices of a Mediator show himself
effectually to be a Savior to them of old, albeit the work of Redemption was
not really acted by him in the World, till the Time appointed of the Father:
for it was but suitable to the superlative excellency of his Merit, to have its
Virtual operation long before his Appearance in the Flesh: even as a Prince
entitled to a Kingdom by Birth or Prowess is immediately vested with the Power
and Government over the People, though the Solemnity of his Coronation be for
some Wise and Politic ends of State, deferred to a longer Season.

Now therefore to give a clear Resolution in this matter, which in truth is but
requisite, and which will be conducible also to the Confirmation of the Point
in hand, it shall here be made evident that the Lord Jesus Christ was the same
Prophet, King, and Priest of his Church ever from the Beginning: and if upon a
due Inquiry we find it to be so, I hope it will then be granted on all hands,
that he was the Savior of his Church from the Beginning also.

The same Prophet ab initio.
To begin with the first, Jesus Christ fulfilled the office of a Prophet in all
those Primitiar times of the World, making known the Counsel of God unto Men,
which without him must for ever have been concealed from them, and giving an
effectual Virtue to those Sacraments which in their Order and Time were
instituted and established in his Church.

Hence is he by the Prophet Esaiah called Wonderful Counselor (for so these
two Words are to be joined) as much as to say, Es. 9 6
A Counselor that reveals Wonders, and discovers Mysteries, the greatest
Wonder and profoundest Mystery indeed that ever was, viz. of God, being
reconciled unto Man, which has been the Staff and Supportation of the World in
all Ages. And in this Counselor does the said Prophet with the People of God
in that Age challenge a peculiar Interest, for we find it there spoken in the
present Tense, as a thing already done; To us a Child is born, to us a Son is
given, and the Government shall be, or, is, or, has been (so the Word may be
rendered) laid upon his Shoulder, and his Name shall be called Wonderful
Counselor. I deny not but that it is the manner of Prophets to speak of
things to come, as if they were presently acted in their sight, and this
interpretation is commonly given of the Prophet in this place, unto which I do
willingly Consent: But withal I conceive that hinders not, but that the People
of God then might be Apprehensive of the present Spiritual Benesit which they
had by Christ, and in this regard might the Prophet render it in the present
Tense. The Septuagints translation differs from our Latin and English Version,
bringing in these Words, viz. (...), the Messenger of the great Counsel, he
that brought the Tidings of Salvation from Heaven, the best that ever was heard
of in the World, even that which was the result of an eternal Decree, enacted
in the Privy Council of the Almighty. This Counsel, I say, the Lord Jesus
Christ has imparted ever from the Beginning; for how else could Adam, Henoch,
Noah, Abraham, David, or any other in those several Ages of old, be able with
Comfort to enjoy the Blessings which God gave them under the Sun, if they knew
nothing of a Way and Mean of escape from the wrath and urse which Sin had
brought upon them? and who could be able to reveal it but this Wonderful
Counselor? No man (says the Evangelist) has seen God at any time (that is,
since the World began) The only begotten Son, who is in the Bosom of the
Father, John. 1.18.
he has declared him. The original Word there (...), that is, exposuit, is
very Emphatical, implying that Jesus Christ has been the Father's Interpreter
to the Sons of Men; for exegesis is an exposition or Interpretation of things
that are obscure.

So then Christ it was (as he says of himself) that was the Light of the
World, Joh. 8.12. Joh. 1.9.
That true Light that lights every man that comes into the World. And
whosoever they were in all Ages that spoke not according to his Word (as he
dictated to them) it was because there was no Light in them. He was the Prophet
and Preacher of righteousness to the old World, for as the Apostle Saint Peter
witnesses 1 Pet. 3.19. He did then in the Spirit of Quickening preach unto the
People of that Generation: 1 Pet. 3.19.
and because there were then disobedient spirits that would not be quickened by
him, therefore they were afterward by the just judgment of Judgment of God
shut up (...), that is, imprisoned in Hell, thrown into the Dungeon where the
bright beams and gracious Quicknings of this Spirit should never come at them.

This office indeed he then executed by the Ministry of Men that were his
Servants, Ps. 68.11
in the same manner as he does now in this Time of the Gospel: The Lord gave
the Word, and great was the Company of those that Published it, as the Psalmist
says in another case. He spoke by the mouth of all his Holy Prophets which
have been since the World began, and to him give all the Prophets witness, that
through his name whosoever believed in him, should not perish but have
everlasting Life. Even those Patriarchs that were before the Flood. Jud. v. 14
what were they but Prophets of his Order? When Henoch Prophesied concerning
him, he spoke as he was moved by his Spirit: for as no Man can discern the sun
without the Light of the Sun, and what Man says St. Paul knows the things of
a Man, save the Spirit of Man which is in him, even so the things of Christ
knows no man without the Spirit of Christ: 1 Pet. 1.11
yea the Apostle St. Peter testifies expressly that it was the spirit of
Christ which was in the Prophets of old, 1 Pet. 4.6
and that the Gospel was preached to them that were dead, that is, as Mr.
Calvin conceives very probably, by comparing this with that which went before,
to those of the old world who were alive in the days of Noah, but dead in the
time of the Apostle's writing

All which considered, it appears clearly that Jesus Christ was the Prophet
of his Church from the beginning in making known the Mind of God concerning
the Salvation of his Elect, and in the Promu^gation of the Doctrine which has
always been one and the same.

Now as touching Sacraments, the Institution whereof belongs to the
Prophetical office of Christ; when the Divine Wisdom brought them on by
degrees, and ordained them for the People's Incorporation into the Body, and
their Corroboration in it, what Grace or Spirituality soever they had in them,
and without which they had been altogether in vain, it was not originally nor
determinately in themselves, but derived from Jesus Christ, Romans 4.11.
and in effect wholly depended upon him: what was Circumcision, but a seal of
the Righteousness (not of the Law, but) of Faith, that is, of Christ's
Righteousness which is the proper object of Faith, whereby Abraham and his seed
were ever justified before God? And what was the Paschal Lamb but a Passover
to Jesus Christ, the Lamb of God that takes away the Sin of the World, without
which, Divine Justice would never have distinguished between Israelites and
Egyptians? Jesus Christ was the Spirit of Life of the Sacraments of old, as
well as of those that are now in use amongst us. 1 Cor. 10.4.
Yea the Apostle says plainly of the Israelites in the Wilderness (1 Cor. 10
4) that They did all eat the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same
spiritual drink, (...), the same Meat, the same Drink, not only the same
together amongst themselves (as some would have it) but the same with us, (for
that is according to the scope of the Apostle in that place) and the Reason
following enforces it, for they drank of that spiritual Rock which followed
them, and that Rock was Christ; their Rock therefore is the same with our Rock,
the Apostle himself being Judge; Christ was their Savior, 1 Cor. 10, 9.
and when they sinned, they sinned against Christ, for so says the Apostle v.
9.

Christ a King Yesterday
Secondly, As the People of God Yesterday, that is, in the times of old, had
Jesus Christ for their Propher, so they had him for their King; I speak not now
of his Natural Kingdom, as he was God Equal with the Father, but of his
Oeconomical, as he was Mediator between God and Man. He was the Head of his
Church from the beginning, and so consequently was it ruled, ordered and guided
by him in all things, the Government was laid upon his Shoulders; for otherwise
he could not well have quitted himself in the great work of Salvation: as a
Prince can never be able to Defend and Protect his Subjects, unless he have a
Supreme Power and Authority over them; and therefore does the Apostle put forth
these together as inseparable Concomitants, calling Christ the Head of the
Church, Ephesians. 5.23
and the Savior of the Body Ephesians. 5.23.

Hence it is that He is called by the Apostle, Romans 8.29
The first-begotten among many Brethren, Many in that place signifying All, all
that ever had been, are, or shall be; for albeit he was born of his
Virgin Mother some thousands of Years after the Creation, and in that respect
viz. of time, was made flesh, taking upon him our Nature after many millions of
Brethren that were before him born into the World, yet nevertheless he was
immediately (upon that great Turn of Providence in the Violation of the first
Covenant by Adam's Transgression) begotten of the Father, according to his
eternal Decree, to be the Mediator at the very instant of God's gracious
reconciling himself to poor man that was then ready to perish. So that in this
regard he might well say as he does, before Abraham was, I am; Joh. 8.58
for before Adam himself was, that is, received into the Brotherhood, and made
a Child of Grace in being actually reconciled unto God through his Mediation,
He was. Which Primogeniture of Christ's into the Brotherhood, as it denotes
his everlasting Regal Power and Superiority (which we shall presently make
appear) so (notwithstanding his Birth which happened to be afterward in due
time) it was often signified in those first Ages of the World, by the
Precedence that was given to the Younger Brethren above the Elder, happily that
the People then might also discern somewhat of this Mystery, which did so
nearly concern them. For Example those nine Patriarchs before the Flood, who
succeeded Adam in their several Generations, we may say of them with very great
Probability, I had almost said with apparent Demonstration from the Scripture
(and so do writers both Ancient and Modern Judge) that They were not the Eldest
Sons and Firstborn of their Parents, Aug. de Civit. Dei Musculus
but only such Holy, Eminent Persons whom God had according to the good
Pleasure of his Will) chosen out from among their Brethren, in a successive,
uninterrupted Line, to be the Progenitors of the Messiah. The like is to be
said of Sem, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Judah, Pharez, Aram, David, Solomon, all
Younger then their Brethren, yet preferred before them: And this I say, (Ab sit
arrogantia verbo) might possibly be so ordered by Divine Providence, that the
people of God might in all the preceding Ages, acknowledge one that was to come
after them for their Lord and Governor by virtue of his Primogeniture among
them. Yea, John Baptist does ingeniously acknowledge so much for himself, and
which may extend unto all; Joh. 1.30
After me (says he) comes a man which is preferred before me, for he was
before me. And in fine, all those Types and Figures that were shadows of good
things to come, were the Praeludiums of his Inauguration to his Office, but the
effects and consequents of his Primogeniture, which was at first given him of
the Father.

The first Begotten then he was from the beginning, which argues his Regal
Power and Sovereignty that he had over all his Brethren: for such Pre-eminence
did belong to the firstborn, as appears in Scripture ( Genesis 4.7. Genesis
27.29.37. 1 Samuel 20.29.) And the Apostle says, that the Heir is the Lord of
all, Gal. 4.1. So S. Peter says of Christ, Act. 10.36.
Act. 10.36. He is Lord of all, which words are there enclosed with a
Parenthesis, but the sense and meaning thereof reaches from the beginning of
the World to the end of it. Did not Abraham acknowledge Christ to be his Lord,
when he treated with him about Sodom, Genesis 18.3.27.30, 31.
after he had appeared unto him in the Plains of Mamre? And with how low a
reverence does he demean himself in that matter, as became a Subject in his
Address to his Lord and King? Behold now I have taken upon me to speak unto the
Lord, which am but dust and ashes. And again, O let not the Lord be angry, and
I will speak, V. 27.30. Yea again and again with the most proper terms of
Homage and acknowledgment of his Power does he put up his Suit unto him: and
that it was Christ who then appeared to Abraham is not to be doubted,
considering the shape wherein he did appear, viz. of a man, which manner of
Apparitions (according to the concurrent judgment of Holy and Orthodox Writers)
was not used by either of the other persons of the Trinity, but only by Jesus
Christ, and was the Prototype to his Incarnation: And in regard that Abraham
calls him the Judge of all the World, Act. 10.42.
which is the Office of Christ; For him (says the Apostle) has God ordained
to be the Judge of Quick and Dead: And because it is so plainly said, The Lord,
that is, this Lord who appeared unto, and parted from Abraham, Genesis 19.) Rained
upon Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord, that is, as an
ancient Council interpreted it (who did pronounce an Anathema against all those
that affirmed the contrary) that Christ the Lord did it from his Father the
Lord out of Heaven: Thus did Abraham, Syrmiensis, An. Dom. 356. Cent. 4. cap 9.
Ps 110.1.
and thus in like manner did David in Spirit call him his Lord, as the Lord
himself testifies out of the Psalm, when he said, The Lord said unto my Lord,
sit thou on my right hand, that is, The Father the Lord said it unto Christ the
Lord. If then David and Abraham two eminent persons, whom the Evangelist by the
Holy Ghost singleth out to be the Coryphaei, the principal in the Line of the
Progenitors of Jesus Christ, did own him in their Generations for their
supreme Lord and Governor, and that also in a certain way of distinction from
the Father, though in a subordination unto him, it may well be concluded that
he was so by all others.

And let it be observed how Moses says of himself, that he was King in
Jeshurun, Deuteronomy. 33.5. But how could that be, Deuteronomy. 33.5. 1 Samuel 8.9
when the Kingly Government, as it is described, 1 Samuel 8.9. was not yet set up
in Israel? I answer, this is not to be understood so much with a reference to
the Political estate of that People, as their Ecclesiastical, in respect
whereof Israel might in an especial manner be called Jeshurun, from a word
signifying Uprightness and Righteousness. For though their Judicial Law, which
was the Soul of their Polity was a most righteous Law, yet their Ceremonial Law
which constituted them a Church was it, that made them a righteous Nation
before God, giving them an interest in the Righteousness of God, that is, Jesus
Christ, whose Name is called the Lord our righteousness. Jer. 23.6.


Now because Moses did the work of a King, in giving them this Law, he might
have the Title of a King given unto him, when notwithstanding he was therein
but Viceroy to Jesus Christ, the supreme Lord of his people in all Ages. And so
a Viceroy is entitled elsewhere in Scripture, as may be seen by comparing 2
Reg 3.9. 2 Chr. 21.8. 1 Reg. 22.47. Neither indeed was Moses any other; for he
(says the Apostle, Heb. 3.5.) was but a Servant in the house, Christ was the
Son, and over his own house. Moses had the Pattern given him in the Mount, not
only of the Form of the Tabernacle: but every tittle and Iota of every Law by
which that People were to be guided was there prescribed unto him; and he was
to do all things as became a Viceroy exactly according to that Pattern and
Tenor, neither adding unto it, nor diminishing from it; but Christ was the
(...), the Ipse dixit, the Legislator of the whole Law, that Law, I say, which
did distinguish the Israclites in their Polity from other Nations and Kingdoms,
viz. the Judicial Law; and that Law which made them a Church above all people
in the World, viz. the Ceremonial Law; and that Law which was a Rule of
Righteousness not only unto them, but to all Mankind unto the end of the
world, viz. the Moral Law: All which Laws were enacted by him as a King over
his Church and People (being according to his Office) provident and careful for
their security and happiness, both temporal, spiritual, and eternal; Answerable
to that of the Prophet ( Es. 33.22. which place Calvin applies to Jesus
Christ) The Lord is our Judge, Call. Inst. lib 2. cap. 11. Sect 5. Es. 33 22.
the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will save us.

If this suffices not, let us consider that as S. Paul says, 1 Timothy 2. There
is one Mediator; So S. James says, Jam. 4.12. There is one Lawgiver who is
able to save and to destroy. 1 Timothy 2.5. Jam 4 12
Now this one Lawgiver must undoubtedly be that one Mediator, because when man
had by his disobedience violated the first Law given him by God himself, he was
immediately thereupon become an Exlex, an accursed Outlaw, and so should have
continued given up to confusion and every evil work, had not the Mediator (in
whom the Father was pleased all fullness should dwell) then instantly appeared,
exercising his Regal Authority in reducing man into some order, both for his
quiet and peaceable living here in this world, and to make way for him into
everlasting Happiness hereafter. Which work, I say, was always the proper work
of the Mediator, for it was not consistent with Divine Justice to give a Law
any more to such a Rebel, but rather to let him alone to perish for ever in his
Apostasy which must certainly have followed, if Christ had not interposed his
Mediation; the virtue whereof as in some sort it extended to all Mankind, yea
to the whole Creation, so it was chiefly fixed upon that People whom God had
elected to himself for his peculiar Inheritance. In order hereunto did this
great King (the Father having Anointed him to that end) show forth his absolute
and Sovereign Authority in giving Law to his People, as it is said in the
Second Psalm, when he was set up to be King, immediately follows the
Publication of his Law. And what Law, but that whereof the Lord had said unto
him, Thou are my Son, this day have I begotten thee? Ps. 2.7.
That is, the Law which was the efflux of his Mediation, unto which Office he
was begotten of the Father that day in which he first entered upon it.

Which Scripture being thus Interpreted, that which follows will be very
apposite thereunto, as being the gracious Dignation of the Father unto his Son
in this Office, Ask of me, says he, and I shall give thee the Heathen for
thine Inheritance, Ps. 2.8.9.
and the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy Possession, Thou shall break them
with a Rod of Iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like a Potters Vessel. That
is, Do thou perform the part of a Mediator, and I do promise thee that the
most Refractory in the world shall be made subject unto thee, yea, the Scepter
of thy Government shall be accompanied with such a mighty and irresistible
Authority, that thou shall subdue all adverse power that rises up against thee.

I am bold, I confess, to render these my poor Conceptions concerning this
Scripture (as I have done of many other in this Treatise) so different from
Interpretations that have been formerly given; but it is with modesty and
submission, and therefore, I hope, I do not offend those that are wise and
godly, being desirous to cast in my Mite into the Treasury of God (if it may at
least be any way useful) and to improve my small Talent to my Masters advantage.

Once, It is manifest that this Scripture is not limited to a particular sense,
but does carry with it a various signification: To say nothing of that
Application of it (which is made by some, especially one of very eminent note
in the Church) to the Birth of Christ, Bishop Andrews.
when he took upon him our Nature, deriving the Warrant thereof from Act. 4.25.
etc. We find the Apostle S. Paul himself, Heb. 1.5.
Heb. 1.5. alleging this place to prove the Deity of Christ, as one, whose
nature was far above, far more excellent, then the Angels (for to which of the
Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.)
Signifying the Fathers eternal, prepetually-constant, and present Generation of
his Son, which shows him to be very God. We find also the same Apostle
applying it to the Resurrection of Christ, Act. 13.33. in these words, He (that
is, God) has raised up Jesus again, as it is written in the Second Psalm, Thou
art my Son, Act. 13 33
this day have I begotten thee. So that in this sense, the Prophet's word there
Hodie, to Day, signifies the Day of Christ's Resurrection, wherein he was
begotten from the Dead; for so he is denominated, Col. 1.18. The first begotten
from the Dead; Col. 1.18
And in the other before the very same word Hodie, implies that Eternity, which
properly has neither beginning of Days, nor end of Time. Since therefore the
word of the Holy Ghost here, is comprehensive of various Interpretations, we
may safely without relinquishing those which the Apostle has given, render
this also which has been here inserted (unless we will entertain that Novel
and Jeiune Opinion of (...), no more but one meaning of one Text) viz. That
Jesus Christ was begotten of the Father to be the Mediator the very day that
he first entered upon his Office, that is, at that instant time when the first
Promise was made, viz. The Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head.

Clearly then Jesus Christ was Yesterday the King of his Church, as well as to
Day, because he was the Lawgiver from the beginning: yea upon Mount Sinai that
Law which was written in Tables of stone by the Finger of God, was the Act and
Deed of this King himself; Quid enim est digitus Dei nisi Spiritus Dei, says
S. Augustine, What is the Finger of God, but the Spirit of God, as may appear
by comparing Mat. 12.28. Luke 11.20. And whatsoever was done by the Spirit to
the people of God, was also done by Christ as Mediator: His Act it was, and in
his Custody or Register was it also kept, being laid up in the Ark under the
Propitiatory (which was a most singular and illustrious Type of Jesus Christ)
and so altogether under his ordering and disposing, as seemed good unto him.

Now let me not be mistaken herein, I do not say, that Christ as Mediator gave
any Law at all, as it may have a consonancy with the Covenant of Works, which
indeed the Law has unto all those who will not be brought into the Bond of the
new Covenant: But this I say, The Gospel of the Law which the faithful people
of God have always found therein, that is, the Doctrine of Faith and
Repentance was undoubtedly (as I hop-hath been made clearly to appear) given by
Christ, as well as the Law of the Gospel; in which respect it is also called
the Law of Christ, Gal. 6.2. And the Prophets who were the best Expounders of
the Law, Gal. 6.2.
did always in their several Generations derive from thence the said
Evangelical Doctrine.

Again, As the Legislative Power was Yesterday in Christ, so in like manner was
the Punitive and Vindictive, both for the correction of his People when they
offended, and for the punishment and cutting off his Enemies, when they grew
implacable in their rage, and incorrigible under his Judgments. A Lawgiver we
know will be of no account, unless he be a Judge, and he that is a King, unless
he be a Judge and a Lawgiver both; he may have an aerie style of Majesty given
unto him, and please himself with the sight of a Crown and Scepter: but as to
true and real power he shall (as has been said, and we have found it by
experience to our shame and misery too too true) remain but the outside, but
the Picture, but the sign of a King. If then the Lord Jesus Christ has been
the Lawgiver of his Church of old, and consequently the King, it must
necessarily follow that he was the Judge also both to interpret the meaning,
and to execute the penalty of his Law. Thus therefore we find those Offices
linked together (as is before said) with a reference to Jesus Christ under the
Law; Es. 33.22.
The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver or Statute-maker, the Lord is
our King, he will save us. And the Apostle S. James says, There is one
Lawgiver, (...) and Judge, Jam. 4.12.
(as it is added in some Manuscripts, and so Jerome renders it) who is able to
save and to destroy. Now this Judge has been no other at all times, but the
Lord Jesus Christ; for he himself says. Joh. 5.22.
Joh. 5.22. The Father judges no man, that is, immediately, but has committed
all judgment unto the Son. Musculus according to his usual wont observes here,
It is not said judgment alone, but all judgment; and in that it is said all, it
plainly shows, that his power is of so large an extent that it reaches unto
all that ever were in the world: For when was it that the Father gave this
power of Judicature unto the Son? When, but Quando cum genuit (say some
Orthodox Ancients, very pertinently, Chrysostom Hilarious, Theophilact.
though they mistook in their computation of this Quando, limiting it unto
Eternity, as Pererius notes) when he begat him, which is not to be understood
of his Divine Generation, because in that respect the Father and the Son judge
both alike after the same manner, being equal in power from everlasting to
everlasting. But here it is said, the Father judges no man, having devolved
that power wholly upon the Son. How then? It must surely be meant of the time,
when Christ was begotten of the Father to be Mediator, and when that was, has
been before said: which being so, Christ was the Judge from the beginning, and
consequently the King of the Church from the beginning also.

Furthermore, the exercise of this power wherewith the Lord Jesus Christ was
vested from the beginning, was in like manner always manifested by him in the
executing of judgment; for as he adds again, John 5.27. The Father gave him
Authority to execute judgment also, John 5.27
because he is the Son of man; which Scripture though it may be applied, and
that properly to the last judgment, when Christ shall visibly appear as a
Judge, yet it is not to be limited to that sense, but has a measure that
reaches unto the Church in all Ages, wherein Christ has according to the
Authority given him of the Father executed judgment.

If it be now objected that these words, because he is the Son of man, do imply
that Christ did not execute this power till he took upon him our Nature; I
shall answer.

First, If Christ was the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, though
notwithstanding he was not actually slaughtered till about the eighteenth year
of Tiberius, what hinders but that he might be also the Son of man before his
Incarnation? Sure we are, the Prophet Daniel speaks of him under that notion.
And some there are that apply that of the Psalm unto him; Dan. 7.13. Ravanel.
Ius, etc. Ps. 80.17. In his Acts and Monuments.
Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, upon the Son of man, whom thou
made strong for thy self.

Secondly, I answer with learned Bishop Mountague, that this style wherewith
Christ was pleased very frequently to denominate himself (Son of Man) is to be
understood with a reference to that original Promise, the first of all made
unto Mankind, The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents head, and not
unto any persons whatsoever to whom Christ might be related according to the
flesh. And hereby, says Epiphanius, did the Lord intimate that himself was the
Party meant in that Promise; and that the virtue of his Merits should be and
was diffused to all Nations in the world Jews and Gentiles originally alike
descended of the woman, who both had a like interest in the woman and her Seed,
though the Jews did and might challenge greater propriety in the Seed of
Abraham then the Gentiles could.

This Title then upon this account does rather confirm the matter in hand, then
in the least Iota appear against it. But I do further offer to consideration;
Did not Christ call himself the Son of man, that he might thereby intimate to
the Sons of men, for their comfort, that there was some kind of Affinity
between him and them, he being (...), the essential Reason from all Eternity,
as is before said; and they, men endued with reason also through his good hand
upon them in their Creation, and therefore he would delight in that Appellation
since he had undertaken to be their Mediator, which might even in their
apprehension advance that Affinity? Which if it be so, Christ does not call
himself the Son of man, so much for his being a Descendant from Mankind; But
Son of man he is, that is, by an Hebraism, Man per excellentiam, 1 Timothy 2.5.
(as the Apostle also calls him) as one that was Superior to them all, and
from whom they all, being reasonable Creatures, have derived their distinction
from other Species in the World about them.

From all which it may appear, that Jesus Christ might be called the Son of man
before his Incarnation, and therefore as such did execute that Authority which
the Father had given unto him.

He executed judgment on Cain, when he excommunicated him out of his Church, as
may be gathered from the Sentence of Malediction which he pronounced upon him,
viz. That he should be a Fugitive and a Vagabond in the Earth; Genesis 4.12.
and from Cain's own desperate and dogged confession, whereby he did in a
sullen manner declare his consent unto that Judgment, Thou, says he, have
driven me this day from the face of the earth: But how could that be? Genesis 4.14.
But how could that be? seeing it is after said of him, that he went and dwelt
in the Land of Nod, and there he built him a City, Genesis 4.16.
where he became the prime Leader or Patriarch of an Antichristian Church in
that Generation, a cast-away-company of forlorn Miscreants, both he and they
giving themselves up to all sensuality, Bishop Mountague. Dr. Light-foot. Jude,
v. 11
so to sweeten their misery and banishment, as their corrupt fancy might
suggest unto them, which (as one says probably) is that way of Cain mentioned
by the Apostle S. Jude: He was not therefore quite taken off from the earth,
but from that part of the earth, where he had joined with his Parents in the
solemn and pure Worship of God, as appears in the words following, where he
says, And from thy presence shall I be hid; which clearly implies, that he
was excommunicated by Christ out of his Church, where the Lord is wont to
manifest his Gracious presence among his people in his holy Ordinances.

After this, the Church in process of time having degenerated from her purity
by a corrupt Commistion with the accursed Progeny of Cain, thereby contracting
to it self the Guilt of all that prodigious Villainy that was then acted in the
world, The Lord Jesus Christ (as became a vigilant and faithful Governor over
his Charge) strove and traveled by his Spirit in the Ministry of his Servants
to reclaim his people from the error of their way, 1 Pet 3.19.
calling upon them to separate themselves from that wicked Generation; but
finding them to be (...), Immorigeri, a people that would not be persuaded into
Order, when he had waited 120 years, while the Ark was preparing, he did at
length like a righteous King and Judge execute his judgment by bringing in the
^loud upon the World of the ungodly, 2 Pet. 2.5.
so cutting off at one blow the whole Posterity of Cain, together with a sort
of treacherous Rebels, that would not be ruled nor reclaimed by him.

But I shall not insist upon many Instances that might here be inserted to this
purpose, Ex. 23.20.
take only one more: That Angel which God promised he would send to the
Israelites to keep them in their way, and to bring them into the Land of
Canaan, was undoubtedly no other then Christ himself. For as Pelargus notes
upon that place, it could not be Moses, according to Caictan's conceit, for he
did not lead the people into the Land of Promise; neither could it be Joshuah.
for he did not keep the Israelites in the way, nor punish their transgressions;
neither could it be a created Angel, for the (...) and Adjuncts there specified
are not applicable to any such, they do only Quadrare, i. e. Aptly suit with
Jesus Christ. Yea, the Apostle S. Paul does testify so much, 1 Cor. 10.9.
1 Cor. 10. where it is plainly said of Christ, That the Israelites tempted him
in the Wilderness. Now concerning this Angel, God forewarned the people in
these words, Beware of him and obey his voice, provoke him not, for he will not
pardon your transgressions, That is, he will surely execute his judgment upon
you, if you rebel against him; 1 Cor. 10.9, 10.
as he did one while by Serpents, another while by the Destroyer, viz. the
destroying Angel, Number. 14.37. For, says he, Exodus 23.21. My Name is in him,
that is, He is the Lord Jehovah as I am, of the same Essence, Power, Majesty,
and Authority, as one well interprets the place; which agrees with that of the
Apostle, Col. 2.9. In him dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily; that is,
not in Clouds and Ceremonies, Col. 2.9.
as between the Cherubims: but essentially, personally, So that Orthodox and
sound Divine Davenant: and therefore it deeply concerned them to stand in awe
of him.

And now to conclude this Point, (wherein possibly I may be charged with
overmuch Prolixity, but that the advancement of the Honor of Jesus Christ
will I hope be a sufficient excuse and plea for me among those that take
pleasure in the promoting thereof) It is I believe very clear and evident by
what has been here said, That the Lord Jesus was the King of his Church
Yesterday, as well as to Day. And therefore when the people of Israel did out
of a proud affectation to be like other Nations, desire a King to be set over
them, the Lord says, 1 Samuel 8.7.
(1 Samuel 8.7.) that they had rejected him from being their King, that is, even
Christ the Lord, as not contenting themselves with that Church State wherein by
his Spiritual Government over them, they were made a people happy and glorious
above all other Nations in the world, whom preposterously they would now all on
a sudden without any direction from God seek to imitate.

In the next place we are to take into consideration the Priestly Office of
Christ; for even in this also we shall find him to be (...), Jesus Christ a
Priest Yesterday.
the same yesterday, i. a Priest to his Church from the beginning.

In the pursuance of this Point we shall fix our discourse principally upon two
places of Scripture, which will, I believe, make it evident and manifest unto
all. And first, very remarkable is that which the Prophet David speaks of
Christ in the 110 Psalm, Ps. 110.4.
Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek. In which words we
may take notice of two things; first, the continuance of Christ's Priesthood:
Secondly, the order of it.

For the continuance, it is an eternal Priesthood, to last for ever, which word
for ever, comprehends in it the whole time and age of the Church from the
beginning: Or if it be limited to time to come, it is to be understood with a
reference unto Christ's first entrance upon his Mediatorial Office, which was
then when the new Covenant passed between God and Christ in the behalf of poor
man, immediately after the violation of the first, as has been said before.
And this possibly may be the reason why the Apostle speaking very frequently of
Christ's eternal Priesthood ( Heb. 6, 7 Chapters) still renders this word, for
ever, in the Singular Number, (...), Heb 7.28. (...). Significat tum supra
legem quam post legem ut Metaphysic^^ etc. (...) Saepe ponitur pro (...)
because Christ's Priestly Office was not to take in that time, wherein our
first Parents stood in the state of Innocence, but only that seculum which was
to ensue even unto the end of the world.

If it be objected that Christ was made Priest since the Law, because the
Apostle says ( Heb. 7.28.) That the Word of the Oath, which was since the Law
makes the Son high Priest, who is Consecrated for evermore. I answer, first,
Although the Word of the Oath as it is mentioned by David, came after the Law
given upon Mount Sinai; yet the Oath it self might notwithstanding be made at
the first making of the Covenant, and so the word of the Prophet implies, being
rendered in the Pretertense, The Lord swear, as a thing that had been done long
before. Secondly, If the Law there be to be taken with a reference to the
Covenant of Works given to Adam, of which Covenant the Law given upon Sinai was
in some respect a Renovation, then it will be clear that this Oath was made in
the time prefixed, viz. upon the passing of the new Covenant. Thirdly, If it
should be limited to the time after the Law was given by Moses, yet it
appears not by the words of the Apostle, that the Priestly Office of Christ
was not effectual before; for though it be rendered in our English Version, The
Word of the Oath which was since the Law makes the Son, etc. yet it is not so
in the Original: the word (...), which is translated Makes, not being in this
latter clause of the Verse, as it is in the former, but possibly some other
word signifying a Confirmation of the Son in his Office, may be there by the
Apostle understood; or the very word (...) may carry with it such a
signification: But in these things I shall submit unto better Judgments.

Secondly, The Order according to which Christ's Priesthood is confirmed, is
the Order of Melchizedek; who this Melchizedek was, is needless here, yea,
unlawful at any time to search out. But for his Order we are to enquire unto
it. And albeit he himself was not known by name in the world till about 2000
years after the Creation, and consequently no real resemblance could be made of
him before that time; yet that hinders not but that Christ's Priesthood from
the beginning might be said to be according to his Order in the purpose and
foreknowledge of God, and have a virtual operation long before, though the
actual susception and administration of the Office by Melchizedek was not till
2000 years after. By order then or similitude, as it is called, Heb. 7.15.
Heb. 7.15. is meant the state or condition of Melchizedek in the execution of
his Office, and that was according to the words of the Apostle, After the power
of an endless life; for he was without father, Heb. 7.16. Heb. 7.3.
without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days nor end of
life (according to his Scriptural being.) The meaning whereof in short is this,
His Priesthood was an everlasting Priesthood: Answerable hereunto and home to
our purpose, such also is the Priesthood of Christ, viz. An everlasting
Priesthood; for as Melchizedek in his Scriptural being had neither beginning
nor end, but a Priest he was before any mention is made of him, Genesis 14.18. And
the Apostle says of him also, that he abides a Priest continually, Heb. 7.3.
So in like manner was the Lord Jesus Christ in effect a Priest long before his
appearance in the world according to the flesh, and continues to be a Priest
still now when he has left the World. Thus does this Scripture witness that
Jesus Christ was a Priest yesterday.

The next Scripture that we shall make use of to this end, shall be that of the
Apostle, Heb. 5.1. Every high Priest taken from among men is ordained for men
in things pertaining to God, Heb 5.1.
that he may offer both Gifts and Sacrifices for sins. Where we may see the
properties of the high Priest described, to show the truth of them in Christ,
which upon due examination we shall find to be fulfilled by him Yesterday, as
well as to day.

First, It was requisite that the high Priest should be severed and set apart
from the common multitude: for so the words there, (...) (that is, being taken
from Men) do most properly signify. Ex 28.1.
Thus was Aaron and his Sons severed and set apart for the Priests Office by
the commandment of God: And as the Aaronicall Priest was thus severed, so was
Christ; for though he had not his bodily being amongst men, till he was made of
a woman, yet he was set apart and destined by God to be the Priest of his
Church from the beginning, and his Office was virtually in force before his
solemn and public undertaking thereof in the days of his flesh.

Which Assertion that it may not seem strange, I shall endeavor to make it
plain by an instance of somewhat the like nature.

When our first Parents had by their Disobedience thrown themselves under God's
Displeasure, all the whole Race of Mankind was then involved in the same
Hazard; all of us, I say, were then, before we had such an Alternate being, as
we have had since in the World, by succeeding Generations, brought under the
Axe of Divine Justice, and that by such a way and manner, which we are not able
now to comprehend; every Mothers Child (as we say in our ordinary Proverb)
stood then at the Bar of God's dreadful Tribunal ready to be haled away to
execution. And this I suppose will be easily granted. Well then, If we were all
present at that time in a likely way of an everlasting Perdition, How came it
to pass that a Pardon was then Actually given to some, and Potentially for
others, if Christ our high Priest was not, according to his Capacity of being a
Mediator at time, present also? But being so, as continual experience has
given clear demonstration, he was then unquestionably set apart by the Father
from the common multitude to perform that Office: which Office, I say, he then
began, and afterward continued it in the firstborn, one Generation after
another before the Law, putting an excellency upon them and their Offerings,
which gave them a special Interest in the favor of God above their Brethren.
Again, when it seemed good to the Divine Wisdom under the Law to divert the
course of holy and religious Service at God's Altar from the firstborn to the
Tribe of Levi, even those Levitical Priests had Christ's Concurrency with them
in the execution of their Office; for when God had commanded Moses ( Ex.
30.30.) to Anoint the Priests with sacred Oil, Ex. 30.30.32.
in the 32 Verse he forbids to Anoint man's flesh with it. How shall we
untie this Knot (says Bishop Downham) Priests must be Anointed with the holy
Oil, but men may not? Surely it implies that that Priesthood surpassed the
height of all humane Excellency, because of the Relation it had to Jesus Christ
in his virtual Concurrency with it. It appears then that Christ was set apart
for this Office from the beginning.

Again, the high Priest (says the Apostle is ordained for men in things
pertaining to God, That is, was appointed to employ all his Office with God for
man's good: He was, says Bishop Reynolds, to be a middle Person to stand and
minister between God and Man in their behalf, to be impartial and faithful
toward the Justice and Truth of God, and not to be overruled by his love to
Men to injure him, and to be compassionate and merciful toward the errors of
men, and not to be overruled by his Zeal to God's Justice to give over the
care and service of them. And such an high Priest was Christ, zealous of his
Fathers Righteousness and Glory, for he was set forth to declare the
Righteousness of God, Romans 3.25. And he did Glorify him on earth by finishing
the things which he had given him to do; Rom 3.25. John 17.4
compassionate also toward the errors and miseries of his Church, for he was
appointed to expiate, and to remove them out of the way, Col. 2.14.

Now since Christ was ordained thus for the good of men, Col. 2.14.
can it be imagined that he had a care only of that sort of men that came after
him into the World and none at all of those that had been before? Was Abraham
the Friend of God, and David the man after Gods own heart, of no reckoning with
him? If so, let that accursed Opinion of the ancient Gnostics the firstborn
of the Devil have a License to pass without control that no man was saved, all
went to Hell unto the 15 year of Tiberius Caesar, wherein it was from Heaven
revealed, concerning Christ, This is my beloved Son, hear him. Or was there
some other Mediator before Jesus Christ took upon him our Nature, who did
execute that Office for 4000 years, and then resigned it up to the Son of God,
leaving the residue to be done by him in a time which happily may not be half
so long? Or were all those that lived in that long Tract of time shut up in
Limbo when they died, from whence they could not be delivered till Christ
himself came among them? These and such other Carcinomata (as Bishop Mountague
calls them) are rather for Cauteries then curing Salves to work upon, we may
perhaps meet with some of them hereafter: undoubtedly the Lord Jesus Christ was
always The man, who was, is, and shall be the Mediator between God and Man.

Lastly, The high Priest was to offer Gif^s and Sacrifices for Sins, that so
Divine Justice might be satisfied, which had been by sin violated. Hence it was
that as the Apostle says, Heb. 9.22. Almost all things were by the Law purged
with blood, Heb. 9.12.
and without shedding of blood is no remission. Death was to attend upon
Justice, as her Executioner, but if Justice pass a Sentence at any time, and
execution follow not upon it, Justice vanishes into nothing, and is become a
mere Ludibrium, for Execution is the very life of Justice; Death therefore,
since he is let into the World by man's sin, must do its office, that so Justice
may live: Accordingly did the Priests who were ordained to see that a due
satisfaction should be made to Divine Justice, and to make an Atonement for the
people, never come before the Lord without blood: But first they slew the
Sacrifice upon the Altar, and then took of the blood, Lev. 16.11 15.
and brought it before the Mercy-seat within the Veil, to testify the death of
the Sacrifice, whereupon Sin was expiated, and Justice fully satisfied. Thus
did the Priests under the Law, and thus also did Christ, without whom all
whatsoever they did had been to no purpose, their sacrificing of a Lamb had
been of no more account with God, then the cutting off of a Dogs Neck, and
there offering an Oblation no better then the offering of Swines blood: Christ
therefore, I say, once for all offered up a Sacrifice, which was himself, the
virtue whereof was always operative to make those former Sacrifices effectual
to those ends and purposes beforementioned, and after that by his own blood he
entered into the Holy Place. Heb 9 12.10, 12.


So then Christ it was that was still represented as a slain man, in all those
Sacrifices of old; for a sentence of Death lying upon him, through the
determinate Counsel, and fore knowledge of God, made him in all those Ages
before, Act. 2 23.
as good as dead, in which regard, he is called The Lamb slain from the
beginning of the world. Rev. 13.8.
And because Justice would have Death for satisfaction, else must the whole
World have immediately fallen under her displeasure; therefore in all likely
hood the very first thing that died in the World was Christ in a Figure, and
consequently a Sacrifice from the beginning

He was a Sacrifice ready even for Cain to make use of for his good, if he had
had Faith to apply it, as appears by the words which the Lord speaks unto
him; If thou do not well, sin lies at the door. That is, Genesis 4.7.
a Sacrifice for sin, for so the offering for sin is in Scripture frequently
called; which Interpretation because it may carry with it a sound of novelty,
Dr. John Harris Harden of Winchester Col.
I shall take leave by the way to tell such, that as I find it owned by a late
learned and reverend Divine, so upon the examining of the grounds whereupon
this Interpretation is built, it will (I doubt not) appear to be very probable.

First, God comes not to deject Cain lower then he was, but to raise him up
from his dejection, as is manifest both by his deigning to give him an Oracle
from Heaven, and also by the words wherewith he begins his speech unto him,
Why art thou wrath? and why is thy Countenance fallen?

Secondly, If the words, Sin lies at the door, intend a sudden judgment to
seize upon him, what coherence can there be between these and the words
following, which are spoken concerning Abel, viz. And thy brothers desire shall
be subject unto thee; For to read the place thus, If thou do not well thou
shall certainly be punished, and thy brothers desire shall be subject unto
thee, This, if there be any coherence at all, were to threaten poor Abel more
or at least as much as Cain.

Thirdly, The Original word Chateath (it is the aforesaid Authors observation)
as it signifies Sin, so also does it the Sacrifice for Sin, as Hos. 4.8. 2
Cor. 5.21. Hos. 4 8. 2 Cor. 5.21.
do witness. And it was the custom (according to which Moses speaks, as being
best acquainted therewith) to lay the Sacrifice at the Sanctuary door, Vt
populum dirigeret ad mediatorem, says Calvin, to teach the people to serve God
in Christ, who is the true Sanctuary.

This sense therefore upon these Considerations may seem to be very agreeable
with the scope of the Holy Ghost in that place, so that a Sacrifice was ready
for Cain at that time: and what Sacrifice was that but Christ the Lamb then
slain, who alone takes away the sin of the World; and besides it seems to be
a sacrifice distinct from that which Cain and his Brother had before offered
unto God. But enough of this

And now to close up this whole matter, it appearech clearly, I suppose by all
that has been here said, that Jesus Christ was the Prophet, King, and Priest
of his Church, Yesterday as well as to Day. And that thereupon it follows
infalliby that he was the same Savior to his people of old, as he is to us now
under the Gospel

A Difference notwithstanding I confess there is in respect of the Dispensation
and Manifestation of Christ unto them and us. He was Velatus in Veteri,
Revelatus in Novo Testamento, veiled and shadowed in the Old Testament,
revealed and exhibited in the New, there showed unto the Fathers in Types, here
manifested unto us in Truths, but yet the Same Christ both to them and us, it
being no more to their Prejudice that Christ was not then actually Crucified,
then it is unto us now that he is not still hanging upon the Cross: for the
Virtual Operation of his Merits in the instant juncture of his sufferings
spreads and expiates it self round about, backwards and forwards, upwards and
downwards, and as a Center extends its Virtue to every part of the
Circumference: so Christ being the Center of his Church, all round about him
within the extent of that Circumference, have their dependence upon him, and
are interessed in his Salvation.

Saint Paul Gal. 4.5. G^^. 4.5. Thus also Grotius (...), i. Judaei and
Proselyti. (...), i.e. Pariter se^l. Jud^i and Gentes.
Gives (as I may say) the perfect Diameter of this Circumference, showing the
full extent of Christ's Virtue (as he is a Savior) to all that are concentrick
with him, that is, To those before him, as well as to those that came after
him; to those before him in these Words, That he might redeem those that were
under the Law, that is those that lived in the time of the Law (for so (...) is
rendered in Scripture as well as under the Yoke and Curse of the Law,) to those
again that came after him in the Words following viz. That we might receive the
Adoption of Sons, that is, that you Gentiles (as appears by what follows v. 6.
Reckoning himself among them, because he was the Apostle of the Gentiles) might
be now also made Partakers with the peculiar people of God in the Adoption of
Children. I confess this Text also is usually construed another way, neither do
I impugn that Construction that is given of it, yet I humbly conceive that I
may without any the least violence reduce the Words of the Apostle likewise to
this sense that I have now given, because it is not inconsistent with the Scope
of the Holy Ghost in this place and because of the Variation of the Persons
there mentioned, viz. Them and we, which may Imply two distinct Subjects
capable of receiving Benefit by Christ, and because Christ himself is here said
to be made of a Woman made under the Law, that is, as Bruno renders it, So
Grotius Faclus sub Lege, quia scil. natus erat Judeus.
Quia vixit sub Lege, because he lived under Law, meaning the time of the Law,
and putting an end thereunto, that so he might have a Favorable Respect unto
those that were Contemporary with him.

I shall conclude this point with some few Examples of Yesterday, for the
further Confirmation of it, and then derive from it some Inferences which may
be of use for us to Day, and so proceed unto that which follows.

Yesterday did Adam lay hold upon the Promise by Faith, and in evidence of this
his Faith, Genesis 3.20.
he calls his Wive's name Eve, which signifies Life, Implying, that though
God had before threatened him that he should Die the Death, yet he was fully
persuaded, that not only he himself should Live, but his Posterity also should
be a Living Posterity, and that among them, his Wife should be the Mother of
Christ according to the Flesh, by whom the Sentence of Death was to be
reversed, Joh. 8.56.
and Life again restored, for, says Moses, She was to be the Mother of all
living.

Yesterday did Abraham rejoice to see Christ's Day Joh. 8.56 (though afar off
Heb. 11.13.) when the Promise made to him, Heb. 11.13
that in his seed all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed, was to be
accomplished, yea and this was as good Gospel as any that is Preached
nowadays, Gal. 3.8.
for so the Apostle calls it Gal. 3.8.

Yesterday did Job declare his Confidence in Jesus Christ in terms of as
certain and high Expectation of Salvation through him as any Believer can now
under the Gospel Job. 19.25. Job. 19.25
I know (says he) that my Redeemer Lives, or my Redeeming Kinsman (as it may
be rendered) He speaks we see after the Language of those times, which has a
Consonancy with the Language of Believers in this Time of the Gospel. By the
Law of Moses, it was required that one Kinsman should redeem the Inheritance of
another that was in danger of an Alienation, who was also to be an Avenger of
Blood; for when a Man was slain, his Kinsman by right of Propinquity did pursue
the Man slayer, to be Avenged of him, wont also to raise up Seed unto the
Deceased Kinsman, who died without Issue. Now unto these Customs, it is
probable Job does allude in this speech of his concerning his Redeemer; yet
clear it is by the Context, that his Aim also therein is at Jesus Christ, in
and through whom he expected all this to be really done unto him. And (let me
add by the way) so it is done unto Job and all others that are spiritually
allied unto Jesus Christ; for that right of Paradise which was lost in Adam,
Christ our Kinsman has redeemed and purchased again for us: Christ also is the
Avenger of our blood, for when that infernal theif had betrayed us unto death,
Christ pursued him, and never left him, till he had Vindicated our Blood upon
him; He has likewise raised us up a Holy Seed, which lay not in our power to
do, being Dead in Law through Sins and Trespasses. True it is Adam did, as it
was said of him, Genesis 5.3.
beget Children after his own likeness, that is Sinners like himself; and his
Posterity to this very day do the like ( and nati natorum, and qui nascentur ab
illis.) But alas Adam and Job and all others amongst us, notwithstanding the
numerous Progenies that may be boasted of, wherein men are too apt to Glory,
may be also said to Die without Issue, that is, could never be able to raise up
a Holy Seed, to inherit the Holy Land, the Celestial Canaan; now comes this our
Redeeming Kinsman, and he does it for us, for he gives right to believers to
become the Children of God Joh. 1.12. who are therefore expressly called his
Seed Es. 53.10. Joh. 1.12. Es. 53.10.
Thus had these Customs of Yesterday their Tendency unto Christ, and their
spiritual accomplishment in him. And thus had Job a respect unto him, when he
gave this Testimony of his Faith, saying, I know that my Redeemer lives.

And thus did the Prophet Daniel in like manner Yesterday betake himself to the
same Refuge, Dan. 9.17.
when he prayed that he might be heard for the Lord's sake, Implying that he
could not expect a gracious Answer to his Supplication, but through the
Mediation of Jesus Christ, who is Lord of all, as the Apostle calls him Act. 10
36. from first to last, and whom the glorious Angels at his first appearance in
the flesh acknowledged to be the Lord, Luke 2.11.
thereby ascribing unto him that Title of Honor which was in all Ages due unto
him.

In short, that Synopsis or Cloud of Witnesses, as it is called, which is by
the Apostle presented unto us in one view Heb. 11. may encompass us about with
convictions enough concerning this Truth, Ephesians. 5.23. 1 Cor. 15.45.
viz. That the people of God Yesterday, that is, in all the Generations of old,
expected and obtained Salvation no other way, but by Faith in Jesus Christ, who
is the Savior of the Body, that is, the Church, ever since it had a Being by
the spirit of quickening, wherewith it has been Acted from the Beginning: for
when the first Adam fell under the Power of Death, the Second became
immediately a quickening spirit.

This was the Faith of Believers Yesterday, who by a spiritual Logic (as the
term (...) which the Apostle uses does imply) came to discern, Heb. 11.1.
and make Demonstrations to themselves of the good things to come, without
those ocular and sensible Manifestations which have since appeared. Mr. Jer.
Dyke.
And this indeed is the true Nature of Faith. For look how it is said of God
(as one well makes the Comparison) that he calls those things that be not as if
they were; so does Faith make things to be which are not, that is, which are
not to sense. For as Faith gives a Nullity to things that are, viz. to the
Afflictions, Miseries and Mortality of this Life, making them to be as if they
were not, according to the Apostles Word (2 Cor. 6.9, 10) As dying, 2 Cor. 6.9,
10.
and yet behold we live, at chastned, and yet not killed, as sorrowful, yet
always rejoicing, as poor, yet making many ri^h, as having nothing, yet
possessing all things; so on the contrary (for it is able to overthrow the
whole Course of Nature) it gives a subsistence to things not being, and makes
those things to be which are not: Thus are we by Faith already in Heaven,
though here yet on Earth, For our Conversation (says the Apostle) our civil
interest and society, Phil. 3 20 (...)
our trading and employment is in Heaven. And thus did the Faith of Believers
under the Old Testament make Christ to be unto them a full and complete Savior
before he himself had a corporal being upon Earth. He was to their Faith a
Sacrifice Crucified from the beginning of the World, who was not indeed
Crucified till the latter end of the World. In them was fulfilled that which
was spoken by the Prophet, He that believes shall not make haste; though they
did earnestly long for the Coming of the Messiah, Es. 28 16
yet they did not charge God foolishly, as being slow and slack in his
performances, but with Faith and Patience were contented to Wait, in the mean
time living comfortably upon that Dispensation of Grace, which God in his great
Wisdom and Mercy had appointed for them. Yea though the Law come forth in its
time for the aggravating of Sin (which as the Apostle says Gal. 3.12. is not
of Faith) crying out unto all with a Loud and Terrible Voice, Do this, or you
shall Die, yet for all that their Faith did not fail, neither was it made void
by the Law, as the law was not afterward made void by Faith; for according to
their Faith, so was it done unto them. Christ the Mediator they not only
expected, but relied upon according to the Tenor of the New Covenant, and
Christ as Mediator did always appear for them, to guide them in their Way, and
to guard them in their need, to grant them their Desires, and to obtain grace
with God in their behalf. This has been largely proved before, and therefore
we need not stand much upon it now.

I will only add one instance more whereby we shall see the gracious
Indulgence of the Almighty in that time of Yesterday dispensed in and through
Jesus Christ the Mediator toward a poor Creature, who was then Ambitious, as
I may say, to have a Discovery made unto him of the glorious Presence of God
beyond the Capacity of his weak nature, and whereto a consenting, according to
his asking must undoubtedly have proved his inevitable ruin. This poor
Creature was Moses, whom I so call in comparison of him, with whom he had then
to do, though otherwise A man of God (...), Ps. 90. Title.
(the Viceroy of Jesus Christ in Jeshurun) who when he perceived the Lord's
favorable condescension, so as to entertain Familiar Conference with him, and
upon his request to renew unto him a Grant of his Presence in the Conduct of
his people to the Land of Canaan, he thereupon (according to the manner of us
all) growth more bold, aspiring to such a knowledge of God, that never any of
the Sons of Adam had attained unto, yea such as was altogether inconsistent
with frail Mortality. I beseech thee, says he, show me thy Glory. It is, Ex.
33.18.
by our late Expositours, denied that Moses was now desirous to see the Essence
of God for that is Invisible 1 Timothy 6.16. Neither was Moses, its like, ignorant
of it, but for my part I leave it undetermined: howsoever it is very evident
that he desired to see that of God, which in much mercy was not granted unto
him, and therefore it might very well be said of him, as it was of the Sons of
Zebedee, he knew not what he asked (For who alas among us can dwell with
devouring fire? who among us can dwell with everlasting burnings?) But as Peter
when he was present at Christ's Transfiguration Luke 9.32.33. was so taken with
that exceeding Glory which he then saw (yet such a Glory probably as the
weakness of man might well bear) that he spoke at random (not knowing what he
said) of building Tabernacles, etc. In like manner Moses is now so transported
with the apprehension of his present Happiness and Privilege above all men,
that though he was not unmindful of his Charge, I mean the people of Israel,
but was importunate with God not to leave them; yet, he forgets his own mortal
Estate, wherein he was to abide, and desires to see that Manifestation of God's
presence, which is reserved for another Life, Ex. 33 19.
but what says the Answer of God unto him? I will make all my Goodness pass
before thee, and I will proclaim the Name of the Lord before thee. And what
could a poor Creature in this World desire more? Oh what admirable Honor is
this that the Lord vouchsafes unto his Beloved Favorite? what an incomparable
Privilege is This Moses now partaker of above his Brethren? But it is the
Lord, who may do what he pleases, for so he says, I will be Gracious to whom
I will be Gracious, and I will show Mercy on whom I will show Mercy.
Nevertheless we may with Modesty enquire how and by what means this glorious
Goodness came to be presented unto Moses; and that we shall find to be even by
this good old Way, which we have here been speaking of viz. the Mediation of
Jesus Christ. I go not about to wrest this excellent Scripture, by forcing upon
it a sense which may not agree with the mind of the Holy Ghost therein, That
be far from me; what I have to say concerning it, I shall leave to the
Judgment of the Wise and Godly.

First I shall by the way take this for granted, because it has been already
proved, that Moses had to do with Jesus Christ, as the rest of the people had,
while He and they were together in the Wilderness. And it must be confessed,
that there was as much need of the help and interposition of a Mediator in
this matter that we are speaking of, as in any thing else; which I say was in
great Mercy dispensed unto Moses, as is manifest. First by the Preparation that
preceded this glorious Appearance. Secondly by the Form and Method of the
Proclamation of the Name of the Lord, at the time of that appearance.

As for the Preparation which is mentioned in the three last Verses of this
thirty third Chapter the particulars thereof are very remarkable viz.
concerning the place that is said to be by the Lord, Ex. 33.21, 22, 23.
and the Lord's putting Moses into the cleft of the Rock, and covering it with
his Hand: which that we may the better understand, and see how apposite they
are to our present purpose, it will be needful for us to take into
Consideration, that whole intercourse between the Lord and Moses.

First, Moses prays unto the Lord, V. 13. in these words, Show me now thy
Way? What is that? Thy Way, say some, that thou meanest to take with this
people in bringing them to the Land which thou did promise to give unto their
Fathers: I will not deny but that this might be in the mind of Moses, now when
the Lord was pleased to admit him into his presence, because he was ever
zealous for the peoples good; But there are some Circumstances which follow,
that do incline me to another sense, at least to join another with this, both
which may be allowed together, being not inconsistent each with other, but
tending both to one and the same end. It seems unto me that Moses here
prays that the Lord would reveal himself unto him out of the Cloud, in some
shape and form, as he might be visible unto his bodily sight, which he
therefore calls his Way, because he had been wont to do so to the Patriarchs
before him, whom he likewise knew by Name. And I do the rather conceive this to
be the sense, because of the ground and reason of his desire, which is added by
him in the words following, Lord (says he) Show me thy way that I may know
thee, and that I may find grace in thy sight. True it is the Lord promises him
immediately after this, that his Presence should go with him, as being an
Answer to his request in the behalf of the people, the necessity whereof Moses
also urges and insisteth upon V. 15, 16. Yet does the Lord give him a further
Answer in the Words that follow V. 17. as to a thing somewhat differing from
that which concerned the people, I will (says he) do this thing also that thou
have spoken, for thou have found grace in my sight, and I know thee by Name.

Now since the Lord had before consented that his Presence should go along with
him in the Conduct of the people, and that Moses had given his Restipulation
thereunto, resting him fully satisfied with what the Lord had promised, to what
purpose is this other Consent now superadded, and that with a note of
difference from what had passed before, if it be not this which I have here
declared, viz. that the Lord would according to his desire Visibly appear unto
him out of the Cloud in a humane shape, as he had been accustomed to do to
others whom he knew by Name? which sense being admitted how clear will the
Circumstances following, that are preparatory to the great discovery of God in
the next Chapter, be unto us, which otherwise will prove very intricate and
obscure? Behold says the Lord there is a place by me, and thou shall stand
upon a Rock, and it shall come to pass while my Glory passes by, that I will
put the in a Cleft of the Rock. Now what place upon Earth can be said to be
nearer to the Lord then another, seeing he fills Heaven and Earth with his
presence? And what Rock, or Cleft of a Rock could be able to secure Moses from
the danger of being consumed by that excellent Glory, which did appear, seeing
the Rocks are cloven to pieces, Nah. 1.6.
and thrown down before him?

How then could these things be? It is in vain now to produce an Anthropopathy,
and so stretch it so far as to make it level with every Circumstance; for
doubtless there was a Reality in this matter, and every particular of it was
done and effected to Moses sense, and to the full satisfaction of his
expectation; so far as might stand with the safety of his Life. Granting
therefore that Jesus Christ appeared unto Moses as a Man, there might then be a
place said to be, according to the ordinary course of Nature, nearer to him in
that Mount, where the Lord was wont to meet this his servant, then another
elsewhere; he might also put Moses into the Rock, and cover him with his Hand,
to preserve him from the imminent Danger, and then take away his Hand, that so
Moses might see some glimpse of that Glory that passed by. Yea more, it is said
Exodus 34.5. that the Lord Descended in a Cloud, and stood with him there, and
proclaimed the Name of the Lord, and yet in the sixth verse it is said, The
Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed; to stand still with Moses
proclaiming and to pass by before him proclaiming too, seems in reason not to
hold well together: the true meaning therefore undoubtedly is this, Jesus
Christ, who is Jehovah the Mediator, came down upon the Mount in a Cloud, and
then after he was descended, appears visibly unto Moses, according to his
former Promise, and stood with him there to protect him from Danger, while
Jehovah that is God the Father who is essentially one with the Son, passed by
in his Glory, proclaiming his Name. To say nothing of the Lord's stay and abode
with Moses, and his converse with him, as it is at large declared in the
following part of the Chapter, Ex. 34 28.
and that for forty days and forty nights, as appears V. 28. after the end of
this glorious Vision; which did also put a glorious luster upon the face of
Moses, which never any of God's former appearances unto him did, It is I
suppose manifest unto all men, that this preparation that was here made, does
demonstrate clearly that Jesus Christ was a mediator to Moses for good, and
that without him he could never have been able with safety to his Life to have
endured that excellent glory.

Secondly, The form or method of that divine Proclamation does also intimate
the same unto us. Let us consider it so far as I conceive for the present it
has a pertinency to the point in hand, and that is in the order and method of
the Names wherewith the God proclaims himself, viz. The Lord, the Lord God.
Observe first, Ex. 34.6.
The Lord, then The Lord God, The first implying one that has his Being of
himself, and who is the Author of all subordinate Beings; the second
signifying, the Lord Strong and Mighty: The first shows Goodness, the second,
Greatness: The first, puts the Creature into a relation unto God, and gives it
a dependence upon him, Ex. 6.3. Note Moses his former admissions into Gods
presence were grantted unto him by an extraordinary condescension, possibly
because he was then to be Mediator of the renewed Covenant of Works wherein
Jesus Christ was not to be concerned.
the second advances the Divine excellency above the Creature, and beyond the
descent of a Correlation unto it: in a Word, The first conferres a Right upon
Believers to and in the Mediator (for it is Jehovah that gives a being to all
the Promises Exodus 6.3.) the second makes the Mediator himself-subordinate unto
God.

Now therefore, behold the Goodness of God presented unto Moses in that The
Lord is named before The Lord God: had this Proclamation of the name of God
been without this preceding Title, I doubt it had not been safe for Moses to
have seen any glimpse of all that transient Glory, such as never was the like
manifested unto him, or any other mortal man before: and if so, what can this
argue but the necessity of a Mediator between God and man, without whom never
could any of the posterity of Adam since the humane nature was defiled by his
Disobedience have the least Acquaintance with the Almighty to their Comfort,
but must for ever have been kept at a distance from him. But it is the Lord
that is between Moses, and the Lord God, which makes all that God says of
himself to be very good.

And now I do here humbly commend this Interpretation which I have given of
this place of Scripture to the whole Church of God, being partly led thereunto
by the consideration of the different manner (which also is observable) of the
Scriptures speaking of God before the expulsion of our first Parents out of
Paradise, where the promise of Grace was given unto them immediately upon their
Fall, from that which is spoken of him afterward; before, viz. In the second
and third Chapters of Genesis, Moses speaks of God with the Appellative Title
of The Lord God, but after in the fourth Chapter, and so forwards he makes
mention of the Lord only, not The Lord God: which to my apprehension does
plainly imply, that God did not appear unto Man after the Fall, as he did
before; but what intercourse soever passed between God and Man, was in and
through the Mediation of Jehovah, that is, Jesus Christ, the Lord: Not but the
Father and the Holy Ghost are called in Scripture Jehovah too, even as the Son
(see Ps. 2.2. Ps. 110.1. 1 Cor. 12.4, 5.) But wheresoever these two Titles,
Jehovah Jehovah El.
The Lord, and The Lord God are set together and distinguished each from other
(as in that to Moses before mentioned, and in this latter mentioned by Moses
(there is the Son only Quatenus Mediator to be understood by it.

Clearly then Jesus Christ was the Mediator Yesterday between God and his
people, as well as to Day. And upon the whole it is manifest that he was (...),
the Same, or the only He to his Church in point of Salvation under the Old
Testament, even as now under the New. And let this suffice for the Confirmation
of this Doctrine. But as we have proved the Truth of it, so it is very fit that
we should now improve it in making some Use thereof for the furtherance of the
Gospel.

In the first place, I shall again take this opportunity to make an Address to
the dispersed of the Jews, whom I do beseech by all that ancient Love that has
been between God and them, that they would yet look upon him whom they have
pierced. And herein I do but exhort you (O ye that were once a People, Zech.
12.10.
yea, the only people of God) to that which your selves know well enough is
prophesied of you, 1 Pet. 1.19 (...).
and which shall surely be accomplished shortly by you. And I beseech you, will
it not be far better for you, that the Prophet's words should be made good in
this Generation, then in those that come after you? Look upon your present
estate wherein you stand, and see whether that honorable Blood of the Lord
Jesus Christ which your Fathers shed, do not lie upon you as a stupendous
guilt unto this very Day. Look upon all that is written by Moses and the
Prophets concerning him, and see whether it be not all exactly fulfilled to a
Tittle in that our blessed Lord, who on Mount Calvary by Jerusalem was with
wicked hands crucified and slain. Nay, have not your selves been instrumental
in executing that upon Jesus of Nazareth, which was prophesied should be done
unto the Messiah? Alas, alas, will you be still wilfully blind? look up and
behold your King! Pilate once spoke it in scorn, or out of a Design of
Rebellion against Caesar; Joh. 19.14
but I speak it unto you, as I said before, out of a hearty desire of your
Restoration to your former Glory: Behold I say your King, and behold your
Priest, and behold your Prophet; Your King, who watched over you in all your
Generations of old, to defend and protect you, and to deliver you from all your
Enemies, and whom now also to serve, you will undoubtedly find to be your
perfect freedom; Your Priest, whose Sacrifice did virtually accompany all the
Sacrifices of the Aaronical Priesthood, making them effectual for your Good,
and will fully expiate your great sin in sacrificing, that is, Crucifying even
this your High Priest, who is now in the Holy place, at the right hand of his
Father, making intercession for you; Your Prophet, who gave unto your Fathers
Statutes and Judgments, so righteous, that there was no Nation how great so
ever in this World that had the like, and who will now again teach you the good
and the right way, if you will hearken unto him.

Awake, Awake therefore O Israel, awake awake, gather your selves together,
yea, gather your selves together, O Nation that art to be desired, behold and
see how tenderly careful the Lord has been of you, ever since he took you to
be his peculiar people: Time was when he carried you about as upon Eagle's
wings, and the time is now come, that he would take ye into his Bosom,
wherein alone you shall after all your unkindnesses find rest for your Souls.
He remembers the kindness of your Youth, O that you would now consider the
kindness of his Age! Forty years long did your Fathers greive him in the
wilderness, and will you go on to vex him forty times forty more? He then
swore in his wrath that they should not enter into his rest, and accordingly it
came to pass; for their Carcasses all fell in the wilderness, but their little
ones which they said should be a prey, them did he bring into that Good Land,
which he promised to give unto Abraham: be warned therefore betimes, for if you
will not turn, you shall certainly fall and perish, as they did, but your
Children shall surely see that Glory that shall be revealed, for the Lord has
sworn in his Love, that Jacob shall not be forsaken for ever. Consider it is no
novelty that we persuade you unto, but that which was from the the beginning,
which we have heard, which we have seen with our Eyes, which we have looked
upon, and our hands have handled of the Word of Life (for the Life was
manifested, and we have seen it, and bear Witness, and show unto you that
eternal life, which was with the Father, and was manifested unto us) that which
we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye also may have Fellowship
with us, and truly our Fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ. Come then, I say, again, and mourn for him whom you have pierced, and
we also will mourn with you; for good cause have we so to do, having alas many
a time dealt too treacherously with this our great redeemer, and put him to an
open shame by our frequent swervings and tergiversations from that righteous
and holy rule that he has set us; we will abandon this present evil World, and
all the flattering insinuations thereof: our dearest relations shall be of no
Value with us in comparison of our fellowship with you, and that Brotherly
Covenant which shall oblige us both unto our common Lord, who has loved you
from the beginning, and will love you again more abundantly, if you will now
turn unto him. Return, return therefore O Shulamite, return, return.

Secondly this may teach us to forbear that Disdain which is commonly found to
be in these days against the Ages that have been before us; For, whatsoever
Light has been in the World at any time, it has been derived from this Father
of Lights, Jesus Christ: And he has by that tender care which himself had both
of the Law, and the Fathers who lived under it and before it, set us an Example
to bear a due respect as becomes Brethren to that antiquity, which has been
enlightened by him in this Day of the Gospel. For the Law, though it was
perverted, by such as would not believe in him, to a Sinister use, even to the
utter Abolition of his whole Evangelical institute, and was in that respect
justly disavowed by his Apostles in their writings; yet he professes the
design of his coming was not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it. And for the
Fathers in their sundry Generations before him, who walking in this Light had
fellowship with him, we have sufficiently seen how he has owned them. Yea and
ever since he has been the leader and supporter of his Church in all the
various changes that have come upon it, for he is he Everlasting Father of his
people Es. 9.6. and the Provision, whatsoever it was, that his family has
hitherto lived upon from the time that he dwelt among us, as it has been as
his cost, and of his wise and prudent devising, so it has been always ordered
and disposed by him. How ill then does it become us, in these days to cast
forth reproachful speeches against the Light of antiquity, or those that walked
in it? Do we not thereby call into question the Wisdom of Christ himself?

I speak not here of the unwritten Verities or Traditions of Antiquity (as they
are called) which have neither with them a Catholic Recognition, nor any
warrant or footstep from the written word (That is a Door which has let in
much Corruption into the Church) nor of the untrue writings of any Monkish
Heterodox Spirits, which are the spurious Issue of that man of Sin: But that
which I do undertake upon this occasion to vindicate, is that Holy, Venerable,
Renowned, Orthodox Antiquity which has been always faithful to Jesus Christ
and his Gospel, which has borne the burden and heat of the day in maintaining
and defending by Writing, by Preaching by Living, by Dying, the Doctrine of
Christ crucified against the Prince of Darkness, and all his cursed Adherents.

What though there have been clouds and eclipses of the glorious Light of Truth
in former times (which notwithstanding have by the brightness of Christ's
appearance in the Ministry of his old Servants been dispelled, scattered and
removed.) What though there have been Differences and Contentions arisen rather
about Circumstantials then Fundamentals of the Gospel (from which we in this
Age are not altogether free) Yet since it is so, that Jesus Christ has been
the same to them which he is to us, we should learn to judge at least more
modestly then we do of the days that have been before us. It is, as it has
been observed, the common disease of all Ages to applaud themselves above any
that have been before them; Actions of men being for the most part according to
the vogue and sway of times, and have only their upholding by the opinion of
the vulgar. We deal with Antiquity but as Posterity will with us, which ever
thinks it self the wiser, and that will judge likewise of our errors according
to the Cast of their Imaginations. Yet I say not but that we have great reason
to bless God for those discoveries of his Grace, and those Manifestations of
his Truth that we enjoy in these times, and I doubt not but God has some also
now that will be valiant for his Truth, as there have been ever of old; but
when we look into the Lives of those who now-a-dayes are most zealous in
decrying Antiquity, and extolling the present Age, and yet find Spiritual
Pride and Censoriousness so common amongst them, besides their Intemperance,
Uncharitableness, Covetousness, Uncleanness, etc. which should not be once
named without Horror among Saints, what shall we then say, but that we are too
much infected with a Laodicean Temper, accounting our selves to be rich and
increasing in goods, and have need of nothing, when indeed we are wretched and
miserable and poor and blind and naked. We make our boast often of the great
knowledge and understanding that we have in the mystery of the Gospel above all
others that have been before us, and that we are as Children standing upon the
shoulders of Giants, and therefore we can see further then they (a childish
Conceit and an absurd Crotchet wherewith many please themselves, being ready to
say not from the Humble Spirit of God, but from a strong opinion of their own
weakness, and a weaker Judgment of the strength of others, we are wiser then
our Teachers, we have more understanding then the Ancient ever had) but can
they, or any else tell us what Holiness there is more now, then there has been
in the Saints of old? What Brotherly Love? What zeal for the Truth? what
contempt of the World? what mortification of inward Lusts and crucifying of the
Flesh with the Affections thereof, is now to be seen in this Generation more
then has been formerly? If we know more then others that have been before us,
and yet come short of them in the power of Religion what a shame is it? At
Saint Margarets Westminster.
It was an ingenuous Confession made by one of late times in their greatest
Assemby, though he mistook in his Parallel We were best (says he) in worst
times, we held our Cloak in the wind and now are laying it off in the Sun. A
miserable declination from the Life and Power of Godliness is come to pass
within these few years: our practicals, our inward and close ways of walking
with God in Faith and Love are sublimed into fancies, and vapor out into Fumes
of new opinions, and which is worst of all, we take this Dropsy to be growth,
and conceive our selves to be more spiritual and refined, because more Aerie
and Notional. The Lord humble us for our declensions and swervings from the end
of the Commandment, which is Love out of a pure Heart, and of a good Conscience
and Faith unfeigned, and for our turnings aside to vain Janglings.

And now if the example of our Lord Jesus Christ, as it has been before
presented unto us, together with his immutable constancy in being still the
Same in the Dispensation of his Gospel, it being never yet wholly retracted
since it was first made known unto the World (for it was once and but once
delivered unto the Saints) will not move us to give a due Veneration to the
Holy Ancients and Fathers that have gone before us, who have been partakers
with us of the same precious Faith, and have labored with indefatigable pains
in the Lord's Vineyard, their works praising them in the gates, let the
consciousness of our own unworthiness under that glorious Light, unto which we
do pretend, persuade us thereunto.

But if any shall say quorsum haec? To what purpose is all this earnestness
about antiquity? I may answer, Is there not a cause, when the Glory of Christ
is diminished by our detraction from it, and when a common violence is done to
the Holy Scripture in limiting the Accomplishment of sundry Prophecies to these
times, and those that come after us? It being most certain they have been
already fulfilled, even in those elder days of the Gospel, that are made of
small reckoning by us.

Thirdly, This may serve to satisfy all the World that the Religion which we
profess is the only true Religion; we I say that have separated from Rome, as
it now stands, or rather as it is fallen from what it was before that
depraved and deplorable Corruption which it has contracted by the intrusion of
many and sundry superstitions upon it through the subtlety of Satan, and the
cunning crastiness of men of corrupt minds, who have sought themselves and
their own interests more then the things of Jesus Christ.

If Antiquity must needs be a mark of a true Church, then can we make our boast
of it as much as any. The rock of Ages is our foundation, and the gates of Hell
shall never drive us from it. We disdain to hold of Luther and Calvin, or any
man else how eminent soever he might be for Piety in his Generation. A tenure
indeed that the recent Conventicle of Rome has devised, which because it
pretends to Peter as its Founder and Author Paramount, will therefore
obtrude upon others the like Weak and Upstart originals, and if they cannot
compare with them (as they conceive) in such a Claim, they are ready to cry
them down for Novelists and intruders as utterly unworthy to have any society
with the Churches of Christ. But far be it from us to build upon any such
foundations; And for any Novelty in our Profession, as concerning the substance
of Religion, we can maintain it against the World, that we are in no wise
Guilty thereof.

It must be acknowledged on all sides that the old way is the only right way,
and that that is most consonant to Truth, which is of greatest Antiquity. But
then the Question will be, where our Computation shall begin? Surely it must
not be at some Centuries of years that have been lately before us; but rather
we are to look for the first beginning of this way, from the beginning of the
World, otherwise it will not in this sense Merit the Title of Antiquity, but
that Gospel exception will be of force against it, Non fuit sic ab initio, Mat
19.8.
It was not so from the Beginning. A singular and compendious Gradation of the
rise and progress of Truth, is that which is given by a certain Ancient, Id
verius quod prius, id prius quod ab initio, id ab initio quod a Deo, That is
truest which was first, that which was first is from the beginning, that which
was from the beginning was of God. And truly (as it was said before, so may we
say it again) our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ
according to the order of the foundation laid in God's eternal decree, and as
the faithful people of God have had theirs in all the Ages of the Church, that
have been before us. If we vary from others in outward forms, or if there be
variances amongst our selves about them (as alas there are too many, the more
is the Pity, and when was there a people of God constituted into a Church that
were wholly free) yet this will not conclude us to have taken up a new
Religion, no more then the several Fashions in our Attire do deprive us of the
ancient Privileges of our Country, and make us another Nation.

To conclude, we are of Yesterday, and know whom we have believed, and are
known of him, viz. Jesus Christ the Same Yesterday, to Day, and for ever.

Fourthly, We may upon the Consideration of this Doctrine see how absurd and
foolish that Dream is of a certain Vbi, a Place of confinement for the Souls of
the Faithful, who lived and died Yesterday in that long tract of time under the
Law, and before it, which place is by the Papists called Limbus Patrum; for in
regard the work of Redemption was not fully accomplished by Jesus Christ, till
he had suffered Death upon the Cross, therefore say they, all those Patriarchs
and Prophets, and Holy men of old from the beginning of the World unto that
time, could not enter into Heaven, but were shut up in some lower parts of the
Earth, bordering upon Purgatory, which say they is next door to Hell. For
(says Bishop Mountague) as if some of their Masters had been soon sent thither
to take a survey thereof, they do quarter out that infernal Clime into four
Regions; And this place amongst the rest, which they have assigned unto the
Fathers, they determine to be the uppermost Fringe, as the Word Limbus
signifies, or the verge of Hell. It is not my purpose to descend so low as to
examine the particulars of this their Subterraneous Chorography. I believe the
Vanity thereof is Visible enough to all that have not their Eyes put out with
the smoke of Purgatory. Rather let the strength of our present Doctrine be set
in opposition to this fond dream of that false and Apostatical Church of Rome,
which has obtruded many such like idle Fopperies upon those poor people that
are bewitched with her Sorceries, and then let all mankind judge which is the
Truth True it is, Bishop Mountague of Nor.
they make much boast of Antiquity in the upholding of this their fabulous
Limbo; though as learned an Antiquary as any possiby that ever was in their
Conclave, affirms, that Antiquity will not own it. Nevertheless if it should,
it shall be of no Value with us, if it clash with the Divine Oracles of the
Holy Scriptures. They tell us that the Souls of the godly are in the bundle of
Life with the Lord their God 1 Samuel 25.29. 1 Samuel 25.29. Ec. 12.7.
And that the spirit returns unto God that gave it Ec. 12.7. That the Soul of
Lazarus was carried by the Angels who always behold the face of God in Heaven (
Mat. 18.11.) into Abraham's Bosom Luke 16. Luke 16.22.
And therefore it is well observed against the Rhemists, upon that place, that
Limbo being supposed to be under the Earth, and Lazarus's Soul from Earth was
carried upwards, If he went to Limbo, the Angels were not well acquainted with
the Way, in that they carry him above the Earth, when they ought to have
carried him to a place underneath the Earth.

Add hereunto what a world of Absurd ities would follow, if this Pepish devise
should pass for current: Act. 15.11
How could Saint Peter say Act. 15. We believe that through the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved even as they? Luke 20.38.
How could the Patriarchs be said to live with God, if they were banished out
of his Sight Luke 20. And if this Limbo be the Brim or Hem of the damned
places, how is it said that the Glutton in Hell saw Abraham afar off with
Lazarus in his Bosom; and that there was a great Gulf and Distance between
the Damned's place, and that wherein Lazarus abode? As for Abraham it may be
collected clearly from Heb. 11.9.10. that he immediately after Death was
received up into Heaven, Heb. 11 9.10.
according to his expectation. Contented he was with his flitting Tabernacles,
while he continued as a Sojourner here in this Life, because there was a City
to come after this Life that would be firm and steady, wherein he looked to be
admitted, and which should make full amends for all his wearisome
Peregrinations. Where we may see, that that City having Foundations, which the
Holy Patriarch by Faith expected, is by an Antithesis set ad oppositum to those
Tabernacles, which he formerly lived in with Isaac and Jacob, whereby is
intimated that he was not received into any other building after his death,
then that which is permanent. Into which City he being received, it must
necessarily follow, that all the faithful people of God, who were transported
by Angels into his Bosom as Lazarus was, were there received and entertained
likewise. Moreover (because this Parable is much perverted by the Papists to
their sinister sense) when Abraham opposes Lazarus's Comfort to the Glutton's
Torment, it is evident that he being in infinite Torment, the other was in
infinite Joy; which because it cannot be but in Heaven, A term appropriated by
the Holy Ghost to the Ages of the Church before Christ. But not fit to be used
now in the time of the Gospel. Gerard. Romans 5.15.
as in the Lord's Presence Chamber, it follows that the Bosom of Abraham is
the Rest that his faithful and right begotten Children have in Heaven.

In fine, That which chiefly I have to say against this absurd error is this,
viz. That it derogateth from the Merits of Jesus Christ, making him not to be
of yesterday, and his death to be effectual only a part post, to those that
come after him. An Opinion therefore to be Anathematized by all the Churches of
the Saint, yea further, the Sin of Adam, is by this means (contrary to the
Doctrine of the Apostle Romans 5.15.) made more powerful to Condemnation, then
Christ's Righteousness can be unto Salvation; for the Sin of Adam casts his
Wicked and Unbelieving Posterity into Hell immediately after Death, whereas by
their Doctrine, the Communication of Christ's Righteousness with them that
believed in him, could not immediately after Death lift them up into the
Kingdom of Heaven. How this can stand with Christ's honor, or how it agrees
with the aforesaid Scripture, let the Jesuits themselves tell us if they can.

Heb. 9.8. The way into the Holiest of all was not made manifest, while as the
first Tabernacle was yet standing. Heb. 9.8.
Upon which place these Limbonians do much harp, for the maintenance of their
foolish error, collecting as they think very strenuously, that the way to
Heaven was not open before Christ's Passion, and therefore the Patriarchs and
good men of old must needs have some other place of rest assigned unto them for
their abode until that time.

was not yet clearly manifested. Whereby he gives us to understand, that the
people of God under the Old Testament, knew the way to Heaven, but darkly, viz.
through the vail of Types. But withal that they knew there was a time of
clearer Light coming, which, when the shadows were removed, and that old
Tabernacle taken down, should make the way plainer to those that should walk in
that Light: for the Word (...) does certainly signify this kind of
manifestation by Light, as we may see in sundry places of Scripture, and not
such an Apertio portarum an opening of the gates of Heaven* as these Popish
Phantasticks vainly imagine, who do hereby only manifest their gross
Ignorance, in that whereas the Apostle says, the way to Heaven was not
manifest in regard of knowledge, They will against all sense and reason
maintain, that the way to Heaven was not open in regard of Entry, as if the way
could not be open to enter, because it was not manifesty known. Upon which
account (as one well observes) they may shut out our Christian Infants at this
day, who do not only not manifestly, but not at all know the way to Heaven:
and if the way to Heaven be open to them for entry, although it be shut in
regard of knowledge, how much more was it open to the faithful under the Law,
who (as to sufficiency) knew the way to Heaven, although not so manifesty as we
do?

As for that which has been Objected out of our Common Liturgy, viz. When thou
had overcome the sharpness of Death, thou did open the Kingdom of Heaven to
all Believers. I answer, they are much mistaken, who render the sense of the
said words in that manner to the derogation of Christ's merit; for if they be
interpreted aright, they do rather advance the honor of the Lord Jesus, in
that way and kind that we have here insisted upon, And as Athanasius used
them, who was the Author of them.
then in the least degree detract from it, the genuine meaning of them, as we
use them, being this, Jesus Christ after his death, did open the Kingdom of
Heaven to all Believers, viz. to the Gentiles as well as to the Jews, whereas
before, it was open only unto the Jews.

Lastly, Where as it is said by some, that though the Fathers were not shut up
in Limbo, as the Papists fondly dream, but immediately after Death were carried
up into Heaven, yet they were not admitted to that Vbi, that place of Glory,
wherein they have been ever since our Savior's Ascension; I Answer, till such
time as we can see some constat for this in Scripture, we must take leave to
declare our Judgment against it: rather because the Holy Scripture is so clear
that Jesus Christ was the same Yesterday which he is to day, we may admire that
the least scruple should arise in the thoughts of any, that the power of his
Resurrection could not put forth the same Virtue to the Saints of old, so as to
make them Quoad statum separationis, as perfectly happy, as it does unto those
that have, and shall come after. We are not to be regulated by the Opinions of
Men in this matter, whether Ancient or Modern, though in some other points that
are not of so great concernment we may happily afford a willing compliancy: In
this case we will call no man Father upon Earth, for one is our Father, which
is in Heaven; To the Law therefore, and to the Testimony, whosoever speaks not
according to this Word, in Order to Christ's Glory, and the Salvation of his
Church, it is because there is no Light in them.

And now when I was even about to leave this point, so to proceed unto that
which follows; I have met with a spoke in my way upon which I must stop a
little, being well assured notwithstanding, that my Text will bear down all
Opposition that may be raised against it.

There have been we know in these late times certain strange Opinions scattered
about, such as have been of pernicious consequence to Religion, And if amongst
the rest I meet with any which strike at the Honor of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which our present Text ascribes unto him, I hope I may take liberty to bear
Witness against them, of how great Name soever the Authors thereof may be that
have maintained them. I shall forbear to nominate any Persons, but do heartily
wish, they would seriously consider with themselves, how they may for the
Church's sake, retract that which they have of this Nature, so unadvisedly
written.

It has been maintained and published by one Author especially of great and
eminent Note, That the Object of the faith of the Patriarchs and Fathers of
old, was not Jesus Christ the Mediator, but God alone, that is, God the
Father, And that such efficacy as the expiatory sacrifices of the Law had, was
not so much in reference to the sacrifice to be made of Christ, as extrinsecal
and affixed by the Divine ordinance and institution of Almighty God: Yea, that
the very Heathen did in those times without Christ, even by the light of Nature
attain unto such a Knowledge of God as was enough for their everlasting
Salvation.

That these Cockatrice Eggs were hatched by Heretics of old is well known, The
Church was much pestred with these Pelagian vermin in former times; But that
after they have been crushed with the hammer of Divine truth in the hands of
Holy Ancients and Servants of Christ of late, that they should I say be now,
brought to Light again, perking up with such boldness as they do, and that
among us in this Church, who have been taught by terrible things in
righteousness to set up and adore the Lord Jesus Christ in his Throne, It is
and will be surely too great a provocation of God's jealousy against us.
Having therefore met with such Assertions as these, so destructive to the
Piety of the times, and so diametrically contrary to the Doctrine that has
been insisted upon, being derogatory to the Merits of the Lord Jesus, making
them useless to the World before the time of his coming, I conceive a necessity
is laid upon me to protest against them.

It has been the great design of Satan at all times to bring the world to be
as little beholding to Christ, as may be; and to that purpose has he bewitched
men with strong delusions, one while suggesting to their minds prejudicate
opinions concerning the ways of Christ, that they are grievous, unprofitable
and unreasonable ways, another while infusing into them Principles of
self-sufficiency, that so long as they have materials enough of their own to
finish their building, what need they go to seek in another's Quarry: sometimes
persuading them that the Saints in Heaven must be his Coadjutours in office, to
obtain grace for his people here, and to help them in time of need; again
making them believe that after this Life is ended, their souls must lie down in
Purgatory for a time, before they can be carried up into Heaven. And why is all
this, and much more attempted by this grand Adversary the Devil? but because,
as I said, he would draw men to have as little dependence upon Christ as
possibly he can; and consequently, that he might by degrees totally eclipse the
glory of the Lord Jesus (for he hates him with a perfect hatred) and utterly
frustrate in the end the great work of Redemption.

From this Forge it is (I doubt not to say it) that this old Antichristianisme
now newly revived, concerning the needlesness of the Knowledge and Faith of
Christ under the Law, has had its forming and contrivance, wherein some of
late have exceeded above measure. It would be too tedious here to intersert all
that is written of this matter in a Book called Theologia Veterum, and to give
answer thereunto; this only would I know, how the Lord Jesus could Quatenus
Mediator be (...) Yesterday, If all that is said concerning Justification and
Salvation, not only of the Fathers that were of old taken into Covenant with
God, but of the very Heathen, not in and through Jesus Christ, but only by a
general knowledge of God the maker of Heaven and Earth, be true. Doubtless
there cannot be truth in both these assertions: and if any shall assert
Doctrines contrary to the express Word of Scripture, whether it is better to
hearken to the Holy Ghost, or them, judge you. But I shall leave this matter to
their second thoughts, who have been too rash in spreading about these
Anti-scriptural Paradoxes, hoping that those who continue still too
pragmatically Active therein will now find Cause to repent them betimes of
their error and retract it.

Only I must here add, if this Error be to be repented of, how much more that
other which is made the ground of it, and which does indeed snatch the Crown
off from the head of Christ, not suffering him to have any thing to do at all
in the salvation of his people from the beginning of the World to the end
thereof, viz. That God was pleased to make choice, not of the Object, but the
Act of faith, The T^ Credere, as it is called, to be imputed to his people for
Justification. And what I beseech you does this signify, but that God was not
so well pleased with his Son, as with us poor sinful Creatures? Or, as if it
stood with the Wisdom and Justice of God, to make choice, and accept of that
which was imperfect (for so is Faith in the strongest Believer, considering it
in the Act) to make sinful man Rectus in Curia, righteous in his Sight, and to
reject that which was most Perfect. If this be not to dishonor both the Father
and the Son, I know not what is. But as the Holy Martyr said of old, in retam
sancta Deliberatio non habet locum, When such affronts as these are put upon
the Almighty God, we must not be mealy-mouthed; how dares any man utter such a
notorious untruth as this, God was not pleased to make choice of the Object of
Faith for our Justification? If an Angel from Heaven should come and preach
this Doctrine we should spit in his face, and hold him accursed: Can there be
any thing in this world dearer to us then this, that the Lord is our
Righteousness? Is not this the foundation of our Comfort here, and of our hope
that we may lift up our heads with confidence hereafter at the great day of
Retribution, against all the pleas of the Law, and the clamours of the great
Accuser of the Brethren? what Doctrine is there that the Apostle Saint Paul
does more clearly and more frequently insist upon in all his Epistles, then
this, that, It is the Righteousness of Christ and Christ alone that is imputed
to us for our Justification? Romans 5.19. 1 Cor. 1.30 2 Cor. 5.21. Gal. 2.16, 1 7
To give some instances: Romans 5.19. By the obedience of one (that is Christ)
many shall be made Righteous 1. Cor. 1.30. Christ Jesus is of God made unto us
Righteousness 2 Cor. 5.21. We are made the Righteousness of God in him Gal.
2.16, 17. Knowing this, a man is justified by the faith of Jesus Christ, that
is, by Christ himself, as is plain in the Verse next following. Yea, and the
Apostle for himself particularly professes, saying, I live not, but Christ
lives in me, Gal. 2.20.
for I live by the faith of the Son of God. See how he glories in the Object
of his Faith, as that which is the staff of his Life, viz. of his justification
in the sight of God, without which he confesses himself to be a dead man. True
it is, Romans 4.5.
that he says elsewhere, viz. Romans 4.5. Faith is counted for righteousness,
but that must be understood relatively, as faith is fixed upon the object and
as the object puts virtue into it, otherwise we should make the Apostle to
contradict himself; and it is very observable, that whenever Saint Paul
speaks of faith in this point of justification, he still renders it thus,
(...), or (...), that is, through faith, or by faith, as implying somewhat that
we receive by faith, but never thus (...), that is, for faith, as if
Righteousness were a recompense given unto us for the bare Act of believing.
Neither is it ever said in an active sense, faith justifies, but by faith we
are justified, that is, Passively by a foreign Righteousness, which by faith as
the recipient only is applied unto us. When a beggar puts forth his hand to
take an alms from a liberal man, should he say, mine own hand, or the sense of
my poverty that made me beg, has releived me in my want, and have no regard to
the Giver, or to the Alms it self, whereby his Life is sustained? When our
Savior tells his Disciples Mat. 5.14. They were the Light of the World, Math.
5.14. Joh. 1.9.
did he then deny himself to be that light which lights every man that comes
into the World Joh. 1.9. A power is given unto Ministers of the Gospel in many
places of Scripture, such as properly belongs unto God himself, and his Son
Jesus Christ, As for example, the works of Regeneration, Conversion, Remission
of Sins, everlasting Salvation: what are all these but works far beyond the
reach of man or Angel, being such as has been said belong unto God and Christ,
yet we know all these are by the Gospel ascribed unto Ministers: 1 Cor. 4.15.
Act. 26.18. Joh 20.23. 1 Timothy 4.16.
for they are said to beget men unto God, as also to convert them, opening
their eyes, turning them from Darkness to Light, and from the power of Satan
unto God, to remit their Sins, yea to save them: but now because these things
are spoken of Ministers in a way of subserviency unto Jesus Christ, will any
man be so void of reason therefore, as to exclude Christ himself, and say, not
Christ, but Ministers do regenerate, convert, forgive, and save those that do
believe? Yet thus do our adversaries argue in this case, because it is said,
faith is counted for righteousness, and we are justified by faith, therefore
has God made choice not of the Object, but the Act of faith to be imputed to
us for our Justification.

There is indeed a lenitive cast in to qualify the sharpness of this corroding
and poisonous error, granting faith not to be the meritorious cause of
Justification. But why then is the Lord Jesus Christ the Object of our faith so
plainly shut out from having any part at all in this matter? and why are we
told that where it is said, we are justified by faith, it is not to be taken
Tropically and Metonymically for the Object, as many Orthodox Writers do
interpret it, whom I could set in opposition to those that are mustered up for
the defense of this Error (if they have at least given that suffrage unto it
as is pretended) yea, and why is such an inference derived from the Apostles
frequent magnifying of faith ( Romans 4.) as to say, the Holy Ghost had not bound
himself so precisely to those words and syllables ( viz. of justification by
faith) if he had not meant to give this Honor unto faith it self, but rather
to some other thing (as it is most uncomely called) which faith lays hold
upon?

Alas, alas, that any who pretend to have a share in the merits of Christ,
should in this manner detract from his Glory? did the Lord Jesus Christ himself
Bear our sins in his own body on the Tree, yea, become sin for us that his
righteousness might be imputed unto us, and according to the appointment of his
Father, be made glorious in our justification, and shall not the travel of his
Soul be his peculiar satisfaction? what, is faith it self become false to the
justling of Christ out of his Throne, whose office it is, and ever has been,
to advance and promote his Crown and Dignity? or rather, is not the hand of
Joab, I mean, the malice of the Devil, as I said before, evidently to be seen
going along in this matter? In vain it is for any man living to make a
flourish, and to boast of a constant adherency to the Protestant Profession,
notwithstanding the fury of late persecutions, when there is such a manifest
agreement avouched with Rome in this particular, viz. of justification by
works; It seems by common report, that the Author of the Book called Theologia
Veterum, is of late deceased, nevertheless what is here written, may stand as
an antidote to preserve others from the infection of these postilent errors
which if there were nothing else to work in the hearts of those that are
faithful to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, a loathing of that Antichristian
Synagogue this alone were enough to cause an everlasting separation.

But I have done; and do be think my self what I have done, how I have raised
up some spirits that may possibly be thought not to be easily laid again,
whereas my hope is, they are rouzed to give Glory to God in consenting to what
is written. Nevertheless so long as I have Truth on our side, I shall not be
afraid, though an Host of adversaries how Potent soever they may prove to be,
did rise up against me. It is not God knows out of any unbeseeming contempt
or disrespect of any Person, that I have meddled in this controversy. Learning I
do reverence wheresoever it is, as much as any shall; only I do wish that it
may not be used as a Weapon to fight against Jesus Christ. But floreat Veritas,
Ruat Coelum, Let the World go which way it will with me, I cannot, I dare not
betray the Truth, by a sinful silence, when so fair an opportunity of
vindicating it, is presented unto me.

I must confess there has been in this particular some small digression, for
having an Error in chase, it has made me go beyond my bounds. But we shall
return, and take into consideration, the second Period of Time here mentioned
in the Text, with a reference unto this third interpretation of it. Consider
what has been said, and let us pray that the Lord may give unto us a right
understanding in all things.

CHAP. II. Shows the meaning of the Word (...), that is to day, as it is
rendered in the Text, according to our Third Interpretation, and treats also
of Christ's Economy therein:
Proposition.
JESUS CHRIST is (...), The Same, or, the only He to Day.

Now herein also two things are to be considered by us: First The Denomination
of Time (...). Secondly, What is predicated of that Time, viz. Christ (...),
The Same to Day.


First the Denomination of the Time, (...), i. e. mansuetus, ad differentiam
noctis quae immitis and ^orrida est.
to Day, from whence we may collect.

The Time of the Gospel is a time of light.

The word (...) derived from (...) implying it, which the former word (...)
does not.

The text we see calls it a day, and it is light we know that forms the
Day, without which it vanishes and comes to nothing. A Day then it is, and a
light-some day. A day which the Lord has made, even the Lord our Light, and
our Righteousness, the Path of that just one, having from the beginning been as
the shining light that shines more and more unto the perfect day. A glorious
day, wherein is concluded the light of Yesterday: For as the light which for
the three first days of the Creation was dispersed through the Heavens, it
pleased God to gather and unite into one body of the Sun; so that Light of
Yesterday which was diffused through so many shadows, and Legal Ceremonies was
at last complicated and folded up in Christ the Son of Righteousness, who is
now in this day of his Power like a strong man running his Race, displaying his
Beams, distilling his Influences, filling the Earth with knowledge, even as
the Waters covers the Seas. But let us more particularly behold and see the
Glory of this Light.

First the Light of this Day is the true Light, 1 John 2.8.
as the Evangelist Saint John calls it 1 John 2.8. Not like unto that of old,
which was darkened with the shadows of the Mosaicall Economy, but clear and
manifest, Lumen illuminans, Joh 1.9.
A Light that inlightneth every man that comes into the World, non
illuminatum, not enlightened by Moses, or any man in the World.

Secondly, It is a great Light, overspreading the whole World, shining out into
all Nations, making a day of Salvation unto all People. There were two great
Lights which God Created in the beginning, the greater Light to rule the Day,
Genesis 1.16.
and the lesser Light to rule the Night: Answerably hereunto has God ordained
two great Lights for his Church, the lesser Light to rule the time of the Law,
and the greater to rule the time of the Gospel; and as the Evening did precede
the Morning, in the ordering of the natural Day, so was the Law before the
Gospel in Reference unto this Day. When therefore the Night is spent, and the
Day come, we may conclude that a great Light, greater then what was before has
appeared in the World; and as it was foretold, so can we say, It is fulfilled,
The People that walked in Darkness have seen a great Light, Es. 9.2.
they that dwell in the Land of the shadow of death, upon them has the Light
shined; so then it is a great Light.

Thirdly, It is likewise a mavelous Light, as Saint Peter calls it, 1 Pet.
2.9.
Leading its followers into a knowledge that passes knowledge either Humane or
Angelical. (So Zanchy interprets the Place Ephesians. 3.19.) Revealing such things
which Eye never saw, nor Ear ever heard, 1 Cor. 29.
nor could have entered into any heart to conceive. Mavelous to the Blessed
Angels, whose Glory and Crown though it be to be Angels of Light always
beholding the face of God in Heaven, yet perceiving a Light here also in this
Day of the Gospel, Mat. 18.10.
whereby they might come to have more experience of the manifold Wisdom of
God, they are said with much greediness of Speculation, to stoop down, and to
gaze upon it. Mavelous to the Children of the Day, who are on all sides
filled with Admiration of the glorious appearance of that shining Light, which
they constantly behold in the dispensations of Grace, and wherein they conceive
themselves ten thousand times happier, then if they had the Glory of the world
laid at their feet. Mavelous also to the Children of this World, it being the
Astonishment of Nations, that all their Projects and Attempts to put out the
Light of this Day have ever been frustrated, and blown away like the Spiders
web; for lo the powers of the Earth, and the Gates of Hell were Assembled,
they passed by together, they saw it, and so they marvelled, they were troubled
and hasted away Ps. 48.4.5. Ps. 48.4, 5.
Veniunt, vident, and vanescunt, they come and see and vanish together.

Yea fourthly so invincible is the light of this day, that all the powers of
darkness shall never be able to extinguish it. To illustrate this particular
let us take into consideration the invincible nature of that light whatsoever
it is, which God who is the Author of Lights has set up among the Creatures
in this World: And to this purpose give me leave to intersert a very pithy and
pertinent Meditation of an Anonymous Author that I have met with in a late
Writer which may lead us farther into the knowledge of the Light of this day,
we see and prove says he by daily Experience how powerful and dreadful a
thing the darkness of the Night is, for when it falls, it covers and
muffleth up the face of the whole World, it obscureth and hides the hue and
fashion of all Creatures, it binds up all hands, and breaks off all
employments, it arresteth and keeps Captive all living Wights, Men and
Beasts, that they must be still and rest there where it arresteth them; yea, it
makes them fearful and faint-hearted, full of fancies, and much subject to
frights; It is of all other such a powerful and unconquerable Tyrant, as no man
is able to withstand: And yet nevertheless it is not of that Might that it is
able to overwhelme or to quench the least Light in the World: For we see that
the darker the Night is, the clearer the Stars shine; yea, the least
Candles-light that is lighted, withstandeth the whole Night, and not only
suffers not the darkness to cover or to smother and oppress it, but it gives
Light also even in the midst of the Darkness, and beate^h it back for some
space and distance on every side of it: So that which way soever it is borne,
or wheresoever it comes, there must Darkness depart, and give place unto
Light, all the power and dreadfulness of it cannot help or prevail ought
against it: And though the Light be so weak, that it cannot cast Light far
about, or drive the Darkness far from it, as in the sparkle of an hot Coal;
yet cannot the the Darkness cover or conceal, and much less quench it, but it
gives light to it self alone at least so that it may be seen afar off in the
dark, and it remains unconquered of the dark, though it cannot help other
things, nor give light unto them. Yea (that that is yet more wonderful) a
rotten shining piece of wood which has the faintest light that can be found,
yet remains invincible of all the power of darkness, and the more it is
compassed about with darkness, the clearer light it gives; so little is
darkness able to overcome or keep down any light, but that it rules and
vanquisheth and expels the darkness, which else overwhelmeth, and snareth,
and fettereth, and puts all things in fear. Now if this natural light be so
powerful, and so able to prevail against the darkness of the night, why should
not the glorious light which now shines in this day of the Gospel continue
still in its Brightness, notwithstanding all the attempts that are made by the
Prince of Darkness and his Adherents to put it out? Continue doubtless it
shall, and remain invincible to the end of the World. Yea, according to that
measure and proportion of the darkness of error, which in sundry Generations
is raised up to obscure and deface it, It shall certainly increase into a
greater Glory. And though this may carry with it the sound of a paradox in the
ears of some people unacquainted with the ways of God, yet it will be found to
be a most certain truth, because this day of the Gospel is not a day of small
things, of things to be despised, of things easy to be reduced to a nonentity,
as if they never had been, such as the designs of Men oftentimes to their
shame prove to be; but excellent things they are, surpassing the comprehensions
of Angels, which are the fruit and offspring of this day, even the Arcana Coeli,
and Magnalia Dei, The secrets of Heaven, and the great things of God, things
which many Prophets and righteous men in the generations of old have desired to
see, but could not, are now clearly made known to the Church in this day which
is therefore called the Day of the Lord's power Ps. 110.3. Ps. 10 3. Dies
exercitus, dies successus, dies victoriae.
A day of assembling his armies, that is, his Apostles and Ministers to subdue
the World, A day wherein his mighty acts have appeared unto men, and the
glorious Majesty of his Kingdom, ruling in the midst of his enemies, and making
himself known to his Church, not only by the name of God Almighty, but to be
the faithful Jehovah, giving such a being to all his promises, as never could
be the like in the Generations that were before: and therefore whenever any
adverse power shall now rise up against him, to hinder or interrupt him in the
completing of his most glorious design in this day of his power, he will most
certainly get himself a name in casting it down, and having commanded his Light
to shine out of Darkness, Joh. 1.5.
though the darkness of men's hearts will not receive it; yet his Commandment
still continues in force, and his word runs very swiftly.

In a word, true and great, and mavelous, and invincible is the light of this
day, concerning which, much might be spoken from the predictions of the
Prophets, who prophesied of this day, and much might be added from the
triumphant exultations of the Apostles, whose eyes were first opened to see the
light of this day: but there is no need to undertake any further the clearing
of the truth of this point, for the day it self does declare it, the Sun which
is the light and life of this day, being not only risen, but ascended, and not
only risen and ascended, but fixed in his Meridian, never more to descend,
till time be no more. Nescit occasum.
Let us therefore now come to improve it by some close Applications unto us
all, whose lot it is to live under this Light.

First, Seeing that this time of the Gospel is such a Lightsome day, we then
that are the Children of the day are to take notice of those Duties which the
day requires of us.

First whereof is, that we rejoice and be glad in it. Truly Light is sweet
(says Solomon) and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the Sun
Eccles. 11.7. 1. Duty. Ec. 11.7.
How sweet then and pleasant a thing is it to behold the light of this day?
wherein the Glory of the Lord is risen upon the Church, Es. 60.1.
as the Prophet foretold it should Es. 60.1 That glory which since the beginning
of the world was out of the reach and apprehension of any Creature, which yet
notwithstanding was earnestly longed for by the Holy and faithful Servants of
God of old. How happy would Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David, Hezekiah,
Josiah, Esaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, etc. have accounted themselves to
have seen that Glory which is now revealed? How full of joy would they have
been in the light of this day, wherein with open face we behold as in a Mirroir
the Glory of the Lord says the Apostle 2 Cor. 3. 2 Cor. 3.18.
Nay wherein all flesh sees the Salvation of God, wherein the Word of God
comes with power and evidence and Demonstration, wherein the Spirit is shed
forth abundantly in the hearts of Believers, wherein knowledge covers the
earth, even as the waters covers the seas, so that God's people now need teach
no more every man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother the sense and
meaning of the Shadows and Ceremonies of old, saying, Jer. 31.34.
Know the Lord, the Lord whom these things do typifie, and so far as such
carnal Ordinances are able, make known unto you; for now is fulfilled that
which then the Lord promised, saying, they shall all know me from the least of
them to the Greatest of them: The whole Mystery of Godliness is now clearly
revealed, in so much that they who are endued with the Spirit of God, know all
things; yea, 1 Job. 2.20. Act. 2.17.
even Children and Handmaidens, people of all sorts and Sexes, understand more
fully the Doctrine of Salvation then the Prophets and great Rabbis of old
could be able to reach into. And therefore it is worth our considering how
emphatically the Spirit of God in scripture does found out this word (now) in
reference to the great glory of this day of the Gospel, to that very end, that
all, who are I say Children of the Day, may see the Light, and rejoice in it.
Observe some instances. Behold, now is the accepted time, now is the day of
Salvation. 2 Cor. 6.2. Now is manifested the Righteousness of God Romans 3.22. 2
Cor. 6 2. Romans 3.22 Ephesians 3.10. Ephesians. 3.5. Col. 1.26. 1 John 2.8
Now is made known the manifold Wisdom of God Ephesians. 3.10. The Mystery which was
hidden from Ages and Generations, is now revealed Ephesians. 3.5. Col. 1.26. The
Darkness is past, the true Light now shines, 1 John 2.8. Now, Now, Now
implying that now, and never before the dawning of this day there was a light
in the world to be reckoned of the highest value.

O blessed and happy Day! And for ever and ever blessed be that good Providence
of Heaven that has brought us to see the Light of this Day, making it unto us
a good Day, A Day of good tidings, A day of Reconciliation with the God of
Heaven, A Day of joy and gladness; Let us therefore I say again and again
rejoice and be glad in it: Let the Children of the World glory, some in their
carnal wisdom, some in their strength, some in their riches, But let us glory
in this that we underl and and know the Lord. Now in this serene and joyful day
of his gracious visitation, did Abraham with great pleasure and rapture of
spirit rejoice to see this day afar off, and shall not we now rejoice when it
is at hand, yea, when it comes upon us, and the Light of it shines round about
us? Surely we are not Abraham's Children, unless we do the works of Abraham; and
if herein we do not rejoice, we are not of the Faith of Abraham, and
consequently shall not be blessed with him.



Ps. 112.4.
Unto the Righteous says the Psalmist (Ps. 112.4.) Arises Light in Darkness,
that is, in the darkest times of trouble, then has their light of comfort been
wont to arise most. And therefore though in some respect the day be somewhat
cloudy, yet it is not a Dismal Day, though the Affliction be great, yet the
consolations of God are not so small with us, but we may glorify God in this
day, and rejoice before him.

True, you will say, But alas we remember God and are troubled, for his Anger we
see is enkindled, it smoketh against the sheep of his Pasture; By terrible
things in Righteousness does God answer his People now in this day when they
call upon him, chiding and chastning them very sore, should we then make mirth?

I Answer far be it from us, when the Lord God of Hosts calls to Weeping and
Mourning, etc. that we should be of that cross. grained disposition, as to
thwart the sad Dispensations of his Providence by giving up our selves to any
vain and carnal Delights; and when his hand is lifted up to correct and
punish, that then we should wilfully shut our eyes, refusing to see, that I say
be far from us! But I beseech you, though this be a day of rebuke, Is it not a
time also of Love? Nay, when with rebukes the Lord does correct his people, is
there not both love and faithfulness to be found in the bottom of those
rebukes, which makes them very sweet unto the soul of a Believer? Besides can
we not distinguish between the sorrowful dispensations of Providence whenever
they come upon us, and the glorious dispensations of grace? If the former be
matter of sorrow, the latter are of joy; Rejoice therefore in the Lord always,
and again I say rejoice.

Oh but it is a day of blasphemy, And who that has a tender regard to God's
glory, and the Churches Welfare can choose but sigh and mourn to see and hear
the Abominations that are so frequent this day? How alas does error and
heresy justle with divine truth? Yea, trample it under their feet? And that
which increases the sorrow, people that profess godliness love to have it so
Some make a mock at Sin, That which should be the terror and amazement of the
soul, as being most of all contrary to God, and a worse enemy to the whole
creation then all the devils in Hell, Fools at this day do play and dally with
it: Others make a mock at Holiness, Pro. 14.9.
either by a profane Diabolical derision of it, or else by a false Pharisaical
Profession of it, thereby to palliate their abominable wickedness. Here are
some jesting pleasantly with their Maker as he did, who would needs drink a
Health to his Patron, blasphemously calling him his Maker; There others
sporting themselves with the Holy Scriptures, exercising their scurrilous Wits
upon those sacred Oracles whereat they should rather tremble, and which the
glorious Angels do stoop down to adore: Alas, alas, is not the Air polluted
with most execrable Hell-invented oaths, and that Unmanly vice of Drunkenness
(as our late King of never-dying Memory, according to the excellent Wisdom
given unto him, in a Speech of his at Oxford, most properly termed it) grown
Impudent notwithstanding all the good laws in force against it? And such
Brothelry commonly belched out by a Brutish Generation, who yet live under the
light of this day, that the very Heathens would abhor it? And is this a time
then think you, to Rejoice

I Answer, For these things indeed let us be humbled and walk mournfully before
the Lord, let horror feise upon us as it was with the Holy Prophet, Ps. 119.53
Ps 119.136.
because of the wicked that forsake the law of the Lord; Yea, let us as he did
for these things even swim in tears Ps. 119 136. But we must know that this
kind of sorrow and humiliation is to be manifested in denying our selves that
natural and lawful joy and liberty we may take sometimes in the free use of the
Creatures, not at all in quenching our spiritual joy, We rejoice not in
iniquity, but we rejoice in the truth, this joy no man nor no Devil should take
from us, because God has called us to it, and calls upon us for it. All this
therefore hinders not, but that we may and ought to rejoice in the Light of
this day, though there be much affliction upon the Church, rebuke from God,
iniquity and blasphemy among men to be seen in it.

Secondly, 2 Duty.
suffer the Light of this day to shine in upon your souls, that the beams
thereof may have their free and clear penetration into every corner of your
inner man. If ye be Children of light; and Children of the day sprung from the
womb of the morning, you will be still craving after light, ambitious of a
Conformity to the nobleness of your extraction: yea, light is your proper
element, and the more you are swallowed up in it, the more comfortable shall
your life be unto you. Mis-mean me not; I exhort you not now to stand gazing
after a Light that is too high for your reach, or to break through God's
pavilion to that light that is inaccessible. There is a knowledge too wonderful
for poor man, which while he is clothed with mortality, yea, and in some
respect when his mortality has put on immortality, He shall never be able to
attain unto. Neither do I call upon you to look after those new lights, which
the varity and darkness of these times do so much cry up and extol; for sure I
am, that which is new in point of Salvation cannot be true, A position, though
much disliked by some giddy heads, may well be maintained against Men and
Angels: Yea, whatsoever may be obtruded upon you as a fundamental Light that
shall appear in this Noontide of the Gospel to be of so narrow an extent, that
it has not or cannot overspread the whole Hemisphere of the Church, is most
certainly counterfeit, a prodigious comet, portending some strong delusions,
rather then a true fixed light, derived from the fountain of light, For says
Christ himself, Luke 17.24
As the lightning that lightneth from one part under Heaven shines to the
other part under heaven, so also is the Son of man in his day, Not only in the
great day of his glorious appearance, but even in this his day: He is not
concluded within the narrow confines of Africa, as the Donatists of old would
have him, Nor in the conclave at Rome as the Papists at this day foolishly
imagine, Nor in the Desert, that is, in the separation amongst those that
nowadays forsake the Assemblies, Nor in their secret Chambers, that is, in
the Conventicles of Schismatics; But his going forth is from the end of
Heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it, his Church has infallibly,
universally been enlightened by him, with that knowledge that is necessary to
Salvation, unto which, whosoever shall add, is a Deceiver, and to be
anathematized by all the Churches of Christ.

Putting away therefore these vanities, Let your souls give entertainment to
that Light, which this Day presents unto you. And so much the rather, because
the Prince of darkness has raised up many foggie, noisome, palpable mists to
obscure this light, with which mists the eyes of a multitude of people
pretending to Holiness are miserably blinded.

And now if it be demanded, what this light is? I Answer

First, It is the light of Life: not a dead light, Joh. 8.12.
as the light of yesterday was, which consisted in carnal Ordinances, and dead
Sacrifices, but a living light, that is, Jesus Christ himself, who though he
was dead to extinguish the former Light, yet being quickened by the Spirit, he
lives to establish this new Light, that shall therefore undoubtedly continue
to the end of the World. For behold, says he, I am alive for evermore,
affixing his Seal with an Amen, to note the unalterableness of his present
estate. He, I say again, is this light of life, not like unto other lights
that have no Life in them; whosoever follows the Sun in the firmament it is true
has light, but it is a Light wanting life; when death comes, it cannot give
him life, because it has it not to give; There is indeed hope of a tree, Joh.
14.7.10.
when it is cut down that it may live again, says Job, and that the tender
Branch thereof will not cease, but when Man gives up the Ghost, where is He?
Not the sent of water, nor the light nor heat of the Sun, can be able to revive
him; But says Christ, He that follows me has the light of Life, that is,
my self. Who am the Sun of Righteousness having healing in my Wings, Mal. 4.2.
Joh. 5.26. Joh 5.2.
it being given unto me to have Life in my self Joh. 5.25. So that I quicken
whom I will Joh. 5.21. And thus says the Evangelist of him Joh. 1.4. Joh. 1.4.
In him was Life and that Life was the Light of Men.

So then here you see what is the light of this day that you are exhorted to
receive, It is Christ Jesus; let him come therefore into your souls, He will
bring both light and life with him, light into your understandings, whereby you
shall get more intimate Acquaintance in the great Mystery of Godliness, and
life into your Affections raising them above the World, and from grovelling in
flesh and blood, to a spiritual elevation; light to direct you in the way, and
life to quicken you in it; light to comfort you in your troubles, and life to
deliver you out of them; the light of the life of grace here, and the light of
the life of glory hereafter: Awake therefore thou that sleep, rise up from
the dead, and Christ shall give thee Light.

Secondly, The light of this day is the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ,
2 Cor. 4.4.
showing to the world such glorious Mysteries which before this day could not
be so clearly known, such as the Incarnation of God, the expiation of sin by
his death, the freeness of Salvation through faith in a Mediator, remedy
against the Curse and mitigation of the rigor of the Law, reconciliation with
God, spiritual Administrations of the New Covenant, all which and many more had
never been manifested to the Children of Men, had not the day sprung from on
high, even from the Zenith of the Heaven of Heavens, visited the Church with
this glorious light, and therefore is it well worthy to be entertained by us.

Thirdly, It is called the light of the knowledge of the Glory of God, then
which nothing can to the Saints be more desirable, and unto which, when the
Soul has in the utmost extent of her Capacity fully attained she is fully
satisfied, setting up her rest with a Ne plus ultra, as the Prophet confessed
saying, I shall be satisfied when thy Glory shall appear. When as therefore
this glory now appears in some glimpses to the Soul, whiles she is shut up
in this Corpse of Clay, such Apparitions being the Praeludium of that perfect
happiness that is to come, must needs be very welcome. Now the Light of this
Day shows unto the Soul of a Believer, so far as it is capable, the Glory of
God, viz. The Glory of his Wisdom, the Glory of his Power, the Glory of his
Grace and Goodness, with other his glorious Attributes, in the Protection of
his people, in the fulfilling of his Promises, in the propagating of his
Gospel; yea, it fills the Soul with Joy and Gladness, raising it up to a
Life Heavenly and Angelical, And therefore well worthy of Acceptance.

Consider I beseech you, shall the Glory of the Lord shine round about us, and
shall not we open our Hearts to let it in? Have we a Price put into our Hands
to get Wisdom, and shall we have no heart unto it? God forbid! Yea, let us not
content our selves with that which we have already attained, 1 Cor. 12.31.
but labor to see more and more of this Glory, covet earnest^y the best things
says the Apostle, be still craving, Lord show me thy Glory, Let me see thy
goings, how thou my God and King go in the Sanctuary, in the Dispensations
of thy Grace, in the manifestations of thy Presence, O come into my Soul, and
let me be Metamorphosed into thine Image from Glory to Glory, 2 Cr. 3.18.
from one degree of Grace to another, till I come in the Light of Glory to see
the King in his Beauty, beholding him as he is, and knowing him even as I am
known.

Thirdly, As we must rejoice in the Light of this Day, 3. Duty
and receive it into our Hearts, so are we to walk in it, and by it, ordering
our whole Conversation according unto it, otherwise we are very unworthy of it.

And here give me leave a while to lead you into that Walk, wherein Zachary
and Elizabeth, a holy couple whose Praise is in the Gospel, were wont to walk,
They Walked, says the Evangelist, Lak. 1.6.
in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord Luke 1.6. Let us then join
Hearts and Hands together, and go and do likewise.

First let us walk in the Commandments of the Lord, Quid enim est Lex Dei nisi
Lux Diei? Ps. 104.23.
doing the work of the Lord in this Day of the Lord. The Day we know is
ordained for man to work in; Man (says the Psalmist) goes forth unto his
work, and to his Labor until the Evening Psalm. 104. So also is this Day set
apart and appointed by God for his people to walk in, that is, to work, for so
is a holy walking before God interpreted in Scripture, e. g. I must (says
Christ) Walk to day, and to morrow, and the day following, Luke 13.33. Ephesians.
2.10.
speaking of his works which he wrought at that time: And good works (says
the Apostle Ephesians. 2.10.) God has ordained that we should walk in them. This
Light therefore must not be consumed in vain, not whelmed under the Bushel of
filthy lucre, nor hid under the Bed of slothful Negligence, but we must make
use of it to show us our way, and to guide us in our work. Let us then arise
and walk, up and be doing: not spend the day in hearing and talking only as
the manner of some is; For as the light of the Sun is no help to the Ears and
Tongues of men, but to their hands and feet to walk and work in: so is the
Light of this Day set up for other ends and purposes then for people to sit and
chat by (pardon the Word) for such in truth is all the Twanging of Religion
upon the Tongues end, so much affected in these days, without doing. It is the
working Believer that is the only Believer, and whosoever shall say the
contrary, he is a Deceiver says St. John, For he that does Righteousness is
Righteous. 1 John 3.7.
Let no man therefore make a flourish of his Faith (though he could remove
Mountains therewith.) Unless he walk in Love, nor say he is a Professor,
unless he be also a Practitioner of Piety: A vain thing it is for a man to
boast how far he will walk to hear a Sermon, unless he will show out of a
good Conversation, how far he will walk to do a Sermon. Oh it is doing, it is
doing that is the Ornament of Religion, the Crown of a Christian Profession, It
is the end and sum of all, as we may learn from a good Arithmetician, when he
had cast up all his Accounts, Let us hear, says he, Ec. 12 13.
The conclusion of the whole matter, fear God and keep his Commandments, for
this is the whole Duty of man, upon which a Reverend Divine of our times
glosseth in this manner, it is as if he had said, I will in two words give you
an Abridgement of all that can be spoken. A tedious thing it is to write many
Books, and as tedious to read them, but if a man should write a hundred, nay
read over a thousand; This is the upshot and end of all, viz. To fear God, for
his inward Worship, and to keep his Commandments, for his outward Service: Lo,
this is the end of man, the perfection of the creature, all that is written
tends to this, all that is commanded, all that is promised, all that is threatened,
all that is done for or against man in Scripture may be resolved into this, to
stir us up to a holy and upright walking with God, and to a working out our own
Salvation, according to that Light which this Day brings unto us.

And now the better to quicken us hereunto, let us take these Persuasions along
with us.

Consider it is the design, First Motive.
the great design of the God of Heaven which he has undertaken this Day
against all the Machinations of Hell, to save his people from their sins, and
to rescue them from the common Destruction, which the old Serpent called the
Devil and Satanas had with deep Subtlety, and in the blackest and darkest
Caverne of his inveterate malice contrived against the whole race of mankind.
To bring which glorious design to pass, was the Light of this Day with infinite
Wisdom formed, And being so formed, God saw that it was very good, good to
discover the Counter-workings of the Adversary, and Good to guide his people in
all their ways, till they have quite escaped the danger, and entered into his
rest with joy. Moreover as he has begun his design, so his desire is very
earnest that it might go on and prosper without any let or hinderance from
those, for whose sakes he undertook it; therefore do we find him very
frequently in Scripture calling to this purpose, Ps. 81.13. Deuteronomy 5.29. Luke
19.42.
Oh that my people had hearkened unto me, and that Israel had walked in my
ways. Oh that there were such a heart in them, that they would fear me, and
keep my Commandments always. Oh that thou heast known even thou, at least in
this thy day, the things that belong unto thy peace, etc. Thus all the day
long, he reaches out his hand, and stretches out his voice unto us, least by
our backslidings and treacherous tampering with temptations in our way, we
give advantage to the Enemy to interrupt the Lord in this day of his power, in
the perfecting his work, his great work.

And now I beseech you brethren. If the Lord has of his abundant mercy been
careful with all this care for a Company of poor Creatures that were ready to
perish, setting up such a light, so exceedingly helpful unto them in their way,
as that without it, they could never be able to keep themselves upright, but
must undoubtedly stumble and fall into utter ruin, should they not do well
then to take heed unto it, that they walk in it? And should they not do very
ill to turn their Backs upon it, thereby so much as in them lies, to frustrate
the design of the Almighty for their good? Consider, shall the Lord the great
and glorious God declare the vehement desires of his Soul unto us, and shall
not we regard them? That be far from us! For us, It is but ask and have with
God, He bids us open our mouth wide and promises that he will fill it; When he
shall therefore wish and desire a thing of us, it is but reason that we should
readily grant it. The wishes and desires of Kings work mightily upon loving and
loyal Subjects. No difficulty shall hinder the fulfilling of them, as when
David did but signify a desire to drink of the water of Bethleem, meaning
only if he could have had it with a wish, not requiring, or so much as
intending that any should fetch it with the hazard of their lives, yet,
immediately three of his mighty men brake through the Host of the Philistims,
and drew of the water, and brought it unto him; Scipio Africanus; being in
Sicile, preparing for his expedition into Africa, when one asked him, what made
him so confident, being a young man, to equipp a Navy for the invasion of so
great a Country, he presently showed 300 of his Soldiers that were before
him, and pointed likewise to a high Tower, whose top was prominent over the
Sea, saying unto him, There is not one of these Courageous and stout fellows
that you see, but without delay would get up to the top of this Turret, and
throw himself headlong into the Sea, if I commanded him. And shall mortal man
prevail more to have his desires fulfilled, then the Almighty God, who rules
and governs all things, can have with those people that profess subjection
unto him? Especially when his desire is toward them for their own good? Surely
if there were that loyalty in our hearts toward God as there ought to be, we
could not but give our consent unto whatsoever he shall desire. Job 22.3.
It was well argued by Eliphaz Job 22.3. Is it any pleasure to the Almighty
that thou art Righteous? or is it gain to him that thou make thy ways
perfect? What is there can be added to infinite perfection? Rather, Pro. 9.12.
Phil. 2.12.
if a man be wise he is wise for himself. And it is our own Salvation that we
are called upon to work out, so that a threefold Cord is here twisted together
to draw us to a diligent walking in the light of this day according to God's
Commands, viz God's design of our Salvation which we should not frustrate, his
desire which we should satisfy, and our own interest and benefit which we
should be so wise as to promote to the uttermost of our power, therefore arise
and walk, up and be doing,

Secondly, 2 Motive.
As we must walk worthy of God who has called us to his Kingdom and glory, so
should we walk worthy of our calling wherewith we are called: 1 Thessalonians. 2.12
Ephesians. 4.1. 1 Thessalonians. 5.5.
and what are we called? We are the Children of the Light, and the Children of
the Day, we are not of the Night, nor of Darkness, whereupon the Apostle
infers, Let us not sleep as do others, but let us watch and be sober.
Brethren let me freely speak to you, we vaunt our selves very frequently that
live under a glorious light, and whatsoever others have been before us, we
regard it not, We are the Men, Our lot is fallen unto us in this time, to know
more of the Mysteries of Heaven then has been known in former Ages. Well, be
it so, but then our service must be answerable, Romans 12.1
it ought to be as the Apostle calls it (...), that is, Reasonable service, not
reasonable, as most of us make it, confining it within those narrow and easy
boundaries which our false deceitful hearts have devised; but reasonable it
must be, viz. Such as is rather suitable to men grown up in a Gospel-stature,
then that which is fit to be done by those who were but the Children of
Yesterday, under the Paedagogy of the Law. We are the Lords dayes-men he has
singled us out for special service, his eye is continually upon us, and we have
much work to do, it behooves us therefore to look about us; for we shall be
inexcusable, if we be found negligent in the day of the Lord. 3 Motive,


Thirdly therefore consider the length of your way that you have to walk, and
the multitude of businesses that you have to do, and then see whether you have
not need to use well the Light of this day, without which, you can never be
able to finish your course with joy.

You have I say a great journey to go, viz. through all the ways of God's
Commandments before you can get to Heaven. Ps. 119.96
And these Commandments are exceeding broad, yet must you traverse them in
their whole breadth, having respect unto every particular circumstance, so far
as you are concerned therein. In this journey there must be no picking and
choosing of our way according to our own fancies, nor turning aside from any one
Commandment; for, he that turns away from the holy Commandment, 2 Pet. 2.21.
it had been better for him that he had never known, nor entered into the way of
Righteousness at all. And now alas how is it possible for a poor weak Creature,
blind and lame (such are we all, the best of us all, of our selves) to walk
steddily in this way, and to continue in it to the end, unless he has the
light of this day to go before him, which alone is ordained of God to be a
conduct therein? especially considering withal the variety and multitude of
businesses that are to be done in the way: Bishop Reinolds.
Let us take notice of them as they are prepared to our hands by a skilful
Workman, one of a thousand. Christ, says he, has service much more then
enough to take up all the Might, strength, studies, abilities, times, callings
of all his servants, businesses toward God and himself, worship, fear,
Communion, Love, Prayer, Obedience, Service, Subjection; Businesses toward and
for our selves, watchfulness, repentance, Faith, Sincerity, Sobriety, Growth in
grace; Businesses toward other men as instruments and fellow members,
exhortation, reproof, direction, instruction, mourning, rejoicing, restoring,
relieving, helping, praying, serving in all ways of love: so much evil to be
avoided, so many slips and errors to be lamented, so many earthly members to
be crucified, so much knowledge and mysteries to be learned, so many vain
principles to be unlearned, so much good to be done to my self, so much service
to be done to my brother, so much glory to be brought to my master, every
Christian has his hands full of work: and can all this be done; without light?
Or will you stand all the day idle, as if you had not been hired at all into
the Lord's Vineyard, but still continue in the marketplace of the World
amongst those that are without? But be it known unto you, you have been hired,
and the penny of eternal life has been offered unto you again and again;
therefore woe unto you if you stand out any longer. As yet there is day light
for you to come in, but you know not how soon it will expire.

Which indeed ought also to be thought upon by us as another special
Consideration to quicken us in our way. 4 Motive.
This day I say will have an end, and we know not how soon the mystery of God
will be finished, and the Oath fulfilled, that time shall be no more. This
nevertheless we know, that there is an appointed time to man upon earth, and
that his days are as the days of an hireling, Job 7.1.
that is, very short and uncertain: so that how short this day of the Gospel
may be to us we cannot tell; and many times it is made shorter then the days
of our lives, being through God's just indignation taken from us, leaving us in
the darkness of our own foolish hearts, and under the power of the Prince of
darkness, because we choose darkness rather then light. Very needful then it is
to hearken to the advice which the Lord gives Joh. 12.35. Walk says he in the
light while you have the light, least darkness come upon you, And also to
follow his example, I must (says he) work the work of him that sent me, Joh.
9.4. Ps. 19.5.
while it is day, the night comes wherein no man can work. We see daily that
the Sun in the firmament has his rising and setting, he comes forth of his
Chamber in the morning like a Bridegroom, and retires again at even: Thus in
like manner is it with the light of this day: it came forth De umbraculo suo,
out of its place, where it lay shadowed before in the Tabernacle of Moses, or
if you will De thalamo (for the word will bear both) out of the
Presence Chamber of the God of Heaven, where it was trimmed after the form of a
Bridegroom in a more gorgeous manner then formerly it had been: and being come
forth, hitherto like a strong man he has run his race, bearing down all
opposition, driving before it the darkness of Judaisme, Hellenisme, Paganism,
Papisme, and Atheism, and what ever it be that is contrary to sound doctrine:
But being in a race, it will have an end, and we may probably conjecture that
it is well near finished: For as the cool of the day does foretell the
approaching of the night, so that coldness of love, which was foretold to be in
the last times, and is now too palpably to be discerned in the World, does
plainly demonstrate the setting of our Sun to be very near. Yea, and Satan
also has great wrath, because he has but a short time to work for his
Kingdom, knowing well that the end of this day will be concluding of his whole
design against the Kingdom of Christ. Do not these things I say signify to us,
that the day goes away and that the shadows of the evening are stretched out.
That our Sun is declining, and his race even almost at an end.

Work therefore now for your lives, if ever you will do it, the night comes
wherein no man can work. Could we speak to the light of this day, as Joshua did
unto the Sun, to stand still and make it slay our leisure, we might then take
our own time? But as all our times, so especially this is in the hand of God;
and as no worldly or infernal power can precipitate this day, or cut short the
hours thereof, so can none protract it beyond that measure, which the grave and
wise ancient of days has appointed unto it. The day is his, and the night is
his, says the Psalmist, the day, I say, of the gospel, and the expiration of
it (as well particular to some Persons and Nations, as universal at the end of
the World) are in his power under his irreversible decree, to be ordered
according to the good pleasure of his Will; and therefore out of our reach to
be interrupted in their course by any thing that we can do. Arise then and
walk, Up and be doing, least dreadful darkness seize upon you before you be
aware. It is reported by Historians of Titus Vespasianus (entitled by them
deliciae humani generis, because he delighted to do good unto all) that when he
had spent a day without doing somewhat whereby the Commonwealth or some private
persons might be benefited by him, he was wont to say Diem perdidi, the day is
lost; O let us consider the day is well nigh spent, and the night is at hand,
If now we stand idle, and will do nothing, or if we be slothful in the
multitude of businesses, Romans 12.11. (...).
which the Lord has set us, not Serving the time with that fervency of spirit,
as is fit for the day, we also may say hereafter when it will be too late
Perdidimus diem, we have lost the day, and are lost in the night without any
remedy. What therefore the Preacher says in his sense, Ec. 9.10.
the same say I in this, Whatsoever thine hand finds (in the word) to do, do
it with all thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor Knowledge, nor
wisdom in the grave whither thou go; That being (as one says) Seculum
Mercedis, not Seculum Operis, not a time of work, but of wages, and your wages
shall surely be according to your work.

To Conclude, Let us according to the Advice of the Apostle walk honestly, Romans
13.13.
that is, Decently as in the Day, in all the Commandments of the Lord, doing
that which is good in his sight (for this is indeed that honest decency which
adorns a believer, and sets a beautiful luster upon his holy profession) In
which Adviso the Apostle seems to allude to the civil Customs and Manners of
people that are modest in the World, who are wont both in their apparel and
deportment to demean themselves decently in the day time, and will while they
are in the light be ashamed that any thing dishonest and unseemely should be
found upon them, or acted by them: whereupon he would have us also that believe
to learn and remember to bear such a respect unto this day of the Gospel, and
the light shining about us, as to have our Conversation honest, and to do
nothing uncomely in it, No Rioting or drunkenness, no Chambering or Wantonness,
nor other the like dishonest works of Darkness should be seen amongst us, which
in this day will cover us with shame to the loathing of our persons in the Eyes
of God, and his Holy angels: Away with them therefore, and let us walk honestly.

And now for a close of this Exhortation, I shall take liberty to speak a word
unto you in season, If you be Children of the day, beware of the deeds of
darkness in this time wherein you pretend to remember the Nativity of our Lord
Jesus Christ. It is not my work to argue against the solemnity which Yesterday,
to Day, and some Days following, is still held up and continued among us;
neither will I undertake (as the manner is) to judge any man here present in
the freedom of his Conscience for his observing this Anniversary Festival, yea
though his observation of it be accompanied with a more then ordinary use of
the good Creatures of God, provided that he does, as the Apostle speaks,
observe it to the Lord. But I beseech you, Is this to celebrate the Nativity of
the Lord, to run into excess of Riot, and to let loose the reins into all
manner of disorder and Licentiousness? Is this to Commemorate the Birth of
Christ, to spend the time in gourmardizing and swinish Drunkeness? Siccine
exprimitur publicum gandium per publicum dedecus? Haeccine solennes dies
decent, quae alios non decent? Will you so testisie your public rejoicing, as
to make your selves a public shame? Do such things become these festival days
which are scandalous and unbecoming those that profess the name of Christ upon
other days? It was the complaint of Tertullian in his time, and we have too
much reason to make use of it now. O my Brethren, beware I fay again of the
unfruitful works of darkness at this time, if you be the Children of the Day.
And a needful Caveat it is, for I think it has been too truly said, God has
been more dishonored in many places of this land by Rioting and Drunkenness,
and other Abominations in the twelve days, then in all the twelve months
following. Let us therefore I say again walk honestly as in the Day, and as
becomes Children of the day in all the Commandments of the Lord.

I have I confess been somewhat large in handling this subject. But the day
will not fail us, though we take a turn or two more then ordinary in walking
this round, I mean in meditating upon this holy walk, and in exhorting one
another while it is called to day, to bestir ourselves in it.

Let us now pass on to the other side of this walk, that is, the ordinances of
the Lord, for they indeed are the excellency and glory of this day; and
methinks it should be our endeavor, yea, it should be our Ambition to exercise
our selves in this walk also more frequently then we do. What greater happiness
can there be in this world, then to walk with God, and to hold a sweet
correspondency with him? To pour out our complaints before him, to make known
our requests unto him, and to receive instruction and benedictions from him?
what a privilege is it peculiar to this day, to find the Lord Jesus Christ in
his Regal and Pontifical attire, walking in the midst of the seven golden
Candlesticks, that is, in the assemblies of his people, breathing upon them
with his spirit, and insinuating himself kindly into their hearts by his word
and Sacraments? Are not the goings of the Lord, the Lord I say our God and our
King in his Sanctuary, worthy to be traced by us, especially, when the savor
of his Ointments does so spread it self that it is sensibly to be discerned?
What, do not the words of God do good to those that walk uprightly? Shall God
all the day long from the rising of the Sun to the going down of the same,
stretch out his hands unto us, filled with the choicest of his blessings that
ever he did hold out to the Children of men, And shall not we put forth our
hands to receive them? Is it nothing to have Satan fall down like Lightning
before us in the powerful dispensations of Gospel Ordinances? O how happy were
we, if we knew our Happiness?

But since I am fallen upon a serious expostulation in this case, suffer me I
beseech you good brethren that belong unto this Congregation, to bring it home
to your Consciences by a particular application; and without offense be that
speech, which is intended not to offend, but only to affect with a clear Truth.

Yesterday, it is like, if there had been a Sermon in this place, here would
have been a full Congregation; To day also it appears our Assembly is greater
then it was wont to be upon these days, yet yesterday, and to day, and all our
days, what do we that are your Ministers but work the work of him that sent
us, preaching peace by Jesus Christ (he is Lord of all) Whence is it then that
our Message is despised? That the holy and divine Ordinance of preaching is so
much slighted by your absenting your selves upon such days of the week
wherein Ministers come freely to impart unto you some spiritual gift, such as
they have received from the Lord? If indeed we did preach any other Gospel,
then that which the Church of God has received from the beginning, or any
other Jesus then him who is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, ye might
have just cause to despise our ministry, and to hold us accursed. But when we
bring unto you no other doctrine of salvation then that which has been
professed and maintained by the Church of God in all Ages, sealed and confirmed
by the blood of Martyrs, yea by the blood of God himself, accompanied also
with the mighty operations of the spirit of God to the conversion and salvation
of multitudes that hear it, how can you without contracting unto your selves an
extraordinary guilt in the sight of God, refuse as you do to resort to this
place at such times, when this word is faithfully preached, having no lawful
let to hinder you, and to keep you from it? Do you not hereby openly proclaim
unto the world that you have no care of your souls, what becomes of them,
whether they sink or swim, whether they saved or damned? Pro. 15.32.
He that refuses instruction, says Solomon, despises his own soul. Nay is it
not a plain demonstration of too great an impiety, as that you care not for God
himself, that you regard him not, fear him not, nourishing in your hearts a
secret atheism and enmity against him? Where there is not a desire of the
knowledge of Gods ways, there is questionless a slender account made of the
majesty of God, and a secret if not an open separation from him. To this
purpose says Job, They that desire not the knowledge of his ways, say unto
him in their hearts, depart from us. Nay more, Job. 21.14.
To refuse to hear the word preached when we may, and God offers it unto us,
at such a time I say, to have no mind to it, no love to it, but disdainfully
to turn our backs upon it, is a greater sin (according to the judgment of
Christ himself) then the sin of Sodom and Gomorrah Hear what he says Matthew.
10.14.15. And what he speaks there to his Disciples, Matthew 10.14.15.
he speaks to all his servants lawfully called to the work of the ministry,
into whatsoever City you enter, and they receive you not, shake off the dust of
your feet, Verily I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for the Land of
Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment then for that City. We^l, be assured
of it, when all is done, and the time of reckoning shall come, This will be
found to be a very great sin. It will not boot thee then (poor man) to say, I
have been careful to celebrate the commemoration of my Saviors Nativity, at
the usual time of the year, no, no, thy observation of this Ecclesiastical
Constitution will not by ten thousand talents counterpoize thy great sin in
disobeying the commandment of thy God by so frequent refusing to hear him, as
thou do, at other time of the year when he speaks unto thee in the ministry
of his word: Whereas therefore you will do this, from which I will not dissuade
you, Do not leave the other undone, which God has so expressly commanded should
be done; but to day hear his voice and harden not your hearts.

There are sundry other Ordinances which the children of the day might here be
exhorted to walk in. But it will not be expedient now to insist upon them all
severally, only let the Sacraments, which are together with the word the prime
Ordinances of this day, have that regard which is due unto them. The Lord we
know has commanded that we should walk in them; For as he said of old under
the Law Lev. 18.4. So has he in effect spoken it again and again in the Gospel
concerning his Sacraments especially, Levit. 18.4.
ye shall keep mine Ordinances to walk therein, I am the Lord your God.
Observe. It is not said to talk and discourse of them only, as the manner of
some is nowa-daies, much less to keep them closed up and confined within those
narrow limits which our late upstart Anabaptistical Projectors have devised,
with whom there has been too much tampering and compliancy; even almost to the
irrepairable ruin of that whole Evangelical Institute, under which we have
hitherto prospered; but to walk in them, that is, to use them both for our
incorporation into his Church, and our corroboration in it. Since then the Lord
has commanded us this service, we had not best stand arguing still about the
administration of it, and in the mean time leave it quite undone: But let
Ministers and People look to it betimes, least the anger of the Lord smoke yet
more and more against them for their disobedience. Thus much for that which
concerns the children of the day, and what the day requires of them.

In the next place seeing the Time of the Gospel is such a lightsome Day, let
this serve to awaken the World that lies asleep in the darkness of Ignorance
and Profaness. And oh that I were now a Boanerges that I might with the Thunder
and Lightning of this day rouse and startle such Sleepers out of their sloth
and security, wherein they are willing to lie down, like those the Prophet
speaks of Es. 56.10. Loving to slumber, miserably stupefied with the Delusions
of the Nooneday Devil, scarcely so much as dreaming of their imminent danger,
till it comes upon them with the dreadful Alarmes of Gods Insupportable
Vengeance. Look up, O ye poor Creatures, behold and see, the Night is past, and
the Day is come, the Morning is not only spread upon the Mountains, and the
Day Star in his Course driving before it the shadows of the Night, but the Sun
has shined out in his full strength. What? Are you not ashamed thus to turn
Day into Night, and to lie snorting in your sinful Security, whiles so
glorious a Light shines round about you? If you will still shut your Eyes; let
your Ears yet be open to that Gospel-Thunder clap ( Joh. 3.19.) and let them
tingle to hear it, Joh. 3.19.
This is the Condemnation (the very damning Sin which sinkes men deepest into
Hell) that Light is come into the World, and men love Darkness rather then
Light.

But let us a little take these sleepers apart one from another, and proclaim
before them the Day of the Lord.

First you that are wilfully ignorant, who know not, nor will understand, but
take Pleasure to walk on in Darkness, and will not see the Light, very apt to
learn how to carry on a Design to your Advantage in things of this World, but
stark fools in the mystery of Godliness; Consider, Is this a time to be
Ignorant, when the Light of the knowledge of the glory of God has shined out,
not in the veiled face of Moses, as it did Yesterday, but in the glorious face
of Jesus Christ? Is this day of the great things of God so illustriously
visible, to be despised? Or is there such Comeliness and Beauty in the Black
hue and prodigious feature of darkness, that men should so much delight in it?
The times of former ignorance God was pleased to wink at, but now he commands
all men every where to repent. Awake, Awake therefore you that have hitherto
despised knowledge, Awake I say, open your eyes now, if ever you will see; for
if this Gospel which this day has so demonstratively made known to the World
be as a Hidden thing unto you, it is an evident token of your everlasting
perdition.

But if this Day does produce such Terror, and prove so Dismal for those that
are ignorant, oh what a black Day is it like to be unto those that are Profane?
Let Swearers, and Liars, and Drunkards, and Oppressors, and unclean
Adulterers, and cruel Mockers and Despisers of Gospel Ordinances, with all the
rest of that Rabble that lie down in the Lethargy of Sin, tremble and be
horribly afraid at the Apparitions of this Day: Since you will not open your
Eyes to see the Light of it, you must and shall abide the evil that attends
upon it. The evil I say how strange soever it sounds in the ears of men
unacquainted with God and his Word, who think of this Day, as if there were
nothing but calmnes and serenity in it; And truly to a Believer that walks in
the light of it, It is a day, as has been said, of rich and abundant Grace, A
joyful day: Mal. 4.2
To such as fear the Name of the Lord (says the Prophet Malachy) shall the Sun
of Righteousness arise with healing in his wings, bringing in his rays the
cheerful and comfortable light of life, that health and salvation, which shall
keep them safe in the midst of all dangers. But will it shine forth thus alike
unto all, to those that serve God, and to those that serve him not? hear the
Prophet in the words before-going, proclaiming the contrary: Behold (let the
world take notice of it) the Day comes, that is, Mal. 4.1,
this very Day we now speak of (as appears clearly by the context) that shall
burn as an Oven, and all the proud, yea all that do wickedly, shall be as
stubble.

You Will say perhaps as those Scoffers did 2 Pet. 3, 4. Where is the promise of
his coming? So, where is the terror of this day? For since we are fallen
asleep in our sins, as you tell us, we are safe and secure, even in this day
that you would have us believe to be so terrible we see no sorrow at all, but
thrive and prosper in the World according to our hearts desire, and to morrow
shall be as this day, yea much more abundant. But O poor deluded people, is
this indeed your presumption? Woe unto you that ever you were born if you suffer
this delusion to prevail upon you. What? Do you think to be safe in the day of
the Lord's Vengeance? Es. 61.2.
For, whatsoever you vainly dream of it, such it is to all obstinate,
impenitent sinners, as it will appear more hereafter. For the present, let me
expostulate the Case with you: Are you indeed so safe from the evil of this
day, as you do pretend: If you be, Scelus tutum aliquis, nemo securum tulit.
Sen. Hyp. Tuta esse scelera. secura non possunt. Bern.
yet, as one said, surely you cannot be secure; Or rather secure say I with
another you may sometimes be, but you can never be safe: A miserable safety
that is surrounded with so much danger, And the security that you boast of, is
a sure token of your imminent Destruction. 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.

You may I confess prosper in the World, and increase in riches, yea you may
come in no misfortune like other folk, nor be plagued like other men, and yet
notwithstanding this day of the Lord's Vengeance have a terrible influence upon
you. There is an Vltrix misericordia an avenging mercy, giving freedom from
trouble, in Anger and Displeasure, Solo auditu contremisco says Holy Bernard
sweetly, I tremble at the very hearing of it, God keep me from such mercy,
These blessings are beyond all wrath. But what talk you of prosperity and
security? Did you never hear that God rains down snares here upon his enemies,
as well as fire and brimstone, storm and tempest? And that the prosperity of
fools shall destroy them? What advantage then have you by these outward
things, wherein you so much pride your selves, and applaud your own happiness,
When they shall be instrumental in bringing you to utter ruin. In the mean
time, oh how does the Soul lie scorching under the burning heat of this day?
Which though it be by some but little felt, yet it is the forest judgment of
all other; for as the Lightning never pierces more fiercely then when it
melts the sword, and hurts not the scabberd, so is the wrath of God never
more incensed then when he punishes the soul and spares the body. Look then
into thy soul, O poor Sinner, and see what this day does there bring forth,
either an obduration upon thy heart, or an inflammation upon thy Conscience. O
how is the heart sometimes hardened in sin? Made more and more obstinate and
perverse against the Lord? Yea, and that which aggravates the misery, it is by
that very means whereby the Saints are renewed, and made happy in their
Conformity to God in righteousness and true holiness; for as the heat of the
Sun softeneth wax and hardens clay both at the same time, so has the light
of this day its several operations upon the Godly and Ungodly according to
their several Capacities, and dispositions, The one it brings into an humble
frame fit for such impressions as the spirit of God will fix upon them, The
other are thereby made more and more refractory and inflexible in their sin,
till they be ripe for destruction. And is not this a great terror unto men,
that, that which might have been for their wealth, to enrich them with grace
and glory, should become unto them an occasion of falling into extreme misery?
Sometimes again the Conscience of an impenitent sinner is set all on fire by
the light of this day, and put into such a flame that nothing can quench it;
yea, the more illuminations it has of the glimpses of that glorious grace
which is now revealed, the more violent flashes of God's glittering sword do
withal break in upon it to the amazing of the soul with terrors that are
inextricable and unexpressible. A black cloud of Witnesses might be produced
that have found this true by too lamentable experience. Not as if this light
did naturally bring forth such sad effects, but wheresoever it shines, being
mighty to prevail, if it be resisted (woe unto them that make the opposition) it
comes I say like Lightning with greater Violence, and where it meets with such
combustible stuff as a reprobate Spirit, it proves through the just judgment
of God a devouring fire.

True it is that even the most holy and faithful servants of God may sometimes
for want of a due observation of this day, have terrible apprehensions of it,
The light of it may seem to go altogether retrograde unto them, and the
illuminations thereof may also turn into dreadful inflammation upon their
Consciences: But yet because they are the Children of the Day, The healing
which is under the wings of that Sun that gives light unto it, shall surely
have a comfortable influence upon them, And the anointing which they have from
the Holy one, shall be as an eye salve, whereby they may see the light more
clearly, and a preservative likewise, so to keep them, as that the promise
shall in this sense be made good unto them, Though they walk through the fire,
they shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon them Es. 43.2. Es.
43.2.


Impii autem non sic, non sic, said the Psalmist in a certain place, As for the
Ungodly, Ps. 1.4.
it is not, nor never shall be so with them. For the Prophet, as I told you
before, puts the difference even there where he speaks of that healing that
shall come upon those that fear the Lord, The day says he comes that shall
burn as an Oven, Mal. 4.^.
and all the proud, yea and all that do wickedly shall be as stubble, etc. In
an Oven or furnace there is no Healing, nor escaping, but burning and consuming
of all that is within the compass of it, especially if it be dry stubble: so is
this day to all Ungodly persons, a Magormissabib, a terror round about. And to
apply the Words of the Prophet Amos to our present purpose, for they have a
measure that will reach unto it; Amos 5.18
The day of the Lord is darkness and not light, as much as to say, You are much
mistaken, if such as you think to meet with any light of consolation in this
day, so long as you continue in your rebellion against the Lord; rather you
will find it tobe with you, as if a man did flee from a Lion, and a Bear met
him, or went into the House, and leaned his hand on the Wall, and a Serpent bit
him. Amos 5.19
If you have escaped from a Lion, the Lion of the Gospel, because possibly he
is of so noble a nature that he has not pursued his prey, This day will send
out a Bear, even the terror of the Law to meet you, that shall rend and tear
without mercy, But if neither of these can overtake you, when you enter into
the Grave, and think to be at rest, a Serpent, an immortal Worm shall bite and
sting you without any remedy.

Where are now all your glorious boastings of this day of the Lord? As that
your Lot is fallen unto you in such a pleasant time wherein you need not doubt
you say of Gods mercy, but hope to be saved (as you often swear it too) and
come to heaven at last as soon as others: For why you know this day salvation
is come into the World, Jesus Christ died for sinners, and such you know your
selves to be: Let Preachers therefore say what they will, we fear nothing say
you though we do perhaps live in sin (as who is there that lives and sins
not?) Yet we will hope howsoever that all shall be well in the end: Alas, Alas
miserable people your expectation will be frustrated, and all your hopes vanish
away like the spiders Web. Do you not see what a dreadful day is come upon you?
You look for peace, says the Prophet, but behold trouble; and for a time of
healing, but no good comes: Even the very Ordinances of this day, Jer. 4.19.
which are sweeter then Honey to those that live in Gods fear, are unto you, so
long as you abide in your profaness no better then poison. You have been
baptized with water, whereby you are distinguished from those that are without
God in the World, But if your Souls lie still wallowing in the pollutions of
sin, it shall be more tolerable for Infidels and Pagans at the day of judgment
then for you. When you come to the Lord's Table, to which you may pretend a
right, because you outwardly profess the faith of Christ Crucified, neither are
you to be repelled from it, until you be juridically cast out, But when you
come, O what a woeful hazard do you run? I need not tell it you in any other
words then those the Apostle uses, You eat and drink your own Damnation. The
Word also when you hear it proves not only a dead but a deadly Letter sent
unto you from Heaven to pronounce your Condemnation; yea, all the Exhortations,
Admonitions, Convictions, Reprehensions that you meet with from Ministers, from
friends, from enemies, from your own Consciences, bring forth no better fruit
then to sink you deeper into Hell. Your continued rejecting of that rich and
abundant grace that is freely and frequently tendered unto you, sets you every
day at a further distance from God, gives the devil more hold-fast of you, adds
more fuel unto your Tophet, making your torment hereafter the more
insupportable. O what a day then is this wherein men treasure up wrath against
the day of wrath? A most deplorable estate! yet this is the Lot of all
impenitent Sinners.

If any should yet enquire how it comes to pass that this inevitable misery
falls upon these wretched kind of people that we have been speaking of, I must
answer, There are two things which the Holy Ghost in Scripture does plainly
present unto us as the grounds and causes thereof. First the sin of such
persons is found out by the light of this day. Secondly, Their sin does find
out them, When sin is found out, Gods anger is enkindled, when sin finds out
the sinner, his anger is then put in Execution. The first of these will
justify God in his severest judgments against sin wheresoever it appears. The
second will convince the sinner of the deceitfulness of sin, and of his folly
in entangling himself with that which will be his utter undoing.

But let us consider these severally.

First, I say their sin is made manifest by the light of this day, and their
Iniquity found to be hateful, yea more hateful then the sin of yesterday. All
things says the Apostle that are reproved, are made manifest by the light; and
the clearer the light is, the more Ugly does a Deformity seem in the eyes of
all that look upon it. Now it is, that sin is become exceeding sinful, that is,
has gotten more strength to do mischief then formerly it was wont to do,
putting more malignity and perverseness into the hearts of men then ever, and
affronting the Almighty with the greatest impudence, despising those means
which Divine Wisdom has found out for the suppressing of it, Now it appears in
its proper colors, insomuch that, as our Savior said, It is inexcuseable,
Joh. 15.22
there being no Cloak of a carnal Apology large enough to cover it. When sin
then shows it self in this manner, who can lay any thing to the charge of God,
or censure his righteous proceedings against it? True it is, Profane and
Godless wretches do what they can to keep their sin close, Pro. 28.13
that it may not be seen, But they shall not prosper says Solomon, that is,
their projects will fail them, For why? The day opens all the secrets of men's
hearts, the light of it comes with such a mighty penetration, that no corner of
the Soul can escape it, whatsoever lust and corruption lurketh therein it
finds it out, All the palliations and tergiversations of sinful men, All their
tricks and evasions, their winding and turning things upside down, their crafty
contrivances to hide their wickedness are now laid Naked, Heb. 4.13.
and openly dissected before the eyes of God with whom they have to do. Yea,
now is preparation made for the discoveries of the great day, Romans 2.16.
for according to the light of this day shall that judgment also be. And
herein will that of the Psalmist be verified, Ps. 19, 2.
Day unto day utters speech. This day will make known unto that day,
whatsoever sin has been acted in it unrepented of. And this now, this I say is
that which fretts the hearts of secure sinners, that their sins which they
would have lie hid, and be forgotten, should be thus found out, and brought to
light to their shame and confusion. Hence comes their rage and madness against
the light, that they could even wish many times the Sun out of his Orb, and the
bright beams of Divine Truths swallowed up in perpetual darkness, rather then
their sins, which they love better then their Souls, should be thus disturbed
and discovered. All which considered how righteous is God in his Anger against
sin when it is found out and made manifest by the Light?

Secondly when sin is found out by the light of this day, unless the sinner
then follows the light to find out a Savior to save him from his sins (to
whom it would certainly lead him if he would diligently observe it) his sins
will surely find out him and fall upon him with all the curses that are written
in the Law, wherein, as the Apostle says, The strength of sin lies, and
without which it could be of no force at all to produce, no nor to pronounce
the least Condemnation. 1 Cor. 15.56.
That execrable League which has been made with sin, will betray the sinner,
and bring him under the power of it, whether he will or no. Thine own
wickedness says the Prophet shall correct thee, Jer. 2.19.
and thy backslidings shall reprove thee. The pride of Israel does testify to
his face, says the Prophet Hosea. Hos. 5.5.
Behold here how sin which for a while seems pleasant to the sinner, and
promises to bring him much delight and contentment, how it will in time slare
him in the face, and prove both a witness against him and his Executioner. You
have sinned against the Lord, and be sure your sin will find you out, Number 32.23
said Moses once to the two Tribes and the half Number. 32.23. which may very well
be applied to all profane persons this day: In which words the Holy Ghost seems
to allude unto dogs hunting greedily after their prey until they have found
it. For so it is with sin, sometimes it is like a Bandog that lies at the door
of the Soul, not suffering any thing that good is to enter there, as some
interpret that place Genesis 4 7. Sometimes it is like a Bloud-hound that pursues
the sinner, and will not leave till it has caught him by the Throat, and rent
the Caul of the Heart with desperation, and this pursuit is the more like to
speed, because it is in the day, wherein the light is a furtherance unto it: So
that the sinner shall at last in effect say to his sin, as Ahab did to Elias,
Have thou found me O mine Enemy? And cry out in the Devils Language, Art thou
come to torment me before the time? Undoubtedly whenever God lets sin
loose upon the soul either to stupifie and harden the heart, or to sting the
conscience with that venom which this day (accidentally and by the just
judgment of God for the despite cast upon the light of it pu^s into it, it is
the bitterest Enemy of all other; wherein nevertheless the sinner does but reap
the fruit of his own folly, and is filled with his own devices, in nourishing
such a Viper in his bosom that will bring all this mischief upon him. Thus may
ignorant and profane people see what a woeful day is come upon them, since they
will not walk in the light of it, they lose themselves in most deplorable
darkness.

Let us conclude this use with some Application. Application.
Consider then with your selves O poor People ready to perish, Is not this a
great and and notable day? And can you now be able to endure the Coming of the
Lord? Mal. 3.2.
Now as the Prophet says, when he appears as a Refiner's fire and as Fullers
soap, that is, to cast out all dross and filth out of his Church, when as the
Baptist says, He comes with his Fan in his hand, Mat. 3.12.
that is, The preaching of his Gospel in the Ministry of his servants, whereby
as with a purging blast, he will thoroughly cleanse his floor, gathering his
wheat into his granary, but burning up the chaff with unquenchable fire? Can
your hearts endure, or your hands be strong in the day wherein the Lord thus
deals with you? How much better were it for you to awaken your selves out of
your sinful security, and to walk in the light of this day, then to have the
Thunder and Lightning of it flash into your Souls with the pledges and
first fruits of everlasting burnings? What meanest thou O steeper (said the
shipmaster unto Jonas when the Sea wrought and roared for his prey) So now when
you are in such apparent hazard, may it not be very well said unto you, what
mean you sleepers? Will you go away in a sleep, and be swallowed up for ever in
the bottomless sea of Gods wrath and fury? What mean you thus carelessly to lie
down in sin, when you should walk before the Lord in the light of the living?
Is this a time think you to say with the Sluggard Pro. 16.10. Yet a little
sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep, when
dreadful danger is so near, and ready to fall upon you as an armed man?

Awake therefore I say you that are ignorant, Be not still brutish for lack of
understanding; when God has sent out his Light and his truth to lead you and
guide you, do not you refuse any longer to follow it. If in the things of this
World you can, as occasion is offered, manifest some skill and dexterity,
promoting carnal interests, and negotiating your affairs to your best
advantage, will you not be without excuse, if in those things that concern the
everlasting estate of your Souls you be foolish and ignorant even as beasts
before the Lord? O remember that you have Souls, souls more precious then all
the world, which should be cared for, as well as your Bodies: And what is both
the Ornament and the Nourishment of a Soul, but that knowledge, which this day
would enlighten it with? Alas consider, Is it not a shame that all the labor
of a man should be for his mouth (as the wise Preacher once said Eccles. 6.7.)
and his Soul in the mean time, which denominates the man, distinguishing him
from other Creatures that are inferior unto him to be altogether Unsatisfied?
Awake therefore and get Wisdom, now while it is to be had, which is the
principal, Pro. 8.7.
And will all your gettings, and above all, get understanding.

Awake also you that are profane! Let the swearer awake lest God also swear in
his wrath that he shall never see the light of this day, unless it be to his
horror and amazement. Let the swinish drunkard that makes a swill-tub of his
body, and his soul a trough for the Devil to bouze in, let him I say awake out
of his intemperance, for it is the eleventh hour of the day, and if he continue
until night, he shall be inflamed with the cup of Gods fury, which is full of
mixture, that is, Ps. 75.8.
of curses that are written for eternity against impenitent sinners. Let
adulterers and unclean persons awake out of their filthiness. They shall else
be thrown into a bed of shame, and the day shall un cover their nakedness to
the loathing of their persons in the sight of God and his holy Angels. Let the
merciless oppressor awake that grindes the faces of the poor with a heart more
hard then the nether mil-stone, let him I say, awake betimes, and break off his
sin by repentance, undoing heavy burdens, and letting the oppressed go free,
otherwise the Arrow of Gods indignation that now flies by day, shall surely
find him out, and pierce him-thorough with a wound incurable: In a word, let
the fraudulent Deceiver, the voluptuous Epicure, the atheistical Scoffer, the
greedy Mammonist, and the Idolatrous Rimmonist, I mean the Superstitious
Romanist, with all other of that Cimmerian crew, children of darkness, who are
this day fast asleep in their sins, rouse up themselves, and be awakened: Alas
poor creatures what mean you? Will you I say again go away in a sleep? De
tenebris ad tenebras, from the inner darkness of your minds swallowed up in
ignorance and profaness to the outer darkness of Gods everlasting displeasure?
Shall the terrible lightning of this day blast your souls till there be no
remedy? What mean you sleepers? Awake, awake, it is now time that you should
arise from sleep, yea the time is almost past: Now is salvation nearer then
when you first believed, Rons. 13.11.
that is, when you first gave up your names to Christ to be his Disciples, and
now is damnation nearer, then when you first were threatened. To conclude, be
confident, what ever Satan may suggest unto you, or what ever vain imagination
your own foolish and deceitful hearts have entertained concerning this day, be
assured I say of this, it will bring you no better tidings, then what I have
here proclaimed in your ears, unless you awake, you will certainly perish;
Albeit you lie sleeping in sin, yet your damnation (as the Apostle says)
slumbreth not, for the day light keeps it awake, 2 Pet. 2.3.
and not only so, but provokes it with greater and greater rigor to fall upon
you. But I will hope better things of you. Who will not disdainfully reject
what is here offered unto you, yea such things as accompany salvation, because
the light of this day naturally bodes that which is good unto the world;
whereas the judgment that comes along with it is but accidental, mercy being
now in her prime, beautified with an evangelical luster, and rejoicing against
judgment.

With this hope we shall terminate this first Point, viz the Denomination of
the Time (...), to day, as it is rendered in the Text according to our third
Interpretation.

That which comes next to be considered is, what is here predicated of that
Time viz. Jesus Christ (...) The same to Day.
THE same now as yesterday, the same which he was from the beginning, (...),
id. prorsus.
as he told the Jews, when they demanded of him, saying, Who art thou Joh.
8.25.

That which he was from the beginning, viz the Prophet, Priest, and King of his
Church, he is the same now in the time of the Gospel. Other foundation can no
man lay, 1 Cor. 3.11.
says the Apostle, then that that is laid, which is Christ Jesus, And other
salvation can no man expect then that which has been from the beginning, there
being no other name given under Heaven, nor in Heaven neither, whereby
believers may ever get to Heaven. Via seculi Via Antiqua. Ps. 139. ult.
It is the decree of Heaven not to be disanulled till time be no more, It is
the way everlasting, wherein the Wisdom and Power of the Almighty shall be
gloriously manifested to the eternal confusion of that grand apostate the Devil
and all his Angels, whose inveterate malice has from the beginning been
principally bent against Jesus Christ.

In the handling of this Subject our business should be to consider Jesus
Christ in the execution of his Mediatorial Office: For that indeed has been
the work of this day, And which has made this day more glorious then
yesterday. Yesterday it is true he was, as it is said before, the only
Mediator between God and man, being ordained of the Father to that high
honor, but it was by virtue of that which he has to day actually accomplished
both in his life, and in his death. Whatsoever therefore has been spoken
concerning him must be understood with a reference unto the work of this day,
whereby all the former mediation in the High Court of Heaven for the Fathers of
old, is made good and effectual in the Law of God, and ratified for eternity.

And this speaks him still to be (...), the same, or the only he, who was
willing in this day of his power to perfect for ever them that in all the Ages
of the Church, have been, are, or shall be sanctified, that is, consecrated and
separated out of the world, and dedicated to be vessels of honor unto God.

We shall not enter into a large survey of that which Christ has done and
suffered, nor make any strict search into his office, whereby it may in all
points be made manifest that he has now in this time of the Gospel fully
perfected the work of redemption, and so proved himself to be the same to day
which he was yesterday: We have spoken somewhat of these things before, and
therefore shall for bear to speak much of them now; and there have been Writers
of late who have magnified the Office of Christ's Mediatourship, therein doing
eminent service both unto him and his Church: Yet it is but meet that we
should, for our methods sake, take this sweet subject also along with us,
though it be folded up but in some general terms, which being opened
particularly would enlarge our discourse too much, wherein already I may be
judged by some to have gone beyond my bounds.

In the first of the Revelation we read how the Lord Jesus Christ appears unto
his beloved Disciple St. John clothed in his regal and pontifical attire, Rev.
1.13.
intimating that he is now ready fitted for that whole Economy, to which he
was designed from the beginning, and implying that he is now solemnly
inaugurated into and possessed with that honor which did always belong unto
his Office. Never did he in all his apparitions of old show himself in such a
manner, as now he does: This garment was then laid up, as I may say, in the
Cabinet of Gods Purpose and Decree, wherein the smell of it was very acceptable
to the Father, inclining him to give out his blessing to his children, who did
then by faith, according to their capacity, lay hold upon it. But now since
that this our great Lord Advocate and Mediator, the first begotten among many
brethren, has been actually called of God unto his office, and assumed the
right of his Primogeniture, he appears vested with it, exercising his
authority, fulfilling the will of his Father, and confirming all that he has
done in the preservation of his people, and their reception to himself since
the World began: With which confirmation Divine Justice rests her self fully
satisfied, and the Pleas of the Law, and the clamours of Satan are all hushed
and silenced. Having then thus put on this garment for the execution of his
office, what does it argue, but that he is (...), the same which he was from
the beginning? A Prophet to day, as he was yesterday, teaching his people the
way of God truly, and foretelling them what shall happen to them in the way, A
Priest to day as he was yesterday, wherein he has offered up a sacrifice for
sin, and makes intercession for us, A King to day as he was yesterday,
protecting, preserving, and providing for his Church, ruling in the midst of
his people, ruling also in the midst of his enemies. Precisely and punctually
the same as yesterday without any variableness or shadow of turning. Yea so far
is he now from being defective in any thing that concerns his office, that he
rather is the same to day in a more transcendent manner then he was yesterday.
Heb. 6.20.
For, observe it, he is said Heb. 6.20. to be made an High Priest after his
entry into Heaven, not that he had not been a Priest before for his Church; but
because it was never so clearly manifested in former times, as it was after his
ascension, when he shed abroad his Grace and powered down his Spirit abundantly
upon his Church.

We shall not multiply Proofs for this out of Scripture, some mention having
been hereof before: Take only one instance, viz. Rev. 1.8. Rev. 1.8.
Where the Lord says, I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the Ending,
which is, and which was, and which is to come: In which last words the order
that he uses in the description of himself, as Mediator, is to our purpose
very observable: For mark, first, he says, I am which is, and then follows
which was etc. Whereas according to the course and method of time, that which
was, should have had the precedence. But here we see, It is by Christ, speaking
of himself with a respect unto his Mediatourship (as appears by the 11.13. and
18. verses following he does) put in the second place, to note unto us, that
his present estate in his office, is to be preferred before that which was, and
gives a Being unto it.

Abraham the Covenant of Circumcision for an everlasting Covenant to him, and
to his seed, adding also a terrible penalty upon the least failing thereof in
these words, Genesis 17.14
The Uncircumcised Man-child, whose flesh of his foreskin is not Circumcised,
that Soul shall be cut off from his people, he has broken my Covenant? Yet now
we here the Apostle Saint Paul telling us that Circumcision is nothing, Nay
more, 1 Cor 7.19 Gal. 3.2
If any should be now Circumcised Christ himself shall profit them nothing. Was
not the Passover commanded to be kept by the people of God, as a perpetual
Ordinance throughout their Generations? And do we not now hear Christ speaking
unto his Church of a new ordinance in stead thereof, saying, This is my body
which is broken for you, and this is my blood which is shed for you, This do in
remembrance of me, thereby taking away the first Sacrament, viz The Paschal
Lamb, that he might instead thereof establish this second? Is not the Temple,
and the Temple-Service quite removed, and all those legal Ceremonies, which
were of Christ's own institution, as has been before observed, now utterly
abolished? And is not all this change now brought about by his own express
order and appointment? How is he then the Same?

Es. 9.6.
He who is the Eternity of Israel, that Pater Aeternitatis, as the Prophet
Esaias calls him, The Everlasting Father of the whole Israel of God in all Ages
and Nations of the World, shall never have the least Imputation of inconstancy
in receding from the great work of Salvation, which he has undertaken
according to the will of the Father, charged upon him: His Covenant he does not
break, neither will he, though the form and manner of the Administration
thereof be, in pursuance of it, totally varied: The same Salvation, on Gods
part toward his people, he has still propounded, And the same terms of
reconciliation with God to the Church he still proclaimed, viz. To repent and
believe. Nothing new then in the Substance of this Covenant, whereof he is the
Mediator, but only in the Accidents and Circumstances of manifestation, which
can never argue any variableness at all in him; As love tokens between friends
may not always be of the same kind, but may sometimes be interchanged, yet
the persons still continue the same to each other in love and faithfulness, And
as the clothes may differ sometimes, when the body that wears them remains
still the same.

We might here speak of the enlargement of the Church in this time of the
Gospel beyond the former limits, even from Sea to sea to the uttermost parts of
the earth, that promise being now fulfilled, viz That her seed should inherit
the Gentiles, and make the desolate Cities to be inhabited, Which enlargement
did necessarily require an abolition of those rites which were affixed to the
Mosaical Tabernacle.

We might also further show how the dispensations of grace are in great wisdom
and faith fullness proportioned not only to the extent, but the age and growth
of the Church; in regard whereof she being not fit now to live upon carnal
ordinances, as she did yesterday in her minority, was therefore to have
stronger meat provided for her, viz. That which is more spiritual.

In fine, We might consider that seeing God does vouchsafe his presence unto his
Church in a more glorious manner, more freely, more clearly in this day of his
power and grace then he has been wont heretofore, easing his people of those
Yokes, which they were not able to bear, and performing the promises and
predictions given out by his Prophets since the World began, it is but meet
therefore that there should be a removal of those shadows that were the
appendants of his former appearances, and that Memorials be kept, and Monuments
set up of the several discoveries of his present glory. These things, I say,
might have been insisted upon more largely* but that it is fit now to draw
toward a conclusion. And that which has been written may suffice to remove
the objection laid in our way, so that we may still proclaim before the World
the Immutability of the Lord Jesus Christ, that he is (...), The same to day
which he was yesterday. Some inferences would now be derived from hence which
may be of use in this time of the Gospel. Let us consider of somewhat in order
thereunto, before we proceed any further to that which follows.

First, We may hereupon again infer, that those Churches which this day profess
the faith of Christ Crucified, according to this constant rule, cannot justly
be taxed with Novelty in their profession, as those who this day follow the
Romish Synagogue are apt to traduce them. What though they have laid aside some
corrupt Rites and superfluous Customs which by long tract of time, and too
near a Vicinity and too sinful a compliancy with the World they had
con^racted, yet so long as they hold the Foundation, and this Foundation still
stands sure, the same that ever it was, it must be accounted a soul slander
to say that they are but of a late edition, and that their Religion was never
heard of in the world, before Luther gave his Imprimatur unto it.

But we shall make no more mention of this here, having also spoken of it
before. Nevertheless because these slanderers are so imperious in their
censures of, others, and to the end they may be convinced of their own folly
(if at least they be not stark blind) it will not be amiss upon this occasion
a little to retort upon them this imputation of Novelty, and so lay it (as it
well deserves) at their own door. We shall not need to seek far for our
Warrant in this matter; our present Text will present it unto us: Jesus Christ
is the Same throughout this day of the Gospel from the beginning to the end,
The Doctrine of life which he has delivered in the holy Scripture is sure and
steadfast, not to be altered and revoked in the least Tittle or Iota of it. It
is not yea and noy (as the Apostle says 2 Cor. 1.19.) But Yea and Amen to the
glory of God, sooner will he overturn the whole frame of Nature, then alter the
word that is gone out of his Lips: Whosoever therefore they be that maintain
any doctrine different from this infallible Standard, and obtrude it upon the
world, as necessary to Salvation, are notorious Innovatours: Now, is it not as
clear as the Sun, that the Church of Rome has herein exceedingly erred,
teaching for doctrines the Precepts of men? What a mass of Upstart Heterodox
Opinions have they forged time after time, which can never be justified by the
everlasting Gospel of the Son of God? which yet notwithstanding are pressed
with so much violence, that whosoever will not receive them, must be
Anathematized, and persecuted to death with fire and faggot: May we not
therefore conclude that notwithstanding all their doting pretensions to
Antiquity, they are but Novellists, a brood of yesterday, and their recent
inventions worthy of no value?

We deny not but where Antiquity is found in a way of Righteousness, it is
indeed a Crown of Glory among the Churches of Christ. But being found in a way
of Error, wandering from the righteous rule of the written word, and laying
inconstancy upon Jesus Christ (who is this way of Righteousness) as if he were
not the same still in his Doctrine which he has delivered to his Church, it is
fit to be despised.

We must here now look to be told that the written word is not the only rule,
but that there are many other unwritten verities, to which we are likewise
bound to give heed, as well as to that which is written. Sess. 4. Decreto de
Can. Script.
Yea and the Council of Trent has thundered out their Anathema against those
who refuse Traditions for the rule of faith, as well as against those that
refuse the written word.

But may it not then be demanded, if it be so, where can faith find a sure
foundation to fix upon, that which is unwritten being very uncertain, whether
it be from Heaven or of men? If the written word be but a part of Gods revealed
will, and these unwritten verities, as they are called, the other part, never
can there be assurance given to any of the whole Mystery of Salvation, neither
can the Church know it aright in the whole series of it, was God has revealed
it. For when some affirm a Tradition to be Apostolical, which others of as
great account disdainfully reject for a spurious super-inducement and forgery,
thrust upon the Churches in aftertimes (which dissenting in this case has
frequently come to pass even in the Primitive Days of the Gospel) what a
miserable maze is the faith of a believer brought into? Will not our
confidences be much weakened in our spiritual conflicts, and our hopes of
gaining Converts to our Christian Profession from among those that are without
(if they should make this objection unto us) be utterly choked, and our
endeavors in that kind frustrated, and come to nothing? To let pass the great
multitude of these Traditions, the number of them being never yet determined,
whereby they must needs become a great yoke and burden to the Church of
Christ: 1 Timothy 3.15.
If that which is written be sufficient to make a man wise unto salvation,
surely that which is unwritten is not absolutely necessary to be heeded by us.

It is not to be denied, but that the Church has Power to appoint some certain
Canons and Rules for the observation of Public order and decency, unto which,
so long as they are inoffensive in their own nature, they that are true
Children of the Church will give a ready and a cheerful obedience: yea we do
confess that in things indifferent a respect ought to be yielded to Antiquity,
and to their Traditions; But if an Angel from Heaven should come and tell us
that all those things which are simply necessary to Salvation are not to be
found in the Holy Scriptures, we must hold him accursed. Yet Bellarmine. says.
Nos asserimus in Scripturis non contineri express totam Doctrinam necessariam
sive de fide sive de moribus. Lib. 4. de verbo non scripto. Ca. 3. Sect. 1.


We further do willingly grant that the Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles
preached many things that were never written, And what they so preached ought
to be of equal Authority with us, as that which is written, Pari veneratione,
pari pietatis affictu (the very words of the Council of Trent not to be
disliked) with as much Piety and Veneration to be received by us, as the Books
of Holy Scriptures, if they were as certainly known. But it is a strange and
strong delusion (which we hope shall never seize upon us) to believe that they
preached doctrines which are a directly contrary to what is written in the said
Books as light is unto darkness. Holy and Faithful Master Deering in his
Commentary on the Epistle to the Hebrews expostulates this case sadly in these
words; Is it the word of Christ written that we should not worship Angels, And
is it his Word unwritten that we should pray unto them? Is it his Word written
that we should not be bound to our Forefathers Traditions, And is it his Word
unwritten that our Fathers Traditions should be to us as his Gospel? Is it his
word written that to forbid marriage which is honorable in all estates is the
Doctrine of Devils, And is it his Word unwritten that Ministers should be
forbidden to marry? Is it his Word written that five words in a known Tongue
are better in the Congregation then five thousand in a strange Language, And is
it his Word unwritten that in our Congregations we should pray in a Language
which the people understand not? Is it his Word written that the dead are
blessed which die in the Lord, and they rest from their labors, And is it his
Word unwritten that they are tormented in the fire of Purgatory? In short, Is
it his Word written that his Ministers should be subject to Kings, should
attend upon their flock, and not meddle more then needs must with the affairs
of this World, And is it his Word unwritten, that the Pope shall exercise
Authority over Temporal powers, depose Kings at his pleasure, and that his
Inferiors of the Conclave should be secular Princes? Has God written it that
Christ sacrificed himself once for all, and made a perfect Redemption, And has
he left it unwritten that a shaven Priest must sacrifice him every day, and say
a Mass Propitiatory for the quick and dead? What perverseness is this of men of
Corrupt minds thus to dream of Traditions contrary to the written Word of God?
And what an intolerable indignity do they put upon Christ to make him thus
palpably contradict himself, as if he had forgotten to be still (...) The Same?
But full well did Esaias prophecy of these men, Es. 29.13.
saying, This people draws near unto me with their mouth, and honor me with
their lips, but their heart is far from me, But in vain do they worship me,
teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of men Mat. 15.8.

But leaving these to their uncertain Traditions, and their most certain
innovations, Let us look home to our selves, and hearken to the Apostles advice
which he gives Phil. 2.5. viz. Phil. 2.5.
To let the same mind be in us which was in Christ Jesus; for he has set us
an example, that we should herein also follow his steps, even to be constantly
the same in those things that belong to the Kingdom of God.

Not that we should stand at a stay, and make no further progress in Knowledge,
Holiness, Zeal for God's glory, Brotherly-love, self-denial, Contempt of the
world, etc. then we have already attained, Rather let yesterdayes work in that
sense be forgotten by us, Phil. 3.13.
and let us reach forth (as Saint Paul said he himself did) to a greater
perfection, making this day to be more abundant, then what has been before;
for in so doing we shall also resemble Jesus Christ, who made his work which
the Father had given him to do, to appear this day under the Gospel in a more
spiritual glory, then it did yesterday under the Law. But my meaning is, that
we be still the same, not forsaking our first love, as the manner of some is,
nor declining from that close and sincere walking with God, whereunto we have
happily by reiterated vows and solemn engagements devoted our selves, after we
escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of Jesus Christ.

A needful warning it will be to us: for the truth is, man's nature is a
wondrous masterpiece of inconstancy, No creature under the whole heaven being
so variable as man is; Nay it is a matter of some difficulty, as the world
goes, amongst a multitude to find a Man, that is, One who for a Masculine
spirit indeed may deserve the name of a Man, or as some render the original
word in Scripture, A Man, A Man, Lev. 15.2. Ps. 49.12.20.
that is, A Man both ways, in regard both of the outward and inward man: For
there are some Men-Men, and some Men-Beasts: which made the Cynick at noonday
to go up and down in a throng of people with a Lantern and Candle in his
hand, searching as he said for a Man, that is, A Man for Constancy and
Prudence, as well as in outward appearance; and Seneca also in his time counted
it a great rarity, Sen. Epi. 128.
Magnam rem puta (says he) unum hominem agere, It is a hard thing to Act a Man
kindly, meaning, to be always One and the Same; For one that does so, How many
are there that disfigure themselves with diversities of shapes? One while they
will be frugal and grave, another while prodigal and vain. Such levity Holy
Bernard sweetly taxes, Non paucos frequenter experimur, etc. We oftentimes
meet with many, who scarcely one hour continue in the same mind, but are like
drunkards nodding and reeling too and fro, changing their judgment, yea without
judgment wavering still from what they had determined Semper quod non habent
cupientes, and quod habent fastidientes, Always desiring what they have not,
and loathing that which they have. This inconstancy speaks men to be like unto
Reuben, Unstable as water, Genesis 49.4.
Far unlike this our Heavenly Pattern who was always the same, No, nor like
that honest Roman of whom it was said, that it was as easy to turn the Sun out
of his course, as to make him go from his Word, or change his resolution.

But especially in the high and weighty matters of Religion to be wavering and
inconstant, argues too much feebleness of spirit, unbecoming those that are
separated from the world to be the followers of Jesus Christ, the Rock of ages
who never changes. As Nehemiah said, Is it for such a man as I to flee? So say
I, for such to fall from their stedfastness, One-while to be Zealous and
forward in the ways of Holiness, another while backward and indifferent,
taking up a Form of Godliness according as their humor and fancy leads them,
like unto those of old, whom Hilary speaks of, that had a Monthly or a
Yearly-Faith, what a shame is it? Sunt qui menstruan vel annu m fidem habent.
Yet alas too many there are in these days among us of this halting
Generation, who are apt to turn with every wind of temptation. I speak not
here with a reference unto changes in point of external order in the Church,
which may sometimes be excusable as we shall show hereafter (though there be a
sort of dissolute and debauched people who can find no other change to spend
their invectives upon, the better to palliate their own wickedness) but when
the life and power of Religion is so far neglected, as that we can recede from
those engagements and resolutions wherewith we have solemnly devoted our selves
to God, To turn aside after Vanity, walking according to the course of this
world in ways of Licentiousness and Profaness, this surely is matter of just
complaint. Alas we consider not it seems what a dishonor we bring upon our
holy profession, How much we grieve the spirit of God, nor what advantage we
give unto Satan to encroach upon us, when we are not Godly and Religious in a
constant and continued Course, but off and on, fast and loose in the Covenant
of our God which we made in our Baptism; When with Pilate we are inquisitive
after Truth, but presently, as he did, turn our backs upon it: seem to consult
with God and his word about our spiritual estate, and in the same breath many
times cast him quite out of our thoughts, as if we could do well enough without
him, Like unto Saul, who in all haste calls out, Bring hither the Ark, But
then, go to, it skills not greatly, Socrates lib. 3. cap. 13.
carry it back again. Such unsavory Salt (as Ecebolius for his treacherous
halting in Religion justly styled himself) can have no relish in it acceptable
to God or his Church.

Away therefore with this spirit of giddiness which has too much prevailed in
these days, and let us quit our selves like men in being still the same! When
we have a Rock appointed for our standing by the wisdom and Faithfulness of
the Almighty, whereon we may be safe against all the storms and tempests of
the Prince of the power of the air, shall we turn away from it, and in our
Conversation swim with the stream of this present evil world, or in our
judgment roll our selves upon the waves of newfangled opinions, where we may
be tossed to and fro and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, and where
nothing is to be expected but to be swallowed up at last in the bottomless
gulf of error and confusion? Oh shall we thus dally in a business of so great
moment? Far be it from us! Rather let us Look unto JESUS, and follow his
Example in being still The Same.

And now that we may deal impartially herein, Let it be a Word in season to us
of this Nation, who have not like our Pattern, been the same of late, what we
have formerly been. We have made it our boast since we separated from Rome and
cast off the Yoke of Antichrist, that we have received Christ Jesus the Lord,
professing his Gospel to be a Law unto us. But how we have walked in him, and
been Obedient unto it, as we have been taught, yea taught of God in the
Ministry of his faithful servants, our deeds may declare. Time was when truth
was of so high account with us, that if it had been possible we would have
plucked out our own eyes, rather then to have parted with it; But we have seen
the time, wherein ( Servis dormientibus The Lord pardon us in this) Truth was
fallen in our Streets, and we have been such strangers unto it by giving
entertainment to Error in the most ugly appearances thereof, that we might
well have asked, as he did, what is Truth? True it is there was a certain
Covenant made (whether according to truth and righteousness somewhat may be
said hereafter) but made I say for the extirpation of Heresy and Error, etc.
But it is as true which was once freely spoken at a Monethly-fast in Saint
Margarets Westminster, If we had sworn to the utmost of our power to have
advanced Error and Heresy, Feb. 24. 1646.
they could not well have grown and increased more then they did, when we swore
against them. There was a time also when we took sweet Counsel together under
the peaceful Government of a Religious King, and the vigilant inspection of
Grave and Orthodox Bishops, walking to the house of God in company, where we
had full Congregations, the office of the Ministry Honored, the Word
faithfully preached, Sacraments duly administered, etc. And have not Sacraments
of late been laid aside as useless and unnecessary, The Ministry cried down as
AntiChristian, Congregations scattered, Churches put to profane and sordid
uses, to the shame of Religion, and the scorn of our Adversaries round about
us? The Word indeed was preached, and we do with all due thankfulness
acknowledge it to God's glory; for though some did preach Christ of envy and
contention, not sincerely, yet some did it of good will, and therefore seeing
Christ was preached, whether in pretense or in Truth, Phil. 1.18.
therein with St. Paul we did rejoice yea and will rejoice. Notwithstanding it
was both our sin and our shame that that Holy and Divine Ordinance was, I say
not with impunity, but with public approbation so much profaned, when the
pulpit was too often made a Tub for Mechanic praters to pour out their
Blasphemies, or turned into a Theater by others to promote carnal interests,
and to strengthen the Schism that was the set up: And if any honest Orthodox
Ministers durst be so bold according to their commission given them of Christ
to manifest their zeal in preaching against these impostours and their
abettours (as some there were who could not forbear) It was not their Gravity,
Learning, Piety, Fidelity to their Country, nor ability to promote the glory
of the Gospel that could be a sufficient safeguard unto them, But they must be
branded with the odious mark of Malignancy, and even in the very execution of
their office, affronted, interrupted, contradicted, yea sometimes laughed to
scorn: I instance not in particular persons, His Majesty's gracious Act of
indulgence forbidding it. But hence it was that many faithful Ministers were so
much despised throughout the Nation, sometimes called Legalists, otherwhiles
Formalists, yea reviled with the most opprobrious terms that Malice it self
could invent. To some they were too plain, to others they were too eloquent,
one while taxed for not preaching Christ, another while for not holding forth
the Doctrine of Free Grace; But if in their Sermons they happened to make
mention of those Holy Ancients whom the Church has honored with the Name of
Fathers, they were presently by some temerarious Head or other censured for
Bablers, or at the best but low-spirited Men, that would be padling in the
shallows of Antiquity, not fit forsooth to be named with the profound knowledge
of these days. So imperious were people grown in their superintendency over
their Teachers; yea though they were illiterate Mechanics, yet being the
Darlings of the Schism, they would presume, as being allowed to be Dictatours
to the most grave and learned Ministers that were not of their Faction, not
considering what the Apostle says, that The spirits of the prophets are
subject to the Prophets, implying doubtless, that it is the Ecclesiastical
Senate that should take cognizance of Preachers Doctrines, so as to regulate
whatsoever may be found amiss in them, not the Company of spear-men, or calves
of the people, as the Prophet calls the rude malitude. But such was the
impiety of those times, that the poor Ministers of Christ (though by the Holy
Ghost accounted the Prime Masters of the Assemblies) did commonly stand in
their Pulpits like Prisoners at the Bar when their Hearers, Ec. 12.11.
how ignorant soever, sat like so many Judges round about them.

Again, As preaching was profaned, so in like manner was prayer too much
perverted and depraved. Whereas in our approaches to God we were wont to fall
down upon our knees, adoring the Divine Majesty with the humbling of our bodies
to the very dust, according to the religious example of the devout servants of
God in Scripture, Luke 22.41. Mar. 14.35. Mat. 26.39.
yea of the Son of God himself, of whom Saint Luke says, that He kneeled and
prayed, Saint Mark that he fell to the ground and prayed, Saint Matthew that he
fell upon his face and prayed, What an Unreverend insolency has the late times
produced, when this humble gesture was in many places wholly neglected, as
being forsooth below the Saintship of our Upstart Reformers, who possibly might
pretend to have more familiarity with the God of Heaven, then those could be
allowed to have, that had been before them; And therefore they might now serve
him without fear, though the truth is, they did it not in righteousness nor
true holiness. Was not the spiritualness of prayer confined to the suddenness
of conception, and volubility of utterance (qualities not incompossible with a
spirit of opposition to all that is good and holy) which also were accompanied
too frequently (it is to be feared) with a vain ostentation of men's abilities
for invention, and with such expressions many times that no honest heart God
knows could say Amen unto them; When a Set-form though compiled according to
the warrant and pattern that Christ has given us, and used with a pious and
sincere devotion, was (contrary to the rules of Christian Charity, contrary to
the judgment of the best Divines, both Ancient and Modern, foreign and
domestic, yea, contrary to the general practice of the Reformed Churches)
condemned and rejected as unsuitable to the spirit of Adoption, and unacceptable
to the God of Heaven, as if the Almighty were more to be taken with the variety
of words, then with the groans of the spirit, which may as soon ascend up into
his ears in the Religious use of a form, as in the uttering of the best
conceived prayer in the World. But it is no marvel that setforms of prayer were
so much decryed, when the Lords prayer it self was slighted, yea so despised,
that if according to the good ancient Custom among us, prayers were concluded
with a rehearsal of it, Such was the horrible profaness of some (who yet
pretended to a Seraphical strain of Holiness above others) that they would
thereupon most unreverendly in the face of the Congregation put their hats on
their heads, that they might thereby throw contempt upon that prayer, and those
that used it. Which disdainful posture, if they did at all account it lawful
and sit to be used in so solemn a matter as the service of God, would have been
more tolerable at those times, when conceived prayer it self was dishonored by
the Plagiary super-inducements of other men's labors, surreptitiously taken out
of their printed Books, and under a pretense of suddenness of Conception
frequently and at large thrust into Public prayers even by those that were the
greatest enemies to common and public forms. Sundry other instances might here
be reckoned up, whereby it would appear that there was not any thing wherein
the Beauty of Holiness had shined out in former times that was not woefully
polluted in those days of Schism by our Changings and Counter-changings, which
were such that it might well be said of us, notwithstanding all our
vainglorious pretensions to a glorious light surpassing all that had been seen
in the Ages before, that indeed and in truth we feared not God: Alas our Glory
was our shame, and we like a foolish people and unwise, loved to have it so,
accounting that which was indeed our shame to be our greatest glory.

But non fuit sic ab initio, It was not wont to be thus. We had left our first
love and zeal for the truth of the Gospel, and therefore did God in his just
judgment give us up to strong delusions to follow after lies. High time then
was it for us to repent and do our first Works, and to say with those in the
Prophet, we will go and return to our first husband, for then was it better
with us then now. The streets of Romish Askelon possibly may ring of these our
mis-doings, and the rather because we are not quite gone over unto them, when
we were brought very near: But they may spare their breath to remove their own
stench, if they can, which is so noisome all the world over. We will our selves
give glory to God in confessing that our transgressions have been many, and our
backslidings have increased. Our sinful compliancy with Anabaptisme,
Brownisme, Familisme etc. which in former times were judged by us, according to
their proper nature, to be most abominable Errors, has been so notorious that
it does even fill our faces with shame and blushing, when we sadly take it into
our consideration, that we whom God have made a Nation not to be despised, but
honorable in the eye of the World, and a Church adorned with a glorious beauty
surmounting other Churches even by their own confession, yea terrible as an
Army with Banners to Antichrist and his Adherents, should make our selves thus
naked and bare by entertaining such scurfe into our bosom which was fitter
rather to be trod under foot. Surely very unworthy have we hereby made our
selves of that dignity which God has put upon us.

True it is this mischeivous project was first hatched and afterward fomented
by some false brethren among us, the spurious issue of John a Leyden and
Knipperdolling, yet because it did prevail and grew to such a height without
any the least control from those that had power in their hands to suppress it,
to whom the Nation did generally in a manner submit, the guilt therefore of a
most shameful Apostasy might too justly we fear be imputed unto us.

But rejoice not against us O our enemy, though we have fallen, we are through
mercy risen again, and though our backslidings have been strong yet they are
not (blessed for ever and ever be the Name of our God) either like unto those
of Jerusalem or those of Rome perpetual. If we have through the sly
insinuations of Jesuitical Emissaries, who have mingled themselves with us in
the late Transactions of our nation, and the cunning craftiness of Hypocritical
self-seekers, been too rash and heady in endeavoring to amend what was judged
to be amiss in things pertaining to God, we will not when God has showed us
our Error be pertinacious in it; but return rather to our Obedience from which
we have swerved, and be better advised hereafter, waiting upon the Lord in his
own way for the propagating of his Gospel as his word and providence shall
direct us. In the mean time we will not spare to publish our sorrow for those
deplorable wastes which our inadvertency has brought upon this poor yet
excellent Church of Christ. Too excellent indeed to be the Mother of such
unnatural, foolish and disobedient Children, as we have been unto her; Who
though she be comely in the eyes of her Beloved, and in the eyes of all the
daughters of his people in the world about her, yet woe unto us we have blackned
her with the spots of our Divisions, and brought a cloud over all her
excellencies. Surely this is a Lamentation and must be for a Lamentation.

But what then would some say, would you have us now to relinquish that
glorious Cause which with a Solemn League and Covenant we have undertaken to
maintain; and return again to profaness and superstition? what were this but to
deal falsely in the Covenant of our God, and to draw the guilt of odious
inconstancy upon us? It will become us rather according to your former
admonition, herein to be still the Same, and to follow the example of those
resolute and faithful Martyrs who of late to the very death persisted in the
justifying of so good a cause.

Now unto this Objection it will be requisite to give a full and clear
resolution, to the end that it may be made evident who those are among us that
come nearest to the pattern here presented in the Text in being still the same,
whether those that object these things, accusing their brethren of I know not
what sinful temporizing and tergiversation for not joining with them in
endeavoring to root up the foundation of this Change which the Divine
Providence has brought upon this Nation, or those that are thus accused, who
upon convictions of Conscience are necessitated with the whole strength of
their souls to promote and give furtherance unto it.

In the treating of this subject, though I question not but some will be apt to
quarrel at my plain dealing, yet I shall without upbraiding any particular
persons, labor as in the presence of God to give satisfaction to those
Consciences that in truth desire to be resolved concerning the warrantableness
of submitting to this Change in returning to our obedience, And shall insert
nothing, but for what I shall be willing to be responsal to any who shall
rationally require an account of me.

To begin then with the Cause, as it was called, and a Glorious Cause, What was
it? It was pretended at first that great matters should be done for the King,
People, and Religion, The King should be made a great and glorious Prince, The
People should have their just liberties restored unto them, Religion should be
established, and set free from the invasion of all Heresies and Errors
wherewith it was before corrupted, All which being done we should find our
selves the happiest Nation upon earth, and Glory should dwell in our Land. Unto
this plausible sound did multitudes of well-meaning people in the simplicity of
their hearts give an attentive Ear, and were allured to contribute their
assistance to the carrying on of so good a work. But if this were the Cause
that was so much cried up and extolled for which the Land was filled with
violence from one end to the other, How came it to pass that it fell so foulely
as it did? Who was it that hindered the progress of it? Was it not they that
absurdly pretend still an adherency unto it, when a sword by their means has
passed through the Soul of it? Is not their Hypocrisy, Double dealing,
Self-seeking, Treachery in the whole managery of this business discovered
plainly in the face of all Mankind? Certainly should all Histories be
searched, there could not be found a more palpable Cheat put upon a Nation
since the beginning of the World: The public faith of the Kingdom to assure
the Reallity of these pretenses was through the prevalency of a sort of
Traitors to God, their King and their Country, frequently turned into public
fraud. Yea the faith of the Gospel was made a Cloak to cover the corrupt
projects of self-ended Men. Nothing done of all that was promised, but rather
very much clean contrary; Confusion and Disorder brake in upon us like a Deluge
and there was no visible remedy in the apprehension of all Unbiassed men, but a
swift and overspreading desolation must needs have fallen upon the whole Land.
All which considered, To make boast still of a Cause, wherewith they dealt so
perfidiously, and of which God in his just indignation, for the Corruptions
both in the birth and growth of it, has said it shall not stand, making it a
Nehushtan, does it not argue a fighting against God, and a design to be still
the Same rather in a treachery which all the Christian world cries shame upon,
then in any thing wherein the glory of God, or the safety of their Country
might be concerned?

As for the League and Covenant (called in scorn the Legal Covenant even by
those who do now plead it) it was indeed brought on to add a seeming strength
to the said Cause, and the better to draw inconsiderate people to join in the
pursuance of it. But there are many unanswerable reasons to be heeded that do
clearly show the nullity thereof, which being exactly related by others, we
shall not need to insist upon them here. Somewhat notwithstanding shall be here
added to give satisfaction in this particular. It is well known that to incline
people to the taking of the Covenant (that is, to take the Whip with six cords
(as the six Articles in K. Henry the eights time was called) to scourge and
torment their Consciences with) some use was made of that Restriction in the
first Article of it; viz. According to the Word of God, being interpreted by
the politic Conciliatours of those days, as a Proviso, whereby an Outlet was
set for any to recede from the Observation of it, if afterward upon better
consideration they found it to be otherwise then it was represented unto them.
But what vile Hypocrisy was this, to lead poor people into a snare by such
tricks of Legerdemain? Nay is it not an impious Mockery of the Holy Ghost thus
to make the Word, which is the Oracle of the most High God, a stale to the
politic Interests of wretched men? For, as it is well observed, upon the same
account we may subscribe to the Council of Trent, yea to the Turkish Alcoran,
swearing to maintain and defend either of them, viz. so far as they are
agreeable to the Word of God. But much better surely may we now make the said
Restriction our Warrant totally to cancel that Covenant by a godly sorrow, and
serious lamentation for it, finding it in sundry respects different from that
Righteous Rule, according to which all our Actions are to be squared. For in
such cases that golden Axiom must be our Guide, viz. Poenitenda Promissio, non
perficienda Praesumptio, The Covenant must be retracted by Repentance, not the
Presumption heightened by Continuance.

As for the Illegality of it throughout, from first to last, our Famous and
Renowned University of Oxford has with a general Consent in a full Convocation
very plainly and faithfully discovered it to the silencing of all Gainsayers,
June 1. 1647.
and to their everlasting Honor before God and Man. Unto whose clear
Argutations I remit all men that are in a capacity to receive satisfaction in
this point, and to be convinced with Reason: Concluding with the Casuist, Ne
sit Sacramentum pietatis, impedimentum pietatis, nec vinculum iniquitatis, Let
not a pious Obligation be a bar to piety, nor a bond of iniquity.

Whereas it is said next, that by Deserting the Cause we shall return again to
Profaness and Superstition, I answer, God forbid! Rather it is to be hoped that
an unanimous Agreement in rooting up the said pretended Cause, would be the
ready way to remove that Profaness and Superstition which have provoked Gods
displeasure against us. But let it be considered, What returning to profaness
can there be now more then the Land was polluted with in the time of the late
Schism, when the Name of God was dishonored by Swearing and Forswearing, The
Ordinances of Jesus Christ neglected, yea despised, Gods faithful Ministers
cruelly mocked and derided; In a word, When iniquity did so much abound,
(though it must be confessed it abounds still too much amongst us, even in
these days of our Deliverance) that scarce any posterity shall be able to add
thereunto? And as for Superstition, which the Holy Scripture calls (...), that
is, Fear of false Demons, rather then of the true God, What can be greater
then that which has been already set up and spread about the Nation by our
Sectarian Seminaries, Independents, Anabaptists, Antinomians, Seekers, Quakers,
and the rest of that Rabble, who have notwithstanding the struglings of God and
Man upon their Consciences, been like a company of Superstitious Dotards, so
mad upon their Idols, I mean their Squint eyed, Wry-necked, Double-tongued,
Snivelling Demons of Horrid and Monstrous Opinions, and wherein they continue
to this very day, that it is a manifest token, as one said not amiss, They are
errour-blasted both from Heaven and Hell. Nay more, Was there ever such a close
and cunning Connivence afforded, since the Reformation began in this Nation, to
Romish Superstitions, then was under the Regency of the said Cause? The great
Projectour, or at least Protractour, thereof himself, who made England to sin,
observing in one of his Proclamations (though nevertheless it was after that
also Tolerated) that Multitudes of Jesuits and Popish Priests did resort unto
and remain within this Commonwealth and the Dominions thereunto belonging,
Apr. 26. 1655.
who with great Audacity did exercise all offices of their Profession, both
saying Masses and seducing the people to the Church of Rome. If then that Cause
so much pleaded for, had such ill Consequents attending upon it, may we not
well say, Sublata Causa tollitur Effectus; When the Cause is taken away, the
Effect will follow?

At least as I said before there is great hope it shall follow, especially now
when God has in Mercy set over us a Man of Understanding and Knowledge, Pro.
28.2.
to lengthen out the State and Tranquillity of our Country, when for the
Transgressions of it, it was by the Intrusion of Usurpers, near unto utter
ruin. A Man I say after his own heart, Tutour'd and Bred up by him like David
in the school of affliction, Whose Heart is also fixed upon God to serve him in
Righteousness and true Holiness; A Prince so pious that he makes it his work,
and accounts it his glory to have true Religion established amongst his people
in the Power and Purity of it: See his Majesty's Proclamation, May 30. 1660.
Witness his extreme dislike of Profaness, which he hasted to publish the very
next day after his happy Return unto us, Commanding it to be read in all
Churches monthly for six months after; (But well worthy indeed to be set up
in them as a perpetual Monument of Piety to all Generations) Wherein he
declares the Purpose and Resolution of his Religious Heart in these words, We
will not exercise just Severity against any Malefactors sooner then against
men of Dissolute, Debauched and Profane lives, with what parts soever they may
be otherwise qualified and endowed. Requiring all Majors, Sheriffs, and
Justices of the Peace to be very vigilant and strict in the Discovery and
Prosecution of all Dissolute and Profane Persons, such as blaspheme the Name of
God by profane swearing and cursing, or revile and disturb Ministers, and
despise the public worship of God. Witness also the Declaration which his
Majesty set forth ( October. 25, immediately following) concerning Ecclesiastical
Affairs, wherein he has made known to God and the world, That his Resolution
is and shall be to promote the Power of Godliness, to encourage the Exercises
of Religion both public and private, and to take care that the Lords Day be
applied to Holy Exercises without unnecessary divertisements, and that
Insufficient, Negligent, and Scandalous Ministers be not permitted in the
Church. Which being so, What is it but a profane slander of the footsteps of
Gods Anointed, both of Christ himself, and his Vicegerent over us, to amuse the
world with false reports of a return to profaness, as if the Times were now
become so loose, that Wickedness should be established by a Law? Whereas there
was never more likelihood then now (if the Devil through the turbulent spirits
of factious Schismatics did not hinder it) for Religion to prosper, and
Holiness to flourish.

Away then with Profaness, and let Superstition pack together with it; for what
entertainment is it like here to find, When King Charles the Sufferer, L.
Bishop of Winton.
the son of King Charles the Martyr (as a Reverend Father of our Church has
worthily proclaimed him) is new by the Divine Power and Goodness settled upon
his Throne, to be the Defender of that Faith for which he suffered? That Faith
I say, which the Church of England professes in opposition to the Church of
Rome, From which (as it was observed by that Loyal and Peacemaking Parliament,
that first so happily brought the Nation under his Majesty's Government)
neither the Temptation of Allurements, Persuasions and Promises from seducing
Papists on the one hand, nor the Persecution and hard Usage from some seduced
and mis-guided Professors of the Protestant Religion on the other hand, could
at all prevail upon him to make him swerve in the least Degree, But chose
rather still to suffer Afflictions though never so grievous, as Moses did, then
to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, by so doing: For which his Name
shall be sweet, and his Memorial precious in all the Churches of Christ to the
end of the World. I say then again, Is it like, that Superstition in any kind
should be Tolerated (much less shall it be Established) under the Government of
so famous a Sufferer for the Protestant Profession, yea and so active a
Defender of it, who has made it manifest that his Care and Study is for the
propagation thereof, And who has solemnly professed that nothing shall be
proposed to testify his Zeal and Affection for it, to which he will not
readily consent?

It will be objected, What do we hear Words, when we see Deeds? Is there not an
Actual return to Superstition in this Land now, when the Ceremonies which were
cast out are brought in again, and the Liturgy restored? And what are these,
but either the Issues of Will Worship which the Holy Scripture does condemn, or
the Bratts of Babylon which should be taken not to be cherisht, but to be dashed
against the stones? Besides, Is not the Government also by Bishops set up again
in its former Height, which is not warranted by the word of God? If we then
should consent to these things, How shall we like unto Jesus Christ our Pattern
in the Text continue faithful with God in our Conformity to his Rule which he
has set us?

I answer, First we may be still the same in a constant Adherency to the
Foundation, though we may as Divine Providence leads us, whether it be in
Judgment or in Mercy, vary sometimes from that which is Circumstantial (of
which nature are those things that are here objected unto us) and our fidelity
to the former will certainly entitle us to a faithful Imitation of Jesus Christ,
notwithstanding our change in the latter. Nay, is it not a great weakening of
the Foundation, and an injurious imputation put upon the Master Builder, to lay
so much weight upon Circumstantials, as to make them Unchangeable when they are
not of his particular appointment, though allowed by him to be annexed to his
Building? It is Superstition doubtless so to set up External Rites in
competition with the Everlasting Rule of the Gospel, as if they were not upon
any Emergency whatsoever to be altered or removed. And it is as rank
Superstition on the other side after they have been removed and restored again,
Superstitio ex super and stando, qua significatur nimium ese. Sen. Epist. 123.
pertinaciously to stand in opposition against them, especially when Experience
has made it manifest that the removal of them has introduced much disorder
and profaness in the service of God. But we may appeal unto Christ himself to
Judge in this Case, Whether or no, when a Christian Magistrate that truly
fears God, taking notice of a great decay of Religion, which by a wild and
lawless Liberty has been brought amongst his Subjects, shall for the
improvement of Piety recommend unto them a Form of Divine Service accompanied
with such Rites and Ceremonies as are in force by Law, and in the observing
whereof True Religion has formerly flourished, Whether, I say it be
Superstition in them to join with him in the Observation thereof, especially
when they are few in number, no merit placed in them, nor are they required to
be observed as things necessary to salvation, or as parts of Gods worship which
under pain of Damnation ought to be used, nor as signs operative, working Grace
in those that make conscience of them; but are expressly declared to be
indifferent in their own nature, and that upon just causes they may be altered
and changed; In so much that if the Supreme Magistrate shall again forbid the
use of the said Service and Ceremonies, the people may without sin lay them
aside, yea are bound in Conscience so to do, and observe others (provided that
they have the same premised Boundaries) which he shall command. All which
considered, Who sees not how unjustly we are accused of Superstition in the
Service of our God, because of our religious using of some few harmless
Ceremonies, without which our late Experience may sufficiently teach us, that
Religion it self would not long stand in safety, but by degrees be totally laid
waste? Ego certe illas veneror, and tantae pietati semper assurgo, for my part
I shall, notwithstanding the Oggannition of gainsayers, highly esteem them,
and commend the observation of them to all who are willing to advance the
Kingdom of the Lord Jesus. It was said of one ( Luke 7.47.) She loved much,
because much was forgiven; Were it not here a (...), an Excursion from the
matter in hand, I, who have too much complied with the late Schism, and
through mercy not only been convinced of my folly therein, but (blessed be
God) do partake of the Indulgence of Holy Church my Mother in the forgiveness
thereof, could open my heart at large in her vindication against her
Adversaries, who are very apt to cast aspersions upon her. But the design of
this Treatise tends another way, and Wisdom in this matter has been clearly
justified of her children.

Nevertheless I shall presume (without offense, I hope,) to offer a small
Libamen of my love and duty unto this dear Mother in the justification of two
of her Ceremonies which by her unnatural children are as much quarrelled at as
any, Those are

First, Bowing at the Name of Jesus. Secondly, Bowing at our Entrance into, and
Departing from the Congregation.
For the first (besides what has been abundantly written by others) we are, in
the duties of Divine Worship and Service, to give unto Christ this Honor, upon
these two Considerations: First, Because that for our sake he made himself of
no Reputation; Secondly, Because a sort of wretched men in the world about us,
set on by the Devil, conspire together to make him of no Reputation also.


First I say for our sake he made himself of no Reputation; great reason
therefore that we should account him worthy of all Honor: not only that which
is Spiritual in captivating every thought to the obedience of his Gospel, but
that also which is of the body, in the outward deportment of it (for he has
bought it with a Price, a great Price, even his dearest Blood, as well as the
Soul) it was no robbery for him to be equal with God, for he was the Brightness
of his Fathers Glory, the Character of his Person, yet Saint Paul tells us, he
emptied himself, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the
likeness of men, and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and
became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross: Now Quanto pro me
vilior, tanto mihi charior, said Holy Bernard sweetly; The more humility
appeared in him, it is but meet that the more honor be ascribed unto him.
Admit that it be not a duty of the Text, to use Genu-flexions at the mentioning
of his blessed Name, whiles we are employed in the public exercises of Divine
Worship, yet since the Father has, even upon the account of his Humility,
highly exalted him, and given him a Name above every name, it well becomes
the Church upon the same account (in a conformity to that Divine Pattern)
according to her poor strength and ability, by all ways and means to exalt him
likewise. This then I conceive may somewhat stop the mouth of Contradition
against the holy and religious custom of our Church in requiring all persons to
Bow at the Name of Jesus, for she has learned it of the Father (whose example
is withuot controversy in this case worthy of all imitation) to exalt him,
because for our sake he made himself of no reputation.

Again, Is not our Lord now (as it has been prophesied of him Esa. 53.3.)
despised and rejected of men? Do not Jews, Turks, and Infidels blaspheme that
worthy name, by which we are called? Are not Socinians those cursed Heretics
as unwearied now in their malice against him, to lay his honor in the dust, as
the Arians were of old? Is not the precious Blood of this Immaculate Lamb of
God, shed to take away the sin of the World, every where almost, beslaver'd
with the impious mouths of execrable swearers? And are there not some wretched
people risen up amongst us in these days, who out of a Luciferian Pride,
pretend that they are as well and as truly God, as Jesus Christ, because they
have their Being in God, and are partakers of the Divine Nature? What then
should the Church do, but out of a detestation of these horrid impieties, and
out of a tender regard to the honor of her Lord, give a signal testimony of
her duty, in commanding all her faithful children to bow their bodies in token
of reverence unto him, at the mentioning of his Name? That Name, I say, which
sounds the sweetest in the ears and hearts of poor penitent sinners, which
speaks him not only to be Inmanuel, God with us, but Immanu (as the rapture of
our admired Bishop Andrews distinguishes it) With us, or, One of us, bone of
our bone, and flesh of our flesh, which has been the occasion that his enemies
have laid hold upon, to make light account of him. But enough of this.

It is said also that our bowing the body at our Entrance into the
Congregation, and Departure from it, is Superstition. In answer hereunto (to
add somewhat likewise to that which has been written by others) If this be
Superstition, we may justly retort it upon the common practice of
Non-conformists themselves in their private meetings, where they use at their
rising up from their Devotions, to bow their bodies to one another, pretending,
as it has been said by some of their principal leaders, that it is a laudable
custom among them, for that they do thereby testify their unanimity in the
service of God, and mutually witness their gratitude for their mutual praying
for one another. Thus plausibly can they please themselves with Apologies for
what they act of this nature among themselves in private, without any scruple
at all of conscience, and yet uncharitably condemn the Churches order for doing
the very same thing in public to the same good ends and purposes amongst many
other, as if their private Incurvations were more warrantable from the word of
God, then our public Genu-flexions: Certainly as public prayers are more
acceptable unto God then private, so public reverence in the place and time of
Gods Worship and Service will better become us, and more adorn our Christian
Profession, then any thing can of that kind in private whatsoever. It is usual
amongst us, for men in token of reverence, to be uncovered, when they enter
into the Congregation, and it is generally looked upon as a bold impiety, if
any should be so void of shame, as to presume to do otherwise. Judge then
whether it be not as lawful to bend the knee, or bow the body, as to uncover
the head, in such a time and place, since those gestures are more solemnly
reverential then this, and the more reverence we use that is suitable to the
quality of the service we are about, the more comely (doubtless) is it in the
sight of God and man.

Our blessed Savior would have his Disciples, when they entered into an house,
to salute it, And if the Son of Peace were there, to let their peace at their
departure rest upon it: How much more then when we enter into, and depart from
the house of God (for such are our Churches, notwithstanding the malicious
prating of profane scoffers, as well as the Synagogues of old were amongst the
Jews) should we show the affection of our hearts toward it by the gesture of
our bodies? Especially when we know that it is the Tabernacle of Meeting
between God and his people? Shall our God then, the God of love and peace, be
there, and we not aware of it? And shall his people there assemble together, in
obedience to his Command, To adore his goodness, To praise his name, To hear
his word, To receive his blessing, To testify their faith, To pour out their
requests, To join together in a holy communion as becomes members of one and
the same mystical body, And should not we be ready, as those that are obliged
to the same obedience, at our Entrance among them, and Departure from them, to
give testimony, by the bowing of our bodies, of the bending of our souls to the
same service, and of our cordial rejoicing at our fellowship with them therein?

Nay more, Are the glorious Angels there present (as the holy Scriture once and
again hinteth unto us they are) desiring to look into our manner of the public
service of our God, and willing to be our guardians in it, And should not we
from first to last so demean our selves therein, with a respect unto their
presence, that they may rejoice to behold their God and our God worshipped on
earth, as he is in heaven, according to our capacities, with reverence and
godly fear? Surely, If these things were considered aright as they ought to be,
they that have hitherto been so stiff in their prejudices against, the holy
Church, for requiring these external Genu-flexions, would be more flexible
then they have been: They would not say, It suffices that our hearts are right
toward God, though we do not show it, and because God requires truth in the
inward parts, Therefore, it is enough that we do with our souls love the
assemblies of Gods people, and delight in the Law of our God in the inward man,
thereby thinking to palliate their want of reverence which is due to God and
his Church. But the wisdom of the Wise checks them for this their folly,
telling them that open rebuke is better then secret love.

This by the way in the vindication of the Order of our Church, concerning
these two particular Ceremonies. Let us now proceed more generally as we began,
in answer to the beforementioned Objection.

Secondly, Admit that it was Will Worship which brought on those Ceremonies and
Liturgy at first, and has now restored them, yet it will not follow that they
therefore are superstitious; For what is that (...) that Will Worship which the
Apostle makes mention of Col. 2.23. Col. 2.23.
And which these Objectours so much insist upon? Great outcries indeed have
been made against it: But what if in the end it do appear that there is not a
mark of dislike set upon it by the Holy Ghost, but rather an approbation given
unto it? Let the place be consulted, and we shall find, that the Apostle there
joins Will Worship with humility and beating down or mortifying of the Body;
both which are required in those that will be Disciples of Jesus Christ; (...)
not sparing.
; If Will Worship therefore be to be condemned, how comes it to be ranked with
those things that are so good and commendable? Again, the Traditions that the
Apostle speaks of are said in respect of Will Worship, that is pretended to be
in them, to have a show or pretext of wisdom, that is, of true spiritual
wisdom, otherwise what advantage would the show be unto them? And can any thing
be said to have a show or shine of such wisdom in Will Worship, if all kind of
Will Worship be in it self sinful? Hypocrites make a show of Holiness, and
false Prophets will make a show of Truth, Zach. 13.4.
putting on a rough garment to deceive; so to make a show of wisdom in
Will Worship implies clearly that Will Worship is a thing good and acceptable
unto God. Else what shall we judge of the free will offerings among the Jews,
which were not required by any particular Law, but were left to every man's
liberty, and so were spontaneous, not necessary? And what else was the
Celebration of Purim, The fast of the fourth month, kept for a memorial of the
taking of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans the ninth day of that month, Or the fast
of the fifth month for the burning of the Temple the tenth day of that month,
Zach. 8.19.
Or the fast of the seventh month for the death of Gedaliah, upon which
followed the utter dispersion of the remainder of the Jews into Egypt, etc. Or
the fast of the tenth month for the seige laid before Jerusalem in the tenth
day 2 Reg. 25.1. Moreover what were the abstinences and austerities of the
Rechabites which are so commended by God, Jer. 35.
and yet were over and above the proportion that was required in the Law? What
the feast of dedication or restitution of the Jews Temple and Religion which
Antiochus had corrupted, Mac. 4.59.
instituted by Judas Maccabeus and his brethren, and yet observed by Christ
himself Joh. 10. All these and many more of the like n^^^^, which the Scripture
makes mention of, reckoned up by Doc^^^ Hammond in his Annotations on the
Epistle to the Colossians (whom I acknowledge to be the Author of this
Exposition) what were they but Will Worship, being supra statutum (which some
vainly conceive to be all one with Superstition) not under any positive
command, yet allowed by God and accepted, and therefore not to be accounted as
superstitious. So those Ceremonies, etc. which have been and are again in use
amongst us (I mean such as are established by law) may indeed be said to be a
Will Worship, wherein we in this time of the Gospel should rather excel those
before us under the Law, then to come short of them) But to say that they are
therefore Superstitious, that is, Antichristian and Idolatrous, as some are
apt most profanely to traduce them, is a Soloecisme proper for those that are
enemies unto reason.

Nevertheless though our Form of Divine Service and Ceremonies be a
Will Worship, yet we shall ever deny that they sprung out of Babylon, that is,
according to the sense of these quarrelsome people, that we received them from
Rome. It is the Lot it seems of this poor Church of Christ, to have this Cross
laid upon her, viz. to be on all sides upbraided still with Rome, Papists on
the one hand checking us, that the first Plantation of the Gospel here came
from thence, and that therefore we are unnatural Children to separate our
selves as we do, from our Mother that gave us our being: Schismatics on the
other hand charging us that we have not, as we pretend, separated from that
Idolatrous Church, but to this very day do hold too servile a compliancy with
it, crying out against us with open mouth, as is the Mother, so is the
Daughter, Rome like a false Strumpet has devised a Superstitious Form of
Religious Worship, and England like a true Chip of the old Block does follow
her example therein: But as Venerable Bede once gave the sense of those four
famous and solemn Letters S. P. Q. R. So may we in this case; Stultus Populus
Quaerit Romam, Senatus populusque Romanus.
foolish people cry out Rome, not understanding what they say, nor whereof they
affirm.

As to the first of these reproaches, if it were not out of our way, we might
reply, that supposing (not granting) it to be true, The people of this Nation
received the Christian Faith from Rome, We hold not our selves obliged thereby,
to follow Rome any otherwise then she follows Christ, for we have learned it
from the mouth of our Lord himself, that who so loves Father or Mother more
then him, is not worthy of him. But what Logic is this? The Planters of the
Faith here came from Rome, Ergo, the people of this Nation were ever after in
the worshipping of God to keep the Order of Rome? If this argument would hold
(says Bishop Jewel) then would I reason thus; The Church of Rome was first
planted by them that came from Graecia or from Jerusalem, Ergo, Rome is to keep
the Order of Graecia or of Jerusalem: which consequence I dare say will not
down with her that takes upon her to be perpetual Dictatrix to all the Churches
of the world.

But we shall let this pass as impertinent to our purpose, neither is there
need at any time to insist much upon it; for it is sufficiently witnessed
(says Bishop Godwin) by many Histories without exception, that our Island of
Britain received the Faith of Christ, even in the first infancy of the Church,
from Jerusalem. That which is now before us is to make manifest the folly of
these Schismatical Objectours, who accuse us of Superstition in our
Church Service, because, as they say, we received it from Rome. It would be too
large a digression here to undertake a Vindication of our Church in every
particular that concerns this matter (enough has been written thereof already
by sundry persons both Learned and Godly whose works praise them in the gates)
yet requisite it is that somewhat be here added to wipe off that aspersion
before premised, which may be reduced to this Argument. Whatsoever Church has
received her form of Divine-Service from Rome, is therein guilty of gross
Superistition: But the Church of England has received her form of
Divine-Service from Rome: therefore is the Church of England in the form of
Divine-Service guilty of gross Superstition.

We will not meddle with the proposition of this argument, Let Rome plead for
her self against it: But as for the assumption we shall by clear and plain
demonstration prove that to be utterly false, both in respect of the times of
old, as also of the later, since the Protestant Reformation.

And first, We may here by the way upon very good warrant affirm, that Non fuit
sic ab initio, It was not wont to be thus with England in the times of old,
viz. To follow Rome in the form of Divine Service. The reason of our
confidence herein, we have from that venerable Author our Countryman before
mentioned, who is by all parties acknowledged to be a faithful Witness worthy
of an high esteem in the Church, He I say in his Ecclesiastical History
informs us Beda lib. 3 cap. 25.
that the Church of this Island of Britain well near until seven hundred years
after Christ, in the keeping of Easter Day and manner of Baptising, followed
the order of the Greek Church, without any regard therein had to the Church of
Rome. And when Austin that imperious Monk was sent hither from Rome, And when
Austin that imperious Monk was sent hither from Rome, here were says Bid at
that time one Archbishop, seven Bishops, Lib. 2. cap. 2.
and one and twenty hundred holy and religious Monks about Bangor, who lived by
the labor of their own hands, the Country being for the most part Heathenish,
and as he further avoucheth, plures viri doctissimi, many more great learned men
that utterly refused to receive any Roman orders or customs from the said
Austin in the Service of God, though he urged them thereunto by many terrible
threats. Again Sain Gregory being then Bishop of Rome, of whom it is said, none
of all his successors were for Holiness and Learning worthy to be compared
with him, when he had sent this Austin hither to preach the Gospel he gave him
his instructions in this manner. Where you find any thing that seems better
to the Service of God then is in the Church of Rome, Choose you the same, and
do your endeavor to bring into the English Church the best and choicest
things, Choose out of many Churches, for things are not to be loved for the
place sake, but the place is to be loved for the things that are good.

By these instances it may appear that this Church in those days did not in
their public service of God conform to the order of the Church of Rome,
neither did that Church impose any such order upon us.

In process of time indeed it came to pass that there were sundry Orders came
here into use, especially that of Sarum compiled by Osmund Earl of Dorset and
Bishop of Salisbury, which continued for above five hundred years till the
reign of Edward the sixth. In all which time the Romish Superstitions in Divine
worship were too much obtruded upon the people of this Nation: But those times
of darkness are not within the verge of this Vindication.

But for our present Liturgy which has been established since the Reformation,
that it should be originally taken out of the said Missal, and consequently
transmitted to us from Rome as they would make us believe, is clearly as
manifest an Untruth, as that we have originally received our Religion from
Rome. True it is that that breviary, as it is called, secundum Salisburiensis
Ecclesiae usum, does agree in some things with our Liturgy: But it will not
therefore follow that our Liturgy is a poor puisne extract taken out of it.
Sober and discreet men would rather infer thereupon that our Liturgy, and as
much of that Popish Portifory as is incorrupt, are taken out of the Primitive
Christian Liturgies, which were devoutly used in several Churches persecuted
for the faith of Christ long before any Romish Superstitions were in Being;
whereunto if there be with us a holy desire of Conformity to show that we are
in communion and fellowship with that poor persecuted Church of old, that was
valiant for the Truth, resisting the enemies of Christ even unto blood, and
upon whose unwearied labors and sufferings we are happily entered, What offense
is it?

Now that our Liturgy is such we might allege the faithfulness of the
Compilers of it, who according to the trust reposed in them (as master Fox
reports it in his Martyrology) had in this important business as well an eye
and respect unto the most sincere and pure Christian Religion taught by the
Holy Scriptures, as also to the usages of the Primitive Church; which the Act
of Parliament made for the Confirmation of it, attesteth in these words, 5. and
6. of Ed. 6. c. 1.
The Common Prayer established by Law in England is agreeable to the word of
God, and the Primitive Church: And as the King, a Zealous and Religious Prince
to satisfy some of his mutinous Subjects about it, says, It is altered from
that the Popes of Rome for their lacre brought it unto.

But it may be this will not be accounted argumentative with our techy
Opponents (though the faithfulness of some of those very Persons is by them
oftentimes proposed unto us for our imitation) We shall therefore here produce
somewhat that is more convincing. And first that we may see it is no new thing
to follow the example of the Primitive times in the forms of Divine worship,
let an instance be considered by us out of Eusebius, an Author of good account
as he is well known in all the Churches. Eccl. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 17.
This Eusebius having taken notice of what Philo the Jew, who lived in the
days of Claudius Caesar above 200 years before him, had observed in the
religious Exercises of the Christians in his time about Alexandria, where Saint
Mark had then newly constituted a Church, how they in their (...), a place set
apart and dedicated to Holy uses, devoted themselves with mavelous austerity
to the Service of God, which they celebrated with a certain Order and form
peculiar unto them, Omnis gene^s metrorum and carminum rythmis. Uno cum rythmo
psallente, reliqui quiet auscultantes, posteriores hymnorum parts ad extremum
una decantent.
and with what Gravity and reverence they sang their spiritual Songs and Hymns
of all sorts of tunes, He I say noting these observations of Philo, adds
thereupon Quae etiamnum apud nos durant, which devout Order of religious
exercise is in use amongst us to this very day, Et praecipue circa salutaris
Domini Passionis Festum diem in jejuniis, etc. especially those which we use
upon the Solemn day of the Lords Passion: yea the very Hymns themselves, and
the manner of their singing, Eusebius says, A nobis recitari solebant, we our
selves have been accustomed to recite in our Church Assemblies. Much more to
this purpose is written in the said History.

But from hence we may infer, First, that the Christians in the purest
Primitive times had places set apart for divine worship, which were reserved
only for that use. Secondly, That they had their Forms of Divine worship when
they met together in those places. Thirdly that there were some special times
of the year as appears by the instance of our Saviors Passion wherein they had
their Forms proper for those times. Fourthly (which is the cause of the
inserting of this Story) the manner of their worshipping God, and the very
subject matter of their Forms were taken up and continued by the Church in the
following ages.

Furthermore it will be requisite that an apology be premised and admitted,
which is this, It is not to be expected that the whole Frame of our Liturgy
should be found in those Historians and others that have written of the Church
in the Primitive times. The dispensations of Gods providence toward his people
are much varied now from those of old, and therefore we are not obliged
precisely to follow their exemplar in the whole Form of any of their Liturgies,
but are to make our Supplications according to the present state and exigency
of the Church wherein we are concerned. They prayed heretofore pro mora finis,
That the final consummation of all things might be deferred, because, as it is
supposed, they were afraid to come under the tyranny of Antichrist, which they
knew would make havoc of the Church in the last days. But we on the contrary
have reason to pray, That the end may be hastened that so Antichrist may be
destroyed.

If therefore we can find that that spirit of devotion which we use in our
Liturgy in the order of Prayers, Psalms, Lessons, Collects, Letany, Versicles,
Responds, etc. be the same with that of the ancient Churches before Rome
usurped Authority over the Churches, and that in their Ecclesiastic
Ministrations there be (sparsim) found some of the same express terms which we
use in ours, I hope we shall not be far from giving a clear testimony in this
matter.

As for reading the holy Scriptures and singing of Psalms, no man can deny that
we therein do conform to the practice of all Churches ever since the beginning.
And for our Collects this we shall say of them, When the order of Sarum (which
probably was the ancientest wherein there was a compliancy with Romish
Superstitions) when I say that was first framed by that Osmund aforesaid, the
Tradition that was then generally received concerning some forms of Prayer that
were derived from Primitive Liturgies was the less regarded, and so might be
swallowed up by time, because they were in that Ordinale collected together,
and brought thereby into Common and Public use; whence it came to pass that
the Collects of it, which we have gathered into our Liturgy, though according
to the significancy of the term, it is like they were collected from the
Catholic Prayers of the Primitive Church, yet have no certain Constat for them
that they were all of such venerable Antiquity. Howsoever the matter of them
being sound and Catholic, and because it is not to be imagined that one Osmund
though an Earl and a Bishop should be generally owned for Os mundi, the Speaker
to the whole Church in the Liturgy of it, we may safely affirm that the said
Collects are of the same pure primitive Original with the rest of our
Church Service.

The form of Letany, in the next place, which is most cavill'd at, was ordered
by Saint Gregory, Lib. 9. Indict. 4. Epi. 45.
while Rome continued in the state of innocence to be used in the Church of
Sicily without intermission upon the fourth and sixth days of every week,
which our Liturgy, in a conformity thereunto, enjoyneth to be said or sung upon
the same days, viz. Wednesdayes and Fridayes. Lib 1. De vocatione Gentium.
And Saint Ambrose who was above two hundred years before him says, That this
form of public devotion in the Church, for the substance of it, was so
generally observed, Vt nulla pars mundi sit in qua hujusmodi orationes non
celebrentur a populis Christianis, That there was no part of the world, where
these Prayers were not used in Christian Assemblies, Non solum pro Sanctis and
in Christo regeneratis, sed etiam pro omnibus infidelibus and inimicis crucis
Christi, pro omnibus Idolorum cultoribus, pro haereticis and schismaticis, etc.
Even as we do at this day in our Letany, not only praying that God would be
pleased to bless and keep all his people, but that he would bring into the way
of Truth all such as have erred and are deceived.

Our Versicles and Responds we oftentimes meet with in Primitive Liturgies. E.
g The Lord be with you, And with thy Spirit.

Lord have mercy upon us, Christ have mercy upon us, etc.

Lift up your hearts, We lift them up unto the Lord.

Let us give thanks unto the Lord, It is meet and right so to do, etc. Thus
says Saint Chrysostom, The Priest in the holy Ministration speaks unto the
people, In 2. ad Cor. Hom. 18.
and the people unto the Priest to quicken their devotion and to testify their
unanimity in the Service of God.

Neither is our Alternate singing, though it be not enjoined in our Liturgy,
without good warrant from that Antiquity which we ought to reverence. Lib. 2
cap. 24.
Theodoret writes that David's Psalms were sung in the Church of Antioch by the
Quire of Singers, one side answering the other in their singing, Act. 11.26.
Which order it seems beginning there, as the Appellative title of Christian
did, Ad fines orbis terrarum tandem pervenit, says he, was at length spread
over the world. And this says Sozomen wrought marvellously upon Theodosius,
Lib. 7. cap. 23.
diverting him from his intended purpose of destroying the Citizens of Antioch,
because of some contempts which they had put upon him; For, as the said Historian
relates it, they, fearing the Emperors displeasure, repented them of what they
had done against him, much bewailing their near approaching ruin, and having
prevailed with Flavianus their Bishop to intercede for them, took this course
according to his directions, Some of them when the Emperor sat at his table
came into his presence singing Psalms after the manner of Antioch, that is,
Antiphonicws, one answering the other, wherewith the Emperor, being a
religious Prince, was so taken, that he let go his anger, was reconciled to
their City, and Phialam quam manu tenebat lachrymis obortis irrigavit, The Cup
which he held in his hand he watered with his tears, and so mingled his drink
with weeping.

In fine, Lib. 6. cap. 8.
This manner of Antiphone in the Church was says Socrates occasioned first by
a vision of Angels which Ignatius Bishop of Antioch that faithful servant of
Jesus Christ, who had been conversant with the Apostles, had presented unto
him, whom he heard lauding the blessed Trinity with Responsory Hymns, the
Pattern whereof he commended to that Church to be ever after observed and
practiced by them, Vnde and ad omnes Ecclesias ista traditio promanavit (says
the Historian) From whence also that order of singing went among all the
Churches.

Many more Instances might be produced to witness that our Liturgy is not of
such an upstart Original, as to derive its Extraction from Rome, since by her
Apostatizing she has changed her name into Babylon. But we must not extra
oleas vagari, and these few may suffice to convince gainsayers of their false
and uncharitable accusation of our Church Service, as that it is Superstitious
and Idolatrous, because Popish and Babylonish; which is so unjust a
calumniation that as it has been observed, There is not any one Protestant
Divine of any note or eminency even among the Reformers of Religion, who did
ever condemn our Service Book of the least point of Popery, but rather many
among them did highly commend it. Yea and Sir Edward Cook that Oracle of the
Law of England, unto whom we have reason for his Gravity, Courage, and
integrity in his place and calling (notwithstanding all the oblatrations of
Popish Rabshekah's against him) to give some heed more then ordinary, Such was
P.R. in his reckonings with Bp. Morton about Equivocation. The like is also a.
vouched by D. Ben. Carrier in hit letter to K. James, page 126.
He I say affirms with much confidence That Pope Pius Quintus wrote unto
Queen Elizabeth a letter about the tenth year of her Reign, offering to allow
and ratify the English Service Book, if she would accept it as from him, which
she refusing to do, he did excommunicate her, and by his Bull roared out an
Inhibition to all his party called Roman Catholics, that they should not from
thenceforth go to any of our Churches, while the said Service Book was read,
though to the hearing of our Sermons a Toleration was granted unto them.

To conclude, Since the Primitive Pattern is thought fit next to the holy
Scriptures to be a Standard for Church-Orders in the Service of God throughout
the Christian world, let our adversaries and friends too, but conform unto it
in such a manner as we have done since we separated from Rome, and I dare
boldly say, we shall have no just cause in the sight of God to charge one
another with Superstition.

And now that Imputation of Superstition upon the account of our Liturgy,
being, with as much brevity as the matter could well bear, yet sufficiently, if
not satisfactorily to our irrefragable opponents, removed, We should undertake
the vindication likewise of Episcopal Government, for that also is by our
Objectours brought under the same Censure. But concerning this neither need
there much be said, it being abundantly cleared of late against those that have
openly professed themselves enemies to that Government. We shall not here
repeat the Arguments that have been used in the behalf of Episcopacy, (such an
unsipid crambe must needs be nauseous, unacceptable, and to no purpose) let all
that are yet unsatisfied in that point read over and peruse his late Majesty's
Arguing about it with those Ministers that attended the Commissioners of Parl,
at the Treaty in the Isle of Wight, M. Marshall. M. Caryll M. Vines. M. Scaman
and if they be disposed to a temper of accepting Reason, they will find cause
enough to alter their judgment. Once, those very Ministers were so far
convinced thereby, that though they were very shy and unwilling to discover
their minds in a matter of so great and necessary consequence, as to give his
Majesty satisfaction in those three Quaeries which he propounded unto them
concerning Church Government, 1 Whether there be a certain Form of Government
left by Christ or his Apostles to be observed by all Christian Churches?
pretending that the whole volume of Ecclesiastical Polity was contained
therein, yet they could not but acknowledge the remarkable Learning of his
Reply, which was clothed, as they write, with a singular elegancy of style,
wishing that such a Pen in the hand of such Abilities might ever be employed in
a Subject worthy of it.

Yet because it will be expected that somewhat be here also said in answer to
this part of the beforementioned objection, Let us take into consideration the
main Argument that is used against Episcopacy, and with a refutation of it put
an end to this Controversy.

That which is chiefly insisted upon by our Anti-episcopal men is the Identity
of Denomination which they imagine the Scripture gives to Bishops and
Presbyters, 2 Whether it bind perpetually, or be upon occasion alterable in
whole or in part?
from whence they will infer the Identity of Office, viz. That Bishop and
Presbyter are not distinguishable in any part of their Authority, which the
Lord has given them for the edification of the Church. A principal instance
hereof they allege out of the Text of the Apostle, Tit. 1.5.7. (upon which for
brevities sake we will only fix, and which being cleared will help us to
interpret aright other places of Scripture of the like nature) The words are
these, 3 Whether that certain Form of Government be the Episcopal,
Pre^byterian, or some other differing from them both? Tit. 1 5.7.
For this cause left I thee in Crete that thou should set in order the things
that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, as I had appointed thee. For
a Bishop must be blameless, etc. In which place, say they, the Apostles
reasoning were altogether invalid and inconsequent, if Presbyter and Bishop
were not the same Office, as well as they have the same Name.

But how justly may it be here said Bernardus non videt omnia? These men that
pretend to know more of the sense of the holy Ghost in Scripture then others,
and are apt to censure all that are not of the same judgment with them, are not
so omniscient, but that their brethren who come after them, may discern
somewhat which they could not see. I shall therefore take the boldness to tell
them my poor judgment concerning that Scripture, hoping that I may make use of
my liberty, as they do of theirs. I know well it is no new Opinion that I am
about to encounter with; but because our late Writers do with a higher
confidence then ordinary seem to abound in their sense concerning this matter,
I shall endeavor their conviction.

And first I shall premise a Caution by the way, yielding in this Controversy
as much as may be consistent with Truth. I do not undertake to produce any
positive Precept from the holy Ghost in this place for the establishment of
Episcopacy in the Church: it is enough to show that a Divine Approbation is
given of it, in describing the qualification of the persons that are to
employed in such an Office distinct from that of a Presbyter, together with
their superiority over Presbyters, and how they are to exercise their power in
the several parts thereof, viz. Ordination and Jurisdiction. Which Divine
Approbation if we can here find, as I doubt not we shall, I hope it will be
acknowledge by all to be Tant-amount to a Divine Institution. And though it
have not any positive Appointment in Scripture, but is only glanced at in some
certain places; yet that should not create any scruple in the minds of any
about it, no more then some points of Faith, which we freely profess, are
scrupled by us, though we find them not expressly commanded in the written
Word. Is it meet for any to say unto God, What do thou? Who alas among us
has known the mind of the Lord? Or who has been his Counselor, to know
fully the reason why he does in such a manner issue out his Precepts? Are not
Clouds and thick Darkness set about the Pavilion of God? Let not silly man then
dare to remove them. It would far better become us to keep our distance, and to
be wise according to sobriety, then to arraign the pure word of Truth before
the bar of our corrupt reason; or to call the holy Spirit of God to account,
for not giving full satisfaction (forsooth) to our foolish expectation. What if
Christ, being willing to make his Regal Power the more known to the world,
would only give some small intimation of his will concerning this matter (as
he has done of sundry other things, which we need not here mention) to try the
spirits of men, whether they would thereby be subject unto him or no? It is
ordinary we know with the Princes of the earth to deal thus with their
Subjects, by a look or a glance of the eye, or by a word of the mouth though
uttered in an oblique way, to give notice of their further intentions, so to
search into and find out the Loyalty and ready affections of those about them:
And shall Jesus Christ be denied this liberty?

This being premised, let us now come to inquire out the meaning of the Apostle
in the afore-cited place, and see whether or no his words will allow of such an
Identity between Bishop and Presbyter, as has been commonly conceived; or
rather, try whether by deduction we can prove from thence the Divine Right of
Episcopacy, which is so much contradicted in these days, only let prejudice be
forborne till such time as we have put an end to this controversy.

First it cannot be denied that the Apostle writes to Titus, as to one, with
whom he had entrusted the sole inspection of that large and spacious Island (an
Island containing in it an hundred Cities called therefore Hecatompolis)
wherein his appointed work was, Not to gather a Church by converting the
inhabitants thereof from their Paganism and Judaisme to the faith of the
Gospel; but the manner of governing a Church which was already gathered, was
prescribed unto him: And this is by the Apostle branched out into two things,
viz Setting in order things that were amiss or wanting, or as it is rendered by
some (according to the original word here (...) correcting disorders, and
Ordaining Ministers, both which plainly argue Episcopal authority; for no
single Presbyter was ever allowed even by our Antiepiscopal men to manage such
a power: Now as according to the Apostles word, Heb. 7.7. the less is blessed
of the better, so must the correction of what is amiss, and the power of
conferring an Ecclesiastical office upon any be in a Superior also.

I know well what is usually objected here, viz. That Titus was an Evangelist,
that is, say some, an Assistant to the Apostle in his peregrinations among the
Churches, and therefore was endowed with an extraordinary power, insomuch that
his office was not capable of a Succession. My answer hereto is this, It is
granted that Titus for some time removed from place to place with the Apostle,
as the exigency of his work required, one while at Jerusalem, another while at
Crete, from thence to Nicopolis he is ordered by the Apostle to come unto him;
after that he is sent to Corinth, from whence he is expected at Treas, and met
with Paul in Macedonia, whence he is sent again to Corinth, etc. as some have
traced him in his several Stages: Yet nevertheless though he was such a
temporary Itinerant with the Apostle, and (if they will needs have it so)
though he executed the office of an Evangelist in so doing, It follows not
that his first Commission for Crete was thereby revoked, But that he did the
office of an Evangelist while he attended the Apostle, may be granted, as he
did while he was resident in Crete, that is, by laboring in the Word and
Doctrine. For after all that can be said, other Evangelist Titus never was, nor
can he ever be proved to be. Add hereunto, Neither can it be found that ever
Titus had such a peculiar charge given unto him in any of those places, where
he either accompanied the Apostle, or was employed by him, as he had in Crete:
For was he ever appointed to such a work either in Jerusalem, or in Corinth, or
in Macedonia, or in Dalmatia, or in any place else besides Crete? Surely it
cannot be imagined but that these places might need the care and vigilance of a
Titus as well as that to which he was consigned. If therefore such an office of
Government fixed upon one person, in one place, over a numerous Clergy, was
for the advancement of the Gospel, of such nacessity in the days of the
Apostles, who were not at all wanting in the discharge of their duty, without
all contradiction it is at least as necessary now, unless we will say that the
care of the Churches welfare was confined unto those Primitive Times, and not
to be extended to after-ages.

All which considered, It is more then probable that the Apostle did devolve a
power upon Titus, not of an Evangelist in the late upstart sense, but that
which is indeed Episcopal, superior to that of an ordinary Presbyter, and not
only so, but that this was to be a president for the Government of the
Churches to the end of the world.

Especially when we look upon the reason which the Apostle annexeth to the
seventh verse in these words, For a Bishop must be blameless, etc. Which for my
part I conceive to be the ground of the Apostles own act in leaving Titus at
Crete for the ends and purposes there premised (knowing him to be a fit
instrument for such a weighty employment) and not at all to show the
qualification of the persons whom he should ordain, as it has been commonly
understood. Such qualification the Apostle had described in the sixth verse,
saying, If any be blameless, that is, as a late Writer glosseth upon it,
approved by the testimony of the Church to be under no scandalous sin, The
husband of one wife, that is, One who lives not with a second wife after
putting away the first, Having faithful children, that is, such (if he have
any) as have all received the Faith. (For if he bring not up his own children
to be Christian, what hope is there that he will be fit to convert others?) Not
accused of riot or unruly, that is, who live temperately and regularly: Meaning
that Titus should not ordain any, but those that are thus qualified in respect
of their own virtuous living, and the Christian education of their children:
But now if he should again in the seventh verse repeat the same qualification
of unblameableness, as referring to the same persons, his words would border
too much upon an uncomely tautology, which was never incident to that spirit by
which he wrote.

As I said therefore before, so I say again, when the Apostle had declared how
the persons should be qualified, whom Titus should ordain, he proceeds to
give Titus himself a reason, implying withal the justification of his own Act,
why he left him in Crete about such an important business as to correct
disorders, and to ordain Elders. For says he, A Bishop (that is, one who must
be employed in these things) must be (as I have found thee to be) blameless as
the steward of God, not self-willed, etc. Otherwise with what face can he lay
hands upon any, looking for such qualifications as are just and fit for such
offices, if they be wanting in himself? Or how can he correct disorders in
others, if he himself be blameworthy? Knowing therefore thee to be in all
points fitted for this great work, I left thee in Crete, etc.

So that the intent of the Apostle here plainly is this, partly to satisfy
Titus concerning his leaving him there, as being for a purpose of an
extrordinary concernment; but chiefly to show the qualifications of the persons
to be employed in correcting and ordaining, upon whom he sets an honorable
mark of distinction for his works sake, calling him BISHOP, whereas the persons
or dained, he had before distinguished by a title proper to their office,
calling them Presbyters. This is one interpretation of the Apostles meaning,
which I humbly submit to the judgment of the Church. It is clear without any
wrest or ambiguity, and upon which it plainly follows that Bishop and Presbyter
are not one and the same, but distinct in their offices; and it is hereby as
plain likewise that the office of Bishop distinct from that of a Presbyter, is
of divine inslitution.

If this sense will not be allowed by our Opponents, as for my part I know not
why it should be rejected, Let them consider a second.

Whereas the Apostle says, that He left Titus in Crete to ordain Elders in
every City, showing in the sixth verse how they should be qualified, viz. That
they be blameless, etc. And thereupon alleges his reason in the seventh
verse, For a BISHOP must be blameless etc. He implies the great care that
Titus should have in ordaining Elders, because from among them BISHOPS were to
be chosen for the Government of the Churches, whom it concerned in regard of
their power and authority above all others to be blameless, as the Stewards of
God, not self-willed, etc. From whence I collect that the office of BISHOP and
Presbyter are not one and the same.

Some Objections possibly will be made against this interpretation also; but
let judicious and sober-minded men judge whether they be of such weight, so as
to carry the Apostles sense against it.

I confess great is the confidence that has been built upon this imaginary
Identity from whence has sprung much trouble to the Church of God: and none
have exceeded therein so much above measure, as those persons, who with a
strange kind of affectation called themselves by that Uncouth name of
Smectymnuus; For they led on with this Error, that BISHOP and Presbyter are
one and the same, take upon them to tax the Apostles reasoning as
inconsequential, and his demand as they call it, Unjust, unless he subscribe to
their opinion; Which censure they are likewise pleased to stretch out further
by a similitude according to their fancy: If a Chancellor, say they, in one of
our Universities should give order to his Vice Chancellor to admit none to the
degree of a Bachelour in arts, but such as were able to preach, or keep a
Divinity-Act, for Bachelours in Divinity must be so, what reason or equity were
in this? So if Paul leaving Titus in Crete should give order to him, not to
admit any to be an Elder, but one thus and thus qualified, because a Bishop
must be so, Had a Bishop been an Order or Calling distinct from or superior to
a Presbyter, and not the same, this had been no more rational or equal then the
former. Thus They. But the sense of the Apostle being rendered as before (which
for ought that I can see may very well be so) Their similitude, or somewhat
alike unto it, may be retorted upon them in this manner, If a Chancellor in
one of our Universities should give order to his Vice Chancellor to admit none
to the degree of a Bachelour in Divinity, but such as were learned in the
Scriptures, of good report, and of a grave and sober conversation, for Doctors
in Divinity (who are to be taken out of that lower degree) must be so, there
would be both reason and equity in such a Command; so when the Apostle gives
order to Titus not to admit any to be a Presbyter, but one that is blameless,
because a BISHOP who is to be chosen out of the Presbytery must be so, I hope
the Divine spirit of this Doctor gentium may pass without control, and not have
an imputation of irrationality any more put upon him, though it be affirmed (as
the truth is) that the office of a BISHOP is here distinguished by him from
that of a Presbyter, and made Superior unto it.

Let none now think of me that because of this my free manner of writing, I
have designed thereby to make way for a Polemical dispute with some persons of
note that are contrary minded in this case, they would mistake me much that
should judge so of me: I am not willing to be reckoned among the disputers of
this world, And I do confess my self the unfittest of many upon sundry accounts
for such an undertaking: besides there has been too much wrangling already
among us, Animosities have increased to the great decay of brotherly-Love in
the management of this controversy, occasioned chiefly by this pretended
Identity. Jam. 1.20.
But the wrath of man, says the Apostle, works not the Righteousness of God:
And what have all the Jehu-like sallies, and furious heats of the adversaries
of Episcopacy at length produced, What I say whereby Gods name may be honored,
or his Church edified? Is not the shame of their nakedness made bare to the
view of all men? Oh that God would now give repentance unto all those that are
conscious to themselves of a guilt herein.

Even those very persons that I mentioned before, who were the Ring leaders in
this difference, have reason sadly to lay it to heart, if they be yet living,
who had they but followed that Counsel themselves which they gave unto that
Reverend BISHOP with whom they did contend, their offense had not been so
great, viz. To have written more cautiously, and to have given less scope to
their luxuriant pen; for as they did let it run into causeless aggravations, it
did certainly bring too great a scandal upon Religion, and made good their
adversaries charge against them. But since things that are past cannot be
wholly recalled, Oh that they would give glory to God in confessing their
Error, and endeavor to repair again those breaches which their inadvertency
has made, by a public retractation. They are men that pretend much to
tenderness of Conscience, and therefore I presume are not of that proud
Cardinal's spirit, who confessed there was need enough to reform the abuses of
the Romish-Church, but he could not endure that Luther a poor beggarly Friar
(as he called him) should give the first Onset unto it: I hope better things of
these men, as to this case, in their capacity, and that they will not disdain
for this once to receive a word of Exhortation from one that is least esteemed
in the Church; because they know well, that the more inconsiderable the person
is, as to his outward estate, that gives them an advice of such concernment as
this, they may the more magnify God's name in a ready consenting thereunto.

But to return to our purpose, I have here offered my conceptions in the
expounding of this Scripture, which has been so much controverted of late,
humbly presenting them to the judgment of the Church, not knowing that ever yet
any expositour Ancient or Modern has rendered the sense of it so before. If the
glory of God may hereby be advanced, and the Churches peace promoted, I have my
aim, and it shall be the Crown of my rejoicing to my dying day. But as to the
Objection that has thus let out my thoughts so far toward this subject, I
will be confident that either of these interpretations that are here given,
will sooner be received by those that are wise and moderate, then our
adversaries wrest which has hitherto created so much trouble unto us.

The result will be this. Episcopal Government is warranted by the word of God,
therefore it is no superstition to have it reestablished in our Church, nor no
transgression of the Law of Christ, to yield subjection unto it.

And now to finish this matter: whereas there has been a Cry made, Away with
Superstition and Away with Idolatry, Away made, Away with Superstition and Away
with Idolatry, Away with Liturgy and Away with Bishops, we may clearly see by
what is here written, that this clamor is altogether causeless. Poor people
that are thus wosully deluded, the Lord pity them, and the Lord forgive them,
for they know not what they say. Much more reason surely is there to cry out
with a shout, Blessed be God for Liturgy and Episcopacy, whereby we are now
really and in truth delivered out of Babylon.

Admit that our Liturgy be found in the manner of some expressions and
translation of it, fit to be changed, for the reasons of expediency and
condescension, (wherein nevertheless we are for the churches sake to submit to
the wisdom of those in whose power it is, to order that change) yet as it is,
considering the woeful effects which the want of it has produced, and in regard
of the reasons before specified, it will well become all that fear God heartily
to rejoice at its Restoration.

Admit also (which yet without contradicting the Holy Ghost cannot be granted)
that Episcopacy were as bad in its own nature, as Schismatics would make it:
yet it must be acknowledged to be far better then that Anarchy in the Church,
which was projected by the late Sect of Over-turners for their own sinister
ends: But it is now manifest that this despised, persecuted Episcopacy, is not
an humane Ecclesiastical ordinance but Divine, and therefore it is that
Government under which we may have the greatest confidence that Religion may
flourish, and our souls may prosper. Especially when we look upon those grave
and reverend persons, who are preferred to that office and charge, and find
them, according to his gracious MAJESTY'S Declaration, Concerning
Ecclesiastical affairs.
men of learning, virtue and piety, such of whom the world is not worthy, if it
should still persist in enmity against them. I name none, for by their works
and by their sufferings you may know them. Only let that free and faithful
Speech uttered in a Sermon before his Majesty that now is (whom God long
preserve) at the time of his Coronation, show what manner of spirit a Bishop
may be of when he is employed in his Masters business in preaching the Gospel,
Apr. 23.1661.
which was this, Those persons (meaning Kings and Princes) that can be punished
by none but God, shall be sure to be most severely punished by God, if because
they can be punished by none but him, they presume the more to sin against him.

What a thunder clap is this to be rattled in the ears of a King when he is in
the height of his temporal glory? Let any now, or all of that sort of people,
who are apt to cry out Away with Bishops. but try a little their own spirits,
and see whether at any time they have been, or can be more faithful in speaking
of Gods testimonies in such an audience, and not be dismayed. I say therefore
again, Let not the people of this Nation any more be such enemies to the Gospel
of Christ, and their own souls, as to say Away with Liturgy and Away with
Episcopacy; rather we should say

Away with Schism and that virulency of spirit which has too much prevailed
upon us in these later times, against those things that are so consonant to the
holy Scriptures.

Away with pride, which we have experimentally found to be the Mother of
contention, and the forerunner of confusion, whose swellings of late with
scorn and contempt have superabounded, Her Children pretending to tread down
the pride of others, Pro. 13.10 Pro. 16.18
have with the faces of Sodom and Gomorrah done it with a greater pride.

Away with hypocrisy and dissembling holiness which has ever been accounted a
double iniquity. It is the best servant the Devil has, and shall have
answerable wages above all the rest. Mat. 24.51
This is that Crocodile that could weep and houle, when it had a design to
destroy and swallow us up quick, That Jezebel that could proclaim a fast when
she projected cruelty and oppression, That Pharisee that could make long
prayers, when poor Widows and Orphans houses were at the end of his devotion,
That Judas that would kiss and betray in the same breath, cry All hail, and in
the very instant smite under the fifth rib, therefore Away with it.

Away with self-seeking that has cramb'd the bags and filled the coffers of
covetous earthworms with the ruins of their Country.

Away with Heresy and Blasphemy, The one cuts the throat of truth, which
should be dearer unto us then our lives, And the other flies in the face of God
Almighty, and bids defiance against Heaven, Both which I dare say have a deeper
place in Hell then Superstition, yet both of them rode circuit about this
Nation, while it stood un-Churched by our divisions, and unkinged by our sins.

Away with that Image of Jealousy, that Anti-Catholick and Antichristian
Toleration, which for politic ends and purposes has cunningly yet most
profanely been cried up as the common interest of Sion that God takes care of,
as if an abomination of desolation were now become the Churches glory, And the
way to preserve truth in its purity were to blend it with Error. Had this
cursed project continued as it began, well might that Machiavellian principle
in time have passed for sound doctrine, viz. That all shall be saved in their
own Religion, though the Church of this Kingdom would (as it was once said)
sooner have become the Devils dancing-schole then Gods Temple. In the mean time
those poor Superstitious Malignants that durst show themselves in the behalf of
Liturgy and Episcopacy must be sure above others to be exempted from this
indulgence, and so left to perish without any remedy: doubtless this juggling
did rouse up the jealousy of the Almighty, and therefore it was high time to
send it packing.

Away with Irreverence, Profaness, Looseness, Sordidness in the Service of the
Holy and Dreadful God, which in the judgment of all that are truly pious is
far worse then that other extreme of overmuch Curiosity and Superstition, This
in some kind preserving supporting exalting Religion, The other desacing
suppressing, trampling upon it.

Finally, Away with Despising Dominion, and speaking evil of Dignities, Jud. v.
8.
which Saint Jude condemns v. 8. that is, as it is probable by the purport of
his Epistle, such dominion and such dignities as were then settled in the
Church, against which Diotrephes, and his crew would be still carping, or as it
is v. 19. Separate themselves. Upon which despisers the same Apostle
pronounces Gods vengeance, which has a measure reaching even to all those who
are this day guilty of the same sin; Jud. v 2.
Woe unto them, says he, they have gone in the way of Kain, persecuting Christ's
servants because they are preferred and accepted before them, even as Cain did
his brother Abel, And ran greedily after the error of Balaam for reward,
pouring out their curses upon the poor Church of God in hope to enrich
themselves by the spoils of it, And perish in the gain saying of Corah, Their
contempt of and insurrection against Church Governors, Bishop Andrews thus
argues, No man could perish in the gainsaying of Korah, under the Gospel
(which St. Jude says they may) if there were not a superiority in the Clergy;
for Korahs mutiny was because he might not be equal to Aaron, appointed his
superior by God. Number. 16.10.
shall suddenly bring certain ruin upon them, as the like sin did on Korah and
his Accomplices, therefore Away with it.

Lastly, Away with that evil spirit of Rebellion against Regal Authority which
eminently possessed that decemvirate of Traitors who have been justly executed
for their Treason; A Spirit that appeared like an Angel of Light, but proved as
black and ugly as any that came out of the bottomless pit; A Spirit that has
brought such a stench and smoke with it, that the Sun and the Air of the
Gospel is even darkened thereby: Yea, let all Ages be examined, there shall
never be found in any Nation such a black veil drawn over the face of true
Religion, since it was established in the World, as has been by the treachery
of those Persons that were fascinated with this Spirit: When a Christian
Prince, as well deserving of the Church as ever any that sat upon a throne, the
most able Protector of the Protestant Profession, has, under a pretense of
Religion, been barbarously murdered by them, and made a prey to their ambitious
lusts and impious designs. Yet these are the men whose example our objectours
propose as a pattern of courage and constancy for their imitation. If indeed to
encourage themselves in an evil matter, so as not to be terrified in the
prosecution of it by the approaches of death, and their appearance before the
great God, has made them fit to be exemplary to those that undertake to be
their Advocates, let them be canonized for Saints, whom the World not only
Christian but Heathen has hitherto abhorred as bloodthirsty and deceitful
men: But so long as the Word and Statute law of the most high God is in force,
and remains unretracted, it is not their constancy in their treason to the
death, nor their smooth language, how spiritual soever it seemed to be,
wherewith they left the World, that shall come up in remembrance before God at
the last day to their comfort, if they died in the justification of that guilt,
for which they were condemned. No unclean thing, says the Holy Ghost, must
enter into Heaven, And amongst all pollutions, that of blood upon the
conscience is in the sight of God most filthy.

True it is, they neglected the body (to use the Apostles word) but what
advantage will that be to them, if they likewise neglected the soul? History
will tell us, it is no news to hear of a resolved obstination and obsirmation
of mind in the suffering of death. There was Attilius Regulus, and Cato
Vticensis, and Anaxarchus, and many more, who for their Countries sake or some
such worldly respect, Tunde, tunde Anaxarchi fellem, non enim tundis Anaxarchum.
have been very prodigal of their lives, Some of them with admirable patience
contented to endure most exquisite torments: Of them we may say in the words of
our Savior, they had their reward, Their highest aim was to be reckoned good
Patriots, or men of valor, and accordingly has same fixed upon them a mark of
renown to this very day. But what reward shall be given unto these, who cannot
be reputed, by any that are rational, fit to triumph in their death upon any
honest account in the least degree* What I say shall be done unto such false
tongues and false hearts and hands full of blood? We must leave the
determination thereof to the righteous judge, who will render to every man
according to his doings.

We should not I confess have thus stepped aside to make this rehearsal of the
flagitious wickedness of such unworthy persons, whose memory will be odious to
all Generations, had it not been necessary to undeceive others who are prone to
applaud and justify them because of their seeming fortitude at the time of
their death. In which regard neither will it be amiss to minister a little
eye salve to such poor deluded people, that their eyes may be opened to see
their folly, and to convince them by some clear demonstrations of the falsehood
of those men, whom they so highly magnify.

I called it a Seeming Fortitude which these Traitors showed at their death,
and well I might, For notwithstanding all the vainglorious flourishes of
holiness and constant perseverance in their Cause, real it could not be:
Besides the failing of virtue in it, which is essential to all true Fortitude,
and which the very Heathen have judged to be inseparable from it, Plutarchus in
vita Coriolani.
insomuch that they conceived there could be no Virtue without Fortitude, nor
no Fortitude without Virtue. What constancy or Christian fortitude could be in
them, when after they perceived that the Law did take hold upon them to bring
them to their condign punishment, they would then all on a sudden pretend to an
undantedness of spirit in their justification, whereas some few days before,
while they were upon their Trial, the greatest number of them did sue for
mercy, pretending a claim to his Majesty's pardon, which must needs carry with
it an Implicit acknowledgment of guilt.

With what face could Axtell at his death make his boast of the Cause,
professing that if he had a thousand lives he could lay them all down for it,
when at his trial (as he said) he had endeavored to obtain the mercy and
favor of his Majesty? And that when some witnessed against him, that he did
beat the soldiers, because they did not at his bidding, cry out against the
King for justice and execution, he shifted it off thus, saying, That it was
more probable, because they did cry out for justice and execution, he did
therefore strike them, using these words, I Will Justice you, I Will Execution ye.

And what constancy did appear in Cook, the most zealous of them all, when the
words he uttered at his death contradicted his pleadings at his trial for his
life, as the book set forth with too partial a respect unto him does relate? At
his death he expressed himself in this manner, I am satisfied that the Cause
(that is, that which was maintained against the King) is the most noble and
glorious Cause that has been agitated for God and Christ since the Apostolical
times, Such a Cause that the Martyrs would gladly come again to suffer for, if
they might. And though too many object against me that of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4
15. Let none of you suffer as a murderer, yet I look upon it as a most noble
and high act of Justice that our Story can parallel, And so far as I had a hand
in it, never any one action in all my life comes to my mind with less regret
or trouble of conscience then that does. Now compare this with what was sworn
against him at his trial, and those excuses and evasions he then used to shift
off his Charge: One of the witnesses that appeared having been of his intimate
acquaintance affirmed upon oath, Mr. Natley.
That when he understood that the said Cock was employed as a Solicitour
against the King, he desired him with tears to consider the dangerous
consequences of such a proceeding, and to desist from it, whereunto his answer
was this, I acknowledge it is a very base business, but they put it upon me,
and I cannot avoid it. This being witnessed against him at his trial, he had
not so much confidence then as to deny it. Whereby it seems that one while he
accounted it a very base business, another while after he had gotten preferment
by it, it was the most Noble and Glorious Act that ever he did in all his life.
His Indictment also charging him with Malice, He replied, that he acted only
as a Counselor for his fee, so that it might be (as he said) called avaritia
not malitia, Covetousness, not Malice. And being told that he demanded
judgment against the King, He answered, His meaning was, judgment for his
acquittal. Yea further, when he was in Ireland, he did, as he said, put in a
Petition to the Honorable Commissioners that he might have the benefit of his
Majesty's Declaration at Breda: but when he saw his expectation therein to be
frustrated by the sentence of death upon him, the Case is altered, his Death
must be a Martyrdom, and the Cause for which he suffers, the most glorious
Cause that ever was agitated for God and Christ since the Apostolical times.
Just like some sturdy Beggar, who at first will seem to be very humble, pouring
out his prayers for such as will relieve him, but if he have not an alms given
him according to his asking, he presently falls to cursing and banning. Let now
the best friends this man had, judge whether he be to be commended for
constancy and fortitude in his Cause, or to be condemned for shameful shuffling
and halting in it, and consequently whether he be a fit pattern for their
imitation.

Had he and the rest of his fellows in iniquity but given testimony of so much
self-denial, as to have refused that Wealth and Preferment which they gained by
their busy actings in their Cause, and have kept themselves in that inferior
rank, wherein they were before they had brought so much mischief upon us, they
might possibly not have been so subject to censure as they were: but when they
coveted feilds and houses, and took them by violence, oppressed a man and his
house, even a man and his heritage, when they spoiled for themselves (as the
Psalmist speaks) and like wretched Ahab did kill, and also take possession,
yet in the mean time would be esteemed as the prime patrons of public liberty,
and in point of religion, Saints of the greatest magnitude in this Hemisphere
of the Church, Out upon it, It was as hateful Hypocrisy as ever was seen under
the Sun, And I doubt not but those that now justify it will have their eyes
open one day so to account of it.

Now therefore O foolish people and unwise that are so miserably deluded with
vain and empty shadows of holiness and constancy in a pretended cause of
Religion, be warned betimes, and as you love your souls, never let them enter
into the secret of these men, nor be baptized with the baptism that they were
baptized with. Away I say with that spirit of Rebellion and Sedition, of
Division and Delusion that has too long haunted this Nation, Let it from
henceforth never be entertained by us any more: And if we have not quite lost
that ancient genuine integrity and goodness of Nature that has been peculiar
to the natives of this Kingdom, we will all join hearts and hands together to
send it packing.

Consider what has been said, and the Lord give us a right understanding in
all things. But I hope it is now made evident who they be among us that come
nearest to the pattern here presented unto us in the text, in being still the
same, Whether those that have framed the objection which has caused this
dispute, or those against whom the objection is framed.

And now because this Text is in an especial manner intended for the
instruction and encouragement of the Hebrews to submit themselves to the
Scepter of Christ's government, I shall out of a friendly zeal for their
Conversion make another short Application unto them.

O ye that were once a people, and who shall again (we believe) be glorious
among the Nations, be at length informed aright concerning the Messiah, whom I
hope you will upon a perusal of what is here written (if you suffer not
prejudice to captivate your judgment) account to be this Jesus only, whom your
Fathers persecuted and we adore. Be wise I say, and receive instruction
concerning his Kingdom here upon earth: It is not to be nor ever shall be
conformed to the Kingdoms of this world in outward pomp and splendor, in
expectation whereof you have been hitherto woefully blinded. For look what
manner of power our Lord exercised over his people yesterday, the same does he
to day; because he is still (...) the same. And whatsoever alteration has
happened therein, as (it must be confessed) some there is, and ought to have
been upon those terms before mentioned, which yet, as we have said, argues no
inconstancy at all in himself, It is a change unto that which is more
spiritual, and so consequently is his Kingdom at a farther distance from the
world, then it was before. Was it not prophesied of him that he should be a man
of sorrows, broken with infirmities, Es. 53.3.
etc. And even where his coming is spoken of as a King, That though he be
just, and brings Salvation with him, yet he is lowly too, and should testify
it by the poverty of his appearance, not to be mounted in a Princely manner, as
the Kings of the earth are wont, but upon no better steed then a ragged Colt,
the foal of an ass, which surely speaks him to be one that would take no
great state upon him.

And has not this which is written been this day fulfilled by this (...) this
only He, Jesus Christ, as all else has been which was yesterday prophesied
of the Messiah? why then will you suffer your selves to be deceived by Satan
with a fruitles waiting for of I know not what glorious appearance of Another
yet to come? True it is we also look for another coming of this our great
Redeemer, and we now call upon one another daily, as you have been exhorted
heretofore, Repent for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand: But (as it is observed
by us from the Holy Prophets and Apostles) The Scepter will be changed, Bishop
King upon Jonas.
and the government wholly altered from what it was before, Then was the
Kingdom of Grace, now of Glory and Justice, Then was the saving, now the
judging of Souls, Then came it in the tongues of Men, but hereafter in the
trumpet of an Archangel, Then with tidings of great Joy to the whole World,
but that that is to come shall be with Terror and Amazement to all the
kindreds of the earth, Then with glory to God on high, and peace upon earth,
but hereafter with Vae Vae Vae habitatoribus terrae, Thrice woe to them that
dwell upon the earth; Then to gather the lost sheep of the house of Israel into
the sheepfold, now to sever the Sheep from the Goats; Then to embrace both Jew
and Gentile, now to divide between servant and Servant at the same Mill,
between man and wife in the same bed, between Jacob and Esau in the same womb,
and to pronounce the one of them blessed, and the other accursed. Repent
therefore we say unto you, for this kingdom of God is at hand, to deface all
kingdoms, to root up the nations, to consume the earth with her works, and the
people with their sins. This is the kingdom and no other that is now to be
looked for; and our Lord is gone to receive it for himself: But whosoever they
be that will not have him to reign over them whiles he swayeth the scepter of
his Grace, which is so despicable in the eye of the world, Luk 19.12.
when he returns he will have such Rebels and Traitors dragged into his
presence, and see them executed before him.

Oh then let not the Serpent beguile you any longer with the expectation of a
sools paradise, Rather come I beseech without any further delay, O ye children
of Israel, and children of Judah together, and seek the Lord your God, Jer.
5.4, 5,
who has promised to be found of you, Ask the way to Zion with your faces
thitherward (and we for our parts will give you the best directions we can)
Say, as it is written of you you shall say, Come let us join our selves to the
Lord in an everlasting Covenant, that shall never be forgotten. Too long alas
have you been unmindful of the Rock that begat you, and forgotten your God that
formed you: And will you still continue to be a froward Generation, children in
whom is no faith? Is the Lord Christ a stumbling block unto you, because of the
reproach that is cast upon his kingdom by a sinful world? A world that
accounts the things of the Spirit of God but foolishness, which things it
cannot know nor receive, because they are spiritually discerned; And will you
conform your selves to the guise of the world? You that have heretofore with so
much zeal declared your abhorrency of it, Will you now join in a confederacy
with it to your shame in that which is so contrary to the concurrent
predictions of all your Prophets concerning the kingdom of the Messiah? Some
of whom I confess do speak of his glory and great achievements, but that must
be understood in a spiritual sense, as that he will bring the world under the
power of his grace, And those that do resist it, he will by his Word and Spirit
most righteously condemn: Else how will you free those other Prophets from
falsehood and error, who speak as much of his poor, base, and contemptible
estate, under many miseries and afflictions, yea of his death and passion?

As for that dream of two Messiasses to come, the one Ben Joseph of the Tribe
of Ephraim, who is to suffer and undergo those indignities, the other Ben David
of the Tribe of Judah, who must redeem, deliver and restore Israel to their
former inheritance, and gather them together out of all the earth, who must
vanquish, subdue, and make tributary all Princes and Potentates of the world,
who never must dye, but live and reign everlastingly in temporal Glory, who
shall raise again the dead Israelites unto life, and amongst them Messiah Ben
Joseph; It is so sottish an absurdity, that I believe you your selves are
ashamed of it.

The Messiah whom you have expected is the Rock of Ages, the Alpha and Omega,
the beginning and the ending, Would you have him then to vary the form of his
Government, which he has always exercised over his Church in a spiritual way,
to a worldly compliancy with the Princes of the earth? What a shameful
inconstancy would this be, unsuitable to his Honor, and no whit conducible to
the work, the great work of Messiah in destroying the kingdom of Satan? Yea
what fruit would thereby redound unto you in carrying you safely through your
pilgrimage here that you might sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the
kingdom of God? For us, We profess this to be our earnest desire in our own
behalf, and if you be indeed the children of Abraham, it would be your ambition
to obtain it rather then any earthly glory. Did the Lord ever in all the time
of yesterday exercise a temporal Power over the Kings and Princes of the earth?
Where was his Throne erected? What metal was his Crown made of? When Pharaoh
kept his people in Egypt, What armies of men did he muster up for their
deliverance? When Amal^k came out against them, Moses his Deputy betakes
himself to prayer, whilst Joshua fights the Lords battles: But what need the
one pray, and the other fight, if the Lord himself who is the Lord of Hosts,
not only of his subjects, but of his enemies too, was to have exercised such a
Power? And how ill did the Lord take it of your forefathers, when they thus
mutinied against him, saying, Nay but we will have a King over us, 1 Samuel 8.7.
that we also may be like unto other nations? They have, says he, rejected me
that I should not reign over them, meaning in his spiritual mediatory Power, as
I have before observed, which though he still in great mercy continued as
formerly, during that regal Government, which they then chose, and which should
in time have been mercifully established among them, had they not been so
precipitant in requiring it, yet was his Spirit grieved at that their rebellion
against him. Oh know for certain, It is a far greater rebellion against the
Lord your God that you are this day guilty of, In that you do so causelessly out
of a vain affectation of conformity to other nations, unwarranted by Moses and
the Prophets, reject the Anointed of the most high God, that he should not be
your King, according to that form of Government, which is devolved upon him by
the Father.

But Non obstante your obstinacy against him, hitherto he has reigned, and
reign he will still, as he has done, Malgre all the gates of hell: He is the
breath of our nosthrils, and the life of our souls; under his shadow we do live
and rejoice, yea and we will rejoice more and more. And as for you, because of
your unkind refusal of him, has not this our Lord, according to his oath,
hitherto with a mighty hand, Ezekiel. 20.33.
and stretched-out arm, and fury poured out ruled over you? Whence otherwise
has it come to pass that so deep a stain has been brought upon all your
excellency, and that your glory is thus eclipsed? That you are scattered over
the world, and whereas you were the head, you are now become the tail of all
nations, as the Lord once threatened you? Which being so, Whether then it be
better to be under his grace, or under his wrath, judge ye. There is no
avoiding it, will ye, nill ye, one way or other you shall ever be subdued unto
him, either as children or as captives, as subjects or as slaves: for the Lord
has sworn by himself (the greatest oath that ever was heard of) the word is
gone out of his mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, That unto him
every knee shall bow, Esa. 45.23.
every tongue shall swear, Esa. 45.23. And if ever demonstrations were found
among the creatures for the confirmation of any thing, there have been such
that are most convincing in this matter of subjecting the world to the
irresistible power of Jesus, according to this oath.

That these Oracles of the Heathen were struck dumb at that time, the writings
of the Heathen do sufficiently witness.
Two memorable occurrents I shall mention in order hereunto that are past all
gainsaying. First at his birth the Oracles of the Heathen testified of him by
their silence, not daring once to peep or mutter out an answer to their
importunate suppliants, after that this (...), the Oracle of the Living God
once appeared.

Secondly at his death, The Sun in the firmament did also bear witness unto
him, by a total eclipsing of his light to the amazement of the world far and
near. In Egypt it was seen and admired by Dionysius Areopagita, as appears in
his Epistle to Polycarp, wherein he desires Polycarp to enquire of one
Apolloohanes (who would not it seems be reclaimed from his Gentilisme) what he
thought of that eclipse which he saw when he was with him at Heliopolis a city
in Egypt, at the time of our Saviors suffering, when he could not but
acknowledge that that with other remarkable wonders, which they took notice of
together, were (...), vicissitudes or changes of Divine works. Which Dionysius
being at that time also a Heathen and much astonished at the unnaturalness of
the said eclipse, cried out, as it is reported of him, (...), etc. Either the
Deity suffers, or has sympathy with that which suffers, or the whole world
is ready to be dissolved: Adding withal, Deus ignotus in carne patitur,
ideoque Vniversum hisce tenebris obscuratur and concutitur; that is, An unknown
God suffers at this time in the flesh, which makes the world to shake under
this obscurity. But afterward when the Apostle Saint Paul came to Athens, and
affirmed Jesus Christ to be the unknown God at whose death the Sun was so
obscured, the said Dionysius hearing him, became a convert to the Christian
Faith, and all his life time after, an eminent servant to Jesus Christ.

These reports possibly you will not regard, howsoever the truth of the eclipse
cannot be questioned by you, which may let in so much light upon you to make
you believe that somewhat extraordinary was then acted in the world, which God
would have the world to take special notice of.

And now to conclude, What is it (O ye miserably blinded people) that you stick
at? If the Lord Jesus Christ the Son of the Blessed Virgin, our Lord and our
God, has not exactly fulfilled all that was Prophesied of the Messiah, If he
has not done the works that no other man did, or can do, If you have not
hitherto smarted enough under that heavy Curse, which your fathers brought upon
you, when they crucified the Lord Jesus, crying out, His blood be upon us and
our children, go on then still in your pertinacy, deny him to be the Lord that
bought you, look for another that can do more for you, then he has done: For
us, in the mean time, we will bewail before the Lord your woeful blindeness and
hardness of heart; and though we cannot converse with you as brethren, because
of your perverseness in your present infidelity, yet we will pity you, as those
who were once a people, in whom the Lord delighted, yea as those of whom we
have good hope upon the return of your Captivity, to see you made the glory of
Nations, a Praise in the earth: Which hope as we may be confident it will not
fail us, in the time and season which the Father has put in his own Power, so
may the consideration of those grounds and reasons hereafter specified, whereon
this hope is built, in time prevail with you, to bethink your selves of your
long estrangement from your God, and to quicken your return unto him.

Lastly, Since it is so that Jesus Christ is the Same to day which he was
yesterday, then have the Churches of the Gentiles good reason to rejoice in
that they, submitting themselves to Christ's yoke, may be sure that the same
Divine Love which was of old manifested to the Jews is in as full measure
according to their capacity extended toward them. What high account was made
of Israel heretofore, the holy Scripture does every where tell us; How God
entered into a Covenant with them, was nigh unto them in all that they called
upon him for, esteemed them his Inheritance, his Vineyard, his peculiar
Treasure, when all other Nations were rejected as unclean, 1 Cor. 9.11.
proclaimed Outlaws, and cast forth as dogs, not suffered to intermeddle with
the childrens Privilege: But now since the Holy Ghost has not only told us,
that Jesus Christ the messenger of this Covenant, the parchaser of this
Inheritance, the planter of this Vineyard, the great Lord Keeper of this
Treasury has broken down the wall of Partition that was between Jews and
Gentiles, Ephesians. 2.14.
making both one, but that he is also the Same to day which he was yesterday,
as able now to save them to the uttermost whosoever they be that come unto God
by him, and as ready to do the will of the Father, in being a Light to lighten
the Gentiles (according to the Prophecies of old) as to be the glory of his
people Israel, we may therefore be confident in our approaches before the Lord,
looking for mercy and grace to help in time of need, being as much interessed
in all the happy Privileges of the everlasting Covenant of Promise, as ever
were the Jews; there is no difference now, says the Apostle, between the Jew
and the Greek, for the same Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon him,
For whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved: Now is the
true heavenly sound gone into all lands, the Gospel preached to every creature,
which the Apostles carried about when they had their Commission given them to
go into all the world, their Line reached to the ends of the earth, Psalm. 19 4,
5.
insomuch that the Orb or Tabernacle of the Sun (so the Divine Spirit of the
Psalmist is interpreted by the Apostle) was bounded within the limits of their
Commission. Romans 10.18.
Saint Paul had his circuit from Jerusalem to Spain, and he made it his
business to preach the Gospel, not where Christ was named, Romans 15.20, 24.
lest he should build upon another man's foundation; So that if one of these
Itinerants could run over so great a part of the world, we may well suppose
that the other twelve might with ease divide the rest of the world among them.

And now what alas were we mad and desperate Idolaters, that God should bring
us hitherto? That the Lord should say to us, who were not his people, You are
my people; and that we should say, O Lord thou art our God? O what a mercy is
it, that we the poor, and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind, Mat. 22.9.
Luke 14.21, 23.
who abode in the streets and lanes of the City, yea that we who wandered about
in the highways and amongst the hedges, should be called to the Wedding-Feast
of the King of heaven? That unto us who sat in darkness and dwelt in the
region and shadow of death Light should spring up? Let therefore the name of
the Lord be magnified by us poor sinners the Gentiles (as the Prophet soretold
it should) from the rising of the Sun, Mal. 1.11.
unto the going down of the same. And since we are through grace become
children of Sion, let us take the liberty here to sing one of the Songs of
Sion, so far as we may be concerned therein.

O give Thanks unto the Lord, for he is Good,
For his mercy endures for ever,
O give Thanks unto the God of gods,
For his mercy endures for ever,
O give Thanks unto the Lord of lords,
For his mercy endures for ever,
To Him who alone does great wonders,
For his mercy endures for ever,
Who remembered us in our low estate,
For his mercy endures for ever,
O give Thanks unto the God of heaven,
For his mercy endures for ever.
Let the Redeemed of the Lord among the Gentiles say so, whom he has redeemed
from the hand of the enemy, and gathered them out of all lands, from the East,
and from the West, from the North, and from the South, not only to dwell in
the house of the Lord here, and to see his goodness in the land of the Living,
but to sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of God to all
Eternity.

And let us of this Nation among the rest and above the rest, as it is our
duty, give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name, acknowledging his great
mercy, in that his unchangeable love has had an extraordinary measure reaching
even first unto us. Oh how has the Lord been pleased to send his Gospel upon
the wing unto this Nation? So wonderfully here prevailing, that England has
had this honor in an eminent manner to be the firstborn of grace among the
Nations? Here reigned the first Christian King that ever was in the world, King
Lucius.
who submitted to the Law of Christ, confirming it by a civil sanction; From
hence went the first Christian Emperor that put an end to the bloody
persecutions of the primitive Christians, Constantine.
yea and after the general defection from the purity of the faith, made by the
Romish Church, which like the tail of the Dragon, threw down to the earth a
great part of the Stars of Heaven, Here the Reformation of the Christian
Religion began first to be established by a Law, by the first King that ever
cast off the yoke of that Antichristian Usurper; King Henry the 8.
Wherein whether his design was to promote any sinister interest of his own, as
some imagine, or to advance the Kingdom of Christ, is not much material for us
to know, The arm of the Almighty has hitherto been stretched out, for the
preservation thereof, counter-working all the Machinations of Hell, which have
been and still are upon the Devil's forge against it. Rejoice therefore in the
Lord O England, and again I say rejoice.

But as it is our bounden duty to ascribe unto the Lord the glory of this
mercy, and to rejoice that we are no more strangers and forreiners, as the
Apostle tells the Ephesians, but fellow-citizens with the Saints, Ephesians. 2.19.
that is, the Jews, and of the household of God. So we cannot but abhor the
treachery of those false brethren among us, called Anabaptists, who like a
brood of Vipers would if it lay in their power (but that Gods mercy toward us,
triumphs over their falsehood) disfranchise us of our liberties in the house of
our God, and rob us of those privileges wherein the Lord Jesus Christ has
made us free, giving us therein equal right with his Israel that was before us,
because he is still the Same.

I might instance in sundry of their Antichristian tenants tending hereunto,
But for brevities sake will make mention only of one, that is, their
Antipaedobaptisme, not allowing the Infants of Believers to be admitted into
the household of faith by the Sacrament of Baptism.

It is not my purpose here to dispute this point at large, being out of my way;
enough has been written of it already. And it has been found by experience to
be a toylsome task to run the wilde-goose chase (as a learned divine now with
God once phrased it) after a well breathed Opinionist, they delight in
Vitilitigation, Mr. Nath. Ward.
It is an itch, as he said, that loves a life to be scrubb'd, they desire not
satisfaction, but satisdiction, whereof themselves must be judges. I shall not
therefore say much to this quarelsome people: Let them consider how they will
answer the Apostle here who avoucheth Jesus Christ to be thee Same to day which
he was yesterday. Certainly if the infants of the Jews were by virtue of
Christ's mediatory office to be received into the bosom of the Church, and
distinguished from those that were without by a Solemn Sacrament of initiation,
but the infants of Christian parents, to whom belongs the Kingdom of God, as
as well as to the Jews before, must not be allowed to partake of a like
privilege, but be reckoned still as dogs (as the Scripture calls all that are
without) Jesus Christ is not the Same according to the Apostles word, Neither
is his office now of so much use unto his Church, as it has been formerly; Of
such blasphemy as this, not to be mentioned without horror, must this cursed
error be the foundation.

But let me ask of these deceivers, How came it to pass that Christ has not
obtained this privilege for our Infants, as well as he did for the Jews,
seeing God is not now the God of the Jews only, but of the Gentiles also?
Surely it must be either because he would not, or because he could not; To say
he would not, does plainly demonstrate his love of us to be less, then it was
of the Jews, which agrees not with that abundant grace that has been now
revealed in the time of the Gospel; To say he could not, contradicts that
universal power which the father had given unto him in heaven and in Earth; The
exercise of which power he would first have to be manifested in discipling
whole Nations of the Gentiles, Matt. 28.18, 19.
receiving them into Covenant by the Sacrament of Baptism, as the Jews were by
the Sacrament of Circumcision. Where the word (Nation) in order to the Gentiles
must without controversy be taken in the same sense, as it was with a
reference unto the Jews; for as the Nation of the Jews was made up of all sorts
and sexes, old and young, so in like manner are the Nations of the Gentiles:
And because his commission, which he then gave unto his Apostles, was not
formed according to the erroneous fancy of these deluded people, who in effect
render it thus, Go and Disciple all men, But thus, Go and Disciple all Nations,
baptising them in the name, etc. And Children being a part of the Nations, we
may conclude without any hesitancy that the intent and purpose of the Lord in
this commission to his Apostles was, that they should wheresoever they came,
baptize the Children as well as the Parents. And seeing he came to break down
the wall of partition that was between Jews and Gentiles, which was actually
done in the execution of this Commission, It is not to be imagined that he
would by it set up a partition wall between Parents and their Children, so as
that they should be at as great a distance the one from the other in point of
eternal Salvation, as Heaven is from Hell; A thing he never did in all the Ages
before, and undoubtedly whatsoever these Dreamers may blasphemously prate
against him, He has not done it now because he is still the Same.

I will not dwell any longer upon the Conviction of these obstinate people,
least the more reason be showed unto them out of the Scripture to lead them
into the way of truth, they be thereby, according to their usual wont, the more
hardened in their error: The Lord open their eyes that they may see betimes,
what dishonor they bring unto Jesus Christ in the diminution of his power by
their frantic Opinions. What disturbance they create unto his Church and
consequently what hazard they run, notwithstanding their conceited assurance,
of their own everlasting Salvation.

We have now done with this second particular, viz. Jesus Christ is (...) The
Same to day which he was yesterday, that is, The Same to his Church in the time
of the gospel, which he was in the time both before and under the Law.

CHAP. III. Shows how JESUS CHRIST shall continue to be (...) the Same for
ever Unto his Church.
WE should now according to our prescribed method come to speak of the third
course or computation of time here mentioned in the Text, and of that which is
predicated of it, viz. (...), Jesus Christ the Same, or the only He for ever.

But to avoid Prolixity which has already spun out the former parts into a
greater length then was intended, we shall not distinguish this into several
propositions, as has been done with those before: Neither indeed can we be
able to speak of what shall come upon the Church in the continuation of this
day of the Gospel to the end of the world: Only this we can say, because the
Holy Ghost witnesses it, That persecutions and Afflictions do abide it, but
withal that Jesus Christ will be (...) unto it, which he ever has been.
Hereupon therefore shall we fix the short remainder of our discourse deriving
some inferences from it for the further edification of those that take pleasure
in beholding the immutability of the Lord Jesus. Observe then.

In the midst of all the various changes and chances that may come upon the
Church to the end of the world Jesus Christ will be unto it still, The Same.

No variableness nor shadow of turning shall ever be found in him, either in
his Mediation with the Father, or in the dispensation of his power among his
people, But he will be Semper idem, Always the Same.

Now herein we can but speak of the exercise of Christ's Mediatory office, as we
have already done, and therefore it will be needless to spend many words about
it. As he began, so he will continue to be the Prophet, Priest and King of his
Church. The same word of truth, which he has revealed, he will still continue,
no addition unto it, or diminution from it will he ever suffer, his Gospel is
an everlasting Gospel, Rev. 14.6. 1 Pet. 1.25
His word abides for ever, And if an Angel from Heaven should come and preach
any other, we must (therefore much more will he) ho'd him accursed. Gal. 1.8.
He is a Priest for ever, according to the oath of God, not to be retracted,
says the Prophet, Has an unchangeable Priesthood says the Apostle. Ps.
110.4 Heb. 7.24.
A Priest established in his Dignity as master and Lord, by virtue of his
Sonship, not like unto the servants the Priests of Aaron's order. Who, when
they entered into the most Holy place, were not there to sit, but otherwise to
execute their office, according to the order prescribed unto them by Moses,
Heb. 10 11
They stood (as became servants (says the Apostle) ministering before the Lord.
But Jesus Christ when he had offered one Sacrifice for sins for ever, and
according to the Law entered into the holy place to finish the Atonement, Sat
down on the right hand of God, noting the perpetuity of his office, according
to the dignity of his person, and that he ever lives (which was not possible
for any other to do) to make intercession. Dan. 7.14. Match. 4.7.
His Throne in like manner is for ever and ever, His Kingdom an everlasting
Kingdom, and his Dominion endures throughout all Generations.

No Salvation then to be expected for ever, Act 4.12.
but only by him, No other Name under Heaven given among men from the
beginning of the world to the end of it, whereby we must be saved; For before
him (as he says of himself) there was no God formed, Es. 43 10
or rather, as it may be rendered, nothing formed of God, for any such purpose,
as to be a Savior, Ec. 2.12. Ps. 145.11 12.
neither shall there be after him. What alas can the man do that comes after
the King? What? He may speak of the glory of his Kingdom, and talk of his
power, to make known to the Sons of men his mighty acts, and the glorious
Majesty of his Kingdom; But to imitate him in his power and his mighty Acts, or
to compare with him in the Majesty of his Kingdom, would not only be a
contempt cast upon his Crown and Dignity, but an utter impossibility, and a
mere vanity for men or angels to attempt it: They poor Creatures being
infinitely unfit and unworthy, must let that alone for ever, and they that will
expect it of them will find it to be folly and shame unto them.

I might here enter into a large discourse upon this point, and open a great
door and effectual for the conviction of sundry enemies of Jesus Christ, who by
their Opinions and practices do in effect deny him to be (...), the Same for
ever: But I forbear for the present, being willing to draw toward a
Conclusion: Some short inferences notwithstanding we shall derive from hence
that may be of use unto us.

And first we may here be ascertained concerning the perpetuity of the Church
to the end of the World. For because Christ will be the Same for ever, the
Church must continue to be for ever also. As the Apostle speaks of the Man and
the Woman, Neither is the Man without the Woman, nor the Woman without the Man
in the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.11.
So may we say of Christ and his Church, neither can the Church be without
Christ, nor Christ (as Mediator) be without the Church; Relatorum uno posito
ponitur and alterum, nec est relatio nisi inter ea quae sunt actu. Objection.
They are like Hippocrates Twins, If one lives, the other cannot die, If one
die, the other cannot live: what therefore Christ promised to his Disciples Joh.
14.19. He will surely make good unto his Church to the end, Because I live, ye
shall live also.

But do we not see the Church in a consumptive estate, groaning and panting
under a most heavy cross, melting her self into tears, yea ready even to give
up the Ghost?

We may be deceived, when we think it is at a low ebb, it may be at that very
instant in a most flourishing Condition. What it loses in outward prosperity,
it may gain in spiritual growth. We must not bound our conceits of the Church
and Kingdom of Christ, according to the models of the Kingdoms of this World.
For though this machina munai, this great engine, frame and structure, may
decrease and diminish in its strength and beauty (as the opinion of some is) by
reason, of the clashings and shakings that happen among the parts thereof, till
that which is now (...) a specious and spacious ornament be made a (...), a
confused lump again; Yet nevertheless so long as Jesus Christ will for ever be
the Same, the persecutions and troubles that the Churches lie under, yea the
differences and contentions that arise amongst themselves shall contrary to
their nature tend to their advantage. And as poison when it is corrected by the
skill of the Physician works more effectually for the health of a sick patient
then a wholesome herb, so certainly shall the Church grow better by her
troubles, then if she had been all this while settled in a most peaceable
estate.

Though the Church be afflicted, and the enemies thereof may seem to prosper,
Aus. 2.
yet let us nor conclude rashly thereupon that Christ has forsaken her, and
that she shall unavoidably perish. Let David lead you a little into the
Sanctuary, Ps. 73.17.18.
then you will find slippery places are set for these prosperous enemies (And
their feet shall slide in due time) But the Church is built upon a rock, Deuteronomy.
32.35.
the rock of Ages, and when all the foundations of the earth are out of course,
we shall find the foundation of the Lord will stand sure, because JESUS CHRIST
abides for ever.

Secondly, As we have assurance given us here of the perpetuity of the
Catholic Church, notwithstanding all her divisions within her, and her
persecutions from without; so we may find a remedy closeed up in the rich
Cabinet of this Text, which will be sufficient (if well applied) to cure the
distempers of our particular Churches. Those distempers I say which have been
and still are occasioned by our quarrelling about setting up Jesus Christ in
his Throne, and the establishment of his Kingdom amongst us, according to his
own rule and order. For the healing whereof, and to persuade to a Brotherly
composure therein, What can be more prevalent then this, viz. Jesus Christ is
the Same for ever?

We all pretend to look unto JESUS, and it is indeed our duty to eye him in all
the dispensations of his power and providence toward his Church, that we may
not vary from that course and order, wherein he has always trained up his
people, nor be led aside by newfangled devices, either of our own or others.
But let us consider, If he be Semper idem, always the Same, How is it that we
are thus divided about him? What? Shall the rule and Canon of our Union be
constant and perpetual, and shall we be still to seek for a way of uniting? Let
dissenting Brethren but lay aside Animosities and prejudices wherewith they
have so easily been beset, and follow the track and foot-sleps of the Lord
Jesus, and we shall quickly see an end of all our differences. 2 Samuel 20 18.
They were wont to say in old time (said that Mother in Israel) They shall
surely ask counsel at Abel, and so they ended the matter; Now also according to
the word of the Holy Ghost in Scripture, Let us stand in the ways, and see and
ask for the old paths, where is the good way? The way wherein the Lord himself
has walked, and let us walk therein, and we shall find rest for our souls;
We shall see Salvation is near unto us, yea nearer then we are aware, and that
Glory does dwell in our Land.

The voice of the Oracle which would guide us into the good way; speaks in
this manner, Jesus Christ is the Same yesterday, to day and for ever; Which in
effect tells us, our foundation is sure and steadfast, and our cornerstone, as
it has hitherto brought on the building into an excellent frame on the one
side, in the Ages that are past, so it would also do the like on the other, in
these our days, and the Ages that are to come, if there were but such a
conformity held with it, as there has been in former times. True it is the
Word written is an infallible rule for the guiding of us in matters of Faith,
from which we are not to digress, It is so likewise in all things else that
concern the Worship of God, and the public good of the Church, so far as it
does lead and direct us therein; but unless we will say that Christ has
deserted his Church ever since he gave a being unto it, we must avow his
continued course and practice in the ordering of it (which I hope none will say
is contrary to what he has written) to be a warrant also of our Subjection
thereto. What then is that good way? Not surely the way of Division and
Separation, which tends to Confusion; for God is not the Author thereof,
neither will he allow of it in any of the Churches of the Saints: but of Unity
and Order, that all such as make profession of the Gospel may be of one accord,
and as they stand in their several relations to the Church wherein the wisdom
of God and his good Providence has placed them, to bear up, as with one
shoulder, the glory of Christ's Name against sin, the World, and the Devil.

Look now unto JESUS. First, It has been his constant design to bring all
those who believe in him into a Brotherly fellowship one with another, not
only to unite them in several Societies, as some would have it, but to gather
those Societies into one Body; And the more there is of this Union among thern
under Himself, who is the sole head of the Body (which Dignity none can
challenge (if it be but by way of Resemblance) without Antichristian
Usurpation, and a presumptuous encroachment upon him) it has ever been most
agreeable to his mind and will. This I say has been the product of his eternal
wisdom for the establishment of his Kingdom in the midst of the Nations.

Secondly, It has always been his work to settle a Government in his Church
for the well being of it, that peace and love might be preserved amongst his
people, punishments inflicted upon the unpeaceable and unruly, and that all
things, especially in the duties of his public worship and service might be
done (according to the variety of emergencies arising in several Nations and
Ages) Decently and in order (For that is decent and orderly in one place and
time, which by experience proves to be uncomely and disorderly in another)
Which government being de facto to say nothing of it here de jure (enough has
been said of that before) continued from the beginning, he has been pleased to
bless and prosper with a most happy success, to the enlargement of his Kingdom,
and the propagation of his Gospel: Which we may well presume he would not have
done in so long a succession of time, and so many vicissitudes of troubles and
deliverances that have come upon his Church, if it had not been according to
his mind; but since it is so, and the Apostle here telling us, that he is the
Same for ever, we may probably conclude that as he has not left his Church
without a care of her well-being in this particular, so he will not digress
from it, but that such a Government so continued and made successful by him
shall be perpetuated, as owned by him, to the end of the world.

Let us then I say again look unto Jesus, and see his goings in his Sanctuary
in the midst of his people from the beginning, Let us see also and acknowledge
his Immutability therein; for the Eternity of Israel is not as man that he
should lie, or the son of man that he should repent: As in all other things
that he has undertaken for the advancement of his kingdom, so undoubtedly in
this he will be the Same for ever. If therefore this has been his work and
design, to establish unity and order in his Church, and to settle and prosper
this very government in it, which is this day so much contradicted, will it
become those that pretend to have an interest in him to walk contrary to him?
Or will he cease to be the Same in the carrying on of his own work, in his good
old way, to please those unquiet people that will never be satisfied, but make
the world believe they do him the greatest service, when they do what they can
to hinder his work?

What though some men's Tongues and pens run riot, crying out still for liberty,
Liberty of Conscience (not considering that to serve the Lord in a cheerful
submission to his sweet yoke, wherewith he has always kept his Church in good
order, is perfect freedom; nor being willing to know nor understand that
Conscientia in tantum libera in quantum ab errore liberata, Conscience is so
far free, as it is freed from error) Yet we may be sure Jesus Christ will
still keep on his course, because he is the Same for ever. And let Conscience
it self (for which all this clamor is made) wheresoever it is not enthralled
to lust or error, judge in this case, Whether it be a liberty which Christ
has purchased for those that believe in him, to cross him in his work, which
he has hitherto wrought for the good of his Church. I speak not here of what
he has permitted a long time for the trial of his people, and the advancement
of his truth* (as being able to bring good out of evil) but what he has
always acted, as the King of his Church, and which the very nature of his
office did indeed require should be done; For any to quarrel at his actings,
and to call in question all that he has hitherto done in that kind, as if he
had been ever since his ascension only a spectatour of his Church, to see how
well she could shift for her self in her own preservation, without the exercise
of his power by settling a government in her, what is this but to tax him with
negligence in his office, and to make him a Savior but in part, which in
effect is to be none at all?

What though there be some things that are circumstantial to this Government,
and some Ceremonies in divine worship that have not an immediate stamp of
Divine authority upon them to make them current (which will never be found in
the whole institute and order of any Church) should we therefore reject all
that is in them good and warrantable? Because people have not their desire in
things indifferent, should they not consent to that which is necessary for the
honor of Christ, and the welfare of his Church? Two things that should be
dearer to us then our lives, much more are they to be preferred before a
self-satisfaction in some scrupulous niceties, the bare using, 1 Cor. 8.8.
or not using whereof (as the Apostle speaks of meat) commends us not to God.
But alas these things are not regarded as they ought to be Men's novel
apprehensions of the Kingdom of Christ, and their particular interests therein
must counter-ballance all the public concernments of Christ and his Church.

But O ye poor deluded people consider, Has not the Lord Jesus Christ been
already too much dishonored by your needless dissentions, but that you will
have him to dishonor himself by varying from his wonted course in the ordering
of his Church? Has not the peace of his poor Church been too much disturbed,
and Christian Charity too much violated heretofore in the late times of
Schism, Mr. Vines.
when (as one of the prime Leaders amongst you said then too truly) It was
almost Popery to speak of it? This was indeed the old mark (for by this shall
all men know that ye are my Disciples, said Christ, if ye love one another)
But the truth is, it was almost worn out, and instead thereof Infelix Lolium,
unhappy Feuds, Quarrels, Divisions, Rents abounded: What fruit had you then in
those things whereof you have been ashamed, that you will now return unto them
again, rather then to join with your Brethren in things that are indifferent?

It was a sweet and Christian resolution of devour Saint Bernard, when he saw
differences arise that might cause a breach between him and others with whom he
had formerly held a brotherly correspondency, He wrote unto them in these
Words, Adharebo vobis etsi nolitis, adharebo vobis et si nolim ipse, Epi. 252.
I will be of you though you be unwilling, I will be of you, though I be
unwilling my self. O if there were in you brethren but this meekness of wisdom
to bear and forbear, and such a zeal for the public peace, which you are bound
in Conscience to promote, it would surely more adorn your Christian Profession,
then all your cariering with Spear in Rest against the established Orders of
the Church in Polemical argutations.

If it be so that you have any peculiar privilege granted unto you from heaven
above others, to go in untrodden paths by your selves, to disavow that order
and government under which the Church has flourished in former times, and to
dissolve all ancient bonds of unity and Christian society in the public
worshipping of our God (as some by their violent Impulses of spirit, others by
their Enthusiasms have pretended to have) let it be produced that we may
believe you. But as the Apostle puts the question, so may we. Is Christ
divided? How is he then the Same? 1 Cor. 1.13
Has he been with his Church ever from the beginning, exercising his Power in
the establishment of order and government in it, without which I say again it
could not well have been so long preserved, promising also that he will be with
it, for that end and purpose, to the end of the world? And has he given a
countermand or a connivence unto some to separate themselves from the said
order and government, yea to do what lies in them utterly to disanul it?
Verily it must not, it cannot be imagined that he who is the Same yesterd^y to
day, and for ever, should at all prevaricate or swerve so diametrally from his
purpose and practice, wherein he has always manifested himself to be the Same.

If the consideration of these things will not bring on a composure of our
differences, and allay the sha^pness of contradicting spirits, I know not what
will. And if when men see what the Lord has done, and hear what God the Lord,
that is, God which is the Lord, Psalm. 85.8.
viz. Jesus Christ does speak, who does use to speak peace unto his people and
to his Saints, to speak it as a Comforter, and to speak it as a Counselor
(for it has always been the earnest desire of his soul to see his people live
peaceably one with another) they will neither acquiesce in his doing, nor
follow his counsel, What shall we judge of them, but that they are willing not
only to turn but to run after folly, and that they delight in vain janglings,
which do minister endless debates, rather then godly edifying?

Lastly, this will afford strong consolation for all that do live godly in
Christ Jesus, both in respect of themselves, and their posterity.

First, for themselves. When we sinde much uncertainty in Creature Comforts
about us, This may be our rejoicing and our refuge, that Christ will be the
Same unto us for ever. Though friends may fail, though means may fail, though
health may fail, though heart may sail, yet Christ will never fail. Look what
Peter spoke, but did not perform, Christ has spoken, and will surely make
good, Though all forsake thee, yet will not I. Let therefore that sweet and
precious Promise be laid up in the heart of every true believer as a cordial to
comfort it in all changes and troubles whatsoever that may arise, written not
only by the Apostle, Heb. 13.5. (...)
Heb. 13.5. but in sundry other places of Scripture for our greater
confirmation, I will never, never, never, never, never leave thee, or forsake
thee.

Secondly, for posterity. We may rejoice in this that the Lord Jesus Christ
will have as tender a care of them, as he has had of us before them, because
he is the Same for ever. He will be the Same to instruct and teach them, the
Same to defend and protect them, the Same to save them from their sins, and to
bring them to glory. Thus argues the Prophet, Psalm. 102.27, 28. Heb. 1.10.
Psalm. 102.27. which the Apostle applies unto Christ, Hebr. 1.10, etc Thou art
the Same, and thy years shall have no end. The children of thy servants shall
continue (under thy protection and provision) and their seed shall be
established before thee.

Shortly then, Is not this exceeding great comfort to godly parents in all
ages, That Christ will be a guardian to their children after their decease?
They shall not be left (as we say) to the wide world, neither shall such
parents be like unto him of whom the Psalmist speaks, who should have none to
favor his fatherless children: But because Christ is the Same for ever, he
will, as he has done, ever take care of his people that are in Covenant with
him, not only making his Work appear unto his Servants, but his Glory also
unto their Children: For he remembers his Covenant for ever; the Word which he
commanded ( viz. his Angels to observe in the preservation of his people, Ps.
105 8.
or, the blessing which he has decreed and issued out with such Authority,
that it shall prevail against all opposition) to a thousand generations. Leave
therefore your fatherless children unto him, he will preserve them alive, for
with him the fatherless shall ever find mercy.

CHAP. IV. Shows how JESUS CHRIST is (...) The Same unto his Church in her
Triumphant estate unto all Eternity.
HItherto have we seen Jesus Christ the Same unto his Church yesterday, to day,
and for ever in all the Generations that have been, are, or shall be in this
world, while she abides in her Militant estate; which has given occasion of
sundry Instructions that may through the good blessing of God be profitable and
seasonable for these last times.

But what then may some say? Will Christ forsake his Church when she is in her
triumph, and cease to be (...), the Same unto her, when he has finished his
whole work, and presented all her children before his Father in glory?

I answer still, Jesus Christ will be the Same for ever unto his Church, that
is to say, Not only in this world, but in that also which is to come.

To this purpose let us briefly consider two things: First the full sense and
utmost extent of the Apostles words here (...), for Ever. Secondly how Christ
will be the Same unto his Church in the world to come.

As touching the First, We must know that the Original word (...) (which is as
much as to say (...), Always Being) literally signifies an Age (which English
word is observed to have some affinity with that Greek termination) and an Age
of what extent soever it be, has an uninterrupted being. Now this word being
here put in the plural number, may probably intend the several ages of both
worlds, First of this present world, together with the sundry revolutions that
are in it, one generation passing, another succeeding: And secondly, of the
world to come.

This sense I conceive with submission may be allowed; for where the word is
put in the singular number, there is often intended the one world, or the
other; Sometimes it is put for this world, as Luke 20.34. Matthew. 28.20.
Sometimes again it is written for the world to come, as Joh. 6.51.58. But being
here rendered in the plural number, (...).
it may well be said to comprehend the several ages of both worlds. Joh.
6.51.58.
I confess, the world to come is often in Scripture, per se, rendered in the
plural number, (...), and with an amplification too in sundry places of (...);
but where the sense will bear a further latitude, as it does here, too narrow a
confinement is not to be set unto it, v. g. Consider we the place of the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 1.17.
1 Timothy 1.17. the Lord is there called (...), The King of Ages or Worlds, that
is, of all Ages in this world, and of that everlasting Age in the world to
come, because indeed, as the Psalmist speaks, His Dominion endures
throughout all Ages, both here and hereafter. So in the Doxologie affixed to
the Lords Prayer (as Dr. Hammond observes) The same words (...) must intend
both Ages or Worlds, the present and the future; For the Kingdom, the Power,
and the Glory is the Lords, not only in this world, but in the world that is
to come: And therefore we do well in that to ingeminate the words in our
English Translation proverbially, For ever and ever, that is, for this world,
which is one for ever, and for the next which is another for ever. The same
sense and meaning very probably do the words of our Text likewise carry, for
the Mediatorship of the Lord Jesus Christ, to which they do refer, has and
shall have its virtual operation between God and his Saints for ever in this
world, and as we shall presently show, for ever in the world that is to come.
Let the words then have their utmost extent and full latitude, comprehending
both worlds, viz. This world till time has spun out it self to the very last
m^nute, And that which follows with all those years of Eternity that shall
never cease.

The second thing to be considered is, How Jesus Christ will be the Same to his
Church for ever in the world to come. For seeing, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor.
15.24.28.
He must reign till all enemies are put under his feet, and That when all
things are subdued unto him, he shall deliver up the kingdom to God even the
Father, that so God may be all in all, we may infer that there shall be a
change in him, and conclude that therefore he cannot be the Same.

But let us not be too forward to conclude before we have understood the
premises aright, as we ought to do.

First therefore to allude unto what I said before, As Jesus Christ is the Same
to day under the Gospel, which he was yesterday under the Law, but in a
different way of the dispensation of the mystery of Godliness; so he will be
the Same to his Church for ever in heaven, but not after the same manner. As
Moses delivered up his dispensation unto Christ, when the mystery of God was
translated from the shadow to the Substance, from the letter to the Spirit, so
will Christ deliver up the kingdom to the Father, when by his Spirit he has
done all that the Father appointed him to do: Yet as he was, under Moses, the
Same in effect to his Church which he is now, so will he be under the Father;
Not indeed so darkly with such glimpses of his appearance, and secret illapses
of his Light and Love into the hearts of his people, as now, but with a more
free and full manifestation of his own and his Fathers glory, without the least
interposition of any let or hinderance whatsoever; For now, says the Apostle,
we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face, etc. Which Beatifical
Vision as Christ has here obtained for us by his Merit, so will he for ever
hereafter be the efficient cause of the uninterruptible continuance thereof
unto us, by his being in us.

But that I may not seem to deliver any thing in so important a matter without
my warrant, let us search the Scriptures, and see what Testimony they give of
Jesus herein. It is not expedient to enquire after, or to speak of those things
which we have not seen. It does not yet appear (says the Evangelist) what we
shall be, much less can we be able fully to discern what the Lord Jesus Christ
shall be, either in his Subjection to his Father, or in his Relation to us,
when God shall be all in all: Good therefore is it for us to be wise unto
sobriety, and to content our selves with what is revealed.

First then this we may assert for a most infallible truth, that Jesus Christ
will for ever be the Same in the Hypostatical union of his Humane nature with
the Divine, even then when he has delivered up the kingdom to God even the
Father. And in this respect shall he then be subject to God: For otherwise, 1
Cor. 15.28.
according to the word of the Apostle, seeing he subsisteth ever in the real
essential Form of God (so the word (...) ( Phil. 2.6.) is to be understood, as
it is taken in the same place, Phil. 2 6.
where the Apostle speaks of the Form of a servant) he shall, as he has ever
been, according to his proper right, without any injurious encroachment upon
the Father, be equal with him. Though I confess his subjection to the Father is
not limited to this sense, as we shall see hereafter.

From which Hypostatical Union of his two Natures, so inseparably to be
continued unto all Eternity, Joy unspeakable and full of Glory will undoubtedly
arise to all those, who are of the same Humane nature with him, that shall be
accounted worthy to obtain that world. O what a happiness will it be to behold
this our Lord and Redeeming Kinsman sitting at the right hand of the Throne of
God, exalted sarre above all Principalities, and Power, and Might, and
Dominion, and every Name that is named? Yea and from hence it will come to pass
that the Divine nature, whereof by Christ we have been made partakers in the
state of Regeneration, shall never cease to have a being in us, but shall be
perfected rather by his Presence, and our Vision of him: For when we shall see
him as he is, we shall be like him, to the full extent of our susceptibility of
his Likeness, and the immediate irradiation of his Light and Power shall
overshadow us, and transform us into the same Image both in soul and body.
This, this I say is the complement of our future happiness, the perfection of
our eternal glory. And this the Apostle clearly testifies concerning our vile
bodies, that even they shall be made like unto his glorious body, Phil. 3 21.
Phil. 3.21. From whence we may safely collect, that as the Image of Christ's
body shall possess our bodies, so shall the Image of his soul possess our
souls, and the Image of his spirit our spirits: Whereupon it will follow, we
shall be wholly possessed with his Glory, when we shall see him as he is, in
the Glory of the Father.

He shall then be (...), the Same in himself respecting his Existence (which as
I have said will infinitely tend to the advancement of the Saints happiness)
and then also the Same to his Church, respecting his Power, though in the
exercise and administration of it, he be not the Same.

His Power I say both over us, and in us. Over us he is now, as our Head to
guide and govern us, so he will be then; for his Headship over his Church, as
his pre-eminence over the creatures he will not relinquish, neither will the
Father deprive him of it, even when God shall be all in all.

And this I conceive to be undeniable (though it may sound strangely unto some)
for the Humane nature of Christ being eternally united to the Divine, it is not
to be imagined, that, as Man, he should be in an equality with the Saints, but
have a superiority over them, and to be the Head of that Triumphant Church unto
all Eternity, without doing any office that belongs unto that Honor, is
inconsistent with the dignity and wisdom of the Son of God.

If any should now require an account of the particulars wherein Christ will
hereafter do the office, and exercise the authority of a head over the Church
Triumphant in Heaven, I must tell them, They are to stay for an answer to their
too curious question till in Heaven we come to see him, as he is; for then, and
not before shall we know even as we are known 1 Cor. 13.12. 1 Cor. 13.12.


Nevertheless in the general, this we know for the present, Jesus Christ shall
then be the head of his Church alone without any Power subordinate unto him, as
now; For, says the Apostle, All Rule, and all Authority and Power (both
Celestial and Terrestrial) shall then be taken away: 1 Cor. 15.24.
No humane Ordinance or Government, of whatsoever Creation it be, shall there
be of any use, no, nor the Angels, (...)
though now (as some conceive) they have diverse offices assigned unto them,
according to the diversity of their names and titles for the discharge of their
Ministry, to which they are appointed of God, 1 Pet 2.13
for those who shall be heirs of Salvation; Hebr. 1.14.
yet when all the heirs are settled in their Inheritance, they shall then be
divested of all their Rule, Authority and Power, Bruno.
their very Titles of distinction utterly cancelled and disannulled (for to the
Angels shall not be put in subjection the world to come) and the Lord alone
shall be exalted in that day.

Furthermore, As a Head he will preserve and uphold all the members of his
mystical Body in their glorious Being; for as all things visible and invisible
both in Heaven and in Earth were made by him, and for him, so by him must they
consist, Col. 1.16.17. Col. 1.16.17.


Again, As a Head he will keep them in a perfect unity together that they may
be one according to the Divine Pattern before them, As the Father is in him,
and he in the Father, Joh. 17.21. Joh. 17.21.


Lastly, As a Head he will show unto them those glorious Mysteries, which for
the present, are beyond their reach and capacity, so as they shall be plain and
obvious unto them. To which particular Saint Augustine (whose judgment in the
Interpretation of holy Scripture is worthy of all acceptance) bears his
witness, whom I find giving the sense of our Saviors words in his Prayer to
his Father, Joh. 17.26. in this manner, Clarificavi illis nomen tuum, etc. I
have Declared unto them thy name (that is, says he, In this World, so far as
they are able to receive it) And I will Declare it (that is, says he) In the
world to come more perfectly.

Yea give me leave to add one Meditation more touching this weighty matter,
which I confess I received long since from a Divine of eminent Note, in his
writing unto me. In Glory, says he, The Relation of Head and members between
Christ and us shall not cease, but shall be rather perfected by the enjoyment
of that for which God did appoint it; which is the shedding abroad of his love
upon those that are made conformable to the Image of his Son. Romans 8.29.
For the end and aim which God has in the decree of Election, is to make
those whom he did foreknow and predestinate to be conformable to the Image of
his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many Brethren: Now when God
shall have accomplished this aim, and we shall be fully conformable to the
Image of his Son, then shall we be susceptible of the Love wherewith he loves
his Son, as he is Man (for the love wherewith he loves him, as God, none can
partake of, but he alone) and when by this conformity to his Image we shall be
susceptible of this Love, then the brotherhood between Christ and us shall not
cease, or be made void, nor shall then his Prerogative of being the firstborn
among many Brethren be taken from him, but it shall rather be most gloriously
completed, when not only the Fathers Love wherewith he loves the firstborn
shall be extended to all those that are fully conformable unto his Image, but
also the Love of the firstborn himself shall have its full and glorious
Influence upon his younger Brethren. By all which it is clear, Jesus Christ
will be over his Church Triumphant in Heaven, as he is now over his Church
Militant here on Earth.

Again, As he will be then over us, so likewise he will be in us. In us he is
now by Faith, but Faith which gives him entertainment in our hearts, and Hope
which attends upon him there, shall vanish with this Life and expire in their
Service, as being of no use in Heaven (for Faith is of things not seen, and
therefore cease when vision comes, Hope also if it be seen is not Hope)
only Love remains to be the constant Bond of an eternal Union betwixt Christ
and us, and by love it is that he will take Possession of our hearts in Heaven,
as he does by faith here upon Earth. 1 Cor. 13.8.
Love says the Apostle never fails: Not the Love of Christ to his Church,
nor the Churches Love unto Christ even in respect of their relation to each
other begun here in this life, shall ever suffer the least diminution.

First, I say the love of Christ to his Church, as it is his mystical Body,
shall never be out-dated: For amongst us says the Prophet Malachy, Mal. 2.16.
He hates putting away, therefore much less will he himself give his Church in
Heaven, when he has presented it a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle
or any such thing, etc. a Bill of Divorce, but will ever own her, and delight
in her, as his beloved Spouse, having loved her, he loves her unto the end,
yea, and beyond the end to all Eternity.

And for the Churches love unto Christ in Heaven, How can it chose but be more
enlarged? Partly because she will ever look upon Christ, as one that had been
when time was, her faithful Mediator, and with eternal acclamations will
applaud him, as her Savior, who has brought her to life and immortality when
she was near unto death and everlasting ruin. But chiefly because the love of
the Father, wherewith he loved Christ shall, Job. 17.26.
according to Christ's own prayer, be in her, that is, take full possession of
her, and consequently as it is added in the same place, will Christ himself be
in us likewise, as the blessed result of that infinite love of the Father
toward his Elect people.

For a further opening of this extraordinary point, and because it has not had
that regard given unto it, as it deserves, it being seldom thought upon, I
shall here crave leave to write the more freely of it. And first let me once
more insert the judgment of the aforesaid Divine in his writing unto me
concerning this matter, whose words I do offer to the consideration of the wise
and godly.

The Saints says he (speaking of their estate in Glory after the resurrection)
are sealed up to God by his name formerly written in their forehead, as it is
Rev. 14.1. Rev. 14.1.
Nor is the name of the Father only said to be written upon them, but the new
name of Christ is also written upon them, and the name of the new* Jerusalem
which comes down from Heaven, as it is Rev. 3.12. And their names once written
upon them shall never be blotted out again, therefore Christ shall be for ever
in them, by his name written upon them; Rev. 3.12.
For by the impression of their names upon them, they are fitted to receive
eternally the influence of the Fathers and the Sons love. And I conceive that
when the work of Christ's Mediation shall be at an end, and that Christ shall
give up all those whom he has brought to glory, unto the Father, that the
Father may be all in all in them, That then Christ also as to them shall
receive a new name, by which he shall be in and over them for ever: For Christ
as he is the head of the new creature to purchase life eternal to all that are
to be brought unto the Father; so now since he has purchased that life, he
has gotten a name above every name: And when he shall have brought all the
redeemed unto the possession of the life prepared for them, then shall they
become his fullness, and by their conjunction to him, he shall have a new state
of glory, as the fruit and effect of his Mediatorial administration shining
upon him; which I take to be his new name, which then also shall be written upon
his redeemed for ever, And they shall be exalted to sit with him in his Throne,
as he was exalted, and sat with his Father upon his Throne Rev. 3.21. Rev. 3.21.
By all which (says the said writer) I conceive it is evident, that in the
state of eternal glory Christ shall be in us, as the fountain and head-spring
of life eternal unto all mankind, over whom (by and in the Fathers love and
name which he has declared unto them, and put upon them to remain for ever,
and to be all in all with them) He shall shine in his own everlasting love and
new name. Thus he. Whether or no according to truth, judge ye.

I might in the pursuance of this subject allege sundry other places of
Scriptures that have a tendency hereunto, Luke 1.33.
viz. that of Luke 1.33. Where the Angel Gabriel tells the blessed Virgin, that
that holy thing that should be born of her should reign over the house of Jacob
for ever, and of his Kingdom there should be no end; Which was also foretold
by Daniel the Prophet Dan. 7.14. Where speaking of the Messiah, Dan. 7.14.
he says, his Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, which shall not pass away,
and his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed; Both which places St.
Austin with much vehemence refers to Christ's Kingdom over his Saints in
Heaven. In securda part quaestionum ex Nov. Test. Tom. 4 Romans 8.17
Et qui horum testimonium retractandum putat, says he, perfidia plenus est,
that is, whosoever he be that shall judge their witness ( viz. of the Angel and
Prophet) to be of no force, is himself full of falsehood. I might also add what
the Apostle says, Romans 8.17. That the Saints shall be heirs of God and joint
heirs with Christ, which clearly implies that his relation to his Church as
the firstborn among many brethren, and chief heir, shall continue for ever.
And that of Ephesians. 5.26.27. Where it is said, that Jesus Christ gave himself for
his Church, Ephesians 5.26.27.
etc. That he might present it to himself a glorious Church, etc. Yea and that
also of Rev. 19.9. might very well be insisted upon to this purpose, where
mention is made of the Marriage Supper of the Lamb, Rev. 19.9. Coe^a, eo quod
est ultima refectio. Rev. 21.23.
which signifies that ultimate rejoicing which the Church shall have with her
Lord and Husband in Heaven, where the light not only of God, but also of the
Lamb shall shine, and gloriously encompass about the Bride the Lambs Wise,
which is the new Jerusalem, that is, the Church Triumphant for ever. But I
forbear to prosecute this Point any further, let us now sum up the Premises
together, and when we have answered an Objection that is considerable, we shall
put a period to this whole matter.

I say therefore, if the Personal Union of both Natures Divine and Humane in
Jesus Christ shall never be dissolved which will heighten marvellously the
Glory of the Saints in Heaven; And the Mystical Union between Christ and his
Church shall also uncessantly continue in Heaven to all eternity, who is there
that is not destitute even of the light of Reason, but will infer that Jesus
Christ will be (...), the Same to his Church for ever in Glory, which he is now
and ever has been unto her in her militant estate during her abode here upon
earth.

1 Cor. 15.24 28.
in the beforementioned place, when he says, That Christ shall deliver up the
Kingdom to God even the Father; And that when all things are subdued unto him,
then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under
him, that God may be All in All?

Now I confess it will be very requisite to be clear and plain in resolving
this doubt, that we may understand aright the sense of the Spirit of God in
this Scripture; For it seems to be directly contrary to our present Doctrine
which we have propounded and confirmed. I shall therefore endeavor briefly the
explanation thereof.

Regnat Pater in Filio, regnabit Filius in Patre (said Musculus well upon the
Place) The Father reigns now in the Son, the Son shall hereafter reign in the
Father: The Scepter indeed shall be changed, and the form of Government
altered, but of his Kingdom there shall be no end, rather it shall be more
glorious then it is now, when all enemies being subdued, Jesus Christ shall
without the Ministry of Angels or men, by his own Light, Love, Life and Power
immediately with the Father and the Holy Ghost, fill and govern all his Saints
for ever.

Saint Augustine has above others written very freely and copiously of this
matter, enough to give satisfaction to any that shall object this scruple: It
will not be amiss therefore here to render his very words, as he has written
them, without any alteration.

In loco supradicto.
In Evangelio legimus Angelum dicere ad Mariam Matrem Domini, quod regni ejus,
id est Christi non erit finis. Et Daniel eadem dicit, Tunc exurget regnum in
aternum, quod nunquam corrumpetur: contra Apostolus de Domino, cum tradiderit
regnum Deo and Patri. Quomodo regnum habebit quod traditurus Deo and Patri? In
causa Patris and Filii, id est, Dei and Christi traditio non abolitio
intelligitur. Considera enim quomodo Pater tradiderit Filio regnum, Ipso haec
Domino protestante, Mat. 11.27
Omnia mihi tradita sunt a Patre meo: Si Pater ergo des^it habere seil. Regnum,
cum tradidit, potest and de Salvatore dici quia cum tradidit, amisit. Nam
Filius postquam traditum sibi a Patre regnum dixit, Patrem adhuc praeferens
ait, Haec est autem vita aeterna, ut cognoscant te solum and verum Deum and
quem misisti Jesum Christum. Joh. 17.3.
That is. In the Gospel we find the Angel telling Mary the Mother of the Lord,
that of his Kingdom, that is, Christ's there should be no end; Daniel also said
the same, Then shall a Kingdom be set up for ever that shall never be
destroyed, The Apostle on the contrary speaking of the Lord, says, He shall
deliver up the Kingdom to God, and the Father: But how shall be have a Kingdom
which he must deliver up to God even the Father? In a case agitated between the
Father and the Son, that is, between God and Christ, a Resignation is not to be
taken for an Abolition: For consider how the Father delivered the Kingdom to
the Son; which thing the Lord himself witnesses in these words, All things are
delivered unto me of my Father; If the Father did divest himself of power, when
he made this deed of delivery to the Son, then may it also be said of the Son
that when he delivers up the Kingdom again to the Father, He himself shall be
wholly deprived of it. But Absit. For the Son after he had said the Kingdom was
delivered unto him of the Father, he gives the Father (notwithstanding) the
pre-eminence in these words, Joh. 17.3.
This is life eternal that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent. Secundum hunc igitur sensum and filius non amittit
regnum, cum tradidit, Accordingly neither shall the Son lose his Kingdom, when
he makes a delivery of it to the Father.

And now consider, Is not the judgment of this Holy Ancient and light of the
Church very clear in this point. That though the economy of Christ's office in
interceding for the Saints shall indeed finally cease, yet of his Kingdom there
shall be no end.

If any should yet enquire what it is for the Son to deliver up the Kingdom to
the Father, I shall again borrow Saint Austin's words (to which there need no
addition, being so pithy and pertinent) for herein also he satisfies the
scrupulous inquirer.

Sed nunc videamus quid sit Filium tradere Patri reguum: Hoc est quod dicit
Apostolus, tunc and ipse subjectus erit ei, qui subjecit ei omnia, ut sit Dens
omnia in omnibus. Subjectio igitur haec, est ipsa traditio regni: Itaque hoc
loeo interpretatio videbitur necessaria, ut and subjectus Patri Filius non
negetur, and nihilominns aeternum regnum habere dicatur, Hoc est regnum filii,
quia in Nomine Jesu omnia genua flectentur, tum coelestia, terrestria, and
inferna.

Post quam omnia Christum fuerint confessa sive vi, sive voluntate, mysterium
unius Dei cunctis manifestabitur and omnis gratiarum actio referetur a Patre,
ex quo sunt omnia, ut cessante praedicatione, unus Deus sciatur in mysterio
Trinitatis; Cum enim omnes potestates, omnes principatus and dominationes
Christo genu-flexerint, tunc Fi'ius manifestabit non se esse a quo sunt omnia,
sed filium ejus, and illum in se videri, Sed per quem sunt omnia. Ambr.
haec est subjectio and regni traditio. Ostendens enim patrem esse a quo sunt
omnia, subjecit se illi, cum de eo se dicit esse: Tanta enim majestas and
claritas in adventu filii videbitur, ut omnes potentiae and chori Angelorum,
hunc singularem putent Deum. Salvator autem cum se non illum esse dixerit qui
dicitur Pater sed Filium ejus, regnans, traedit regnum Patri; in hac re
manifestata est and subjectio and regni traditio, quia cum and a Patre se
profitetur esse quicquid habet, Patris confitetur esse, omnem summam referens
ad eum. Thus he sweetly and sufficiently; Whose words may be thus translated
into our own Idiome.

Let us now consider what it is for the Son to deliver up the Kingdom to the
Father. It is even that which the Apostle says, Phil. 2.10.
then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under
him that God may be all in all, whence it follows that this subjection is the
same with the delivery up of the Kingdom. An interpretation therefore here
seems to be necessary, that the Son may be acknowledged to be subject to the
Father, and yet nevertheless that he may be said to have an everlasting
Kingdom, which may be called the Kingdom of the Son: because then at the Name
of Jesus every knee must bow of things in heaven, and things in earth, and
things under the Earth.

When all things do confess the Lord Jesus, and are made subject unto him,
whether it be by constraint, or by consent, then shall the mystery of one God
be made manifest unto all, and all praise shall redound unto the Father, of
whom are all things; that so, when preaching (that is the creatures service in
proclaiming the Name of God) shall cease, the one only God may be known in the
mystery of the Trinity. For when all rule and all authority and power shall bow
the knee to Christ, then shall the Son manifest himself that it is not he of
whom are all things, but that he is his Son, and that in him, he himself is to
be seen (according to his own words, Joh. 14.10.
Joh. 14.10) This then is the subjection and the yiedling up of the Kingdom:
Christ subjecteth himself unto the Father, proclaiming the Father to be he of
whom are all things, confessing also that he himself is of him. For so great
Majesty and Glory will appear in the coming of the Son, that all the powers of
Heaven, and company of Angels may possibly look upon him as God alone. But our
Savior when he shall say, I am not he, that is, the Father, but his Son, he
delivers up the Kingdom to the Father, and yet continues to be King still.
Herein then I say is manifested both his subjection, and his delivery up of the
Kingdom; because when he professes that he himself is of the Father, he
confesses that whatsoever he has is of the Father, ascribing unto him the
glory of being the complement of all things.

Besides this the same Saint Austin adds yet another sense concerning Christ's
delivery up of the Kingdom to the Father, interpreting the said Kingdom for
the people of the Kingdom, that is, his charge of the Elect Saints, which he
received of the Father, not suffering one of them to be lost, Ad Oro. Cont.
Priscillia. cap. 7. tom. 6.
Cum tradiderit Regnum Deo and Patri, id est, cum perduxerit sanctos suos ad
contemplationem Patris etc. He shall deliver up the Kingdom to the Father,
that is, when he has brought all his Saints to behold the Glory of the Father,
and his own Glory which he had with the Father before the World was.

Now whether we understand the Apostle in this sense or that other before
(either of which we may safely adhere unto, and unto one or both of them
without question must the words of the Apostle be reduced) we may conclude
infallibly that Christ's delivery up of the Kingdom to the Father shall not
deprive him of that power and authority which he had before over his Church,
but that he shall continue to be King thereof unto all eternity.

August. eodem loco.
Quod autem dicit Apostolus, deinde finis cum tradiderit Regnum Deo and Patri,
ibi finem non consumentem, sed perficientem significat. And whereas the Apostle
says, then comes the end, when Christ shall deliver up the Kingdom etc. That
is not to be understood of the end bringing with it destruction and
dissolution, but rather that which brings perfection; wherein shall be a
clearer demonstration of Christ's Power and Wisdom in the governing of his
Church then is possible now to be discerned; For as Luther upon these very
words of the Apostle, says well, Est idem hic in Terris regnum, quod postea in
Coelis futurum erit, nisi quod jam contectum oculis nostris non pateat. It is
the same Kingdom here upon Earth, which shall be hereafter in Heaven, but that
we are not able now abiding in this mortal and sinful estate to perceive it
being hidden from our eyes.

I could multiply Authors both Ancient and Modern who do all agree in this,
that when Christ delivers up the Kingdom to the Father, he then only lays
down his Mediatorial Office, not continuing any longer the Fathers Deputy in
the governing of his Church, but that his Kingdom notwithstanding shall
everlastingly be the Same: The same in the manifestation of his Wisdom, Power,
Love, Goodness toward his redeemed people to all eternity. Only how and
wherein he will exercise the Authority of a Head over his Church otherwise then
is before related, there is none that is wise unto sobriety that will speak of
it, or be inquisitive after it. Such knowledge is too wonderful for us, it is
high, we cannot attain unto it.

Now therefore let all the ends of the Earth, that is, Application.
all the Inhabitants of the World far and near, Look unto Jesus, and be saved
Consider him in his Divine Nature, Es. 45.22.
as he is begotten of the Father from eternity to eternity, consider him also
in the several works of creation, continual preservation, and future
restoration of all things, look unto him in his relation to his Church, what
he has been, is, and eternally will be without any variableness or shadow of
turning, you will find him in all that which the Apostle here proclaims him to
be, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever.

Look unto him then I say, that you may more and more long after his apperance,
love him, and delight in him. Look unto him that you may follow his example (an
example equivalent with all Rules of righteousness) in those things which he
did and commanded, though not altogether in those things which he did, but
commanded not. What better object can you have to fix all the thoughts of your
hearts upon? He is the pattern set for your imitation according to the depth of
Divine Wisdom: He is the gift of God to the World (...), Joh. 4.10
a greater gift then which (though God be great in power and infinite in love)
he has not to give. Ephesians. 1.6.
He is the beloved, in whom the Father is well pleased, deliciae Dei and humani
generis, the darling of the Almighty, Hag. 2.7. Ps. 45.2. Cant. 5.10.
and the desire of all Nations fairer then the children of men, white and
ruddy, the chiefest of ten thousand, white in his Divine Nature (according to
the sense of some late Expositours) which was the brightness of his Fathers
substance, and red in his humanity, being of the same substance with the first
Adam who was made of red earth; white in his holiness, and red in his blood and
sufferings; white in his own immaculate purity and innocence, but red in the
imputation of our sins, which are like scarlet and crimson Es. 1.18. White in
his goodness and free grace to humble sinners, but red and bloody to all his
enemies that will not suffer him to reign over them.

Worthy is this our Jesus that we should continually look unto him. He looks
unto us in all our afflictions and supports us in them, In all the deadly
hazards that we are liable unto through the malice of Satan, and preserves us
from them, In all our backslidings, and recovers us out of them, In all the
duties of Religion, and by his spirit enables us unto them, In all the works of
our callings, and commands a blessing upon them. Without him we can do nothing,
without him we are nothing, without him we can hope for nothing: He looks upon
our graces, the fruits of his own spirit in us, and cherishes them; upon our
infirmities and pities them, upon the purposes, inclinations, desires of our
hearts toward him, and delights in them; upon our bodies and souls and will
undoubtedly save them. Should his eyes then run to and fro amongst us, and be
still set upon us for good, and should not we look unto him again?

I call you not to an empty speculation of Jesus Christ in a picture, according
to the manner of superstitious dawbers, who paint him out in a Crucifix suitable
to their own foolish fancy (for who among them can say expressly, such was the
fashion of his countenance and other parts of his body, as we see here in the
draught before us) and then Pygmaleon-like dote upon it, or rather like the
Prophets Carpenter, as they are well resembled, fall down and worship it when
they have done Such vanity as this let us leave to those that have their eyes
full of spiritual Adulteries, Sic ille manus, sic ora se^ebat.
whom a deceived heart has turned aside, so that they cannot deliver their own
soul, nor say when they take hold of their Crucifix, is there not a lie in my
right hand?

But beloved Christians, I speak as to wise men, Judge ye what I say, You that
have been in the Holy Mount with Jesus, I mean that have been conversant with
him in his Word, and have the anointing which ye received of him abiding in
you, whereby you are made able to see him that is invisible, you know better
how to look unto him, 1 John 2.27.
that you may draw virtue from him. The Wise man's eyes are in his head, Ec 2.14
says Solomon, he considers well what he does, that he may do it to ^he best
advantage; or he lifts them upwards, says Saint Ambrose, and fixes them
upon Christ his Head, sitting at the right hand of God, Pro. 17.24
when the eyes of a fool are in the ends of the earth, poring upon vanity, to
the seeding of his folly, but nothing at all to the satisfying of his soul. We
wa^k here by faith as the Apostle tells us, and not by sight; 2 Cor. 5.7.
The less therefore there is of sight, the more answerable to the Rule will our
walk be: Let Faith then have its perfect work in drawing the whole soul to look
uncessantly unto Jesus, as the Author and Finisher of our Faith and Salvation,
who has begun his good work in us, and will also perfect it; who has given us
grace to believe and will surely continue this grace with us even to the end,
because he is the Same for ever. Faith will make us to see what he has done
for us, how he was faithful in fulfilling all Righteousness, what he has
suffered likewise, how he was faithful unto death, yea unto wrath; for that
which we should have been suffering in hell for ever, that did he in the short
time of his Passion suffer in our stead; it will make us see what he is now
doing, dwelling in our hearts, shedding abroad his love in our souls,
preserving us out of the hand of the enemy that seeks our destruction,
appearing before God in our behalf, preparing a place for us, that where he is,
there we may be also. And what he will do, present us before his Father,
proclaim our Integrity and Sincerity before his Angels, crown us with Glory,
embrace us with the everlasting Arms of his Love, continue to own us for his
brethren unto all Eternity.

Oh then let us look unto this Jesus that our souls may be more and more
ravished with his love. They that thus look unto him here with the eye of
Faith, when their natural bodies shall become spiritual bodies, shall most
certainly with their eyes behold this their King in his beauty for ever with
joy unspeakable and full of glory. Which exceeding superlative eternal weight
of glory that we may obtain, both I that have here, according to the grace that
is given unto me, written of this Subject, and you that with an honest and good
heart have read and perused it, The Father of Mercies and the God of all
Consolation grant unto us through the Mediation of that Son of his love, our
Lord and our Life Christ Jesus, Amen, Amen.

Bern. Sermon. 22. in Cantic. Currimus omnes post te, O Domine Jesu, in Odore
Vnguentorum tuorum, in omnem terram exivit Odor Vitae, and qui vitalem hanc
sparsam ubique fragrantiam non sentit, and ob hoc non currit, aut mortuus est,
aut putidus.

AN APPENDIX To the former TREATISE, Added, because of the several ADDRESSES
that are therein made unto the JEWS, and proving clearly from Scripture that
they shall in time become a people again in whom the Lord will delight.
BEcause mention has been made of the great hope that is to be conceived
concerning the Jews Restoration, it is fit here to show the reason of this
Hope, and what good warrant may be produced for our confidence therein: The
rather because there are some amongst our selves, who will (because they will)
be Scepticks in this point, being too apt to insult and trample upon this
forlorn and desolate people, though our Apostle has given sufficient warning
to the contrary. Neither will our undertaking herein be impertinent to the
matter we have had in hand, for it will in the issue plainly demonstrate the
Immutability of the Lord Jesus Christ toward this people, and that his
Covenant which he made with their Fathers is not forgotten, but shall
inviolably be kept and fulfilled to a tit^le in this day of his power, because,
even because he is (...) still the Same unto them, as ever he was from the
Beginning.

The ground upon which we do in the name of God proceed, is this. If Moses and
the Prophets be of account with the Jews, or the Lord Jesus Christ and his
Apostles of any value with us, there may be great hope for the Jews to expect,
and good warrant for us to believe their restoration.

First, Hear what Moses says of this people Deuteronomy. 4.30.31. When thou art
intribulation (as they are this day) and all these things are come upon thee,
Deuteronomy 4.30 31.
even in the latter days (remember that) if thou turn to the Lord thy God, and
shall be obedient unto his voice: (For the Lord thy Ged is a merciful God) he
will not forsake thee, neither destroy thee, nor forget the Covenant of thy
Fathers which he swear unto them. But if God has now cast away his people in
these latter days, so as that they shall be no more a people, has he not
forgotten the Covenant of their Fathers, which he swear unto them?

Possibly it will be replied, That promise was attended with this Proviso, If
they turn unto the Lord their God, and be obedient unto his voice; But that
will never be because of the hardness of their hearts, to which they are given
up by the just judgment of God for their contempt of the Gospel, when it was
sent unto them.

In answer hereunto, hear Moses once again, Deuteronomy. 30.3. etc. If thou return
unto the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 30.3, etc.
then will the Lord thy God turn thy Captivity, and have compassion upon th^e,
and w^ll return and gather thee from all Nations, whither the Lord thy God has
scattered thee. If any of thine be dri^en out unto the utmost parts of heaven,
from then ^e will the Lord thy God gather thee, and from thence will he fetch
thee: And the Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart and the heart of thy
seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul that
thou may live.

You Will say, How does this take away the premised Objection? Hear and consider:

First, These promises doubtless are grounded upon the new Covenant (for the
old admits of no mercy to be showed unto any upon the violation of it) The
condition therefore must be understood in an answerable sense, If you return,
and if you obey, that is, when thou shall Return, and when thou shall obey,
being induced thereunto by that Grace which I will give unto thee. Secondly, Of
whom speaks Moses this? Of some few, a Tribe or two of the Children of
Israel, or of the whole Nation? Surely of the whole Nation; but hitherto is not
the Captivity of the whole nation turned, neither has the Lord gathered them
from all those nations, and the utmost parts of heaven, whither he had in his
sore displeasure scattered them. Thirdly, Circumcision being the Sacrament of
initiation whereby this people were separated from the World, and solemnly
admitted to be a peculiar portion to the Lord, the promise here of circumcising
their hearts does not so much imply their confirmation in their obedience
during their restored estate, as the turning of their hearts even at the time
of their readmission to be the Lords. Fourthly, This promise has never yet
been fulfilled in any of their former deliverances: For Saint Steven speaks
to them in this manner, after all that God had done for them, Act. 7.51.
Ye stiff-necked and uncircumeised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the
Holy Ghost, as your fathers did, so do ye. It remains therefore that the
accomplishment thereof is yet to come, viz. In these latter days. Thus Moses.
The Prophets likewise with one Consent do testify the same.

First, Isaiah is very free and copious in this matter. It shall come to pass,
says he, Es. 11.11, 12.
in that day (Es. 11.11, 12.) that the Lord shall set his hand again the second
time, to recover the remnant of his people that shall be left, from Assyria,
and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from
Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the Islands of the Sea, that is, from all
quarters of the World. And he shall set up an ensign for the Nations, and shall
asseble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah,
from the four Corners of the Earth.

Let us here also take notice of some considerations very pertinent, as I
conceive, to our present purpose.

First, The Prophet we see speaks of the second time of Gods stretching out his
hand for the deliverance of all the posterity of Jacob, which second time must
be in the days of the Messiah, as appears by the tenth verse. Secondly,
Observe this place is not to be understood of the elect both Jew and Gentile
(as some will have it) For the Prophet had in the tenth verse spoken
particularly of the Gentiles. Therefore the people here intended are without
controversy only the seed of Abraham according to the flesh. Thirdly,
Consider how the Prophet speaks not of Judah alone, or the two Tribes that came
out of Babylon after the seventy years Captivity, but (which is very
remarkable, not only here but in sundry other places) of Israel and Judah
together who never yet were united since their first separation. Fourthly, This
assembling and gathering of Israel and Judah together shall be in those days,
when the Lord sets up an ensign for the Nations, that is, when the Messiah
shall be lifted up in the Ministry of the word, For he is the rock of Jesse,
which should stand for an ensign of the peoples.

See another Prophecy from the same hand Es. 43.5, 6. Fear not, says the Lord
to Israel, for I am with thee, I will bring thy seed from the East, and gather
thee from the West, I will say to the North, give up, and to the South, keep
not back, bring my Sons from far, and my Daughters from the ends of the earth.
And again Es. 45.22, 2a. Look unto me, Es. 45.22.25.
and be ye saved all the ends of the earth, In the Lord shall all the seed of
Israel be justified, and shall glory.

Let it be now hereupon considered, Has there been as yet an universal
gathering of Israel to the Lord, such as is here mentioned? Has the Lord as
yet justified all the seed of Israel, that is, the Nation of them against their
enemies? Or does the Nation yet glory in that salvation, which has been
wrought in the world now in the time of the Gospel? If not, then surely these
things are yet to be fulfilled.

If it be objected (as some will not stick to do it) that these and the like
places are to be understood Synechdochically, as putting a part for the whole,
viz. Israel for the whole Church of God throughout the World, that it should be
gathered and justified, and that all the people of God should glory and make
their boast of the Lord. I answer, Though it should be so, yet the literal
meaning here, as it refers to the posterity of Jacob, is not to be wholly
slighted; for admit, that it be an usual form of speech by a Synechdoche, to
put a part for the whole, Yet such a Synechdoche must needs be accounted a
violent assault upon reason, and was never before heard of, as that a part
should signify the whole, when that part which should express the whole is not
included, but shut out from it: doubtless in all Synechdochichal speeches the
part set down for the whole must be always a part of it: as when Saint Paul
said, Ye shall see my face no more Act. 20. His face is a part of him, And
thus must all other Synechdoches whatsoever be understood, the part signifying
the whole must of necessity be included and contained in it. If therefore all
the Nation of Israel here be put for all the Nations of Believers in the World,
as a part of the whole, then it must certainly follow that the Nation of Israel
according to the flesh was included apart, and not excluded from the whole.

Let us go on, omitting for brevities sake what might be more added out of the
Prophet Esaias to this purpose, wherein he has abounded: Consider how Jeremiah
keeps also in the same track. For thus says he in the Name of the Lord. Jer.
3 18.
In those days the house of Judah shall walk with, or to the house of Israel,
and they shall come together, etc. And again, I will gather the remnant of my
flock out of all Countries wither I have driven them, and will bring them again
to their folds, Jer. 23.3, 4.
and they shall be fruitful and increase, and I will set up Shepherds over
them which shall feed them, and they shall fear no more, nor be dismayed,
neither shall they be lacking, says the Lord.

Add hereunto, Lo the days come, says the Lord, Jer. 30 3.9.
that I will bring again the Captivity of my people Israel and Judah, says the
Lord, And they shall serve the Lord their God, and David their King, whom I
will raise up unto them.

The like also is prophesied by Ezekiel, Thus says the Lord, Ezekiel. 37.21, 22,
23. etc.
behold I will take the Children of Israel from among the Heathen, whether they
be gone, and will gather them on every side, and I will make them one Nation in
the Land upon the Mountains of Israel, and one King shall be King over them,
and they shall be no more two Nations, neither shall they be divided into two
Kingdoms any more at all, and my servant David shall be their Prince for ever.
Moreover I will make a Covenant of peace with them, it shall be an everlasting
Covenant with them, and I will place them and multiply them, and will set my
sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore. My Tabernacle also shall be with
them, Yea I will be their God, and they shall be my people, and the Heathen
shall know that I the Lord do sanctify Israel, when my Sanctuary shall be in
the midst of them for evermore.

Again (Jer. 31.1, 4.) At the same time says the Lord, that is, Jer. 31.1, 4.
in the later days (as appears Jer. 30.24.) I will be the God of all the
families of Israel, and they shall be my people; Again I will build them and
thou shall be built O Virgin of Israel, thou shall be again adorned with thy
Tabrets, and thou shall go forth in the dances of them that make merry.

I willingly pass by many other places that might be alleged, for it would be
too much to insert all that is written thereof.

But I demand, Has any of these things as yet come to pass? When was it that
the house of Judah did walk with the house of Israel together, since the time
they were divided one from the other in the days of Rehoboam? Has the Lord as
yet gathered the remnant of his flock out of all Countries, whither he has
driven them, or set up shepherds over them, to seed or to defend them, so as
they should fear no more, nor be dismayed? Do Israel and Judah this day
unanimously serve the Lord their God, and David their King, that is, the
Messiah David's Son (as Interpretersiboth Jewish and Christian expound it) of
whose government and peace there shall be no end? Has God set his Sanctuary in
the midst of them, or pitched his Tabernacle among them, so as the Heathen do
take notice of it, that it is the Lord that does sanctify Israel? If his
Sanctuary has been among some of them, it has been again removed, but here it
is said, his Sanctuary shall be in the midst of them for evermore: In fine,
Has God as yet in these latter days declared himself to be the God of all the
families of Israel since their defection from him, and owned them again for his
people? Is this Virgin as yet repaired, since she was stripped of her ornaments,
or has she yet furbisht over and trimmed up her Tabrets, that she might
rejoice at her restoration?

If none of all these things I say be yet come to pass, and the word of God
cannot be retracted, they are yet to be fulfilled, and shall in time most
certainly have their due accomplishment.

Yea more, that neither their divisions amongst themselves, Israel against
Judah, and Judah against Israel, nor their inveterate stubbornnes against the
Lord might be any hinderance unto them, the Lord promises by the Prophet
Jeremy in these words, Jer. 32.39
I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for
the good of them, and of their Children after them. And by the Prophet Ezekiel
in these words, A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put
within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will
put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall
keep my judgments and do them. Oh blessed and thrice happy shall this people be
when these things are fulfilled. I deny not but these promises have a measure
reaching to us Gentiles, even all among us, that are interessed in the new
Covenant. But I say again the people that are mentioned cannot without violence
done to the sense of the Holy Ghost, be excluded from them in the days of the
Gospel.

I omit what might be further added out of these Prophets to this purpose, As
the vision of dry bones in the Prophecy of Ezekiel, restored to life again: And
that of two sticks made both one in the hand of the Prophet; with sundry other
discoveries of the mind of God concerning this truth, which upon an
unprejudicate perusal even by those that are contrary-minded, would appear unto
them to carry in them this sense, viz. That this firstborn of the Almighty,
this people so entirely beloved of the Lord shall not at this day be quite
forgotten, as dead men out of mind, nor be ever divided one from another, as
they have been, but shall restored again notwithstanding the seeming
impossibility of it, to their pristine glory, and shall be happily reunited
together into one, as becomes brethren.

In the next place let us try whether the Prophecy of Daniel will afford us the
like Suffrage herein, as the other Prophets have done.

But before we enter hereupon give me leave to premise a word or two. It is not
my purpose here to launch out too ventrously into this deep, I foresee the
danger that attends upon it, many of late having lost themselves in so doing by
a too much confidence of their skill and strength, that I may not therefore
fall under the guilt of rashness and inadvertency in this kind with others, who
have been peremptory in stating and determining the Epoche's and Periods of
times mentioned in this Book, and that of the Revelation (which have appeared
to their shame to be of a larger extent then those limits which they have set
unto them) I shall only offer what I have to say to the judgment and
examination of the Church, not daring to determine in a point of such
difficulty and uncertainty, as that is, which I am now about to insist upon.

The place which I have singled out for my purpose is in the ninth Chapter of
this Prophecy and the twenty fourth verse; Where the Angel who is before called
the Man Gabriel; because he appeared in a humane shape, speaks unto Daniel in
this manner. Seventy weeks (as it is translated) are determined upon thy
people, Dan. 9.24.
and upon thy Holy City, to finish the Transgression, and to make an end of
sins, and to make reconciliation for Iniquity, and to bring in everlasting
righteousness, and to seal up the Vision and Prophecy, and to anoint the most
Holy.

In the exposition of which words I find Interpreters do gene rally run upon
this foot of account, making these seventy weeks, as they are called, to be
seventy times seven years, and to begin at one of those four Edicts mentioned
in Ezra and Nehemiah, that came forth from those Persian Monarchs, Cyrus,
Darius, and Artaxerxes, for the restoring and returning of the people, and for
the building of the Temple and City; wherein they do much vary one from
another, and are at a great loss in their computations, because not only the
Scripture does not afford help in this matter, not expressing the full years of
the reign of those Princes, nor yet the series of their succession, but those
Historians also that have been of old, who (as a learned Antiquary observes)
having so many, Bishop Mountague.
and so great helps at hand, which we want, of the Persian, Babylonian,
Assyrian, Egyptian Writers, who at large related the acts of those Princes,
with whom in their times the state of the Jews did concur, and who were
abundantly furnished with Histories of the Seleucidan and Lagidan Princes of
the Macedonian race, with whom the Jews after the Captivity had great
negotiations, have left unto us so very poor, or none at all helps for
direction herein, in so much that we have little or no cause to thank them for
it; Upon which consideration I say none of our Expositours before us could, nor
can any man else to this day conclude precisely upon a certain root of time for
the beginning of these years according to this account: nevertheless it is the
concurrent judgment of writers that at one of these forementioned Edicts must
these seventy weeks take their Commencement and Beginning: the final Period
whereof, which must be as uncertain as the Beginning, they make to be either at
the coming of the Messiah, or at his Baptism, or at his Death, or at the
destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple, the amounty of which time, say they,
makes up 490 years, and are afterward by the Angel branched out into several
parcels, where every part has some Cardinal thing of special remarke fixed
unto it, that should happen within that time.

But I shall now crave leave to lay down my conceptions of this Scripture,
differing from the ordinary interpretation of it, believing there is enwrapped
in it the whole purpose and determination of God concerning his Israel from
first to last, beginning at some notable Epoche, and to be continued until the
final restoration of that Nation which is yet to come.

This I confess may seem strange at first sight, because of the novelty of it:
But by that time we have duly considered the words, as they are delivered by
the Angel, it may happily be adjudged not altogether impertinent, and may give
occasion unto some of a more diligent search and enquiry after a further
meaning of the Holy Ghost in this Scripture, then as yet has been thought upon.

Observe then, the Prophet understanding by books, as he says in the second
verse, the number of years, whereof the Word of the Lord came to Jeremiah that
he would accomplish seventy years in the desolations of Jerusalem (which years
were then expired) he sets himself (as ver. 3.) to seek the Lord God by
prayer and supplication in the behalf of his people, and the Holy City, that
mercy might at length be showed unto them in their deliverance. Whereupon this
answer is presently returned unto him by Gabriel; but what answer is it? Not
punctually positive to his prayer, which was for the aforesaid deliverance so
much desired by him, now after the expiration of the term appointed for the
Babylonish Captivity, that seems to be the least part of the Angels errand at
this time, but because Daniel was a man greatly beloved, the Angel has a
matter of greater import here to reveal unto him, in which he might be assured
that the deliverance which he prayed for should also be included. But what is
this business of greater import? Is it the happy consequents which should
follow upon their deliverance? Thus indeed has it been conceived: But rather
is it not (as I have said, and which I shall undertake here to prove to be) the
purpose of God concerning his delivering this people out of all their troubles,
especially those which they endured in Egypt and Babylon, and now also in their
dispersion into all Lands, where they are scattered to this very day, from the
very time when they were first brought into a preparatory way of being formed
into a Nation? As for the Holy City, that only is inserted in this answer,
because the Prophet had mentioned it in his prayer, and the Angel speaks more
particularly of it in the verses following. This with submission of my judgment
of the Holy Catholic Church, and of my Mother the Church of England, I
conceive to be the genuine sense of that Scripture, and what I have now to say
to it, I desire may be considered without prejudice.

My supputation of the time here mentioned is after this manner. These 70.
Weeks, as they are called, I take for 70. Jubilees, each of which being 49.
years, they together make up 3430 years. Now if we reckon from the time of
Jacobs going down into Egypt (which is the Epoche that I six upon, the reason
whereof I shall show hereafter) there will not at this time want much of
completing these seventy Jubilees.

For from that time to the Incarnation of our Savior the Lord Jesus Christ,
Which agrees with Alstedius his account
were 1721. years, and since the Incarnation are 1660. Both which accounts make
up 3381. So that to fill up the said number of Jubilean years there remains
but one single Jubilee more, which will fall out to be in the year of our Lord
1709. About which time the people of Israel (called here Daniels people because
of his care and tender affection toward them) may become a people again,
according to the concurrency of Scriptural Prophecies, their iniquity,
transgression and sin finished and taken away through the reconciliation that
shall be then between their God and them, in stead whereof they shall have an
everlasting righteousness, brought in by the good hand of God upon them,
whereby they shall become a righteous Nation for ever, and so consequently the
whole Vision and Prophecy concerning them will be sealed, that is, confirmed
and concluded; and the most Holy, or the Holiness of Holinesses, that is,
either the Holiness of Israel, surpassing all the Holinesses of believing
Gentiles shall be anointed, that is, exalted above all others, or the Messiah,
even the Lord Jesus, who is the Holiest of them all (for there is Ho^ier then
the Holiest, and there is Holier then they) shall be anointed, that is, reign
as King over them, and they by their unanimous acclamations and cheerful
subjection acknowledge him to be their Sovereign.

The sense of this Scripture I confess is new, but it will not follow thereupon
that it cannot be true. Yet I am not confident that it is the only meaning of
the Spirit, for then I should pretend to be wiser then Daniel. But I will wait
for the determination of the Holy Church about it, and expect till the end be,
what Divine Providence will work in bringing of it to pass, hoping to rest, and
to stand in my lot with Daniel at the end of the days.

Some intricacies I know will appear in this interpretation, which I shall
endeavor to unfold: Yet sure I am they are not so many as other Expositions
are perplexed with, and so snarled that they can never be resolved.

First an account will be required of me why I should call and reckon those for
Jubilees which are in our Translation called Weeks. I answer, though the word
be translated Weeks (which I do not take upon me to correct, the word having a
measure according to Scripturephrase extending to various significations) yet
such as are skilful in the Original do well know that these words may be also
rendered thus, sevens seventy are pared out for thy people. Now the Scripture
speaks of three several sorts of sevens or septenaries in order to such times
which the Lord has sanctified. First, the seventh day, secondly, the seventh
year, thirdly, the seventh Sabbatical year. The seventh day was the Sabbath
wherein the people were to rest, Lev. 23.3
Lev. 23 3. The seventh year was the Sabbatical year wherein the ground rested,
Lev. 25.4. The seventh Sabbatical year was the Jubilean Sabbath, Lev. 25.8. The
acceptable year above all the rest, Lev. 25.4. Lev 25.8. Es. 61.2. Ezekiel. 49.17.
the year of liking or good will, Es. 61.2. or as Ezekiel calls it, the year of
liberty, or general releasement proclaimed by sound of trumpet, wherein every
man was to return to his Inheritance again, and every servant to his freedom,
which privileges doubtless brought on much rejoicing and jubilation among
them: It was a year of great expectation, insomuch that it is conceived to be
the great Epoche or Cardo of their times, as the Olympiads were among the
Graecians, Hospinian de Orig. Fest. c. 9.
and the lustra of old and indictions of late among the Romans. Hoc observa
(says Alstedius) Jubilaeos esse infallibiles Characteres secundum ques
praecipua tempora in Scripturis definiri possunt: This know, that Jubilean
Sabbatisins are the most infallible characters to decipher and d^stinguish the
principal times of note in the Holy Scripture. This septenary therefore seems
to be worthy of more then ordinary regard: And the rather because it did
likewise in an especial manner shadow out our deliverance by Christ, which was
indeed the acceptable year of remission, prophesied of before, Es 61.1.2. and
so interpreted by our blessed Savior, Luke 4.18. As also thereby was signified
our return into the Heavenly Paradise, Luke 23.43. from which we are fallen in
Adam. The seventh year may be applied to every man's particular consummation
when his soul is received up into glory, but by the Jubilean Sabbath (wherein
all the Israelites had their re-entry upon their Lands formerly sold) is the
general re-entry of all believers into the Kingdom of Heaven, which they had
formerly forfeited by their sins, most happily prefigured. These things then
being so, and the Angel leaving it undetermined which seven of the three it is
that is here meant, Did not our Savior allude unto the 70. Jubilees when he
spoke of our sorgiving one another seventy times seven?
whether this great Septenary rather then that of weeks of years may not in
reason be judged to be that which the Angel here intended, when he said sevens
seventy are cut out for thy people, let the Church determine.

As for that objection which perhaps may here be cast in, that the Jubilean
year was not ordained before such time as Moses gave out the Law to the people
in the Wilderness, and therefore could not be reckoned on before it was in
being. And that also, that the Jubilee was a part of the Ceremonial Law, and
therefore as out of date, not to be reckoned on in the time of the Gospel,
these I say upon due consideration will appear to be of no force.

For first, the seventh day Sabbaths and Sacrifices were a part of the Mosaical
Institute, yet were observed by Gods people from the beginning of the World, so
might Jubilees too, for ought that may be objected to the contrary. Yea it is
apparent that Jubilees have been distinguished of old into two sorts, viz.
Jubilaei Mundani, and Jubilaei Mosaici, that is, Jubilees of the Creation, and
Jubilees of the Law; so that this account by Jubilees might be before the Law.
But there is no need to go so far for an answer: The Angel might here speak of
such an account of years by way of Prolepsis or Anticipation (a Figure usual in
Scripture) though there were no Jubilees to be observed by that people for
above 200. years after Jacobs going down into Egypt. And whereas it is objected
in the second place, that because the Jubilee is a part of the Mosaical
Pedagogy, therefore it is not now to be reckoned on; I answer, no more do we,
so as to observe it according to the Law of Moses, nevertheless while the world
stands, 49. years will be so many still, and no more nor fewer then they were
wont to be, when Moses gave out the Law. And the Angel might speak according to
the Phraseology of that Age, and to the apprehension of the Prophet, though the
Judaical observation of Jubilees was to cease long before the expiration of the
time that he was insisting upon. But enough of this. Let us proceed.

The time of Jacobs going down into Egypt is (as has been said before) very
remarkable, and may be esteemed a fit Epoch for the beginning of these seventy
Jubilees. The grounds and reasons of which conjecture, I do now here offer to
consideration.

First, when Jacob went down into Egypt God promised him to make him a great
Nation, Genesis 46.3. And withal designed that very place for the performance of
his word, which was there fulfilled. For thus Moses tells the people. Deuteronomy.
10.22. Thy fathers went down into Egypt with threescore and ten persons, and
now the Lord thy God has made thee, as the Stars of Heaven for multitude.
Whence we may collect, this journey into Egypt was the beginning or
providential occasion of forming this people into a Nation, and whereby God did
visibly fore-lay his design of proving himself unto them to be the great
Jehovah, in giving a being to his Promise made before unto Abraham: Therefore
very fit to be the Epoch of the Vision and Prophecy concerning this people.

Secondly, Egypt was the place where Israel was first as a Child trained up
under his Fathers discipline, and for the sins wherewith they there sinned, God
made them there to pass under the rod, and brought them first into the bond of
the Covenant ( Lev. 17.7. Josh. 24.14. Ezekiel. 23.3.) so that in all likelihood,
there did the time of Jacobs trouble begin, which in the purpose of the
Almighty, was (as the Angel here speaks) cut out and pared for this people.
And as they continued in their undutifulness, forgetting the God that formed
them, so was their trouble also continued afterward by sundry punishments
inflicted on them in their several Generations, but especially in the
Babylonish Captivity, and to this day lengthned out in their present dispersion
into all Lands, where the Lord has scattered them. And have we not good reason
then to suppose that Jacobs going down into Egypt at the commandment of the
Lord was eminently subservient to these ends, that God might enter upon his
work, his great work, which he had determined concerning this people? Somewhat
surely there is in it that the Spirit would have us to take special notice of,
because we find it so often mentioned in the Scripture, see Genesis 46.6. Deuteronomy.
10.22. Deuteronomy. 26.5. Josh. 24.4. Psalm. 105.23. Act. 7 15.

It may be said Abraham also went down into Egypt two hundred and sixteen years
before Jacob, this account therefore of Jubilees may as well begin from that
time as from Jacobs going thither.

A negative answer must hereunto be given. For first, though Abraham went into
Egypt, yet it was not at the commandment of the Lord, Ps. 105.14.15.
but as a traveller from one Country to another, as his affairs called him, and
it was but for a short time, for he went up from thence again, and which is
remarkable, All that he had he brought away with him, Genesis 13.1.

But as for Jacob, he went not thither but at the express word of the Lord, and
there he continued till the day of his death, and his Posterity removed not
from thence till the Lord led them forth with a strong hand and stretched-out
arm. Secondly, when Abraham went thither, God had not made known unto him the
afflictions that his Posterity should endure in that Land, and therefore he
might be at his liberty before, to go thither or not, as seemed good unto him;
but when once this was revealed unto him ( Genesis 15.) there must then be no more
journeying into Egypt by these Patriarchs, till the very beginning of that time
came, which is here by the Angel said to be cut out for this people, that is as
I have said, for their growing up into a Nation, and suffering such
chastisements which the Divine Wisdom had appointed for them. Genesis 26.2.
And hence it was (very probably) that an express inhibition was given unto
Isaac, that he should not go down into Egypt, as his Father Abraham had done,
though it seems a necessity lay upon him to relieve himself and his family at
that time by the plenty of Egypt, being put to as hard a strait, by reason of a
second famine in the Land of Canaan, as his Father Abraham was.

Thirdly Jacobs going into Egypt was a Type of our Saviors going thither (one
resembling the other in sundry notable circumstances) and in that regard is the
greater notice to be taken of it. To instance.

First Jacob went thither at the commandment of the Lord, so was Jesus carried
thither by a Message from Heaven. Secondly Joseph was a means of bringing Jacob
into that Land, so did another Joseph carry Christ into it. Thirdly, Jacob went
down into Egypt, that being the Country chosen of God for Isreal's infancy, for
he grew a lovely Child, there God taught Ephraim to go, taking them by their
arms, Hos. 11.1.3. So was the Holy Child Jesus carried into Egypt, to be there
for a while kept at nurse, as I may say, with his mother, and during his
Sabellicus Historiographus scribit Josephum cum Maria and puero Jesu in Aegypto
7. annos exulasse, tantum scil. temporis debuit implendae Herodis malitiae.
Minority to have that education as was meet and convenient for him. Fourthly,
Jacob went thither to preserve his life from the Famine, Genesis 45.5.7. And Jesus
was carried thither, to keep him out of harms-way, and to preserve his life
from those that sought to destroy it. Fifthly, Jacob and his posterity were to
stay there, till the time came which the Lord had set for their dismission from
thence, so Jesus was not to be brought out of Egypt till he was called
according to the saying of the Prophet Hos. 11.1. Out of Egypt have I called my
Son, and word brought by the Angel for that very purpose, Matthew. 2.13.19.
These things being so, may we not infer that the time of Jacobs going into
Egypt was a time of great remark in Scripture, and that it is the fittest of
all other to make an Epoch from whence these seventy Jubilees are to derive
their commencement and beginning.

Another argument there is yet to be considered for the confirmation of this
sense of the Angels words, taken from the end or final cause for which these 70
sevens were determined, which is here said, To finish the transgression, and to
make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity (that is, that
no unrighteousness of what kind or degree soever, whether that single
transgression of Jacob in the sinful manner of supplanting his brother Esau, or
that unnatural cruelty of his ten sons against their brother Joseph, or the
numberless multitude of sins, whereof they have since been guilty, or their
most execrable iniquity against the Lord of life, and his Gospel sent among
them, should remain as a blot upon them, to cause any more separation between
their God and them) and to bring in everlasting righteousness (which will
consummate the Vision and Prophecy) that they may be a righteous Nation, and
holy People to the Lord above all others, so long as the World endures.

Hereupon I demand, Have these things as yet been fulfilled upon this People?
Is their iniquity, transgression and sin (to speak of it first in a general
sense) finished or purged away? Yea is it at all restrained? Rather does it not
abound more and more? If then these seventy sevens must be limited to so narrow
a compass as they have usually been, Where is the truth of this Prophecy?
Where? It is in the Messiah (say some) who by his death has done all this for
them: Most true, But nevertheless it shall not be effectual unto them till they
do believe, and receive him for their Messiah; For Christ is the end of the Law
for Righteousness to every one that believes, says Saint Paul, Romans 10.4. But
withal the Apostle there adds that which we find in this people to this
very day, Romans 10.16.
They have not all obeyed the Gospel. For as Esaias says, so may we, Who among
them has believed our report (concerning this Messiah) which has been carried
to the end of the world? Yea the same Prophet fears not in plain terms to
say, I was found of them that sought me not, I was made manifest unto them that
asked not after me, meaning the Gentiles, but to Israel he says, All day long
have I stretched forth my hands unto a disobedient and gain saying people: This
time therefore is not yet expired, because their iniquity, transgression and
sin as yet remains.

Or if that single transgression in Jacob or his sons beforementioned was
finished, having received a just recompense of reward at their deliverance out
of Egypt; and the multiplied rebellions since of the Jewish nation, wherewith
they in their several generations afterward did provoke the Lord against them,
were sealed up at their return out of Babylon* so as they should appear no more
to their shame: yet their iniquity in crucifying the Lord of glory is still
marked before the Lord, and therefore is their present captivity still
continued. But when these seventy sevens are ended, God will surely be
reconciled to them for that also.

It will be objected, How does this Interpretation agree with the words
following, where these seventy sevens are branched out into a tripartite
division, and made to expire at the furthest with the destruction of Jerusalem?

I answer, Though mention be there also made of seventy sevens, yet I conceive
it will not necessarily follow that they must be the same with those before
spoken of, ver. 24. but because the Prophet had in his prayer, besought the
Lord for the City Jerusalem, as well as for the people, therefore after that
the Angel had made known the mind of the Lord in order to the whole Vision and
Prophecy concerning the people, he then goes on to reveal unto him in the
following part of the Chapter more particularly what shall befall the City
within the compass of another seventy distinct from the former, yet included in
it, wherein also should happen the greatest manifestation of Gods love unto his
Israel: For in that time the whole Prophecy relating to the Messiah (who was to
confirm the Covenant made with Abraham, and who, as the Angel says, did
confirm it in one week of that seventy) should be fulfilled. In regard
therefore that this latter is so expressly referred to the City, both for the
re-edifying and the destruction of it, and the former as punctually referred to
the people for those ends and purposes there specified, as has been proved, it
may well be presumed that they are not the same.

Yea, the Angel himself seems to put the difference: For when he speaks of the
first seventy he calls upon the Prophet to understand the matter, and to
consider the vision, that is, the vision which was by the said term of years to
be sealed: And when he speaks of the latter seventy, he again advises the
Prophet to know and understand, implying that he was about to reveal another
secret unto him touching his City which would likewise require his best
understanding, as the other before did.

And now to conclude, Let it be considered whether this sense that I have
(through the guidance I hope of Gods grace) given of this Scripture, does not
carry with it a sound of truth, according to the mind of the Spirit of God in
it: which if it do, Is it not clear that the posterity of Jacob (called here by
the Angel Daniel's people, because God would not own them during the time of
his desertion of them) shall shortly be restored to the honor of their
Primogeniture, and become Gods people again, according to the Covenant made
with their fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; which Covenant he will not
break, because he is 'O (...), the Same yesterday, to day, and for ever.

Much more might be added in the vindication of this sense that I have here
given, but it is time now Manum de tabula, to put an end to this matter, in the
handling whereof I have already been larger then at first I intended, when I
entered upon it: yet meet it was that I should not only give the meaning
thereof according to my apprehension, but to clear up the difficulties of it,
yea and to answer those objections that might be raised against it: I confess
there is a singularity that I may possibly be charged with, yet I hope I may be
excused therein: For first in such dark and dubious offertures of the mind of
God, as this is, no man is or ought to be bound up by the sense of another, but
a latitude may be taken in rendering the construction of them, provided that the
common Boundaries which the spirit of Truth has set unto us in this case be
not transgressed. Secondly I have here with all due modesty declared my opinion
after the form of an Hypothesis, and by way of Conjecture, with submission also
to the Church of Christ, wherein I do but as becomes a dutiful son of the
Church: Only let not my humble manner of proposing my judgment create a
prejudice in the hearts of any persons to make them to think the more slightly
of what I have here written. If it be but a bare conjecture that I have here
offered, it is but as all other Interpretations have been that hitherto are
given of this Scripture: Neither indeed was it possible, as I have before said,
that any Expositor could go beyond a conjecture in their Interpretation of it:
For the variety of their Epoche's do plainly argue much uncertainty in their
computations. And whereas they generally agree upon one root of time in order
to their accounts, viz. The going forth of the Commandment (though when that
should be they cannot precisely tell) who knows but that by the Commandment may
be understood the Word which the Angel spoke of before unto the Prophet, verse.
23. that came forth from God himself at the beginning of his supplications to
restore and build Jerusalem, rather then an Edict from those Persian Princes,
whom Expositors have severally fancied to themselves to have issued out for
that end without warrant uncontrollable from the Spirit of God? Yea and some
other sense might yet be rendered of these words more then hitherto has been
thought upon by any, which upon trial may possibly endure the Test as well as
those that have formerly passed for current amongst us. But I approve of that
sage advice which an Ancient has long since given, viz. It is best at some
time to say nothing, at every time to say enough, but at no time to say all.

Go we on therefore to the next, that is the Prophecy of Hosea. In the first
Chapter whereof, we find that when the Lord pronounces Loammi against his
people, which should be the last Abdication of them even in this their present
dispersion (according to the concurrent judgment of sundry Expositors) making
no other account of them then as of a heathen Nation. Hos. 1.10.
The Prophet notwithstanding upon this angry word which sounds terribly to all
that hear it, adds immediately a word of comfort again, saying, Yet the
number of the children of Israel shall be as the sand of the sea which cannot
be measured nor numbered.

It will be said that this word of comfort has reference to the Israel of God
among the Gentiles: I answer, Be it so, yet I say here again, the holy Ghost
has not set any such limitation, as if the posterity of Jacob were to be quite
excluded. For let me ask with an inversion of the Apostles words, Is God the
God of the Gentiles only? Romans 3.29.
Is he not also of the Jews? Yes of the Jews also: otherwise how should the
children of Israel and the children of Judah be gathered together (as it is
said they shall, verse. 11.) after this ultimate abdication, and appoint
themselves one Head to be their Governor? which being yet to be done, it
follows that this Prophecy also is not yet fulfilled.

Yea, and if it be true that that vast and large part of the world called now
America has been the receptacle and hiding place for the ten Tribes ever since
their exile out of their own land (as of late it has with very great
probability been conjectured to be, some conceiving the same to be
fore-signified by the Prophet Obadiah, verse. 20. Obad. v. 20.
The captivity of Jerusalem shall possess the cities of the South, that is, of
America, so situate, or the dry Cities, that Country being much under the
Torrid Zone: Others construing that Prophecy Esa. 66.19 as foretelling the
same thing, Esa. 66.19.
I will send those that escape of them unto the Nations to Tarshish, Pull, and
Lud that draw the Bow, to Tubal and Javan, to the Isles afar off that have
not heard my fame, neither have seen my glory, etc.) Then also shall that be
fulfilled in them which follows, Hos. 1.11. And they shall come up out of the
Land, where they have all this while layen hid, and where the Lord has shut
them in. But how shall they come up will some say, seeing they are now ever
since their entrance there, environed round with the sea? Shall the sea give
them way again, as it did when they came up out of Egypt? So indeed some are of
opinion taking their guess from 2 Esa. 13.47. Or shall the Angels be sent to be
their Convoy with some unwonted miracle through the air? I answer, First it is
questionable whether that other world, as it is called, be divided from this by
the sea, (some Writers of very good note think otherwise,) and if both be still
contiguous, What hinders hut this people may return the way that they went? But
put case that Time and the Sea two insatiable devourers have through Gods
permission made a separation, to the end that this banished Nation might be
there shut up till the time of their Enlargement be fully come, then may that
of the Prophet Esaias be verified concerning the manner of their return, Esa.
60.9.
Esaias 60.9 The ships of Tarshish, that is, of the Mediterranean sea (for so is
Tarshish in that place to be taken) shall be first ready (being of the nearest
vicinity to the land of Canaan) to bring these Sons of God from far, etc. unto
the Name of the Lord their God, Hos. 1.11.
and to the Holy One of Israel, etc. At which time great shall be the day of
Jezreel (says the Prophet in the forecited place) that is, It shall be a day
of great admiration unto all by reason of the gathering together of the
Israelites, which before seemed rather to be Jezreel (that is, a people
dispersed by God) then an Israel that had power with God and prevailed.

Again in the third Chapter of this Prophecy of Hosea, Hos 3.4.
verse. 4. it is foretold of this people in this manner; The children of Israel
shall abide many days without a King, and without a Prince, and without a
Sacrifice, and without an Image, and without an Ephod, and without Teraphim, As
much as to say, They should live like a company of salvage Indians, no
government Ecclesiastical or Civil, no form of Religion to be found among them,
either according to the law of Moses, or according to the corrupt Exemplar of
their forefathers: All which has come upon the ten Tribes in these latter
days. But mark now what the Prophet adds, Verse. 5.
verse. 5. Afterward shall the children of Israel return and seek the Lord
their God and David their King, that is, (as it is confessed on all hands) the
Messiah, David's son according to the flesh; and shall fear, that is, worship
the Lord and his goodness, manifested in the Messiah (without Types and
Shadows, much more without the least mixture of Idolatry old or new) in the
latter days. If then this judgment here written be executed upon this people
to the uttermost, undoubtedly their Restoration and Return both from their sin
and their captivity, shall (according to the words of this Prophecy) be
fulfilled, and in the determined time brought to pass also.

Thus have we hitherto seen the Prophets as with one voice testifying and
proclaiming the purpose and counsel of God concerning the Calling and
Conversion of the Jews in the latter days. More Testimonies of the like nature
might be produced out of the other Prophets to this purpose. But the time or at
least the patience of some would fail, if we should undertake to show further
what David and the rest have Prophesied and written hereof. We shall therefore
forbear to insist upon any more, and seeing that in the mouth of two or three
witnesses every word is established, the Prophets already mentioned may suffice
for the whole number.

But because there are some amongst us who with much pertinacy do affirm that
the Jews shall never be a people again, so long as the World endures (which
assertion does thwart the Doctrine of Christ's Immutability which we have here
maintained) hear therefore what the spirit speaks of it to the Churches out
of the New Testament; For even therein also have we a full and clear testimony
from the mouth of Jesus Christ himself and his Apostles to assure us of this
truth against all Cavils whatsoever.

First, Luk 21.23, 24.
Then see what the Lord says Luke 21.23, 24. There shall be great distress in
the Land, and wrath upon this people, and they shall fall by the edge of the
sword, and shall be led away Captive into all Nations, and Jerusalem shall be
trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.

See here how in wrath the Lord remembers mercy (says venerable Bede upon the
place) Quia non in perpetuum, donec tempora Nationum impleantur, the judgment
here written is not to be perpetuated till time be no more, but only to
continue till the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.

Concerning which times, though it be true that the Father has reserved them
to himself, as a secret not fit to be imparted to the World (in which regard it
has been and will be too much boldness to prescribe the very instant of their
expiration) yet we may safely say of them (the words of our Savior here
importing no less) that whenever they do expire, Jerusalem shall be delivered
from her bondage, and consequently that light and gladness, joy and honor
shall come upon the Jewish Nation. Let us then for this end make a little
enquiry into them, and consider what is meant by these times of the Gentiles.
Sundry constructions are given of them by Interpreters, nevertheless I doubt
not but that which has a tendency to our present purpose, we shall find to be
most genuine.

Two Expositions I have met with, which (though the Authors thereof be of
great note in the Church) are not in my poor judgment to be allowed, the one
reaching beyond the sense of the Holy Ghost, the other coming short of it, as
it shall here evidently appear.

First, That which goes too far makes the filling up of the times of the
Gentiles to be contemporary with the final Consummation of all things and so
consequently holds that neither the Jews nor Jerusalem shall ever be restored
again. Thus the Lutheran Expositors generally understand it. But against this
it may be Objected.

First, We no where find in Scripture that the fulfilling of the times of the
Gentiles is rendered in such a sense, viz. For the end of the World; and in such
cases the Holy Scripture has been still wont (the wisdom of God so ordering
it) to explain it self by some reiterations and parallel places, to the end that
the Church might in a form of sound words fully know the mind of the spirit.
Secondly, It is inconsistent with the Prophecies that went before concerning
the Gentiles, that in the time of the Gospel, they should generally submit unto
the Church of the Jews (as we have before undeniably proved) when Jerusalem
shall be again inhabited, and made a praise in the earth. Thirdly it is plain
that our Savior in this 21 of Saint Luke puts a difference between the
desolation of Judea, Vide Albertum magnum super locum.
and the dissolution of the world, making the former a portentous omen and sad
prefiguration of the latter. As therefore the dissolution of the world shall be
seconded with an eternity of rest to all Believers, so (that the type may suit
the Antitype) shall the desolation of Judea be also attended with a sweet
peace and happy deliverance to Gods ancient people, the inhabitants of that
Land even in this World before the dissolution thereof. All which considered
this cannot be the meaning of our Savior in this place.
The other exposition which I mentioned that comes too short, is given by a
late learned and industrious writer amongst us, Doctor Hammond by name, who
affirms that the times of the Gentiles here foretold by our Savior are
already past, having had their full end at that last and notable destruction
both of the City Jerusalem and the people, which was brought upon them by
Aelius Adrianus sixty five years after the burning of the Temple by the Romans
under the conduct of Titus the Son of Vespasianus: All which time of the Romans
possessing the City, he makes the full extent of this word (...) until, and
will have it reach no farther. For then says he, Adrian rebuilt a part of the
City, and called it by his own name, Aelia, inhabiting it with Gentiles,
whereupon it followed, that as all the Jews remaining such in opposition to the
Christians were utterly banished the City, etc. So the believing Christian Jews
returned thither again from their dispersions, and inhabited it again, and
joined, and made one Congregation, one Church with the Gentiles, which had
there by that time received the faith also, and till then continued a distinct
Church from the Jews. Thus he.

But against this novel conceit, for so it may (Salvo honor Docti and defuncti
Authoris) well be called, which as I said comes short of the sense of our
Savior in the forecited place, some just exceptions offer themselves to our
consideration.

First, If we examine the story upon which the said Author groundeth his
assertion, we shall find that the truth of this Prophecy concerning the
treading down of Jerusalem by the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles
were fulfilled, was so far from receiving its final accomplishment at that
remarkable change under Adrian, that it might well be thought, it did then more
then ever before, begin most eminently to appear. The story of which times
related both by Ethnic and Christian Authors in short is this:

The Emperor Adrian being willing it seems to vex the Jews, caused an
Idolatrous Temple to be erected in Jerusalem dedicating it to Jupiter, and
commanding withal a certain number of Romans and other Foreiners, devoted to
that Idol, to dwell in the City, that they might resort unto his Temple;
whereat the Jews, who till then had a toleration both for the exercise of their
Religion, and their abode in that Country, being thereby much provoked (and
because, as some report, the Emperor had issued out an Edict against their
Circumcision) They brake out into open Rebellion, whereunto they were stirred
up by a Seditious person, who called himself by the name of Barchochebas, that
is, the Son of a Star, pretending thereby and making the Jews believe that he
was ((...)) sent to be as a light from Heaven unto them, according to the
Prophecy of Balaam, and that he would deliver them out of their present
bondage. To him they are easily persuaded to yield their Consent, being deluded
by the significancy of his name (says Eusebius) and choosing him for their
Captain, they grew up into a very formidable Army. But the Emperor hearing of
this insurrection, prepares to suppress it, and after a long and tedious war of
three years and a half with these rebellious Jews, brings upon them a sweeping
desolation: their Ringleader (whom the Jews afterward for his imposture
called Barchozbah, that is the Son of a lie) fell in the battle, and many
thousands of his followers (myriads says Nicephorus) were by famine and sword
miserably destroyed. Such of them that escaped were by a decree from the
Emperor banished for ever from that City and commanded upon peril of their
lives, Ne pedem in agrum Jerosolymitanum aliquando inferrent, not once to set
footing any more upon that Land, or so much as to look toward it from any high
place: And moreover to signify their utter Alienation from thence, there was a
Hog cut in marble, set upon the gate by which men go to Bethleem. In fine this
City, as Eusebius says, being by this war utterly deprived of her ancient
inhabitants, and a peregrinis nationibus habitari coepta, and begun to be
possessed by foreign Nations, was afterward made a Roman Colony, and the name
of it changed into Aelia Capitolina. Yea such a deluge of miseries did then
b^eak in upon that City and people, insomuch, says Saint Jerome, Comment. in
Zeph. Cap. 1.
Vsque ad praesentem diem, etc. even unto his time the Jews were not suffered
to enter into Jerusalem, unless it were to bewail the ruins of it; which
admission also once every year they purchased at a dear rate, not being allowed
to abide there above their limited hour, and whosoever desired to stay there
longer, to spend more tears, they were to give more money to the Soldiers that
were set to watch them, ut qui quondam emerant sanguinem Christi, emant
lachrymas suas, that they who had before bought and sold the blood of Christ
should now buy their own tears, says the same Father sweetly in the same
place, who there also very Graphically describes the manner of their
lamentations: from these premises we may therefore conclude that Jerusalem was
now more then ever before trodden down of the Gentiles.

Secondly, Admit that some converted Jews, as this Author says, resorted
thither after this change, yet that argues not that the city was reduced again
to her pristine estate; for those Jews were not formed into any Polity, had not
the Government of the City, but the Romans still kept it in subjection: True it
is that by degrees it came to be inhabited awhile by Christians, and was
dignified with a Patriarchal seat, yet still the Gentiles had it in possession,
and in that respect trod it under foot. For the word here (...), as learned
Grotius observes, is all one with Tenere jure victoriae, i. e. to keep in
subjection by right of Conquest, and therefore, he from thence deriveth this
consequence, viz. The sense of it cannot be limited to the Romans alone, but
reaches to all others that came after them in the Conquest of that City, as
Persians, Saracens, Franks, and Turks, who have successively taken it into
their possession, the Turks at this day trampling upon it, and giving it a name
of their own devising, according to their Language, viz. Cusumobarech: whence
we may infallibly infer, that the times of the Gentiles in treading down
Jerusalem is not yet fulfilled.

And now having weighed these two expositions of our Saviors words, and found
them too light, it remains that we seek out some other, that is more agreeable
to his sense and meaning.

First then shall we say that by the times of the Gentiles is meant the times
of their ignorance, and abominable Idolatries? And that as when the iniquities
of the Amorites were full, God did drive out those Nations from the Land of
Canaan, and according to his promise brought his people into it, giving it to
them for a perpetual inheritance. So when the measure of the Idolatries of the
Gentiles, their cruelties, oppressions of one another and sundry other
abomina^ions that are amongst them is come to its full length, then shall be
brought to pass the saying that is here written, Jerusalem shall no more be
trodden down, as it has been, nor the Captivity of the Jews any longer
continued.

Or shall we say that by the times of the Gentiles may be understood the times
of Gods patience in waiting for the Conversion of those Gentiles, who
professing the name of Christ have too much departed from his rule and
government? So indeed says Gr^tius, that the words of this Text may in some
respect carry that interpretation.

But because these imply a total amputation and desertion of the Gentiles upon
the restoration here spoken of, contrary to the sense of the Holy Ghost in
many places of Scripture, We shall therefore wave them also, and subscribe unto
that of Bid beforementioned, as most sound and Evangelical, wherewith we have
likewise the concurrent assent of very good Expositors both ancient and modern,
viz. That by the times of the Gentiles is meant their several seasons allotted
unto them by the providence of the Almighty for their receiving the Gospel, and
the filling them up to be the completing of those determined seasons to the
utmost period; And that when these seasons, which are known unto God alone, are
perfectly fulfilled, and the fullness of the Gentiles thereupon come in,
according to the predictions of the Apostle Romans 11. (of which we shall also
speak somewhat in its proper place) Then and not before, shall the Captivity of
the Jews be turned back, and Jerusalem also rescued out of her thraldom. Then I
say again it shall doubtless come to pass; For can any thing fail of all that
the Lord has spoken? Is his arm shortened that he cannot make good his word?
Or has he forgotten to be gracious? Is his mercy so frequently promised, so
clearly confirmed by a perpetual Covenant to his firstborn Israel clean gone
for evermore? But how shall he then be 'O (...), the Same? Joshua once spoke it
in the justification of God before his people, when he had settled them in the
promised Land, and gave them rest round about, There failed not ought of any
good thing which the Lord had spoken unto the house of Israel, Josh. 21.49.
All came to pass Josh. 21.49. No more certainly shall any thing fail now,
because the Lord who is still the same has said it, the word is gone out of
his mouth* and cannot be disanulled. Shortly then, as this City and people is
according to this prophecy scattered and laid waste, so when this appointed
time here mentioned is come, They shall (though all the powers of darkness be
against it) be restored to their liberty and dignity again.

A second witness out of the New Testament to confirm us in this point we have
given us out of the first of the Acts sixth and seventh verses. Act. 1.6.7.
The words are these. When they therefore were come together they asked of him,
saying, Lord will thou at this time restore again the Kingdom to Israel? And he
said unto them, It is not for you to know the times or the seasons which the
Father has put in his own power.

I know well the Apostles have been, and are to this day charged here with an
error common among the Jews (as it is reported of them) namely, That the time
should come when the Messiah should reign as Lord and King upon the Earth,
according to the manner of the world; and that all Nations should in that kind
be subject unto him, and because the Jews were to have the pre-eminence among
them, therefore does the Apostle speak here of his Dominion in this man^er,
calling it the kingdom of Israel.

But I must crave leave to enter my dissent unto this charge, because it runs
on too fast in the world without a warrant, yea I cannot but account it too
much rashness to impute a fault unto those eminent servants of Christ, where
the Holy Ghost in Scripture has not given a clear demonstration thereof. A
fault indeed here is whereof they were too guilty, in busying themselves about
the knowledge of a time wherein they were not concerned, and for which the Lord
rebukes them. But that they should now (as for what they had done formerly in
that kind, it is not here Material) look for such a temporal Kingdom of the
Messiah, as the Jews generally did, and do still expect, this I confidently
deny. The grounds of which confidence will appear, when I shall have proved
that this discourse between Christ and his Apostles is a clear confirmation of
the point in hand.

That we may understand a^ight the sense of this Scripture, let us consider
distinctly three things. First, the occasion of this Question. Secondly, the
persons that put the Question. Thirdly, the Answer unto it.

First, the occasion from whence the Question did arise is couched in this word
therefore, when they therefore were come together, they asked of him, etc. By
which word of connection it is manifest that their Question was not suddenly
started as of a thing impertinent to the purport of Christ's Doctrine, which he
had been pressing upon them in those forty days, since his Resurrection, but
rather was produced by them, as a result very consonant thereunto. He had been
speaking to them, as it is said verse. 3. of the things pertaining to the
Kingdom of God, that is, of the future estate of his Church, for as for the
Doctrine of Salvation, he had fully made that known unto them before, as
appears Joh. 15.15. Where he says, All things that I have heard of my Father,
I have made known unto you: So that probable it is, the Subject of his
discourse now was, as I have said, concerning his Church, giving instructions
for the planting and governing of it, and premonitions also what dangers and
difficulties it was like to suffer, and how it should prosper and prevail over
them all in the latter end. And herein the Lord manifests his provident care
and tender compassion which he had of his Church, resembling thereby good old
Jacob his Type (in this very particular) who when he was about to leave the
world. calls upon his sons to gather themselves together, that he migh show
unto them, what should befall them in the latter days. G^n 49 1.


Whereas therefore the Lord Jesus Christ had been speaking to his Apostles of
these things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, and they thereupon enquire of
him concerning the restoring the Kingdom to Israel, is it not past all
gainsaying that some at least of the things which he spoke had reference to
this restoration? Especially when as it is well observed by Grotius, In his
Annota. Luke 21.24.
non negat se id facturum, sed quo id futurum esset tempore, noluit ab ipsis
inquiri, he does not deny that such a thing he would do, but only was not
willing to be enquired of by them, when it should be done. Much was to be done,
as the sequel now proves, before this which they so hastily sought for could
come to pass, which they thought not of (for it could never have entered into
their hearts to conceive, unless it had been revealed unto them,) wherein
nevertheless they and their Successors for many Ages should be employed as
servants and co-workers with Christ, to the end, that this much desired
restoration might, by the bringing in of others also to the faith of the
Gospel, be attended with the greater glory. And hence it is that the Lord
commands them that they should not depart from Jerusalem (because from thence
was the word of life to go out into the world) till they were baptized with the
Holy Ghost, which was the promise of the Father, whereby they were to be endued
with power extraordinary (as being the chief intruments under Christ) for so
great a work, and to authorize others in an ordinary way to be their co-agents
in it.

Secondly, consider the persons that put the Question. First, it was the
Apostles, men not to be despised, such as were legati a latere, whom Christ had
chosen above all others to be his witnesses of what he did and taught, and to
be his Ambassadors to carry his name into all the world, Who did eat and
drinks with him after he arose from the dead, Act. 10.

Secondly, the Apostles, who though they were not yet baptized with the Holy
Ghost, according to the promise of the Father, yet had received the Holy Ghost
by Christ's breathing on them, whereby they had not only power given them more
then ordinary, but knowledge also more then ever they had, to discern what
might be most conducible to the advancement of their Masters honor, and so
knew more of his mind in order thereunto, then any others could or can
possibly attain unto.

Thirdly, the Apostles altogether, not one or two of them separated from the
rest, desirous to wind themselves into their Masters favor above their
fellows (as it had unhappily fallen out in former time,) but the eleven with
one consent joined as one man to put this Question unto him; for when they were
come together, it is said, they asked of him, saying, Lord will thou at this
time restore again the Kingdom to Israel? Which Kingdom if it were never any
more to have a being in this World, as a thing inconsistent with the manner of
Christ's Spiritual Kingdom, their general agreement about it would doubtless
have been adjudged no better then a conspiracy against the Dignity and
Prerogative Royal of their Lord and Master, and consequently had not gone
without a severe check, no more then their precipitant disquisition after the
time did, for which they are reproved.

Thirdly, consider the answer that the Lord gives, It is not (says he) for
you to know the times or the seasons which the Father has put in his own
power. Observe, he does not tax them with folly and backwardness of believing
the Prophets, as he did the two Disciples going to Emmaus; For they after all
the manifestations that he had made in their sight of the mighty power of God,
and the clear testimonies he had given, that the predictions of the Prophets
concerning the Messiah were terminated in him, doubted nevertheless whether it
was he that should redeem Israel out of his troubles: But these believing the
Prophets, being now thoroughly instructed by him concerning his Church, and
assuring themselves thereupon that he was ordained of God to be the restorer of
Israel's liberty, without which the Church could not be complete, he only
reproves them for their overmuch haste, and busy intrusions into the secret
counsels of the Father, being desirous it seems before the time to be
eyewitnesses of that, as well as of all the other mighty works which Christ
had done among them.

Yea moreover, if we compare the words spoken to those two Disciples, with
these here to the Apostles, some further light may yet appear unto us
concerning this matter: To them it is said, Luke 24.26.
Ought not Christ to suffer these things, and to enter into his glory? To
these, It is not for you to know the times or seasons which the Father has put
in his own power. In the first, he implies that the redemption of Israel (that
is, such as they meant, else our Saviors reply had not tended to the resolving
of their doubt) could not be accomplished before he entered into glory; For
there this our Lord and Nobleman (as he is called, Luke 19.12.) went to receive
his Kingdom, and there he was to rule and order all things for the benefit and
advantage of his people, both of Israel, and of all other Nations in the World,
according to the times and seasons which the Father would impart unto him, when
he was in glory. In the second he intimates that the times and seasons for the
bringing to pass Gods righteous purpose concerning the thing which they
demanded, are running on in that glory whereinto he was entering, and are guided
only by the will of the Father; and therefore they should be contented with
their measure, and wait with patience for the full accomplishment of this
deliverance, which God in his due time, best known unto himself, would surely
bring to pass by him, even while he is in his glory. But let us proceed.

Thirdly, it cannot but be now expected, that that well known witness of Saint
Paul ( Romans 11.) should be produced. Romans 11.
Let it then be examined, for it brings with it so clear an evidence in this
case, that the Holy Spirit by it seems to remove away all doubting.

We shall not stay to make any large Metaphrase upon the Chapter (he that runs
may read the sense of it) let it suffice to take notice of the general scope in
the whole, and to gather out of it somewhat that may be most material for our
confirmation in this point we are upon, and for the conviction of those that
are of a contrary judgment.

In the two Chapters immediately before-going the Apostle having written
severely of the rejection of the Jews (according to the Prophecies that went
before of them) for their rejecting of the Gospel, he undertakes in this to
mitigate the acrimony of his censure, to the end the Gentiles might not take
occasion to insult over them, as if they were an abject people, given up to a
final abdication: Which unbrotherly insultation that he might anticipate
(foreseeing that it would prevail too much, as it seems it does to this very
day) he renders here his meaning in plain terms, showing manifestly what the
purpose of God is concerning his rejection of this his ancient peculiar people,
viz. That it was not to be either universal or perpetual; which mitigation he
sweetly insinuates once and again in the form of a Dialogue: Has God (says
he) cast away his people? God forbid. Have they stumbled that they should fall?
God forbid.

Where, by the way, we may observe the Apostles method, in contracting his
whole discourse concerning this subject in the solution of these two Quaere's.
In his treating of the first he proves clearly that the rejection of the Jews
was not a total rejection. In his arguing upon the second, he proves also as
infallibly that it shall not be a final rejection. So long therefore as we
follow the conduct of the Apostle herein, we shall not need to fear the
contradiction of any other.

The first part of his undertaking we shall for brevities sake omit, and
because it may be judged not fully Argumentative to the point in hand: For it
is not to be doubted (will some say) but that some of these castaway Jews
might belong to the Election of Grace, as well as the Gentiles, and therefore
may in all ages be converted to the Faith, as the Apostle himself was. That
therefore which we have to say shall be derived from the second, wherein we
shall prove as undeniably that the whole Nation shall in Gods due time be made
happy in this Conversion also.

First then observe with what Authority the Apostle makes known his mind, not
nakedly asserting his judgment, but like an Apostle indeed prefixeth his'
(...) thereunto. So he did at first, when he entered upon this matter, (...), I
say then, so does he now again (...), I say then: Thus Dictator-like as became
him, he pronounces his Sentence (tanquam ex Cathedra) whereby he not only
gives a further Explanation of his meaning, but advises all sorts of people
(his Advice here being equivalent with a Command) to acquiesce in his saying,
and to subcribe unto him.

But what is it that he says? First he puts the Question, Have they stumbled
that they should fall? that is, per Synechdochen, that they should fall
finally? Or as Saint Chrysostom glosseth upon it, Is their fall so great that
it is irrecoverable, The Answer hereunto follows, not by a bare Negation, but
as abhorring such a thought in himself, or in any other, (...), as much as to
say, That be far from you once to imagine, as it is from me so to determine.

And now if the Apostle had said no more, this verily had been enough to stop
the mouth of all contradiction: For who is he that dares utter a word in
opposition to the Apostles saying? But that the Gentiles might not think more
highly of themselves, nor more disdainfully of the Jews then they ought to
think, behold how his heart is enlarged for his brethren his kinsmen accoding
to the flesh (as he calls them, Romans 9.3.) Showing first (in that which we are
willing to pass by) the Possibility of their Reception, secondly the
Probability of it, thirdly the Certainty. The Possibility (as I have said) he
had insisted upon before in the beginning of the Chapter. Now comes he, verse.
11, 12, etc. with variety of Arguments to show the Probability. Afterward,
verse. 25, etc, etc. he proves the Certainty thereof; In the end applauding and
magnifying the Wisdom and Knowledge of God, his stupendous Wisdom in making
the Desertion of the Jews and occasion of calling the Gentiles, and his
profound knowledge far beyond the reach of all the heavenly Intelligences, in
knowing how to work upon the most obstinate Jews, by bringing them to the
obedience of the Gospel through their envy and emulation toward the Gentiles.

This in short is the sum of the Apostles undertaking. And should we now
follow his track throughout his whole Discourse upon this Subject, though
possibly some would account it tedious to afford us their company; yet we
should not be found guilty of an inexcusable digression from the subject that
we have before treated of, in so doing. For the Text being directed to the
Hebrews, to assure them of Christ's immutability toward them (which argues
clearly that he would not finally forsake them, though for the present they
were as strangers scattered about the world, 1 Pet. 1.1.) The explicating
therefore of these parallel Scriptures which the holy Ghost has recorded for our
confirmation therein, cannot with any shadow of reason be reckoned as an
impertinency, especially when a point so material to the honor of the Lord
Jesus Christ is called in question, as it is this day. Neither indeed could
that which has been here done in order thereto have been omitted, unless we
should have betrayed the Text to the gainsaying of men, which God forbid. And
let this serve for a vindication against all those cavillers, who are ready to
object impertinencies unto me in the allegation of those Scriptures which have
here been made use of to this purpose.

Nevertheless to avoid more prolixity we shall not exactly trace the Apostle in
the pursuance of this argument concerning the Probability of the re^ingrafting
of the Jewish Nation into the Church of God; only give leave in the behalf of
Gods glory, and the special interest of his Church, to put a Quaere or two,
which are the fruit and offspring of an astonishing admiration: The Resolution
whereof shall be left unto the adversaries of this poor despised people to be
determined by them, either with a retractation of their error here, and
repentance for it, or hereafter before the Tribunal of the righteous Judge,
when he shall appear in his glory.

First then I demand, 1. Quaere
Whether it be not just and meet that God should obtain his end, which he has
proposed unto himself concerning both Jews and Gentiles in the dispensation of
his mercy? He has (says the Apostle, verse. 32.) concluded them all in
unbelief, that is, in his just Judgment shut them all up together, as in the
very verge of hell, under the dominion of sin: (which misery nevertheless they
had brought upon themselves by their contumacy against him) but to what end?
Was it that he might destroy either one or the other? No verily, but rather
that he might have mercy upon them all both Jews and Gentiles. To the Gentiles
who were first in this (...) pertinaciously set against the Lord and his
Anointed, he would make known the riches of his Grace, and take them into his
Covenant as well as the Jews. But because the Jews indignation was so great
against the Gentiles, that they would not vouchsafe to own them as brethren and
copartners with them in the same grace (though they themselves also most
unthankfully rejected this grace when it was offered unto them, resembling
thereby, as the proverb is, the Dog in the manger, who would neither eat of the
fodder himself, nor suffer the poor hungry Ox, standing by, to eat of it that
would) therefore did God leave them to a woeful blindness and hardness of heart,
that through their fall, salvation might come to the Gentiles; wherein
notwithstanding God had a favorable respect unto the Jews likewise, viz. That
they seeing the Gentiles taken into his bosom, enjoying the privileges of
children (far beyond their expectation) and themselves despised of God, and
dispersed over the world, might be provoked to emulation, that is, to an
earnest desire of reconciliation with God, as disdaining to be a Nation
inferior to any other Nations in his love, and willing to be like unto them,
yea to surpass them in all things that might endear them unto him.

Now consider when God shall in the depth of his Wisdom contrive a glorious
design for the exalting of his grace, so glorious, that next to the sending of
his only Son into the world would be the greatest that ever should be acted
upon the Theater of the world, and withal give notice of it in his Word to the
children of men, that they might wait for the accomplishment thereof, Is it not
an affront offered to the Wisdom of God, and a check given unto his Grace, for
any to doubt, whether it should come to pass or no?

Secondly, 2. Quere
Since not only the glory of God, but the interest of his Church is herein
highly concerned, I demand in the next place, Whether it be not very requisite,
that they who profess themselves children of the Church should rejoice in those
discoveries of Divine Providence that may any way tend to the promoting of that
interest? Saint Paul here who was called to be an Apostle of the Gentiles,
accounts it a magnifying of his office, to make his boast of the great increase
of those spiritual riches, which he foresaw should be the portion of the
Churches of the Gentiles upon the reception of the Jews in the latter days.
Hear how he argues* If the fall of them, that is, the Jews, be the riches of
the world, and the diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles, how much
more their fullness? And again, If the casting away of them be the reconciling
of the world, what shall the receiving of them be, but life seem the dead?

Words indeed of an irresistible conviction, unless we will say with the
Laedicean, We are rich and increased in goods, and have need of nothing: Alas
we have need of more grace, because Satan now has more wrath then ever, having
but a short time to work for his kingdom; we have need of more holiness,
because the pollutions of the world are grown more filthy; we have need of more
acquaintance with our God, because our hearts are grown more deceitful:
doubtless we are not so full, but we have yet need of more, at least we have
need of more brotherly love, and Christian unanimity, then is at this day to be
found amongst us, and that those schisms and divisions under which the poor
Church of Christ lies struggling as it were for life should be taken out of
the way. True it is we Gentiles who were before a beggarly people have upon the
Jews falling into poverty been enriched by Divine bounty, but have not we also
grown wanton with our wealth, gadding about after vanities that cannot profit
us? When they were cast out of favor we were reconciled to God, who were
before strangers, yea enemies unto him: But have not we also many a time vexed
his holy Spirit by our treacherous Apostacies, as much as they? And how then
shall this be remedied? Which way shall we have our wants supplied? Our
breaches repaired? Our hearts more established in the truth? Does not the
Apostle who is of counsel with the Almighty in this case, and therefore knew
best the way of Divine dispensation of grace toward us, does not he I say tell
us here plainly how all this shall be brought about to our exceeding great
advantage, viz. by the reception of this people into favor, restoring them
again fully to their dignity and pre-eminence among the Nations? Not indeed as
a meritorious cause thereof (that is far from the Apostles meaning) but in a way
of subserviency to that providence which orders all things for the good of
Church.

And now let it be considered, How great is that goodness which God has laid
up for his people even before the Sons of Men in the latter days? May we not
then expect a more plentiful effusion of his Spirit in the powerful operations
of it upon the hearts of Believers? And that all those pestilent heresies
wherewith the Christian Churches among the Gentiles have been miserably
infested even almost unto death, should be thrown to the Moles and to the Bats?
The jarring and jangling sound of Schism no more to be heard in their
Assemblies, and instead thereof both Jews and Gentiles to be united together in
a most entire and indissoluble bond of Brotherhood? And when this fullness of
happiness shall come upon the Gentiles (as it will surely happen unto them upon
the fullness of the Jews, the Apostle himself being witness) may it not be
reckoned (according to the Apostles word) as it were a new life from the dead?

I demand therefore again, Are these things so? Has God determined to advance
so much the interest of his Church by the Restoration of the Jews, and is it
meet that we should stand cavilling at it? Shall this our Apostle thus magnify
his office, and with a paternal care of our good, argue so irrefragably in our
behalf, and should we like a company of wayward children with unkind
Recalcitrations spurn against his office, and our own happiness, vilifying the
one, and as much as lies in us nullifying the other? How these Quaere's may be
answered, together with many other that might be gathered from the following
branches of the Apostles arguing about the facility of the Jews Restoration,
shall I say be left to their consideration, who not only causlesly call it
into question, but peremptorily deny that the Nation of the Jews shall ever be
reckoned among the Nations of the world any more, and so consequently asperse
the Lord Jesus Christ with inconstancy toward this his first beloved people,
as if he would not be 'O' (...) unto them, the Same to the end, which he has
been from the beginning.

If any shall say, That to put these Quaere's in such a manner is to beg the
Question, that is, To conclude that for a truth, which is in controversy
whether it be so or no. I must answer, If the Apostles arguing hitherto will
not satisfy, and that neither Possibilities nor Probabilitics heaped together
will down with gainsayers to draw them to a conviction, we have a more sure
word of Testimony given here in the close, whereunto they should do well to
take heed, least unhappily they be found even to sight against God.

To the end therefore that no man might in this case plead ignorance, which is
commonly the mother of arrogance, Hear what the Apostle adds, verse. 25, 26,
etc. I would not brethren (says he) that you should be ignorant of this
mystery, (lest you should be wise in your own conceits) that blindness in part
is happened unto Israel until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in; and so
all Israel shall be saved, etc.

I know well that these very words of the Apostle are also wrested by some to
another sense; as there will not want cavils against the clearest
demonstrations of Truth to the worlds end. And if we should give an ear to
whatsoever may be suggested unto us by opposite parties, we shall never be free
from hesitancies in the interpretation of any Scripture, nor in the asserting
of any Doctrines, though never so fundamental. Let this present Scripture be
looked upon but with an unprejudicate eye, and be considered in the most plain
and grammatical sense of it, and then see whether it does not precisely
determine this point, viz. That there is a time approaching, wherein the Jewish
Nation shall be restored, and become a glorious converted Nation again, which
God will own for his Beloved people, notwithstanding all their unkind
rebellions against him. To afford some help herein, observe,

First the Apostle speaks of this matter, as of a mystery, and therefore
should the more diligent heed be given unto it. A mystery indeed it is; First
in regard of the origination of it, being sprung out of the profound abyss of
Gods infinite wisdom and knowledge. Secondly in regard of the progress of it,
being much opposed by the infidelity of men, who are and will be slow of heart
to believe it. Thirdly in regard of the unsearchable way and manner how it
shall be acted, when in the fullness of time it shall be brought to pass in the
world, however therefore men do slight it, the Apostle it seems makes great
account of it. Secondly, He advises the Romans to take special notice of it; I
would not brethren, says he, have you ignorant hereof, etc. As if he should
say, beware that you do not out of a fond conceit of your privileges above the
Jews, cast this mystery out of your thoughts, as a thing impertinent to your
cognizance, for you are concerned in it, and that which is revealed of it will
certainly be required of you. Thirdly, He proceeds to a description of the
mystery so far as it was revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost. Non enim est
(...) quod significat n^^tilation^ alic jus partis, and sic in oculis
coecitatem sig^isicat, Sed (...) qu^d ind^atio^e^n significat a (...) callu^,
five d^^it^es in (...) unde (...), i.e. call ^n (...) s^em (...) (...) (...)
^ungo.
Blindness (as we read it) in part is happened unto Israel until the fullness
of the Gentiles be come in, and so all Israel shall be saved.
Where first, that we may the better poise this mystery, let us a little by the
way consider the judgment inflicted upon this people; which alas alas we find
to be exceeding great. So much does the word (...) signify, for that is not a
blindness in the mind only, but a spiritual obduration overspreading the whole
soul, whereby they are become utterly unsensible of their sin and misery. And
thus we find the word (...) rendered before verse 7. by Beza and others,
reliqui occaluerunt, that is, the rest were hardened, or covered all over with
a brawny thickness. Thus also is it written of them Act. 28.27. The heart of
this people is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes
have they closed, least they should see with their eyes, and hear with their
ears, and understand with their hearts, etc. For why? God has given them in
his just displeasure (says the Apostle) verse 8. (...), A slothful spirit, a
spirit that luls them asleep in their sin, leading them in the dark: or as the
word may imply, A spirit that pierces them through, railing them fast to their
infidelity, pricking their eyes that they should not see, and boring their ears
that they should not hear unto this day.

Hence it is that they obstinately reject all means of their conversion, they
blaspheme Christ in their Synagogues, and whenever any mention is made of
him, they cry out Deleatur n^men ejus, let his name be forgotten, and then spit
thrice upon the ground in detestation of him: they inure their Children from
their Childhood to curse the Lord Jesus, and the blessed Virgin his Mother,
and if any do undertake to refute their errors out of the word, they presently
stop their ears, refusing to hear, etc. Thereby verifying the Word of the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.15
2 Cor. 3.15. even unto this day, when Moses is read, the Va^l is upon their
Heart. In a word as the same Apostle summeth up their wickedness in another
place, They killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, 1 Thessalonians. 2.15.10.
and have persecuted us, and they please not God, and are contrary to all men,
Forbidding to speak to the Gentiles that they might be saved, to fill up their
sins always; for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost.

Surely a very fearful and sore judgment it is, that is fallen upon this
people. And what should we do in this day wherein the avenging hand of God
lies so heavy upon them? Should we now forget the brotherly-Covenant, and with
Edom insult over them in the day of their calamity, Obad. v. 12
speaking proudly in the day of their distress? That be far from us. Rather let
us for our humiliation consider, so long as they are under so severe a lash of
Gods just indignation, we, that are sinners of the Gentiles, shall still have a
taste given us of the cup of Gods anger, none of all our Churches must look to
be delivered from their present troubles, they must and shall be still haunted
with a spirit of division among themselves, and with persecution from the Devil
and his Antichrist: For lo the Lord has begun to bring evil upon his people,
and upon the City which is called by his name, and should we be utterly
unpunished? Thus argues the Apostle Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 4.17, 18 Whose words
we may make use of to this purpose: When God had begun to cast off the Jews
(for of them it is probable the Apostle in this place is especially mindful,
because otherwise the order which he there observes that God used in bringing
his people under his rod before he poured out his fury upon his enemies, was no
new or strange matter, but had been of old) He thus writes; 1 Pet. 4.17 18.
The time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God, and if it first
begin at us, that is, the Jews (for these Epistles were written to them)
whether it be those amongst us that profess the faith, or the generality of our
Nation that deny it) what shall the end be of them, viz. the Gentiles, who obey
not the Gospel of God, that is, Who when they have received it, are not easy
to be persuaded by it, but are refractory and unruly under it, as we all are to
this very day? And if the righteous (such were all the Jews whiles they
continued the house of God) scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the
sinner of the Gentiles appear? Whether this be the proper sense of the place or
no, I will not contend, but will leave it to consideration; nevertheless our
argumentation cannot be refelled, if the green tree suffer in this manner,
shall the dry tree escape? If the children, the dearly beloved of Gods soul, be
thus severely punished, shall we in the mean time that were strangers, reckoned
no better then dogs feeding under our Masters table be without chastisement?
especially when now grace has abounded toward us, there are with us also,
even with us sins against the Lord our God? The consideration hereof may I say
teach us to walk humbly, and should put us to our prayers, yea to earnest
importunities, that God would be pleased once again to look upon his ancient
people with an eye of compassion: and the rather should we be willing hereunto,
because there is hope in Israel concerning this thing; for behold here the
unspeakable goodness of God in a mystery, made manifest by this scripture of
the Apostle, according to the commandment of the everlasting God; this
obduration which is upon Israel is but in part, till the fullness of the
Gentiles be come in.

Observe first, It is but in part that they are thus hardened, (...)
In part I say, not as if the Jews for the generality had not wholly rejected
the grace of God (for alas the judgment written in that respect is (as it has
been said before) come upon them to the uttermost, the whole way of God for
their salvation being hidden from their eyes) but it is in part, How? because
all the Nation has not fallen under this judgment, say some; so Saint Austin,
Ex part dixit, quia non omnes excoecati sunt, He says in part, because all
are not hardened. Epist. 59. Tom. 10. Molli locutione significare vellet
plurimos non omnes aut non omnino. Grotius. Ambr. Tom. 5.
But if this were the meaning, wherein lay the mystery? For it was manifest by
the Apostle himself, and sundry others with him, that there was a remnant of
Believers among the Jews in those days, according to the election of grace.
Rather therefore I conceive with Saint Ambrose, He says in part, because this
obduration was to be but for a time; so that this restriction of (...) is not
set by the Apostle as Calvin and others would have it to temper the asperity of
the word (...), so as to be an extenuation of their sin (for that appears still
to be exceeding sinful) but it refers to Gods decreed boundary for the time
of the worlds continuance, implying that that should not be wholly spent,
before this obduration of theirs should be wholly removed from them; and when
that shall be, the Apostle here tells us, when the fullness of the Gentiles is
come in.

If any shall demand what this fullness of the Gentiles is? I must answer with
Origin, Quaerit ista plenitudo gentium, unus solus not it and unigenitus e^us,
etc. What this fullness of the Gentiles shall be is known only unto God, and to
his only begotten Son, and to those to whom the Son will reveal it. Possibly
it may be a great multitude of Gentiles, such as was not the like in all the
generations of old that should flock together to the Church like Doves to their
windows; by the accession of which multitude to the faith, the Jews shall be
provoked through a holy emulation to acknowledge Christ to be the true Messiah,
repenting themselves of their so long estrangement from him, or possibly
because the Jews shall hereafter have their peculiar fullness (according to what
is said before of them v. 12.) in opposition to their present failing,
therefore has God also appointed a certain fullness for the Gentiles (unknown
as yet what it shall be) that when it is come, (...) So rendered. 1 Cor. 6.3.
neither of them should have cause to despise each other any more. In sine,
this I think we may safely say of it, that this word of the Apostle has some
affinity with the word of our Savior, Luke 21.24. before insisted upon, viz.
When the times of the Gentiles (as they are in the hand of God) shall be
fulfilled; so that when God has finished all his predeterminate counsel
concerning the Gentiles, and the depth of his wisdom issued forth such a
spiritual and ecclesiastical fullness among them, as may be for the advancement
of the Gospel and Kingdom of Christ, then shall the mystery of God concerning
his Israel be finished also, 2 Cor. 3.16.
The veil shall be taken off from them, their occallation wholly cease, and
they shall (according to the Prophecy of Zachary) Look upon him whom they have
pierced, and mourn for him, as one mourns for his only Son, etc. And then
(says the Apostle) all Israel shall be saved.

All Israel, that is (not as it is construed by some) the whole Israel of God
throughout the world consisting of Jews and Gentiles, for that neither was any
mystery to those, unto whom this Epistle is written, who knew full well by
daily experience that multitudes of the Gentiles together with some of the
Jewish Nation were converted to the faith, and by consequence should
undoubtedly be saved; yea if this construction should be admitted, the Apostle
had receded from his scope, which he aimed at throughout this whole Chapter,
which was to suppress the insolency of the Gentiles against the Jews, and to
quicken the poor Jews with some lively hope of their restoration.

Laying aside therefore this mistake, though it be fathered by many, who carry
a great name amongst us in the interpretation of Scripture, By Israel here is
undoubtedly meant Children of the flock of Abraham, sprung out of the thigh of
Jacob, those whom the Apostle calls before v. 14. His own flesh. Concerning
whom a Question likewise is started by Expositors upon the occasion of this
Note of Universality (all) whether thereby is meant all (none excepted) or
many, that is, the greatest number of the Jews that shall be saved. Which
needless Question I shall not stand upon, only deliver in short my poor
conceptions concerning the Apostles sense in this particular with submission to
the Church.

By all Israel is meant not Judah alone, which then dwelt in the Land of
Canaan, but all the twelve Tribes of Israel that were scattered abroad in the
world, all of them (says the Apostle) shall be saved, that is, delivered from
their sin, and consequently from their captivity, and brought again (as they
were before) into a state of salvation, wherein they shall abide for ever, so
long as the world endu^eth.

This in truth is the bottom of the mystery that is here intended, and this
sense I am prone to give of it, being inclined unto it by the word of the
Prophet as it is alleged by the Apostle, viz. There shall come out of Sion a
deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob, for this is my Covenant
with them, when I shall take away their sin.

In which words three things are of special remark.

First, the Apostles varying from the Prophet in the allegation of his
testimony; for this will be of singular use to our present purpose. The Prophet
had said, a Redeemer shall come, the Apostle says, there shall come a
Deliverer; a Redeemer shall come to Sion, says the Prophet, there shall come a
Deliverer out of Sion, says the Apostle, to those that turn from ungodliness
in Jacob, says the Prophet, to turn away ungodliness from Jacob, says the
Apostle.

And why is there so much disparity may some say between them? Should not the
Apostle, since he will corroborate his assertion from what is written by the
Prophet, produce his testimony exactly without any alteration? I answer, the
spirit of truth, always One and the Same, wherewith these Actuaries and
Penmen of Holy Writ, were guided, knew best in what terms to express the
purpose and counsel of God concerning his people, both in the times of the Law,
and of the Gospel: Distingue tempora and concordabunt scripturae.
Hence it is that the Apostle is here made the Prophets interpreter rendering
his sense in evangelical terms, according to the intent and purpose of the
Spirit therein: That therefore which the Prophet speaks of the coming of
Christ in the flesh, is extended by the Apostle to a blessed effect that shall
follow thereupon, which he might in reason warrantably do, for causa proxima
posita necesse est poni effectum, the effect will undoubtedly follow the cause,
and that coming of the Messiah was certainly the immediate cause of all the
happiness that at any time was to come upon the Church to the end of the World.
Here is then no contradiction in this disparity, but a sweet and melodious
harmony rather, the echo whereof to my apprehension sounds in this manner:
This Redeemer or redeeming Kinsman of Israel, Christ Jesus, being come unto
Sion, shall out of Sion, that is, from his Church, where he has his dwelling
and abode by his spirit, cause a deliverance to arise for his kindred Israel,
in restoring them again to their spiritual estate, which being lost by their
unbelief, he had purchased again for them: And because the Redeemer was to slay
the murderer of his kindred, as well as to re-enfeoffe them in their Land and
livelihood, therefore shall this deliverer also turn away, that is, utterly
destroy ungodliness (their murderous enemy) out of Jacob, which being his act
for them, they also by right of propinquity and nearness of kindred may be said
themselves to be active in it.

Upon the whole matter then, the Apostle by his variation of the Prophets
terms seems to take away all scruples of the Jews Restoration. First, their
Redeemer shall be their Deliverer, who is both willing and able so to be,
willing by his relation unto them, able because he is the Lord strong and
mighty. Secondly, he shall come out of Sion, because he is come unto Sion, that
is, he shall from his Church, by some powerful means that shall be used, issue
out a deliverance unto them, because he came to his Church to be her Redeemer.
Thirdly, neither shall their ungodliness, that is, their pertinacy in their
present infidelity hinder this deliverance (as some conceive by it an
impossibility of their return) for he shall turn it away from them, and they
shall no more turn unto it again.

Secondly it is observable, Though the Apostle here varyeth from the Prophet in
the formality of Isreal's conversion and deliverance, yet he fully agrees with
him in the subject thereof, that is, Jacob; For mark, Neither of them both
says, Ungodliness shall be turned away from Judah, which was the remnant that
God had reserved, to the end that they should know that he was the Lord,
Neither do they say, from Israel (as distinguished from Judah) which had been
long ago driven into banishment; But from Jacob, as signifying all his
posterity, All I say, not intending probably every particular person that
should come out of his loins, but as ranked into several Tribes, not one of
them shall be lost, but all shall be saved, that is, All of them in their
several generations shall after this deliverance continue faithful with their
God, and never be separated from him any more.

Thirdly the Apostle and Prophet both engage the truth and faithfulness of God,
for the accomplishment of this deliverance in these words, For this is my
Covenant with them, when I shall take away their sins: With them, that is,
without all controversy to be understood of the seed and posterity of Jacob
(as the whole current of the Apostles design in this Chapter makes it manifest)
and as has been before sufficiently proved. I demand then, Has God Covenanted
with this his Israel to save and deliver them from their sin and captivity,
when the fullness of the Gentiles is come in; and when the Word is gone out of
his mouth, and past into a record in Holy Writ, the Register of his revealed
Counsels to his Church, will he then retract it, and not keep his Covenant? O
far be it from any to put such an imputation of inconstancy upon the
Unchangeable God: Faithful is he that has Covenanted, who also will do it. And
now let us join these two together, the Strength of Isreal's Redeemer, and the
Faithfulness of their God, and who is he then that can doubt of their
Restoration?



Lutheran party) it may well be demanded, What advantage would accrue to the
Churches of the Gentiles by the reception of the Jews? How shall the world be
enriched (according to the word of the Apostle) by their fullness, more then it
was by their fall and diminution, if the world must be dissolved immediately
upon their conversion? I will not deny but this may be the glorious and blessed
Catastrophe of the mighty acts of God upon the I heater of this world, and that
it is kept as a reserve by the providence of heaven to crown Messiah's
victories and his peoples glory: But that at the very first appearance thereof,
when the consolation of Israel, and the riches of the Gentiles so largely
promised in the Word, and so earnestly expected and desired in sundry
generations, shall by the good hand of God be produced into act, that the I
say, at the very rise and springing of these glorious manifestations of Gods
Power and Faithfulness, this stage should be taken down, and the scene removed
into another world, as if the distinction between Jews and Gentiles should be
continued there, as it is here, is not easily to be believed. Undoubtedly God
will so do this mavelous act that it shall for some time be had here in
remembrance to the advancement of his own glory, the honor of his people, and
to the everlasting confusion of the Prince of darkness with all his adherents.

Neither is this considence without sufficient warrant from the word of God;
for besides that which has been already said to this purpose, if we consult
the Prophet Esaias once again in the place beforementioned, and compare him with
the Apostle in these very words, that we have stood last upon, we shall find
ground firm enough whereon to build this assertion, viz. That this world shall
continue for some generations after the Jews return from their finne and
captivity.

Observe therefore, When the Prophet had said, The Redeemer shall come to Sion,
and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, he adds, Esa. 59.21.
As for me, this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, My Spirit is upon
thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth shall not depart out of thy
mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds
seed, says the Lord henceforth and for ever.

Which words I confess in the spirit of them, are directed to the Church, and
the children of it, assuring them that Gods Spirit and Word shall continue with
them for their instruction in all things needful for their salvation. But when
the Apostle who with the Prophet is guided by the same infallible Spirit shall
lead us further to an application of them unto the seed of Jacob after their
Restoration, we may safely conclude that they do carry also with them this
sense as well as the former, viz. That Israel shall, when they are returned
unto the Lord, cleave unto him for some generations, three at least, wherein
they shall continue steadfast unto the end.

Now that the Apostle intends the same with the Prophet in this particular as
well as in any other before insisted upon, seems to me very probable. He does
not indeed intersert those very words of the Prophet, having mentioned that
already which was equivalent with them: 2 Pet. 3.15.
I or as the Apostle Saint Peter will have the long-suffering of God to be
accounted Salvation, so the Apostle Saint Paul, in that he says, All Israel
shall be saved, reckons the pouring out of Gods Spirit upon Israel, and putting
his Word into their mouth, together with their constant adherency thereunto
throughout their generations (according to the Prophecy written of them) to be
Salvation also.

This sense I conceive does the Contexture point out unto us, and I shall
humbly commend it to the examination of the Church. The Apostle when the finne
of Israel is taken away, says, as the Prophet before him had said in the name
of the Lord, This is my Covenant with them: What is that? Nothing more is added
by the Apostle, and it might be thought that the subsequent words of the
Prophet, wherein the Covenant is expressed, should have been rehearsed by the
Apostle, but they we see are omitted, not as if he did for brevities sake cut
them off, as it were with an Et caetera, as Junius would have it: Parallelo^um,
Lib. 2 Par. 2 3.
No need at all of so Jejune a supplement: What then does he mean by this
Covenant? even that which he had before said, and which is the same in effect
with the words of the Prophet, that is, All Israel shall be savea: otherwise
that (...), As it is written, had been written in vain: I say therefore once
again that by these words of the Apostle. All Israel shall be saved, is meant
the Covenant that God made with them, and they signify that all the Tribes of
Israel in their several successive generations, they and their seed, and their
seeds seed, after their ungodliness is taken away, shall stick close unto God
for ever, and be so guided by his Spirit and Word, which he will put into their
very mouths, that they shall never depart from him any more. Which being so, it
will necessarily follow that their Conversion shall not be at the very instant
of the final Consummation, but long before it.

The Apostle goes on, verse. 28. etc. to show the certainty of the Jews
Restoration, anticipating some objections that may be made against it. As
concerning the Gospel, says he, they are enemies for your sakes, but as
touching the election, they are beloved for the Fathers sakes. Gentiles as it
were after this manner; You look upon the Jews as desperate in respect of their
conversion, because of their pertinacy in despising the Gospel,for which they
are in all places, wheresoever they do become, liable to Gods vengeance, who
abhors them as the worst of enemies upon earth: viz. for your sakes, that
the Gospel might through their rejecting of it, the sooner come unto you: And
secondly, you must consider, that though they be for your sakes at such a
distance both from God and his Gospel, yet God is not unmindeful of the
Covenant which he made with their Fathers, whom he chose to be his special
friends and favorites, and for whose sakes, as he promised them sundry times,
he would be the God of their Seed after them for ever: Which Promise he will
most surely perform, for God is not as man that he should lie, or the son of
man that he should repent, and therefore does the Apostle add v. 29. a sure
foundation of his former assertion; The gifts and calling of God, says he, are
without repentance.

Now that we may also interpret aright the Apostle in these words, let us
examine a little what he means by these gifts and calling of God. Some
understand here by (gifts) the saving graces of Gods spirit, whereby his people
are adapted for his service in all holy obedience to his commands; and this
calling they take to be Gods effectual calling them to a state of salvation;
for say they, as for any other gifts and calling of God, they are many times
revoked, which implies some kind of repentance in God (as the Scripture speaks
often concerning him) as being sorry at his heart that ever he had so bestowed
them: But of his saving graces and effectual calling he never repents. Thus I
say do some render the sense of this place: But though this be true in Thesi, I
conceive it does not fully square with the Apostles meaning: for if these be
the gifts and this the calling, we see clearly the Jews have been deprived of
them long ago, and therefore are not (...); neither can this Verse be a
confirmation of what the Apostle had spoken before concerning the Fathers.

By these gifts therefore and calling, I take to be meant the liberal
manifestations of divine bounty in outward things toward this people both
fathers and children, and Gods separating them from other Nations to be his
firstborn. This is that election mentioned in the Verse before going, upon
which says Grotius well, Eos olim Deus elegit, hoc est, summis beneficiis
affecit, God chose them, that is, God blessed them with great blessings above
other people, Elegisse enim Deus dicitur quibus eximie benefecit, for God is
said to choose those to whom he does in an extraordinary manner extend his
bounty, Et solet id non sieve magna causa dici de Patribus Judaeorum, and that
does the Scripture very often not without good cause apply unto the fathers of
the Jewish Nation, as appears, Act. 13.17. Deuteronomy. 4.37. Neh. 9.7. Psalm. 135.4.
And therefore whereas the Apostles word is here (...), the gifts of God, the
same Grotius renders the Article (...) by the demonstrative Pronoune (...),
that is, So it is Heb 3.4. Non de singulari cujusque electione sed de totius
gentis Judaicae communi adoptione est hoc dictum accipiendum Sic Calvin and
Pet. Mar.
these gifts and calling of God, as limiting them to those which did peculiarly
belong to the Nation of the Jews, and no other. Which gifts and calling,
because they were unto that people in a special manner the appendances and
resultancies of that everlasting Covenant which God made with them (though they
may for a while because of sin, be taken from them, even as saving grace it
self may sometimes be suspended in its operations) they are said to be such of
which God will not repent (as sometimes in other cases he has done) the
consequence whereof is, he will not for ever exclude this his ancient people
from their federal privileges and dignity above other Nations which he
promised their fathers he would, and did according to his word, give unto them.

One instance of Gods immutability toward them in this kind above all other
people, let us here insert, as being proper and pertinent to our purpose, which
is this, viz. that the very name and memorial of this people is not for their
contumacy in their sin utterly extinct in the world (which has been the
destiny of others, and they could not avoid it) but are the only people of
Gods long suffering in that kind to this very day.

To make this evident, consider, the Holy Scripture gives report of sundry
famous and mighty Nations that were of old contemporary with the Jews, whose
height was like the height of the Cedars, and their strength like unto that of
Oaks, yet has God destroyed their fruit from above, Dan. 2.
and their root from beneath. We read of a goodly Image that represented the
world in its various and successive gallantry by the advancement of its
choicest favorites, whose head was of gold, his breast and his arms of silver,
his belly and his thighs of brass, and his legs of iron; the gold was
precious, the silver pure, the brass glittering, the iron strong, yet all of
them are broken to pieces, and become like the chafe of the summer-threshing
floor, carried away with the wind that no place can be found for them. What is
now become of all their policy, magnificence, prowess, which for the time did
so ruffle in the world far and near? Where are all their Laws that have been so
much extolled, and their Lawmakers, to whom wisdom it self was esteemed but
as a dutiful handmaid? Why do not the Romans now appear in the vindication of
their Numa Pompilius, that mirroir of Princes (as Plutarch describes him) in
his days? Or the Athenians for their Solon? Or the Lacedaemonians for their
Licurgus? Or the Cretians for their Minos? Or the Carthaginians for their
Charondas? Or the Egyptians for their Osiris? Or the S^ythians for their
Zamolxis? All famous Lawgivers in the several confines of their times and
places: If the sword of their Law has lost its edge, is not the Law of their
sword able to set it again? Are all the stout-hearted among them utterly
spoiled, and can none of their men of might sinde their hands? Tenent omnino
reliquias Legis sua^, circomciduntur, sabbata observant, pascha immolant, Azyma
comedunt. Aug. in Ps. 59.
No verily, for at the rebuke of the God of Jacob have the Chariots and
Horsemen of these Nations been cast into a dead sleep. Only the Jews that
were the dearly beloved of his Soul, who are scattered about in the World,
notwithstanding all their troubles, captivities, dispersions, Massacres, do
every where grow rich and populous, keep themselves, their Laws and Customs
unmixed from all others, can still deduce their Original and History by
infallible testimony from the beginning of the World, which no Nation that now
is, can do the like. A very pregnant proof that they are kept by a special
providence according to what the Lord has said of them by the Prophets; as
namely by Jeremy (Jer. 30.10, 11.46.28.) Fear thou not O my servant Jacob,
neither be dismayed O Israel, for I will save thee from afar, Jer. 30.10.11.
Jer. 46.28. Amos 9.8.
and thy seed from the Land of their captivity, though I make a full end of all
Nations, whither I have scattered thee, yet will I not make a full end of thee;
And by the Prophet Amos, Behold the eyes of the Lord God are upon the sinful
Kingdom, (meanning whatsoever Kingdom it be, continuing in its sin) and I
will destroy it from the face of the Earth, saving that I will not utterly
destroy the house of Jacob (says the Lord) that is, their sins, though they be
never so great, shall not provoke me to root out their name from under Heaven,
Amos. 9.8. Answerable hereto is that of the Prophet Jeremy, whose testimony
once more let us hear, Jer 31.36.37. Where the Lord uses as vehement
asseverations, as any we shall likely sinde throughout the whole Scripture; If
these Ordinances (that is, of Heaven and the Sea) depart from before me, says
the Lord, Jer. 31.36.37.
then the seed of Israel shall cease from being a Nation before me for ever.
Thus says the Lord, if Heaven above can be measured, and the foundation
searched out beneath, I will also cast off all the seed of Israel for all that
they have done, says the Lord.

Observe, though their doings which in an ordinary course of divine justice
would certainly bring on their utter undoing, and would be enough inevitably to
ruin all the Nations else in the World besides, if they should at any time be
guilty of the like, yet shall not the anger of the Lord be so enkindled,
because of them, as to cut off the seed of Israel for ever. A high expression
of an extraordinary favor, which nevertheless will exactly be made good to a
tittle even to the end of the World, because the mouth of the Lord has spoken
it.

And here before I come to infer my intended conclusion from the premises, Mr.
The. Wilton on the Romans.
give me leave to super-adde the testimony of a faithful interpreter of the
mind of God in Scripture, concerning this matter, who has written of it
within this present Century, whose words are these.

The counsel of the most wise and mighty God in the wonderful preservation of
the Jews ought diligently to be considered, whereas sundry very ancient people
and famous, as Persians, Chaldeans, Trojans, Vandals, Lombards, Goths, Saxons,
Picts, Hunns, etc. are either quite extinct and destroyed, or else being
severed and scattered have not so held their own as to keep still their own
ordinances, and to be able to show their Original and History in sure record,
or to preserve themselves for their civil life and religion unmixed with other
people whither they came, yet behold a strange thing and remarkable, the Jews
only notwithstanding their great and long dispersions and manifold calamities,
desolations, and death in sundry Countries, where they have been butchered like
sheep, as in England here at London and York by hundreds and thousands, Judaei
sunt Librarii nostri: Ne forte Pagani dicant nobis, vos Christiani literas
istas composuistis, proserimus codices a Judaeis inimicis, ut confundamus alios
immicos. Codicem portat Judaeus ut idem credat Christianus. Aug. Loco Sup. In
Graeco quodam codice Basiliensis editionis. Object.
and elsewhere in other Countries knocked down upon heaps, and others cruelly
spoiled, do for all this not only remain in very numerous multitudes, chiefly
in Asia and Africa (as Master Beza and Grynaus upon certain knowledge do
report) but do keep their Tribes distinct and unconfounded, and their Religion
all without commixtion, as much as they may, reading and searching the
Scriptures, but with very corrupt construction, yet with this fruit and
commodity, that both their pedigree and descent from Abraham and the Patriarchs
may appear, and eke by the witness of our books (out of which we derive our
holy Christian Faith) may be justified and cleared from suspicion of imposture
and fraud (which the Heathenish Philosophers, and other profane atheistical
persons cannot now charge us with, seeing the people still remain as preservers
of those Oracles of God which be the Fountains of our Religion) of all which
what other thing are we to deem and judge, but that they are reserved thus
miraculously of God against the time of their conversion and salvation to come
hereafter in Gods determinate season?

All which considered, I appeal unto all men that are able to discern whether
the Apostles words are not hereby clearly confirmed, viz. that the gifts and
calling of God are to the Jews (...) and (...) (as the word is reported to be
rendered) unchangeable and not to be repented of. For my part I take it to be
undeniable, and therefore do also infer, that undoubtedly there is a time
before the end comes, wherein they shall most certainly be restored.

If it should be yet objected that the Jews are not only Gods enemies in a
passive sense, but in an active, as not obeying his Gospel, nor believing his
Son whom he sent among them and thereupon will conclude that there is no hope
of their conversion, because he that casts away the remedy makes his disease
incurable.

v. 30.31. For as ye in times past have not believed God, yet have now obtained
mercy through their unbelief, even so have these also now not believed, that
through your mercy, they also may obtain mercy. Which words seem to be written
by the Apostle in form of a Prolepsis to preoccupate the aforesaid objection
by a clear demonstration in themselves that should obtrude it, being as much as
to say, Learn of your selves that the Jews Conversion is not altogether
hopeless, notwithstanding their present enmity against God in their
disobedience to his Gospel; For if you who were sometimes foolish and
disobedient, living in malice and envy, even as bad as the Jews, hating of God,
and hateful unto him, have yet nevertheless obtained mercy, why should you
doubt but that the Jews, though they be now a stubborn and refractory people,
may obtain mercy with God also? especially seeing mercy has happily come unto
you upon the occasion of their contumacy, but to them it shall come in a far
more excellent way, viz. Through your mercy, that is, by beholding of that
mercy which God has manifested unto you.

Gods aim and purpose, we see, is the exaltation of his mercy though men be
merciless in judging and condemning one another, for says the Apostle v. 32.
God has concluded all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all. Where
the word (...) all, is commonly interpreted with a reference unto both Jews and
Gentiles, that neither side may have whereof to boast before God, but that both
these and those may be saved by mercy, which sense I willingly subscribe unto,
as not contrariant to the Apostles scope in this place. But I demand, may it
not be understood, as referring to the Jews only? so as that the word of
universality (all) might be taken for all Israel, as it is before, meaning all
the tribes of Israel, whom God had shut up in unbelief, that he might have
mercy upon them all? Certain it is, the original has it (...), where the
article (...) does not stand as an idle cipher, to signify nothing, but is put
as a relative to distinguish this (...) all, from some other, and may be as
much as (...) (as it is said before of the article (...)) and therefore does
our English translation bring in the word them, God has concluded them all in
unbelief, as implying the Jews only in this argument, though from the thing it
self the Gentiles are not exempted. But I leave this criticisme to the
examination of the judicious. The conclusion notwithstanding from hence also
will follow, That the Conversion of the Jewish Nation shall for the magnifying
of Gods mercy, in due time, most certainly come to pass.

Jews are so embodied with other people, and so mingled with other Nations,
that there is an utter impossibility that they should ever any more become a
Nation distinct from the Gentiles: But if there be any found that are distinct,
they shall not be formed into a Nation, but those that are in Spain shall be
called Spanish Jews, and those that are in Italy Italian, and those in Germany
Germans, etc.

Abraham, can easily make good his word which he has spoken concerning the
restoration of his Israel. And albeit it were so that they are indeed embodied
with other people of the world (which yet is not true for the generality of
them, as we have before showed) yet shall that word spoken by the Prophet Amos
be herein verified of them, Lo, I will command, Amos 9.9.
says the Lord, and I will sift the house of Israel among all Nations, like as
corn is sifted in a sieve, yet shall not the least grain fall upon the earth
Amos 9.9.

Jews restoration, is to put the world into a careless security concerning the
end; for if this must be before the end comes, will not many people, who are
too much negligent already in preparing for the great day, take occasion
thereby to grow more remiss therein, and so consequently may that day come upon
them unawares, as the Scripture often speaks, which, if it should find them
in their sins, will undoubtedly prove a black and dismal day unto them.

Ps. 19.2. Day unto day utters speech, The day of death gives an infallible
testimony to the day of judgment of every man's final estate, whether it be
good or bad, whether it shall be to the resurrection of life, or the
resurrection of damnation. And according to that information, so shall the
judgment be, as death leaves us, so judgment shall find us.

Secondly, We that are Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the manifold grace
of God must not be afraid to make known the counsel of God in Scripture, least
ungodly people should make an ill use of it. What ever the consequents be of
our sidelity in the discharge of our Ministry, we are to leave them to the
wisdom and determination of the Almighty, who will order all things for his own
glory, as seems good unto him* Even in this very case touching the end of the
world the Apostle Saint Paul, though he had in his first Epistle to the
Thessalonians written of the sudden and unexpected coming of the Lord yet when
he perceived that some false teachers were like to take occasion by what he had
written thereof, to make those people believe that the day of Christ was then
at hand, thinking thereby, as it is probable, to carry on a pernicious design
against the whole doctrine of the Gospel, he thereupon tells them plainly in
his second Epistle, 2 These. 2.2.3.
that That day should not come, before such and such things which he there
mentions were first come to pass: He feared not, it seems, lest he should give
occasion of a carnal security to presumptuous sinners (as it is here objected
to us) by his writing of the protraction of the great day, but leaves that to
their peril, who will pervert his words, and turn them to such a sinister
sense, declaring the mind of God clearly, without casting such scruples, as
these Objectors have causlesly devised, to stop the current of this Doctrine.
And this may be a sufficient warrant unto us to speak freely of that which the
Scripture holds out unto us in this particular, not regarding what wicked
persons deluded by the devil may suggest unto themselves thereby.

And yet as Calvin well observes upon the place, Neither does this word of the
Apostle about the deferring of the great day, contradict other Scriptures,
which speak of it as being at hand, Instat enim, says he, Dei respectu, apud
quem mill anni sunt tanquam dies unus: It is at hand in Gods account, with
whom a thousand years are but as one day, though to us it may seem long, being
lengthened out for many generations, unto the time appointed of the Father,
that so the great work of God in this world, decreed from Eternity, might be
fully finished.

In fine, Whatsoever is or can be objected against this doctrine, we may safely
conclude it to be of no force: But for it self, it shall stand, and prove
infallibly a victorious truth in the Church, because Jesus Christ is (...), the
Same yesterday, to day, and for ever.

Let all therefore that wish well unto Sion lay it close to their hearts, that
they may now more then ever, seeing the time approaches, lay out their utmost
strength and zeal in the promoting thereof, praying earnestly, constantly unto
God, that this ancient beloved people may once again find grace in his sight,
casting away those sins, which may probably be a hinderance to the bringing on
of this glorious work. And amongst them all, let us abandon the Idolatries and
Superstitions of the Romish Synagogue, which will certainly be a very great
obstacle to the Jews conversion (though God will also in his own time make this
great mountain of opposition to become a plain.

Thus I say should this doctrine be promoted by us, and whatsoever else Divine
Providence may put into our hands to do, in order to such an excellent end, O
let us do it with all our might. It is doubtless a most Catholic doctrine, as
tending to an universal Union under Christ our Head, it is the most noble and
Divine doctrine, next unto that of the great work of eternal Salvation wrought
by Christ, that is revealed unto us in the Gospel, and it is most advantageous
to us Gentiles of all other Doctrines, therefore we should promote it: It is
that which opens to the Church the bottomless and inexhaustible treasures of
the Wisdom and Knowledge of God, to look with admiration, as the Apostle did,
into the depth thereof. And though neither men nor Angels can be able of
themselves, in this or any else of the Arcana Coeli, the counsels of the most
High, to know the mind of God, yet since as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 2.16. We
have the mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.16.
who is in the bosom of the Father, and has declared him unto us, we may with
confidence make our boast and speak of that which he has revealed. And because
God has an absolute Sovereignty over all his creatures, not bound unto them
with any Popish or Pelagian thongs of Necessity, Congruity or Condignity, but
is free to do what he please by the liberty of his own will, to cast off the
Jews, and receive the Gentiles in their stead, and restore the Jews again to
his grace and favor, that both Jews and Gentiles may together rejoice in his
Salvation (For of him, and through him, and to him are all things.) Let us
therefore with the Apostle applaud and magnify him, saying, To him be glory
for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
An ALPHABETICAL TABLE.
A. ADam's standing in the state of Innocence, was longer then it is commonly
conceived to be. Page 105 Adeption or progressive agitation of the Creatures,
not the original or primary efficient cause of their continuance. p 53 Abuses
of the late Times detected p 223 Afflictions are ordained and ordered by God. p
80 Ages before us not to be despised p. 166 Ambitious persons enemies to
Christ's Sovereignty. p. 76 A Story of Amphilochius. p. 22 Of Alphonsus the
Atheistical King of Spain p. 74 Anabaptists, great enemies to the Church. p.
270 How and wherein the Angels shall be employed in the great day. p. 90 What
Antiquity, in print of Religion, is to be regarded. p. 169 Arianism an
abominable Heresy. p. 12 Arius his death by the just hand of God. p. 35
Consulting with Astrolegers about future events, unlawful. p. 72 A notable
saying of Augustus Caesar. p. 81
B. Of the nature of Bees, in having a Government. p 58 The Believers Ro^k. p.
81 Blaspemy of Socinus. p. 26 Blaspemy of Paul Beast. p. 38 Blaspheming
Heretics must not go unpunished. ibid. Of bowing at the Name of Jesus. See the
word Jesus. Of bowing at the entrance into, and departure from the
Congregation. p. 235
C. How Cain was cast out of the Church. p. 147 Of Ceremonies. p. 234 Cerinthus
an enemy to Jesus Christ. p. 34 Though Christ be the first begotten of every
Creature, it follows not, that he is therefore a Creature. p. 16 Christ has
raised up our nature to the highest elevation. p. 32 Jesus Christ is the first
begotten intellect in reference to the Angelical Nature. p. 17 Jesus Christ is
the first-begotten reason in order to the rational. ibid Christ is to be
honored in the hearing of his Word. p. 28 Christ is the bringer forth of every
Creature p. 18 Christ gives the earth to whom soever he will. p. 50 In what
sense Jesus Christ is Creator. p. 42 Christ is the Preserver of all. p. 52
Christ will restore all things. p. 82 The form of a servant in Christ did not
obliterate the form of God. p. 20 Christ is to be worshipped with divine
adoration. p. 21 Christ a Prophet from the beginning. p. 136 Christ a King from
the beginning. p. 138 Christ a Priest from the beginning. p. 149 Christ the
Same to his Church in this day of the Gospel, which he was yesterday to the
Fathers of old. p. 212 Christ will be the Same to his Church for ever. p. 273
What manner of change there shall be of the Heavens, etc. at the last day. p.
98 The Church shall be continued to the end of the World. p. 275 The folly of
ignorant people in imputing all extraordinary tempests to conjuring. p. 73
Contemplation of God through the Creatures. p. 48 Covetous persons enemies to
Jesus Christ. p. 76 Of the late Schismatical Covenant. p. 229 The Creation the
Work of Christ. p 42 The Creatures willing subjection unto Christ. p. 53 Of
the observation of Christmas. p. 198 The Creatures misery under Man. p. 65 The
excellency of our Creation. p. 105 None but the New Creature shall be the
Inhabitant of the New Creation. p. 107 Against curiosity in searching into
those things of God, that are beyond our reach. p. 19
D. Daniel's seventy weeks interpreted. p. 305 The day of the Gospel is a
terrible day to all impenitent sinners. p. 203 A description of Christ's
encountering with death. p. 78 The Divine Service of the Church of England free
from Superstition. p. 234
E. The consideration of the Earth may lead us to an admiration of the Glory of
God. p 49 The great Engagement that lies upon England above other Churches of
the Gentiles to give praise unto God. p. 270 Episcopacy proved to be of Divine
Right. p. 248 Eternity expressed by terms appropriated unto Time. p. 6 The
force of Example is great to induce likeness of manners. p. 2 Examples of Gods
Judgments which have fallen upon the enemies of the eternal Deity of Christ. p
34
F. Fanatic people make themselves equal with Jesus Christ. p. 24 A conviction
of those that hold, that the object of the faith of the Fathers of old was not
Jesus Christ. p. 175 To hold, that not the object, but the act of faith
justifies, is a gross error. p. 176 Faith of believers how fixed before the
coming of Christ. p. 156 A faithful saying, uttered in a Sermon at his
Majesty's Coronation. p. 256 How the Father is said to work by the Son. p. 43
Of that fire which the Scripture speaks of, whereby the Earth shall be burnt
up at the last. p. 96 To ascribe unto fortune good or ill success, is a great
sin. p. 71
G. The divine generation of the Son of God, is a permanent and everlasting
generation. p. 10 Gentiles instructed. p. 268 Gentiles obliged to give praise
unto God. p. 269 Of the fullness of the Gentiles. p. 338 The glory of the life
to come described. p. 107 How God ruled over man before the flood. p. 64 Civil
Government is no encroachment upon Christ's natural or donative power. p 55
Authoritative power or government over men, shall be continued to the end of
the World. p. 66 Government is an ordinance of divine appointment, proved both
by the written and unwritten Word of God, that is, by Scripture and nature. p
57 The good that arises by Government unto mankind. p. 65
H. The several forms of the Heathens enquiring after future events. p. 72 That
the Heathen did without Christ, by the light of nature, attain to such a
knowledge of God, as was enough for their everlasting salvation, is a great
error. p. 175 The impudent connivence that was given to Heretics in the time
of the late Schism. p 37 To consider the Heavens, a mean^ to work in the hearts
of men an awful reverence toward the Lord Jesus Christ. p 48 The Hypostatical
Union of two Natures in Christ, Divine and humane, shall never be dissolved,
nor the Mystical Union between Christ and his Church. p. 285
I. Look unto Jesus from the beginning to the end. p. 295 Of bowing at the name
of Jesus. p. 235 The error of the Jews in following the light of yesterday. p.
121 An exhortation to the Jews. p. 164 Another exhortation to the Jews. p. 262
The calling of the Jews proved. p. 299 Of the Jews insurrection under Aelius
Adrianus. p. 321 The Jews w^ful blindness and hardness of heart described. p.
335 The Jews continuan^e in the World, when other great and mighty Nations are
utterly extinct. p. Ignorance in this daylight of the G^spel, condemned. p.
202 Of the joy that Christians ought to take in their enjoyment of the G^spel.
p 184 Julian the Apostate his blasphemy and death. p. 34 No justification by
the works of the Law. p. 126
K. Government by Kings proved to be the best Government. p. 60 King Charles
the First commended by those that were his Adversaries, p. 248 A saying of his
against drunkenness in a Speech at Oxford. p. 187 King Charles the Second his
zealous forwardness in establishing Religion. p. 231
L. The woeful effects of pretended liberty of conscience. p. 38 New lights not
to be regarded. p. 188 Of the invincible nature of light. p. 182 Of Limbus
Patrum. p. 170 The Liturgy of the Church of England not taken out of the Romish
Missal. p 242 The agreement of our Liturgy with the Forms of Primitive
Devotion, clearly demonstrated. p. 244
M. Millenaries and Fifth Monarchists refuted. p. 103. Miracles not to be
expected under the Gospel. p. 132 Fifth Monarchists may see their error. p. 70
No murmuring ought to be at Divine Providence in disposing the Earth and all
that is therein. p. 50 Murmurers reproved. p. 74 How mutable the children of
men are in their works. p. 45 The Mystical Union between Christ and his Church
shall never cease. p. 286
N. The humane nature exalted above the nature of Angels. p 32 Gods remarkable
judgment on Nestorius p 35
O. The Oracles of the Heathen ceased at the birth of our Savior. p. 266
Oracles from Heaven not to be now under the Gospel. p. 129 Order among the
Creatures. p. 58
P. The error of the Papists in following the light of yesterday. p. 128 The
vanity of the Papists in looking unto Jesus in a Picture. p. 296 Christian
Parents comforted concerning their Posterity. p. 281 Profane Politicians
enemies to Christ's Sovereignty. p. 77 The profane alarmed. p. 203 Proud
persons enemies to Christ's Sovereignty p. 77 Poland polluted with Socinianism.
p. 39
Q. Quakers enemies to Jesus Christ. p. 39 Quarrelling against the restoring of
lawful Government in this Nation condemned. p. 74
R. Our Religion maintained to be the only true Religion. p. 169 An approved
remedy to heal the woeful distempers and divisions of this Church and Kingdom.
p. 276 The Creatures future restoration. p. 93 Christ's Righteousness imputed
to us for Justification. p. 177 Of the first Resurrection. p. 106 The Romish
Church guilty of Novelty. p. 217
S. Samosatenian Heretics confuted p. 12 Satan has no power in the Air but
by permission p. 73 Sectarists justly charged with Superstition. p. 231
Consider the wonders of God in the Sea. p. 49 Sin of the ungodly is found out
by the light of this day. p. 207 Sin by the light of this day finds out the
sinner. p. 208 Smectymnuus detected. p. 253 The cursed blaspemy of Socinians
abhorred. p. 26 That the Souls of the Patriarchs did not before Christ's
Ascension ascend into that place of bliss* whither the souls of the Saints now
ascend, is proved an error. p. 174 Of the Suns Eclipse at our Saviors Death.
p. 266 Of Superstition. p. 233
T. The time of the Gospel is a time of light. p. 180 A Story of Theodosius. p.
30 The godly preserved in the time of trouble. p. 80 Of Traditions. p* 218
Toleration of all Religions is Anti-Catholick. p. 257
V. Gods just Judgment upon the Emperor Valens. p. 35
W. Will Worship proved to be lawful. p. 238 A Christians walk. p. 191 To
consult with Witches an horrible impiety. p. 72 World upheld by Christ. p. 52
Y Yesterdayes light which consisted in Types and Shadows, is vanished. p. 118

A TABLE to guide the Reader to the several Places of Holy Scripture which are
quoted in this Book, many whereof are occasionally illustrated, and some noted
with Asterisks, though not according to the commonly received Sense, yet
nevertheless according to Truth, expounded.
Genesis.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 16. 181. 1. 25. 46. 1. 26. 78. 1. 28. 63. 1. 31. 45. 1.
31. 105. 2. 16.17. 105. 3. 15. 116. 3. 20. 156. 4. 7. 154. 4. 12.14.16. 147. 4.
15.23.24. 64. 5. 3. 157. 6. 3. 64. 6. 11.12.13. 64. 9 6. 64. 9 26.27. 121. 11.
25. 63. 14. 18. 150. 17. 5. 122. 17. 6. 60. 17. 14. 215. 18. 3. 140. 18.
27.30.31. 140. 26. 2. 312. 45. 5.7. 313 46. 3. 311. 49. 1. 325. 49. 4. 221.
Exodus.
Chap. Verse. Page 3. 2. 97. 3. 8. 109. 3. 15. 121. 6. 3. 163. 8. 18. 46. 15.
11. 50. 18. 11. 77. 23. 20. 148. 28. 1. 151. 30. 30. 30.32. 152. 33. 18. etc.
159. 34. 6.7. 91. 34. 6.7. 163. 34. 28. 163. Leviticus.
Chap. Verse. Page 15. 2. 221. 16. 11.15. 153. 16. 22. 79. 18. 4. 201. 19. 32.
30. 20. 6. 38. 23. 3. 309. 24. 16. 38. 25. 4.8. 309. Numbers.
Chap. Verse. Page 14. 37. 148. 16. 9.10. 24. 16. 10. 258. 32. 23. 209.
Deuteronomy.
Chap. Verse. Page 4. 7. 122. 4. 30.31. 300. 5. 29. 193. 6. 10.11. 109. 7. 1.
112. 10. 22. 311. 30. 3. 300. 32. 4. 21. 32. 7.8.12. 64. 32. 25. 276. 33. 5.
141. 33. 19. 49. Joshua.
Chap. Verse. Page 21. 49. 324. Judges.
Chap. Verse. Page 3. 20. 30. 5. 14. 92. 12. 18. 92. 13. 18. 32. 17. 6. 66. 1
Samuel.
Chap. Verse. Page 8. 7. 149. 8. 7. 265. 8. 9. 141. 10. 12. 133. 25. 29. 171. 2
Samuel.
Chap. Verse. Page 20. 18. 276. 1 Kings.
Chap. Verse. Page 8. 27. 96. 12. 31. 66. 18. 39. 122. 2 Kings.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 11. 97. 25. 1. 239. 1 Chronicles.
Chap. Verse. Page 21. 16. 32. 24. 19. 66. 2 Chronicles.
Chap. Verse. Page 19. 6. 55. Job.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 6. 89. 5. 6. 80. 7. 1. 196. 9. 4. 33. 12. 12. 29. 13. 5.
29. 13. 7.8. 38. 14. 7.10. 189. 14. 14. 90. 19. 25. 41. 19. 25. 156. 21. 14.
201. 22. 3. 194. 29. 21.22. 28. 31. 24. 76. 38. 4. 25. 38. 6. 49. 38. 7. 89.
38. 10.11. 49. 38. 28.29. 45. 38. 39. etc. 48. 39. 20. 39. Psalms.
Psalm. Verse. Page 1. 4. 206. 2. 7. 5. 2. 7. 142. 2. 10.11.12. 40. 2. 8.9. 143.
8. 3. 48. 8. 5.6. 80. 12. 6. 70. 18. 11. 19 19. 2. 208. 19. 4.5. 268. 19. 5.
86. 19. 5. 196 24. 1. 45. 25 14. 130. 29. 10. 49. 33. 7. 45. 33. 8. 50. 36. 5.
81. 36. 6. 54. 37. 11. 112. 41. 9. 34. 45. 2. 296. 48. 4.5. 182. 49. 12.20.
221. 50. 3. 91. 62. 10. 115. 68. 11. 137. 68. 17. 92. 73. 17.18. 276. 74. 12.
63. 74. 16. 45. 74. 22.23. 33. 75. 3. 81. 75. 6. 51. 75. 6.7. 76. 75. 8. 211
80. 17. 146 80. 13. 193 83. 19. 48 85. 8. 281 89. 13. 50. 89. 33. 33. 91 1. 81.
95. 5. 49. 100. 5. 81. 102. 19.22.23, etc. 26. 102. 26. 97. 102. 27. 282 104.
5. 49. 104. 4. 45. 104. 9 40 104. 19. 45. 104. 23. 191. 104. 24. 49 104. 25.26.
49. 105. 8. 282. 105. 14.15. 312. 106. 24. 114. 110. 1. 141. 110. 2. 68. 110.
3. 184. 110. 4. 149. 110. 4. 274. 111. 2. 48. 111. 3. 48. 112. 4. 186. 119. 53.
188. 119. 91. 62. 119. 96. 195. 119. 136. 188. 135. 7. 45. 136. 5. 46. 138. 6.
77. 139. 14. 78. 139. 24. 212. 145. 3. 47. 145. 9. 46. 145. 11, 12. 274. 147. 4
45. 147. 5. 29. 147. 19, 20. 122. Proverbs.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 16. 65. 2. 6. 28. 8. 7. 211. 8. 14. 29. 8. 15, 16. 57. 8.
22. 6. 8. 22. 11. 8. 27. 25. 8. 30, 31. 19. 9. 12. 194. 10. 22. 76. 13. 10.
256. 14. 9. 187. 14. 34. 109. 14. 39. 65. 15. 32. 200. 16. 18. 256. 17. 24.
297. 23. 5. 81. 27. 24. 81. 28. 2. 235. 28. 13. 208. 30. 27. 59. 30. 30. 58.
Ecclesiastes.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 11. 46. 2. 12. 274. 2. 14. 297. 7. 9. 75. 9. 10. 198. 11.
7. 184. 12. 10. 28. 12. 7. 171. 12. 11. 224. 12. 13. 192. Canticles.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 16. Preface. 5. 10. 296. Isaiah.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 3.4.5. 126. 6. 1.3.5. 26. 7. 14. 14. 8. 2^. 28. 9. 2. 181.
9. 6. 30. 9. 6. 78. 9. 6. 136. 11. 1. 123. 11. 10.11.12. 123. 14. 13.14. 25.
14. 27. 93. 22. 12.13. 187. 23. 3. 49. 25. 9. 21. 26. 4. 81. 26. 11. 186. 28.
16. 158. 29. 13. 220. 30. 33. 6. 33. 17. 110. 33. 22. 142. 33. 22. 145. 37. 29.
81. 40. 22.23. 75. 40. 22.23. 110. 40. 26. 54. 40. 26. 92. 41. 4. 44. 42. 6.
123. 43. 2. 206. 43. 5.6. 302. 43. 10. 274. 44. 17. 296. 44. 24. 45. 45. 7. 73.
45. 22. 295. 45. 22.25. 302. 45. 23. 21. 45. 23. 266. 48. 12. 42. 48. 13. 54.
53. 3. 103. 53. 3. 263. 53. 8. 8. 53. 10. 21. 53. 10. 157. 34. 2. 216. 54. 17.
74. 55. 9. 11. 59. 21. 342. 60. 9. 318. 60. 1. 184. 61. 2. 204. 61. 2. 309. 62
2.3. 124. 63. 3. 25. 63. 15. 96. 64. 4. 108. 65. 17. 95. 95. 17. 97. 66. 19.
317. Jeremiah.
Chap. Verse. Page 3. 18. 303. 4. 19. 207. 5. 22. 49. 6. 16. 277. 12. 19. 209.
14. 19. 207. 23. 3.4. 303. 23. 5. 123. 23. 6. 141. 23. 25. 62. 27. 5. 51. 30.
3.9. 303. 30. 10.12. 347. 31. 1.4. 303. 31. 31. etc. 118. 31. 34. 185. 31. 34.
130. 31. 36.37. 347. 32. 39. 304. 33. 25. 62. 35. 1. etc. 239. 46. 28. 50. 4.5.
264. Lamentations.
Chap. Verse. Page 3. 23. 81. Ezekiel.
Chap. Verse. Page 16. 13. 60. 20. 33. 266. 21. 21. 72. 21. 25.26. 66. 28. 3.
111. 37. 21. etc. 303. 46. 17. 309. Daniel.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 34. 104. 4. 23. 89. 4. 30. 111. 5. 22.23. 37. 7. 13. 146.
7. 14. 274. 7. 14. 290. 9. 17. 157. 9. 23. 76. * 9. 24. 306. 9. 27. 118. 10.
11. 89. Hosea.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 10. 316. 1. 11. 318. 3. 4.5. 318. 4. 8. 154. 6. 3. 48. 11.
1. 313. 13. 14. 78. Amos.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 9. 112. * 5. 18.19. 206. 9. 6. 48. 9. 8. 347. 9. 9. 350.
Obadiah.
Chap. Verse. Page 12. 336. 20. 317. Michah.
Chap. Verse. Page 4. 4. 65. 4. 7. 274. 5. 2. 6. 5. 2. 19. Nahum.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 6. 162. Habakkuk.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 14. 58. Zephaniah.
Chap. Verse. Page 3. 4. 66. Haggai.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 7. 296. Zechariah.
Chap. Verse. Page 8. 19. 239. 8. 23. 124. 9. 9. 263. 12. 10. 164. 13. 4. 239.
Malachi.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 11. 122. 1. 11. 269. 2. 16. 288. 3. 2. 210. 3. 12. 210. 3.
17. 90. 4. 1.2. 189. 4. 1.2. 203. 4. 1.2. 206. 2 Esdras.
Chap. Verse. Page 13. 47. 317. Wisd. of Solomon.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 13. 78. Ecclesiasticus.
Chap. Verse. Page 38. 2 62. 1 Maccab.
Chap. Verse. Page 4. 59. 239. Saint Luke.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 6. 191. 1. 33. 290. 1. 35. 13. 2. 11. 157 2. 13. 58. 4.
18. 309. 9. 32.33. 160. 10. 24. 120. 11. 49. 12. 12. 18. 111. 13. 33. 191. 14.
21.23. 269. 16. 16. 118. 16. 22. 171. 16. 29. 118. 16. 24. 188. 18. 11.12. 77.
19. 12. 264. 19. 42. 193. 20. 38. 172. 21. 23.24. 319. 21. 24. 326. 22. 41.
225. 24. 26. 103. 24. 26. 327. Saint John.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 3. 45. 1. 4. 28. 1. 4. 190. 1. 5. 184. 1. 9. 137. 1. 9.
178. 1. 9. 181. 1. 10.14. 17. 1. 11. 63. 1. 11.12. 114. 1. 12. 157. 1. 14. 21.
1. 17.18. 119. 1. 18. 18. 1. 30. 140. 3. 19. 133. 3. 19. 202. 4 10. 295. 4. 48.
132. 5. 17.19. 44. 5. 21. 189. 5. 22. 145. 5. 23. 23. 5. 26. 44. 5. 26. 189. 5.
27. 146. 5. 39. 118. 7. 46. 28. 8. 12. 137. 8. 12. 189. 8. 56. 156. 8. 56. 186.
8. 58. 139. 9. 4. 196. 10. 30. 44. 12. 14. 132. 12. 35. 196. 12. 40.41. 26. 13.
1. 288. 14. 2. 108. 14 2. 110 14. 10. 294. 15. 15. 12. 15. 15. 325. 15. 22.
208. 17. 3. 292. 17. 4 152. 17. 5. 19. 17. 21. 113. 17. 21. 287. 17. 26. 289.
18. 36. 67. 19. 14. 165. 20. 23. 178. Acts.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 6.7. 324. 2. 17. 185. 2. 23. 154. 3. 19.21. 82. 4. 12.
274. 7. 51. 301. 10. 36. 157. 10. 36. 140. 10. 42. 140. 11. 26. 246. 13. 33.
143. 15. 11. 172. 17. 22. 231. 17. 28. 76. 26. 18. 176. 28. 27. 335. Romans.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 5 90. 2. 16. 208. 3. 22. 185. 3. 25. 152. 3. 29. 317. 4.
5. 177. 5. 5. 94. 5. 12. 78. 5. 15. 172. 5. 19. 177. 6. 14. 119. 8. 17. 290. 8.
19, etc. 83. 8. 21. 83. 8. 23. 114. 8. 29. 18. 8. 29. 287. 9. 4.5. 125. 10.
6.7.8. 131. 10. 4.16. 314. 10. 18. 268. 11. 1, etc. 328. 12. 1. 195. 12. 11.
197. 13. 1. 69. 13. 1.2. 57. 13. 4. 55. 13. 4. 65. 13. 11. 211. 13. 13. 198.
15. 20.24. 269. 1. Corinthians.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 9. 44. 1. 13. 280. 1. 24. 44. 1. 30. 177. 2. 9. 108. 2. 9.
181. 2. 16. 352. 3. 11. 212. 3. 11. 134. 4. 15. 178. 6. 3. 338. 7. 19. 215. 7.
21. 88. 8. 8. 279. 9. 21. 268. 10. 4. 148. 10. 9.10. 148. 11. 10. 92. 11. 11.
275. 11. 14. 57. 12. 31. 191. 13. 8. 288. 13. 11. 119. 13. 12. 286. 15. 24.28.
284. 15. 24. 286. 15. 28. 291. 15. 45. 158. 15. 56. 209. 2 Corinthians.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 1. 44. 1. 19.20. 70. 3. 6. 119. 3. 14. 119. 3. 15. 336. 3.
18. 185. 3. 18. 191 3. 18. 121. 4. 4. 190. 4. 6. 190. 4. 6. 121. 5. 7. 297. 5.
17. 95. 5. 21. 154. 5. 21. 177. 6. 2. 185. 6. 9.10. 158. Galatians.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 8. 274. 1. 12. Preface. 1. 23. 133. 2 16.17. 177. 2. 20.
177. 3. 2. 215. 3. 8. 156. 3. 19. 127. 3. 23. 119. 4. 3. 118. 4. 4. 135. 4. 5.
155. 4. 9. 119. 5. 18. 119. 6. 2. 144. Ephesians.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 6. 296. 2. 10. 191. 2. 14. 268. 2. 19. 270. 2. 20. 134. 3.
5. 185. 3. 10. 185. 3. 10. 90. 4. 1. 194. 4. 11. 66. 5. 13. 208. 5. 23. 158. 5.
23. 139. 5. 26.27. 290. Philippians.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 18. 223. 2. 5. 220. 2. 6. 26. 2. 6. 285. 2. 7. 20. 2. 10.
21. 2. 10. 293. 2. 12. 194. 1. 13. 220. 3. 20. 158. 3. 21. 113. 3. 21. 286. 4.
7. 8. Colossians.
Chap. Verse. Page * 1. 15. 7. 1. 15. 10. 1. 15. 15. 1. 15. 44. 1. 16. 41. 1.
16.17. 287. 1. 16. 45. 1. 16. 90. 1. 17. 52. 1. 18. 143. 1. 26. 185. 2. 3. 300.
2. 9. 148. 2. 14. 152. 2. 14. 110. 2. 15. 80. 2. 17. 120. 2. 23. 228. 3. 11.
41. 3. 11. 62. 1 Thessalonians.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 12. 194. 2. 15.16. 336. 4. 16. 91. 5. 2.3. 351. 5. 5. 194.
2 Thessalonians.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 7. 91. 2. 2.3. 351. 2. 4 69. 1 Timothy.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 17 283. 2. 1.2.3. 62. 2. 1.2.3. 69. * 2. 5. 147. 2. 5. 63.
2. 5. 142. 3. 6. 24. 3. 15. 218. 3. 16. 15. 4. 16. 178. 6. 16. 159. 2 Timothy.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 12. 103. 3. 12. 103. Titus.
Chap. Verse. Page * 1. 5.7. 248. Philemon.
Chap. Verse. Page 9. 30. Hebrews.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 1.2.3. 8. 1. 2. 43. 1. 3. 53. 1. 5. 143. 1. 6. 22. 1.
10.etc. 26. 1. 10. 282. 1. 14. 89. 1. 14. 287. 2. 3. Preface. 2. 14. 79. 4. 13.
208. 5. 1. 151. 6. 20. 214. 7. 3. 150. 7. 15.16. 150. 7. 24. 274. 7. 28. 149.
9. 8. 173. 9. 10. 118. 9. 10. 120. 9. 12. 153. 9. 10.12. 153. 9. 22. 153 10. 4.
1^5. 10. 5. 79. 10. 11. 274. 10. 13. 68. 11. 1. 158. 11. 9.10. 172. 11. 13.
156. 11. 16. 109. 12. 28. 96. 13. 5. 281. James.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 20. 254. 4. 12. 142. 1 Peter.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 1. Preface. Chap. Verse. Page 1. 11. 137. 1. 12. 32. 1. 19.
164. 1. 25. 274. 2. 9. 181. 2. 12. 182. 2. 13. 55. 2. 13.14. 70. 2. 13. 287. 2.
24. 79. 3. 19. 147. 4. 6. 137. 4. 11. 230. * 4. 17.18. 336. 2 Peter.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 4. 24. 1. 4. 32. 1. 19. 131. 2. 3. 212. 2. 4. 111. 2. 5.
148. 2. 21. 195. 3. 10. 95. 3. 10. 113. 3. 13. 95. 3. 14. 107. 3. 15. 243. 1
John.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 8. 181. 2. 8. 185. 2. 20. 185. 2. 27. 297. 3. 2. 93. 3. 2.
108. 3. 2. 110. 3. 7. 192. 3. 8. 113. Jude.
Chap. Verse. Page 4. 134. 6. 111. 8.11. 258. 11. 147. 11. 258. 14. 93. 14. 137.
19. 258. Revelation.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 8. 6. 1. 8. 214. 1. 11. 7. 1. 11. 41. 1. 13. 213. 1. 14.
30. 3. 12. 289. 3. 14. 18. 3. 14. 42. 3. 21. 289. 4. 11. 50. 9. 11. 80. 13. 8.
154. 13. 8. 135. 14. 1. 289. 14. 6. 274. 19. 9. 104. 19. 9. 290. 19. 10. 21.
20. 4.6. 104 21. 5.6. 82. 21. 5.6. 94. 21. 23. 290. 21. 27. 107.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 15. read coeval p. 4. l. 36. r. homogeneal p. 6. l. 24. r. ab
initio p. 10. l. 10. r. coeval p. 14. l. 11. r. God p. 13. l. 11. r. tittle p.
15. l. 22. r. Christomachoi p. 23. l. 36. r. glosing p. 26. Marginal Quotations
misplaced p 27. l. 15. r. him p. 30. l. 15. r. site p. 39. l. 29. r. connivence
p. 48. l. 9. r. track p. 58. r. annosa in the Marg. p. 67. l. 7. r. feud p. 68.
l. 3. r. covet p. 68. l. 24. r. himself p. 78. l. 30 r. creature p. 86. l. 20.
r. covetous ibid. l. 25. r. excentrick p. 104. l. 11. r. met ibid. l. 18. r.
this p. 109. l. 33. r. leading p. 120. l. 29. r. tropes p. 128. l. 2. r. ill
ibid. l. 16. r. and many p. 130. l. 3. dele the p. 131. l. 35. r. whole series
p. 137. l. 19. dele of judgment p. 139. l. 5. r. put both p. 140. l. 31. r.
apparition p. 155. l. 21. r. expatiates p. 156. l. 19. r. the Law p. 162. l. 9.
r. put thee ibid. l. 16. r. to stretch p. 163. l. 13. dele the p. 167. l. 4. r.
the everlasting p. 172. l. 34. r. Saints p. 174. for Athanasius, r. St. Ambrose
p, 179 l. 30. r. my side p. 186. l. 2. dele the period p. 186. l. 3. begin the
sentence at the word Did p. 194. l. 35. r. we live p. 197. l. 11. r. the
concluding p. 200. l. 37. r. be saved p. 209. l. 23. r. his heart p. 226. l.
35. r. has made p. 235. l. 4. r. my dear p. 242. l. 6. r. chosen.


