THE Loyal Bumper: or, England's Comfort BEING A Health to King William and
Queen Mary, and the Prince of Denmark.
To an Excellent New TVNE.
(1)
Here Is a Health to the King whom the Crown does belong to,
Confusion to those that true Kings would do wrong to:
We'll here use no Name of an Old King or New King,
But we'll Drink a Health, Boys, a Health to the true King.
(2)
Here Is a Health to that Man that has wrong done to no Man,
Be he English or Dutchman, or Spaniard, or Roman:
Here Is a Health to those Children their Parents obey well,
For the Disobedient we know will not Sway well.
(3)
Here Is a Health to Just Men, from the Cott to the Throne, Boys,
For Conscience will tell you, all should keep their own, Boys:
Here Is a Health to those Worthys that stand up for David,
And shame take those Members their Head have out-braved.
(4)
Here Is a Health to Queen Mary, true Joys light upon her,
May her Life be attended with Glory and Honor:
We'll here use no Name of an Old Queen or New Queen,
But we'll Drink a Health, Boys, a Health to the true Queen.
(5)
Here Is a Health to the Prince, Heaven send him long Life,
And if e're he be Crowned, let him Reign without Strife:
We here do not name him, whether Old Prince or New Prince,
But we'll Drink a Health, Boys, a Health to the true Prince.
(6)
Here Is a Health to those hearts that are Honest and Loyal,
And those which are not so, may Heaven destroy all:
We do not name any, whether Old hearts or New hearts,
But we'll Drink a Health, Boys, a Health to all true hearts.
(7)
Here Is a Health to the Clergy, true Sons of the Church,
Who leave not their Prince nor Religion in the lurch:
We here do not mention whether Old Church or New Church,
But we'll Drink a Health to the Sons of the true Church.
(8)
Here Is a Health to those Soldiers that 'ill Fight for their Pay,
That will stand by their Master, and not run away:
Whether Lords, D. or E. so they Fight for their King, Boys,
Or else let them Dye all like Dogs in a String, Boys.
(9)
Once more to all these, let the Glass then go round,
Preserve all the Loyal, and Traitors confound:
Send Peace to Old England, and give Caesar his Due, Boys,
And then 'twill be better for me and for you, Boys.
FINIS.

