A LETTER FROM An English Reformed Quaker, To his Friend in Scotland of the
same Persuasion: With the Answer and Reply thereto.
MY Friends, I once showed my self bent and courageous for your Principles; yea
not only so, but counted you the only Apostles of our Land: But being now by
the grace of God convinced of your evil Practices, Diabolical Opinions, and
Erroneous Ways, I cannot but in Conscience tell you the reasons why I now leave
and depart from your Society, and am convinced, that no well grounded person in
the Principles of Religion, and even those of your own Faction will discommend
me therefore* after a serious and impartial trial of these few following
Reasons* But multiplicity of words being vanity, I proceed to the thing
intended; And it is this,

First, Whether or not do ye own the Scriptures to be the Word of God* Ye say,
ye do own them to be such; yet notwithstanding whereof ye deny part of them.
But Secondly, Ye are worse than the Papists; For we cannot charge them with
such a defection from the Scripture, as we can charge you with; for ye own
part of your Translation, and other Part thereof ye deny, notwithstanding of
the curse that is pronounced against Adders to the Scriptures, or Parers
therefrom, which says, Cursed is he that adds or takes from the Scriptures,
for his name shall be taken out of the Book of Life. But the Papists they own
their whole Translation, and adds nothing thereto, nor pareth nothing
therefrom; yet that part of the Scriptures which ye own, ye altogether
misconstruct, and take it in as literal a sense, as if the Scriptures were not
at all myste^^ous; But if we take them in so literal a sense, they shall seem
contradictory the one part thereof to the other. As for example, when our
Savior was accused and mocked by the high Priests and Elders, he answered
nothing; and when he was beat in the high Priests Hall, he checked his smiters,
saying, If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil; but if well, why
smitest thou me? Which places conform to the Literal sense thereof, seem
contradictory as aforesaid.

Secondly, I shall treat upon brotherly love, as the first part of your
misconstructions, instituted by our Savior himself, in that 5 Chapter of that
Epistle of St. Paul directed to the Ephesians, Verse 2. Which says, Walk in
love, even as I have loved you. But I understand not what sort of love this can
be of yours, that suppose a man should beat you, scandalize your honest name
and reputation, defraud you of your goods, and seek to invade your persons, yet
ye will not at all reprove him; whereas God himself expressly commanded the
contrary, saying, Leviticus 19. 17. Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy
neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him, and Christ's own Warrant for reproof in
the above cited place: But the right Interpretation of brotherly love is,
before ye avenge your self of your Neighbor, rather suffer a double injury,
remitting your Cause to God, who, says St. Paul, Romans 12. 19. Vengeance is
mine, and I will repay it.

Thirdly, Quaeritur, Whether or not ye deny the two Sacraments? I know by my
own Experience that ye do so. I shall begin with the First, viz. Baptism, which
serves 10. For washing and purifying us from our sins, Mat. 28. 19. 20. A Sign
and Seal for ingrafting us into Christ, Gal. 3. 27. And Christ's own Warrant for
it, saying, Go ye through all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost.

Fo^^thly, Ye deny also the Lords Supper* therefore I shall speak a little to
that Point likewise, which is this, viz. We have Christ's own Warrant for it, 1
Cor. 11. 23, 24, 25, 26. which says, That the same night wherein he was
betrayed he took bread, and after he had given thanks, brake it, and said, Take
ye, eat ye, this is my body, which is broken for you, this do in remembrance of
me. After the same manner also he took the Cup when he had supped, saying, This
Cup is the New Testament in my blood, which is shed for the sins of many; this
do ye as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me, etc.

Fifthly, What say ye anent not giving Thanks for your daily Food; Christ was
not of your mind, for he gave Thanks when he brake Bread, as is expressly set
down in the above cited place. I would only ask you, whether you merit any such
thing at Gods hands, or not? If ye do not, then consequently ye are the most
ungrateful people in the World, who will not so much as give God thanks for
your sustenance.

Sitxhly. What say ye anent Women's Preaching, I find one express Word to the
contrary, 1 Timothy 2. 11. 12. Suffer not a Woman to Teach, but to be in
silence, and learn with all submission, etc. As likewise, ye suffer all Persons
to Preach, although never so Illiterat* Whereas the contrair is expressed, in
Deuteronomy. 17. chap. 9. 11, 12, and 13. verses. As also the Word of GOD is to be
preached by those that are sufficiently Gifted.

Seventhly, Ye deny giving Honor to any Person; But Jacob was not of your
Opinion, when he met with Isaac, he embraced, and saluted him, and fell on his
neck, and kissed him, Genesis 33. chap. and verse 4.

Now my Friends, Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die? But continue in your
perverse ways, God that made you will not save you, but cast you out of his
sight for ever. Therefore, my Friends, prevent that ^ourse by speedy
repentance, and say with holy Job, If I have done iniquity, I will do it no
more. Sir, I rest,

Your most humble Servant, J. L.

Answers to that Letter presented by some of the Clergy against us.
Friend,
YE talk, that ye once was a Man bent upon our Principles and counted us (as ye
say your selves) the only Apostles of our Land; and ye say, that ye cannot but
depart from our Society, upon the account of some few alleged Errors, of our
Profession, which thou have Summed up in a Sheet of Paper, and in the
Conclusion of it, thou tells us: That if we abide in this Diabolical Opinion of
ours, thou can liken us to no other thing than Wolfs in Lambs Skins; and a
Monster, that destroys all that is Sacred, both in Heaven and Earth, and Tears
all to Pieces, in Order to Salvation; By which Sentence and Expression of your
Folly, thou have committed an high Sin against God, and have put a shame upon
that Opinion which thou do profess; as if we could ascend up unto Heaven, and
take it by force, (if we may so speak) and thou likewise say, that we are
this day an Angel of Light, and to Morrow a Beelzebub: which Expression, ought
rather to be spoken against your selves, than against us, for ye are always
Various in your mind, and can never content your selves with one and the same
Principle, but alters many things in the same; whereas we are the same Church
to day that we were a thousand years since; As also ye say, that suppose a Man
should beat us, scandalize our honest Name and Reputation, and defraud us of
our Goods, etc. We will not at all reprove him; Whereas we have Christ our
Savior his own example for the same, as is evident, and clearly appears in
that 27. chap. of his Gospel, written by St. Matthew, 12, 13, and 14 verses of
that Chapter, which says, That when he was accused, and mocked of the high
Priests and Elders, he answered them nothing etc. And in like manner, in that
Fifth Chapter of St. Matthew at 13. v. of that Chapter, he says, Whosoever
shall smite thee on the right cheeck, turn to him the other also. And sicklike,
ye charge us with defection from the Scriptures, and calls us worse than the
Papists, because ye say, we own part of your Translation, and denis other
parts thereof, but they own their whole Translation, which speaks forth
evidently against your selves; and by the same ^eans ye prove your selves worse
than them. I say no more, but wish you may turn you from your folly, and turn
you to the good old way, and we shall be one People, as there is but one
Shepherd.

Your Assured Friend G. H.

A Reply to the above-written Answer.
FIrst when I set Pen to Paper, and Compyled my last Treaty in form of a
Letter, (which is a short View of some few Errors of that Sectary called
Quakers, but if I have past any thing in it, I hope the Reader will be Candid,
and judge Discreetly of the same, considering the Indisposition of the Author)
and I thought not it should be laid open to the View of the whole World, but by
reason of an confused and insignificant Answer which I have received, made and
composed by some of their own Faction, not proceeding orderly, but first coming
to the Conclusion, and then to some few Paragraphs thereof, whereby they may
get some little shadow of Scripture at they pretend to, albeit stricte
loquendo ut antea pr^d^o^tur, ye shall find the Places which they have cited
literal sensu sumpia Nonsense, (if I may so speak) as is abovespecified,
therefore I have been forced to add this following Reply* wherein till (by Gods
Grace and Assistance) I shall orderly proceed, and add the Reply ^s following.

As to the first Paragraph, Which is the Doctrine of Non Reprobation, Ye say,
That ye have our Savior Christ his own Example and Warrant therefore* which if
holden as a part of your Religion, it will make the Scriptures contradictory
the one part thereof to the other; as for Example, When our Savior was
accused, abused, and mocked by the Highpriests and Elders, he answered them
nothing; and when he says, whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek,
turn to him the other also* notwithstanding when he was smitten in the
High-Priests-Hall, he checked and reproved his Smiters, saying, If I have
spoken evil, bear witness of the evil; but if well, why smitest thou me; which
places seems contradictory to the other, conform to the Literal Sense thereof;
but stricte considerando and figurative loquendo eadem significant, as is above
rehearsed.

As to the second, ye say, That ye can destroy nothing that is Sacred, neither
in Heaven or Earth, Whereas by your evil ways, ye draw others from the Faith,
and Deludes your selves, and thereby heaps up Wrath against the day of Wrath to
fall upon your selves, and adds Fuel to Hells Fire.

Thirdly, Ye say that ye were the same Church 1000 years since that ye are yet,
whereas the Errors, which have risen up in the Church, which ye do thereby
defile, we find were not come in at the six Century, neither was the Church
ever governed by Quakers.

Fourthly, Ye say we Confute our selves in this Point, viz. That ye are worse
than the Papists, because ye do own part of our Translation and denies another
part thereof. To which I Reply* That seeing the Papists have a Translation,
although somewhat different from ours, yet ownes the whole therein contained,
in that respect they are better; but ye owning part of your Translation, and
another part thereof denying, ye are much worse than them in that respect. But
seeing every Person, though never so Illiterate* does Confute your Errors, I
with the Eastern Churches do leave you (seeing I can prevail nothing) to wallow
in your Filthiness; and I Protest, and take God to be my Witness, I would by the
Grace and Assistance of God have reclaimed you* and did endeavor as far as in
me lay to heal your Backslidings, but ye hated Instruction and refused to be
Informed; and so I fear, that that Word is fulfilled on you, which says, He
that is filthy, let him be filthy still.

FINIS

