AMICO ROSA INIMICO SPINA

portrait of Sir William Lower

THREE New Plays, VIZ. The Noble Ingratitude A Pastoral-Tragi-Comedy. The
Enchanted Lovers. A Pastoral. The Amorous Fantasme. A Tragi-Comedy.


All written by Sir Will. Lower Knight.

Amico Rosa, Inimico Spina. LONDON: Printed for F. Kirkman at the John
Fletchers Head over against the Angel-Inn on the backside of St. Clements
without Temple Bar, 1661.

The Noble INGRATITUDE.

A Pastoral-Tragi-Comedy.

By Sir William Lower Knight.

Amico Rosa, Inimico Spina.

LONDON: Printed for Fr. Kirkman at the John Fletchers Head over against the
Angel-Inn on the backside of St. Clements without Temple Bar, 1661.

To her MAJESTY THE QUEEN OF BOHEMIA.
MADAM,
Were I not fully persuaded that this Dramatick Piece in the Original is one of
the best that has been presented upon the French Stage, I should not have
presumed to offer the Copy to the best of Queens, and indeed the most Juditious
of Women: If I have failed in my judgment of the Authors work, I am
indisputably right in the Character of my Patroness: Your Majesty's goodness in
pardoning this presumption, and in approving the Plot and Language o^ the Play
in my Version has begotten this future ambition in me, to publish it under the
favor of your Royal protection, which will secure it indubitably from the
malevolent censures of any ignorant, arrogant, or malignant person whatsoever.
If in the intervals of your high contemplations your serious thoughts shall
descend to divert them a little, as before, so now after the Dedication and
Impression, in reading those Scenes, I must ever esteem it an unparalleled
honor to me, who am,

MADAM, Your Majesty's most humble, most obedient, and most faithful Servant
William Lower.

PROLOGUE.
BEfore I entered, I was told what now
I see decypher'd upon every brovv;
A sullen sadness, and close murmurs say,
The Title is enough to damn the Play The Bill condemns before the Action, Pox
Upon the Poet with his Paradox, Noble ingratitude, o barbarous sound! Virtue
will die to see that Monster crovvn'd: Strange voices these, strange censures
from the wits,
For such he takes you, every one that si^s
Spectatour here usurps a privilege,
Which is unjust, before he hears, to judge.
Wise, and just Iuries, who in every cause
Strictly observe the custom of the Laws,
The bottom sound, and never their verdicts bring
Upon the superficies of a thing;
They weigh the ground of matters well, and never
Proceed to sentence till they see all clee^;
Have patience then a little, and suspend
Your judgments till you see us at the end
Of the fifth Act; three hours will soon be passed,
In Sceans and Songs the minutes fly too fast;
Then if we do'nt maintain our Paradox,
Let me be shamed, and sit three hours (...) stocks
For punishing your patience; if the crime
Deserves more r^gour, let a longer time
Of penance be pres^rib'd me there; but I
Hope from your judgments, justice, clemency*
A nobler sentence, and that you will allow
Me next a Lavvrell vvreath to crown my brovv.
ACTORS.
ZELINDA, Daughter to Lindarache, disguised like a man under the name of Ormin,
in the habit of a Slave. ZEGRY, Master to Zelinda, and Lover of Fatima. ALABEZ,
Second Slave to Zegry. CHARIFA, Woman-Slave to Fatima. FATIMA, Mistress to
Zegry, and in Love with Adibar. ABENCERAGE, under the name of Almansor, Brother
to Zelinda. ZAIDA, Sister to Zegry. MEDINA, Woman-Slave to Zaida. ADIBAR, Lover
of Zaida. GAZVL, Slave to Abencerage. GOMELLA, Father to Fatima. LINDARACHE,
Mother to Zelinda, and to Abencerage.
The Scene is in the Forest of Argier.

THE NOBLE INGRATITVDE. A Tragi-Comedy.
ACT. I.
SCENE I*
ORMIN alone. CHarming abode, delightful solitude,
Fair places where I first received my life
And love, old trees, clear brooks, whose shade and murmur
Speak pity for my sorrowful adventure,
Sweet Zephirs, Echo, rocks, and silent forests,
Be witnesses all of my secret griefs:
I am no more now that Zelinda sometime
Adored by the worthiest Lovers of
The country round about; alas! I serve
Under the habit of a Slave, a traitor
With an unparraleld'd fidelity,
Traitor in Love, I mean, not otherwise,
A Hero, but ungrateful, one who slatters me
In my extreme misfortune, yet would hate me,
If he knew that I Love him. Gentle trees,
Happy are you, although the rigourous ^inter
Uses you hardly, for when the fair Spring
Makes the cold to cease, you suddenly
Resume your ancient verdure, and at harvest*
Upon your branches we see fruits, where formerly
Hung Isicles: my fortune's not so good;
Each of the seasons have twice chaung'd, since Love
Resolved to afflict me, all which time
I Have languished continually, and could no^
Ptetend to the repose my heart has lost:
He whom I love with so much constancy
^s false and fleeting; o Gods! here he come^

SCENE. II.
ZEGRY, ORMIN. ZEGRY. Ormin* I sought thee.

ORMIN. Sir, I sought you also.

ZEGRY. Know that to morrow we will depart hence.

ORMIN. What! will you leave so soon your native country,
These cottages, these woods and these fair meadows?

ZEGRY. I have not hid from thee that in those places
I love the sweet Fatima, a rich Master-peice
Of Heaven, and hoped to see that Beauty here
So cherished and adored; but I have learned
That she is now at Tunis with her Father;
And though this happy residence may be said
To be a second Paradise, I cannot
See any fair thing here, since she is absent.

ORMIN. How happy is Fatima, and how miserable
Am I! -- aside.

ZEGRY. How grievous is her absence to
My amourous soul! to render me by her,
To morrow by the break of day we'll take
Our way for Tunis, I shall be too happy,
If ^ man see her, and I do believe
That she will bear some part too in my joy;
She had no little trouble, I perceived,
For my departure last, and without doubt
I Am not indifferent to her.

ORMIN. Certainly
Her flame will not be quenched.

ZEGRY. That Is all my hope.

ORMIN. And that is all my fear -- aside.

SCENE III.
ALABEZ, ZEGRY, ORMIN. ALABEZ. Cheer up, cheer up,
Smother your sighs, I have a counter poison
For all your sorrows.

ZEGRY. Speak it then without
Holding us long in trouble.

ALABEZ. Give me leave.
First, if you please, to take a little breath.

ZEGRY. Speak then?

ALABEZ. I Am not disposed yet.

ZEGRY. Oh thou make me.
Suffer too much? tell it unto us quickly.

ALABEZ. You might die with it.

ZEGRY. Is It then some misfortune
Sent me by destiny?

ALABEZ. I say agiane.
You might die with it, but it would be with joy;
Fatima yesterday late in the evening
Arrived in these quarters.

ZEGRY. Is it possible,
Fatima?

ALABEZ. Yes, assure you, I have seen her.

ZEGRY. Perhaps thou art deceived.

ALABEZ. I am no ass.
I did observe her well, and knew her perfectly.
Her Slave, who was my Mistress formerly,
Entered just now with her into that wood.

ZEGRY. Good Gods? do I not see her?

ALABEZ. Yes, that is she
Which passes by.

ZEGRY. What luster has her eye,
What grace her gate?

ORMIN. Alas?

ZEGRY. I see a thousand new charms there.

ALABEZ. Are you besotted? will you not salute her?

ZEGRY. No, to perform that complement, I Will give her
A visit, when I shall have without doubt
My soul less in disorder.

ALABEZ. For m^ part,
Who do not love so daintily, I will,
Without deferring it, make my address.

ZEGRY. Without discovering our selves, we may
From hence know by the usage of the servant,
In what esteem the Master is at present.

SCENE IV.
ALABEZ, CHARIFA, FATIMA, ZEGRY, ORMIN. ALABEZ. SWeet Beauties welcome, from
what quarters come you?

CHARIFA. What means this insolent? Go on your way

ALABEZ. How Is this? instead of kisses and embraces,
As I expected, I am quarrel^d with:
Charifa, whence this change?

CHARIFA. Begone, and leave us.

ALABEZ. Thou actest well the scornful.

FATIMA. What Is that follow
Which follows us?

CHARIFA. It Is an impertinent,
Whom I know not.

ALABEZ. I am much changed then
Since this last voyage; but thy soul is cha^g'd
And not my visage, without doubt thy Mistress
Has better eyes, and more wit; she will know
An old, and a familiar acquaintance.

FATIMA. who are you then?

ALABEZ. My Masters Slave.

FATIMA. What Master?

ALABEZ. Should you not know him neither?
Is his name razed out of your memory?

FATIMA. Assuredly, Charifa, this man's mad.

ALABEZ. How, Madam, is it possible you can
Forget the valiant Zegry?

FATIMA. Zegry?

ZEGRY. Heaven?
What strange inconstancy is this? who ever
Could have imagined it? -- aside.

ALABEZ. That noble and illustrious successor
Of those brave warriers who even in Spain
Have gathered Lawrells, and brought home fair spoils,
Madam, your faithful Lover, Zaida's brother.

FATIMA. Oh! I remember him.

ZEGRY. False, and Ungrateful!

ALABEZ. You ask not how he does.

FATIMA. What interest
Have I in his sweet person? happily
He Is dead.

ALABEZ. He is indeed.

FATIMA. We are all mortal;
The Prophet has his soul.

CHARIFA. A faith full servant
Would have accompanied his Master; why
Art thou not dead too?

ALABEZ. Only to ^nrage thee.

Zegry discovering himself. ZEGRY. The Prophet has his soul, o false Fatima!
Is It thus you do express your goodness to me?
Deceitful object, my return, I see,
Displeases you, who would despise me dead,
Must hate me living, I disturb with pleasure
That faithless joy which the delightful news
Of my feigned death procured you: I live still
Ungrateful, but I live no more for you:
M^ passion is transform^d all into fury:
As much as I loved you, I now despise you:
My heart shakes of so rigourous a yoke:
Love raises no more sighs, nor fires within me,
Only I sigh that I used so much care
To please you, and if I burn yet, it is
With anger, not with love.

ORMIN. Oh this success
Answers my wishes fully? -- aside.

FATIMA. This confession
Surpriseth, but no way afflicts me;
My first discourse should make you understand
That I Am not very tender hearted to you,
And, me thinks, after such a clear contempt
As was expressed there you might believe
Nothing should trouble me that comes from you,
Unless your amourous address: I have
A thousand other Lovers braver far
Then you, and therefore I daign not to put you
In the rank of my conquests.

ZEGRY. Sure, your pride
Is greater then your beauty, the charm is
Dissolved wherein I formerly was held;
It Is true, I sometime thought you beautiful;
But I was amourous, and therefore not
To be believed, having now my spirit
No more disordered, you cease to be fair
And I to be abused, whereas you
Pleased me formerly, it was because
It is impossible for me, when I
Am loved, to be insensible.

FATIMA. I love you?
Heaven! what a strange opinion is this?
I never had but strong aversion for you.
All your endeavors served but to displease me;
But though I hated you, I loved your Sister,
And ^t was for her sake that I feigned to have
Some pity for your passions; her prayer
A hundred times restain^d my hate, you swear
That your days did depend upon my sight,
And yielding unto her desites I did
Enforce mine eyes to smile, when my heart frowned,
To the end not to be cause of your death.

ZEGRY. Your eyes have never made a mortal wound.

FATIMA. Take heed that your do not revive again,
One Only of my looks darted more gently.
Can change this violent anger into love;
But I am very nice of such a look,
It is too rich a price, Sir, for your conquest
I limit my desires to see you never,
Adieu, become wise, and leave me in peace.
-- Exit Fatima.
SCENE. V.
ZEGRY; ALABEZ, ORMIN. ZEGRY. YEs false Fatima, I will become wise,
Thy contempt is unjust, but mine is lawful:
Since thou pretendest but to make thee hated,
I will obey thee, thy unworthy trophy,
My heart shall be no more, his charms are broken,
His flames are quenched; Alabez, follow her
Close at the heels, even unto her house;
But have a care not to discover thee.

ORMIN. Her pride's unjust, and not to be endured;
Your change herein is but too equitable,
O how well should you do to free your heart
From the imperious captivity
Of such a cruel conqueror, you are
Born with too many fair advantages,
To obtain nothing but eternal wrongs;
There are Sir, other beauties in the world
Which would be glad to share their flame with yours,
To imitate your sighs, and which would tell you
That the resplendent honor of a crown
Is beneath that to be beloved of
An object that one loves Contempt in love
De^erves to be repayed with contempt,
And who refuses, is not worthy of,
For the most part, the person that is refused.

ZEGRY. How great my griefs are, and how grievous is
This proud contempt? o light, and wavering Sex!
O black ingratitude! since love began
To trouble Lovers, was there ever torment
Equal to mine? I feel my heart infected
With all imaginary griefs.

ORMIN. Oh? Sir,
Believe me, I know some that are much more
To be lamented, and if what I know
Were reveald to you, you should have great cause
Of comfort by it.

ZEGRY. Oh speak, and divert
The grief which does oppress me. oftentimes
A wretch is pleased in his misery
When he sees that he suffers not alone.

ORMIN. O love, I pray thee make his heart grow tender
At the recital of the evil which he
Has caused me, oh make him Sensible
Of my sad sufferings? -- aside.
A young Beauty, Sir,
Whose name and birth, if you please I Will conceal
Through decency, only thus much I'I tell you,
That she was near to me and loved me deerly,
Scarce yet attained to the fifteenth year,
When love and marriage was proposed to her,
And she commanded to expect for husband
A man too lovely, and to much beloved;
And who for his part was so far from being
Warm^d with a mutual flame, that he unlawfully
Took an affection for another object:
His faithful Lover with grief understood it
But yet a worse misfortune afterward
Surprised her, the ungrateful brak the accord
Of the approaching marriage, and departed
For a long voyage without seeing her;
I can assure you that her grief was quick,
And anger ardent after this affront;
But yet her anger was less then her love:
Although, the inconstant left her, she retained him
Still in her soul, and valuing not her sex,
Nor fearing death, i the habit of a man
She followed his steps.

Zegry meditating ZEGRY. O barbarous rigor!
O lamentable passion!

ORMIN. You will be
More touched when you shall know the rest: scarce was she
Embarked on the sea, when by a new,
And worse misfortune certain infamous rovers
Surprised her vessel, and not long time after
They sold her unto that ungrateful man,
Who falsely and unworthly forsook her:
And so at last it hapened that Fortune
As Well as Love would put her into chains:
But she still without changing heart, or habit.
Found sweetness in this double slavery;
Far from desiring to be free, she followed
Her faithles friend into his native country,
And fearing not to be discovered,
Serv^d this deceitful Master without hope,
Endeavored to please him, and therein
Prosper^d so well, that he esteemed her zeal,
And concealed nothing from her; but this kindness
Was not a cure, but corsive to her grief,
Because it made her privy to the happiness
Her Rival did enjoy in the affection
Of him she loved, who every day protested
Unto her, that rather then lose her love,
He Would lose his life.

Zegry still meditating. ZEGRY. Vnparalel'd punishment!
Cruel injustice!

ORMIN. Gods! he grows tender,
Love be propitious to me, -- aside.
Sir, what lay you,
Is not she more then you to be lamented?
Compared to her torments, your afflictions
Are sweet. You answer not.

ZEGRY. Yes, yes, I grant it
I ought to hate her, but I Have too much weakness:
Oh fair Fatima!

ORMIN. Oh my hard misfortune!

ZEGRY. Ormin, What charms she has?

ORMIN. You answer nothing
To what I said.

ZEGRY. What spak'st thou to me of?

ORMIN. Of a young maid
Oppressed and injured in love.

ZEGRY. My thoughts
Were otherwise employed, and troubled,
I heard thee not, at least I have forgotten.

ORMIN. You seemed to compassionate her grief,
And her misfortune very much.

ZEGRY, Alas!
I only thought upon my proper grief.

ORMIN, What! shall th'ingratefull and cruel Fatima
Although she quits your heart thus, have the glory
To live still in your memory? oh no,
Banish her thence; but if you will think of her,
To ease your evils a little* employ your thought
Only to think of her defects; remember
That she is too proud, and fancy to your self
That she is not fair enough, to hold so noble
And such a faithful Lover as you are*
That there is nothing charming in her eyes,
Nor in her cheeks, that her proportion,
Her posture, stature, gate, and carriage
Have nothing commendable, that her wit --

ZEGRY Ormin, no more, I cannot suffer yet
She should be injured; that ungrateful Beauty,
Who laughs with scorn at my sad languishment,
Has no defect at all but her fierce rigor;
And I fear that in spite of this defect,
My violent love will triumph o'r mine anger.

ORMIN. What, shall Fatima be so proud, and you
So humble? shall she be composed of Ice,
And you of fire? must you persist to love her,
When she despises you? oh fall no more
Into that fatal error. It belongs, Sir
But to low spirits to suffer without hate,
Such a contempt; to leave what flies us,
Is little trouble, and when hope is quenched,
Love should be querched also.

ZEGRI. What thou say,
Ormin, is very true, I should indeed
Follow Fatima in her lightness to me,
I should in her unkindnes trace her steps,
I should be as insensible as she is
Severe and rigourous, my flam'es an error,
I do confess it, but I love this error,
Thy faithful counsels are not seasonable,
Love has not yet given place unto my reason,
I Am born to languish, and to die for her;
Although she be ungrateful she is not
The less fair for it.

ORMIN. The false hope that flattered me
Fled in a moment; miserable Lover,
And too unjust! -- aside

SCENE VI.
ALMANSOR, ZEGRY, ORMIN. ALMANSOR. FRiend, I am very joyful
To meet thee.

ZEGRY. My content is still complete,
When I behold thy face, as in thy absence,
Nothing seems sweet unto me: Now I see
Thou Art habited like us, this garment is
Well made.

ALMANSOR. I took it just now in th'apartment
I have in thy abode.

ZEGRY. This Shepherds habit
Becomes thee rarely; but for an Almansor,
It is too much abasement.

ALMANSOR. Sure the habit
Takes nothing from the luster of the merit,
In imitating thee, I cannot err;
Thee, whose heart is as noble as thy race*
And unto whose aid in an eminent danger
I owe my life.

ZEGRY. The Shepherds of this wood
And fair Campania, are descended from
Those Heroes, who in time passed conquered Spain
From those renowned Moors, whose great exploits
Made the Kings of a hundred Christian people
Tremble for fear, and who seeing Tunis conquered
By Charles the fifth, conserve here in these places
Their glory and their freedom, secretly
Dispose the hearts of the most Zealous Kings
To drive the Christians from this desolate country,
And are in readiness to join themselves,
And to increase the first fair levies which
Shall be employed on such an expedition.

ALMANSOR. I know that this fair desert's like a Court:
But have thou heard yet that Gomella is
Returned here? suffer me at present, Zegry,
To leave thee, he is my familiar friend,
And I owe him a visit.

ZEGRY. Then thou know
Fatima.

ALMANSOR. Yes, that Beauty has received
The light from brave Gomella; friend adieu
I will return to thee with speed, excuse me
At present, I must speak with him upon
A business of importance -- Exit Almansor.

SCENE VII.
ZEGRY ORMIN. ZEGRY. A business of importance? oh that word
Redoubleth my affliction; to marry
Fatima, without doubt, is his design:
Oh Heaven? have thou ordain^d that, to make up
The full proportion of my misery,
^y dearest friend should rob me of my Mistress?
^las! if this be true, grief, fure will kill me;
^ear Ormin, let us use our best endeavor
(...) hinder this misfortune; I expect
(...) only remedy from thy advise.
^he most resplendent wit yeildeth to thine
(...) point of knowledge, I have observed in thee
^omething that's great, and extraordinary;
Thy judgment charms me, and thy care surpriseth me.

ORMIN. (...), I Am your Slave, and glory to be so.

ZEGRY. (...) no, I make thee free, henceforth be thou
^hy Masters friend.

ORMIN. ^he sweetest liberty
^easeth my fancy less then the chains which
^ear for you.

ZEGRY ^is zeal so little common,
^akes me grow tender, and amazeth me.
(...), quit thy fetters, Ormin, I commmand it,
(...) free.

ORMIN ^^nce it is your pleasure, I obey;
^las! what have I said, Love, can I be
(...) liberty, when my heart is not free?

The end of the first Act.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
FATIMA, ZAIDA, CHARIFA, MEDIN^ FATIMA. ENter again, sweet Zaida, ceremony
Between us should be banish^d, where^ will you
Trouble your self unnecessarily?

ZAIDA. Since you will have it so, I Will go no further

FATIMA. I may assure my self then ere we part,
That Adibar shall have no free admittanc^
To your society, I have already
Told you, that formerly he loved me;
But now I know that you give laws to (...)
And I have cause to hope that, if you scorn (...)
He may return unto his first subjection.

ZAIDA. Fatima, be assured than he shall be
Repulsed, his love will be but troublesom^
But if you love me, forget not to feign
Some kindness for my brother; I beseech
For my sake give him cause to hope a little

FATIMA. Adieu, I promise you that at next meetin^
I will receive him better. -- Exit (...)

SCENE II.
ZAIDA, MEDINA. ZAIDA. WHat think thou
Of fair Fatima, and of her request?

MEDINA. ^ think that Adibar is not a person
^o be despised.

ZAIDA. True, but I am too proud
T'accept a heart that has been conquered
By any other, and would now be mine
Trough an inconstancy, but if I durst
To love --

MEDINA. Why stop you, Madam?

ZAIDA. Oh Medina!
I must not speak the rest.

MEDINA. ^ut I divine it;
You are in love, and I have cause to judge
that it is with Almansor, that fair stranger

ZAIDA. Who, I in love with him?

MEDINA. ^hy not, I pray you,
Is that a crime?

ZAIDA. Oh do not name that love,
which is no other but a fair esteem.

MEDINA. There is so little difference between
Esteem and love, that oftentimes we take the
One for the other, and are so deceived.

ZAIDA. I cannot but remember that my brother
In his last voyage did conclude my marriag^
In Argier, that he who is designed to be
My husband, is here shortly to arrive,
And that my heart ought to reserve it self
Wholly for him. Besides in thy opinion.
Would it not argue a great weakness in me
To love this stranger, though my broth^^ friend.
Who has not been above a month amon^
And whose desert as yet's unknown unto

MEDINA. Seeing this Stranger, who is not of the vul^
Deserves to be caressed of your brother,
There Is reason to believe that he deserves
To be your Lover, and I cannot conceive
Why your mouth will conceal the fl^^ which is
So clearly for him in your eyes and coun^^^nance.
As often as he comes with your brothe^
To visit you, your looks seem to be fixed
Wholly one him, and at the same time also
I observed often that the stranger eyed you
With the same ardour.

ZAIDA. Prithee, speak in earnest,
Did see him to behold me oftentimes?

MEDINA. You ask it me with very much impresse m^
I do believe in less time then an howr,
That you have questioned me upon this (...)
More then a hundred times; your curiosity
Gives me a full assurance that his looks
Displease you not, nor wound your modesty

ZAIDA. Alas! can one in justice be offended,
To be beloved?

MEDINA. If his love pleases you, I think his person
Will please you equally.

ZAIDA. I consider him
Without interpreter; but perhaps, he loves
Elsewhere, and I may be unpleasing to him.

MEDINA. Madam, although you fain would cover it,
This fond suspicion publishes your flame,
Iealousy always is daughter of love.

ZAIDA. would it pleased Heaven, that he were free, and that
He thought me fair, But I see him come forth
Gomella's house, I Will satisfy my self
In sounding of his soul, upon this bank
I will repose my self, and feign to sleep.

MEDINA. What Is your design? I cannot comprehend it.

ZAIDA. Withdraw, anon thou't understand it better.

SCENE III.
ALMANSOR ZAIDA. ALMANSOR. G^mella is expecting his return.
In visit, here I may conveniently
Dream of my new love: Heaven! do I not see
Under that flourishing shade the beauteous subject
Of my sad sufferings? Love in this encounter
Seems to flatter me sufficiently;
It is the lovely Zaida without doubt:
How sweetly, and with what tranquillity
Does that fair one repose, whilst wretched
Languish with the disease which she procures me
Surely she cannot hear me now, I may
Speak at this present unto her of love,
And not offend her; but alas! the rigor
Of my sad destiny is great, when I
Presume to speak, I fear that she may hear me
You that have taught me the true use of sighs*
Dear object of my joy and of my griefs;
Suffer my amorous and silent soul
T^expresse its secret passion before you,
And to complain here of a thousand evils
Which you have made me suffer, yet unknown
Unto your self: and you resplendent sources
Of all my fires, from whence I have deriv^d
Such violent heats, fair charming eyes, the authors
Of my captivity, enjoy the rest,
Which your have taken from me: If I see
The poppies which shut up your lids, be no^
Offended that you lose your lights, the Sun
Is subject to the same eclipse, and can
No more then you, dispense himself thereof.

Zaida feigning her self in a dream ZAID. Almansor.

ALM. Sure, she dreams.

ZAIDA. Oh! rigourous torment!
To burn, to languish, and not dare to speak it,
Alas!

ALMANSOR. O Heaven! what hear I?

ZAIDA We resent
One and the same heat.

ALMANSOR. Oh! that it were true!

ZAIDA. My modesty, excuse me.

ALMANSOR. O favorable sleep^

ZAIDA. Cruel constraints!
When shall we be content, when shall our plaints
Have end?

ALMANSOR. In this great ecstasy of joy,
All my respects are vain; to give her thanks
I Will kiss her fair hands. -- He kisseth her hands.

ZAIDA. Hold, insolent; whence does proceed this boldness? -- feigning to awake,

ALMANSOR. What have I done? -- aside.
I came to give you thanks.

ZAIDA. For what?

ALMANSOR. It Is for your goodness.

ZAIDA. How, I know not:
I Am sure I never gave you any matter
For this acknowledgment, who ever will
Consult the appearance of the thing, shall find
That I have much indifference for you;
But though I had less, was it fit to trouble
My rest, in making your acknowledgement

ALMANZOR. Excuse my transport, beauteous Shepherdess*
If I had less loved, I had been less guilty;
In this occasion a Wary Lover
Would have expressed little love in showing
Too much respect; and whatsoer my crime b^
It would be pardoned, if you slept still;
But, alas! my good fortune is soon changed,
I find that you awake but to afflict me,
Your eyes in taking unto them again
Their grace and luster, take unto them also
At the same time their usual cruelty.
And that most charming hope which I so little
Enjoyed, vanished with your sleep.

ZAIDA. This is
An ill expression of your self, that word
Of hope gives me astonishment, I never
Gave it, nor took it yet from any person.

ALMANZOR. If I might dare to credit your discourse,
At least you had not an aversion for me,
Nothing would be equal to my good fortune
You would not find my presence trouble so me,
I should be used better, I should be
Esteemed and possibly --

ZAIDA. Proceed.

ALMANZOR. I might be
Beloved.

ZAIDA. Beloved! of whom; if you magine
Of me, you are mistaken.

ALMAZOR. Notwithstanding
You honored me so much to tell me so:
If I may but believe your voice, I have
Place in your heart, you are my wltnesse and
My judge both at one time; oh disavow not
That favorable sentence, that fair Oracle
Proceeding from an adorable mouth.
Those words so full of charms pronounced in sleep,
Which promised me blessings so soon vanished

ZAIDA. I dreamt, Almanser, and you are not ignorant
That a dream oftentimes is a deceiver,
And still a lie.

ALMANSOR. True, a dream is my glor^;
But I have passions which are real truths,
The flame with in mine eyes has appeared to you
Too clear, to be concealed, and the coldness
Which you express unto me, quenches not
My love, although it ruineth my hope.

ZAIDA. This love comes very late, and really
I Am troubled at it, you know well that I
Am otherwise engaged.

ALMANSOR. Alas! I cannot
Deny but I have heard say that a Lover
Favored of Heaven is to come sho^^l here
To take you from mine eyes, I know you love him
Before you see him, therefore I Will not trouble
Your pleasures, nor his joy: how great soever
His happiness be, I do intend to suffer it
Without complaining of you, but withal
I do intend to die. As soon as you
Shall depart hence upon the fatal voyage
Ordained, where your happy marriage
Must be accomplished, Know, at the same time,
That you shall see me in my griefs excess
Depart to go unto the grave, where those
Remains of fire which sparkle in my bosom,
After my death shall still yet warm my ashes.

ZAID: Fortune does ow you, Sir, a happier lot

ALM: My good or evil lot depends on you.
All other favors would be troublesome:
Lastly I do adore you, and not fortune.

ZAIDA. What expect you from me in the condition
Wherein I am?

ALMANSOR. Immortal heats and torments;
I still must love without hope to be loved.

ZAIDA. Who loves much, may hope to be loved likewise.

ALMANSOR. What may I hope one day for better usage?

ZAIDA. Consult with your fidelity upon it.

ALM: Your soul appears too insensible
To love.

ZAID: A constant Lover may do much;
The first refusal ought not to astonish
Any one that has love enough to give it.

ALMANSOR Oh this is plain enough to my glad sense!

ZAIDA. The blood strikes up unto my brow; alas!
I Have said too much, and now I blush for shame on it.

ALM: This glorious confession rendereth me
Too happy and content.

ZAID: Dreams sometimes are not
Without effect; but the Sun has already
Finished his career, let us go in
Yet further to discourse upon this matter
I fear that troublesome.

SCENE IV.
ADIBAR, ZAIDA, ALMANSOR, ADIBAR. Without too much ambition may I hope
The honor to take you by the fair hand
The one is free, may I presume to kiss it?

ZAIDA. I have no need, Sir, of your services.

ADIBAR. They may be worth a Strangers, notwithstanding
Your scorn of me.

ZAIDA. In thinking to oblige me,
You may displease me, by this odd expression.

ADIBAR. The Prophet, who knows how I reverence you,
Knows also how far forth I fear your anger,
And the cares which I take, should well assure you,
That I come here but for to honor you:
May I aside declare a secret to you
Of some importance?

ZAIDA. Nothing 'is so important
As decency, which in the opinion
Of every one, allows we not the Liberty
To hear the secrets of such as you are.

ADIBAR. I desire nothing of you what another
Does not obtain*

ZAIDA. His discourse pleases me,
And yours I hate.

ALMANSOR. You take an unfit time
To tell your secrets, to the indiscreet
Love seldom is propitious; th incivility
Which your pride does express, is an ill mea^s
To gain esteem.

ADIBAR. I am not here to take
Lessons from you.

ALMANSOR. I give them to your equals
To all intents and purposes.

ADIBAR. This passion.
Which carries you away, convicteth you,
And does excuse me of the incivility
Wherewith your error charged me; a man
Better instructed, to avoid suspicion,
Would have retired himself out of respect;
You are too gross; but as you are a Stranger,
I ought to bear a little with your ignorance.

ZAIDA. You have ^he faults which you co^demn in him;
This Stranger does oblige me, and you trouble me.

ADIBAR. Yet you should take away your hand from him -- to Zaida.

ALMANSOR. If she should do it, you would be in danger.

ADIBAR. In quitting her, you might run to your death.

ALMNASOR. I respect Zaida, you I do despise.

ADIBAR. If by the same respect I were not stopped,
In my revenge, your punishment should soon
Follow your insolence.

Zaida quitting, Almansors hand. ZAIDA. These hasty motions
Are sorry passtimes for me; by this violence
I know that neither of you does respect me,
But both offend me.

ALMMANSOR. Do you take
Your hand from me to answer his desires?
My Rival will become too proud at this:
Should you affro^t me wit design to please him?

ZAIDA. By what right also am I bound to give
You satisfaction?

ADIBAR. Madam, I beseech you,
Use no constraint to your free inclination
In my behalf, I know which of us two
Pleases you best, I yield to him in fortune,
And perhaps too in merit, his discourse
Is acceptable, mine is hateful to you;
Of this truth I cannot be ignorant;
Therefore to the end I may not trouble you,
I will retire me, my respect for you
Is stronger then the jealousy, wherewith
My amourous soul is justly seized now,
And I will force all my resentiments for you,
Yea eve^ to hate my self, if you should hate me.
Let here my happy Rival without trouble
Discourse with you, establish, if you please,
His happiness at the expense of mine;
But take this into your consideration
That Adibar, who quits you with regret,
Though the least loved, is not the least discreet.

ZAIDA. Where go you Adibar? come back again.

ADIBAR. My absence will oblige you.

ZAIDA. No, once more
I say come back again; if you esteem me,
You will return, to take away suspicions
Opposed to my glory, lend me, pray you,
Your hand, and lead me back. -- he gives her his hand.

ALMANSOR. Oh! I cannot
Suffer this cruel injury.

ZAIDA. Almansor,
Stay I command you, on pain of my hate.

ALMAN^OR. Hear me a word or two,

ZAIDA. I can 't be moved.
Reason I hear, and duty is my guide.

Exeunt Zaida and Adibar. SCENE V.
ALMANZOR. What unexpected clap of thunder's this,
Which ruineth my joy thus with my hope?
Reason I hear, and duty is my guide;
My constancy, at these words gives place
To my despair; and duty is my guide
No, cruel Zaida in following Adibar,
It Is Love that guides you: but what! I may be
Too rash in censuring her so; perhaps
She does enforce herself in quitting me*
And does prefer my Rival here before me,
To take off all suspicion of our love.
She loves, she loves me; oh* what say I, fool?
without doubt she has left me through contempt.
Love, like to fickle Fortune is in constant.
His Empire, does resemble his who does
Command the sea, where nothing is secure,
To day a calm, to morrow a sad storm,
And every minute, the most fortunate
Upon that element, may fear a change.
Even in the Port, We often suffer Shipwreck:
These are sad truths, whereof I need not doubt:
But what makes my Slave so hastily
T'addresse his steps unto me?

SCENE VI.
ALMANSOR, GAZUL* ALMANZOR. Have thou found
Gomella?

GAZVL. Yes, Sir and I think that he
Adva^ceth here with large steps to embrace yo^

ALMANSOR. It Is that which my care should prevent.

GAZVL. Must I
Withdraw whilst you discourse?

ALMANSOR. Yes, and be sure
Thou fail not to prepare for me a consort
Of Music.

GAZVL. How a consort, Sir, so late?
ALMANSOR.
SCENE VII.
GOMELLA, ALMANSOR. GOMELLA. Oh! Sir,
How glad am I to see you here again?

ALMANSOR. My joy in seeing you is no less great:
But speak we of my mother.

GOMELLA. Stay her coming;
To morrow without fail she arrives here
Unknown.

ALMANSOR. Unknown! and why dares she not to be se^

GOMELLA. The secret only you must know from her,

ALMANSOR. Comes not my Sister?

GOMELLA. You must not expect her.

ALMANSOR. Where is her residence?

GOMELLA. I cannot tell you.

ALMANSOR. How Is this, Gomella, what can I imagine
In the uncertainty wherein you leave me?
I am astonished at this proceeding;
Your obscure language is a clear presage
Of a conceal d misfortune: Oh! my Sister
Is dead, I need not doubt it.

GOMELLA. Her death is not
The evil which should attrist you.

ALMANSOR. What, is it then
Happened unto her?

GOMELLA. No, but something worse.

ALMANSOR. That word is not sufficient to clear me:
Shall I not know why I received an order
To depart from ^^^missa where I was
Brought up, to come with all speed to these quarters,
T^addresse my self to you with confidence,
To change my true name of Abencerage
Into that of Almansor, and to have
A care not to reveal my family?

GOMELLA Upon this point I must shut up my mouth:
Y m not allowed to say more unto you.
It is you Mothers absolute injunction,
And request to me; have but patience
Until to morrow, when you shall be satisfied
From her own mouth; but the Sun, I perceive,
Already grows pale before the Moon.
Enter into my cot, and take with me
A poor repast.

ALMANSOR. I do desire to be
Dispensed thereof now, if it pleases you.

GOMELLA. Where will you go?

ALMANSOR. Zegry expects me
On my engagement at his house to night.

GOMELLA. Zegry, what say you, what charm does oblige you
To answer so ill to Abencerage name,
To that debate, which for a thousand reasons
Is, between your two houses, as it were,
Hereditary?

ALMANSOR. A far juster duty
Inviteth me to love him: but for him,
I Would lost my life in Cairo, treacherous enemies
Encompassed me round, and had he not
Succored me speedily, I had been murdered:
His name, which I knew well without discovering
Mine own, disturbed my new born amity;
But his goodness for me, his cares, his kindness,
Soon dissipated all those old resentements;
And so in order to the friendship which
Conjoined us, at last we came together
Into this country, where I was obliged
By the same frienship to lodge no where else
But at home with him.

GOM: Oh Heaven! but proceed.

ALMANSOR. You know his Sister: at first sight of her,
I was her servant: by a powerful charm
Whose art she only knows, her fair eyes paid
But one look for the purchase of my heart;
And if the God of marriage. --

GOMELLA. Soft, hold there.
Take heed you flatter not your self with such
A fatal hope, destroy your passions,
Or you destroy your honor.

ALMANSOR. How, my honor?

GOMELLA. Yes, Sir, your honor, what! does this discourse
Surprise and trouble you?

ALMANSOR. I fear the name
Of an ungrateful person.

GOMELLA. Fear that also
Of a low spirited one; these shameful motions
Do wound your duty.

ALMANSOR. May I not know how?

GOMELLA. To morrow, when you see your Mother here,
You shall be satisfied, in the mean time,
Hate both the Sister, and the brother.

ALM: Hate them?
I who have been so much obliged unto them?
No, no, I swear --

GOM: Swear not but let us entet;
Your mind will change, when you have heard th'adventure.

The end of the Second Act.
ACT III,
SCENE I.
ZEGRY, ORMIN. ZEGRY. THe night approaches, it is time to put
This letter with my hope into thy hands:
Work on her Slave, and act discreetly, that
She take this diamond from thee, afterward
Use all the skill thou have to know the secrets
Of her disdainful Mistress, and consider
That I expect at thy return to hear
The sentence of my life* or of my death.

ORMIN. Cruel commandment, whereunto I see
My felfreduc'd! -- aside.
One word, Sir, ere I go.
Think well upon it yet, what hope have you?
Your importunities will increase her anger,
And you should do much better, If I durst
To tell you so, henceforth to free your self
Of this unworthy Empire; as love is
The price of love, so hate should always be
The recompense of hate, and of contempt.
Your soul's are too ill suited to unite,
Love loses his power in Antipathies,
And it is an equal crime, Sir, in a contrary
Effect, to hate who Loves us, or to love
Who hates us.

ZEGRY. Oh! speak no more on it unto me:
My evill's invincible, and my soul feels
Too sensibly the charms which do destroy me;
To overcome my griefs, which have no equals
I seek some gentle succor, and not counsel,
My chain, alas! is too strong, and my heart
Too weak, as not to yield unto the torrent
which carries me away.

ORMIN. O rigorous Fate! -- aside.
But if all your endeavors ate in vain,
If fierce Fatima still persist in her
Former disdains --

ZEGRY. what pleasure do thou take
To Increase my troubles? hide her rigours to me
And speak but of her charms: my heart is try^d
By torments great enough, it need not be
afflicted with an evil not yet arrived.
flatter my weakness, though therein thou show
Thy self less faithful, if thou do desire
To interest thy self in my misfortunes.

ORMIN. Sir, if your eyes could penetrate into
The secrets of my heart, you would soon ^ind
How great an interest I take in them,
And that if your lot lay within my power,
Your pleasures should soon pass your hope, I call
The Prophet, so much honored amongst us,
To witnes^ that I feel the counterstroa^s
Of all your troubles, that I Am grieved for them
As Much as you, and tremble in like manner,
Lastly that you are dearer to me far
Then you imagine, that my happiness
Depends on the success of your amors,
And that it is for you alone my heart
Makes its devotions.

ZEGRY. Grant it gracious Heaven
That thy zeal happily succeed in touching
In my behalf the soul of that ungrateful:
My sister has already been with her,
And I believe she has not failed to speak
To her for me, their friendship flatters me;
And gives me leave to hope that who esteem
The sister, may in time cherish the brother.
Adieu, perform thy duty, and return
With speed to calm the tempests of my spirit
-- Exit Zegry
ORMIN. I will endeavor with permission of
The holy Prophet, to hear such success
As I desire.

SCENE II.
ORMIM alone. WHereto shall I resolve me in this sad
Extremity? shall I solicit now
My Rival against my self in the behalf
Of an ingratfull Master that does wrong me
And though he appears blind to my disadvantage,
Shall I approve my self so more then he?
What shall I press the effect of what I fear?
Shall I give him content at my sad cost,
By a constraint so cruel? and shall I
Become my self the faithful Minister
Of the injustices which he does do me?
No, no, let us not serve with so much heat
To trouble us yet with a new misfortune,
A person who cost me so many tears:
If I must die, at least let me not give
Arms for to pierce my heart; o'th contrary,
Let me act so, that he may hope for nothing
From fair Fatima, let me without scruple
Betray this false one, and deprive him of
A good which would become so fa'tal to me.
I should ground all the hope that's left unto me
Upon the loss of his. But how is this,
That at these words I tremble with affright?
I find my heart already rises up
Against me in behalf of this false Master.
Alas! how cruel and perfidious
Soer he be, I cannot fail of faith
To wards him, but must love, and serve him truly.
It Is so resolved, my anger must give place
Unto the love that reigns in my bosom:
An ill example never justifies
A crime: let us deliberate no more;
But what is the noise I hear? it is Fatima
That passes, and Charifa follows her.

SCENE III.
FATIMA, CHARIFA, ORMIN FATIMA. THis foul contemps which Zaida offers me
Provokes me highly, ^o far was this false one
From hindering Adibar to visit her,
(As she engaged herself in promise to me)
That she accepted kindly of his hand,
To disoblige me; it is an injury
Of such a nature as requires reveng.

CHARIFA. The affront is known unto your self, you saw it
With your own eyes, and to speak truly Madame,
The injustice is extreme.

FATIMA. Know that my anget
Is so too; let us enter, it is late,
This night shall give us counsel.

ORMIN. I Will go one,
And stay no longer, las! I dare not open
My mouth, nor keep it shut. Love, I beseech thee,
Mingle at least some good in the great mass.
Of my misfortunes, grant that in demanding
All things of her, she grant me nothing for him. -- aside.
Madame, shall I find so much goodness from you
As to allow me the sweet liberty
To leave this letter here in your fair hands?
It comes from a Lover the most passionate
Of all those which the Luster of your eyes.
Has made slaves; and who, not withstanding all
The love wherewith his soul is seized, has griven you
Some cause of plaint.

FATIMA. Of plaint! is it Adibar
That writes unto me? Softly to Charifa.

CHARIFA. Wtihout doubt it is he,
My heart does tell me so.

FATIMA. What would that false one
Desire of me?

ORMIN. How cruel is this sweetness
To me? -- aside.
The end of his desires is to
Appear before you, highly to detest
His insole^t crime, he would express the trouble
Wherewirh his soul is pressed, to the Divinity
Justly offended, and receive in making
His fault worthy to be forgot, a pardon.
Or death at your fair feet.

FATIMA. I desire not
His death; but I would have him live and hope*
How late soever his repentance comes,
I love it, and 't is welcome. My heart is
Already pacified by thy discourse.

ORMIN. I have for my misfortune, too well sped. -- aside.

FATIMA. Lets see with what, air, in this letter he
Vtters his thought, we will go in to read it*
And to give answer; since he is no longer
Obstinate in his coldness, I will send
His pardon signed and sealed.

ORMIN. How full of joy
Will Zegry be at my return?

FATIMA. What say you?
Zegry.

ORMIN. It Is he that sends me, he will kiss
The words where with you have flattered him.

Fatima tearing his letter. FATIMA. This is
My answer, go, and carry it unto him. -- Exit Fatima.

SCENE IV.
ORMIN, CHARIFA. ORMIN. THis in equality astonisheth
And puzleth me, -- Charifa!

CHARIFA. No, good night.

ORMIN. Hear me, I pray thee.

CHARIFA. I take no delight
To talk with fools

ORMIN. Stay yet a little.

CHARIFA. I have not the leisure.
Adieu, fair prater!

ORMIN. Be not so ungentle.
My hand shall speak gould, to supply my mouth

CHARIFA. I do'nt believe thee.

ORMIN. Believe the event.
From Zegry take this diamond.

CHARIFA. To betraye,
And sell my Mistress? God defend, I will not
Receive it-

ORMIN. Be not such a simple creature.

CHARIFA. I take it then to please thee, but accept it
Unto a good intent: the stone's not false,
At least I think so.

ORMIN. Thou may be assured on it,
It Is very fair, and perfect.

CHARIFA. Pardon me,
My words might seem t'imply a doubt, that I
Suspected thee, but I am innocent.

ORMIN. Will thou not tell me by what fatal error
Thy mistress humor changed so suddenly?
And how it came, that only at the name
Of Zegry her heart presently grew cold,
Although enflamed with my discourse before?

CHARIFA. I love thee but too well; and if rhou wilt
Be secret, I Will discover unto thee
This secret of importance, this hid mystery.

ORMIN. Thou will oblige me much, speak, I Am discreet.
And will concea'lt as closely as thy self.

CHARIFA. Fatima then loves Adibar as much
As she does hate thy Master; but for her,
Adibar by a pleasant fair return
Has no, less coldness then thy master love.
Thou know that thou art not yet known of her,
And that love oftentimes troubles the brain:
Hence was it, that at first she did believe
That Adibar sent thee to speak to her;
But since she knew her error, she was mad;
I hear a noise, let us speak soft I fear
We should be heard.

SCENE. V.
ALABEZ, ORMIN, CHARIFA ALABEZ. THe Devil! where thinks my Master
That I should meet with Ormin? it is night
And I cannot find my way.

CHARIFA. Prithee be still.

ORMIN. Let me alone* thy honor is not much
In danger with me.

CHARIFA. Foh! my diamond
Is fallen from my finger.

ORMIN. Without doubt
The grass conceals it from our sight.

CHARIFA. We may
Seek it a good while ere we find it here.

ORMIN. Yes in this manner, I Will go fetch a light*

Exit Ormin. SCENE VI.
ALABEZ, CHARIFA. CHARIFA. Return I Have found it. -- taking him for Ormin.

ALABEZ. I should know that voice;
It is Charifa, strange! what might she do
So late here in these woods? I will approach
A little nearer. -- aside.

CHARIFA. Thou but jests with me,
Kiss me no more, if thou do, I Will retire.

ALABEZ: A rare piece this! I must hear all.

CHARIFA. Yes really,
Promise me to be quiet, or I Will leave thee.
This is a little too much liberty
At first, I am a maid that stands upon
My reputation, and fear evil tongues,
I hold my honor very precious to me.

ALABEZ. Thou seek'st to lose it, and invitest him
To take it from thee. -- aside.

CHARIFA. What! thou speak not
A word unto me.

ALABEZ. Excellent adventure!

CHARIFA. How does thy heart sigh, and thy close mouth murmur?
Those liberties, for all what I have said,
May be excus^d, if thou will marry me;
Thou know that one must marry, to love well
And if I please thee. --

ALABEZ. Oh? what impudence?

CHARIFA. What say thou?

ALABEZ. I am much surprised, by Heaven.

CHARIFA. What! answerest thou nothing? should this be
Through a contempt? I think that I Am not yet
So torn by time, as not to be thought worthy
To be considered; thou know well
Alabez, if I would have had that fellow.
My marriage with him had been already
Concluded, but that is a lowt, and has not
The art to please me as thou have, his faults
Are more considered by me, then his services.

ALABEZ. The impudent jeers at me to my face.

CHARIFA. That troublesome never did any thing
Which pleased me, he has a sottish spirit,
And silly carriage; if the fool should marry me
I would not pass my word that he should not
Be one of those which every one points at
With' finger, which permit their neighbors to
Think their wives fair, and which we commonly
Call cuckoulds.

SCENE VII.
ORMIN, CHARIFA, ALABEZ. ORMIN. SEe here, I have brought you light.

CHARIFA. What have I done? this is a gross mistake.

ALABEZ. What think thou; have not I much cause to be
Well satisfied? I have done nothing then
That ever pleased thee, I Have a sottish spirit
And silly carriage. Thou should die with shame.

CHARIFA. Why? prithee? I have uttered but a truth.

ALABEZ. But a truth, traitresse, o thou brazen face!
What! If I married thee, thou dangerous beast
I should be of the number of those people
Which we call cuckoulds? thy impertinent tongue
Lied a hundred times, I Would rather choose
A rope then such a bed fellow:

ORMIN. Whence springs
Your quarrel?

ALABEZ: Peace a while, I shall in good time
Talk with you, friend, companion of iil luck

Ormin putting out the candle. ORMIN. We must be gone, there is nothing to be
gotten
But blows here by a fool. -- Exeunt Ormin and Charifa.

SCENE VIII.
ALMANSOR, GASVL, ALABEZ* ADIBAR. ALMANSOR. Go see whence comes this noise.

ALABEZ. Oh have I met thee, -- giving Gasul a buffett.
precious Apostle?

GASVL. How base traitor!

ALABEZ. Pardon me,
I took thee for another, in good faith:
I sought a raskal that escaped me,
To whom I did intend that injury
But I shall soon o'r take him without running.

Exit Alabe. ALMANSOR. Have learnt the cause of those co^fused rumors*

GASVL. No, but I have been beaten by a person,
Who afterward made me excuses for it-

ALMANSOR. The house is not far of, give order to
The voices to advance, and bid them sing
Near to that Little wood.

Adibar appearing on the other side: ADIAAR. See, friends, the place
Where Zasda dwells, if you are ready now,
Begin immediately.

The first song.
YE deserts, and dark cells
Where night and silence dwells
You whom I trust with my sad cares.
GASVL. This voice belongs not to our company.

ALMANSOR. This Stanza finishd, let us be prepared
To sing forthwith the air which I compos^d.
Ye deserts and dark cells,
Where night and silence dwells,
You whom I trust with my sad cares,
With all my deaths, and my despairs,
Rocks, forests, and thick Shades,
Which the Sun never invades,
You in whose bosoms I enclose
My love, my sighs, my plaints, and woes:
Alas! when will you be
Keepers of my felicity?

Second Song.
Ye brooks, and Zephirs sweet,
Which here in Springtime meet
To water and perfume these plains
ADIBAR. What insole^t voice troubles our confort here?
Th'affront shall not pass without punishment
Ye Brooks, and Zephirs sweet,
Which here in Springtime meet
To water and perfume these plains
Frequented by the amorous Swains
Favor me not to flow
Oblige me not to blow,
Until my tears their course have spent,
And my sighs given my gr^efs full vent,
Then in your Channells glid^,
And winds breathe, as before, in pride.

ADIBAR. Who art thou that dare here to trouble me?

ALMANSOR. My name is too well known to be conceal^d.
I Am called Almansor.

ADIBAR. Fear, fear then mine anger.
I Am Adibar, thy greatest Enemy
Who to meet thee, have made some weary steps
Unto no purpose; now when least I sought thee
I Have found thee; tell me, how comes it that thou
Take a license to besiege my Mistress
With so much insolence? do visit her,
As friend unto her brother, or as Lover
And servant unto her?

ALMANSOR, Content thy self
To understand that as the brothers friend,
The Sister does accept my services,
And that I reverence her: assure thy self
That if I were so happy as to be
Her Lover, I should be discret enough,
Not to acquaint thee with it.

ADIBAR. These refinings,
And juglings which thou usest to defend thee,
Cannot withdraw thee from my just revenge,
Thou shall die. -- Draws

ALMANSOR. Rather fear that my sword here -- draws.
Peircing thy heart, quench thy love in thy blood.

SCENE IX.
ZEGRY, ADIBAR, ALMANSOR. ZEGRY. FOr bear, and moderate this barbarous fury,
What means this, friends?

ADIBAR. Nothing, since we are parted.

ZEGRY. Oh, is it you Adibar?

ALMANSOR. This is not the Song
Which I desire.

ADIBAR. Zegry, thou do me wrong.

ZEGRY. What cause, dear friend, could animate thee so?
Permit me, I beseech you having parted you,
To reconcile you too at the same time:
I take an interest in your debats:
Let me know therefore what your differnce is.

ADIBAR. Zegry in vain you interpose your felf
To hinder the proceeding, my revengt
Is just, and your cares but prolong his life
For some few minures. -- Exit. Adibar.

SCENE. X.
ZEGRY, ALMANSOR. ZEGRY. Dear Almansor tell me
Whence comes so strong a hate between you two?
Relate the cause on it,

ALMANSOR. It Is not worth the labor;
This petty difference which troubles thee,
Should be determined ere known.

ZEGRY. In vain
Thou do persist to hide this secret from me:
Almansor, I guess at it; sure, some Beauty
Embroils you; I Have heard here two different consorts.
The rest I do divine.

ALMANSOR. Friend, I confess it;
We both at one time gave our Eve^ing Music
To one and the same Mistress.

ZEGRY. May not I
Know her name, Friend?

ALMANSOR. Heavens how am I put to t^?
Should I tell him that I adore his sister? - aside.

ZEGRY. Friend, this reservednes suits not that name,
I did not hide my amors for Fatima
From thee.

ALMANSOR. He has already promised
His sister; Im confounded; if I dare
To name her, what will he not say? -- aside.

ZEGRY. This confused silence should sufficiently
Instruct me that he does adore Fatima,
And dares not tell it me -- aside.
What! shall I not
Know then what object has subjected thee?

ALMANSOR. Her fair name uttered would make us enemies,
Instead of doing thee a courtesy
I should do thee an injur^; adieu;
Dispense me to say more on it.

ZEGRY. How is this!
Will thou not go unto my house?

ALMANSOR Excuse me,
This night I am engaged by promise to
Lodge at Gomella's.

ZEGRY. How! Gomella's, say thou?

ALMANSOR. Yes, I fear that he stays for me, adieu,
I Have promised him, and I cannot fail my word.

Exit Almansor. Zegry alone. ZEGRY The traitor Loves Fatima: and intends
To marry her: to judge on it otherwife,
Is to abuse my self; yes owing me,
His life, he makes use of it to destroy me;
But he that could save it, can also ruin it;
And his death loudly shall proclaim to all
That the same arm which serves the innocent,
Can punish the ungrateful insolent.

The End of the third Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
ALMANSOR, GOMELLA ALMANSOR. YOu shall not go alone to meet my mother,
I I follow you, Gomella.

GOMELLA That needs not
Her order does oblige you to expect her
Here at my house.

ALMANSOR. But nature does impose
A stronger law upon me.

GOMELLA. Sir she has not
Understood of your coming yet, your sight
Will be too sudden a surprise, for bear
Till I acquaint her with it.

ALMANSOR I expect
No blame in this encounter; If I should
Surprise her, it would be delightfully:

GOMELLA. Seeing you will, let us go together then.

ALMANSOR. I do but what I ought.

GOMELLA. I speak my thoughts.

ALMANSOR. Zegry comes forth his house; before I go,
I must embrace him.

GOMELLA. Stay, you may not do it.

ALMANSOR. Constraint's unjust, as much as it is cruel:
Ought I to fly a friend so dear, so faithful?
Suffer me to speak to him, and I Will follow you
Immediately.

GOMELLA. I cannot, for I have an express order
Unto the contrary. -- Exeunt.

SCENE II.
ZEGRY, ORMIN. ZEGRY. ORmin, did^st thou observe how carefully
That traitor shun^d me as soon as he saw me?
Did mark how he was troubled at first,
How he advanced, a step or two to Wards me,
And then went back again, how he resigned
The place unto me in confusion,
Pressed with the stings of his ingratitude?

ORMIN. What ever I observed, it can never
Enter into my thought Almansor should
Be guilty of so base and black a crime;
And though in show I find him culpable,
I esteem him incapable to commit
Any base act; he still appeared unto me
A person of much honor, and too jealous
Thereof, so ill t'imploy the life which he
Holds of you: besides I find within me
A certain secret instinct which I
Can^t comprehend, that when I should accuse him,
Forces me to defend him.

ZEGRY. Seeing me
To cheris'h that too much beloved Ungrateful,
Thou art accustomed also to caresse him.
I cannot believe, neither that he betrays me,
Nor can I doubt ont, that is my punishment.
And those sweet motions, which I scarce can banish,
Aggravate his offense, instead of lessening it:
Judge then how much I am to be lamented
In this condition, the only good
That rests to me, is to fear nothing more.
Fortune would not afflict me h^er by halfs;
I lose a Mistress, and a friend together:
Both injure me, and I have so much weakness,
That I cannot hate the Mistress, nor the Friend;
But could thou yesterday learn from Charifa
Why fair Fatima has so much contempt
Within her bosom for me? thou have told me
That Adibar does charm her, but thou have not
Told me from whence her hatred does proceed.

ORMIN. Fatima, if I may believe what has
Been told me, always did abhore you for
Vnfaithfullnes, she has some reason to
Be^ieve you false, and this is that as far
As I can understand, which does oblige her
To be so cruel to you.

ZEGRY. False, say thou?
I never was so.

ORMIN. She has understood though,
That a maid called Zelinda, fair enough,
Very young, and of an illustrious family,
And who received sometime many services
From you, being almost on the point to see you
Her husband, and when all things were disposed
And ready for the marriage was foully
For saken by you and despised; it seems
That this example touches, and does teach her
That who can once, can change a thousand times,

ZEGRY. Ormin, this change is no inconstancy.

ORMIN. It would be very hard to prove it innocent:

ZEGRY. Without doubt this pretended marriage
Made a great noise; but I will tell thee all

ORMIN. What will th'ingratefull say? -- aside

ZEGRY: Before that marriage was concluded which
Was to unite us to Abencerage blood,
And by that means at last to quench the heat
Of an old hatred, fair Fatima was
Already Mistress of my heart; to make me
Take a new chain, Zelinda, who^ they offered me
In my opinion, was not fair enough:
So that I saw her without loving her:
Her feeble Beauty could not shake the fetters
Which tied me, yet I endeavored
To have some kindness for her, but her eyes
Or my heart were not strong enoug to work it;
And if I did her any services,
It was but in design to please my parents:
Fatima there fore is to blame to think
That I am false: fince I had never love
For any but for her.

ORMIN. Alas! I need not
Doubt more of his contempt! I was inquisitive
To know too much, and now I do repent it.

-- aside. ZEGRY. This is a truth, which easily can be ptov'd?
But how comes it my sister, s up so soon?

SCENE III.
ZAIDA, MEDINA, ZEGRY, ORMIN. ZAIDA, Brother, have you receiv^d the intelligence
Is given me of the death of him which was
Designed for my husband?

ZEGRY. Yes, I Have heard it;
It is too true, he died in Argier
O'th spotted fever.
I Am unhappy by it;
But you are near your joy, and may discourse
Of marriage and love.

ZEGRY. Oh, Sister, rather
Say that I must no longer now discourse
Of love nor Marriage: say that I must punish
A base and an ungrateful spirit with death
One that has wickedly betrayed my frie^dship:
Fury alone presides now in my soul,
And I must think nor speak of any thing
But of destroying a perfidious wretch.

ZAIDA. Who is that traitor? let me know, I pray you,
What signal crime provokes you so highly.

ZEGRY. Thou know too well the Author of my injury
His name's Almansor, his love is his crime,

ZAIDA. His Love! What hear I?

ZEGRY. Sister, it is too true,
His insolent love has stirred up mine anger.

ZAIDA, He knows that Almansor loves me,
And that is it enrageth him. -- aside.

ZEGRY. His death,
Is just, add he shall die, base, and ungrateful!

ZAIDA. Brother, you should examine without passion
All that which might be of a friend suspected,
And we should never judge of his offense
But with much care and much indulgence: always
Almansor l^tth appcar'd too generous
To mingle any foul or unjust thing
In his affections; and he owes you
Too much, to have a thought to wrong a friend
That saved his lif^

ZEGRY. Sister, thou do oblige me;
Thy arguments with little contradiction
Disarm all my resentments quite; Almansor
Is so dear to me, that how ere he wrongs me,
Thou will do me a couttesie, to stop
My anger.

ZAIDA. Perhaps, you have accused him unjustly.

ZEGRY. Would that it pleased Heaven I were abused!
But alas! my suspicion is too just,
I Will tell't thee now; he loves

ZAIDA. Who?

ZEGRY. Fatima:

ZAIDA. How! should he love Fatima? really
That crime is black:

ZEGRY. The better to assure thee on it, it is best
Thou go to vissit her, I do believe
Thou Wilt understand from her that he adores her,
And that he is false to me.

ZAIDA. Traitor! Inconstant!
Pernicious Spirit!

ZEGRY. But, Sister, Why appear you
So troubled in your eyes and countenance?

ZAIDA. The trouble of mine eyes clearly denotes
That my heart feels the evils which your friend does you,
Your friend, what hay I said that name suits ill
With his condition, if he be your Rival,
He Is not your friend. Go persently to quench
His life and Love, and wash away the crimes
Of his soul in his blood.

ZEGRY. No, Sister, no;
We should examine without passion
All that which might be of a friend suspected,
And one should never judge of his offense
But with much care and much indulgence; always
Almansor has appeared too generous,
To mingle any foul, or unjust thing
In his affections; and he owes me
Too much, to have a thought to wrong a friend
That sau"d his life.

ZAIDA. In what an error are you?

ZEGRY. If I am in an error, I received it
From you: these were your sentiments, good Sister,
And shall be mine.

ZAIDA. Then knew I not his crime;
But now that it is plain, take your revenge,
I will no more restrain you.

ZEGRY. Stop me rather;
Condemn my anger, not my amity.
In favor of Almansor I would be
Abused; I will accuse him, but I would
That others should excuse him, I speak of
Revenge, but seek it not, and threaten only
But to the end to have my arm restrained.
His passion, perhaps, may be condemn^d
Unjustly: possibly it might be born.
Before our friendship, and, perhaps Fatima
Answers unto it, and that to unite them,
Gomellas orders do invite him here;
If it be so, to free my self from crime,
Sister, it is just I yield Fatima to him:
I Will break my chains, and with a settled heart
Will make the pleasures of my friend mine own.

ZAIDA, what strange abuse, what secret charm thus softens
Your heart in the behalf of an Ungrateful:
He owes his life unto you: ought he not
T'acquit him self to wards you by all possible
Endeavors? if he be our Rival, can you
Without much weakness tamely give him up
Your Mistress? if he be your friend, as you
Esteem him, ought he not to give you up
The object which you love.

ZEGRY. Without reply
Go presently to visit fair Fatima:
And fail not fully to inform your self
Of their intelligence. -- Exit Zegry.

MEDINA ZAIDA. MEDINA. YOu astonish me;
I cannot conceive how one can love a man,
And press his death.

ZAIDA. Oh! say not that I love
Such an ungrateful and inconstant wreteh:
Believe that if I have fires, they are fires
Of rage, and that my heart will never be quiet
Till this perfidious Lover be a sacrifice
To my just anger.

MEDINA. But you weep, Madam.

ZAIDA. True, I weep, Medina:
If that false one should perish, I should die;
I feel that rage and tenderness, hate and love
Triumph by Turns within me: I*m his Enemy,
And yet I am his Lover, when my anger
Increases, the other Kinder passion springs:
And though that he be lovely, and has falsely
Betrayed me, I can neither love, nor hate him

MEDINA. Madam, speak softer, you will elce be heard.
Adibar comes toward us.

ZAIDA. I Will not stay.

SCENE V.
ADIBAR, ZAIDA, MEDINA. ADIBAR. Zaida, where go you with my heart!

ZAIDA. I pray you,
Leave me alone, and do not trouble me,
Adieu.

ADIBAR. Receive my services.

ZAIDA. I have
No need of them.

ADIBAR. I do beseech you, hear me.

ZAIDA. You must excuse me, I have other business.

ADIBAR. With a look only, consolate my griefs;
It Is you I seek.

ZAIDA. And it is you that I fly.

ADIBAR. How! treat you such a faithful Lover so?

ZAIDA. Fatima there will be less cruel to you.

ADIBAR. Mock not at her, Fatima is as fair,
Although less proud then you.

SCENE VI.
FATIMA, ZAIDA, ADIBAR, CHARIFA, MEDINA. FATIMA. What Adibar
Still with this scornful? my revenge is just,
It Is time that it break forth. Zaida, I find you
In such a black and heavy melancholy,
That I lose the design whIch brought me hither:
Shall I dare speak of dances, revels, feasts,
And of a marriage in the condition
Wherein your are?

ZAIDA. What say you, of a marriage?

FATIMA. Since you press me,
You shall know all; know that my Father has
Provided one for me.

ZAIDA. For you, Fatima?

FATIMA. Yes, Zaida, and she bu^imes is well forward.

ZAIDA. In your contents I claim an interest:
I should be glad to know your Lovers name,

FATIMA. He Is an accomplishd man, noble, and brave
And of a charming presence, and rare merit:
I doubt not but you will approve the choice
My Father has made of him.

ZAIDA. How she makes me
Languish to meet death? -- aside.
Well, who is the man?

FATIMA. You know him very well;
He made long time his ordinary residence
At home with you* your brother Zegrys friend
Have I yet said enough?

ZAIDA. Tell me his name too.

FATIMA, Divine you not that he is called Almansor!

ZAIDA. I can no more, but faint and die. -- aside.

FATIMA How she
Is changed, she feels my pain, and I Am revenged

ADIBAR. I have much interest in this event.

ZAIDA. This match without doubt cannot choose but please you.

FATIMA- True, I am not of those who through a maxim
Of I know not, what modesty, blush at marriage
As if it were a crime, feign to sigh at it,
And yet in secret are sad at the heart,
If it should not be consummate. I assure you.
Upon this point I not dissemble with you:
I no way hate the Lover that is designed me,
I prize his love, his services, his merit
At a high rate, and if he loves me much,
He is no less b^lov'd.

ZAIDA. It seems then,
He loves you very much.

FATIMA. I cannot express it:
He lives but for me, breaths but for me:
I am the sole original of his good
Or evil fortune: when he sees me not,
He is in torments, and when hazard brings me
Unto his sight, again, I have great cause
To fear that he might die with sudden joy;
Lastly if any truth be in his oaths,
All other beauties are contemptible to him.

ZAIDA. Oh Heaven! what hear I, where am I? Oh trator!
Ungrateful wretch! -- aside.
But could you so soon love him
Before you knew him?

FATIMA. I cannot be blamed
For this quick love, I saw in him at first
All things that might induce a maid to love:
Besides herein I execute the order
My Father does ordain, I willingly
Obey his will; and since he has chosen him
For son in law and for support, I think
That he is worthy of it, and conform
My self unto him.

ZAIDA. But what are your thoughts
Of Adibar?

ADIBAR. I dare not to pretend
To her passed goodness more.

FATIMA. He deserved not
The honor of my love; he changed first,
And I change at my turn.

ZAIDA. He was not always
Unworthy to please you; can you forget him?

FATIMA. Yes, and with much justice, and reason too,
He is to me the most ungrateful person
Upon the earth; his contempt was unjust,
But mine is not so. Let us cease to speak
Of that inconstant Lover; I will pay him
Hatred for hatred, contempt for contempt.
Let us again talk of our marriage,
And let me know if I may have the honor
To see you there,

ZAIDA. Excuse me, I Am oppressed
With a great pain, which is redoubled
Since your discourse, so that I Am rendered
Incapable to be present there, and am
Enforced to quit you at this very instant.

ADIBAR. I wait you; suffer me to pay the service
I owe you. -- He leads her by the arm?

ZAIDA. I am forced through my weakness
To accept your support. -- Exeunt Zaida and Adibar

SCENE VII.
FATIMA, CHARIFA. FATIMA. ZAida feels my discase, but Adibar
Fli^s me; herein my revenge is complete,
Though my hope be destroyed.

CHARIFA. You have lost nothing
By that, Almansor's worth a thousand of him

FATIMA. Judge better of my plaint, what I have said
Is but a fiction; I perceive Medina
And thou are intimate, she could not choose
But tell thee that Almansor's very dear
To the ungrateful Zaida, this I heard
From thy own mouth.

CHARIFA. Well.

FATIMA. This devise of mine,
In feigning that Almansor was to marry me,
Is to revenge me of her for admitting,
Contrary to her promise, my false Lover
To address courtship to her, and to punish her
For the evils which she has procured me.

CHARIFA. How cunning are you! this deccit is notable.

SCENE VIII.
ADIBAR FATIMA FATIMA. HOw! quit so soon the object of your heart?

ADIBAR. I studied more her rest then my content.

FATIMA. You appear seized with an extreme sadness.

ADIBAR. I cannot see that suffer which I love,
Without grief:

FATIMA. Zaida sure, repulsed you.

ADIBAR. My respect only put me of, and not
Her cruelty,

FATIMA. If she were just, or generous
She would despise a lover that is unfaithful.

ADIBAR. I were to blame, if I should complain of her.

FATIMA. Almansers fortune is more sweet with me

ADIBAR. I Am to well satisfied, to be jealous of it.

FATIMA. You do but flatter you with a vain hope,
Zaida has but disdain, and hate for you.

ADIBAR. Her hate and her disdain are ended now;
And our hearts speedily shall be united
By marriage.

FATIMA. But Sir, you may be mistaken
In your account, and hope; do you not know
That Zaida's promised?

ADIBAR. Rather you may be
Deceiv^d in this point: perhaps you know not
That he who was to marry her, is dead.

FATIMA. How is he dead?

ADIBAR. Yes Madam, and fair Zaida
Propitious at last, will render justice
To my devout affection, and did
Assure me when I took my leave of her
That she would marry me, if I could get
Her brother to consent unto 't; adieu;
To obtain this so dear and precious Beauty,
I must address me to her brother, and
Solicit my best friends. -- Exit Adibar.

SCENE IX.
FATIMA, CHARIFA. FATIMA. WHat have I done?
Alas! my fiction has only served
To dispose Zaida to deprive me of
My Lover.

CHARIFA. Madam. --

FATIMA. Leave me; in a fate
So sad as this, every thing hurts, destroys,
And makes me desperate.

CHARIFA. Will you not hear me?

FATIMA. No, I hear nothing but the fury which
Raigns in my confuf'd spirits, grief seiseth me
And anger does transport me.

CHARIFA. Madam, comfort you.

FATIMA. Oh that I were dead! cease to comfort me
In such a just despair put me to bed,
Or in my grave there to lie buried.

The End ^f the fourth Act.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
GOMELLA, LINDARACHE, ALMANSOR. GOMELLA. YOu see the cote where I make my abode.

LINDARACHE. Sir, if you please, I shall desire to be
Private a while here with my son, and presently
I Am yours.

ALMANSOR. Oh Madam, oh dear Mother,
In this blessed time shall I obtain the honor
Of your embracements?

LINDERACHE. Stay, Abencerage,
Know our dishonor first, and show thy self
My son before I embrace thee, I was mother
Of two fair children, when a Ravisher
Stole away both my Daughter, and thy Sister.

ALMANSOR. Good God! what do you tell me?

LINDARACHE That thy Sister
Is ravished.

ALMANSOR. Name but the Ravisher*
And he is dead.

LINDERACHE. Come, now embrace me, Son, this saying makes me
Believe that Heaven has given thee me for to
Revenge me.

ALMANSOR. Let me know his name, I swear
By the holy Prophet, that his blood shall wash
The injury, and that this arm of mine
Shall sacrifice him instantly unto you.

LINDARACHE Thou shall know all, hearken, and let me speak:
Thou art not ignorant of the enmity
Which reigned for many ages twixt the houses
Of The Zegries, and of the Abencerages:
Now thou must know that on the opinion
Conceived that a marriage would put end
To this contention, my daughter was
Designed for wife to Zegry; every thing
Was ready, and the day appointed, when
Through an aversion, or rather through
Contempt, the treacherous Zegry flying our
Alliance, hastily embark'ed himself
For Argser; and to add unto our griefs,
As Soon as this report was spread, my daughter
Was seen no more.

ALMANSOR. O Heaven! who should be cause
Of this misfortune?

LINDERACHE. Read this letter here,
It will inform thee fully

Almansor reads the Letter. LETTER.
YOu, from whom, I received my breath,
Know that a sad fate worse then death
Is hapened to me, all our name
In my loss^ bear an equal shame:
The false and cruel Zegry is
The Author of my miseries;
For he it it that by his charms
Has taken me out of your arms,
Zelinda.


ALMANSOR What have I heard!

LINDERACHE. Abominable truths.

ALMANLOR. Zegry her ravisher! oh fatal news!

LINDERACHE. In this misfortune I had so much judgment
To hide this our dishonor, and her rape:
By the advice of the illustrious,
And wise Gomella, I spread every where
The rumor of her death, and sent thee order
At the same time to depart from Tremissa
And to come here: lastly in Tunis staying
Thy coming, I passed an unknown life
In tears and lamentation: and seeing
The time of thy return to be at hand,
I came here to this fatal residence:
I find thee, and my grief is charmed already,
To see my just rage in thy soul imprinted,
And thy brave arm disposed to take revenge,
And to deprive that wretch of life, who has
Deprived us of honor.

ALMAOSOR. Oh how many
Afflictions seize! my heart!

LINDARACHE. It Is time to punish,
Not to deplore, in such a fatal fortune
Express thy grief by bloody brave effects
Of rage and courage, vain regrets, and sighs
Suit with my sex, revenge belongs to thee.
Thou know the offender, go repair
Th*offence: I would not have reserved for thee
Th Employment, if I could revenge my self
Without thee; and I had already seen
The punishment of Zegry, If I would
Have us^d Gomellas service; thy arm only
Must wash the stam of from tby brow; take all
The revenge to thee, as the affront's all thine:
Seem no more until thou have revenged
Thy Sister, Go, seek, find and punish fully
Her barbarous ravisher; adieu, perform
Thy duty, and make thy self to appear
A worthy branch of that ill^strions stock
Of Heroes, from whose loins thou art descended;
To end our common miseries and fears,
Go thou to shed blood, I go to shed tears. --

Exit Lindarache. SCENE II.
ALMANSOR alone. ALMANSOR. OH heard extremiti^s! oh cruel violence!
Alas! the friend that does oblige me, is
The enemy that wrongs me; I owe then
My safety unto him that robs me of
My honor, and the man that saved the brother
Has ruined the Sister! in this case
What counsel should I take? shall I become
Ungrateful, or be infamous, shall I
Break the bond of a holy amity?
Shall I let forth the blood which preserved mine*
That blood in which love will that I have Interest?
And to say all, the blood of my fair Mistress?
She comes forth, and without doubt aymeth here
Honor will that I fly, but Love restrains me:

SCENE III.
ALMANSOR, ZAIDA, MEDINA. ZAIDA. HE dares not to advance, his crime intimidates
him.
We will pass by the traitor, without speaking
A word.

ALMANSOR. Dear object of all m^ affections,
Charm of my Spirits!

ZAIDA. Surely, you are mistaken.
You would speak to some other.

ALMANSOR. Suffer me
To Express my passion unto your fair eyes*
Love, --

ZAIDA. You take me without doubt for Fatima.

ALMANSOR. How for Fatima; this wo^d does acquaint me
Confusedly with the unjust suspicion*
From whence this chang springs: possibly you have
Believed that I seck to please her, seeing
The league that it between me, and her Father;
But Heaven, and Love my conqueror, be witness,
That your fair Image wholly does possess
My heart, that to remove you thence, Fatima*
Is altogether incapable, that I look on
All that is lovely in her without love
And that as sensible only of the darts
Of your rare beauties, I confine my thoughts
And actions to civilities for her.

ZAIDA. How do you look upon Fatima then
With an indifference? -- Let me see how far
His impudence will go -- aside.

ALMANSOR. Can you doubt of it? you that have tied all
My senses with such sweet and pressing bonds?
Can you suspect with any justice, Madam
My heart of treachery, my oaths of falsehood,
And believe that my soul has so much blacknes,
As to betray my Mistress, my friend,
And my Deliverer? could you imagine,
Without being deceiv^d, that having once
Beheld you, one could love elsewhere? oh no:
For me to be inflamed with a new fire
You are too charming, and I Am too much charmed.

ZAIDA* Too much charmed, monster of perfidiousnes?
Will thou abuse me then after thou have
Betrayed me, and with an unworthy love
Carried away, will thou join impudence
To infidelity?

ALMANSOR* To in^idelity,
What say you, Zaida? this discourse confounds me.

ZAIDA. I see it plainly, wretch; were thou less wicked.
Thou would be less confounded; an ungrateful
Still blusheth at reproaches.

ALMANSOR. An ungrateful?

ZAIDA. Does that word trouble thee? and fear thou
The name of an ungrateful person more
Then foul ingratitude it self?

ALMANSOR. I know not
The cause of this your anger, should I never
So much examine me, I still should find
My conscience innocent.

ZAIDA. In thy account then
It Is nothing to deceive a maid, to wrong
Thy friend, to fail thy faith, to love Fatima,
Lastly

ALMANSOR, I, say you?

ZAIDA. Yes, thee

ALMANSOR. Oh ^ believe me,
I love her not.

ZAIDA. Dare thou to say it yet?
Do thou not love her when thou do adore her?
Thy false equivocations cannot here
Abuse me, I know that thou art to morrow
To marry her.

ALMANSOR. To matry her! o Heaven, believe it not,
I swear.

ZAIDA, No, no, forbear, I believe not
The oaths of one that is perjured, every one,
Knows of this marriage*

ALMANSOR. Who told it you?

ZAIDA. A certain person.

ALMANSOR Whosoe'r it be,
That certain person ly'd. Tell me his name,
And my just anger presently shall carry him
The reward of his false intelligence.

ZAIDA, Go punish then Fatima, it was she
Her self that told it me.

ALMANSOR Oh give less credit,
Ador able Wonder, to such false discourses.

ZAIDA. Good God! who ever saw such impudence?

ALMANSOR. The marriage which she has forged, is
A falsity; bear witness thou dread Master
Of Heaven that this I speak is truth; but if
I lie, let thy hand with a thunderbolt
Strike me unto the center of the earth:
Let my name be forever odious,
If the fire which I feel proceeds not
wholly from your fair eyes, and if my heart
Ever conceived for Fatima any thing
Beyond a weak esteem.

ZAIDA. I must sift yet:
This brazen face more thoroughly. -- aside.
How will thou prove
The truth of thy assertion?

ALMANSOR, I can produce.
A hundred proofs to disabuse you presently.

ZAIDA. I Will have but one, and that too very easy;
To put an end to the suspicions,
Which I Have co^ceiv'd of thee, give me forthwith
Both thy hand and thy faith.

ALMANSOR. I give it you
With an excess of yoy. -- but what would I,
Give her a hand that must destroy her brother,
And plung it self in his most noble blood? --

aside ZAIDA. What do thou answer me so ill for such
Rare bounties? do thou murmur to thy self,
Grow pale and study, as if thou resent'st ill
What I propose.

ALMANSOR. Madam, clean contrary
I was raped with th'unexpected honor,
And happiness wherewith I saw me filled,
And the excess of my joy transported me:
I fear through my obedience to betray you,
To make detraction to speak against you,
And to treat Zegry too unciviliy
In giving without his consent my hand
And faith; but this weak fear yields to my flame
Duty prevails not now upon my soul,
And cannot take from me the glorious purpose
Of giving you my heart and hand together.

ZAIDA. Thou think on it too late, my mind is changed,
And never shall change again, know that I feigned,
Only to try thee, that excess of goodness,
And thy fires for Fatima presently
Burst forth.

ALMANSOR. Oh! I had never any for her!

ZAIDA. Thy deceit's plain enough, I Am very well
Assured of this fatal marriage:
When I pressed thee to pass thy faith unto me,
I faw that thy remorses for Fatima
Accused thee, and thy confusion
Confirmed me in my belieft that she
Received the faith which I demanded of thee.

ALMANSOR. I offer it unto you.

ZAIDA. No thou caust not
Dispose of it. Thou have already given it,
And wilt abuse me.

ALMANSOR. You abuse your self
Wiih too much warines.

ZAIDA. Have thou the boldness
To reply yet? Go, go to thy Fatima,
To morrow is your marriage day, I know it.
She has affections for thee, fince thou have
Refused me.

ALMANSOR. Hear me, I do beseech you.

ZAIDA, No, no? that were too great a weakness in me:
Know that I leave thee, never too see thee more.
A secret poison's hid in the discourse
Of an Ungrateful person, and each word
A traitor speaks, destroys worse then the sword.

Exit Zaida. SCENE IV.
ALMANSOR, alone. ALMANSOR. STrange success, this! How is my soul possessed
Still with new troubles? must I suffer then
The punishment of a fault which I have not
Committed? when revenge does press me to
Destro^ a friend, must I at the same time
Destroy a Mistress too? must I lose Zaida?
Yes my heart, I must loose her presently,
Since in depriving her of a dear brother,
My arm will draw her hate and anger on me:
I should hence forth no longer be so soft,
It Is time to think of Zegrys death, he must
Pay his blood to repair the honout which
He robs me of. This Enemy so dear
Must die, and I must sacrifice him to me;
He comes: at his approach some tender motions
Oppose my just resentments, and indeed
Render them weak, my friendship combateth
The anger that possesses me, my tenderness
Is less weak, and my fury is less strong.
He saved my life, he ravished my Sister;
Shall I go to embrace him, or to kill him?

SCENE V.
ZEGRY, ORMIN, ALMANSOR. ZEGRY. AT last I Have met with him that wro^geth me,
Ormin leave us alone.

ORMIN. I will retire me.
Into this thicket secretly to see
What passes, I doubt there will be a quarrel: -- aside.

ALMANSOR. You appear troubled.

ZEGRY. I Have much cause to be so.

ALMANSOR. What troubles you so much?

ZEGRY. A wretch, a Traitor,
Whose crime gives me an infinite regret,
And does deserve more then a single death
To punish it.

ALMANSOR. May I serve you herem?

ZEGRY. Yes, I cannot finish my revenge without thee.

ALMANSOR. Zegry, you can dispose of all my blood.

ZEGRY. It is an offer which I can^t refuse.

ALMANSOR. Who is th'affronter?

ZEGRY. Thou art extreme bold:
Know thou not, traitor, that it is thy self?

ALMANSOR. I?

ZEGRY, Thou; never seem to wonder at the thing.
Only defend thy self.

ALMANSOR embracing him. ALMANSOR. How much am I.
Indebted to thee for this sudden passion,
It Is now the chief point of thy amity:
Thy anger does oblige me, though it wro^gs me.
I had already in my heart resolu^d
The design of thy death, and justly too:
My arm was ready for it, when inspight
Of all my fury, at thy first approach
My heart grew tender, and had been reduced
To balance the fierce darts which I had levelled
Against thee, if thy furious transport
Had not called home my choler unto me,
And banished my tenderness.

ZEGRY. I Will hear
No more discourse, once again guard thy self

ALMANSOR. So fierce a fight can^t but be sweet unto me
Honor solicits me more justly to it
Then thee, but let me know at least the cause
That does provoke thee; I will make it plainly
appear that thou complainest wrongfully,
And justify my self in Killing thee.

ZEGRY. How! feignst thou to be ignorant, and instead
Of making a confession, do thou threaten me?
Thy base crime grows greater by thy boldness.

ALMANSOR. Let me at Iast know what that base crime is.

ZEGRY. Consult thy conscience, and thou shall know it,
It will instruct thee that wi^h a false heart
In recompense of all my kindness to thee
Thou rob'st me of my Mistress, and that
Through treacheries which cannot be excused,
Thou art to marry her to morrow privately.

ALMANSOR. If I am criminal, assure thy self,
It is not in this point: I never did
Look on Fatima with desires of love;
Only thou ma^st reproach my heart for having
Sight for thy Sister without thy consent.

ZEGRY. How! do thou love her?

ALMANSOR. No, no, it would be
An extreme error, I say, I adore her,
I dare not say I love her. That which I
Resent now for her beauties does surpass
The thing that s called Love.

ZEGRY. By this confession,
Dear friend, thou have restored life unto me.
My griefs and troubles now are waited on
By an excess of pleasure; Zaida is
Too happy, and her thoughts could never hope
A more illustrious husband: she is free.
The Lover unto whom I gave my word,
Has seen his destiny determined
By death, and my repose shall fully be
Settled to meet a brother in the person
Of my most dear friend.

ALMANSOR. What thou offerest me
Should be most dear unto me; but do thou
Know him whom thou makst choice of for thy brother?

ZEGRY. I think, I do; thy country is Tremissa,
Thy name, Almansor, and thy family
Is noble and illustrious; and if I
May believe thee, thy greatest glory is
To be my friend.

ALMANSOR. Thou know me but by half yet;
I was born here, and born thy enemy,
More then one just and honest motive does
Engage me to thy ruin; not to hold thee
Long in suspense, I am Abencerage.

ZEGRY. Abencerage.

ORMIN. O Heaven! -- aside.

ALMANSOR. That wotd does tell thee.
Our difference, and my duty.

ZEGRY. I as well
Know as thy self the mutual hatred which
In our two houses seems almost as twere
To be immortal; but thy blood which now
Thou owe to my succor, should for me
Stop the course of it in thy soul; and though
My friendship seems to stagger on this point,
I will content my self to hate thy name,
And love thy person. Yes, pursue thy love
Unto my Sister; by a marriage
We may be tied with new knots, and by
That holy flame, the irreligious heat
Of that so old, and fatal enmity,
Will be extinct.

ALMANSOR. This marriage would be sweet,
But I cannot think of it till by thy death
I have revenged my self upon thee.

ZEGRY. How!

ALMANLOR. It is not that which thou believ'st provokes me,
Thy name I hate not, but I hate thy person,
And I cannot but in thy blood repair
The wrong which thou have done me.

ZEGRY. I?

ALMANSOR. Yes, Thou.
How ill thou actest the astonished,
Thy base crime grows greater by thy boldness.

ZEGRY. Let me at last know what that base crime is.

ALMANSOR. Consult this letter, read, and thou shall know it.

ZEGRY reads. YOu, from whom I derive my birth,
Know that a sad fate worse then death
Is hapn^d to me; all our name
I^ my loss bear an equal shame;
The false and cruel Zegry is
The Author of my miseries,
For he it is that by his charms
Has taken me out of your arms.
Zelinda.


ORMIN. Without doubt they will both mistake themselves.

ZEGRY. I cannot comprehend this dark Aenigma.

ALMANSOR. It is too plain to me here that my sister
Zelinda gives us to understand
That thou art her base ravisher.

ZEGRY. Can thou
Suspect me of so foul an action?

ALMANSOR. Can thou deny it, traitor? and can I
Believe it?

ZEGRY. Hear me but a word or two.

ALMANSOR. It would be to no purpose, guard thy self,
I Will hear no more.

ZEGRY. How! dares the man that ow^ me
His life, to assault mine?

ALMANSOR. That obligation
Cannot divert me from my just reveng:
Thou wrought'st my safety, and my sisters rape,
And so much as life is less dear then honor,
So much an affront which reflects upon it,
Carries it in my soul upon a benefit,
And I am less afraid to be ungrateful,
Then to be infamous; but let us leave
Discourse, and come to action.

ZEGRY. Stay, Ungrateful,
Stay yet a little.

ORMIN. Help, oh help;

SCENE VI. And the last.
ADIBAR, ZAIDA, MEDINA, ALABEZ, LINDARACHE, GOMELLA, FATIMA, CHARIFA, ALMANSOR,
ZEGRY, ORMIN, GASUL. ZAIDA. WHat noi^e
Is this I hear?

LINDARACHE. What rumor is raised up?

ADIBER. Hold, hold!

LINDARACHE. No, no, go on,
My son, finish thy work.

GOMELLA. Their quarrel, Adibar,
Cannot be taken up, therefore let us leave it
To be decided.

ADIBER. No, such a third person
As I, shall never suffer them to fight,
And to look on.

GOMELLA. Well then, defend your self.
We 't fight all four.

Ormin to Almansor. ORMIN. Oh! brother rather lift
Your arm up against me, I'in guilty only,
Zegry is innocent,

LINDARACHE. Whom do I see?

ORMIN. ^ou see Zelinda your unfortunate Daughter,
Who left your family to follow Zegry;
And who in changing fate and habit only,
Could not enforce her soul to the least change:
My heart which was pleased in slavery
By him, forgot it self in following.
Somewhat too constantly this fleeting Lover;
But having known him to be taken with
Another Object* I feared in discovering
My self, to draw upon me his contempt,
And would still suffer the same violence,
If his own i^terest brake not my silence.

LINDERACHE. Oh, Daughter!

ALMANSOR. Oh! my Sister!

ZEGRY. Fair Zelinda,
Revenge your self, I mourn you, I accuse
My self, and yield my bosom to your stroke*

ORMIN. Zegry, You need not to fear any thing
From my resentments, if you pity me,
I am not to be pitied.

ZEGRY. I blush
That after so much goodness as you have
Expressed to me, I have but one soul
Too give you; and if the consent of your
Parents and friends will be propitious to us,
There Is nothing can impede our marriage.

LINDARACHE This marriage is the chief of all my wishes.

ALMANSOR. Friend, thou can make me happy too, thy Sister
Depends on thee, thou know, I adore her.

ZEGRY. I offered her unto thee, a while since,
And now I do again with height of joy.

ZAIDA. All my suspicions are extinguished,
And you must know that following my duty,
I follow my desires; but Adibar
Will complain of it.

ADIBAR. Madam, you are deceived,
When I lose all hope, I lose all my flame:
And to express unto you that I do not
Resent it, I will sacrifice my heart
In flames of love to that fair Saint, for whom
I burned formerly; Gomella. may I
Hope your incomparable Daughter?

GOMELLA. Adibar,
My family is honored by your choice.
Fatima, take your husband from my hand.

FATIMA. Such pleasing orders I shall willingly
Obey.

ZEGRY. Come, let us go unto the Mosque
Together, to give thanks unto the goodness
Of Heaven that set an end to our misfortunes,
And made appear by this happy success,
That one may be ingrate, yet generous.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE
THe Prologue promised something for the Play
Under a penalty, I come to pay
What he engaged for, not to beg applause,
But, if we have transgressed the Comic laws,
To suffer punishment; Beauties, to you
First I address me for the Poets due;
He s^eks but justice from your ^vorie hands,
As you like or dislike ho falls or stands:
Smile on the piece, and no man dares to frown,
Your vote swayes both the Cavaleer and Clown:
Yours are the leading voices, in your looks
We read our fortune better then in books;
Y are pleased, for Heaven's displaid in smiles, so the^
I need say nothing to you,, Gentlemen.
ERRAA.
Page the 8. last Line, for comet, read comes. Page the 13. Line the 2. for
follow, read fellow. Page the 21 Line the 7. for unworthly. read unworthyly.
Page the 24. Line the 11th, for querched, read quenched. Page the 29. Line the
8. for trough read through. Page the 39. Line the 16. for wit read with. Page
the 74 Line the 6. for she, read the.



THE ENCHANTED LOVERS: A Pastoral.

By Sir William Lower Knight.

Amico Rosa, Inimico Spina.

LONDON: Printed for Fr. Kirkman at the John Fletchers Head over against the
Angel-Inn on the backside of St. Clements without Temple Bar, 1661.

THE ENCHANTED LOVERS: A PASTORAL By Sr. WILLIAM LOWER Knight.

Amico Rosa, Inimco Spina.

HAGE: Printed by ADRIAN VLACK. 1658.

ACTORS.
Thersander. A Cavalier disguised in the habit of a Shepherd in love with
Diana. Thimantes. Disguised also in the habit of a Shepherd in love with
Ismenia. Clidamant. Disguised also in the habit of a Shepherd in love with
Parthenia. Melnitus. A Shepherd of the Island in love with Diana. Mercator. --
A Merchant of Sevil. Diana. A young La^ disguised in the habit of a
Shepheard^sse. Parthenia. Niece to the Princess, in love with Clidamant.
Ismenia. A young Lady disguised in the habit of a Shepheardess. Molissa. The
Princess of the Island, and Inchantress, in love with Thersander. The Goddess
Diana.
The Scene is in the Island of Erithrea in Portugal.

THE ENCHANTED LOVERS. A PASTORAL.
ACTUS I.
SCENE I.
MERCATOR, MELINTUS. MERCATOR. IF you have any service to command me
At Sevil, honor me with your Commission,
To morrow I embarke, and leave the I Will,
Until you Mart returns, and games renew.

MELINTUS. But first you will kiss the fair hands of the Nymph,
And take her pasport with you?

MERCATOR. That Is a duty
I dar^ not fail in, though my interest
Were not concerned in it. I intend this day
To carry her my casket of my richest
And choicest merchandise; when she has bought
What best pleases her fancy, I shall be
Dismissed, having no more commodities
To sell unto the Shepherds of her Court.

MELINTUS. Have you sold well?

MERCATOR. To what end should I feign?
The trade goes well enough, I complain not:
Rich Rubies, Pearls of price, bright Diamonds,
Store of fair Coral, costly Ambergris,
Portraits, and other such dainty devises,
Have passed through my fingers at good rates:
Diana's festival is still kept solemn;
And as the games which fail not every year
To be renu'd, invite unto those woods
The neighboring Shepherds, to dispute the prizes
Proposed on those days, I saw among them
Some noble strangers clad in pastoral weeds
That for the honor of this Island chose it
Their sanctuary and repose.

MELINTUS. You need not
Wonder at this, the place which they have chosen
Denotes their judgments; here ambition
Has no employment; if at any time
We sigh here, it is for love, no other passion
Is seen among us; though this Island be
A part of Portugal, we have our laws,
And Empire to our selves; she that rules here
Has not the name of Queen, we subjects are
Our Sovereigns companions, and her virtue
Makes us to taste so much repose, that she
Has put the Sheephook into the hands of
A hundred Hero's, who wearied with Laurels,
And the noise of the war, are here retired
From the four corners of the World: she rules
So sweetly, that crime only feels her anger.
And as she is descended from the blood
Of Zoroastres, she knows well the virtue*
Of Herbs, and the influence of every star;
She understands the secret mysteries
Of Magic, and sometimes makes use of it
To serve her interests; there is no Prince
Nor Monarch that stands not in fear of her.
And suffers her not to reign in peace
For his own safety.

MERCATOR. I know this Asyle,
And charming residence looks not with envy
Upon the Court of the King of Portugal;
Besides I am not ignorant that the fair
Ismenia, drawn here, by the sweet report,
Of these enchanting pleasures, to enjoy them
In quiet, left the favor of her Queen;
And that this beauty by a sudden change,
Adds (...) luster to this Paradise.

MELINTUS. See where she comes, Diana too with her,
I must in private speak unto this fair one*
An interest of love obliges me
Continually to make her my devotions.

MERCATOR. Go Sir, and prosper, may your Saint prove sweet
And gentle as those South-gales I expect
In my embarkment. -- Exit Mercator.

SCENA II.
DIANA, MELINTUS, ISMENIA DIANA not seeing MELINTUS. DIANA. TRue, I hate that
horrid noise;
Now my free thought released from such a trouble,
Enjoyes it self.

MELINTUS to DIANA. So soon to quit the sports,
What was your fancy?

DIANA. To avoid discourse
That troubled me, and here I meet with new.

MELINTUS. Can such a subject as brings homage to you,
Produce the effect you speak?

DIANA. What does not please me,
Both troubles and offends me.

MELINTUS. You will one day
Quit those disdainful rigours?

DIANA Yes, when you
Have neither hope, nor love.

MELINTUS. Do You entertain
Every one thus that loves you?

DIANA. If he be such
As you, I use him just in the same manner.

MELINTUS. Surely the Shepherd Clidamant speeds better.

DIANA. It Is then assuredly because he does not
Resemble you.

MELINTUS. He entertained discourse.
With you in gentle whispers at the Sports.

DIANA. I do confess it,
We talked of you, and of your little skill.

MELINTUS. Your subject was more serious, without doubt.

DIANA. What ever it was, yours, I am sure, offends me.
Remove this hated object from mine eyes;
Your presence will at last provoke my anger.

MELINTUS. Can one displease you, speaking of your Loves?
Thou Husband'st for him that so sweet discourse.

ISMENIA. Every one knows that who but speaks Melintus,
Speaks jealous.

MELINTUS. It is no secret what men think of thee;
Every one knows, that who speaks but Ismenia,
Speaks cocket.

ISMENIA. Really thou have much reason
To be afflicted at that late discourse,
Clidamant merits much, and I Will oblige him.

DIANA. Leave us.

MELINTUS. He does expect you, and I trouble you;
But we will find out a way to cross his fortune.

Exit Melintus. DIANA to ISMENIA He thinks that Clidaemant enjoys my love.

ISMENIA. Thou have no reason, Shepheardess, to draw him
Out of his error: in the mean time will thou
Not yield thee to the faithful services,
The prayers and tears of the devout Thersander?
Will thou not love him yet? he that encouraged
By thy fair presence, only to please thee,
Has gained so many prizes, who to give
Thy anger no pretense, though he loves much,
Can more be silent, since the ardent flame
Wherewith he burns for thee, is only known,
To me, unto Thimantes, and thy self.

DIANA. Never speak unto me of it.

ISMENIA. What! still cruel?
But hearken, I will give thee an advise
Shall touch thee; whilst we may, we should lay hold of
The flying time; he only makes beauties,
And he destroys them; in the lovely season
That thine lasts, use the gifts which nature gives thee;
Thou will one day lose this fair luster which
So charmeth hearts, and be an object of
Contempt, as now thou art of adoration.

DIANA. Rather that love, whose Orator thou art,
Yet know his use so little, does times office;
It Is he that withers a face; the cares,
The troubles and the griefs, which by his means
Possess a heart, deface the lovely features,
And mow the flowers, he is like time the Tyrant
Of all things; he in a few days dryes up
Our Roses, and our Lillies.

ISMENIA. Shepheardess,
Such fear has small foundation, quit this thought
For thy own interest; when love is once
Lodged in the heart, the ey has then more light
The face receives thence its full perfection;
Then we esteem us, then we please our selves,
And know our utmost value, we correct
By art even to the least defect, we call
Our Glass to counsel in the ordering
Our gate, our carriage, and our countenance;
There our eye cheers with smiles, or kills with frowns,
Or faintly darts its glances, or with strength,
Either to wound near hand, or further of;
Therefore once more for thy own interest,
I say unto thee, love, at least a little,
Thersander that adores thee.

DIANA. Really,
Thou do surprise me, to speak thus unto me,
Thou that have never yet had love, nor thought
Tending to that sick passion, thou that make
So many Lovers only for thy glory,
Without remembering one of them, thou that
Please thy self by turns in their discourse,
Thou that wilt gain all, and conserve thee nothing.
Thou suffer Thimantes to adore thee
To day; but tell me will thou entertain
His love to morrow?

ISMENIA. I love, but I have always had my method
In love, the Lover that is troublesome
Unto me, is my Lover for a day;
I burn not yet for love, nor do I sigh for it:
I make a sport on it still, but never a torment;
In thrusting no one of, I Am every day
Attended by a multitude of servants
That present courtship to me, and all strive
Who shall be foremost, on whom I command
And reign as Princess; they suppose they please me
In putting up my praises; when I go
Unto the Temple, they fail not to follow,
And carefully to tread in all my steps.
I am not pleased to see in such brave Shepherds
A troop of slaves attending on my train;
I please them all in flattering their desires:
I Am much delighted, when I make them jealous,
Provided that their jealousy extend not
So far as, to betake themselves to arms
For the honor of my beauty^; this high point
Of evidences might, perhaps, enrage
Even all my other lovers.

DIANA. Ha! how ill
Thou know love, and his maxims, I behold
Thy changes as so many crimes; for my part,
If my heart were taken with an object once,
I could not pass from love unto contempt;
I should be fixed unto my first Idea,
And that God wholly should possess my thoughts.

ISMENIA. Well then, Diana, love, if thou think fit,
Beyond the grave, and make so fair a fire
Arise beneath thy ashes.

DIANA. Oh, alas!

ISMENIA. What signify those sighs?

DIANA. They signify
The sorrow of the heart.

ISMENIA. But whence proceeds
That sorrow? is it from thy brothers death,
Or from some lovers? come, deal plainly with me,
Do thou not love Thersander yet at last?

DIANA. No, I assure thee.

ISMENIA. Speak, I Am very secret.

DIANA. I Will tell thee then, in Sevil I received
Both life and love, Cleagenor, Ismenia,
Is the name of the Conqueror, whose image
Is graven in my heart.

ISMENIA. O Gods! how this discourse
Has consened my thought, I was about
To give instructions; -- but pursue.

DIANA. Our parents
Approved our love, and the day for our marriage
Already was appointed, when Nearehus,
Provoked by an infamous desire,
Came to solicit me unlawfully
In favor of his flame; this favorite
Unto the King after a passion painted,
And colored with sighs, called his presents
To the assistance of his faith; but this
Proving effectless, he resolved my ruin;
He came with open force to satisfy
His beastly and unruly appetite;
And to that end would carry me away.
My Mother having notice at that instant
Of his design, made me to take a drink,
To frustrate it, and then, her subt'le policy
Spread through the Town the rumor of my death:
Indeed the virtue of this drink procured me
So long a sleep, that it appeared to be
The sleep of death; Nearchus terrified
With this sad news, came to behold it painted
Upon my face; remorse of conscience
Within his heart then, quarreled with his love:
His sad despair armed him to kill himself:
But whilst his soul was troubled herewith,
I was conveyed secretly into
A Bark; scarce had I yet finished my sleep,
But at my first waking I saw my self
Upon the Sea. My Mother then related
The whole adventure to me, and the secret
Imposture of my feigned death, when suddenly
A storm brake the discourse, horror and death
Marched on the floods: alas, what shall I say?
Our vessel being carried by the fury
Of The winds and waves, was split upon a rock,
The several pieces floated on the waters;
I know not which of the Gods took care of me
In putting one under my trembling hand,
Which making me pass on those moving graves
Through the disturbed empire of the winds,
Carried me to the shore in all appearance
Devoid of life; here in this quiet Island
Of Erithrea where Melissa raigns
My body found a receptacle; she
Returning at that instant from the chase,
Perceived it lying, which the enraged Sea
Yet threatened on its banks, and that same God
Which would complete his miracle, inclined
Her heart to pity at this spectacle:
She caus^d me to be carried to her Court:
It is unto her succor that I owe
The remnant of my days: here I first changed
My name, the better to assure my flight,
And so to disappoint Nearchus pursuit.

ISMENIA. How Shepheardess, is not thy Name Diana?

DIANA. No, C^lia was my true and only name;
But for my safety I made to Melissa
A feigned relation of the miseries
Of my sad life; since she received me
Into her palace, where I live with her,
And am now of her Court. Seven times the Sun
Has finished his Carier, since I have seen,
Or heard news of my mother.

ISMENIA. Was Cleagenor
Informed of all this?

DIANA. Oh, alas! this is
One of the points that causes my affliction:
Cleagenor surprised by the same
Imposture, came to see me in my bed,
As in my grave: I wonder that the noise
Of his redoubled cries brake not my sleep:
The heat to revenge me dried all his tears:
He found his rival, and assaulted him;
They fought on equal terms; Nearchus fell
Under his arms for dead; Cleagenor
Was forced to fly to avoid the fury of
The Offended King: his sudden flight gave not
My Mother opportunity t'inform him
(As she intended) with the fiction
Of my pretended death: since his departure
It Is now seven years complete, in all which time
I Have heard no news of him; so that I know not
Whether I mourn the living, or the dead;
In the mean time to weep my fate more freely,
And to conceal my miserable fortune,
I feigned a Brothers death.

ISMENIA. I Am sensible
Of thy misfortune, and will bear a part
In thy sad grief, if that will make it less;
I no more now condemn thy sighs, nor tears;
But yet at last preserve thy beauty from
Those murdering sorrows; in this doubtful case
Fix thy fair thoughts upon some other object;
If death has seized thy Servant, sure thou losest
Too many tears and sighs; or grant he live,
Is It probable that he will keep his constancy
For thee whom he thinks dead? but here is my Lover.

SCENA III.
THIMANTES, DIANA, ISMENIA. ISMENIA to THIMANTES. WHat business brings thee
hither?

THIMANTES. Here I come
A little to divert my thought.

DIANA. What thought?

THIMANTES. It Is a disease which does assault my sense.

ISMENIA. What is it, without more circumstance?

THIMANTES. My plaint
Without words would express it; at the sports
Too many Shepherds had unto my grief
Too long thy free ear, and perhaps, thy heart;
A World of people pressed round about thee:
The Shepherd Dorilas, me thought, discoursed
Too long with thee, I saw so many others
Prostrated at thy foot --

ISMENIA. Without more words
Thimantes is become a jealous fool.
Since thou will love me, learn to know me well:
Thimantes I am free, and will no Master;
I Will never depend on any but my self.
Tell me, I pray thee, did I ever promise
To speak to none but thee? do thou imagine
So vainly, that thou art the only Lover
That serves me? have not I yet some which ought
To be conserved? and amongst all the Shepherds,
Whose faith I have received, if I should open
My mouth and eyes on none of them but thee,
And that one of those days thy mind should change;
And mine change too, (as all this well may happen)
Would all the others, jealous of this kindness
Expressed to thee thus in particular,
Be still my Lovers, though I had lost thee?
And if my liberty were not exposed
For all, which of them would commiserate
My fortune in thy loss; I think upon
The Event of things, which thou can not assure:
At least if one quits me, another takes me:
Consider if this humor pleases thee,
If thou can serve me all thy life time thus,
And not be jealous; if thou can, hope one day
Both mouth and hand, and happily the heart
May flatter thy affection.

THIMANTES. This way
Seems very strange unto me, but almost
Every fair evening some appointed place
Of meeting seems t'assure me of thy love
Sufficiently, and not to flatter me
With frivolous hope.

ISMENIA. Yet hitherto it is
But airy words.

THIMANTES, I hope all things from time
In waiting for that day, our names engraven
In every place, will speak my love, Ismenia,
I promise --

ISMENIA. But no more, here comes Thersander;
That Shepherd, whose enflamed heart thine eyes
Has rendered ashes --

DIANA. Well Ismenia,
I leave you.

ISMENIA. This is too much ^igour, trust me,
At least afford the face, if thou deny'st
The heart.

SCENA IV.
THERSANDER, DIANA, THIMANTES, ISMENIA. THERSANDER to DIANA. OH stay, dear
object stay, thou that art cause
Of all my torments, I have but one word
To say before I dye, the Nymph has crowned
My valor with these prizes, here I come
To lay them at thy feet, with them my heart:
If thou will triumph on this festival day,
Suffer at least thy conquest in thy sight,
That Is all the ambition of this captive heart.

DIANA. Captive to me? if so, make it change Master,
I freely do release it; break its chain
Thy self, if thy design be not to have me
Free it with my own hand.

THERSANDER. Alas! it is not
Its liberty that I desire.

DIANA* Then let it
Live still a slave, and sigh.

THERSANDER. How, Shepheardess!
Refuse a heart, this precious present which
Is always worth a Temple, and the Gods!
Think well upon it, it becomes thy justice
Not to despise this noble sacrifice,
Since I give but the same victime and incense
Unto the powers above; in my opinion
Our Goddess in the Temple is less fair,
And thou do bear the bright name of Diana,
As well as she.

DIANA. Since this rich present is
Of such high value, as it is worthy of
A Temple and the Gods, I believe, Shepherd,
That it becomes my justice not t'accept
This noble sacrifice, and I should wrong
Our puissant Gods in daring to partake
Their glory, and to share their incense with them,
My name's Diana, to thy eyes I Am fair;
But I am not a Goddess like to her.

THERSANDER. Although thou have no Temple, nor no Altars,
Thou make thy self adored; it is to day
Thy festival which I have celebrated:
I have no other worship, nor no other
Diana, the fire of my love is not
A profane fire, and if some spark thereof
Warm not thy breast a little, I must suffer
The violent heat on it.

DIANA. Rather I advise thee,
Quench it with my contempts, this remedy
Will cure thee, that thou shall complain no more.

THERSANDER. Good Gods! what remedy is this which thou
Offerest me here? I must dye, Shepheardess,
If thou cur'st so; flatter at least, I pray thee,
With one sole word the love which thou have raised;
If I Am, not happy, make me think I am so.
Alas! I cannot hear a single syllable
To succor me; if thus thou curest, Shepheardess,
I must dye, there is no prevention for it.

ISMENIA. Why carriest thou a heart still so rebellious
To love?

THIMANTES, Why do thou persecute with scorn
This faithful Shepherd?

DIANA. It is best be gone.

THERSANDER. Yet thrust of thy disdain, if thou will spare
My hand, my death, finish the forming of
The sword that kills me, one word more of hate,
And I die presently before thine eyes;
Speak, answer me.

ISMENIA. No more, here comes the Nymph.

DIANA. Happy arrival, which has freed me from
So great a t^ouble!

THERSANDER. Well for my part then,
I Will try the temper of the marble rocks;
My plaints may pierce them, though they could not move
A Virgins heart to pity, much less love.

SCENA V.
MELISSA, PARTHENIA, DIANA, ISMENIA, THIMANTES, CLIDAMANT, MELINTUS. MELISSA.
SInce a full year and more that I have governed
This happy Island in the right and lawful
Line and succession of my Ancestors
By the death of my Sister, and since first
Diana's feasts were celebrated here,
Never so many Laurels crowned your heads,
Nor ever any day ordained for pastime
Has entertained mine eyes with such delight.
Every one striving to bear hence the prize
Proposed to his contention, showed his skill,
Both at the Course and Lute; how handsomely
Thersander did behave him at these exercises!
With what a grace he acted every thing!
How charming was his port! and if I may
Say what I think of him, he must be sprung
Either from Kings or Gods: how happy is
Thimantes in his friendship!

THIMANTES. This happiness which I enjoy's not new,
It has a longer date then from to day:
His name is precious to me; 't was my fortune
To have the benefit of his acquaintance
At my last voyage, I saw his arrival
From his own native country at the Court
OF th King of Portugal; the sympathy
Of humors which one man has with another
Tied us together in so firm a friendship
That having met him sad and full of thought,
I prevailed with him as to bring him here,
In hope that in this quiet region where
Melissa reigns, he should lose all his grief.

MELISSA. Indeed although that prosperous Shepherd has
Received all the prizes from my hand
Wherewith he is crowned, I find him notwithstanding
Still melancholy may not this be in him
Some sad effect of love, blessed Shepheardess,
Who ever thou art! thrice happy is thy fortune,
In which this noble stranger bound his choice!
He is so far above the common merit,
That a Nymph should not much abase her self
In loving him.

CLIDAMANT. Indeed he merits much,
And we esteem him all, we love his virtues,
Without being jealous of them.

PARTHENIA. Clidamant
Comes nothing short of him in my opinion.

ISMENIA. Thimantes too will go as far as he.

DIANA. Another time, Melintus without doubt
Will perform better.

MELINTVS. Yes, when you shall turn
Your eyes on that side.

MELISSA. Shepherds, once again
Prepare, I pray you, for the Nuptials
Of Thirsis with Parthenia; Niece, that Shepherd
Is worthy of you, and you are not ignorant
That I intend, as soon as he returns,
To make him (as I hope) your happy husband.

PARTHENIA. aside Yes, if my heart can suffer violence.

MELISSA. In the mean time, let us go unto the Temple,
Our thanks and our devotions to pay
Unto the Gods on this so glorious day.

The end of the first Act.
ACTUS II.
SCENA I.
ISMENIA, THERSANDER, THIMANTES. ISMENIA. It Is true, Thersander, I have done
for thee
As Much as possibly I could, I made
Thy sighs, thy constancy, thy faith appear
For to persuade her, but I lost my labor,
Diana is insensible, her heart,
Which loves sweet applications cannot touch,
Among so many rocks, is become rock.

THERSANDER. What shall I do, Thimantes? what a rude
And rigorous fortune steers my destiny?

THIMANTES. Quit that ungrateful, and come forth of slavery.

THERSANDER. How shall I come forth? I Am born miserable
Under the frowning, and the fatal aspect
Of an ungentle Star, which in despite
Of all my studies to defend me from it;
Pursues Cleagenor under the name
Of poor Thersander.

ISMENIA. Softly. What is that I hear!
Good Gods!

THIMANTES. Thersander, what have thou discovered?
Has thy own mouth betrayed thus thy secret?
See into what great danger thy imprudence
Puts thee at present; fear thou no more,
Nearchus, and his power?

THERSANDER. No, I fear nothing
After this sentence, but seek death, for since
It is resolved by fate that I must die,
What matter is it, by what arm it be,
Whether Nearchus, or Diana kill me.

ISMENIA. Oh Gods! how happy is he? -- softly.
Has not she
For whom thou die had some intelligence
That thy heart loves elsewhere? if it be so,
And that thy inconstancy procures thy torment,
Thou wrongfully accusest her of cruelty.

THERSANDER. Quite contrary, this love wherewith thou see
My heart disturbed, is a sure testimony
Of my fidelity: it is true, alas!
I sometime loved an object of such beauty,
That the Gods never framed so fair a piece:
The Roses and the Lillies formed the color
Which died her cheeks, and in her sparkling eyes
The Sun was painted; to express unto thee
Yet better her divine perfections,
Diana is her Portrait to the life
Celia is seen in her; she like Diana
Had a Magestick carriage, she had
A mouth, and eyes like her, she had an air,
Fierce too like hers, but amiable; lastly
In every thing she seemed Diana's self:
My heart is constant therefore as before,
Since still I love her in her living Portrait.
I thought at first then, that her death was false,
And that Diana was that lovely object;
But when I saw Diana entertain
With such contempt the fervent love wherewith
My heart was taken, when I saw her rigours,
And infinite hatred, I perceived my error,
And said this is not Celia; so that
I saw well by her cruelties indeed
That I pursued her picture, and had passion
But for a Portrait.

ISMENIA. What! is Celia dead then?

THERSANDER. Alas! that is my affliction, I saw her
Stretched out upon her deathbed dead, Ismenia;
And more dead yet then she, I saw those places
Shine with a certain rest of brightness which
Her eyes had darted: presently on this
I had a Combat with Nearchus for
This charming Beauty; that proud favorite
Unto the King by infamous desires,
Formed him an object to his filthy pleasures,
This outrage was intended to her sweetness:
We fought on this occasion, it was
My fortune to disarm him; but the death
Of Celia, and the anger of the King,
(To save me from the rigor of the Law)
Enforced me to a flight, and made me wander
Seven year from Province unto Province: lastly
Wearied to see the Court of every Prince,
I thought to free me of all dangers here
Under the feigned name of Thersander, and
The habit of a Shepherd: to disguise me
Yet better, the afflictions of my heart
Have changed my Visage.

ISMENIA. Have thou nothing with thee
That formerly was Celia's?

THERSANDER. Yes, one day
I received from her hand this precious pledge
Of her unfeigned love, behold this Portrait,
And judge, I pray thee, if I love Diana,
Or Celia.

ISMENIA. Let me have this Portrait; with it
I Will cure thy evil, Diana seeing it
Will become gentle, I Will go show it her.

THERSANDER. What will thou do, Ismenia? but I see
Diana: O Gods! end my misery.

SCENA II.
DIANA, THERSANDER, ISMENIA, THIMANTES. DIANA. I Sought thee every where. -- to
Ismenia.

THERSANDER. You will oblige me, -- to Ismenia.
Ismenia, to restore my Portrait to me.

ISMENIA Troublesome Shepherd!
I have much to say -- to Diana
To thee in private, therefore let us enter*
Into this Wood. -- Exit Ismenia and Diana.

THERSANDER. Show her that Portrait! oh my martyrdom!
Traitrous Ismenia, is this that faith
For which Thimantes always answered
To me for thee? yes it is by thy counsels,
Thimantes, only that my seduced soul
Left her the conduct of my faithful love:
Nothing from thee or me can work upon her,
She jeers at all; but let us find her out.

Exit Thersander and Thimantes. Ismenia returns with Diana. ISMENIA. I see w'
are private here, we may speak freely.
A Mistress yet at last sighs for Thersander,
And one too in this Island far less cruel
Then thee; accept his service, and embrace
His faith: this portrait which thou see here,
He received from her as a faithful witness
Of their reciprocal and mutual fires.

DIANA. What do I see?

ISMENIA. That portrait (as I take it)
Whereof Thersander is so proud.

DIANA. I gave
Such a one to Cleagenor; Ismenia,
Who gave it thee?

ISMENIA. Cleagenor himself.

DIANA. O Gods! what say thou to me? thou art in
An extreme error.

ISMENIA. I tell thee again*
Cleagenor himself gave it to me.

DIANA. This discourse holds no credit.

ISMENIA. Every day
Almost I see him, and thou see him also
As well as I.

DIANA. I comprehend not these obscurities.

ISMENIA. He loves thee, and thou fliest him.

DIANA. I fly
None but Thersander.

ISMENIA. Well, henceforth accuse
None but thy self of these disasters, it is
The same Cleagenor that loves thee,
And whom thou fli'st.

DIANA. Cleagenor! Ismenia;
That cannot be, is 't possible that I
Should have been two months without knowing him,
For so long it is since he arrived among us.

ISMENIA. Thy grief hood-winck'd thine eyes, thou could not see him.
Think thou that since those seven years thou have lived
Upon those fair banks; time that changes all things,
Has not yet changed a face? there comes Thersander;
Take a full survey of him, whilst I hold him
In some discourse; make show as if thou would enter
Into that Wood, and have a care thou do not
Discover thee till I have ordered
Thy meeting with him.

DIANA. Happy pledge of love! Entering into the Wood.

SCENA III.
THERSANDER, THIMANTES, ISMENIA, DIANA. THERSANDER to THIMANTES. THou see
what she has done; unto Diana
Sh' 'as given the Portrait.

THIMANTES. See she enters there
Into that Wood.

ISMENIA. A word with thee Thersander,

THERSANDER. Perfidious, finish here thy crime, and be
My murderer; strike, strike this heart, I pray thee,
That hopes no more; but by what interest
Have thou betrayed me?

ISMENIA. Why complainest thou?

THERSANDER. O gross dissimulation! dare thou yet
To ask what is my plaint?

DIANA. He has his gate. Softly, looking on him, where she was hidden.

ISMENIA. Thy heat hears nothing, give me leave to speak.

THERSANDER. Yes, to feign more, and to lie at thy pleasure,
Am I obliged still to thee for my life?

ISMENIA. How soon love does degenerate into folly?

THIMANTES. Thersander, hear her.

THERSANDER. What is 't she can say?

ISMENIA. Since thou art so obstinate, let thy love go
Which way it will, I Will have no more to do in it.

THERSANDER. Speak then, what will thou?

ISMENIA. I have naught to say now.

THIMANTES. Thou would speak to him.

ISMENIA. 'Twas to laugh a little.

THIMANTES. I pray thee, speak unto him.

THERSANDER. I conjure thee,
Ismenia, in the name of all the Gods,
Jeer not my Passion.

ISMENIA. It is now my turn
To be perverse.

THERSANDER. I hear thee, speak, what sai'st thou?

ISMENIA. Since thou will have it, know then that a Rival
Has caused thy grief and torments.

THERSANDER. How, a Rival!
At that Word I Am all fire, a Rival!

ISMENIA Yes,
A Rival, good Thersander, but a loved one.

THERSANDER. What! loved of Diana?

ISMENIA. Yes of her,
And more too, of thy self.

THERSANDER. That Is very strange;
How should I choose but bear a mortal hatred
To him my Mistress loves; who ever he be,
I must revenged die.

DIANA Softly. If this should be
Cleagenor, O Gods! how is he changed?

THERSANDER. Where is that Rival?

ISMENIA. With thee, Thersander;
Thou would defend him, if occasion were,
At the expense of all thy blood; believe me,
Thou never leavest him.

THERSANDER. Without dissembling, -- to Thimantes
Tell me Thimantes, art not thou that Rival,
She means? I think thou art my friend, deal plainly
And freely with me, art not thou that cruel,
That false and traitorous Rival?

THIMANTES. Answer him,
Ismenia.

THERSANDER. Well, what will thou say at last?

ISMENIA. Thersander has for Rival in his love. --

THERSANDER. Speak, whom?

ISMENIA. Cleagenor,

THERSANDER. Cleagenor!
Ismenia, ha! my joy, sure, is extreme;
True, I confess, I love this Rival equal
Unto my self, and if he may be loved
Of the object whom I serve, I will adore
My chains without condemning her of rigor.

ISMENIA. Thou have lost nothing by this bout, thy fortune
May create envy, fair Diana has
Yielded to Celia's portrait.

DIANA. Softly, Who, to see
Those decayed features, could have known that face?
But my love has at last drawn them afresh
Within my memory; I must draw near him,
And yield to my impatience.

THERSANDER, to ISMENIA. Pardon me,
I cannot believe thee; but here comes Diana;
See if her eyes have n't the same cruelty,
Always the same pride, and the same disdain.

DIANA. Ismenia, I am come to tell thee something,

ISMENIA. Me Celia?

THERSANDER. How, Celia?

ISMENIA. Yes, Celia.

THERSANDER. Alas! I Am in an error; it is her eyes*
Her gate, her countenance, but not her heart.

ISMENIA. It Is she, Thersander, whom thou do behold,
It is her very self.

THERSANDER. How! is it a custom
To call forth from the bosom of the Grave
Departed souls? and by what privilege
Has that God, who at the eternal sleep
Presides, ordained her waking?

DIANA, to THERSANDER. Though thy faith
Finds this point strange, is not love strong enough
To make thee to believe a Miracle?
Cleagenor sees me, and knows me not:
How comes it, is my Portrait false? have J
No more attractions? see if it be thy Celia,
At least if it be not she; it is no more
That beauty which was late so cruel to thee;
Cleagenor!

THERSANDER. My Celia*

DIANA. Is it possible,
O Gods! that J should see again what J
Best love in the World?

THERSANDER. Is it you that J see?

ISMENIA. Take heed, be moderate, one may die with joy.

THIMANTES. Ismenia, follow this example here;
Grant only at this instant but a kiss
To my impatience, see at last Diana
Cease to be unkind.

ISMENIA. What! does the object rouse thee, and the example
Provoke thy spirits? thou will have but one kiss?

THIMANTES. I will be satisfied.

ISMENIA. Give me then
Some verses, or at least a nose-gay of
The choicest flowers.

THIMANTES. Ismenia, I Will not fail
To bring them thee.

ISMENIA. Then trouble not thy self,
The kiss is thine.

THIMANTES. Will thou withhold from me
So long what is my due?

ISMENIA, It will be better
When it is much expected, and longed for.

THERSANDER. Behold my whole adventure in few words.

DIANA. I Have made thee too a full description
Of my misfortunes; thou see how I feigned
(To give my grief full vent) a Brothers death
In weeping of my lovers.

THERSANDER. What felicity
Do I enjoy now?

THIMANTES. Use your utmost skill
To make it lasting to you, and beware of
The fickleness of fortune, and her wrongs.

THERSANDER. What! have we yet any thing more to fear?
Is not that blind inconstant Goddess weary
Of persecuting us?

THIMANTES. Love is a child,
He must be governed well, Diana's beauty
Has gained her lovers, they may hurt, Thersander;
Melintus has a subtle wit, and we
Both know he loves Diana, and besides
Is jealous of her; fear some foul play from him,
If thou appear his Rival; he disposes
The spirit of Melissa at his pleasure;
When he shall see you serve as obstacle
Unto his love, he will take speedy order
For your removal.

THERSANDER. But to hinder him
To hurt me, I conceive Diana has
No less power on the spirit of the Nymph.

THIMANTES, But if the Nymph loves thee, as I observed
Her heart expressed some such matter lately,
When at her last return home from the Games,
Her free confession to us all, declared
How much she did esteem thee, but at last
With such an esteem that love followed
Close at the heels in plain terms, and indeed
Spoken by her of purpose, if she loves thee,
I say (as I Am confirmed in that thought)
How will thou steer thy course?

ISMENIA. It Is very true,
Her discourse comes into my memory.

THERSANDER. O Gods! what is this you utter?

DIANA. For my part
I begin to believe it, and remember
The passage too, I fear all things from thence:
This is the only mischief we should shun.

ISMENIA. What can she not do against your interests,
When your refuse shall come to arm her anger
Against you? Know that with a single word,
In The twinkling of an eye too, she can calm
The floods and make a mutiny amongst them,
Call forth corrupted bodies from their graves,
Make their cold ashes speak, and their pale ghosts
To walk; these were the secrets, Zoroastres
Taught, whilst he reigned, to his posterity;
She is descended from him; and to give
Her self content, will make use of her art
To serve her passion.

THERSANDER. I know that her skill
Extends to Magic. Yes I fear her love
With so much power, and yield unto thy counsel
Advise us what to do.

THIMANTES. Disguise your selves
Under the names of Brother, and of Sister,
In the mean time we will spread abroad the rumor
Of this event that every one shall hear it
Within the Island.

THEERSANDER. J approve this project.

DIANA. My life lies on it.

ISMENIA. I go to begin
To lie unto Parthenia.

SCENA IV.
PARTHENIA, ISMENIA, DIANA, THERSANDER, THIMANTES. PARTHENIA. ISmenia,
I would speak one word with thee but a moment.

ISMENIA. Immediately when you have born a part
In the contentment of this pair; Diana
Has for the future no more cause to weep
Heaven has been pleas^d that she has found her brother,
It is this happy Shepherd, they acknowledge
Each other.

PARTHENIA. This event, J must confess
Confounds my spirit; Thersander found her brother?

DIANA. Yes Nymph, it is the same,
For whom my grief was hitherto extreme.
The Gods at length have heard my prayers and sighs.

THERSANDER. Yes, Madam they have granted our desires.

PARTHENIA. J'm very glad on it, and my soul is ravished
With this good fortune of our friends, which makes
Our lives content, Diana will oblige me
If she please at her leisure to inform me
with the discovery; but acquaint the Nymph
Therewith, and to that purpose go to see her.

THERSANDER. We ow that duty to our Sovereign.

Exeunt There Is and Diana. PARTHENIA. In the mean time Ismenia and my self
May entertain each other in discourse,
Thimantes, J believe, will not be jealous.

THIMANTES. Let not a third come, Madam, and J fear
Nothing from you. -- Exit Thimantes.

PARTHENIA. Ismenia, J know not,
If J may safely tell a secret to thee,
Alas!

ISMENIA. J know it well, since the heart sighs;
When one would say J love, and dares not speak it*
The heart at the named point gives an Alas.
Have not J ^ell divined?

PARTHENIA. Ismenia,
I do confess it, see too, if thou can
Divine the object that procures my grief
Let me not speak him, spare my cheeks those blushes.

ISMENIA. I cannot, a sigh carries not so far;
You love; but what more, is beyond my skill
To understand, unless your self unfold
That sigh unto me by its cause.

PARTHENIA. It Is true
I love.

ISMENIA. But whom?

PARTHENIA. It Is --

ISMENIA. Outwith't.

PARTHENIA. Clidamant.

ISMENIA, Behold a handsome way to name a Lover;
Ha! how you fear your lips should touch upon it!
One must draw 't word by word out of your mouth;
You have then but one lover; really
It Is well as't happens; had you lists of them
As I have, which I name, and reckon over
Every hour of the day, your bashfullness
Would well become you; love is a fair fruit,
But then it must be gathered, modesty
Leaves it to fall and wither, but I pray you
What will Melissa say to it, who intends
To match her Niece to Thirsis?

PARTHENIA. Oh! I hate
That Th^rsis, and shall be even in despair,
If the Nymph force me to observe my duty
In that par^icular; yet I would keep it
Without disturbance, if the love I bear
To Clidamant should not return me his;
For to speak truly I am violent
Where honor does engage me, therefore would I
Have his heart to be sounded, and as I
Find it disposed, I should pursue my love,
Or quench my flame.

ISMENIA. Speak unto him your self,
Nothing's more easy.

PARTHENIA. But, Ismenia,
Thou have a wit would help me; if I should
Speak to him, he has little understanding
If he should not know that I first was taken*
And I should sin against the rule of maids
To make such a confession.

ISMENIA. You may write then,

PARTHENIA. That is all one, still the same point of honor
Forbids it me; my Letter would discover
My love, and make him boast thereof, perhaps,
To my dishonor, if he might have once
That mark on it in his hand.

ISMENIA. Let him then
Divine it, if he be Astrologer.

PARTHENIA. Treat not my passion thus with railery.

ISMENIA. I must then serve you in it, I perceive;
Well I Will about it with my best invention;
I Will write a Letter to him, and invite him
By a feigned love, as soon as it is night,
To meet me at the Echo of the Garden,
To entertain us there.

PARTHENIA. So in my absence
Thou shall discern his thought.

ISMENIA. This business
Concerns you, Madam, and requires your presence.
You shall speak softly to him, and in those
Sweet moments, you shall understand much better
What his thoughts are, and thus you may your self,
To find out if he loves, speak of your self.

PARTHENIA. Thou will be present too?

ISMENIA. Yes, J 'l so well
Contrive it, that he shall believe undoubtedly
That it is I that speak.

PARTHENIA. But how can we
Speak to the Echo, for thou know the Nymph,
As soon as it is night, retires her self,
And then we cannot come there, what devise now
Have thou that we may speak to him?

ISMENIA. Cannot we
Speak to him from the terrass which joins close
Unto the Garden; you know that you can
Conveniently come there at any hour
From your apartment; it is upon this ground,
And these conjunctures, that I Have ta'n the plot
For my invention.

PARTHENIA. J admire thy wit,
It Is wonderful industrious and ready.

ISMENIA. I Will write the Letter here before your eyes,
Behold the paper for it.

PARTHENIA. How, these are
Thy writing Tables!

ISMENIA. They can speak of Passions
Discreet and secret; J 'l about my business,
And use my smoothest style*

PARTHENIA, Especially
Appoint him well the hour and place of meeting:
How redevable am J to thy wit
For this great favor? what do J not ow thee
For this good office, thou giv'st me again.
Life, and repose.

ISMENIA. See what J write unto him
In two words for you, they are very pressing,
And will engage him to be take himself
Unto the place appointed to know more.

PARTHENIA. It Is very well; it rests now how to giv' 't him.

ISMENIA. Leave me the care of that; but here he comes.

SCENA V.
MELINTUS, CLIDAMANT, PARTHENIA, ISMENIA. MELINTUS, to CLIDAMANT. YEs, J have
heard Diana is his sister.

CLIDAMANT, to PARTHENIA. Madam, Melintus and my self are going
To seek Thersander, to congratulare
With him his happy meeting with his sister.

ISMENIA, to CLIDAMANT. seftly Thersander's happy, and thou art no less,
Since thy good fortune offers it self
Unto thy hand, from whence thou mai'st expect
All that thou can desire without that jealous.

PARTHENIA, to ISMENIA. Come, let us go, the Nymph expects us.

ISMENIA, softly to CLIDAMANT. Having no opportunity at present
To speak unto thee, read, J think 't will please thee.

CLIDAMANT. Read it, J think 't will please thee, what in the name
Of wonder does she mean?

MELINTUS. Take but the pain
To open, and to read it thou shall find.

CLIDAMANT. J think, J may make thine eyes witnesses
Of what it does contain, there is nothing in it
Secret or serious, Ismenia loves
To jest, and to be talked of; and this is
Some new piece of her wonted merry wit.

MELINTUS. J am impatient, prithee open it.

CLIDAMANT. Let me see what divertisement is here,
Which she expounds good fortune, what is this!
He reads. List of my Lovers by an exact order
Of Alphabet.
It Is very well put of;
But so far forth as J can see yet, neither
Obse^ve J here Melintus or my self.

MELINTUS. For my part, J renounce there; turn the leaf,
Go on.

CLIDAMANT, reads. Stanza's of Dorilas upon inconstancy. It Is true, Ismenia
thou art fair,
But more inconstant then the air;
And every Lover is a Mark
Exposed to thy humourous dart;
As soon as he meets thy disdain,
He flies to death to cure his pain,
And makes but one large step in all
From his bright glory to his fall.
With these defects yet thou can charm;
But I Will not love, for fear of harm;
Yet J approve all things in thee,
Yea even to thy inconstancy;
And will not, to incur thy hate,
Jealous Melintus imitate,
Whose humor every thing offends,
And nothing pleases but its ends.
CLIDAMANT. Melintus, what sai'st thou unto them?

MELINTUS. J see for what design she put those Tables
Into thy hand, J called her cocket lately,
And that, it seems, provoked her to rerurn me
The injury with one of the same nature.

CLIDAMANT, continues to read. Sonnet of Silvio, my most faithful Lover.
A Madrigal of Thirsis, -- what is this follows,
Unto the Shepherd Clidamant.

CLIDAMANT. Melintus,
Am J not purblinde, see if this name does
Strike thine eyes thus like mine!

Melintus looking into the writing Tables. MELINTUS. Nothing's more certain,
It is addressed to thee; thou art more happy
Then thou imagin'st.

CLIDAMANT, reads. As soon as the dark shadows of the night
Hang o'r the light,
At the Echo of the Garden let us meet;
But be discreet;
It Is love invites thee; more anon,
When w' 're alone.
Ismenia.

Melintus would take the writing Tables. MELINTUS. Prithee let me see them,
Grant me this favor -- not, then J, believe
Thou do disguise the truth, and read'st Ismenia,
When it is subscribed Diana.

CLIDAMANT. Oh fond jealous!
How long will thou thus be thy own tormenter?

MELINTUS. Yet show them me.

CLIDAMANT. To cure thy troubled spirit,
J'l first o'rcome thy curiosity;
And since the discreet Lover, what vain heat
So ever presses thee, never shows thus
His Mistress name --

MELINTUS. But --

CLIDAMANT. Quit those blind suspicions; as soon
As it is night I Will go unto the Echo
Alone, and with our noise; I Am all a fire
To know what she will tell me, in the mean time
Let Us go unto the Nymph to seek Thersander.

MELINTUS, softly To be more sure, and to inform my self
Yet fuller of thy faith in this my doubt,
I Will to the Echo too, and ^ind it out.

The end of the second Act.
ACTUS III. SCENA I.
MELISSA, DIANA.
MELISSA. I Say to thee again that J receive
Much pleasute at this news, that thou, Diana,
Art sister to the generous Thersander;
He has informed me with the strange misfortune
Which separated on the churlish Sea
The Brother from the Sister, in what place
Upon a plank, escaped from the wrack,
The storm removed him from the anger of
The enraged Sea, what countries he has seen,
What pains and troubles he has undergone;
Lastly he named the happy fortune which
Conducted him to us here; I thank Heaven,
That made thee know him, I Am as sensible
Of this content as thou can be thy self;
He is so highly qualified, that he is worthy
The name of King, ye both shall find with me
A Sanctuary, and what ever fortune
Ye have, I will partake it good or bad;
My fortunes, ye shall bare too, so that all things
Between us shall be common: I believe
Diana toward me will be so well*
Disposed of her part, and that whatsoever
Concerns me, will touch her.

DIANA. Madam, I should
Be barbarously ungrateful otherwise;
I still remember that being on the Shore,
Cast as a wretched wrack there by the floods,
Expecting every minute deaths approach,
I met with you my port and sanctuary:
Oh that I have not power for all this goodness
TO express how much acknowledgement I have!

MELISSA. Thou have.

DIANA. How Madam?

MELISSA. In expecting nothing
But death as I do now, thou can be to me
At thy turn both my port and sanctuary;
Thou can subdue the enemy that braves m^,
That of a Sovereign will make a slave;
He Is in thy power, thou can abate his courage.

DIANA. What is that enemy which troubles you?

MELISSA. He Is one whose Magic can enchant the arms
Of the most Valiant; he can draw tears from
The most Heroic; nothing is so strong,
Which he cannot compass; and without respect
To any place or person whatsoever,
He equally distributeth his flames.

DIANA. I know him not yet by this Character.

MELISSA. How know thou not that tyrant of great Monarcks?
That famous Conqueror of Conquerours,
Who notwithstanding is but a blind child?

DIANA. If J durst to express me, J believe,
I know him.

MELISSA. Speak it freely.

DIANA. I Am mistaken,
Or I have seen love painted in such colors,
Blind and a child, yet a great Conqueror.

MELISSA. It Is the same love whereof I speak unto thee

DIANA. Who is the happy Lover that procures
Your martyrdom?

MELISSA. Alas! could thou not spare me
The shame to speak him? cover, gentle night,
Immediately those places and my brow
With the same color, so to please my heat;
I love; but let us finish since I Have said
I love, Thersander is my object.

DIANA. What,
My Brother?

MELISSA. He* If his heart be a prize
Not easy to be gained, there is nothing which
I would spare for him, I would arm to have him;
Naught should oppose me, every obstacle
J would o'rcome; already by some words
Which he observed not, spoken by the bie,
My love was half expressed.

DIANA. As he should not
Dare to pretend unto so great an honor,
He would be criminal, if he believed
To understand you.

MELISSA. Well then, be thou here
The mouth and true interpreter of my heart,
Express the kind heat of my timorous soul;
Tell him that I Am a subject to his Laws,
That he may boldly fix his thoughts upon
The person of Melissa, and not fear
To be condemned, that his ambition
May soar so high a pitch, and not be checked,
That he may sigh the same sighs with a King;
Husband thar heart for me, to which mine aims;
But let him not think that it comes from me;
My honor would receive a prejudice
By such a thought, thou only shall acquaint him
With this, as from thy self.

DIANA. J understand you,
He must needs yield to this; I Will do your will.

MELISSA. As soon as he appears, I will retire me,
And from one of these places I shall hear
Every word that you speak one to another
In reference to my flame.

DIANA. I should methinks
Act with more freeness, if J were to treat
With him alone.

MELISSA. No, J will hear my self
What he thinks of me, J can best of all
Trust mine own ears and eyes in this affair.

DIANA. But, Madam, after all --

MELISSA. Shepheardess,
The thing's resolved, thou need'st not say no more.
Until he come, J pray thee, entertain
These woods here with some air, and let us see
If the Echo will answer to thy discourse;

DIANA. Your prayer is a command; some plaints of love
Shall make the subject of it.

MELISSA. What thou will.

DIANAS Song.
Ye Trees, ye Rocks, perfumed Valleys, sweet
And charming Zephirs, murmuring fountains keep
My griefs close in your bosom, you alone
Are witnesses unto my fires and moan,
Tell me if my sad heart, not daring to
Delare it it self, at least may sigh its woe?
May sigh its woe -- Echo.
Well then my sighs, make no noise as pe pass
The airy Regions only breath alas
Unto the ^eart that sent you forth; since I
Cannot speak to thee, dear object of my cry,
Let the Ecco, that is attentive, say for me
That if I love (as sure I do) it is thee.
it is thee -- Echo*
SCENA II.
THERSANDER, MELISSA, DIANA. THERSANDER. DIana's here about, her voice assures
me.

MELISSA to DIANA softly Thy Brother comes here, take this opportunity.
Be sure thou speak unto him loud enough;
Thou art my only hope; I go from hence
To hear, and to observe thee.

DIANA. softly. We are undone,
Thersander will discover all in speaking.

THERSANDER. It Is now no longer time to utter sighs,
Let us resume our joy, and dry our tears,
Crown our sad spirits with flowers, and think no more of
Our passed misfortunes, let us form our discourse
Of the most pleasant thoughts, and let us chat
Of love.

DIANA. Let me alone, I Will entertain thee
Upon that subject.

THEERSANDER. It belongs to me
To speak of that, and when I do consider
With what darts in my heart --

DIANA. I know it well
It Is of a longer date then from to day,
That I have read thy heart; and I believe
That never any one has seen a Brother
To love his sister so.

THERSANDER. The love wherewith
I am assaulted, and would make thee see,
Exceeds that of a brother, it begets,
Complaints and Sighs, it drives to despair,
And kills; the love we bear unto a Siste^,
Makes not so many sufferings; but J love --

DIANA. J divine whom, thou burnest with desire
To speak unto me here of Celia^s love.

THERSANDER. Thou do divine right, J take a great pleasure
To speak of it with thee; methinks I see her
Still when J look on thee; how fit I find thee
To be the faithful guardian of my love,
Assured of thy fidelity, and that
Thy heart is always mine.

DIANA. Thou need'st not doubt it.

THERSANDER. O my dear!

DIANA. Brother I Am not ignorant
How dear I am unto thee.

THIMANTES. Thy fair eyes --

DIANA. How! flatter and court thy sister
By thy discourse?

THERSANDER. I cannot speak, unto thee
Thou interrupt'st me still.

DIANA. The advice is worth it, and I Will give rhee notice
That from esteem they pass to love for thee,
That scarce arrivedst thou unto this place
But thy good fortune without any trouble
Gained thee the conquest of a heart, for which
Great Kings will envy thee, it is Melissa's.

THERSANDER. O Gods! what do thou say?

DIANA. What does astonish thee,
I see how thou art troubled to believe it.
This great heart finds no place yet in thy faith:
To make thee happy in it, I must embrace thee.
She speaks softly to him, in embracing him. The Nymph hears our discourse,
it is fit thou feign.
She speaks loud again. Will thou not yield to this excess of honor?
Think that thy Celia in this conjuncture,
Has no resentment in her heart against thee,
Nor murmurs at it.

THERSANDER. In this ecstasy
Wherein I am through this excess of honor,
I Am seeking of my self, but cannot find me.
How! dare to love the Nymph? t'aspire to her?
No my ambition's not so criminal.

DIANA. Under those high respects, J see thy love.

THERSANDER. How can I otherwise express it, Sister?
If the Nymph tempts me, and will make a crime on it,
It shall then have the name but of a lawful
Respect; and if I see occasion
T'express me further on this point, this lawful
Respect shall bear the bolder name of love.

DIANA. Brother, it has that name, and J am ready
To boast unto her, her illustrious conquest:
But the Sun, J perceive, plungeth himself
IN the waters, and the shadows seize the tops
OF the Mountains, it is time now to betake me
Unto Melissa; but behold, she comes.

Melissa comes forth from the place where she was hidden. MELISSA. What serious
discourse have you together?

DIANA. Our subject is of Love, of Mistresses,
Of Servants, and of Sighs.

MELISSA. What! has Thersander
Already gotten him a Mistress?

THERSANDER. Madam,
I have too little merit and address:
Besides to serve, to honor and obey you,
I have no other thought; our discourse was,
Your goodness for us, which my heart shall ever
Record as in a Register of Brass,
Where my acknowledgements shall never pass.

SCENA III.
MELINTUS, MELISSA, DIANA, THERSANDER. MELINTVS. calling. HO, Clidamant!

MELISSA. It is enough, let us go,
I hear some noise, and would not be seen here
In The night. --

Exeunt Melissa, Diana, Thersander. MELINTUS, continuing to call. Ismenia,
Clidamant! they hear,
But fly me, and the night robs my sight of them;
But this is not Ismenia, and I am
Deceived much, if I saw not the gate,
The stature, and the gesture of Diana;
Yes, Clidamant abused me with a lie,
Diana builds his fortune at my cost,
And that note which he would conceal from me
Without doubt was subscribed with her fair hand;
Yes, 'twas Dianaes, though he read Ismenia,
To spare my grief a little, and my trouble.
How simple was J that J followed
Not close upon his steps: but soft, methinks,
J hear a noise, perhaps it may be he.

SCENA IV.
CLIDAMANT, MELINTUS. CLIDAMANT. O Night, lend me thy silence, make these woods
To hold their peace in the absence of the day,
And let no sound be heard here but my love:
At last I Am happily delivered from
A troublesome companion, that would
Obstruct my fortune, that same jealous Shepherd
Without respect and faith.

MELINTUS. I Am much obliged
Unto thee for this noble character
Thou giv'st me; in despite of all my care
And cunning thou art come without my company
To see thy lovely Mistress.

CLIDAMANT. I came here
To meet another person: for my Mistress,
I have already spoken with her fully.

MELINTUS. Yes, if mine eyes deceived me not, thou talkd'st
Unto Diana, and seeing me follow,
Ye both fled at one time, these Woods concealed you.

CLIDAMANT. Good Gods! what say thou to me?

MELINTUS. But I Will be
More wise another time, and heed you better.

CLIDAMANT. I understand not what this language means,
But this distrust does me an injury:
Why covet'st thou to accompany me thus,
Since the object that expects me, forbids it;
Desire thou to publish secret passions?
Ismenia in thy sight gave me those Tables;
It Is she that does expect me at the place
Appointed; for Diana, she knows nothing
Of this invention: if thou can, enjoy
That lovely Shepheardess and think not me
Guilty of any treason, I seek only
Ismenia, and shun society:
In this affair, Shepherd retire thy self
And leave my love in peace, why would thou do me
So ill an office?

MELINTUS. This appointed meeting
Denotes some artifice; I observed lately
At our last Games the amorous commerce
That passed between Diana and thy self,
So many kind respects, such gentle glances,
And private whisperings forming the suspicion
That still awakes me.

CLIDAMANT. Cease to trouble me,
And thy self too unnecessarily;
Our discourse only was an effect of
Civility; I say again, I leave
Diana to thee; oh how perfectly
I hate those vain suspicions and condemn them!

MELINTUS. Ismenia's very free she would have had
Boldness enough to express her love by day,
Why should she make choice of the night to speak it?
Why dared she not to utter it in words,
But writ it to thee?

CLIDAMANT. In vain jealous Shepherd,
Thou ask me that question, all that I
Can say unto thee, is that I am sent for;
I cannot tell thee more if the occasion
Be good or bad; if J could satisfy thee
Upon that point, believed thou should excuse me.

MELINTUS. I Will follow thee where ere thou go.

CLIDAMANT. Oh Gods!
What a Tormentor have I?

MELINTUS. I attend thee,

CLIDAMANT. Then stay thou here, I Will leave the place unto thee.
I feign to withdraw, to withdraw him also. softly.

Exit. MELINTUS. What! leave thou me alone? and cunningly
Hid'st me those secrets, which yet I must know:
Feign as much as thou will, in spite of thee
I will ^ind out to which of those two objects
Thou giv'st thy faith, and do direct they vows,
I Will be a witness of thy secret love;
Another shall inform me on it, Thimantes
Will tell me all the Plot; to him I Will go,
And give him notice of the assignation;
He Will come to let me know sure, if Diana
Appears there; or if it be Ismenia,
J shall do him a mischief; when Thimantes
Shall see his Mistress appoint secret meetings
To others then himself at such an hour,
He has a poor spirit if he loves her still:
So shall I have pleasure in my resentment
In weakening the ^ierceness of Ismenia,
And of her servant, I Will to him immediately.

SCENA V.
PARTHENIA, ISMENIA. PARTHENIA, upon the terrass. I Hear a noise, Ismenia, is it
not Clidamant?

ISMENIA. Fear not, we shall hear of him presently.

PARTHENIA. J hear no more noise, all is hushed and still;
Only the night, and silence reigns here.

ISMENIA. Hark, J hear something, let us handsomely
Dissemble now.

PARTHENIA. Oh how I feel my soul
Seized with love and fear!

SCENA VI.
CLIDAMANT, ISMENIA, PARTHENIA. CLIDAMANT. NO person follows me,
J am at liberty; jealous Melintus
Haunteth my steps no more.

ISMENIA. Madam, it is he.

CLIDAMANT, Well I Will go on to instruct me what Ismenia
Has to impart unto me in these Gardens:
Ismenia!

ISMENIA. Clidamant.

CLIDAMANT. Is it thee, Ismenia?

ISMENIA. Yes, I expect thee.

CLIDAMANT. Thou may have pretense
T'accuse my tardy coming, but a jealous --

ISMENIA. It is enough, thou art beloved, assure thee;
Draw near; but let us speak soft, I Am afraid
We should be heard. --

Put your self in my place and take this opportunity. softly. SCENA VII.
THIMANTES, CLIDAMANT, PARTHENIA, ISMENIA. THIMANTES. Speaking to Melintus
behind the Stage. I Am obliged to thee for this advertisement;
If J find at the Echo either of them,
Diana or Ismenia, believe me,
I Will faithfully report it, to remove
Thy trouble, if J can: Ismenia
Appoints me very often here to meet her,
Where, notwithstanding her inconstancy,
Her mouth in secret gives me the hope
Of a most constant love, and for a pledge
Of her faith, never any but my self
At those hours entertains discourse with her:
I Will to her now, and charge her with this crime
Of coming here without acquainting me.
I Will approach softly without making noise
Lest it might raise a scandal in the night;
Ismenia,

CLIDAMANT. quitting Parth. Some noise has struck mine ear,
I Will return to you -- Exit.

PARTHENIA. O what feat is comparable
To mine! Ismenia, come to me presently.

CLIDAMANT, speaking to Thimantes, whom he takes for Melintus. Melintus, really
I can no longer
Suffer your importunity? why should you
Imagine that J am the Author of
Your trouble? J speak to no person her^
But to the Shepheardess Ismenia;
J tell thee once again, she sent for me,
And J am certain that the note is written
And signed with her hand; it is true, this fair one
Sighs only for the love of me, her mouth
Has told it me already, and I answer
Unto her fires with a mutual heat;
Assure your self, and settle upon this
My faithful protestation, that Diana
Never made me sigh.

THIMANTES. softly. O most persidious!

CLIDAMANT. See what an injury you do me now,
To satisfy you yet more fully hold,
There are the writing Tables, see her name.
Examin't well, and take repose at last
Without disturbing mine. Do You place your glory
In persecuting me?

THIMANTES. softly. Shame of my love,
Depart my memory, J have wherewith
Both to reproach, and to convict thy falsehood;
And when I Have done it, treacherous spirit, I Will quit thee,
And then J shall be satisfied.

CLIDAMANT. Melintus,
What is it thou murmur'st yet? J must break with thee,
If this st^ange humor lasts, in acting thus,
You will lo^^ all your friends, your jealous head,
And strange fantastic humors, but he is gone;
I will return unto the object which
Both charms and loves me.

PARTHENIA, to ISMENIA. There Is our discourse,
Make an end on it thy self.

CLIDAMANT. I Am rid at last
Of my impertinent; jealous Melintus
Has left me now.

ISMENIA. Adieu, let us retire.
I Am certainly informed that thy ambition
Aspireth to Parthenia, in vain then
Thou hold me discourse.

CLIDAMANT. In two words J will tell thee, that J have
Too full a knowledge of the eminence
Of her condition, as to dare to lift
My hope so high: Oh if I durst to love her;
But being less ambitious, J obey
My duty, and J better know my self,
Adieu until to morrow.

PARTHENIA, to ISMENIA. Oh Ismenia!
What content have J? and how skillful art thou
In this affair of love? I do admire
Thy wit, and thy invention; the thing
Answered my wish.

ISMENIA. By this discourse of his
You may perceive love under that respect,
Like fire under its ashes; it is not lately,
Your charms have taken him.

PARTHENIA. In the mean time --

ISMENIA. In the mean time, live all fair wits, say J;
Without me, you had been reduced unto
A sad condition, to die with grief,
And love, without expressing it.

PARTHENIA. It Is late;
Come, in the absence of the day let us prove,
If sleep will follow on the steps of love.

The end of the Third Act.
ACTUS IV.
SCENA I.
THIMANTES, ISMENIA. THIMANTES. HOw! in the night, persidious, to exasperate
My anger, dare thou to grant private meetings
To any but my self? yea in the night
Without light and attendance in the Garden,
Thou entertain'dst the Shepherd Clidamant.

ISMENIA. How Is this! Thimantes in a rage, O Gods!
Who would have thought it?

THIMANTES. Will thou say that J
Complain now without reason, that J have
A cracked brain, and bleer'd eyes? it is too long*
Inconstant, to arrest thy spirits, behold
This witness, it has told me every thing;
Yet J should not believe that thou were guilty,
If such an evidence accused thee not,
But since J dis-ingage my faith to thee,
This very instant, J restore thy papers
And will have nothing more to do with thee.

ISMENIA. Well, let it be so then, J doubt it not,
But J shall be provided in good time;
When one forsakes me, presently another
Offers his service, otherwise J should,
In this unlucky moment of thy change,
Be destitute of an officious Lover;
But thanks unto the Gods, more then one calls me
His Mistress, and J shall have no less courtship
And press for thy departure, these notes here
Express the names of those that I Have subjected,
I Will blot thee presently out of my Table Book.

THIMANTES. Light Shepheardess!

ISMENIA. For all this J am troubled
For thy disquiet, without further jesting,
Know that this trouble which possesses thee
Proceeds but from a fiction, speedily
I Will clear it to thee, only have but patience
To stay here till the Shepherd Clidamant
Arrives, before whom I have order to
Discover the deceit; and then I know
Thou will excuse me for it. -- here he comes.

SCENA II.
CLIDAMANT, ISMENIA, THIMANTES. CLIDAMANT. HAve J not staid too long? suspect
me not,
Thimantes, J was sent for: well what is
Your pleasure?

ISMENIA. Thy misfortune is extreme
Thimantes cannot suffer that another
Should love me, and one that account intends
To measure with thee sword and arm to day.

CLIDAMANT. He is my friend, and therefore J am loath
To have a quarrel with him; to acco^d it,
Choose of us two him whom thou think most faithful.
I am content to stand unto my fortune.

ISMENIA. Thimantes, what say you?

THIMANTES. J agree to 't.

ISMENIA, to CLIDAMANT. Then thus; for him, J do confess I love him
A little, but for thee, -- nothing at all.
My mouth interprets truly what my heart thinks

CLIDAMANT, O the most fickle and most want on issue
Of the inconstant sex! thou love a momen^,
J love a moment also.

ISMENIA. Notwithstanding
J have a secret to impart unto thee.

CLIDAMANT. A Secret in thy heart loses its name
In less time then a minute, without doubt:

ISMENIA. Thou thought last night, that I discoursed with thee
At the Echo of the Garden?

CLIDAMANT. Yes,

ISMENIA. But what
If thou were then deceived, and that another
In my place counterfeited there my voice?

CLIDAMANT. What have thou told me?

ISMENIA. That which may be true.

CLIDAMANT. J cannot comprehend it, nor find thee;
Thou do do nothing but deceive at all times,
And in all places; thou can turn thy heart
And eyes into all senses; how! an other
Possess my place?

ISMENIA. What if by this advise
J gained thee the heart of a fair Mistress,
One that is illustrious, and of noble blood,
And who after the Nymph has the chief rank!

CLIDAMANT. Well feign thy fill, thou may speak what thou list;
I Am henceforth in no humor but to laugh.

ISMENIA. If by the greatest oaths wherein my honor
Can be engaged, thou will believe the truth
Of what J told thee, that another person
Beside my self received thy vows last night
J hope thou will find out some fitter Epithits
Then false and wavering for me.

CLIDAMANT. After such
An obligation, my charity
Would sway me much.

ISMENIA. Then solemnly J swear,
It was Parthenia in my place, to whom
Thou did express thy love; she borrowed
My name and shape, and thine eyes suffered
This sweet imposture.

CLIDAMANT. Still thou do abuse me,
J knew thee by thy voice.

ISMENIA. When we spoke loud,
'T was I that spoke; then presently Parthenia
Advancing in my place discovered softly
Her soul and thought unto thee: after this,
Judge, if I have deserved from thee, or no.

CLIDAMANT. How! is it possible that she, to whose
High rank, I should not dare to aspire unto
So much as in a thought, that she to whom
I durst not speak a word in way of plaint,
That she, to whom my high respect concealed
My amity, should yet feel pity for me?
Alas! this cannot be, it is sin to think it.

ISMENIA. Thou shall see if I lie, and how sh' esteems thee;
I wait her here.

CLIDAMANT. Therein I should obtain
The hight of my ambition; for this favor,
Oh let me kiss thy hands and die with pleasure.

SCENA III.
PARTHENIA, ISMENIA, CLIDAMANTES, THIMANTES. PARTHENIA. WHat spectacle is this?
I see Ismenia
Sports with my fortune, if I trouble you,
I will retire, continue that rare favor;
Who freely gives the hands, may give the heart.

ISMENIA. Ha! Madam, really you are a novice
In love; I gave him intimation of
The arri^fice we used, and he at first
Received my discourse with so much joy,
That he craved from me that civility.
Unto what jealous strange suspicions
Are you drawn by this object! he but aimed
To kiss my hand, and you are like to die for it?
Trouble your self no more thus to no purpose.

PARTHEIA. Ismenia thou restor'st me life, and rest,
I love thee, Clidamant; this jealous fit,
Methinks, might well have spared me the shame
Of telling it.

CLIDAMANT. Fair Nymph, believe --

PARTHENIA. Bur let us
Enter into this Wood.

CLIDAMANT. I wish the Echo,
Sometimes a friend to Lovers, would redouble
My voice in saying to you that J love,
And make you to repeat my words, J love.

PARTHENIA. Ismenia, be a faithful witness of
Our chaste amors, and come along with us
To hear what we discourse, Thimantes be
Discreet and secret.

THIMANTES. Madam, I Am all silence.
See, what a strange unnecessary evil
Is that a jealous person does sustain;
Foolish Melintus how thou art deceived
In thinking that Diana is the object
Gf Clidamant's affection -- here she comes
Discoursing with her brother, J will leave them.

SCENA IV.
DIANA, THERSANDER. DIANA. LEt us consider what we are to do,
She loves thee infinitely, and J have
Command from her to speak to thee again*
In her behalf.

THERSANDER. Advise me what to do.

DIANA. Since the Nymph loves thee with such passion,
As I perceive she does, it is fit thou flatter
Her grief a little, otherwise I fear
That I shall lose thee after having found thee.
What mischief can she not do, when provoked?

THERSANDER. Since there needs but to feign all will succeed.

DIANA. In the mean time, Ismenia will be careful
To inquire for us, when the Merchant-ship
That Is bound for Sevill will be fully ready
To set sail from the harbor; we shall hire him
To land us where we will; till when, our care
Must be not to offend the Nymph, for fear
She ruin us; she will presently be here.
She Is come already; act the Lover well,
Dissemble handsomely, therein consists
All that we can expect.

SCENA V.
MELISSA, DIANA, THERSANDER. MELISSA. A Word, Diana.
Have thou removed that fatal obstacle,
Which came to intetrupt the pleasant course
Of my affections? have thou settled
My life's content, and razed Celia
Out of thy Brothers spirit?

DIANA. His heart follows
Where my voice and his glory calls him,
And cheerfully yields obedience
To such sweet Laws.

MELISSA. Blessed Interpreter
Of a most ardent love! have thou advised hi^
To keep it secret?

DIANA. Only that point, Madam,
J have forgotten, but J will redeem it;
And tell him on it before you; if you please
That I go for him.

MELISSA. Go, and bring him hither.

DIANA. softly. Feign handsomely unto her

THERSANDER. softly to Diana. Fear it not.
I Will speak before her but of you, and to you,
And yet not make her jealous.

Then he says to Melissa, by whose side is Diana, whom he looks upon.
THERSANDER. aloud. Could you doubt
My heart should be so stupid, and insensible
Of my felicity how happy is
My fortune, and how gentle was the storm
That gave me this blessed port, whereof great Kings
Are jealous? What proud Conqueror would not
Submit and lay his arms down with himself
At the fair feet of such a charming object?
A rude obdurate rock, would be consumed,
The coldest Marble would be kindled by it:
Yes, Madam, a fair eye but opens
Its lid here, and it is day; the nights black shadows
Fly only from the Sun of those bright eyes,
Her fires too at the sight of them grow pale.
I must confess then, Madam, that J love them,
And that J live more in this beauteous object
Then in my self: my spirit is charmed with
A happiness unparalleled, when J
Think that J love them, and am loved again.

MELISSA. Come, thou but feignest love? do not abuse me.

THERSANDER. O Gods! what do you say? Madam, J love
Or rather J adore.

MELISSA. How have thou then
Disposed of Celia that reigned o'r thy heart?

THERSANDER. That affair's ordered well, I Have put her interests
Into my Sisters hands; sh' 'ath promised me
To make all fair of that side, and will answer
To me for her.

MELISSA. Have thou not boasted to me
That her eyes were the object of thy love?
That for thy sake she cherished the light
Of the alternate day, and that they would
Cover themselves with an eternal night,
If thou should cease to live or to be faithful:
Think well of thy part what thou have promised;
Be firm, be constant, fail not in that point,
Consider not at all this supreme greatness;
Stick to thine object, love it for it self,
And have no interest for thy ambition,
Flatter thee with the honor to possess her,
Look only if she loves thee, not if she
Enricheth thee; the beauty whom thou serv'st,
Should be thy crown, all greatness whatsoever
Should be esteemed in thy account beneath it.

THERSANDER. Never doubt it, Madam, J shall have those thoughts;
Greatness shall never blind me so far forth
As to oblige me to forget my love;
Which always shall pure as the day ^tar burn
Base interest shall never sully me.

DIANA. I Will tell my Brother now, what I forgate
To THERSANDER. If thou know well to love, know thou as well
To hold thy peace, love like the other Gods,
Is not without his secrets, he is served
Sometimes by hearts that cannot express themselves:
Take heed how thou provoke his jealous power,
Adore his Altars, but adore in silence;
For silence is a part of his Religion;
And oftentimes this fierce God is offended
At his own name; if any thing hereof
Should be known in the Isle, thou art undone:
Love, without speaking of it, that is the law,
Which is imposed on thee; she for her part
Will love thee likewise, use the secret well,
Melissa otherwise would die with grief;
J know the excess of love wherewith thy soul
Is filled; but for thy own interest,
Put a seal on thy mouth.

MELISSA. Yes, have a care
That none suspect our love, I Will take my time
To publish it, in the mean time I Will study
Thy set^lement and thy repose which makes
That of my life; this free confession now,
Would call up envy from her Cell, and make
Our greatest Hero's, to dispute with thee
What J have promised thee, thine enemies.
Judge then how precious thy obedience is;
Since all thy good and happiness depends
Upon thy silence.

THERSANDER. Sure, J should be stricken
With a strange blindness, if J observed not
This your command; J will obey so well,
That, Madam, even you your self shall doubt
Whether J love, or whether you J love.

MELISSA. In the mean time thy sister shall assist me,
And have the ordering of our Amors;
Believe what she shall say, since I will make her
My only bosom friend, unto whose trust,
J will commit the secrets of my heart.

THERSANDER. J will make use of her in the same manner.

Enter Melintus, he speaks to Melissa MELINTUS. Madam, a Jeweller, that uses
still.
To come unto the Games, desires access
Unto your presence.

MELISSA. Cause him to come in:
This Sevil Merchant comes every year
To sell and traffic in the Island with us.

SCENA VI.
MELISSA, MERCATOR, THERSANDER, DIANA, MELINTUS. MELISSA. SHall you remain
sometime yet on our shore?

MERCATOR. I stay but for your Passport to depart.
Every year, Madam, by your Highness bounty
My traffic thrives so well, that whatsoever
Commodities I bring unto your Isle,
J carry nothing back, you empty still
My casket: now I Will show you, if you please,
such rarities, as can be had no where
But in my hands.

MELISSA. Let Us see them.

MERCATOR. Here Is a Diamond
Darts flame of all sides.

MELISSA. It Is a sparkling stone
I like his luster.

MERCATOR. Will you have it, Madam?

MELISSA. I Will tell you presently, show all at once,
Then I shall soon choose: let me see that Coral.

MERCATOR. The piece is very fair; till now your Isle
Has never seen the like.

MELISSA. And what is that other?

MERCATOR. A piece of Ambergris; Madam, it is rare
And of great price; I have passed diverse Seas
To purchase it; alone it is worth as much
As all my casket.

DIANA. For my part, J cannot
See any thing that is new here.

MERCATOR. Shepheardess,
This rope of Pearl is very rich and new,
'T would make you look more fair, more gay, more sparkling.

MELISSA. Without those Ornaments of Art, she is
Charming enough, she needs no strange additions.
She makes all our Shepherds die for love:
But for all this, though you are fair without them
I will bestow them on you, if you like them.
What says Diana.

DIANA. Madam, your great bounties --

MELISSA. Lay them aside.

MERCATOR. But, Madam, look upon
This Masterpiece of Art, it is the Portrait
In little of the King of Andalousia.

MELISSA. He Is one of the best made that I have seen.
And who is this?

MERCATOR. It is his favorite
Nearchus sometime Prince of Pichery,
Who by a beauty fatal through her charms,
Gave up his arms, and life unto his Rival,
A gallant Gentleman, his name Cleagenor.

THERSANDER, the first line softly. May I believe! good Gods! how he observes
me?
But are you certain of Nearehus death?

MERCATOR. He returned sorely wounded from the fight,
And died four days after, as all know.

MELISSA. His valor seems yet painted in his face.

MERCATOR. But he that conquered him had more by much.
Behold his Portrait.

THERSANDER. softly Oh! what shows he?

MELISSA. Is this that valiiant Cleagenor?

MERCATOR. Yes, it is his picture.

THERSANDER. softly, O unlucky ^ccident!

MERCATOR. Of all those that J had, this only 's left me:
The offended King commanded me to carry them
Unto all places where J went, and traffick'd,
That so he might be known, and then arrested;
For after this great Combat, to secure
His head from pursuit, he took flight immediately.

MELISSA. Thersander, in my judgment, nothing can
Better resemble you, J think your sister
Will say as much.

THERSANDER. Madam, we see that Nature
Sports sometimes in her works, and makes some feitures
In faces to resemble somewhat nearly.

MELISSA. This Merchant,, I believe, 's of my opinion*

MERCATOR. Madam, without doubt, it is Cleagenor,

THERSANDER. The thing is little certain on the faith
And bare ground of a Portrait.

MERCATOR. Sir, you are
The very same, I am confirmed now
In my first thoughts, all that which hitherto
Hindered me to judge so, was the name of
Thersander, and the habit of a Shepherd.

THERSANDER. Who! J, Cleagenor?

MERCATOR. Yes, Sir, J saw you
The last year in the fortunate Is^^nds, and
Not above four months since in Portugal;
Sevll's your native Country; since you meet here
Your safety, to what purpose should you cover
Those things with silence?

MELISSA. Sure, you need not blush,
Thersander, at this fair acknowledgement.

THERSANDER. I confess, Madam, that J blush a little,
Not that mine arm has not done all that which
It ought to do in the death of my Rival,
Nearchus was too rash, and insolent;
From the fair and unspotted object which
Made my most chaste desires, he in his thoughts
Formed the object of his filthy pleasures;
But he has paid for it, and his death is just:
Only the thing that troubles and afflicts me,
And for which I am sorry at my heart,
Is thar J told you nothing of my secret.

MELISSA. J guess the cause of it, and know your thought.
And what fear troubled it, and that you chose
Another name only to free you from
The penalty of the Law; but fear not any thing;
I Will oppose power to power for your defense;
Your interests are mine, J'l make your peace;
The King of Andalousia shall be weary
Of persecuting you; if he persist
To trouble your repose, J'l invade his:
If he refuse to grant what we demand,
From our request we will proceed to arms.

THERSANDER. What obligation have you upon me
For all your goodness?

MELISSA. But let us make an end
Of seeing all the rarities.

MERCATOR. Behold
With admiration, Madam, this rare piece,
It is Diana's Picture.

MELISSA. How Dianaes?

DIANA. softly. O sad misfotrune!

MERCATOR. It is the Divinity,
Whose Temple's here, the Goddess of this place.

DIANA. softly, I cease to tremble, all is well again.

MELISSA. What Portrait's this?

MERCATOR. It is a Beauties, Madam,
Whose heavenly graces made two desperate Lovers,
That sight for her, arm for the field, and fight;
It is that fair ones whom I told you of
For whom Cleagenor and Nearchus burned,
And who pursued hotly by two Rivals,
Cost the one flight, and life unto the other.
After Nearchus death, I bought his Portraits:
This that he had without doubt's to the life.
But who can better then Cleagenor
Instruct you in this point?

MELISSA, to THERSANDER. D' ye know this piece?

THERSANDER. I know not what to say on 't.

MELISSA. I observe
Much of thy sisters air in it.

DIANA. O ye Gods!
Turn aside this misfortune.

MELISSA. Really
The glass, Diana, which receives thy image,
Represents less thy shape and countenance;
And any other but the Painter would
Believe indeed that he finished this Portrait
Upon thy presence.

MERCATOR. There Is no doubt of it.
One may admire in this adventure how
Art imitateth nature: It is she
For whom Nearchus sighed.

THERSANDER. softly. O Gods! where are we?
Our fortunes now are desperate.

DIANA. Know thou me?

MERCATOR. I am of the same Town, and therefore know you;
Your mother is Melora, and she dwells
At Sevil; I shall make her a glad-woman
At my return, to tell her that her Celia
Lives yet, and is in health here in this Island.

MELISSA. How! Celia?

MERCATOR. Yes, Madam, that is her name,

DIANA. What cloud of error blinds thy soul thus?
That Celia whom thou mean, and do discourse of,
Died before Nearchus.

MERCATOR. It was believed so
At first; but since, all Sevil knows the contrary,
And that false death is now no more a mystery
Unto me; J know where the mourning went,
And how a Coffin only was interred
Instead of you, that this apparent sign
Of your death only could secure you from
Nearchus ill designs; I know besides
That you betook your self unto the Sea,
Where you sight not, but for Cleagenor;
The Sea proved false to you, and to your mother,
And separated you one from another
By the assistance of a hideous storm:
She having saved her self upon a plank
Sought you from one end of the World to the other;
But hearing no news of you, she believed
At her return to Sevil that the Sea
Had swallowed you, and death had made her search
Unprofitable.

DIANA. Thou know secrets which
To me are Riddles.

MERCATOR. Wherefore should you, Lady,
Dissemble thus your knowledge of a thing
Which is no more concealed; one of your people
A complice of the Plot, divulged it lately;
Melora too since her return revealed
The whole Imposture, all impediment
Being removed after Nearchus death:
This that I know, I understood from her.

THERSANDER. All this thou say, is strange news unto us.

MERCATOR. You have the art, I see, well to dissemble;
But by your favor might it not be you
That did employ a friend unto me lately
To pray me to receive in^o my bark
Two Shepherds, natives of the Town of Sevil?

THERSANDER. Madam, this Merchant does compose Romants.
And tells you all these strange adventures only,
To show his wit, and faculty that way.

MELISSA. Yet his discourse is not without some ground,
I find good reason so to judge of it;
If I remember well, you willingly
Did put the interest of Celia
Into your sisters hands, she promised
To make all fair of that side, and to answer
To you for her: Merchant, another time
See us again. How both of you abuse me
With an Imposture formed under false names
To carry on your love in a disguise!
What in my Palace, in my Court, my presence,
Sport with my person thus in a contempt!
Insolent wretches, you shall feel what force
My anger has when thus provoked, I Will make you --

THERSANDER. Oh, Madam!

MELISSA. Go, Impostor, thou shall answer
For all the troubles of my hear^; none ever
Afsro ntd me yet without punishment:
I Will sacrifice you both to my disgrace,
In such a manner, that ye shall repent
Eternally that ever ye made me blush:
Depart my sight.

THERSANDER. O what misfortune's this!

MELISSA, to MELINTUS. See that you separate them one from another
In several apartments, that they may
Hold no discourse together. O misfortune
Not to be paralleled! What shall I do?
Of whom should I take counsel in this case?
Shall I hear yet my love that murmureth?
Ought I to suffer, or repel the injury?
It is resolved in my offended heart
That those black Passions shall succeed my love,
By which the soul when in disorder, bteaks
The chain wherewith she is ti'd, break forth my fury,
And ruin these ungrateful they shall know
My power, as they have seen my goodness to the^:
They shall not mock at my simplicity,
Nor reproach me for my credulity:
How! treacherous Thersander; oh! that name
Thersander combats yet within my heart,
In its defense, my spirits at this name
Are wavering, and my anger's weak, my hate
Is in suspense; I am not pleased with that
Which I demand; I fear what J would most.
Ha traitor, must J to torment my self
Suspend my judgment upon thy destruction?
Must J dispute the case within my self
As doubtful to determine, no pass sentence
Against him for this barbarous affront:
Arm my despair, and inspire thou my rage:
And let me see how faithfully my Art
Will serve my vengeance in the punishment
Of these ungrateful Lovers, I intend not
To give a sudden death to either of them,
But they shall suffer that which shall be worse:
By the effect, and strange force of my charms,
They shall have, without dying, every day
A thousand deaths; I will continually
By turns afflict the sad eyes of the Lover,
And of his Mistress: both of them shall see,
That they may suffer equally, each other
To die and to revive, this punishment
Is strange and cruel; but it is that I use
In my revenges; come, why loiter we
In our design? my heart like flint shall be
Insensible of their calamity.

The end of the Fourth Act.
ACTUS V.
SCENA I.
CLIDAMANT, PARTHENIA. CLIDAMANT. MIne eyes and ears never saw, nor heard the
like
The miserable cries of those poor Lovers
Fill all these places with astonishment.
Thersander and Diana are so charged,
I could scarce know them, as I now came from them:
Pale death by turns skipping from face to face,
Cannot make them yet to dye unto their love:
But, Madam, is it true what is published here
Among the people, that those strange enchantments
Come from Melissa?

PARTHENIA. Yes, they are the works
Of her Art, without doubt, she could do more yet
Nothing's too hard for her, the destiny
Of mortals seems to be held in her hands,
And as she pleases, she disposes it.
What can she not do, when she is in choler?
The miserable Thirsis feels the effect,
And rigor of her power by sad experience.
Has not fame yet informed you with his sufferings?

CLIDAMANT. Yes, Madam, J have heard them fully spoken.

PARTHENIA. You know then that he loved Roselia,
And so deceived the expectation,
And desire of the Nymph who hitherto
Designed him for my husband, and knows not
That I have love for you; to her commands
This Shepherd was Rebellious: what did she?
Roselia was fair, she became sick;
She wept, she pined, she complained; the brightness
Of her fair eyes, extinguished in a moment:
The whiteness of her Lillies as soon faded;
And of so many beauties there remained
Only the place, where sometime their seat was,
Her Lover that perceived her taken from him,
Seeks her in every place, but cannot find her:
That was a Masterpiece of her Apprentiship;
But this without doubt is another work
Of higer knowledge; if in her resentment
But for my interest she made poor Thirsis
A miserable Lover, judge how far
She may be carried, moved at her offense,
In her revenge for her own interest.

CLIDAMANT. If the Nymph knew the love I have for you,
I could expect no other usage from her;
She would without doubt cause me to be carried
unto some fearful Island where I should
Be rendered miserable all my days:
But let her art do what it can against me
Employed by her hate, it shall work nothing
Upon my faith, to do it prejudice:
Oh! could I flatter me with the same hope,
That you would have like constancy for me!

PARTHENIA. You n^ed not doubt of it, I Am wholly yours,
My love is strong, and little fears her anger:
I Will keep it still sincere and firm unto you:
And you shall find me constant unto death:
Should she destroy me with her power, and kill me
I Will rather dye my self, then my affection.
My life cannot pay the debt J owe unto you.

SCENA II.
ISMENIA, THIMANTES, PARTHENIA, CLIDAMANT. ISMENIA. WHat strange news do we
hear? is it true, Madam,
That by the effects of fortune and enchantment,
Thesander and Diana dye ^by turns,
And live again to wail their miseries?

PARTHENIA. Ismenia, it is too true, they are enchanted.

THIMANTES. If I durst speak my thoughts, and what I Have heard,
They impute this injustice to the Nymph.

PARTHENIA. It is not to be doubted but she is
The Author of it, and this cruel punishment
Denotes that she studies high revenge,
When she is offended.

CLIDAMANT. Whatso'er her power be
Which causes fear, let us go presently
With our complaint unto her: in my judgment,
This is no way to make her self obeyed:
Fear is the parent not of love, but hate.
And that same fatal art which her revenge
Calls to her aid, establishes her crime,
And not her power. But here J see she comes.

SCENA III.
MELISSA, MELINTUS, CLIDAMAT, PARTHENIA, THIMANTES, ISMENIA. MELISSA to
MELINTUS. WHat does this stroke surprise thee?

MELINTUS. Truly, Madam,
Their punishment's too great, and all the Jsland
Murmureth at it.

MELISSA. Shepherds, what say you?
Can J revenge me of an injury?

CLIDAMANT. Yes, Madam, and the estate wherein you have put them
Has made all those their friends that envied them.
Hear our petitions for them, and be pleased
To do them justice: what have they committed
Worthy of such a punishment? for having
Hid their love from you, lived in your Court
Under the name of brother, and of sister,
Deceived the hope and envy of their Rivals,
Conserved their honor, and, perhaps, their life,
^s this so great a crime, as should be punished
By charms which have no end? must they be made
To dye, and to revive continually
By turns, and by a strange unworthy fate
The living be enforced successively
Still to lament the dead? their pittious cries,
And hideous clamours give both souls and mouths
Unto those rocks to join in plaints with me:
The whole Isle's moved with them, and disturbed

PARTHENIA. Madam, I join in this petition,
Vouchsafe to hear me: O forbear to dart
Thunder and wrath upon this happy place,
Where the Gods liberally pour upon mortals
So many an^ so great felicities:
Begin not to disturb the sweet repose
Of an abode that is savoured by Heaven,
To please those Shepherds, whose devotions
May f^x upon some other Sanctuary
More safe, and other Sovereigns more sweet.

THIMANTES. Yes, Madam, stop the mouth of this sad murmur,
Let it be smother^d, this enchantment has
Continued too long, break, break the charm,
And pacify our spirits immediately,
Which are astonished at this proceeding.

ISMENIA. If in the freedom which J use too frequently,
My mouth might dare to speak, and not displease you,
I should then tell you that this rigid course
You take, would leave you here nor Shepheardesses
Nor Shepherds; they would seek this place no more
For their retrait and sanctuary, but shun it
Like a destroying rock* and this fair Island
The glory of the world, would be a wilderness:
To enjoy subjects, rule your passions better,
And be more sovereign over your self.

MELISSA. Shepherds, and Shepheardesses, your discourses
Astonish and surprise me, know, my Art,
Is a sufficient warrant for my actions;
J could do greater yet, and stranger too:
Though this which you have seen seems unjust
Unto you, have you any right, or privilege
To complain to me, and to murmur thus?
Much less to reprehend, and censure me?
How! should the bold Shepherd Thersander dare
To injure me, and to deride my power?
Should he presume to lay aside his duty
And respect for me, and I wink at it,
That so can punish such an insolence?
Presume it not, the blood of Zoroastres
Is not yet born under so ill a star,
J know its influence better, and can use it
To the destruction of those that wrong me:
Yes, Shepherds, I am skilful in the qualities
Of herbs and roots, and as I have occasion
J choose them, some for poison, some for medicine:
When I will, I prescribe some to confound
The memory, and to distract the spirit;
But those obnoxious weeds I never use
But for their punishment that do offend me;
Have I not reason to maintain my rank
In dignity and honor? those that dare
To brave me, without doubt, hazard themselves:
My scepter's guarded with enwreathed serpents,
Whose fearful aspects bid all keep aloof,
And threaten death to those that dare to touch it:
Thirsis has felt their stings: what reason had he
To be an enemy to his own fortune
And interest, in foolishly refusing
The honor of the name to be my Nephew:
I will advance him, and expect that he
Shall yet accept this honorable title
Of Husband to my Niece; Parthenia,
Your color changes, but in vain you hide
Your thoughts from me, I can discover them,
I know that you love Clidamant, and more
What you design, and what you do discourse;
But understand both one and the other of you,
That I must be obeyed in what I will;
My power can force it; take heed ye provoke not
My anger; if J may not be beloved,
J will be feared.

PARTHENIA. Madam --

MELISSA. It is enough,
You know my prohibition.

CLIDAMANT, I hope
To bend her, but at present let us say nothing.

THIMANTES. We all know your high rank and quality
With reverence and respect, so in that notion
We employ but our prayers to persuade you;
They are our only arms, be touched with them,
And dissipate these charms: Thersander now
Begins t'awake out of his fatal fit;
You Will hear his plaints and clamours presently,
His cries and his despair for his dear Mistress
This is the hour, wherein he is tormented:
This object without doubt before your eyes
Will raise up pity, Madam, in your heart:
His sighs will quench your anger, and prevail
Much more then we; see he begins to move:
Madam, you will be touched, to hear him speak.

SCENA IV.
THERSANDER, DIANA, MELISSA, ISMENIA, PARTHENIA, CLIDAMANT, THIMANTES.
THERSANDER by DIANAS body. O Lamentable object! why mine eyes
Were ye not covered with eternal darkness,
That J might not have seen this fatal spectacle?
Oh! what cause have I to complain of fortune,
That my sleep is not the last sleep of death?
In the night of the Grave I should take rest,
And not be tied to die thus all my life,
I should be there but dust, and this sad sight
Should not have martyred my heart and eyes.
Yes, my dear Mistress, sometime my delight,
Thy sight is now my greatest punishment,
And in this sad estate wherein I see thee,
Thou which were once my joy, art now my grief;
Thy body's but a trunk that gives me horror,
Thy head all over's smoking with thy blood,
The graces lodge no more there, I see death
In every place, where I saw love before:
How! do thou live no more then? have I lost thee
As soon as found thee? hopes born and destroyed
With an immortal love, fantosme of fortune
Which lasts good but a day, wealth too soon lost,
Brightness too soon put out, excessive joy,
To which so many plaints so soon succeed,
Why in that splend or wherewith all you flattered,
My name, did you promise so much unto me,
And give so little. Fair eyes, sometimes conquerous,
Whose lights are shut up in eternal night
In spite of all my prayers, call me not
From death unto the light; is it possible
That I can see here what Diana sees not?
No, no, I live no more since she is dead;
Yet my heart moves; but this last struggling is
But a small spark that is left behind, and shines
A little after death; it is but a vapor,
An exaltation, a wind, a sm^ak,
Last dying and last kindled; I am coming
To join with thee, object of my desire,
To give thee soul for soul, and sigh for sigh;
Death is my aid, my hope is but in her;
I will express that I am faithful to thee
In that, not able to survive thy fate,
I put my self into the arms of death.

CLIDAMANT. Madam, you see how great his torment is,
And whereunto your hatred has reduced him;
You see besides how far without proportion
Of the crime to the punishment, the power
Of your enchantment goes; these woods weep at it;
And these rocks which before heard no complaints,
Are pierced now with his cries, and become soft,
And sensible, the Echo likewise mourns,
And should you only, Madam, be without
Compassion for him.

MELISSA. Yes, without compassion;
Since he took pleasure always to displease me,
I Will please my self by a most just return
Jn my revenge, and never cease t'afflict him:
No, think not that J will incline to pity.
I Am too much injured to be pacified:
His sorrow makes my joy, and I am glad
To s^^ that by this famo^s punishment
I shall establish my authority.

THIMANTES. Diana's turn is now; see he revives
To weep her lover, and immediately
To follow him by the force of your Art:
Sad spectacle? hearken unto her grief,
And open your eyes, and heart to her complaints,
Diana upon Thersanders body.
DIANA. What, my dear Lover, art thou then but dust?
Alas! thy mouth wants speech, and thine eyes light.
But inspight of the plot which makes me sigh,
I have the happiness yet to lament thee:
Flow, flow, my tears, and pour upon this object
Torrents of flame, not water, there is nothing
So cold in the dark bosom of the Grave,
Which the fire of these Rivers cannot warm:
Yes, by my tears at last, my cries, my plaints,
Dear ashes, I will kindle you again,
Though cold now and extinguished like the Phoenix
I Will raise you up again by force of sights,
Which you shall Echo to me.

THIMANTES. Madam can you
Behold this sight, and not be moved at it?

DIANA. Love, can thou not answer to my desires*
Thou art a miracle thy self, and therefore,
Methinks, should do one: art thou in the world
No more a source of life? oh can thou not
Restore my lover to me, from whose arms
They 'ave ravished him; which of the Gods can call him
Back from the gates of death, if thou can not?
My dear Cleagenor, J pray thee, answer me
By these my tender sighs, by Celia's name;
How Is this! I can pronounce thy name, and mine
And yet, O Gods! thou answerest me nothing;
I see, alas! thy mouth and eyes still shut:
He Is dead, and these names cannot touch him now.
Love, since thou have no power to su^cour me
In that point as to make him live, at least
Make me to dye: I come, my faithful lover,
It is impossible I should survive thee;
I feel that my despair to enjoy thee here
Gives me to death; my heart has lost the spirits
Which made it move, J scarce can utter more:
Happy thy Celia, if her death could give
Thee life again, if thy sleep might have end
By mine, and if I could with all my blood
Redeem thine; J have done, my love is coming
To meet thy flame, and I expire upon thee
The rest of my sad soul.

CLIDAMANT. What! is your heart
Not touched yet with this object? are you still
Jnsensible of so much grief as she
Suffers by your means? oh! let pity yet
Disarm your anger, the Enchanted Lovers
Have suffered enough Nymph, break the charm*

MELISSA. Yes, I am touched at last, J must confess,
And really am sorry for the evil
Which they have drawn through their temerity
Upon themselves; but though their grief appeaseth
My anger now, the charm which I have made
J cannot undo; to tell you truly, Shepherds,
It is so strong that only a Divinity
Can break the chance on it; it is decreed by fate
That it shall last yet longer, and J cannot
Prevent it, though it be my proper work.

THIMANTES. How! cannot you prevent it? heavenly Gods.
What saying's this? no, no, you have not left
Your anger, but retain it still; and willing
To punish them, and to revenge your wrong,
Will make of them a lasting spectacle
Unto the eyes of all; and to excuse
Your self the better of this cruelty,
Would put it off to some Divinity;
But the Gods by our prayers and tears appeased,
Jnspight of your attempts, will stop your charms:
Yes, Madam, the great Gods condemn your plots,
They are the Sovereigns, and absolute Masters
Of destiny, we hope all things from them,
And that they will suffer crime no longer here
To reign and tyranize. Thou Goddess, which
Art in this place adored which hold fate,
And fortune in thy hands, which hate crime,
and whose cares keep the Shepherds that serve thee
In this delightful Island, look upon
The sad estate whereto love has reduced
Two miserable Lovers, whom the Nymph
Pursues with horrid cruelty to death
By fatal charms, destroy the power of them,
And render to this government again
The liberty to love, and to declare it.

Thunder and lightning. PARTHENIA. Ha! what a sudden flash of lightning's this,
That strikes mine eyes, and what a clap of thunder
Shakes all this place?

ISMENIA. With what a thick black cloud
The Sky is covered?

MELISSA. I believe Heaven trembles,
And its Arch opens; behold the Goddess
Descends, and makes sign, as if she would speak:
We must give audience.

SCENA Ultima.
The Goddess DIANA. DIANA. YOur prayers are heard, let nothing trouble you,
Fair Celia and her Lover both shall live
And love for ever, their afflictions
Are ended, and I have dissolved the charm,
No accident shall henceforth trouble them.
They stirred up pity in you, now they may
Make you to envy them; search all Records,
You Will find no subject equal to their love.

THERSANDER, to DIANA. By what enchantment is thy life restored?

DIANA, to THERSANDER. By what enchantment do thou live again?
The Goddess continues. I Will recompense their inexemplar virtues,
And pay the price of their affection;
To consummate their happy Nuptials,
I Will open my Temple, and assure you all
Of my protection. It Is my pleasure also
That the love of the Shepherd Clidamant
Be at the same time crowned with Hymen's honors,
And that he end his days with sweet Parthenia,
That henceforth he command in the Isle with her;
My justice has made choice of them to reign.
The Nymph I do degrade, she is too criminal,
And dispense you of your obedience to her;
I Will make the power of her Art unusefull;
And free this Island from all future fear,
And danger; but to save her from the Thunder
Of the offended Gods, I will recive her
Into my Temple, which shall be her Sanctuary.
Her Sex hath' long enough ruled the Province,
I Will change the order of its Government,
And henceforth it shall be under the power,
And wise administration of a Prince,
Which shall be of the blood of Clidamant
From father unto son.

Melissa seeing the Goddess to ascend. MELISSA. I confess Goddess,
You do me justice in approving crime
One makes himself a complice: without you,
The Gods, high Sovereigns, Masters, and disposers
Of destiny, would, sure, have punished me
With death; I go into your Temple now
To employ other charms, to wash away
My criminal defilements with my tears
To pray unto the immortal powers, whilst J
Have breath, and so disarm them at your Altars:
But to the end her law may be fullfill'd
In every point, Cleagenor, fail not
To love your Celia.

THERSANDER. O how redevable
Am I to your rare goodness?

MELISSA. Clidamant,
Enjoy what you deserve, accept Parthenia,
With her, the crown, and succeed happily
The rank which I freely resign unto you.

CLIDAMANT. You command still, and keep your Sovereign rank,
When the reign is conferred upon your blood;
And by all my respects, I shall express
That it is but in your name that I Will be Master.

PARTHENIA. Though Heavens* kind hand chooses a husband for me,
Since you allow him, I Will hold him of you,
And will possess no honor here, nor power,
But to express the more my service to you,
And my acknowledgements.

THIMANTES. Ismenia,
Must we not couple too?

ISMENIA. Yes, if the Goddess
Had said it; we will defer our marriage,
Till she descends again.

CLIDAMANT. Ismenia,
I command in this place now, and J will it.

ISMENIA. Since you will have it, I accept his vows
Of faithful service. If Melintus too
Has shaken of his jealousy, J must
Be reconciled with him..

MELINTUS. Well, J agree to 't,
Let us remain friends.

CLIDAMANT. Heaven has promised us
That we shall all be happy, let us go
Forthwith unto the Temple to conclude
This triple marriage, and henceforth we shall
Honor this day as a great Festival.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge the 5. for Scene I. read Scena I. page ibid. line the 5. for you, read
your. p. 48. l. 20. for bare, r. share. p. 69. l. 5. for my, r. thy. p. 74. l.
20. for loved, r. beloved. p. 99. l. 4. write in the margent Clidamant. p. 102.
l. 25. for nam r. flame. p. 96. l. 8. for exaltation, r. exhalation. p. 97. l.
2. for he, r. she.

THE AMOVROVS FANTASME TRAGI-COMEDY


THE AMOROUS FANTASME; A Tragi-Comedy.

By Sir William Lower Knight.

Amico Rosa, Inimico Spina.

LONDON: Printed for Fr. Kirkman at the John Fletchers Head over against the
Angel-Inn on the backside of St. Clements without Temple Bar, 1661.

TO HER HIGHNESS THE PRINCESS ROYAL.
MADAM,
IN presuming to dedicate this imperfect Piece to the most accomplished
Princess of the Earth, I confess to show much more ambition then discretion,
more rashness then solid reason and moderation; but seeing ordinarily that the
greatest Persons have the least pride, and the most charity, I cast my self
wholly upon your clemency, and fly the test of your judgment, which being so
exact, would doubly condemn me, first in the design it self, next in the
conduct, and consequence of it, as being a composition weak, and unworthy of so
high a Patronage. If it may serve to divert Your Highness in some vacant hour
when your sublime thoughts are suspended, I have the only end I aim at, and
shall glory in the honor and happiness to introduce some thing with the New
Year, which may give you the least satisfaction: My conclusion is a most
humble petition for pardon, and a favorable censure of the bold ambition,
which I have to entitle my self,

MADAM, Your Highness most humble, most obedient, and most Faithful Servant
WILLIAM LOWER.

PROLOGUE To the Court.
HA! what divine shapes strike mine eyes, and make
My tongue to faulter, and my limbs to shake,
Through a respestfull awe and reverence,
Which thus so strongly seyseth on my sense?
These are no Fantasmes, such as we present,
But true Divinities from Heaven sent
To grace our Earthly Theater; then I,
Who cannot stand before such Majesty.
Fall on my knee, and in this posture pray
I may be heard to speak before the Play:
Madam, to you then, from whose beauteous sight
Those lesser Stars derive their borro^ed light,
First I address me; and although I Am sent
From the proud Poet with a complement
To let you know that he protests and says
His Scenes will please, I cannot have that faith:
He sw^ares that he prepares a Piece so rich
In high conceptions, that it will bewitch
Your eyes and ears, a Banquet that may please
The Danity Pallats of the Deities:
Unheard of vanity! I cannot choose
But undeceive you, know it is an abuse,
You Will meet ^ith no feast here, since the chief dish
Which he presents, is neither flesh nor fish,
But a mere Fantasme, garnished like a coarse,
Larded, and served up with some love discourse,
Vnsolid matter flourishes of wit,
And airy fancies, in my judgment fit
But for the public Stage, not to appear
Within the verge of this illustrious Sphere,
Where nothing but the quintescence of wit
Should dare to enter: humbly I submit
To your transcendent judgment my advise,
And wish it may be found more rash then wise,
For daign t'applaud the Play, and I Am content
To suffer for it any punishment,
to Appease the Poett, whose rage will be hot
Upon my head, if you protect me not:
Auspitious Planets, rule this night, and shed
Sweet influences on your board and bed.
ACTORS.
CARLOS. Lover of Isabella, and Friend to Fabritio. CLARINA. Woman to Isabella.
FABRITIO. Lover of Climene. CLIMENE. Mistress to Fabritio, and to the Duke.
JACINTA. Woman to Climene. FERDINAND. Duke of Ferrara. VALERIO. Captain of the
Dukes Guards. ISABELLA. Sister to Fabritio. ALPHONSO. Father to Fabritio and
Isabella. LICASTES. Servant to Alphonso. CELIN. Servant to Carlos. GUARDS.
The Scene is at Ferrara.

THE AMOUROUS FANTASME. A TRAGI-COMEDY.
ACTUS PRIMUS.
SCENA PRIMA.
Carlos, Clarina, in a street. Carlos. ARt sure of it, Clarina? is it possible
That Isabella now is sensible
Of what I suffer for her, and resents
In my behalf the fire which her fair eyes
Have kindled in my heart?

Clarina. Sir, I assure you,
It Is an undoubted truth, which I received
From her own mouth.

Carlos. I Am much astonished
With a success so charming.

Clarina. For my part,
I wonder that you are astonished at it:
Is it so great a miracle, I pray you,
To see a Maid to chaung? we have a mind
Alternatelie to turn love into hatred,
Or hatred into love, such an effect
As this so common in our Sex, should not
Seem strange unto you: Isabella. is
Of age sufficient to feel the effect
Both of the fire she kindles, and o'th'evill
Which she procures; the end, Sir, of her coldness
Should not surprise you: who gives love, can easily
Take it again; and when a young heart never
Has loved any thing, at the first fire
That sparkles, it is inflamed; my Mistress is
As sensible as fair* you will be happy,
If you are faithful.

Carlos. But come thou by her order?

Clarina. To speak truly,
She willed me to speak as from my self;
But, Sir, your goodness is a gage that makes me
To tell you all, it is by her express order
That I have uttered this secret to you
Of such importance; but you must be silent
And discreet, if yov'll profit by the knowledge.

Carlos. But may I not at least acquaint her brother
With my good fortune? he is bound by friendship
To favor me, and I should do him wrong
To disguise any thing to him.

Clarina. Oh! Sir,
That Is it my Mistress, dreadeth, believe me,
Above all things: so far you must be from
Acquainting him therewith, that you should fear
Least he might have the least suspicion of it:
Know you not yet that her inhumane Father,
Will not permit her to give you her hand,
That to uphould the splendor of his house,
He Will raise his Son unto his Daughters cost,
And, (as it is often practiced now a days)
To the one designs his goods, and to the other
A Monastery?

Carlos. I know well that her Father
Has fuch a purpose, but though he be of
A nature so inhumane, sure, her brother
Is not so barbarous: we are tied together
By such fair bonds of friendship, that I know
He Will mix his interests with mine.

Clarina. If I
May frelie speak my thoughts here, I must tell you
That interest can break the strongest bonds,
That commonly men better keep their wealth
Then their fidelity, and that there is
No friend which they love equal with themselves
Be sure you trust no person now a days,
Danger still follows too much confidence:
The less a good is known, the sweeter it is:
Lastly Sir, keep your secretts to your self,
My Mistress does desire it.

Corlos. Oh! Clarina,
It is enough, there is no reason more
In this point to examine now, but I
Obey without dispute; the name of Friend
Must yield to that of Lover; but shall I
See our fair Mistress by thy means this evening?

Clarina. Sir, it is very late.

Carlos. I know thy skill.
And thou know -- puts gould in her hand.

Clarina. Yes, your liberalities.
I Will go t'advertise her, as you desire,
And presently return, if you will stay,
Either to bring you up, or to persuade her
To come down to you. -- Exit Clarina*

Carlos alone. Carlos. Oh how sweet it is
To mollify a hard and cruel heart!
How charming is Love, when it is mutual?
what high content, what ecstasy of joy
Feels a poor captive in his troubles, when
The hand that tames him, helps to bear his chains?
A good gain^d easily is not esteemed:
The more it costs, the more it is precious:
Although the Horizon's covered with darkness,
I easily discern the door to open;
Doubtless, it is Isabella, I Will advaunce.

SCENA SECUNDA.
Carlos, Fabritio. Carlos. My happiness is greater then I dared
To fancy is, I cannot express unto you,
By what soe'r endeavor I can use,
The fullnss of my passion and my joy.

Fabritio. Dear friend, I do beseech thee let us leave
Vain complements, I know shy goodness for me.

Carlos. Good God! how I Am confounded* it is her brother
Fabritio. -- aside.

Fabritio. Thou know then, it seems,
How highly fortune is propitious to me,
My mar^iage is concluded and agreed,
And thou come without doubt to wish me joy.

Carlos. Friend --

Fabritio. I Am certain, it is this that brings thee hither:
Thou will congratulate my happiness.

Carlos. How ready, and ingenious he is
To draw me out of trouble? -- aside

Fabritio. Thou comes to take part in my ravishment.

Carlos. Thou should do me a great wrong, to judge otherwise.

Fabritio. Know then that our desires did jump together:
I was a going hastily unto thee
To tell thee tbe glad News, I did believe
Thou knew'st it not, and did not think to be
Prevented, I am highly redevable
To thy rare friendship.

Carlos. I do nothing for thee
That is considerable, my interest
Alone brings me hither, and thou need'st not
To thank me for it.

Fabritio. How! what interest
Can thou have in this place?

Carlos. The same which friendship
Enjoyneth me to take in thy contents.
Between two faithful friends, such as we are,
Every thing should be common, joy and happiness
Possesse^h both, when one of them enjoyes it.
Know when I bear a part in thy good fortune,
I more oblige my self then thee, and am
So well paid for my care and tenderness,
That there needs no addition of thanks.

Fabritio. Know also of my part when Fortune does
Confer her favors on me, they are dubled
When Carlos shares therein, and would diminish
If he should not partake them; but who comes
So late forth of our house?

SCENA TERTIA.
Clarina, Fabritio, Carlos. Clarina addressing her self to Fabritio thinking
to speak to Carlos. Clarina. SIr, enter quickly;
My Mistress Isabella in her chamber
Expects you and will. --

Fabritio. How, what will she?

Clarina. Misfortune! it is Fabritio, I must
Dissemble. -- aside.

Fabritio. Well, what will she, finish now.

Clarina. Sir, she would speak with you,
To Express the joy whereto her love engages her
On the conclusion of your marriage.

Fabritio. I know her tenderness, and what I owe her;
Carlos and I will see her presently
To give her a good night.

SCENA QUARTA.
Climene, Iacinta, Carlos, Fabritio. Climene coming out of her house. Climene.
IT is Fabritios voice this which I hear,
I cannot come forth in a fitter time.

Carlos. I willingly wait on you, your desires
Are mine, you need not doubt them -- to Fabritio.

Fabritio. Let us enter.

Carlos. How this success favors my flame! -- aside

Fabritio stopped by Climeme. Fabritio. But who does stop me? Heaven! it is a
Woman,
It seems she Would speak with me Carlos stay.

Carlos. I wait you here.

Fabritio. How comes it she withdrawes
When I advaunce?

Carlos. Withour doubt she has something
To speak to you in private.

Fabritio. In the hope
Wherein I am that I am he you seek,
Be not offended that I dare t'approach:
I Have courage and civilitie enough
T'esteeme me fortunare if I could serve you:
T'engage me, Madame, to the offer which
I make to use my utmost cares and pains
T'accomplish your desires, it is sufficient
That Heaven has given you the advantage to be
Of that fair Sex unto which all owe homadge:
If I may notwithstanding without giving you
The least offense be honored to know
Your name, you will increase my Zeal in giving me
So fair a satisfaction.

Climene Take it then,
My dear Fabritio, and know Climene.

Fabritio. Climene, my fair Mistress, what occasion
Could bring thee here at such an hour as this?
Thou doublest my fear and perturbation;
The more thy voice assures me; the more
Uncertain am I: and so far am I
From coming forth of error, that I enter
Into new Labyrinths, and doubts, I was
More happy when I knew thee less; oh what
Design have thou, I cannot comprehend it?

CLIMENE. Climene. Leave me to speak, then, I will tell it thee.
I will not say what joy and happy rapture
Seized me when I understood the news,
That by a joint accord our friends and parents
At last had yielded to our marriage;
My love, which thou should not forget, exemps me
To discourse this unto thee, and enjoynes me
To a relation much more important*
And much less pleasing,

Fabritio. How* what thing is ther^
In nature that can trouble our repose,
Since as our hearts, our parents are agreed?

Climene. It Is of a longer date then from to day
That Love uses to mingle with his sweets
Much bitterness, those whom he flattereth
At first are seldom happy, his deceit
Is equal to his blindness, and like Fortune,
H'is constant only in inconstancy:
This is a truth, which thou shall but to sensibly
Conceive: one day which was the fatallest
Of all my life, wherein my father burdened
With age and sickness had the sorry honor
To be by the Du^e of Ferrara vissitted:
This Prince knew me in this extremity,
And thought to see some charms upon my pale
And blubbered face, mine eyes unluckily
Wept unto hIs, and from the sources of
My tears his flame took birth,

Fabritio. Oh Climene,
I fear --

Climene. That fear offends me; my heart wholly
Was thine, I gave it thee, and the Dukes passion
Stirred up in me nothing but my aversion:
Though I concealed this fire, thou have no cause
To complain at it, for before it was known,
I hoped to quench it, and I scarce should yet
Reveile it to thee, if thy interest
Obliged me not to speak: on the report
Which was spread of our marriage, the passion
Of the Duke was converted into rage;
He came unto me in his first transport,
Swear to me solemnly that my choice was
The sentence of thy death, that Love opposing
My punishment, he thought to do more in
Destroying what I loved; and to the end
He might with the more rigor punish me,
He would even to the bottom of thy heart
Go for to seek me: Lastly knowing well
That his desire is to assault my life
In threatening thine, conducted here by love,
And more by fear, I come to conjure thee
To Avoid his fury; fly hence, what soever
Care for me keeps thee back here, and to save
My life, preserve thine.

Fabritio. This discourse is cruel
As much as it appears sweet: should you
Advice me to absent me from your person?
Sure I should little know what it is to love,
To Obey you in this point: Come, come, say all,
Confess your love is changed, that my remains
Of hope must vanish, and that the Dukes flame
Has dazzled you, I see well that mine here
Is troublesome, that you abandon Love
To follow Fortune, and that poor Fabritio
With all his fetters pleases your fair eyes
Less then a crowned Captive: I condemn not
This signal rigor; you deprive me of
A happiness whereof I was not worthy,
And in receaving of a Scepter offered
Unto your beauties, you obtain much less
Then you deserve. Reign, nothing is dishonorable,
To gain a diademne; and as I love you
More then my self, I shall esteem my death
A fair design, if entering into
A tomb, I leave you in a throne,

Climene. Fabritio,
Can thou love me, and speak thus? reallie
Thou detract'st from my glory in this thought
That I can be unfaithful, bannish it,
It is thy enemy and mine; suspicion
Between us two should be a hideous monster;
Can thou be ignorant with any justice,
That I love less a scepter then Fabritio,
And find more joy in being captive with thee
To reign over thy heart, then ore the universe?

Fabritio. It is enough, Climene, my devout
And a mourous soul, which ever must adore thee
Although thou should abuse it, would believe thee:
And though a lie carries a swarthy face,
In issu^^g from thy mouth it would have charms;
But how comes it to pass that when thy sweetness
For my sake flies a crown, thou do ordain me
To depart, and to leave thee? how to leave thee.
And in a Rivalls power to! no, this remedy
Is Worse then the disease. Suffer my presence,
Or suffer my despair, what matter is it
Whether the Duke, or absence kill Fabritio

Climene. When two inevitable dangers meet
To invade us at once, it is wisdom still
To think of the most pressing, here thy ruin
Is certain, being absent, thou can live;
Consider this, that to what punishment
Soer our love exposes thee, thou can not
Suffer but I must suffer too, nor dye,
But I must cease to live, for know absuredlie
My days shall finish with thy destiny;
When we are dead, the grave shall be a wittnes
Of our reunion? where I see thee not
No object pleases me; if thou art yet
Incredulous of words and protestations,
At least believe my tears.

Fabritio. Oh open not
Those precious sluices, keep that treasure in;
Increase not my affliction with thy grief:
Not all the blood which tunneth in my veins
Is worth the least drop of these liquid pearls,
The evils wherewith my life is thretened
Are too well paid with a single tear.

Climene. Oh leave those vain discourses, and depart.

Fabritio* Well, well, Climene, I must then obey.

Climene. I have as much cause here to be afflicted,
As satisfied, I fear more thy departure
Then wish it, and I give my faith unto thee,
That thou should not depart, if I could keep thee
And expose but my self. Let Us separate;
But what! this fatal image robs me
Already of my strength, spare me, I pray thee,
In parting hence the danger here to dye
In bidding thee adieu. -- Exit Climene.

Fabritio. Climene flies me;
O lamentable destiny!

SCENA QUINTA.
Carlos, Frabitio. Carlos. FRiend, comfort thee.

Fabritio. I am inconsolable,
And must die, Carlos, since I must absent me.

Carlos. Thou shall be happier, if thou will hear me,
I have a means that thou shall not depart,
And yet, in safety too, shall see Climene,
Alone, and without trouble.

Fabritio. To abuse
Thy friend, is but an odd way, in my judgment,
T'assist him, it is to aggravate my evil,
And not to heal it: is there any art
To render me invi^ible?

Carlos. For once then
Believe that I will do for thee a thing
Which seems impossible, give me leave to speak
And in a moment thou shall lose ^hy grief,
And thy astonishment: Thou know well
That Italy has for a certain time
Been troubled with two factions, whose partakers
In every city name themselves a loud
The Guelps and Gibelins: on this occasion
My Father and Climen^s against each other
Took an immortal hatred; through their credit
And their condition, each made himself
Head of a faction; the Duke receiving
Advertisement thereof, and apprehending.
The issue of this enmity, so strongly
Conceived, made them both to be arrested,
Not without, reason, and confined them
As prisoners, each one to his own house.
My Father who saw his pretension vain,
Knowing his house was near unto the others,
Had recourse unto cunning, and believed
That every thing was lawful to destroy
The greatest of his enemies; to work then
His ruin, and in private too, he caused
A close Mine to be dug even underneath
His adversaries garden; being finished,
My Father fell sick, and soon after dyed;
I was, as thou know by the right of birth
Heir of his goods, and not of his revenge;
But though I should now have a hatred for
Climene, I should sacrifice it wholly
Unto thy love; in opening this Mine.
Thou may, without being seen, have easy access
Unto thy Mistress, and to execute it
Securely, we will make all men believe
That thou art gone.

Frabitio. How infinitlie am I
Indebted to thee? how shall I acquit me?

Carlos. My friendship is offended very much
At these expressions of acknowledgments.
I Will to the Duke expreslie t'understand
What his intentions are concerning thee.
Enter into my house. -- Exit Carlos.

Fabritio. I Will go t'impart
This secret to Climene. But what hear ^?

SCENA SEXTA.
The Duke, Val^rio, Fabritio. Iacinta, Guards. Duke. Do that which I
commanded.

Valerio knocks, at the door of Climenes house. Fabritio. It Is the Duke.
Rage overcomes my reason.

Duke. What aversenes
Soe'r Climene has unto my flame
Some little hope yet flattereth my soul,
I Have gained her woman; who has promised
This night to bring me p^ivatelie into
Her chamber, the door opens, Iacintae!

Iacinta coming from Climene. Iacinta Yes every thing succeeds to your wish,
My Mistress is deceived and takes you for
Fabritio, she commanded me to open
Without delay, her order does excuse me
In letting you to enter, lose no time;
But I hear her descend, speak not a word,
Without doubt, she will mistake her self.

Duke. We will
Be cleared therein, let us approach a little.

SCENA SEPTIMA.
The Duke, Climene, Fabritio, Iacinta, Valerio, Guards. Climene addressing her
self to the Duke and thinking to speak to Fabritio. Climene. WHat would
thou, my dear Lover?

Fabritio. a, dear Lover!
Heavens! what is this I hear!

Climene. I have cause, reallie,
To complain of thee, could thou not one night
At my request refrain my company?
Yet I excuse thee upon this presumption
That who loves well is little Master of
Himself, and cannot deny but my charmed soul
Complains here but of being too much loved.

Fabritio. May I believe this? Heaven! am I enchanted?

Climene. Thou need'st not doubt this truth; when I would be
Angry against thee, suddenly I check
My self, and when my mouth accuses thee,
My soul defends thee.

Duke. Fortunate Fabritio -- aside

Fabritio. O happy Rival! -- aside.

Climene. Thou do know my love.

FABRITIO. I knew it ill. -- aside

CLIMENE. What! answearest thou nothing?
Doubts thou my flame, or fearst thou that another
More pleasing object drives thee from my soul?
What ever happens, rest thy self assured
That my love and my life shall have one course*
And that it is impossible for me
No more to love thee.

DUKE. How unhappie am I? -- aside.

FABRITIO. How miserable am I? -- aside.

CLIMENE. What obliges thee
To murmur still thus to thy self? must I
Confirm my love unto thee by some oaths?
If my flame for thee make not all my glory,
If thou alone possessest not my heart,
And all my thoughts, let --

FABRITIO. Swear not ingrate full and perfidious Woman,
It needeth' not, I do believe thy words.

DUKE. Thy death shall soon follow thy insolence:
My Guards.

Fabritio flying. FABRITIO. It is in vain to make resistance.

Valerio and the Guards go after Fabritio. DUKE. Pursue, and kill him.

IACINTA. Alas! I Am dead with fear.

CLIMENE, I faint, I faint, Iacinta, hold me up.

Duke. Let him dye, it is but just, too great a merit
Is often a great crime, in ruining
This Rival, I may gain what I desire;
And if he perish not, my hope must perish:
Let Us see if the success answeareth my wish.

SCENA OCTAVA.
Valerio, The Duke, Iacinta, Guards. Valerio. OH, Sir, it is done, he is dead, in
vain he did
Endeavor to defend himself, he fell
Pierced with a thousand mortal strokes, his soul
Found overtures enough to sallie forth
His bloody body, covered o'r with wounds

Iacinta. Oh! stay Sir. --

Coming forth of Climenes house. Duke. Thy cares are superfluous.
I am revenged, Iacinta, and Fabritio
Is dead.

Iacinta. Oh if you love Climene, enter not
Into the house, she is scarce recovered yet
Of a great faintnes which seis^d on her spirits.

Duke. The blood which I have shed, will cost her tears,
I will not go, to add unto her griefs,
But retire me, a while, in the mean time,
Valerio, let it be your charge to go
Unto Fabritios Father, to acquaint him
With his sons death, and further let him know
That for his rash and saucy insolence,
He has received but a just recompense.

The End of the first Act.
AGTVS SECVNDVS
SCENA PRIMA.
Isabella, Clarina, In a Chamber. Isabella. WHo enters there?

Clarina. Madame, it is Valerio,
Who from the Duke Discourses with your Father

Isabella. What pressing business might bring him here?

Clarina. To tell you, I should be a Prophetess.

Isabella. A message at this hower's not ordinary.

Clarina. It does appear as strange to me, as you.

Isabella. Let us expect the issue on it, and change
Discourse.

Clarina. You feign would have me speak of Carlos;
Madame, confess it.

Isabella. I cannot deny
But I am pleased, when I hear him prays^d.

Clarina. I should not be in my right sense if I
Should speak ill of him, he is a brave man,
And of a Liberal and obliging nature,
He merits much.

Isabella. But in what manner did he enrertaine
The intelligence thou gav'st him that my humor
Toward him was inclined to more sweetness,
And rhat my heart at last disposed it self.
To love him?

CLARINA. With transports, and ecstasies,
Which cannot be expressed.

ISABELLA. Have thou been careful
To tell him cunningly, according to
Those rules I gave thee, that to do him service
Thou did betray thy Mistress, and gav'st him
That notice without my consent?

CLARINA. Yes, Madame
I told him so, and very handsomely;
But your strange love surpriseth me, you fear
that he should know it, and yet tell it him:
If he less knew it, would you be more pleas^d?
What humourous fancies are in Lovers spirits?

ISABELLA. Though I love Carlos, (be it reason, or
Fancy that guides me) I believe I do
My self wrong, when I do justice to him;
The bashfulnes which Heaven has put into
Our Sex, for bids us to be free in what
Concerns the point of love, nor must we think
any thing lawful in relation to it:
And by that power, which I know not my self,
I cannot without blushing say, I love:
It seems that our eyes made to tame hearts,
When those that were our captives do become
Our conquerours, although they find the dart
Lovely and charming that subjected us,
Cannot without some shame, behold this change
The art to despise love, my heart no longer
Can practice, but o Heaven! whom see I Carlos?
So late here in my chamber.

SCENA SECUNDA.
CARLOS, ISABELLA, CLARINA. CARLOS. PArdon me
This bold intrusion, seeing the door open,
I could not but lay hold of the occasion;
And following my love, I thought I might
With out offending you with disrespect
Enter, to cast my self at your fair feet.

ISABELLA. How fancy you that I can be so little
Respectfull of my honor, as to suffer
A vissit from you without being offended?
No, Sir, your hope deceives you, and this liberty
You take, denotes in you little love,
Or too much Vanity; can I believe
You love me well, in giving to your self
A license thus to make foul-mouthed detraction
In veigh against me, or can you imagine,
Without great folli^ in your self, that I
Can approve this design so little modest,
And not b'offended at it?

CARLOS. Though I can
Produce some reason here for my defense,
I hold me criminal, since I offend you,
And should but little profit to persist
In the opinion of my innocence
When your fair mouth condemns me,

ISABELLA. I condemn you,
It Is very true, and for your punishment
I bannish you; you must go forth.

Carlos. I dare not
Appeal upon your sentence, but retire;
I obey with regreet, but without murmur.

Isabella. How Sir, begone so soon, what motives pray you,
Induce you thereunto?

Carlos. Since you ordain it
I must depart, it is fit that I obey you.

Isabella. I should think, Carlos, that you obey here
Some what too quickly for a perfect Lover:
Believing that you loved me, I appeared
Too proud, and scornful: it is an assured maxim.
That one loves coldly what he quitteth easily;
Love is but il expressed by respects;
Who readily obeyes, knows not to love

Carlos. I am astonished at this discourse;
Can you Complain, I quit you, Isabella,
When I obey you against my sentiment
When my love glittereth in my submission,
And when by a kind heat, which is not common,
My happiness displeases me, when it
Offends you? what would you then have said,
If seeking only my own sa^isfaction,
I had preferred my desires and wishes
Before yours? in what manner can I please you,
If in obeying you, I anger you?

Isabella. You argue too well for a man in love.
Where love is strong, reason is impotent;
The one cannot be established, whilst the other
Subsists; sometimes a maid would be resisted,
And obstinately loved against her consent;
And as her close desires are very seldom
Express d, she often speaks with intent
To meet a contradiction, and to be
Enforced unto that which she desires:
According to this maxim, possibly,
I have on this occasion discoursed
Conrrarie to my sentiment, and perhaps,
I should be so far from believing me
Injured thereby, that you would have obliged me,
In not obeying me.

Carlos. I Am raped in pleasant wonder, if those words
Astonish me, they charm me more; if I
Must stay to please you, nothing is more easy,
Then to content you fully in that point:
Seeing obedience is not pleasing to you;
I will stay, Madame, and will not obey.

Isabella. It is too late; begone, my mind is changed;
Occasion is lost as soon as' passed;
You would have too much pride, and I should have
Too little, if after such a confession
I should detain you here.

Carlos. This order is
Severe and rigourous.

Isabella. But it is just:
I love not always to be disobeyed.
Follow Clarina, go, and have a care
You be not seen. O Heaven! I hear my Father.

Clarina. Alas* we are undone; perhaps, he doubted
Of your intelligence, enter forthwith
Into this closet.

SCENA TERTIA.
Alphonso, Clarina, Isabella. ALPHONSO. Oh Daughter, daughter!

ISABELLA, He appears furious. -- aside.
I read my sad misfortune in his eyes.

ALPHONSO Can I live after such high injuries?

ISABELLA. What is the Matter, Sir?

ALPHONSO. How! demandest thou?
Do thou not plainly see in the excess
Of my quick griefs, that I am burthered with
The greatest of misfortunes?

ISABELLA. What misfortune.
Oh! Father?

ALPHONSO. Isabella, Isabella,
I must no more be called by that name.

ISABELLA. I feigned in vain, it is best to confess all.

ALPHONSO. O fatal chang, Heaven, who could'er have thought it?

ISABELLA. Sir, I beseech you, hear me

ALPHONSO. What would thou
That I should hear, I know now but to well
What that love costeth me which takes pleasure
In blood and tears, and hides deadly poisons,
When it shows flowers.

Isabella. I confess --

Alphonso. Oh how often.
Our expectations are deceived, in'wishing
Children, we wish troubles, and punishments.

Isab. If his death

Alph. Yes, his death is certain,

Isabella. Suffer
That by my tears --

Alphonso. Thou sheddest them in vain.

Isabella. Father, revenge is easy.

Alphonso. But alas?
What should I enterprise against the Duke?

Isabella. The Duke? What say you?

Alphonso. Art thou ignorant,
That my son by his order received death?

Isabella. I know it not; oh miserable destiny?

Alphonso. Valerio from him brought me the sad news,
And would enforce me to agree with him,
That he in killing him did not unjustly:

Isabella. What cruelty is this? wast not enough,
Through an unjust and barbarous constraint,
To forbid you a just revenge, but even
To complain of the injury?

Alphonso. True, Daughter;
To punish yet my son after his death,
They will I understand it, and not murmur:
It seems they have a mind, that I should go
To kiss the hand that murthets me, as being
Stained, and smoking yet writh my sons blood.

Isabella. But S^r, consider in this sad conjuncture,
That my dear Brothers body does expect
Interment.

Alphonso. Yes, I have took care for that,
By order from me it is to be brought
To this apartement.

SCENA QUINTA.
Licastes, Alpbonso, Isabella. Clarina. Licastes. THe death, Sir, of your son
is but to certain
W'ave brought his body into the next chamber.
Some little distance from this place we found it
Stripped, and so much disfigured with wounds,
That we should not have judged it to be his,
If seeking carefully we had not found
His coat not far of, and a little further
His hat^^ The thing which troubles me most
In this misfortune is, that having made
A fruitles search all over for the rest
Of his habillements, I could not find
Any one of them, and can not imagine
Who should have taken them thence.

Alphonso. Unhappy Son
Of an unfortunate Father!

Licastes. Sir, you may
From hence see this sad object, if you please
To cause that curtain to be drawn aside. aside

Alphonso. Draw it, Licastes, let me see my sorrow;
We would be private, every one retire.
The curtain is drawn, and he sees upon a bed a murdered body. I cannot in
this Lamentable object
Discern one feature of my Son, and scarce
Will my confusion give me leave to know
Him whom I have begotten, lying thus
In such a mangled condition.
Son, if it may be lawful in the sad
Estate wherein our miseries have put us
For me to use that name sometime so sweet,
I must then say unto thee, that this spectacle
Makes me to feel thy wounds more sensibly
Then thou thy self did when thou did receive them:
Thy miserable destiny and mine
Differs not much, the blood which thou shed'st is
The purest in my veins, the arm whose rigor
Hasted thy death, gave not the fatal stroke
Through thy heart, but it entered in my bowels:
And if we differ any thing in such
A miserable fortune, it is in this,
That I still feel the pressing evils, which thou
Suffer no more, Sources of my afflictions,
Deep wounds, which appear now but bloody mouths,
Whose silent accents seem here to solissit
My arm to a reveng, know that a subject
Houlds not his Sovereigns fate between his hands:
In vain ye ask reveng' against such a blood;
Alas here I can offer you no other,
But what my heart makes to flow from mine eyes.

Isabella. The cruelty of the Duke, Sir, should be punished.

Alphonso. He is my Prince, although in my concernement
A tyrant, subjects destinies depend
Upon their Sovereigns, a crime becomes
Just in their hands; and if at any time
Those earthly Gods ought to be punished',
It must be by a thunder bolt from Heaven:
In this case I should make but vain attempts.
If the Duke dye, shall my Son live again?
But what chance brings Clarina here in such
Distracted haste?

SCENA QUINTA.
Clarina, Alpbonso, Isabella. Clarina. Oh Signeur, oh Madame! --

Alphonso. What ails thee, art thou mad?

Clarina. Oh, I have seen --

Alphonso. what have thou seen that troubles thee so much?

Clarina. I have seen, I have seen --

Alphonso. What have thou seen?
Speak, I conjure thee.

Clarina. Since then I must speak it,
I Have seen a dead man walk.

Alphonso. The ast lost thy reason.

Clarina. Nothing's more true, that fearful Fantasme follows
My steps, I hear him, he pursues me; save me.

Isabella. It is my Brother --

Alphonso. Straung! It is my Son.

SCENA SEXTA.
Alphonso, Fabritio, Isabella. Alphonso. Son, is my soul sure, or am I
deceived,
Is this but an illusion which I see
But a vain object formed by my fancy?
If so, finish my life here with my error?
May thou yet be in the number of the living?
Fabritio, is it thy body that I see
Or is it thy shadow? come thou to fill me
With joy, or with affright? come satisfy me,
Let me embrace thee.

Fabritio. I see the light, Sir, and I find here charms,
Since you esteem my life at such a rate
As to lament it lost; not but as injured
By love and fortune, they should not do to me
A favor to deprive me of the light;
But though they should oblige me very much,
In the condition wherein my soul
Is now, to quench my feirce flame with my blood,
And though my blood thus shed would make my fortune,
More sweet, I would conserve it, since it is yours.

Alphonso. How comes it that thou have so strong a hatred
For life? thou can not doubt Climenes love;
The passion of the Duke alarumes thee
Too much; if thou love much, thou art no less
Beloved.

Fabritio. A fair appearance oftentimes
Bears false wittnes, I assured my self
Too much of her fidelity, and though
I could doubt the report my senses made me,
I have too sure a testimony of her
Perfidiousnes, since her own mouth confirmed it:
She entertained in amourous discourse
My happy Rival with so passionate
An air, that I forgate both my respect
Unto the Duke, and the care of my life,
In uttering my despite; the Duke possessed
Strongly with love and hate, gave express order
Unto his Guards to kill me; but I knowing
That my defense then was unprofitable,
Under a dark porch sought my sanctuary,
Whilst an unfortunate stranger walking that way
They took to apprehend me in the dark,
Was suddenly environed with the Guards,
And peirced through with halbards. as soon as
Those murderers were gone, to draw my life
Out of such hazards, and to make this error
More probable, I took the bloody clothes
Of that deplorable body, and was ready
To leave it mine, having cast his into
The current of the river, when a noise
Of voices crossing my design, I was
Constrained to leave that body naked and
Without life, to come speedily to you*
And to advertise you of this event.

Alphonso. I fear the issue of this blessed succsse;
Know that the Duke boasts of thy death already,
He thinks it just, which makes me to judge
That thy preserved life is still in danger;
If thou desire to obey thy Father,
Stay not a minute here, but seek thy safety
In sudden absence.

Fabritio. But What! must I leave
Climene?

Alphonso. She has left thee, her example
Shows thee the way to infidelity;
If to betray a person that does love us
Be a base act, to love one that betrays us,
Is no less weakness.

Fabritio. I am still a Lovet,
Though an abused Lover, and she has.
More beauty then injustice, her crime puts
No fearful object in her eyes and countenance.
Although she cease to love, she cease not
To be beloved, and my heart charmed by her,
Deceives it self, if it thinks to be able
To hate her, though she has betrayed it.

Alphonso. I find that absence is the only remedy
For this disease, it is fit thy passion yield
To my desires; fly through obedience,
Or through resentment, oh assure thy safety
By thy remove, it is that which I desire.

Fabritio. And which I fear.

Alphonso. That matters not.

Fabritio. But Sir --

Alphonso. But I command it thee: for fear to be
Perceived, go forth without attendance and
Without noise unto Carlos house, and there
Pass the rest of the night; to morrow early
Before the day break, take the way to Florence,
Where I have many Friends that will defend thee.
In the mean time I Will send thee by a friend
A horse and money for thy journey; haste.

Fabritio. My Sister.

Alphonso. Add not to my misery
By sad regretts: be gone, be gone; adieu;
Let me embrace thee, I deprive my self
Of my most dear support, but though I lose thee,
It Is with intent to save thee. -- Exit Fabritio.

SCENA SEPTIMA.
ALPHONSO, ISABELLA. Isabella. By what cruelty
Banish you my dear Brother?

Alphonso. Isabella,
Thou speak like a Sister, and I act
As Father, it is far more pleasing to me
To have an absent Son, then none at all:
I will deceive the Duke by taking of
His unjust pursuit against his life, when he
Shall fully understand his death: I will
To morrow that my house be all in mourning,
That this corpse be interred for my Son;
And to the end that all Ferrara be
Deceived with the Duke, I Will honor it
With funeral pomp, this is a debt we owe.
Unto a blood, whose loss has conserved ours,
Although we had no furthet use of it.
Lastly --

SCENA OCTAVO.
Fabritio, Alphonso, Isabella. Fabritio. SIr --

Alphonso. What is it that troubles thee?

Fabritio. I met the Duke, Sir, at our door, he followed
A torch, which might, perhaps, discover me,
I hear noise, he pursues me, oh receive him,

Alphonso. O duty too unjust! cruel constraint!
Go quickly with thy Sister Isabella
Into that closet.

Isabella. He goes to Carlos house, what shall I do?

Fabritio. Come along with me, what should hinder you?

Isabella. I fear you should be seene^, and there fore would
That the light might be put out in this place.

Fabritio. I contradict not, les us enter then.

SCENA NONA.
Carlos coming out of the closet. Carlos. They are both entered, I must
quickly forth:
Fortune no longer seems to be contrary
To my designs; the way is free; but what!
I hear the Fathers voice: oh how unhappie
Am I?

SCENA DECIMA.
The Duke, Valerio, Alphonso, Carlos, Guards. Duke. ALphonso, I am not deceived,
Your sone is Living, I have seen him: having
Understood, that Climene in a soowne
Fainted, being careful of so fair a life,
And guided by my love, I went unto
Her house, where happily I saw your son:
I ^now that she adores him, and dare say
That her disease will Vanish, if he Lives:
Lastly I wish it, and am come of purpose
To be informed cleerelie of this truth.

Alphonso showing the Duke the body which is upon the bed. Alphonso. SIr, you
may easily be cleerd herin;
Behold my son, judge if his loss be certain:
You feared him living, do not fear him dead.
See, his congealed blood smoaks at your presence?

Duke. It is too much I Am fully satisfied
That he is dead; but what did Carlos here
Without light?

Carlos, To secure my Friend, I must
Feign hand somlie -- aside,

Duke. He seems to be astonished.

Carlos. Sir, it is not without cause that I am so.
For coming here to understand the news
of my dear Friend Fabritios destiny,
As Soon as I entered that open chamber,
His Ghost appeared before me in a posture
So dreadful, that I tremble to think on it:
He had the figure of a fearful Fantasme,
His bosom was opened with a large wound,
His color pale, and all his body bloody.
He came toward me with a staggering pace,
And darted forth a look though languishing
Yet feirce; a bleak, and black blood issued
Out of his mouth, and in his eyes grim death
Walked the round.

Duke. I also saw just now
Fabritios shape, but much less horrible,
Me thought he was alive.

Carlos. I dare engage
My credit, that your Highness saw his shadow
As Well as I.

Duke. It Is that which does confound me.
I still held for a fable what the vulgar
Report, of vain ghostes, and could not imagine
That a spirit once departed from a body,
Should leave the dead to come among the living,
Cease to be simple, and be visible,
Having no more a body. Notwithstanding
This success startles me, I could not think it,
And now I cannot doubt it. But adieu,
I see your grief increases by my presence.

Alphonso. Sir, I wait on you.

Duke. I know what is a Farher, and that nature
Will not allow him to pay homadges
To him that robbs him of a Son -- Exit Duke.

Alphonso. How highly --
Am I indebled to you for this favor? - To Carlos

Carlos. It is not great; twere requisite Fabritio
Should instantly betake him to my house,
From whence he may unseene make his escape,
I Will go unto the Duke now, to confirm him
Yet stronger in his error. -- Exit Carlos.

SCENA UNDECIMA.
Alfonso, Fabritio, Isabella. Alphonso. Go, and choose
Florence to morrow for retraite.

Fabritio. Sir --

Alphonso. Let me
Receive no more replies, do what I bid thee,
All my desires should be strong laws to thee,
Adieu, let me give thee the last embrace.

Isabella. Sir, notwithstanding all your care, I fear
My brother cannot submit himself unto
This severe order; by his last discourse
I comprehended too well that he loves
Climene still after all her contempts,
And that his blinded soul is still resolved
To lose all, rather then to lose her sight.

Alphonso. I will be satisfied heerin, and know
The means to do it, fail not thou to morrow
Toward the evening to go to Climene:
The evil, that has surprised her, invites thee
Unto this Duty; for my part, I will
Make Carlos a vissit at that time:
If my son stays, I doubt not but to find him
In one or to there house; but it is late,
Adieu, in humane Fortune give unto thee
As much rest, as I have unquietnes,
And trouble at my heart. -- Exit Alphonso.

Isabella. Las! mine does bleed
with double grief* though the first wound be hid,

The End of the Second Act.
ACTVS TERTIVS,
SCENA PRIMA.
The Duke, Iacinta, in Climenes Garden. Iacinta. THis is the Garden, Sir, where
presently
My mistress comes to walk her melancholy:
The grief she takes for her Lovers loss,
And her decayed health distracts her judgment;
Although the danger of her malady
Be great, she walks, and would even fly herself.
Be you assured her griefs will suddenly
Conduct her here to weep her sad misfortunes,
And you may see her without witnesses,
And without trouble, if your Highness please
To fetch a turn or two in this close Alley.

Duke. Thy care augments my trouble, not my hope;
I burn, and fear to see her equally:
I burn to see her when I represent
Unto my amourous soul a charming Image
With all its beauties, and I fear to see her,
When my sad fancy represents unto me
The rigor of those fair offended eyes:
It Is an undoubted truth, I fear to see
That fair afflicted one to reproach me
The evils wherein my flame has plunged her,
To say that hatred is the only fruit
Of my addresses, and that with my Rival
My spirit is destroyed.

Iacinta. Your Highness, Sir
Should be prepared against the bloody taunts
Of a beblubbered Mistress: to speak truly,
And not to flatter you, I cannot see
The least hope that she will be wrought to love you
By this sweet way you take; I should advise you
Unto another course, make use of force,
Where kindness cannot work; ravish a good,
Which is denied to you; take her hence,
Who is so foolish and so rigourous,
And force her to be happy against her will.

Duke. How, take her hence by force? oh no, I cannot
Consent unto it, force can never be
Compatible with love, I would be loved
Without constraint, and cherished with out fear,
So far would her disdain be by this means
From ceasing, that it would take deeper root,
As having juster ground to propagate.

Iacinta. Your reasons are not altogeither lawful;
Our Sex, Sir, has strange maxims, oftentimes
It feels not what it does express, and seldom
Loves Deaths fatal wracks, after a fortune
Of such a nature, love in woman's heart
Turns unto grief, and that grief vanishes:
Her oaths and cries are of no consequence,
Her passion dies, when the object is no more.
Perhaps, Climene at this very hour,
Feels that ambition from loves ashes springs
Within her heart, and that she is prepared,
In spite of her just mourning to proferre
The glorious possessour of a throne
Before the sad inhabitant of a tomb
And, possibly, wearied with her affliction,
She would be forced to embrace your love.

Duke. To take her hence, and force her unto marriage,
Are the last means which I will try; before
I use toward her the least violence*
I Will see her.

Iacinta. Sir, she comes there.

Duke. How she studies,
And how her slow uncertain pa^es speak
The violent troubles of her spirit, her palenes
Depaints her grief.

Climene. Leave me alone, and pass
Into that alley.

SCENA SECVNDA,
Climene, Iacinta, The Duke. Iacinta. Madame, --

Climene. Once again
I say I will be private for a minute;
Retire, and leave me to my self.

Iacinta. But if
The Duke. --

Climene. Be gone, and speak no more of him,
His name is odious to me.

Duke. How unfortunate
Am I?

Iacinta. I told you, sweetness would do nothing
Upon that stubborn spirit.

Duke. I will follow
Thy counsel, let us speedily go forth,
My presence would increase her cruelty.

Iacinta. For fear you should be seen, be pleased to stay
Till she goes in; till when I cannot hand sonelie
Draw you from hence; in the mean time your Highness
May in those shadie walks divert your sadness.

SCENA TERTIA.
Climene alone. Stanzas. THou which they say can with facility
Act what includes impossibility,
Blind Guide, false Child which can have no pretense
At all unto the state of innocence,
Tyrant of hearts, Love, which have boasted still
That Death submitts unto thy power and will.
Make her to know that she muade^ thy right
In robbing my Fabritio of the light
And cause him to return again, or give
Me passeport the Shades where he does live.
The sweetest objects that now strike mine eyes,
Increase the number of my miseries,
The Suune tells me Fabritio's but a shade,
The Lillies at his loss look black and fade,
Those Rose, Queen of the flowers, seems to be
Stained with my Lovers blood, and neepes with me.
Dear Lover, thou sad object of my cries,
Whose image still dwells in my heart and eyes,
Rep^oach me not that I live yet to mourn,
After thy ashes sleep in their cold vrne,
Death without doubt ere now had joined me
To thy sad shadovv, if I could agree
That thou should dye within my heart, oh no
I cannot leave th'y adored Image go.
Thy cruel Rival when he murdered thee
In his conceit, mistook, and murdered me:
His furte was deceived, not satisfied,
In cutting of thy days, Climene dyed,
The Duke betrayed his vows, for I expire
In thy cold ashes, Thou liv^st in my fire.
Climene. What Is that I say, Thou live in my fire,
Thy living Image is carved in my soul;
But those immortal characters, alas!
Which flatter me, are dead Fabritios.
Unjust and rigourous fate, was it reasonable,
That death should sease him so near marriage?
But why dispute I in such great misfortunes?
I Will suffer my sad sighs, fotbid my tears,
And to enuenome my affliction,
I Will cease complaint, nourish my sorrow, and
By prudent cares for fear to weaken it,
I Will strengthen it within, I Will signalize
My griefs by silence better then by speech.
When one has lost all who complains, receaves
A kind of comfort, therefore I Will for bear;
Yes, my dear Lover, to deplore thy death
In stronger terms then plaints and exclamations
But what! I hear a fearful noise beneath me?
A noise under the Stage. It seems that to join me to Fabritio
A sudden thunder does prepare it self
To come forth from the center of the earth:
The noise redoubleth, and renewed strokes
Makes me believe that underneath my feet
They dig graves, I perceive the flowers to fall
The plants to be unrooted, the most settled
And firmest oaks to tremble; it is time
To fly hence, but I cannot, fear for bids me;
Heaven! the disorder grows, and the earth cleaves
Fabritio comes forth thence, my strength fails here,
And I am almost dead with fear and weakness.

SCENA QVARTA.
FABRITIO CLIMENE. Fabritio coming out the Mine. Fabritio. THanks unto Carlos,
and in spite of destiny,
I hope to see Climene in this garden
But to conceal the means on it I must cover
Most carefully the opening of the Mine:
Those stones, and those green boughs will make the hole
Invisible, I need but seek the ungrateful,
Before I vent my anger; I Will reproach her
With my pass^d services, with her inconstancy,
And her false oaths; for fear my death should give her,
Some satisfaction, and to the end t'afflict her,
I will appear unto her, and protest
That I will live yet to abhor her; yonder
I see that fair Inconstant; but alas!
I see her pale, cold, and in dying posture;
At this sad object which confounds me.
A tender pity does succeed my passion;
And if this pity caused by her misfortune,
Is not yet love, it is something, sure, that is near it,
Climene thou fair object of the flame
which rises up again, when almost dead,
Cast yet a languishing look upon Fabritio;
For all thy anger and inconstancy,
I never sought any reveng against thee;
Return, and if thou will not that I live,
At least with one sweet look honor my death:
I hear some coming, I must hide my self.
If I should go into the Mine again,
There Is danger I might be surprised.

SCENA QUINTA.
The Duke, Climene. Duke. I have heard strokes which troubled me much
The noise came from this side, let us advaunce
I see Climene, who sleeps; but alas,
Vnparalel'd misfortune! she is dead,
And underneath a thick veil, her fair eyes
Are shut up never to be opened:
Tyrannick destiny, by what law is it
That such a rare and exquisite beauty has
So tragical a fate, and that the Star
Of my nativitie, which has produced
My fires, finds in its morn eternal night?
But I am in an error; Master piece
Of all perfection, fate is innocent,
And I alone am guilty, it is this arm,
This barbarous arm that has taken hence my Mistress
In murdering my Rival.

Climene. Oh, alas!

Duke. She breathes, she breaths, and opens her eyes
Love, be propitious to me.

Climene. Is it thee,
My dear Fabritio, Fantasme of my soul,
Sweet Shadow of my Lover? what will thou?

Duke. Her grief distracts her judgment.

Climene. Come thou to reproach me suddenly,
That thou had lived, if thou had not seen me,
And that the fire sometime so fair, which kindled
Our hearts with mutual love, served but to light thee
To descend to the grave?

Duke. You are mistaken,
Adoreable Climene.

Climene. Tell me then
The cause that brings thee, Come thou to solissit
My heart and arm a while yet to defer
My death, unto the end to revenge thine!
Will thou that this hand plunged in the Dukes blood
Make my destruction just, and thine revenged
Speak speak; he shall not long be in condition
To triumph in thy death, in the midst of
His Court, and in the eyes of all Ferrara,
I Will pierce the bosom of that barbarous Prince.

Duke. My heart fears but the strokes of your fair eyes,
Know me, and recollect your wandering senses
The excess of your sorrow wrongs you much.

Climene. Whom do I see?

Duke. A Prince that loves you.

Climene. What fatal accident, what cruel destiny
Presents me, in stead of my Lover,
His murderer, Sir, you must pardon me
This langvage, as a person highly injured:
I can no mor respect you: is it possible,
You are not fully satisfied yet
In barbarously depriving me of him,
I loved more then my self, but you must come
To robb me of his Shadow?

Duke, This vain shadow
You speak of, is but an illusion
Formed by your fear and your affliction;
And when I Have dissipated from your fancy
This fatal image, you will find that I
Have more advauntaged, then injured you.
For dead Fabritio, please you to remember,
That it was your interest made me punish him;
The insolent discou^se which he held forth,
Carried me justly to that violence:
If I had spared him, I had injured you,
And if I had done less, I had less loved.

Clim^ne. By ^his account then I Am indebted to you
For giving, me the greatest of misfortunes,
In killing even before mine eyes the object
Which I adore, without whom the fair light
Is odious to me; you are much deceav'd
In your pretentions, you have gained nothing
In ruining a Rival, and the art
Whicch you use to asperse his reputation,
Cannot hinder him to live with in my soul:
Though this death which I feel livelie with in me
Had not expressed so much hate and contempt
As you show love and tenderness, I should
Have loved him so much as I hate you.

Duke. I condemn not your just transports, but bear them,
He was your Lover, though he was my Rival;
And I repent my rage in that I wronged
Your charming Image, printed in his soul:
I know that Rival, which was odious to me,
Pleased your fair eyes more then I, his merit
Was that which only rendered him guilty:
I hated him for being too amiable;
But in that hate, I fully did express
My love to you in offering you a heart,
And with that heart a crown. But I offend you,
Your looks speak your disdain. not to provoke you,
I leave you, and hope yet, that you will one day
Have less aversion for me.

Climene. Time can never
Cure my disease, death only is its term.

SCENA SEXTA.
Iacinta, Fabritio, Climene. Fabritio. I will approach, I see the Duke retire,
My trouble is passed; and Climene lives;
But, heaven: who comes here again to cross me?

Iacinta to Climene. Iacinta. The Funeral is coming.

Climene. What, Fabritio's?

Fabritio. It is Iacinta, I need not for her
Keep a loofe of. -- aside.

Iacinta. Yes Madame, you may see
The coffin which encloseth your dead Lover
From your Balcony at this very instant:
His Father, who intends to celebrate
His mourning, honors Fabritios death
With funeral pomp, and whilst they carry him
Unto the Temple, you may, if you please,
See that unfortunate body pass.

Climene. I will so,
It is my last desire,

Fabritio, discovering himself. Fabritio. Enjoy it, Madame,
Behold here the unfortunate Fabritio.

Iacinta Heaven! where shall I fly safely from this Fantasme.
I dare not stay. -- Iacinta flies away.

Climene. What! will Iacinta leave me;

Iacinta. I have no other Mistress now but fear.

Fabritin houlding Climene. Fabritio. False and ungrateful Beauty, do you
fly me?
This makes your lightness. To appear too much:
If any justice yet reigns in your soul,
After you have betrayed me, give me leave
To complain my misfortune.

Climene. I betray you?
What do I hear, Heavens! how astonished am I
At this so strange event? if I may here
Believe mine eyes, it is the living portrait
Of my Fabritio, but if I believe
His voice, it is but a deceitful Fantasme
Of such a faitfull Lover:

Fabritio. I am that very Lover, who against
Your will could not, in losing all his hope,
Lose his life too; yes, I live yet, Ungrateful,
And fear I live for you still in despite
Of my just anger, I know not what power
Opposes it. in steed of murmurring,
I sigh, and all the heat that rests with me
Resembles anger less then love.

Climene. Now I
Begin again to know Fabritio;
His heart in spite of him does secretly
Render me justice; and when the false mouth
Condemns me, it seems resolute in thought
That I am faithful.

Fabritio. Faithful? oh it is
Unto the Duke that this speech is addressd
He only is to hope for all your love.

Climen^. Can thou impute those base thoughts un^o me?

Fabritio. They are truths, if I may believe your oaths;
I should doubt yet of this extreem misfortune,
If I had understood it from the mouth
Of any other but your self.

Climene. An evil
When it is known, is easy to be cured;
I know thy error, cease to be abused;
If the last fatal evening I expressed
^ind words unto the Duke, I did believe
That I discoursed to thee, and so upon
That faith all that I said to him, was wholly
Intended unto thee^, thy only Image,
Which can possess my heart, my memory,
And all my senses with so much renown,
Was only guilty in that fatal moment,
If but a little blindness may be said
To be a crime in Love.

Fabritio. Unto a Lover,
Whose soul resignes it self unto suspicions,
Any excuse is good enough, and passes,
A lie that pleases deceives plea^antlie,
And every thing is easily believed,
Which is desired; though all thy reasons were
As false as fair, so sweet it would be to me
To see my f^ares to end, and in my fancy
To flatter the affliction which thou
Might cause me, that thou would oblige me strongly
To make me yield to be abused.

Climene. Let thy heart be
Free from those Low suspicions; if thou will
Absent thee, I am ready here to follow thee;
I Will manesest unto thee every where
The cle^renes of my faith, be it to live,
Or dye with thee, let Heaven bless, or deceive
Our expectations, I Will live satisfied,
Or dye content.

Fabritio. What owe I --

Climene. Thou ow'st nothing;
Nothing of thanks, in following thy desires,
I follow my own sentiments; but how
Were thou secured?

Fabritio. Fortune did favor me,
A stranger passing that night perished
Instead of me, and this Mine gives me means
From Carlos house to enter into thine.

Climene. Thou may a while here entertain thy thoughts
In the mean I Will go to fetch my Jewels:
Pass underneath this arbor, I believe
I hear a noise; as soon as it is night,
I Will come to thee again.

SCENA SEPTIMA.
Iacinta, Fabritio. Fabritio. IF I am not deceived, here comes Iacinta,
Climene trusts her with her nearest secrets:
Forrune, it seems, to day in every point
Will be sweet to me, if I can oblige her
To go away with us.

Iacinta. Scarce freed yet
From my first fear, I tremblinglie return
Unto Climenes house: Fabritio
Was murdered through my means, and without doubt
He comes to revenge himself upon me
From the other world: my ruin were inevitable
If I should meet that fearful Ghost again.

Fabritio. Stay. --

Iacinta. It Is the Spirit, good God, I dye with fear!
Oh Genrle Fantasme, have compassion of me;
I do confess my fault, and promise faithfully
Never to betray you, nor my Mistress more.

Fabritio. Strange! but I must know more. Disguise me nothing,
If thou do --

Iacinta. Touch me not then, I beseech you,
And I will tell you all: it is true, ^ always
Endeavored ^o hurt you, that I studied
To serve the Duke in his amors against you,
And that indead I was cause of your death.

Fabritio. Pernstious spirit. --

Iacinta Enter not into fury,
This is not all yet, lend your ear, I pray you,
I had forgot to tell you that the Duke.
By my advise this day has fixed upon
Climenes rape, and that this very evening
He will attempt this unjust enterprise,

Fabritio. Horrid perfidiousnes!

Iacinta. I have told all my faults, now may it please you
That I leave you in peace: for know that nothing
Is so unpleasant to me as discourse
With people of another World. If you
Were not dead, you would be so good unto me,
To grant me pardon upon my repentance.

Fabritio. It would not suite well with a generous spirit
To punish a weak woman. Go. --

Iacinta. Mon^ieur Fantasme,
God will receive your soul. -- Exit Iacinta.

Fabritio. The Duke this night
Intends, it seems, ^o take away Climene,
Heaven, must my hope be yet again destroyed?
But my heart leaves it self to be assaulted
With a vain fear, seeing I am beloved,
What should I doubt; nothing is strong enough
To disunite two hearts whieh love has joined,
This God does miracles for those that be
His faithful Votaries, and such are we.

The End of the third Act.
ACTVS QVARTVS.
SCENA PRIMA.
Fabritio, alone. Behold the hour, wherein I hope to see
The Beauty which my soul loves and adores;
The Sun already having run his course,
Darteth no more here but a feeble light:
With his last rays he now adornes the West
He setts with glory, shines when he is lost
And the fair remnants of his dying brightness
Makes his fall and loss illustrious,
Pardon, thou glorious Star, whose splendor hurts m^,
If my hope comes, when thy light vanishes:
Ingenious Love, to hurt me more, assembles
That mass of Instre which so charmeth me
In fair Climenes eyes, and presently
Her looks will give me brightness which surpasses
That which thou take from me: But she stays,
Heaven. she neglects me, she appears not:
The Moon is well advaunc'd; and all my hope
Dies with the day; this long delay denotes
A fault of love: I hear one walk, and if
My eyes are faithful witnesses, I see
This miracle of Fair ones come at last.

SCENA SECUNDA.
Climene, Fabritio. Climene. FAbritie --

Fabritio. Here, fair subject of my flame.
Here Is he, who is as ^aithfull as he is happy.

Climene. I did not think to have been so long absent.
I fear that I have put thee to some trouble.

Fabritio. Believe, indead, that to Fabritio
The least remove of thy fair eyes is grievous.
I did expect thee sooner, and to speak
The truth resolved to complain unto thee,
Upon this point; but to forget it quite,
It is sufficient that I see thee now;
I have no power to complain before thee,
The present pleasure flattering my thought,
Takes wholly from me the remembrance
Of my passed trouble.

Climene. Since love forces thee
Not to accuse me, the same passion
Obliges me too to excuse my self.
It was not the care of these Diamonds
Wherewith I Am laden, which caused my stay,
It only was the care to take a time
Proper for our departure.

Fabritio. Let Us refer
The prosecution of this discourse
Unto another time, and think we now
To finish our designs, and t'haste our flight;
I fear the strokes yet of injurious chance,
She should be ^rusted least, when she smiles most.

Climene Let Us haste, I willingly consent unto it,
I fear least that torch should discover thee,
Oh hide thee!

Fabritio. I will dye rather then hide me;
An outrage is intended to thy person.
I must prevent it, being advertised
That the Dukes ready by a barbarous order
To carry thee away by violence.

SCENA TERTIA.
The Duke, Valerio, Climene, Fabritio, Guards. Valerio. SHe must be here

Duke. I Will draw aside a little,
But so, that I Will hear all: Go, speak from me.

Fabritio. What suffer thee to be taken hence by force,
And in my presence?

Climene. No, if any Violence
Be offered, step forth unto my aid,
In the mean time hide thee, and make me not
To fear for any but my self; Valerio,
What seek you here at such an hour as this?

Valerio. I could not wish to meet a better object
Then your fair self, a coach near hand attends you,
I must conduct you there, having for it
An express order.

Climene How! from whom have you
This order?

Valerio. Madame, from the Duke my Master,
Whom every one is bound here to acknowledge
For Sovereign.

Climene. Let him be never so Sovereign,
Yet he must know that the free soul of Climene
Is not within his power; my heart depends
Upon another, and say what he will,
That is no lawful subject to his Empire.

Valerio. Madam, I Am sorry -- but I must obey,

Climene. What! thinks he to make himself beloved.
As one makes himself hated* Losing liberty?
Believes he that I should be so simple
To take so many marks of hatred for
Effects of love? what from his enmity
Might I not fear, if when he loves me,
He seeks to persecute me?

Valerio. I am forced
As Much as you are, but it is in vain
For you to give your self o'r to complaints,
Follow me quickly where I go. --

Duke. Stay, stay;
Her beauty will not suffer any outrage
To be done to her person, in my presence,
Or rather I have too much passion
To suffer that she should be injured.
It Is true that troubled much, and desperate
At your contempt I was prepared to take you
Away by force, I did expect the issue,
And will confess, Madame, that in my soul
Love vanquished respect; but presently
At your first words love vanquished at its turn,
Yielded unto respect: cease, cease to fear,
Thou charming wonder, the heat of that love
Soomewhat too violent: should your heart be
Hard as a rock, I only would employ
Respect to touch it, there is more passion in me
Then hate in you: in all the places where
I reign, you shall be Souveraigne, and I shall
Esteem me happy, not to give you laws,
But to take them of you.

Climene. I should give thanks
Unto the Duke for such a declaration
If I could flatter here Fabritios enemy.

Duke. Although his loss has reason to oblige me,
Since it afflicts you, it afflicts me;
But there runs a report upon this point
which terrifies me, it is that to your eyes
His Fantasme does appear.

Climene. There Is nothing false
In this report, Fabritio since his death
Appeared before mine eyes.

Duke. To dissipate
Obnoxious fears which might cause evil visions
Within your fancy, some of my attendance
Shall presently have order not to leave you,

Climene. Oh! Sir, this is not it which I demand.

Duke. It Is the least duty I must render you:
Suffer them for to guard you.

Climene. Sir, it needs not.

Duke. Your quietness concerns me, and I must
Take care of it.

Climene. So far you would be from obliging me
By this design, that you would hurt me rather;
Of this care therefore I dispense your Highness.

Duke. To condescend to your desires herein,
Were to betray you, the sad vision
Of a dead person does increase your griefs.
Permit --

Climene. No, Sir, command them not to follow;
The vision does please me, and I fear
To be deprived of its company.

Duke. This Spirit will always distract your reason,
As long as you stay in the house alone.

Climene. If but to chaung house will give you content,
I Will satisfy you, Carlos is my neighbor,
I will retire to him.

Duke. If you fix there,
I contradict it not, his mother is
A very prudent Woman, and her counsels
Will be a great help to your timourous spirits,
Permit me to conduct you to her house.

Ciimene. This prayer is a command, Sir.
I cannot
Refuse to follow, him, especially
Seeing Fabritio likewise has design Softly.
To go there.

Fabritio. What discourse in the name of wonder
Might she have all this while there; but good God^
The Duke draws her away, I Will succor her.

Duke. This Fantasm's nothing elce but the effect
Of a sad thought, the senses are all hurt,
when the soul's troubled.

Fabritio. I Will put out the light.

Duke. Lastly IN promise you that there is no Fantasme,
Nor ever was; but what is that I see?
O prodegie! o Heaven! how am I troubled?

Fabritio. It is Fabritio, who is come to take
Climene from you.

Climene. O Fabritio,
Unto what danger comes thou to expose thee?

-- aside. Fabritio. Climene, save thy self, or leave me perish.

Climene. My life's in danger, when thou hazardest
Thy self. I do withdraw now, follow me.

Duke. Advance, Guards, I Will be cleared in this point,
Leave me not, I command ye.

Fabritio. She is gone,
I Will follow her.

Valerio. Sir doubt not on it, it is
Fabrotio's shadow.

Duke. No matter, I Will be satisfied therein.

SCENA QUARTA.
Carlos, Valerio, the Duke, attendance. Carlos coming out of the Mine. Carlos.
I Will go to aid my friend, this noise does make me
To judge that his life runs some danger here.

Valerio. It is impossible to take a Fantasme;
Yet he is taken, and it is a sensible,
And solid body.

Duke. Traitor, and the greatest
Of all my enemies.

Carlos. Oh Sir! what fault
Has Carlos committed? never had you
A subject yet more faithful.

Duke. What is that?
It Is Carlos, strange! this is a new surprise:
Here all my arguments are vain. Come you,
Carlos, to take Climene from my hands?

Carlos. I, Sir? by no means; the noise which I heard
Drew me unto this place to know the cause on it.

Duke. Who came into this garden then to stop me?

Carlos. It was Fabritios shadow, can you doubt ont?
We can give you a certain testimony
Thereof, as knowing well his voice and visage.

Duke. I observed them my self very distinctlie.

Carlos. Assure ye, Sir, it was Fabritios shadow.

Duke. I Am stranglie troubled at this prodegie;
Climene was persuaded by my reasons
To quit this house, and I was bringing her
Unto thine, when that spirit came and parted us,
So that we have lost each other in the dark.

Carlos. This success, Sir, strikes me with terror too.

Duke. Carlos, we must find out this charming Beauty,
And for her safety bting her home to thee:
Seek thou of that side, the rest follow.

Carlos. Oh heaven! we are undone, the plotts discovered:
If the Duke find Fabritio, his ruin
Is certain, but if in spite of the night
I Am not abused, I see a woman coming
Toward me.

SCENA QUINTA.
Carlos, Climene. Climene. FAbritio, is it thee?

Carlos. No.

Climene. Oh, my grief!

Carlos. Although it be not he, at least it is
His second self, it is Carlos. --

Climene. Oh! dear Sir,
How mise^able am I?

Carlos. I know, Madame,
All your misfortune, having understood it.
From the Dukes mouth, who very much in passion,
Seeks you with no ordinary care.

Climene. Fabritio's here about, if he should be
Unfortunately found, it were impossible
To save him afterward; Sir, if you love him,
Divert his danger, overtake the Duke;
To draw him hence, tell him that I am ready
To come forth of this fatal place, and that
I Have promised to stay here till you come,
To goo with you unto your house.

Carlos. I fly;
In the mean time, find, if you can your Lover,
And tell him what has happened, above all
fail not to be here presently, your self.

Climene. Fortune; I fear is not propitious
Enough unto me, to permit me now
To find Fabritio, with too much heat
Her anger does pursue me, to consent
That I shall have this happiness, notwithstanding
I hear a noise, perhaps Love favorable
To my chaste flames, guides my Lover here:
But what, they are two women; they have seen me,
Or I am much deceived, I must begone
To seek Fabritio, and to shun their presence.

Exit Climene. SCENA SEXTA
Iacinta, Isabella. Iacinta. IT is my Mistress, Madame, approach bouldly*
And give me leave to go immediately
Into the house, my conduct, and my cares
A^e here superfluous.

Isabella. Stay, she goes away,
And I see her no more, come, let us follow.

Iacinta. Good God! if I should meet the spirit again
Which I fo dread?

Isabella. Thou know all these turnings,
And thou can guide me; Go before.

Ianinta. Who, I? defend me, God, from such a rudenes,
I know my duty well, though a gross Girl,
Madame, you are to go first, I Am to wait you
Oh if the spirit should come to punish me
For my late treason! -- softly

Isabella. But thou tremblest.

Iacinta. Alas! there is reason for it.

Isabella. Stay here then,
I Will follow her without thee, ho, Climene!

Iacinta. She leaves me alone, oh, I am lost!
Madame, where run you?

Isabella. Do not stay my stepps.

Iacinta. Should you be never so angry, by your favor,
You shall not follow her.

Isabella. Thy importunity
Is really, extreme, why do thou stop me?

Iacinta. Because I love you, you would be in danger,
Should you go on, your safetie's dear unto me,
And I Will take care on it.

Isabella. Leave me.

Iacinta. No, I must not:
I Will tell you a strange thing a fearful Spirit
Haunteth those places,

Isabella Is It a waggish Spirit?
Hobgoblin, or a Robin-Good follow?

Iacinta. No, he is not pleasant, rather on the contrary,
It is an evil, and a mischievous spirit.

Isabella. Who told it thee?

Iacinta. Mine eyes, which did not lie.
And I swear to you that I Have twenty times
Seen it in several figures, sometimes like
A man, and sometimes like a ravenors beast,
And still at every bout mischievouslie
Ready to break my neck.

Isabella. Climene then
Is not in safety here.

Iacinta. I know not that;
But I believe there is a league between them
They agree very well: But see the spirit
In form now of a Giant; Heaven protect me.

SCENA SEPTIMA.
Fabritio, Iacinta, Isabella. Fabritio. IT is Iacinta, and Climene is
Without doubt with het.

Iacinta. It approaches to us,
Oh let us fly, it is death to meet with it.

Isabella. It stopps at me, o Heaven, what fear have I?

Fabritio. Climene, stay, and hear me, I Am Fabritio.

Isabella. It is my brother, strange surprise! I will
Speak soft and conterfeit my voice to find
What his design is, -- aside.

Fabritio. The injurious Duke,
From whom my cares would take thee, seeks thee
Without doubt at this instant, let us lose
No time to shun his violence, but haste we
To Carlos house: besides, I fear my sister.
For she at home this evening said unto me.
That she would come to vissit thee: if she
Should see me, presently my Father, who
Thinks me already far of from this place,
Will understand the contrary. This is not
To detract from my Sister, she is good.
And very innocent, but her fault is
She cannot hold her peace.

Isabella. Continue, Brother,
I Am much obliged unto you, pray, proceed.

Fabritio. Misfortune! it is my Sister Isabella.

Isabella. Pursue, good Brother.

Fabritio. Las! I Have said too much,
Excuse the fears and weakness of a Lover*
If thy heart felt such seisures thou should know
That the God, who is President of love,
Is but a timourous child, and trembles always:

Isabella I do confess, that I am ignorant
In maxims of this nature, and indead
Too innocent to understand them well:
Concerning your abode, which I have learned
With some regrett, for being known to me
It Is not less secret: I will make appear
By silence and discretion, that I am
A better Sister to you then you are a
Brother to me.

Fabritio. Oh! Sister, what sweet sentiments have you?
How shall I merit them?

Isabella. I hear some body,
Brother, let us withdraw.

Fabritio. I Will take your counsel; go forth of this dwelling
To Carlos house, I Will follow you immediately.

SCENA OCTAVA.
The Duke, Carlos, Isabella, attendance. Carlos. YOu see Climene stays here,
as I said.

Duke. Conduct her! it is enough, Im satisfied,
And will go forth content.

Carlos. Madame, it is Carlos,
Follow me without fear, speak soft --

Isabella It Is Carlos,
I Will follow him without constraint. -- aside.

Duke. Guards, wait upon Climene for this night,
My eyes must be deprived of the happiness
To see her, my love urges me in vain
To follow her, defer we till to morro^
To render her a vissit, the good which
I expect thence would be too dearly bought
If it should cost a trouble to Climene.
Depart we, and lets flatter us with hope
That we through perseverance shall o'rcome,
And that there is no heart so hard by charm,
Which those fires in my bosom cannot warm.

SCENA NONA.
Climene, Fabritio, The Duke. Climene. FAbritio.

Fabritio. My Climene.

Duke. Heaven! what hear I?
My judgment is confounded here; Climene
Is gone with Carlos, yet some secret charm
Which I cannot comprehend, houldeth her here
In conference with the shadow of the dead.

Climene. Every one is retired we are alone,
The Duke is also gone out of the garden:
Let Us finish the design we have in hand,
Le^'s press it on, and fly we without fear
That Tyrants love, for whom I Have so much horror

Duke. In what a hideous gulf of black despair
Am I plunged by this prodegy? is it a truth,
Or is it a dream?

Fabritio. Haste we, but I Am afraid
That in the dark we shall not find the Mine.

Climene. No matter we caan go out of the garden
Another way, the key of the back door
Which I have here about me privately,
Will give us passage forth to Carlos house,
Where against the light returns, I will be ready
To Embrace thy fortune, and to follow thee,
Go where thou will.

Fabritio. By what expressions. --

Climene, It Is enough, make me no reply, but follow*
We lose time,

Duke. There Is no doubt of it, it is certain,
Fabritio either dead or living steal
Away Climene; ha! I cannot suffer,
This outrage in my sight: come, I Am resolved
To lose my self, or reskue her; o Heavens!

The Duke running to succor Climene, falls into the Mine. The End of the
fourth Act.
ACTVS QVINTVS.
SCENA PRIMA.
Carlos, Isabella. In a hall of Carlos house. Carlos. WHom see I here?
misfortune! oh unluckie
Encounter! but, perhaps, I am deceived,
Is it you, Isabella?

Isabella. Strange? what hear I?
Is It possible that Carlos should not know me?
Are all my features suddenly defaced?
No, they remain yet, only I have cause
To think a hat they are razed out of thy memory

Carlos. Oh, Madame, this suspicion is unjust,
I will upon this point tell you the truth
With all sincerity.

Isabella. Pray, what sincerity
Can one expect from you?

Carlos. Condemn me not
Before you hear me: I had a design
Which prospered not, my intent was to bring
Another woman here, and I confess
That I am sorry now to see you Madame,
In her place, your fair presence is indead
A trouble at this time. But --

Isabella. It suffices,
Ungrateful, thy crime is acknowledged,
And more sincerely then I could have thought.

Carlos. Suffer me to express my self

Isabella. It needs not,
What explication can be more clear?

Carlos. Hear what remains.

Isabella. No, I will hear no more,
All thy disguisements are superfluous.

Carlos. But know --

Isabella. What should I know more? have thou not
Told me that thy soul's fleeting, thou intende'st
To bring another Woman here, thou will
That I believe it, and I do believe it.

Carlos. I have not. --

Isabella. True, thou have not any thing
For me but coldness, and presumption;
To see me in her place, thou say, thou art sorry,
And with an unjust passion thy salfe spirit
Carried away, goes from inconstancy
To incivilitie.

Carlos. Give me leave to speak.

Isabella. What can thou say unto me?
That thou acknowledgest the Empire of
A Worthier object, that in vain thy heart
Has stood against her charms, and that to gain thee
I have too little beauty?

Carlos. Oh deceive not
Your self with so much art, and I beseech you
Be less unjust to my poor heart that loves you.

Isabella. In losing such a heart as thine, I shall
Lose little, it is faith^es, base, and treacherous,
And I pretend not any thing unto it;
Adieu.

Carlos What without hearing me, oh stay,
I do beseech you, stay.

Isabella. My presence here
Does trouble you.

Carlos. It is a real truth.

Isabella. A real truth,
Ungrateful?

Carlos. You shall not go forth before
You Have heard me, suffer me upon this point
To Express my thought.

Isabella. I should again be troubled
With thy discourse.

Carlos. What I shall say unto you
Can easily be verified.

Isabella. No, no,
I forbid thee to justify thy self.

Carlos. For the last time yet give me leave to say*
That it is you alone whom I adore,
That I am wholly yours.

Isabella. Well, let me see then,
If I have any power yet in thy soul.

Carlos Madame, command, you shall be satisfied.

Isabella. Say nothing more then to excuse thy self,
And leave me to depart. this I command,
Obey me in this point.

Carlos. For such a perfect Lover as I am,
It is a crime to obey too readily.

Isabella No, no, I have some power upon thy spirit,
Show thy respect by thy obedience,

Carlos. Love by respect is very ill express^d,
Who can obey well, knows not ^o love,
This favorable council, cruel Beauty,
Was given to Carlos.

Isabella. Yes to Carlos faithful*
But this fatal advise, whereof thou do
Presume so much, was never given unto
Carlos inconstant,

Carlos. Madame, what is my crime?

Isabella. Ungrateful, I will tell it thee, it is true
I had for thee something about my heart
That savoured of tenderness and that
I know not what began to differ little
From the toy called Love; at last I was
Tainted with that disease, when for my punishment
I knew my love produ^ed but thy hate;
True, thou feel'st it no more, now that thou see
That I am touched; I become trouble some
To him that is dear to me; now that my flame
Appears, thine is consumed, and beginning
To love, I cease to be beloved. Beloved?
what have I said'? I learn by the effects,
That thou feignest always, and did never love me
What can thou answer to excuse thy self.
So just a reproach cannot but confound thee;
Thou striv'st not more to justify thy self,
Thy silence speaks thee guilty and confounded.

Carlos. This trouble which appears in my countenance
Proceeds from your injustice, not my crime.

Isabella. What have I said here which thou can deny?
Defend thy self.

Carlos. You have forbidden me
To justify my self. I fear you would be
Offended still with my discourse.

Isabella. No, no
Speak, Carlos, now my anger's vanished;
Although thou should be false, and prove i^.
In such a high degree as to betray me,
I might complain thereof, but could not hate thee constant
And whatsoever change thy heart should make.
I should excuse thee if thou did desire it.

Carlos. Upon your fair hands for this sweet expression,
Let me imprint my joy, and my resentment.

He kisseth her hand. SCENA SECUNDA.
Alphonso, Isabella, Carloo. Alphonso. WHat do I see?

Carlos. But Madame, your suspicions
Injute my love extremely.

Isabella. My suspicions
Give Carlos intimation that I love him.

Alphonso. You love him?

Isabella. Heaven! what hear I?

Carlos. O hard Fortune!

Isabella. I must dispose my self to dye, he will kill me -- aside
Father.

Alphonso. Unworthy object of my anger
Justly provoked, I Am thy enemy,
Call me no more thy Father: how! presum'st tho^
To Offend me in so high degree as thus
Against the rules of reason and of honor
To come to Carlos at his house by night,
And in despising the Religious Cloister
Whereto I Have destined thee, to give thy self
Over to base amors?

Isabella. I do beseech you,
Hear me, grant me that savor, will you, Sir
Refuse me?

Alphonso. Yes, every thing except death.

Carlos. Hear equity oppressed by my mouth,
If her flame be a crime, I^m guilty only;
Yes if it be a fault, daigne to remember,
That I am the cause on it, and whom you ought
Only to punish, be more just without
Being more gentle, save the innocent.
And destroy the offender.

Isabella. No, against me
Bend all your fury, if it be a crime
To love, it is a virtue ^o be loved:
The tenderness which I resent for Carlos
Denotes his merit, and setts forth my weakness:
And if my passion be worthy death,
Carlos is free, and I alone am guilty.

Alphonso. Perfidious, thou shall dye then.

Carlos Oh, abandon
That thought.

Alphonso. Then Carlos with my honor take
Away my life, that is the only way
To make her crime safe; nothing but my death
Can stop her punishment.

Carlos. Fear nothing from me,
I have respect for you, and since I could not
Appease your anger, I oppose no further
But rather press you now that Isabella
May perish

Isabella How* do you press my destruction?
Oh now is the fatal moment, wherein I
Have just cause to complain of destiny
My heart is pierced with grief to see you here
With such injustice to become my judge,
And not my complice. I was well resolved,
Carlos, to dye, and quarreled not with fate,
So long as I thought to expire for thee;
But I believed not in this adventure
That Love as well as Nature would betray me,
And that I should at last go to the grave
Thus by a Fathers stroke, and Lovers sentence.

Carlo^. Madame. I Have said but what I should have said:
Once more I do repeat it, since your daughter
Must dye, Sir, and I cannot hinder it,
Content your self to strike, but pray mistake not
The bosom, here direct your strokes, it is here
That Isabella's lodged, here she is Mistress,
Here she is criminal, here you must assault her
To punish her, and in peircing my heart,
You cannot miss her.

Isabella. Oh, believe him not;
Turn your arms here.

Alphonso aside. Alphonso. Ready to shed my blood,
I feel my tears flow, and my choler's cold:
I only by a sudden strange effect
Am vanquished in the fight, let us feign yet,
Carlos, your cunning for a little time
Retards her Punishment, but fatisfy me
Upon a thing that brought me here, and which
Does trouble me extreemely tell me truly,
Is my Son here, or no; if he be here,
His death is but too ^ertaine.

Carlos. I assure you,
He is not here, Sir.

Alphonso. Since you do assure me,
I will not doubt it.

SCENA TERTIA.
Fabritio, Alphonso, Climene, Carlos, Isabella. Fabritio. WE are free at last
From the Dukes hands.

Alphonso. O Heaven! is it possible?
Fabritio yet present him to mine eyes?
I gave, Sir, too much credit to your words.

-- to Carlos, Carlos. He was not here, Sir, when I said them to you,

Alphonso. Thou blinded Son, through what ingratitude
Build'st thou thy pleasures upon my disquiet?
What has made thee despise a Fathers Will,
whom thou know cherishes thy life so much
And why in violating all the rights
Of nature, do thou make so small account
Of the light which thou owe me? Ungrateful!

Fabritio. The care, Sir, of my safety trouble^h you
Too much, I do not hate the light, but love it
Less then Climene.

Alphonso. I commanded thee
To quit this residence^

Fabritio. But I received
Another order.

Alphonso. How! from whom?

Fabritio. From Love.

Alphonso. Love makes no laws but for those that will take 'em;
And reason now forbids thee to embrace it

Fabritio. Oh reason, Sir, had left me, and I was
Too much enchained, to depart.

Alphonso. Can thou
Stay without shame, after an infidelity?

Fabritio. Climene is as constant as she is fair:
My spirit was struck with an injust suspicion,
I Am disabused, and she is ready here
To follow me.

Alphonso. To follow thee?

Climene. Yes Sir,
To follow him, I have engaged my self;
Though his condition be changed, I am not.

Alphonso. I always doubted till this very moment.
Whether a woman could love constantly;
Bu^ if your love has any reason with it,
Haste you to go out of his fatal c^ntry.

Fabritio. There Is nothing that shall stop my stepps to morrow
Sir, I swear to you. --

Carlos. Friend, thou shall not swear.

Fabritio. If you believe it not, I do assure you,
You are in an extreme error; who can stay us?

Carlos. Pehaps, It may be I.

Fabritio. You?

Carlos. Yes, I will
Tell you a sad adventure, which should be
Equally grievous to us both; Ciimene
Is by a fatal chance committed to
My guard, and I Am responsible for her.
I Have the Dukes ordsr for it, and to add
To the misfortune, I thought to have taken
Climene, and I took your sister for her.

Isabella. What! this was then the cause which troubled you
So much but now?

Carlos. You have but little reason
To doubt of it; but understand my trouble
In this extremity, if Climene flies,
I shall be forced to expose Isabella
Instead of her to the Dukes passions:
I love her, and it is now no longer time
To disguise my thoughts to you, Judge, I pray you,
If in this danger I ought to expose her.

Fabritio. How great is our misfortune?

Alphonso. Not so great
As it appears unto you; to be free
Of all fear, get ye gone all four togeither.
The Duke will he reduced afterward
To be appeased.

Carlos. This is a most sure way;
But whence proceeds this noise?

SCENA QUARTA.
Celin, Alphonso, Carlos, Fabritio, Climeno, Isabella, Celin ^o Carlos. C^lin.
Sir, diverse men
Armed with halberds desire speech with you.

Carlos. It Is the Duke and his Guards, sure, their design
Surpriseth me.

Alphonso. I have lost all my hope.
Carlos, assuredly my sonne's discovered.

Carlos. We will be presently cleared on that point.
Without light let Fabritio stay here,
And if he doubts that they are come to seek him
Behind this false wall he may hide himself:
He shows them a wall which is turned upon a pivot of Iron. See, how it
turns; before his death my Father
Fearing the malice of his enemies,
Caused it to be made in secret for him,
And I know that there is no wit so subtle^
That can find out Fabritio in this place.

Alphonso. To save thy life, do this, Son, I conjure thee;

Climene. And I Climene pray the^.

Fabritio. Lobey
As son, and I obey no less as Lover.

Carlos. Let Us cease discourse, and go forth presently.

Exeunt all but Fabritio. Fabritio alone. Fabritio. Heaven! must I always be
distracted thus
Twixt fear and hope, and must so just a love
Have such a rigid fortune? the Duke loves,
Or abhorres her, and I know that there is reason
To fear all things from him that hops nothing;
And that' bove all things it is dangerous
To be competitor with his Prince, and Rival
Unto his Master. But what! hear I not
Some person walk, at if he would come to me*

SCENA QUINTA.
The Duke, Fabritio. The Duke alone. Duke. I Have passed through a straight way,
now I enter
Into a greater, yet am still in doubt,
My hope's confounded, and my spirits dark*
Which should light me in these obscurities?
Am I'mongst mortals? am I in some cave?
Am I upon the earth, or in is center?
Murdered Fabritio offers himself
To my remembrance, would Heaven punish (...)
For his unjust death? but I hear a noise,
Who Is there?

Fabritio. Fabritio.

Duke. Fabritio!
Appears his Fantasme here then for my punishment,
And am I sunk down into Hell alive
To suffer for the evils I Have made him suffer?

Fabritio. I hear the Dukes voice, which I know full well.
Is it you then, Sir Duke?

Duke. The art not deceived.
I am the author of thy death, I will not
Say any thing unto thee for to save
My life thou can without crime take it from him
Who has taken thine from thee, all the fear which
Rests unto me in this sad misfortune,
Proceeds from my crime, not from my death;
And if now any grief oppresses me,
It Is not to dye, but to dye culpable.

Fabritio aside. Fabritio. He thinks me still dead, I will profit by
This error. -- aside.
Duke, you have just cause to fear
My fury, your fate now is in my power,
Nothing can stop the course of my revenge;
I can now sacrifice your blood to mine;
But, Sir, you are my Prince, and I le not do it;
Injustice I abhor, and notwithstanding
My anger, I would rather suffer it
Then execute it.

Duke. The mote thy respect
Appears for me, the more unjust's thy death
And the more black my crime; by this, my fault
Becomes doubly condemnable, the less
Sevete thou art in punishing me, the more
I Am worthy punishment But if thy shadow
Pretends to resp^ct me, what obliges thee
To persecute me thus in every place?
How comes it that thou do confer upon me
Imperfect favouts? why do thou pursue me?
What is it thou do defire?

Fabritio. Since you ordain it
I Will speak it then; know, Sir, that this your trouble
Shall never see an end before you cease,
To love Climene.

Duke. Cease to love Climene?
Oh! that is too much presumption, I may cease
To live, but not to love her. to obtain
Thy wishes, thou should ask a possible thing;
But I should have abused thee if I had
Flattered thy hope that I would cease to love
That charming Beauty.

Fabritio. To love in this manner
Is to love like a tyrant.

Duke. Well, I know
That I love like a tyrant, but no matter:
Know also that. Love who gives Law to me,
Is yet a blinder tyrant far then I:
To force me to love this ungrateful Mistress,
He has to much strength, and I so much weakness
Only the hope that I can give thee is,
Never to see her more, yet still to love her.

Fabritio. He that can lose the object, can lose also
The flame, the heart houlds not what the eye is
Deprived of, Love from our will has his power;
To cease to love, there needs but the desire:
To put out all your flames, quench all your hope,
And yield Clim^ne to my constancy.

Duke. But if I should do so, what is ^hy design?

Fabritio. To marry her.

Duke. To marry her? what! art thou
Not dead then?

Fabritio. What have I said?

Duke. Thou should be
Of The number of the living for this work;
Who cherishes a body, must not be
A shadow. Speak, and believe that thy death
Has cost me tears.

Fabritio. He feigneth for to know me,
And to destroy me afterward. -- aside.

Duke. He answeareth not a word; Lets seek about.
But least he should go forth, it is requisite
To keep this port: to know too where I am,
It Is best to make a noise; hola! who is there?
Some one come to me.

Fabritio. Heaven! whereto am I
Reduced? but let me, ere they bring a light
Advaunce toward the wall, and hide my self
Behind it.

Duke. I Will be cleared in this doubt,
Here comes a light.

SCENA SEXTA.
The Duke, Carlos, Alphonso, Valerio, Climene, Isabella, Guards. Climene. Do
we not see the Duke?

Duke. See I again my Mistress?

Valerio. Oh! we sought
Your Highness every where.

Duke. Is this enchantment?
Where am I?

Carlos. In my house.

Duke. But where is he?

Alphonso. Who, Sir?

Duke. Your Son.

Alphonso. My Son.
Your Highness is abused.

Duke. I Have speaken with him;
Use no deceit toward me.

Alphonso. Those are visions.

Duke. They are truths, but he cannot come forth, seek ^^refully
On every side.
Alphonso speaking to Carlos. Oh Carlos how I fear!

Carlos addressing himself to Alphonso. Carlos. I say, be not afraid.

Valerio. Sir, I Have seen nothing.

Duke. Heaven! what new prodegie is this? Judge all
If I have reason to believe my self
Enchanted: I went forth the garden, thinking
To see before mine eyes Fabritios Ghost,
When suddenly I fell into a precipice;
And passing through places which I know not,
Arrived here, where to increase the horror
Of my sad soul, his shadow once again
Appeared before me, spoke long time unto me,
And used persuasions to make me cease
To love Climene, and to yield her to him.
This discourse gave me much incertaintie
Of his condition; I doubted if
He was dead* but surprised and amazed
By this success, I need no more to doubt it.
Would that it plased Heaven he were alive,
I should be free then of that sad remorse
Which wounds my conscience, I would do him justice,
And banishing my fires, would satisfy
My self in rendering him happy.

Alphonso. Sir,
It is an easy generosity
To lament, an oppressed enemy
That is no longer to be feared, you think
My son dead, and on that account, bewa^le him,
But if he were alive indead, you would
Be less humane.

Duke. I would not break my word.
By Heaven, by fair Climene, by all nature,
I swear to you Alphonso, that if now
Fabritio yet alive should by a miracle.
Appear before mine eyes, so far would I
Be from opposing still his just desires
That I would willingly resign unto him.
That Beauty so beloved and Cherished.

SCENA SEPTIMA.
Fabritio, The Duke, Alphonso, Carlos, Climeno, Isabella, Valorio, Guards.
Fabritio coming forth from behind the false wall. Fabritio. Behold me living
then, most generous Prince,
Keep your word and your oath, and make me happy.

Duke. Is this a Fantasme? Heaven!

Alphonso. Shake of your fear.
It is Fabritio living, and his death
Is but a feigned thing.

Fabritio. Sir, at your feet
I humbly do expect the blessed effect
Of what you promised.

Duke. I Will keep my word,
Climene's yours.

Alphonso. Sir, favor my poor family
In every point, givs Carlos too in marriage
Unto my daughter, and approve with me
Their innocent desires,

Carlos. I humble crave
That favor from your Highness

Duke. I consent to it;
Carlos, enjoy your wish, although I am
Deceived by your artifice; but losing
My Mistress, I lose my injustice too:
In not betraying me, you did betray
My glory, who commands ill, should be ill
Obeyed*, unjust designs may justly be
Destroyed: Come follow me, and whilst your joys
Are making ready, ^ell me by what Art
The Amourous Fantasme played his subtle part.

The End of the fifth and last Act.
EPILOGUE to the Court.
LEt me Star gaze a while, and calculate
Those Heavens, to know our fortune, or our fate
Before I dare to speak; I cannot see
One cloud appear that should discourage me;
It Is a good omen: Fair Queen of this night,
Not Cynthia, but a Goddess far more bright,
To you I kneel. From him, whose glory is
To offer you a pleasing Sacrifice,
I meaneth' ambitious Poet I am come,
Humbly to beg a favorable doom
Upon his Fantasme, who although he be
At the full point of his felicity
A perfect body no^, yet if you frown
Upon his action, and so cry him down,
No more a feigned Fantasme to be made,
He dies indead, and flies into a shade.
FINIS.

