A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE VIRTUES OF THE Famous Well OF ASTROP, Not far from
Oxford, of late so much frequented by the NOBILITY and GENTRY.

By a Learned Physician.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXVIII.

A Brief Account of the famous Well of Astrop, not far from Oxford.
THis WELL rises on the side of a Hill in Astrop, a Village belonging to
King's Sutton in Northamptonshire, but joining to Oxfordshire, three mile from
Banbury. It was dedicated to S. Rumbald a Child which spoke so soon as he was
born. It yields an Iron water participating of Vitriol, as all Iron does.

It opens, astringeth, and consolidateth egregiously: it abstergeth viscous
and tartarous Humors in the Stomach, Mesenteric, Hypochondria, Reins, Ureters,
and Bladder, and opens the Obstructions of those parts: it penetrates through
every occult passage where other Medicines cannot come.

It dries up the Defluxions and Distillations of the Head, and by this means
takes away the old and long continued Headache Vertigo, Palsy, Convulsion,
Trembling, Darkness of the Sight, and watering of the Eyes, and all sorts of
the Gout: it cures mattery and running Ears, too much Spitting and Moistness
of the Mouth.

By absorbing and taking away the excrementitious Humidities of the Brain, it
preserves from an Apoplexy: it alters a relaxed and weak Stomach, stirs up
the Appetite, and confirms the Retentive Faculty thereof: it stays often
Vomiting, the Cholericus Morbus, Diarrhoea, Dysenterie or Bloudy-flux, and
Lienterie: it kills Worms in young and old, and expels them.

It opens the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, cures the Flatus
hypochondriacus, and the Palpitation and Trembling of the Heart proceeding from
thence: it is a certain remedy for the Scurvy: it fastens the Teeth, though
ready to drop out: it cures Aches and Cramps in any part of the Body
whatsoever, and gives great ease therein suddenly.

It opens all Obstructions, and suppresseth all Overflowings in Women,
strengthens the Womb, and is a great help to Conception, and preventative
against Miscarrying: it cures the Mother, and Precipitation of the Matrix, and
falling down of the Fundament.

It extirpates Agues of long continuance, cures the Jaundice and Dropsy in the
beginning, especially if from a hot Cause: it helps the Green Sickness, and
restores a fresh and lively Color to the Face.

It takes away the swelling and pains of the Spleen, expells the Stone and
Sand: but especially it helps the infirmities of the Bladder, as the
Exulceration thereof, Strangury, and difficulty of making water, and the
involuntary passing away of the water, the pissing of Blood, and the Gonorrhoea.

In Bathing,
It comforts the Nerves and relaxed Joints, helps the Gout, confirms a slippery
Matrix, and prevents Abortion: it strengthens broken Bones and Members out of
joint, and discusseth the Tumors that succeed those Accidents, cures the Scab
and Impetigo, stays the falling down of the Fundament, the immoderate flowing
of the Menses, and the Haemorrhoids.

By Lotion,
It helps many Diseases of the Eyes, the asperity of the Eyelids, the falling
off of the Hair, and the running Sores of the Head.

By Injection,
The Diseases of the Womb, Fundament, and Bladder.

FINIS.

