The Loyal Maids good Counsel to all her Fellow-Maids.
To be careful of wanton Young Men,
They Will promise they love you again and again:
But if they get their will of you before you are wed
You may look a new sweetheart and a new Maidenhead:
And believe no false youngmen that will dissemble and lie,
Lest they send you away with salt Tears in your Eye.
To the Tune of, Come hither my own sweet Duck. R. P.



YOung Maidens I pray you be careful,
and hearken then unto me,
And be sure to keep your Maidenhead
when in Company that you be;
For Young Men are so false-hearted,
as many does plainly see,
They Will swear and lie and give you fine Words,
they will deceive you if it may be,
And only to bring you to their Bow,
for to fulfill their will:
I pray young Maidens be wise in this,
for good Counsel means no ill.
They Will make you believe that they love you,
to draw your hearts away,
When it is nothing else but to prove you,
for to show you Venus play:
And when you have yielded to their Will
oftentimes it never comes to good,
They Are as false as Judas, so many are ill
if it be rightly understood:
But only to bring you to their Bow,
for to fulfill their Will:
I pray young Maidens be wise in this,
for good Counsel means no ill.
The second part
to the same Tune.
They will have you to the Beer and Wine,
and there Money they will not spare,
But there is a thing above your knee,
but of that take special Care,
Or else you may be overthrown:
the sport it will move them so,
Then you may curse the time you kept Company:
all this is true you know,
And only to bring you to their Bow, etc.
They Will vow in your ear, and to you will swear,
there shall never be no strife,
And tell you you are there Love and their Dear,
and they will make you their one sweet Wife:
When all are lies that some men devise,
they will undo you and away they will go;
Be careful of this when they slaver and kiss,
fond Love it is false you do know:
And only to bring, etc.
They Will wake you all night for their own delight,
and keep you you cannot sleep,
And many will seek to do you a spite
to bring bobbing and hey ho to me t:
And if they can bring there purpose about
then they will desire no more,
Then he will be gone like a false hearted Man,
and brag on it he has made you a Whore:
And only to bring you to their Bow,
There is many a Maid has been served so,
both in London and the Country too;
When a false-hearted Lover a Maiden does woe,
then all the skill he can show he will do:
But now pretty Maidens be ruled by a fool,
when she proffers such kindness, I say,
And give them mock for mock, let them not come under your Smock,
if they do they will show you some play.
And only to bring you to their Bow,
It is very hard for a Maiden to trust
some Young men's Constancy,
They are so cunning and so unjust
as the World does plainly see;
They strive to make a Maid a Mother
before they will make her their Wife,
He is but a Knave, if he were my own Brother,
to destroy a poor Maid so with grief,
When they seek for to bring them to their Bow,
Content your selves, now pretty Maids,
in closing up the same,
There is many thousands of honest Young Men
of Credit and in good Fame,
If you can choose amongst those Men,
and let the worser sort then stay,
But have a care of your Maidenhead
keep it till your Wedding Day:
Some will strive to bring you to their Bow,
She was a Maid that did set out this Song,
she was thirty before she was Wed,
She had great care of every one,
to save her Maidenhead.
At last their came an honest Man
and made her his own dear Wife:
If she had yielded to some that came before
she had been undone all the days of her life:
Printed for P. Brooksby at the Golden Ball in Pye-corner.


