portrait of Richard Lower RICHARD LOWER. M. D. Aetatis Suae. 55.


DR. LOWERS, And several other Eminent Physicians RECEIPTS: CONTAINING The Best
and Safest Method for Curing most Diseases in Humane Bodies.

Very useful for all sorts of People, especially those who live remore from
Physicians.

LONDON, Printed for John Nutt near Stationers' Hall. 1700.

Price Bound 1 s.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
HAving long studied the Noble Science of Physic, (which is nothing else than
the knowledge of Preserving present Health, or Restoring it when decayed, by
expelling Diseases) and through the whole Course of many years Practice in
London, having had equal Success with the most celebrated Physicians of the
Age, and now finding my Body almost worn out by Time, and Lise dwindling upon
the Socket ready to be extinguished, I resolved to do something, that might be
beneficial to my Country, before I took up my Abode in the Cave of Darkness and
Oblivion.

Now considering that many People lived so remote from a Judicious Physician:
That the Sick Person in many Acute Diseases might lose his Life before a
Physician could be brought to his Assistance: That others were not able to give
Fees, and consequently must Dye for want of Money to pay a Doctor: That some of
the Faculty were dilatory in their proceedings, and that Apothecaries too often
in compounding Medicines Slur'd in Quid for Quo, and made use of such Drugs as
they had by them, though being Decayed were fit for Nothing but to be thrown to
the Dunghill. These considerations, I say, put me upon publishing this Manual
of Prescriptions, that all Persons might have Cheap and Effectual Remedies at
Hand to Cure their Diseases: That their own Eyes might be Judges of the
Goodness of the Drugs, and their own Cares concerned in making up their
Medicines, without hazarding their Lives upon the Carelessness, or Sordid
Interests of Apothecaries, who play what Tricks they please, and can never be
Detected when the Medicine is compounded.

The following Prescriptions by their own Innate Virtue speaking for
themselves, they stand in no need of my Commendations; and therefore all I have
to add, is to assure the Reader that the Prescriptions that bear the Name of
the late Famous and Incomparable Physician Dr. Lower, were all his Own
Receipts, Communicated to me with his Own Hand a little before his Death, that
such Great Benefits to Mankind might not Die with him, nor fall into Hands
where the World could Reap no advantage by them.

The other Prescriptions are the Fruits of their Studies, whose Names and
Images are stamped upon them, and the rest are My own. They are all the Peculiar
Acquisitions, and Secrets of their Authors, Studiously Invented, Diligently
Revised, and so often Reformed and Meliorated by long Use and repeated
Probations, that I could no longer withstand the Importunities, of those many
Judicious Persons that desired the Publication of them, nor Conceal them longer
from the Benefit that will redound to the Public by the Use of them. And that
they may prove as Beneficial for time to come, as they have formerly done, is
the Hearty Desire of

J. W.

THE INDEX.
A.
AChes or Pains, Page 31, 40, 43, 77 Acidities of the Stomach, Page 3
Asthmatick Coughs, Page 2 Almonds of the Ears being down, Page 39 Agues to
Cure, Page 26, 37, 99 Aguish pains of the Head, Page 76 Apoplexy, Page 9, 78
Appetite to create, Page 17 Aching of Hollow-teeth, Page 3 Astringent Clyster,
Page 88 St. Anthony's Fire, Page 104
B.
BAlsam of Lucatellus, Page 30 Bloody Flux, Page 18, 26, 41 Blood to sweeten,
Page 39 Blood-shot-Eyes, Page 63, 95 Bruise, Page 11, 51, 85, 103 Blasts, Page
23 Biting of Mad Dogs, Page 27 Bleeding at the Nose to Staunch, Page 28, 75
Burns, Page 30, 48, 97 Bleeding Wounds to stop, Page 26 Burns made with
Gunpowder, Page 58 Balsam for Scalds or Burns, Page 94 Breast sore, Page 40
Back to strengthen, Page 48, 101
C.
CAnker in the Mouth, Page 13 Colic, Page 8, 12, 61 Clyster Anodyne, Page 59
Convulsive Fits, Page 17, 103 Colds, Page 18, 60, 105 Consumption, Page 23, 49,
80, 88 Cramp, Page 46 Costiveness, Page 80, 98 Coughs Consumptive, Page 11, 31
Chalybeate Infusion, Page 13 Cephalic Plaster, Page 33 Cordial Water, Page 95
Cephalic Powder, Page 9, 98.
D.
DRink for the Scurvy, Page 84, 89 Drink to be used in Fevers, Page 98 Diet
Drink effectual in Venereal Accidents, Page 20, 21 Diabetes, or Pissing-Evil,
Page 83 Dead Child to bring away, Page 37 Drink for Young Children, Page 50
Diarrhoea, Page 5 Daffy's Elixir, Page 1 Dropsy, Page 24, 38, 78, 84 Delivery
to help, Page 65 Digestion to cause, Page 90 Dullness of hearing, Page 57
Defluxions, Page 20, 91
E.
EYe-water, Page 19, 34, 61 Ears pained, Page 45, 82 Emulsion cooling, Page 52
Eyes inflamed, Page 72 Epilepsy, Page 17 Excessive sweating, Page 64 Electuary
Stomatick, Page 100
F.
FAce bruised, Page 75 Fevers Spotted, Page 7 Fainting Fits, Page 73
Falling Sickness, Page 24, 61, 106 Face to preserve, Page 46 Feet-stinking,
Page 96 Fistula, Page 10 Felon, Page 42 Freckles, Page 62 Phlegm and Choler to
purge, Page 100
G.
GAngreen, Page 25, 75 Gravel, Page 32, 52 Gout, Page 40, 56 Gouty pains to
appease, Page 77 Gonorrhaea, Page 20, 80 Green Sickness, Page 83 Green Salve to
make, Page 93 Giddiness in the Head, Page 9, 44 Gums Scorbutic, Page 102
Green's Powder, Page 104
H.
HEart-burning, Page 3 Haemorroids, Page 47 Hair to increase, Page 61
Hysterical fits, Page 8, 52, 87, 89 Humours-clammy, Page 64 Head to purge, Page
97
I.
JAundice-black, Page 65, 105 Jaundice-yellow, Page 4 Imposthume of the Lungs,
Page 44, 71 Itch, Page 15, 81, 102 Italian Plaster, Page 50 Inflammations to
cure, Page 107
K. KIdneys ulcerated, Page 19
L.
LIver to strengthen, Page 25 Looseness, Page 21, 35, 91 Lungs oppressed, Page
77 Lower's Tincture, Page 1 Lozenges pectoral, Page 10 Limewater to make, Page
14 Lip-salve Sir Edmund Kings, Page 22 Lozenges of Rhubarb, Page 99 Lungs
Consumptive, Page 108
M.
MOther-fits, Page 38, 54, 93 Mouth-sore, Page 13, 86, 92 Milk-water, Page 44
Members bruised, Page 101
N.
NIpples-sore, Page 35 Noise in the Ears, Page 16 Numb Palsy, Page 106 Nose
red and shining, Page 49
O.
OBstructions, Page 51 Oil of Toads to make, Page 60 Oil of Charity, Page 24
P.
PAins in the Side, Page 85 Plague to prevent, Page 55, 59 Pleurisy, Page 70
Pectoral Syrup, Page 74 Preservative against Infection, Page 86 Pectoral Pills,
Page 90 Piles, Page 21, 47, 92 Plasters for the Feet, Page 13 Plaster for the
Worms, Page 15 Paracelsus's Plaster, Dr. Lower's way, Page 42 Palsy, Page 103
Q. QVinsey, Page 67
R.
RVpture, Page 54, 68, 73 Rickets, Page 63, 96 Rheumatick Eyes, Page 15, 76,
95, 108 Rheums, Page 20, 82, 91 Rheumatick Pains, Page 7, 31, 40 Running Sores,
Page 98
S.
SCurvy, Page 41, 53, 68 Scald Head, Page 22 Stomach-sore, Page 57, 69 Stiches,
Page 43, 58 Spitting of Blood, Page 28, 36, 60 Shingles, Page 23, 62 Stoppage
at the Stomach, Page 69 Stone, Page 14, 58, 70, 52, 83, 97 Stomach-worms, Page
72 Swellings to discuss and ripen, Page 49, 76, 79, 88. Strangury, Page 78
Sinews shrunk, Page 27, 65 Shortness of Breath, Page 2, 79 Sharpness of Urine,
Page 12 Stone in the Kidneys, Page 32 Syrup of Cinnamon, Page 33 Surfeit-water,
Page 43 Sight to strengthen, Page 54 Speck or Film in the Eye, Page 101 Strain,
Page 16, 21, 81 Snail-water. Page 87
T.
TEnesmus, Page 66 Throat-sore, Page 46, 90, 106 Teeth to whiten, Page 3 Teeth
to fasten, Page 4, 52, 102 Tincture Stomatick, Page 45 Tetter, Page 57
V.
VOmit to make, Page 93 Ulcers, Page 10, 36 Ulcer in the Lungs, Page 19
Vomiting to stop, Page 35, 47 Vapors Hysterical, Page 47
W.
WHite Salve to make, Page 68 Worms to kill, Page 74, 94, 107 Watery Humors,
Page 86 Wind to expel, Page 95 Whitlow, Page 9 Wen, Page 18 Web in the Eye,
Page 27 Wounds to cure, Page 53 Weakness of the Back, Page 55 Whites, Page 100
Water to clear the Eyesight, Page 61
Dr. LOWER's, And several other Eminent Physicians RECEIPTS.
To make Dr. Lower's Tincture, commonly called Daffy's Elixir.
TAKE of the best Senna, Guiacum, Liquorish sliced small, Aniseeds,
Coriander-seeds and Elecampane-Root, of each half an Ounce; Raisins of the Sun
stoned a quarter of a pound; Let them all be bruised, and put into a quart of
the best Aqua vitae. The Dose is 2 or 3 Ounces. It gives present ease in the
Colic.

An excellent Medicine for Asthmatick Coughs, by Dr. Lower.
Take Conserve of Hips 2 Ounces, Flower of Brimstone one Ounce, Balsam of
Sulphur anisated 40 Drops; moisten it with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of
Marshmallows: Take about the bigness of a Nutmeg of it at any time.

For shortness of Breath, by Dr. G -- s.
Take of Orris root powdered 2 Drams, make it into a mass with a piece of
Squill bruised, of which make about 20 Pills, and take 4 every morning, and at
Five in the Afternoon, drinking a Draught of the following Apozem after them.
Take of the five Opening Roots of each an Ounce, of Maidenhair and Speedwell,
of each an handful, of Coriander-seeds a quarter of an Ounce, boil them in 3
pints of Water to a quart, then strain it, and add to it Tincture of Saffron an
Ounce, Syrup of Horehound an Ounce and an half.

How to make the King of France's Teeth-Powder, famous for making the Teeth
white, and preserving them from the Scurvy.
Take of Chalk and pebble Stones burnt, of each an Ounce, Myrrh, Bole-armoniack
and Dragon's-blood, of each half an Ounce, of Ammoniacum and Cuttle-bones of
each 3 Drams; Let them be all finely powdered.

For the Heart-burning, or Acidity of the Stomach.
Take of the whitest Chalk 2 Ounces, of Crab's-eyes and Bole-Armoniack of each
half an Ounce, of Oil of Nutmegs 10 Drops, powder them, and take a quarter of
an Ounce at a time, in a Draught of Milk and Water.

A very good Remedy for an hollow, aching Tooth, by Dr. C -- n.
Take of Camphire and Crude Opium of each four Grains, make them into 3 Pills,
with as much Oil of Cloves as is convenient, roll them in Cotton, lay them to
the aching Tooth, and they will give you ease in an Instant.

To fasten loose Teeth, and prevent the Toothache.
Take Myrrh and Japan-earth, of each two Drams, bruise and boil them in a pint
of Claret, to the consumption of the third part, then strain it, and let it
settle, wash your mouth with the Clearest every morning. If your Teeth are very
foul, take a rag and dip it in Spirit of Vitriol, and rub your Teeth with it,
washing your mouth with Water after it.

A Method to cure the Jaundice, which has been tried with great success.
In the first place give the Patient a Vomit of the Infusion of Crocus
Metallorum, and Oxymel of Squills, according to his Constitution, then take of
Aloes and Rhubarb of each 2 Scruples, of prepared Steel one Dram, Tartar
vitriolated one Scruple, make Pills, with Syrup of Horehound, of which give 4
every night.

Take of the Roots of Turmerick half an Ounce, tops of Centaury the lesser,
Roman Wormwood and Horehound of each an handful, Roots of the greater Nettle, 2
Ounces, boil them in 3 pints of Water to the consumption of half; when it is
almost boiled enough, add to it Juniper berries an Ounce, Yellow Saunders and
Goose Dung made into a Nodulus, of each three Drams, Saffron 2 Scruples,
Rhenish-wine a pint; when it is boiled enough strain it, and add to it
Compound-water of Snails and Earthworms, of each 2 Ounces. Take 3 Ounces of it,
after each time of taking the following Electuary.

Take of the Conserve of Sea wormwood, of the outward Rind of Orange-peels, of
each 2 Ounces, of Species Diacurcumae, and prepared Steel, of each 3 Drams; of
prepared Earthworms and Rhubarb of each 2 Drams; Flowers of Sal Armoniack, and
Salt of Amber, of each 2 Scruples; of Saffron powdered one Scruple, with a
sufficient quantity of Syrup of Horehound; make an Electuary, of which take the
quantity of a large Nut-Meg twice a day, drinking 3 Ounces of the bitter
Tincture after it.

For a Diarrhoea, or Looseness.
It is better to Carry off the corrupt Humor that is a float, by purging; than
to check it by Astringents, unless the extreme weakness of the Patient
indicates the contrary. In the beginning of the Looseness, give this Bolus over
night,

Take of Mercurius Dulcis one Scruple, of Rhubarb finely powdered 2 Scruples,
make it into a Bolus, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Dried Roses: If
the Patient is but weak, give no more than half a Scruple of Mercurius Dulcis;
If this does not put a stop to the Looseness, let the Patient take this Vomit.

Take of White Vitriol a Dram and half Oxymel of Squills 2 Ounces, mix them,
and give a spoonful at a time in a Draught of Carduus-water, give more or less
according as it works: But if through weakness the Patient cannot bear purging,
then give him this Bolus. Take of torrified Rhubarb half a Scruple, make it
into a Bolus with half a dram of Diascordium and Venice Treacle, give it at
night with 3 Spoonfuls of this Julep after it, and so every 6 hours. Take of
Mint, and small Cinnamon Water hordeated of each 4 Ounces, of Species of
Hyacinth, red Coral, and Bole-Armoniack of each one Dram, Syrup of Quinces an
Ounce and an half; Clisters of Milk, with Diascordium, are also very good. Take
of Burnt Hartshorn 2 Ounces, boil it in two Quarts of water to one, with a
Crust of Bread, and some Cinnamon, strain it, and add to it small
Cinnamon Water 2 ounces, and as much Sugar as will sweeten it, Let it be the
Patients ordinary Drink.

A powerful Remedy for Rheumatick Pains, By Dr. Lower.
Take of Senna, Hermodacts, Turpethum and Scammony, of each 2 Drams, of
Zedoary, Ginger and Cubebs, of each a Dram, mix them, and let them be powdered;
the Dose is from one Dram to two, in any convenient Vehicle. Let the parts
affected be anointed with this Liniment. Take Palm Oil 2 Ounces, Oil of
Turpentine one Ounce, Volatile Salt of Hartshorn 2 Drams; afterward lay on a
Plaster of Mucilaginibus. Some that have been very much troubled with
Rheumatick Pains, have, by the taking of Spirit of Hartshorn in Compound-water
of Earthworms found mighty benefit.

An excellent Medicine for the Spotted, and all other malignant Fevers,
prescribed by Dr. B -- re.
Take of the best Virginia Snake-Weed, and Root of Contraryerva finely
powdered, of each half a Scruple, Goa-stone half a Scruple, Castor and Camphire
of each 5 Grains, make them into a Bolus, with a Scruple of Venice Treacle, and
as much Syrup of Peony as is sufficient; to repeat the Bolus every six hours,
drinking a Draught of the following Julep after it.

Take of Scorzonera-roots 2 Ounces, Butter-bur Roots half an Ounce, of Balm and
Scordium, of each an handful, of Coriander-seeds 3 Drams, of Liquorish, Figs
and Raisins, of each an Ounce; let them boil in three Pints of Conduit-water to
a quart, then strain it, and add to it compound Peony-water 3 Ounces, Syrup of
Rasberries an Ounce and an half. Let it be the Patient's ordinary Drink.

A Medicine for the Colic, which not only gives ease in the most violent Fits,
but also being often used prevents their returning.
Take of the best Manna, and Oil of Sweet-Almonds, of each an Ounce and an
half, of Chamomil Flowers boiled in Posset Drink an handful, let the
Posset Drink be strained from the Flowers and mingled very well with the Oil of
Almonds and Manna; let the Patient take it Three days successively, and
afterward every third day for a Fortnight.

For Hysterical Fits.
Take of Pill Faetida and Ruffi, of each a Dram, Castor half a Scruple, Salt of
Amber and Volatile Salt of Sal Armoniack, of each 12 Grains, make them into 24
Pills, with as much Elixir Proprietatis as is sufficient; take 4 of them every
Night, or every other Night, according as they Work. Take also 30 Drops of the
following mixture in a Draught of Penny-royal-water, twice a day, or at any
other time when the Fits come. Take Spirit of Hartshorn, and Oil of Amber, of
each 2 Drams, Tincture of Castor and Spirit of Saffron, of each one Dram.

For a Whitlow.
Take Sage and Castle-soap, of each a like quantity, mix them well, and lay
them on the Whitlow, or take common Rosin finely powdered, as much as is
sufficient, and mix with the white of an Egg and lay it to the part.

Dr. R -- 's famous Cephalic Sneezing-Powder.
Take of Sage, Rosemary, Lilies of the Valley, the Tops of sweet-majoram, of
each half an Ounce, of Nutmegs and Asarabacca-roots, of each one Dram; dry them
and let them be made into a fine Powder. It Cures Megrims and Vertigo's,
prevents Apoplexies, and gives ease in all pains of the Head.

To Cure any old hollow Ulcer or Fistula.
Take 3 Drams of the best Myrrh grossly powdered, boil in half a pint of Claret,
let it stand and settle, pour the clear off for your use. If the Ulcer be very
foul, dress it with a Dram of red Precipitate, and two of Linimentum Arcei, as
soon as it is well cleans'd inject the Tincture Warm. If it be a Fistula, after
you have used good Digestives, and are assured, that it is clean at bottom,
make use of the Tincture, which will engender good flesh, and Unite the Lips of
the Wound in a very short time, lay upon the Orifice, if the Wound be in a cold
part, Emplastrum ad Herniam, which will both keep it warm and help to close it.
In green Wounds this Tincture has not its equal, for it heals them at 2 or 3
Dressings.

A very good Receipt to make Pectoral Lozenges by Dr. B -- d.
Take of the Powder of Diarrhodon Abbatis, one Dram, Flowers of Sulphur, and
Benjamin of each 2 Scruples, Powder of Elecampane half a Dram, Japan Earth, one
dram and an half, natural Balsam one Scruple Tincture of Sulphur anisated, 40
drops, London Laudanum, gr. 10. White Sugar Candy a quarter of a Pound, make
them into Lozenges, with a sufficient quantity of Spanish juice, dissolved in
Hysop-water.

Dr. B -- y's Receipt for a Consumptive Cough.
Take of the Syrup of white and red Poppies, of each 3 Ounces, of Barley
Cinnamon Water, and red Poppy-water, of each 2 Ounces, of Tincture of Saffron,
1 Ounce, Liquid Laudanum 40 drops, and as much Spirit of Sulphur as will make
it Acid. Take 3 or 4 Spoonfuls of it every Night going to Bed, increase or
diminish the Dose according as you find it agrees with you.

An excellent Remedy for a Bruise.
Take of Red Coral, Dragons Blood, Irish slate and Mummy, of each half an
Ounce, of Lemnian Earth, and Sperma ceti, of each 2 Drams, of Rhubarb 3 Drams;
let them all be finely Powdered, grive a Dram of it at a time, in a Draught of
Brunswick Ale, after the Patient has been Blooded.

For Suppression and sharpness of Urine.
Take of Fennel, and Parsly-water, of each 2 Ounces, of the Compound Water of
Horseradish an Ounce and an half, Sal Prunellae one Dram, Spirit of Turpentine
10 drops, Syrup of Marshmallows an Ounce, mix them, and let the Patient drink
it off all together, and it will give him ease in a very short time.

For the Colic.
Take of Chamomil Flowers, and Mallow Leaves of each an handful, Juniper
Berries, and Faenugreek seeds, of each half an Ounce, let the Seeds and Berries
be bruised, boil them in a pint of Water, add to it strained, of Turpentine
Dissolved, with the Yolk of an Egg, and Oil of Chamomil, of each an Ounce,
Diacatholicon, 6 Drams, Hiera Piera, 2 Drams, mix and give it; after the
Operation of the Glyster, give the Patient the following mixture. Take of Rue
and Chamomile Water of each 1 Ounce. Cinamon-water an Ounce, liquid Laudanum 20
Drops, Syrup of white Poppies an Qunce.

An excellent Plaster, to be applied to the Feet in Fevers, which lie much in
the Head.
Take of Burgundy Pitch, and Emplastrum Cephalicum, of each a like quantity,
spread it upon Sheeps Leather, and apply it.

A famous Water for a sore Mouth or Cancer, by Dr. Lower.
Take 3 Pints of small Beer, half a Pound of Honey, of Red Sage, Rosemary,
Bramble Leaves, and Celandine, of each an handful, roch Alum, as much as will
make it sharp, let it boil till it comes to a Quart, then strain it and keep it
for use; this Water will Cure any sore Mouth if curable: If at any time
stinking Ulcers infect the Gums or Mouth, let half an Ounce of Unguentum
Aegyptiacum, be added to half a Pint of Water.

To make Dr. Lower's bitter Chalybeat Infusion.
Take of the Tops of Roman Wormwood, and Centaury, of each an Handful, of
Carduus Seeds and Gentian Root, sliced, of each half an Ounce, of Filings of
Steel 2 Ounces, of Compound Gentian and Wormwood-water of each 6 Ounces, of
Milk Water a Quart, put them all together into a Bottle, and let them stand
close stopped 15 days, then strain and keep it for your use. Take 6 Spoonfuls
every morning, and at 5 in the Afternoon, fasting an hour afterward.

How to make the Lime-drink famous for Curing the Stone.
Take a good half Peck of Lime-stones new burnt, and put them into 4 Gallons of
Water, stir it well at the first putting in, then let it stand, and stir it
again; as soon as it is very well settled, strain it off clear into a large
Pot, and put to it 4 Ounces of Sassafras, and 4 Ounces of Liquorish sliced
thin, Raisins of the Sun stoned 1 Pound, half a Pound of blew Currants, Mallows
and Mercury, of each an handful, Coriander, Fenil, and Aniseeds of each an
Ounce, let the Pot stand close covered for Nine days, then strain it, and let
it settle, and pour the clearest of it into Bottles, you may drink half a Pint
of it at a time, as often as you please, in your mornings draught put a Dram of
Winter Cherries powdered. This has cured some that have been so Tormented with
the Stone in the Bladder, that they could not make Water, after they have in
vain tried all other Remedies.

For Rheum in the Eyes.
Take half an Ounce of Lapis Calaminaris, made red hot 3 times, and quenched in
red Rose Water, afterward filter it through a brown Paper, and wash your Eyes
with it very often.

A Plaster for the Worms, by Dr. Brown.
Take half a Pint of Ox-gall, and boil therein 2 or 3 spriggs of Lavender
Cotton, and as much Wormwood, and as much Rue, when it has boiled a pretty
while, take out the Herbs, and put to it an Ounce of choice Aloes in powder,
then set it on the Fire till it grows thick, and let it be spread on a piece of
Sheeps Leather, and applied to the Navel.

An Ointment for the Itch.
Take Pomatum 3 Ounces, Sal-Prunellae, and Sulphur vivum finely Powdered, of
each 3 Drams, mix them and let the Patient anoint every night and morning, but
it is much more effectual if this Lotion be first used. Take of the Roots of
Elicampane, and sharp pointed Dock, of each 2 Ounces, let them be bruised and
boiled in 3 Pints of Vinegar to a quart, to be used twice a day, for 3 days.

For a Noise in the Ear, Proceeding either of a Cold, or a Blow.
Take of Tincture of Castor, Oil of bitter Almonds, of each one Dram, Civit 2
Grains, mix and Drop of it into the Ear, stopping the Ear afterward with a
piece of Black-Wool. If the Noise comes of Cold, purge the Head with Pills of
Cochiae.

An Effectual Remedy for an Old Strain.
Take of Crown-Soap a quarter of a Pound, the strongest wort that you can get a
Pint, of Brandy 2 Ounces, let them all boil together; about the latter end, add
to it Myrrh, and Bole-Armoniack, finely Powdered of each 3 Drams, afterward
let it boil to the Consistence of a Plaster, which spread upon Sheeps Leather,
and apply to the part affected.

An Experienced Remedy against Epilepsies and Convulsive Fits.
Take of Male Peony Root, half an Ounce Missletoe of the Oak, Man's Skull, and
white Amber, of each 2 Drams, red Coral, and Cinnabar of Antimony, of each one
Dram, Camphire half a Dram, mix and reduce to a fine Powder, of which give from
a Scruple to a Dram twice a Day, especially 3 days before the full Moon, in 3
or 4 spoonfuls of this mixture.

Take of the Water of Lilies and Rue, of each 4 Ounces, of the Compound
Peony-water 2 Ounces, of Tincture of Castor 3 Drams, Salt of Amber one Dram,
Syrup of Peonies, an Ounce and an half.

To Create a good Appetite, and strengthen the Stomach by Dr. Lower.
Take of the Stomatick Pill with Gums, Extractum Rudii, of each a Dram, Resin
of Jalap half a Scruple, Tartar vitriolated one Scruple, Oil of Aniseeds 4
Drops, mix with Syrup of Violets, and make into Pills, of which take 4 or 5
over Night; they are of excellent use in the Megrims, and Vertigo, by reason
they carry the Humor off from the Stomach, which fumes up into the head.

A very good Medicine for the Bloody Flux by Dr. W -- s.
Take of the best Rhubarb finely Powdered half an Ounce, of red Saunders 2
Drams, Cinnamon one Dram, Crocus Martis Astringent, 3 Drams, of Lucatellus
Balsam, what suffices, make a mass for Pills of which take 4 every day for a
Fortnight. This has Cured some that have lost a vast quantity of Blood, after
they had in vain tried abundance of other Remedies.

For a Wen.
Take of black Soap and unquench'd Lime of each a like quantity mix them well
together, and spread them upon Sheep's Leather, apply to the part affected, and
it will Consume away by degrees.

An Excellent Plaster for any pain occasioned by a Cold or Bruise.
Take of the Plaster of red lead, and Oxycroceum, of each equal parts, of the
best Theban opium, one Scruple, spread it on Leather, and lay it to the part
that Aches, after you have well anointed it with this Ointment, Take of
Ointment of Marshmallows, one Ounce, Oil of Exeter half an Ounce, Oil of Spike,
and Spirit of Hartshorn, of each a Dram.

A famous Collyrium, or Eye-water.
Take of Red-rose, and Eyebright-water, of each 2 Ounces, of the best Aloes
finely Powdered one Dram, Sugar of Lead one Scruple, mix them, and with a
Sponge let some drop into the Eye every Night.

For an Ulcer in the Lungs and Kidneys.
Take of white Poppy seeds and Starch, of each one Dram, of Marshmallows,
Purslain and Quince-seeds, of each 2 Drams, of Liquorish, Gum-Arabick and
Amber, of each one Dram, of Myrrh, Bole Armoniack, Japan Earth, and red Coral,
of each 2 Drams, let them be Powdered, and made into Pills, with a sufficient
Quantity of Balsam of Capevie, roll them in Liquorish-powder, of which give 4
every Morning, and at 5 in the Afternoon; take of Marshmallows, Grass, and
asparagus Roots, of each one Ounce, of Speedwell and Maidenhair one handful,
Figs and Raisins, of each one Ounce, boil them in 3 Pints of Water to a Quart,
strain and keep it for use.

For Cold Rheums or Defluxions of the Head.
Take of Lignum Aloes, and Sassafras, sliced thin, of Amber Grossly beaten, of
each 2 Drams, cut Betony half an Ounce, Rosemary and Lavender-flowers, of each
a quarter of an Ounce, mingle and smock as Tobacco.

A very effectual Injection for a Gonorrhea, which Heals the Ulcers, and stops
the Gleeting.
Take of Plantain, and Frogs spawn water of each 3 Ounces, of Trochisci albi
Rhasis, 2 Drams, Sugar of Lead one Dram, honey of Roses, one Ounce.

A Diet-Drink, very effectual in all Venereal Accidents.
Take of China, Sassafras, and Sarsaparilla-Root, of each 2 Ounces, Guiacum one
Ounce and a half, Crude Antimony, made into a Nodulus, 2 Ounces, boil them in a
Gallon of Water, to two Quarts, about the latter end, add of Coriander-seeds,
half an Ounce, of Raisins and Liquorish sliced, of each 2 Ounces, strain and
drink instead of Beer.

For the same.
Take of Gum Guiacum two Drams, of Mercurius Dulcis, and Extractum Rudii, of
each one Dram, make into Pills with Balsam of Capivie, of which take 4 every
other Night.

A very effectual Remedy for the Piles.
Take Black-lead scraped fine, mix it with some honey, till the Honey looks
black, then put it into an Oyster-shell, and set it over the Fire, till it
Grows so stiff, that you can make it into a Suppository.

For a Looseness.
Take a small handful of Rice, Bruise it well, and boil in some Claret, till it
comes to the thickness of a Poultice, spread it on a Cloth, and lay it on warm
to the belly of the Patient, renew it every Night till the looseness is stopped.

For a fresh strain.
Take of Linseed Oil, and rectified Spirit of Wine, of each 2 Ounces Oil of
Spike one Ounce, mix and rub the part very well with it, and lay to it a
Plaster of Paracelsus.

Sir Edmund King's Lip-Salve.
Take two Pennyworth of Virgins-wax, melt it in a Silver Porringer, with Orange
Flower-water, let it cool and take the Cake off, which melt again in fresh
Orange Flower-water, repeat doing so for 3 or 4 times, then put to the Wax an
Ounce of Oil of Behn, a Scruple of Saffron finely powdered, and a lump of
double refined Sugar, about the bigness of a Nutmeg, mix them well over the
fire, keeping it stirring till it is Cold, then work it with a Knife on a
marble, and keep it in a Box for your use, if you would have it something
redder, add a little Alkanet roots in Powder.

To make Oil of Bacon, for a Scald-head.
Take a piece of fat Bacon, roast it, and let it drop into a Dish, of which take
2 Ounces, and mix with 2 Penny worth of Verdigrease, and anoint the Head with
it once a day, this has been often tried with success.

An excellent Ointment for a Blast.
Take of Elder, Bramble, Fetherfew, Maidenhair, Vervain and Dill, of each one
handful, 12 Leaves of red Sage, chop them small, and boil them in fresh Butter,
strain and keep for your use, anoint the place 4 or 5 times in a day with a
Feather, lay mallow Leaves dipped in the Ointment all over the part.

For the Shingles.
Take of the Green Moss, which sticks to the sides of a Well bucket, and apply
cold, renewing it once every day, in 4 or 5 days it will make a cure.

For a Consumption.
Take the Yolk of a new laid Egg, beat it with 3 spoonfuls of Red-rose-water,
put to it half a pint of the Stroakings of red Cows Milk, sweetened with a
sufficient Quantity of Sugar of Roses, add to it a little Nutmeg scrapt, take
this every morning for a month, fasting 2 hours after it, this restored a
Gentleman that was given over by the Doctors.

To make the Oil of Charity.
Take Chamomil, Rosemary, Lavender, Wormwood, Sage, Valerian the lesser, of
each 2 handfulls, put them after you have stamped them, into a Quart of Oil of
Olives, let the Herbs infuse in the Oil till they are crisp, then strain the
Oil out, which is very good for any white swelling, especially the King's Evil.

For a Dropsy.
Take of Horseradish Roots slit thin, and sweet Fenil-seeds bruised, of each 2
Ounces, Smallage and Fenil Roots sliced, of each one Ounce, of the tops of
Time, Winter savory, sweet Majoram, Water Cresses, and Nettles, of each one
handful, bruise the Herbs, and boil them in 3 Pints of Sack, and 3 of Water, to
the Consumption of half; let it stand close covered for Three hours, then
strain it, and drink a Draught of it twice in a day, sweetened with Syrup of
Fenil, fasting 2 hours after it.

To Cure the Falling Sickness.
Take the Ashes of a Swallow, burnt in an earthen Pot, of which give as much as
will lie upon a Sixpence, mingled with juice of Rue, every Morning for 9 days
together.

To Cure a Gangreen.
Take 4 Ounces of unslack'd Lime, and pour upon it a Pint of warm Water; let it
stand so 6 hours; then Filtrate it through a brown Paper, and put to the
clearest of it Sublimate half a Dram, keep it in a Glass close stopped, shaking
it often; first wash the Sore with it very well, then lay to it a Linen Cloth
dipped therein; it will consume the Proud flesh, cleanse the Sore, and by its
drying quality, heal it in a very short time. It is of singular use in the Itch
and Leprosy.

To strengthen the Liver and prevent a Dropsy.
Take of the red and Yellow Dock-Roots, of the White and yellow Saunders,
Guiacum, and Mechoacan, of each an Ounce, of Agrimony, and Hart's-tongue, of
each 2 handfuls, of Coriander-seeds, once Ounce, bruise them and put them into
a Canvas Bag, with a stone to sink it. Put the Bag into 4 Gallons of new Ale.
In 4 days time it will be fit to Drink.

To stop a Bleeding Wound.
Take Roman Vitriol, Calcine it till it is red, Powder it, and apply it to the
Wound; or take of the aforesaid Vitriol, dissolve it in Water, and lay to the
Wound a piece of Lint dipped therein.

An excellent Remedy for Agues which has been often tried with very great
success.
Take of Black-soap, Gunpowder, stinking Tobacco and Brandy, of each an equal
quantity, mix them well together; and 3 hours before the Fit comes, apply to
the Patients Wrists; let this be kept on for a Fortnight.

For the Bloody Flux.
Take 2 Quarts of Conduit-water, in which, Gads of steel have been often
quenched 3 Sheets of white Paper, a stick of Cinnamon, an Ounce of old Conserve
of red Roses, and half a pint of Claret; boil them all together to the
Consumption of half; strain and drink of it plentifully.

To Cure the biting of a mad Dog.
Take 2 Quarts of strong Ale, two Pennyworth of Treacle, 2 Garlick-heads, an
handful of Cinquefoil, Sage and Rue, boil them all together to a quart; strain
and give the Patient 3 or 4 spoonfuls twice a day: Take Dittany, Agrimony, and
rusty Bacon, beaten well together; and apply to the Soar, to keep it from
Festering.

For Sinews that are shrunk.
Take 12 young Swallows out of the Nest, of Rosemary, Lavender and Strawberry
leaves, of each an handful; bruise the Swallows with their Guts and Feathers;
then boil them all in a sufficient quantity of fresh Butter; after you have
strained it, rub the part with it very well by the Fire.

For a Pin or Web in the Eye.
Take 2 or 3 Lice, and put them alive into the Eye that is grieved, then shut
it close, the Lice will certainly suck the Web out, and afterward without any
damage to the Patient, come out.

To stop Bleeding at the Nose.
Lay to the Temples, the Ear of a Hare burnt to Ashes, and tempered with
Vinegar; Bole Armoniack being in the same manner applied, will also have the
same effect.

An approved Remedy against spitting of Blood.
Take of the tops of stinging Nettles, Plantain leaves of each a like quantity;
bruise them and strain the Juice out, and keep it close stopped in a Bottle, of
which take 3 or 4 spoonfuls every morning and Evening, sweetened with Sugar of
Roses. The Juice of Comfry Roots, drank with Wine is also very good; let the
Patient be blooded at first, and sometimes gently purged. But if there happens
to be any inward soreness occasioned by straining, this Electuary, will be very
convenient, viz. Take one Ounce of Lucatellus Balsam, of Conserve of Roses, 2
Ounces, 12 drops of Spirit of Sulphur, to be made into a soft Electuary, with
Syrup of white Poppies; the dose is the quantity of a Nutmeg every Morning and
Evening.

Another for the same by Dr. A.
Take of Conserve of Red-Roses, Hips, and Comfry, of each an Ounce and an half,
Dragons Blood, and Bole Armoniack, of each a Dram, Japan Earth, Species of
Hyacinth, and Red Coral, of each 2 Scruples; mix them and make an Electuary
with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Red Poppies, of which take the quantity
of a Nutmeg every Night and Morning, Drinking a Draught of the following Julep
after it.

Take of the Water of Oak-buds, and Frogs Spawn, of each 3 Ounces, of Redroses
and Plantain, of each 2 Ounces, of Distilled Vinegar an Ounce and an half,
Bloodstone finely powdered one Dram, Syrup of Coral 2 Ounces. If the Patient is
troubled with a Cough (as it often happens,) and cannot Expectorate freely, let
him take of the following Linctus, with a Liquorish-stick, twice or thrice in a
Day: Linseed-Oil fresh drawn 2 Ounces, Oil of Almonds an Ounce and an half,
mucilage of Fleawort-seeds 2 Ounces, of Lohoc Sanum 3 Ounces.

An excellent Receipt to make Lucatellus Balsam.
Take Venice Turpentine, washed in Rose Water, one Pound, Beeswax half a
Pound, of the best Sallet Oil 3 Pints, of Red-rose-water and Sack of each a
quarter of a Pint, red Sanders finely Powdered one Ounce, of Oil of St. John's
Wort, and Balsam of Peru, of each 2 Ounces. Put the Beeswax sliced thin,
together with the Oil and Turpentine, into your Pipkin first, then the Sack and
Rose Water, let them boil together about a quarter of an hour; take it off the
Fire, and let it stand till next day, having made a hole in it, for the Water
to drain out, then set it over the Fire, and put in the Oils, and last of all
the Sanders by Degrees, stirring it very well till it is cold.

An Admirable Ointment for Burns.
Take of Nightshade, Housleek, Hemlock, and green Coleworts, of each 2
handfuls, of Violet-leaves and Henbane, of each one handful, bruise all these
Herbs, and boil them in 6 Pound of fresh Butter till they are soft, then press
the Juice out, and set it over the Fire again, and put to it Beeswax 4 Ounces;
after it is boiled a little, take it off, and put to it Salt of Lead-half an
Ounce, stir it well till the Salt is dissolved. Cut away the Skin, before you
lay this to the Sore, and it will heal it in Twenty Four hours.

A Powerful Remedy for Rheumatick pains in the Joints.
Take of Senna, Hermodacts, Turpethum, and Scammony, of each 2 Drams, of
Zedoary, Ginger, Cloves, and Cubebs, of each one Dram, mix them and let them be
Powdered; the Dose is from one Dram to two in any Convenient Vehicle. Let the
parts affected be anointed with this Ointment; Take Palm Oil 2 Ounces, Oil of
Turpentine one Ounce, Volatile Salt of Hartshorn 2 Drams, afterward apply to
the part, a Plaster of Red-lead; some that have been very much troubled with
Rheumatick pains, have by the taking of Spirit of Hartshorn, in Compound Water
of Earthworms, found a mighty benefit.

For a Consumptive Cough, attended with spitting of Blood, by Dr. Lower.
Take of Leaves of ground Ivy, Colts Foot, Maidenhair, and Mouse-ear, of each
one handful, of the tops of St. John's Wort, one handful, of each of the
Saunders 2 Drams of Coriander seeds 3 Drams, of Liquorish flic'd, and Raisins
stoned, of each 2 Ounces; boil in 3 Pints of Spring water to a Quart, strain
and use for your ordinary drink.

To Cure the Stone in the Kidneys.
Take of Sassafras and Sarsaparilla, of each ^ Ounces, of Saxifrage, Parsley,
and Anifeeds bruised, of each 3 Ounces, of horehound, Juniper Berries, and
Watercresses, of each one handful, of the inward Bark of Elder 3 Ounces, 3
Limons sliced with their Peels on, half an Ounce of Oil of Vitriol; put these
into 3 Quarts of White Wine, and 3 of strong Ale, let them stand 24 hours close
covered, then put them all into a close Still, and draw off with a gentle Fire:
Take a quarter of a Pint of this Water, mingled with as much White Wine, and
sweetened with Syrup of Marshmallows, every morning, and at 4 in the Afternoon,
for 4 days together, using gentle Exercise after each time of taking; it will
dissolve the Stone, and bring it away in little pieces.

For the Gravel.
Take 3 Ounces of Dr. Lower's Tincture, as it is made, Page the first, and
dissolve in it one dram of Tincture of Salt of Tartar, give it in the morning
Fasting.

To make Syrup of Cinnamon.
Take 4 Ounces of Cinnamon grossy powdered, a Pint and an half of Claret, put
them into a Glass Viol, close stopped; set it in the Sun 9 or 10 days, or infuse
in a Skillet of warm Water 24 hours; shake the Viol often, strain the Liquour
from the Cinnamon, and with a Pound of Sugary boil it to the thickness of a
Syrup; if you added to it, after it is removed from the Fire, 4 or 5 spoonfuls
of Rose Water, and 2 Grains of Musk, it would give it a very pleasant flavor;
it is an admirable thing to Comfort the Stomach, Heart and Womb, it discusseth
Wind, stops all manner of Fluxes, and being given in a little Cinnamon Water,
helps hard labor.

Dr. Lower's Cephalic Plaster, which gives ease in all pains of the Head,
stops Catarrns, and strengthens the Eyesight.
Take of Rosin 2 ounces, Beeswax, Frankincense, Turpentine, and Deer's Suit,
of each one ounce, of Mastich powdered, two Drams, of White Wine 4 ounces; put
the Rosin, Beeswax, Frankincense, and Deers Suet into the Pipkin, together
with the White Wind first, and let them boil a little, then put in the
Turpentine washed in Rose water, and last of all the Mastich, stirring it very
well.

An Experienced Water for hot and sharp Humors of the Eyes.
Take 2 Quarts of May Dew, gathered from Barley, of white Copperas and Salt, of
each a quarter of an Ounce, boil them all together till they come to a Quart;
keep for your use in a glass close stopped. Let the Salt lie a little while in
the Embers, being wrapped in a wet Cloth, and rub it small with the Copperas
before you use it.

A famous Water to preserve the Eye sight, or if lost to restore it.
Take a Rye Loaf, without Salt or Leaven, cut it into thin slices, and Distill
in a cold Still; take of the Water that comes from it, and drop of it into the
Eyes twice or thrice every day, for a month together; this Water Cured a
Gentleman after he had been blind a whole Year: Take also a Rag of Holland
Cloth, and burn it between two Pewter Dishes, and of the Water that comes from
it, drop a little into the Eye every Night.

For sore Nipples.
Take of Sperma Ceti, Oil of Almonds, and Virgins-wax, of each an equal
quantity, melt them together, and every Morning and Evening anoint the part.

For extreme Looseness.
Take a Pomewater, roast it soft, and mix the Pulp of it with as much Chalk
finely scraped, mix them well together with a Knife on a Trencher, and apply to
the Patients Navel, as hot as he can endure it; let it lie on 24 hours.

Dr. C -- n's Receipt to stop Vomiting, and strengthen the Stomach.
Take of Spearmint, Barley and Cinnamon Water, of each 3 Ounces, of
Plague-water 2 Ounces, of Salt of Wormwood, one Dram, of Juice of Lemons one
Ounce, 3 Leaves of Gold, Confection of Hyacinth, 2 Drams, Syrup of red Poppies
an Ounce and an half, mix and give 4 spoonfulls every 4 hours, shaking the Viol.

An approved Poultis for an Ulcer.
Take a good quantity of Bryony Roots, stamp them, and boil them in a
sufficient quantity of Bacon-grease, till it grows stiff; this Cured a Man's
Knee that was Fistulated in several places.

A Receipt that Cured a Gentleman, who had for a long time spit Blood in a
great Quantity, and was so wasted with a Consumption, that Dr. Willis declared
it was impossible for him to recover.
Take of Hyssop-water, and of the purest Honey of each one Pint, of Agrimony
and Coltsfoot, of each one handful, a sprig of Rue, brown Sugar Candy,
liquorish sliced, shavings of Hartshorn, of each 2 Ounces, Aniseeds bruised
once Ounce, of Figgs flic'd, and Raisins of the Sun stoned, of each 4 Ounces;
put them all into a Pipkin with a Gallon of Water, and boil it gently over a
moderate Fire till half is consumed, then strain it, and when it is cold put it
into Bottles, being close stopped; take 4 or 5 spoonfuls every morning, at 4 in
the Afternoon, and at Night the last thing. If you add fresh water to the
Ingredients after the first Liquor is strained off, you will have a pleasant
drink to be used at any time when you are a dry.

An Approved Medicine to bring away a dead Child.
Take Betony, Hyssop, and Vervain of each a small handful, boil them in a Pint
of White Wind, to half a Pint, and give it to the Patient to drink.

A very successful remedy for an Ague.
Take of the whitest Hen dung you can get, and boil it in Aniseed-water, till
it be somewhat stiff, then spread it on a Plaster, and take an Onion cut into
slices, which being pricked with a Knife, lay upon the Plaster, and apply to
both Wrists an hour before the Fit comes; as hot as the Patient can endure, let
the Plasters lie on a week after they are applied.

Another for the same.
Take a good quantity of the best Venice Turpentine, and as much Frankincense,
beat them well together spread upon Sheeps Leather and apply before the Fit
comes.

For Fits of the Mother.
Take the thick Skin of the Gizzard of a Capon, rub it very clean, dry it and
beat it to Powder, give a little quantity of it to drink, in Beer immediately
before the Fit comes, or take 3 or 4 spoonfuls of Sage-water, with 6 drops of
Oil of Amber mixed with it, either in the Fit, or before the Fit comes to
prevent it.

An Excellent method to Cure the Dropsy.
Take a good quantity of black Snails, stamp them well with Bay Salt, and lay
to the hollow of the Feet, putting fresh twice a day. Take likewise an handful
of Spearmint, and Wormwood, bruise them, and put them into a Quart of Cream,
which boil till it comes to an Oil, then strain and anoint those parts, that
are swelled. Take of the Tops of green Broom, which after you have dried in an
Oven, burn upon a clean Hearth to Ashes, which mingle very well with a Quart of
White Wind, let it stand all night to settle, and in the morning drink half a
Pint of the clearest, at 4 in the Afternoon, and at Night going to Bed do the
same. Continue laying the Poultis to your Feet, and drinking the White Wind for
3 Weeks together; this method has been often used with success.

For the Almonds of the Ears being fallen.
Take of Oil of Bays, and quicksilver, of each 2 Pennyworth, 18 Sage Leaves,
Bole Armoniack powdered 2 Drams, mix them all together very well, and spread
upon a piece of thin Leather as big as a Sixpence, and apply to the Crown of
the Head, and the Nape of the Neck. Be sure that the Quicksilver is killed
either with fasting Spittle, or Venice Turpentine.

A famous Diet Drink to sweeten the Blood.
Take of both the sorts of Scurvy Grass, of each 6 handfuls, of Ground Ivy 8
handfuls, of Sage 6 handfuls, of Soap-wort Roots, 4 Ounces, of Agrimony and
Garden-Cresses, of each 4 handfuls, of sharp pointed dock roots, 8 Ounces, of
Rosemary and Balm, of each one handful, 4 Orange-Peels, one large Nutmeg
sliced; put these things into a Bag, and steep in 8 Gallons of New Ale, as soon
as the Ale has done working, stop the Barrel close, take a pint of it every
Morning, and at 4 in the Afternoon; in 4 days time it will be fit for your use.

A Poultis for a swelling Caused by the Gout.
Take of Raisins of the Sun stoned, beat them well in a Stone Mortar with
Malago Sack, till it comes to the thickness of a Poultis, which being applied
to the swelling, will take it down. A Plaster of Red Lead will have the same
effect.

An excellent Bolus to carry off Rheumatick pains by sweating.
Take of long Pepper, and Grains of Paradise powdered, of each half a Dram, of
Venice Treacle one Dram, mix and make a Bolus, which take when you go to Bed;
as you Sweat drink Sage Posset Drink; take care you don't get cold after it;
Repeat it twice or thrice.

To Cure a sore Breast.
Take a Sheeps Head, cut it open, and after that you have washed it very clean,
boil it in Water two hours together, then strain it, put to the Liquor half a
Pound of Rice, and set it over the Fire, and boil it to the Consistence of a
Poultis, mingle with it a quarter of a Pound of fresh Hogs Lard, and as much
Saffron in powder as will Color it. This being laid on warm to the Sore, will
without any other Application both break and heal it.

For the Dysentery, or Bloody Flux.
Take of the Suet of a Loin of Mutton, especially that which sticks to the
Kidney, and of right Nants Brandy, of each 4 Ounces; let them boil a little,
and give the Patient it to drink warm. When the Bloody Flux raged amongst the
Soldiers in Ireland, this was almost an Universal Medicine, and seldom failed
of succeeding.

A very good water to Cure the Scurvy, purge the Blood, and to cause a good
habit of Body.
Take half a Peck of Sea Scurvygrass bruised, Horse Radish Root sliced thin one
Ounce, of Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Cardamoms, and Ginger bruised, of each half an
Ounce, 12 Oranges cut in quarters, of Raisins of the Sun stoned half a pound,
infuse all these 24 hours in 3 quarts of White Wine; put them all into a cold
Still, with 2 quarts of Water, and draw off with a gentle Fire about 3 quarts,
take about half a Pint of it every Morning and Afternoon.

To Cure a Felon.
Take Sage and White Soap, of each equal parts, mix them well, and lay to the
part it; presently gives ease, and stops its going any further.

To make Paracelsus's Plaster Dr. Lower's way.
Take of Litharge of Gold and Silver, of each 3 Ounces, of the best Salad and
Linseed Oil, of each a Pint and an half, set them over the Fire, stirring them
continually, as soon as they boil, add to them in powder Red L^^d, and Lapis
Cal^minaris, of each half a pound (...) boil till they look black, and grow
^hick, then b^ing taken off the Fire, add of yellow Wax and black Rosin, of
each a Pound, of Gum Sandrack half a Pound, of Amber, Olibanum, Myrrh, Aloes,
of both the kinds, of Bithwort-root, of Mummy, Dragons Blood, Lemnian Earth,
white Vitriol, Bloodstone, and Camphire, of each one Ounce, all finely powdered
and set over the Fire again, give one gentle boil, and put to it of Oil of
Bays, and Venice Turpentine, of each half a pound, of Oil of Juniper 4 Ounces,
and last of all put in these following Gums dissolved in Vinegar, and strained,
viz. Galbanum, Sagapenum, Opoponax, Ammoniacum, and Bdellium, of each 3 Ounces,
When it is boiled enough, being dropped upon a Stone, it will not stick to your
Fingers. All the time you are making the Plaster, take great care that you keep
it constantly stirring, for otherwise you spoil the whole Mass.

For a Stich or Pain in the side.
Take Chamomil Flowers, Oatmeal and Bran, of each equal parts, put them in
Bags, and lay hot to the part that is pained; change them as often as they Cool.

To make a very good Surfeit water.
Take of the best Spirit of Wine one Gallon, of Damask Rose water one Quart, of
Poppy Water one Pint, of Raisins stoned one Pound, and an half, of Brown Sugar
Candy one Pound, of Dates sliced and Raisins stoned, of each 4. Ounces, of
Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, and Aniseeds, of each one Ounce, bruise them
well, two large handfuls of Poppy Leaves, of Balm and Angelica, of each one
handful. Infuse for 4 days close covered, then strain and keep it for your use.

For a Weakness or Giddiness in the Head.
Take dried Rosemary Tops, and Rose Leaves, Lavender Flowers, red Sage, and
Mint, of each one handful, of Cloves, Nutmegs, Mastick, Benjamin and Storax, of
each half an Ounce, bruise them well; and being quilted in red Sarcenet, wear
next your Head.

To make Milk-water, very useful in all sorts of Fevers and Consumptions.
Take of Carduus 2 handfuls, of Rue, Goats Rue, Angelica, Wormwood, Mint, and
Balm, of each one handful; put them all being well bruised into a cold Still
with a Gallon of Milk, and draw off with a very gentle Fire, least it should
run thick; you may draw off almost 3 Quarts. Drink a Glass of it at any time
sweetened with Sugar.

To Cure an Imposthume.
Take the Roots of Dragon, stamped with White Wind; strain and drink a good
Draught of the Liquor which will break, and bring it away without any thing
else.

Dr. Lower's Stomatick Tincture, which being continued for a considerable time,
perfectly Cures those that are much troubled with the Cholick.
Take of Gentian Root sliced thin, of the yellow Peel of Oranges, of Calamus
Aromaticus, grossly beaten, of each one Ounce, of Rhubarb sliced half an Ounce,
of Aniseeds, and Coriander seeds bruised, of each 3 Drams, of Hiera Picra, 3
Drams; Infuse them warm, 24 hours in a quart of White Wind, then strain, and
take of it 3 or 4 spoonfuls every morning, fasting an hour after you have taken
it.

For Violent pains in the Ears.
Take an Head of Garlic, and roast it, then take of the softest of it, and mix
with as much Mithridate, and apply it about Bed time to the Patients Ear, as
hot as he can bear it, if there is occasion renew again the next day.

To preserve the Face, from being deformed by the Small Pox.
Take an Ounce and an half of Pomatum, of Oil of Almonds, one Ounce, of Sperma
ceti, and Virgins Wax of each 3 Drams, of Damask Rose Water one Ounce, set them
all together over the Fire, and as soon as they are melted take them off, and
after you have stirred them very well, let them stand till they are cold, then
make a hole, and drain out the Water, and with a Feather anoint the Patients
Face.

To Cure the pains of the Cramp.
Take of the Oil of St. John's wort, and Spirit of Lavender, of each one Ounce,
mix them very well, and with the mixture rub the part affected.

To Cure a sore Throat that is Inflamed.
Take of Plantain Water half a Pint, beat it well with the white of a New laid
Egg, then strain it and sweeten it with white Sugar, let the Patient wash his
Mouth with it as often as he pleases.

To fortify the Stomach, and stop Vomiting.
Take of the Salt of Wormwood one Scruple, give it in a spoonful of Syrup of
Lemons, with 3 or 4 Spoonfuls of Mint Water after it, repeat it every 2 hours
till the Vomiting ceases.

For the Hoemorrhoids.
Take of Diapalma melted down very thin, with Oil of Chamomil, one Ounce, put
to it Saffron finely powdered one Scruple, Opium 3 Grains, mix them well, and
being moderately warm, anoint the part affected.

For Hysterical Vapors by Dr. Lower.
Take of strained Galbanum one Dram, of Assa faetida, Myrrh, Castor, and Salt
of Amber, of each 2 Scruples, make into a Mass with a sufficient Quantity of
Natural Balsam, of which being made into Pills, take 3 every Morning and Night,
in a spoonful of Hysterick-water.

An Approved Medicine for a Burn or Scald.
Take the White of an Egg, and as much of the best Linseed Oil; beat them well
together; dip a Cloth in it, and apply to the Sore, often shifting the Cloth.

A Strengthening Plaster for the Back.
Take half a Pint of Oil of Roses, four Ounces of white Lead finely powdered;
first put the Oil over the fire, and when it is a little warm put into it the
white Lead, and a quarter of a pound of Beeswax cut very thin, keep it
continually stirring till it is thoroughly incorporated, and looks blackish;
then take it off the fire, and as it cools put in a Dram of Camphire, of white
Saunders and Myrrh powdered, of each two Drams, of fine Bole and Terra
sigillata of each one Dram; continue stirring it till it is quite cold, make it
into rolls, and use it as you have occasion; for any weakness, wasting, or pain
in the Kidneys, it is of Singular use.

A Cataplasm to divert Humors, or abate any Swelling.
Take of Bean and Barley Meal, of each 2 spoonfuls, of Honey one spoonful, Oil
of Chamomil one ounce; mix with strong Ale, enough to make it thin; let it boil
a little, and apply it warm; if you would have it draw, add to it some Rye Meal.

An excellent Cordial for a Consumption.
Take of the Stroakings of a Red Cows Milk, and Muskadine, of each 2 quarts, of
Raisins of the Sun stoned and Blew Currants well cleans'd, of each a pound, of
Liquorish and Dates sliced, of each 4 ounces, of Cinnamon one ounce, of Nutmegs
bruised half an ounce, put them into a cold Still, luted, and draw off the
Water; of which give 4 ounces sweetn'd with Sugar Candy every morning fasting,
and at 4 in the afternoon, using gentle Exercise after. Continue taking it for
a Month together.

An Excellent Oil to cure the Heat and Shining of the Nose.
Take 12 ounces of Gourdseed, bruise them and take the Kernels out; blanch six
ounces of bitter Almonds, put them into a Press, and draw the Oil from them,
with which anoint the Nose often.

Dr. Lowre's Purging Drink for young Children to sweeten their Blood.
Take half an ounce of choice Rhubarb sliced thin, burnt Hartshorn bruised one
ounce, Raisins of the Sun stoned 2 ounces, infuse them in a pint of Ale, and a
pint of small Beer 24 hours; give 2 or 3 spoonfuls at a time as occasion
requires.

To make the Italian Plaster, which cures Corns, heals old Sores and Ulcers.
Take 10 ounces of Oil of Olives, 4 of Beeswax, of Litharge of Gold, Litharge
of Silver, and Ceruss, of each 4 ounces, of Myrrh 4 drams; first put in the Oil
and Beeswax, then the Litharge, constantly stirring it; when it is boiled to a
brownish Color, take it off the fire, and put to it Myrrh, and of Venice
Turpentine 4 ounces, stir it well together, and pour it into a Pail of Water
and work it up. When you make use of it for Corns, first cut your Corns as
close as you can without fetching of Blood, then lay a Plaster of this to it,
keeping it on for 4 days, 5 or 6 of these Plasters will bring up the Corn by
the roots.

For a Bruise occasioned by a Fall.
Take Horse-dung, and Sheeps Suet, of each equal parts, boil them well
together, and apply warm to the part affected like a Poultis.

For Obstructions by Dr. Lowre.
Take of the Conserve of Roman Wormwood, and of the yellow Peel of Oranges, of
each an ounce and an half, of Gentian Root powdered, and compound Powder of
Aron Roots 2 drams, of Cream of Tartar, and Steel prepared with Sulphur, of
each 3 drams, make it into a soft Electuary, with a sufficient quantity of the
Syrup of the 5 opening Roots, of which take the quantity of a Nutmeg every
morning fasting, and at 4 in the afternoon, taking 6 spoonfuls of the following
Tincture after each time of taking it.

Take of the tops of Centaury, of Camomil-flowers, and of Agrimony, of each one
handful, of Gentian Root sliced half an ounce, of Carduus and Coriander Seeds,
of each 3 drams, of the filings of Steel 2 ounces, infuse a whole day in a
quart of Whitewine.

An Excellent Cooling Emulsion which gives ease in Fits of the Stone and Gravel.
Take of Melon, Cucumber, Citrull, and Gourd-seeds, of each 2 drams, white
Poppey-seeds 3 drams, of Almonds blanched half an ounce, of Barley-water a
quart; bruise the Seeds well in a Stone Mortar, then by degrees pour the Water
upon them, which strain out; after you have made it look as white as Milk, and
sweetened with Syrup of Marshmallows; if the Patient cannot make water, you may
add to it a dram and an half of Sal Prunellae.

To fasten Teeth made loose by the Scurvy.
Take of Pomegranate-flowers, Mastich, and Myrrh, bruised, of each 2 drams
boiled in Claret, and wash your Mouth every morning and evening.

A Plaster for Hysterical Fits.
Take of Assa Faetida, Gum Caranna, and Galbanum strained, of each equal parts,
spread upon Sheeps Leather, and apply to the Patients Navel; put a piece of
Cotton with 2 grains of Musk in the middle of the Plaster.

A Receipt brought out of Turkey to cure a wound, by anointing the Weapon.
Take a piece of Rusty Bacon, melt it with a pair of Tongues into a Dish, and
anoint the Weapon with it, wrap it in a woollen cloth, and set it with the
Point upwards, anoint the Weapon twice aday, this will cure any Wound that is
curable.

A Prescription by Dr. S -- m for the Scurvy, which has been often used with
very great success.
Take of Pine, and Fir-tops, of each one handful, boil them gently in a pint of
Posset Drink made of Whitewine and small Beer, let it stand till it is cold,
then strain it, and take 6 spoonfuls of it with 20 drops of the Golden Tincture
of Steel every morning fasting, and at 5 in the afternoon, walking after each
time of taking it. Once every week take 2 quarts of Epsom water, about a week
after you have begun this method, be let blood; continue this course for a
month or six weeks. Those days that you purge forbear taking the Tincture and
Posset Drink.

An Ointment for a Rupture.
Take 2 handfuls of Black Snails, of Mallows, Rue and Balm, of each one
handful, put them all into an Earthen Pot, with Butter enough to cover them,
let the Pot stand 3 hours in the Oven, then strain it, stirring it till it is
quite cold.

An experienced Eye-water to strengthen the Sight, and prevent Cataracts.
Take of Eye-bright-tops 2 handful, of Celandine, Vervein, Betony, Dill,
Groundpine, Clary, Avens, and Pimpernel, of each one handful, Rosemary-flowers
one handful, of Capons Galls, and Aloes bruised, of each half an ounce, of Long
Pepper one dram; infuse 24 hours in 2 quarts of Whitewine, then draw it off in
a Glass-still, drop the water with a Feather into the Eye often.

Dr. Fryar's Directions for Curing the Fits of the Mother.
Take 2 drams of Cream of Tartar, dissolve it in half a pint of Rue-water, add
to it 2 ounces of Treacle-water, and take it in the morning fasting. This like
an Enchantment, cures fits at once or twice taking, though the party has been
given over for dead. In all Languishing Fits of the Mother and Spleen, give 3
or 4 spoonfuls of this Julep, Take of Rue, Balm, and Chamomil-water, of each 3
ounces, of the tincture of Castor, one ounce, Treacle-water 2 ounces, of
Confectio Alkermes 3 drams, of Syrup of Gilly flowers 2 ounces, mix them all
together; let the Patient take once or twice a week, 4 or 5 of these Purging
Pills. Take of Pill. Ruffii, and Faetidae of each one dram, of Castor, and the
troches of Myrrh, of each half a dram, of Oil of Amber a scruple, of Balsam of
Peru half a dram, make into Pills, and take them over night.

For Heat and Weakness in the Back.
Take Earth-Moss, and boil it in Cream to an Oil, and anoint the Back with it.

An Approved Drink to prevent the Plague.
Take of the best Sack 3 pints, of Rue one handful, boil till it is wasted half
away, then strain it, and set it over the fire again, putting to it of Long
Pepper, and Ginger bruised, of each half an ounce, of Nutmegs sliced, a quarter
of an ounce, let it boil a little, and take it off from the fire, and put to it
of Mithridate 2 penniworth, and as much Treacle, and a quarter of a pint of the
best Aqua vitae; take 2 spoonfuls of it every morning and evening. It likewise
seldom fails in Agues, being taken 2 or 3 times before the Fit comes.

For the Gout.
Take a pound of Beeswax, and half a pound of Rosin, of Olibanum 4 ounces, of
Litharge of Gold finely powdered, and White-lead, of each 12 ounces, of
Neats-foot Oil a pint. Set the Oil together with the Beeswax and Rosin over
the fire; as soon as they are melted put in the Powders, keeping it continually
stirring with a stick; as soon as it is boiled enough, take it off the fire,
and pour it on a board anointed with Neats-foot Oil, and make it into rolls;
apply this Plaster spread on Sheeps leather, to the part affected; once a week
take of Caryocostinum the quantity of a large Nutmeg dissolved in Whitewine,
keeping your self warm after it; by applying this Plaster, and taking the
Caryocostinum, there are many which have found very great benefit.

To Cure Dullness of Hearing.
Take the Crum of a Loaf which was worked up with Carraway seeds, and Juniper
berries; as soon as it is drawn out of the Oven, dip it in strong Spirit of
Wine, and apply as warm as may be endured, so that the steam may be received
into the Patients Ear; as soon as the Bread is taken away stop the Ear with
Cotton dipped in Oil of bitter Almonds and Rue. The steam of Pennyroyal,
Origanum, Wormwood and Cloves has also very good effect in curing such as are
thick of Hearing.

To Cure a Tettar.
Take an ounce of Sal Armoniack rubbed to powder, and mix it with white Soap and
fresh Hogs-lard, of each 2 ounces make an Ointment, and anoint the part
affected, with it every morning and evening.

For a Sore Stomach.
Take half a Sheet of Cap Paper, cut it into the shape of an Heart, and dip it
in Brandy, and old Candle-grease melted together, of each an equal quantity,
apply warm to the Pit of the Stomach.

An Excellent Ointment to Cure one that is burnt with Gunpowder.
Take an handful of Groundsel, 12 heads of Housleek, of Goose and Chickens
dung, of each a pound, bruise the Herbs, and mix them very well with the Dungs,
then take 2 quarts of Boars grease, and boil them all together for a quarter of
an hour, strain and keep for your use.

For a Stich or Bruise in the Side.
Take of the Kernels of Wallnuts and Hazel-nuts, of each 2 ounces, of Figs and
Rue, of each one handful, a raze of Ginger, half an ounce of Salt, and a
spoonful of Honey; mix them very well together, and take the quantity of a
Nutmeg of it 3 times in a day, and apply it spread upon Leather, to the part
grieved.

For the Stone.
Take the Stone that grows in the Gall of an Ox, grate it, and drink of it in
White Wind as much as will lie upon a six pence; for want of the White Wind you
may drink it in Posset Drink, in which Pellitory of the Wall has been boiled.
Or take the green Weed, which is commonly brought with the Oisters, wash it,
and dry it to powder of which give the same quantity in a large draught of
Arsmart Water.

A famous Anodyne Glister, which gives present ease in Fits of the Stone.
Take Pennyroyal, Centaury, Wormwood and Chamomil-flowers, of each an handful;
of sweet Fennel, and Fenugreek-seeds, of Juniper and Bay Berries, of each half
an ounce, bruise them and boil them in a pint and an half of Posset Drink to a
pint, strain and put to it 2 ounces of Sack, of brown Sugar, and Linseed Oil,
of each 3 ounces.

To preserve a Man from being infected with the Plague.
Take of both the sorts of Aloes, of Cinnamon and Myrrh, of each 3 drams, of
Cloves, Mace, Lignum Aloes, Bole Armoniack, Mastich and Camphire, of each a
dram, beat them to a powder, and take a scruple of it every morning and evening
in a Glass of Canary.

For a Pain and Coldness in the Head.
Take Storax and Benjamin, of each an ounce, bruise them, and quilt them in
brown Paper, and apply to the hindermost part of the Head.

Against spitting of Blood.
Take Mice-dung, rubbed to powder, and give of it as much as will lie upon a
Groat, in a quarter of a pint of the juice of Plantain and Comfry, sweetened
with Sugar, every morning the first thing, and at night the last thing;
continue taking it for a week together.

To make the Oil of Toads, of excellent use in the Gout, King's Evil, or any old
Sore or Ulcer.
Take 6 Toads, boil them in 3 pints of Salad Oil, till they are turned black,
then strain the Oil out, and put to it half a pound of Beeswax; as soon as the
Beeswax is melted, pour the Oil into a Pot, and keep for your use; in the
boiling take care that the Pipkin be close covered.

A Famous Water to Clear the Eyesight.
Take of Aloes, and Sugar Candy, of each 2 drams, of Camphire half a dram, of
Red Rose, and Eyebright-water, of each 3 ounces, shake them very well together,
and wash your Eyes with it 3 times aday.

To Cure the Falling Sickness.
Take the powder of Misseltoe of the Oak, of Man's Skull prepared, of each one
dram; give a scruple of it every morning in a quarter of a pint of
Paeony-water; give more or less according to the age of the Patient.

To make Hair to grow.
Shave the Head often, and, after shaving, bath it well with Brandy, or the
Spirit of Honey, and twice every day anoint it with Bears-grease.

Dr. R's Pills for the Cholick.
Take of the Pill ex duobus, and extractum Rudii, of each 15 grains, London
Laudanum one grain, make into 5 Pills, with a drop of the Oil of Aniseeds;
before you give them, let a Glyster of Hiera Picra be administered; and after
its operation give the Pills. When the passage downwards is stopped, so that
nothing can be voided, which often happens in violent Fits, give the Patient 3
ounces of Dr. Lowre's Tincture, and about an hour after let him drink 2 quarts
of Epsom water, dissolve in the first Glass an ounce and an half of Glauber's
wonderful salt; if the 2 quarts do not move him, let him take another quart
with another ounce of the Salt: But the first 2 quarts seldom fail of success.

To take away Freckles, and Beautify the Skin.
Take of the Oil of Tartar, and Oil of sweet Almonds, of each equal parts,
shake them well together till they become white; every night going to bed
anoint the part with it.

To Cure the Shingles.
Take the juice of Housleek, temper it with a sufficient quantity of
Barley-meal till it comes to the consistence of a Cataplasm, apply it to the
part affected, renewing it every 24 hours. Or, take half a pint of Elder-flower
Water, and an ounce of Hungary-water, mix and dab the part with it often.

To make a Drink for the Rickets.
Take the Roots of Succory, of the Leaves of Marshmallows, and Coltsfoot, of
each 2 ounces, of Scurvygrass 6 handfulls, of Agrimony, Avens, and
Watercresses, of each one, handful, boil these in 6 gallons of Wort; when you
tun it, hang in it a Bag with these tied in it: Take of China-root sliced, and
Polypody of the Oak bruised, of each 4 ounces, Hearts horn, Maidenhair, and
Liquorish sliced, of each 3 ounces, of Raisins of the Sun stoned, and Currants
bruised of each one pound, of Liverwort, and Hart's-tongue, of each 4 handfuls,
put a Stone into the Bag to keep it from swimming a top; in a weeks time it
will be fit for use, let it be the Child's constant drink; it will be better to
make but half the quantity at a time.

For Bloodshot, or Inflamed Eyes.
Take one ounce of Lapis Calaminaris finely powdered, of Frogs Spawn Water half
a pint, mix them well together, and wash your Eyes with it 3 or 4 times in a
day.

For Clammy Humors, which fasten the Eyelids together.
Let the Patient, when he is in Bed, take a little of the Ointment of Tutty,
melted in a spoon, and anoint his Eyelids therewith, they being first closed
together; in the morning let him take some Plantain or Rose Water and wash it
off.

By Dr. Lowre. To Cure an Excessive sweating arising from the vitiated
Fermentation of the Blood.
Take of Dragons Blood, Nutmegs, Torrified Rhubarb, of each one dram, of
Diaphoretick Antimony, and Flower of Brimstone, of each 2 scruples, of powder
of Mastich half a dram, of Sal-prunellae 2 drams, mix and make a mass, with a
sufficient quantity of Gypress Turpentine; make it into Pills of a moderate
Size, of which take 4 every night and morning.

An approved Medicine to relax Contracted Sinews.
Take a Sheeps Head, cut it in two, and being tied together, boil till it is
very tender, then lay it in a Dish, and the Bones being all taken out, put to
it of rectified Spirit of Wine, and Oil of Roses, of each a good quantity, lay
it to the part grieved as warm as can be endured; repeat with a fresh one every
24 hours, till the Patient finds benefit by it; with the Sheeps Head bon an
handful of Mallows.

The Lord Chesterfield's Excellent Powder to help Delivery.
Take of Cummin-seeds, Saffron, Grains of Paradise, Date-stones and white
Amber, of each equal parts, reduce it into fine Powder, of which give a scruple
in extremity in a draught of burnt Claret, or Mace Ale.

A Receipt to Cure the Black or Yellow Jaundies, by Dr. I -- n.
Take of the inner rind of Barberry-bark sliced thin one ounce, half a dram of
Saffron, of red Saunders half an ounce, infuse a whole night in Whitewine, in
which Gads of Steel have been quenched; give a quarter of a pint of it every
morning.

To Cure a Tenesmus, or a continual desire of going to Stool, without any
occasion.
Take an Old Tile, made very black with Smoke, rub it to fine Powder, mix with
boiling Vinegar, and apply to the Patients Fundament. Or fill two bags with
Wheaten Bran, boil them in Whitewine Vinegar, and let the Patient sit sometimes
upon one, and sometimes upon another as hot as he can endure. Let the following
Clyster be also often injected. Take half a pint of the decoction of Burnt
Hartshorn, of Oil and Honey of Roses, of each one ounce, one yolk of an Egg,
and a quarter of an ounce of Diascordium. If the disease proceeds from an
Ulcer, which you may be assured of if there is either Matter or Corruption,
mingled with the Patients Excrement. Take of Oil of Roses 2 ounces, of Mucilage
of Gum Tragacanth 3 drams, of Aloes and Frankincense of each half a dram, mix
with White-wax, and make an Ointment, wherein dip Cloths and put up the
Fundament.

To Cure a Quinsey.
Take of the Powder of a Swallows Nest, and Album Grecum, of each an equal
quantity, mix with Honey, and apply Plaster-wise to the Patients Throat; wash
his Throat also with this Gargarism, Take of the Leaves of Plantain,
Woodsorrel, and Pomegranat-bark, of each a small handful, boil in fair water to
a pint, strain and put to it 2 drams of Sal Prunellae, Honey of Roses, and
Syrup of Mulberries, of each once ounce. Let the Patient blood in the Arm, take
but a little away at a time, and repeat in 12 hours. Once a day give the
Patient a Clyster with Hiera Picra, and Sal Gemma in it. Cupping-Glasses
applied to the Shoulders, and bleeding under the Tongue, have been often used
with success; let the Patient drink plentifully of Barley-water.

To make the famous White Salve, which being applied to the Stomach, cures the
Pains and Weakness thereof, to the Belly, the Cholick, and to the Back, the
Pains of the Kidneys.
Take of the best Salad Oil 3 pints, of White and Read Lead, of each a pound,
of Castle-soap 12 ounces; incorporate them well together, and boil till the
mass is of a grayish color, then take it and make into Rolls, which will keep
good a long time.

For a Rupture.
Take of Frankincense, and Olibanum, of each 2 ounces, Burgundy-pitch, Mastich
and Camphire, of each half an ounce, of Deers-suet, Beeswax, and
Venice-turpentine, of each one ounce, boil them with a pint of Whitewine, to
the thickness of a Salve, spread upon Sheeps-leather, and apply to the part.

To Cure the Scurvy, by Dr. C -- n.
Take of the Conserve of Scurvigrass, and Roman-wormwood, of each 2 ounces, of
the powder of the Leaves of Ground Pine, and of the Compound powder of Aron
roots, of each 3 drams, of prepared Steel half an ounce, of Tartar vitriolated
2 drams, chemical Oil of Sassafras 6 drops, mix and make an Electuary, with a
sufficient quantity of Syrup of Oranges, of which take the quantity of a Nutmeg
twice a day, with 6 spoonfuls of this Julap. Take of the compound water of
Horseradish, and of Earth worms, of each 3 ounces, of Scurvigrass-water half a
pint, of Chalybeat wine 4 ounces, of Syrup of Coral 2 ounces; once in a week
let the following Bolus be taken: Take a Scruple of Mercurius Dulcis, and half
a dram of Rhubarb, make a Bolus with Electuary of Sassafras.

For a soreness, or stoppage at the Stomach, proceeding from a great Cold.
Take 2 ounces of Deers Suet, of Sperma Ceti, and Oil of Mace, of each a dram,
of Beeswax half an ounce, Saffron in Powder half a dram, spread upon thin
Leather, and lay to the Stomach, drop upon the Plaster 4 or 5 drops of Oil of
Cinnamon, and rub it all over.

To Cure the Stone.
Take of Filipendula-roots, Winter-Cherries, Ashen-Keys, and Haws, of each an
handful, dry them in an Oven, powder and give a dram at a time, in a draught of
Whitewine, twice aday.

To Cure a Pleurisy, by Dr. Lowre.
Let the Patient be blooded on the side affected; as soon as he is blooded,
give him one of these Papers of Powder; Take of Crab's-eyes 2 drams, Sal
prunellae, and red Poppey-flowers, of each one dram; of volatile Salt of
Hartshorn half a dram, mix; the dose is half a dram every 4 hours, with 6
spoonfuls of this Julap; Take of Carduus, sweet Fennel, and red Poppey-water,
of each 3 ounces; of Spirit of Salarmoniack 2 drams, Syrup of red Poppies an
ounce and an half. Take of Grass and Eryngo-roots, of each 2 ounces, of Barley
and Liquorish sliced, of each one ounce, of Raisins of the Sun stoned 2 ounces,
boil in 3 pints of water to a quart, strain, and add to it Syrup of Maidenhair
2 ounces, Sal Prunellae, a dram and an half, let it be the Patients ordinary
drink. At night if the Pain is very intense, give from 15 to 20 drops of liquid
Laudanum in any proper vehicle.

To Cure an Empyema, or Imposthume of the Lungs.
Take of Marshmallow-roots 2 ounces, of Ground Ivy, Coltsfoot and Maidenhair,
of each one handful, of Figs, Liquorish and Raisins, of each one ounce and an
half, boil them in 3 pints of water to a quart, strain, and sweeten with Syrup
of Coltsfoot; being drunk often, it will ripen the Imposthume, and cause it to
break speedily. Take likewise of Lohoc Sanum, Oil (...) Almonds, and Balsamic
Syrup, of each one ounce, of Syrup of Horehound 2 ounces, mix, and with a
Liquorish-stick, take of it often. As soon as the Imposthume is broke, take of
Orris Powder, and Flower of Brimstone, of each 2 drams, Cypress Turpentine,
enough to make into Pills, which roll in Liquorish-powder, and take 4 of them
every Night and Morning, they will both cleanse, and bring away with ease the
purulent matter; let the Patient after each time of taking the Pills, and at
any other time when a-dry, drink plentifully of the following Vulnerary
decoction, which will purify his Blood, and preserve his Lungs from being
corrupted. Take of Sanicle, Mouse-ear, Agrimony, St John's wort, and Scabious,
of each one handful, of Grass-roots 2 ounces, Radishes, or Chick-pease half an
ounce, Liquorish sliced one ounce, boil 'em in 3 pints of water to a quart,
strain and sweeten with Syrup of Ground Ivy. To carry off the Morbifick Matter,
it will be convenient once in a week to take some gentle Physic.

For Stomach-worms.
Take Turmerick, Long Pepper, and Aloes, of each half an ounce, ^^wder them,
and mix with Hogs-lard, and Treacle, of each equal parts, being very well
mixed, sow up in a square Bag, and apply to the Pit of the Stomach, keeping it
there 9 days, every third day drink a Treacle Posset.

A very good remedy for an Inflammation of the Eyes.
Tak the White of a New-laid Egg, beat it very well with a dram of Alum finely
powdered, dip a fine rag in it, and lay over the Eyes, as soon as it grows
warm, remove it, and apply a fresh Rag in the same manner, continue doing so
for an hour together; if the Inflammation be very great, repeat every night and
morning, otherwise at night only.

A Famous Powder to Cure a Rupture.
Take of Clary, and Comfry, of each 2 handfuls, or Knot grass, Cranes-Bill and
Bears-foot, of each one handful, dry them in an Oven, and reduce to a fine
Powder, to which add the same weight of Powder of Aniseeds, and Liquorish, give
a dram of this every morning and evening in a draught of any convenient Liquor
for 3 weeks together. Anoint the part affected with this Oil, which, together
with the Powder, has proved very successful. Take the Oil of Swallows, and of
Oranges, of each 2 ounces, of the Oil of Chamomil one ounce, shake together,
and anoint the part.

An Excellent Cordial-water for Fainting Fits, and a Pain at the Heart.
Take of Balm, Mint, Red Sage, and Borrage, of each 2 handfuls, Vipers Grass
one handful, of Aniseeds 3 ounces, of Cloves, Nutmegs, Ginger, Cinnamon,
Cubebs, and Galengal, of each half an ounce, of right Nants Brandy one quart,
of strong Ale one gallon; cut the Herbs and bruise the Spices, put them
together in an Earthen Pot, and let them stand all night close covered, in the
morning put them into a Cold Still, and draw off with a quick Fire, let the
Still be luted; take 3 or 4 spoonfuls of this water sweetn'd with fine Sugar at
any time.

To make Dr. S -- m 's Pectoral Syrup, which Cures all sorts of Coughs.
Take an handful of Maidenhair, boil it in a quart of water to a pint, strain
and put to it of Hysop and Coltsfoot-water of each a pint, take 2 ounces of
Liquorish sliced and scraped, of Aniseeds bruised half an ounce, 6 Blew Figs
sliced, of Raisins of the Sun stoned 2 ounces, boil them till the water is
wasted to a pint, then strain and put to it 4 ounces of Sugar Candy, and set it
a boiling again, as soon as it grows thick, put to it of Syrup of Violets and
Borrage, of each 3 ounces, keep it stirring on the fire till it grows thick,
then take it off, let it not boil after you have put the Syrup in.

To make a Drink which kills the Worms in Children.
Take burnt Hartshorn, Purslain-seeds, Coralina, and St. John's Wort, of each
equal parts, boil them very well in Spring Water, strain and give a large
draught of it every morning fasting, for a week together.

To Cure a Gangrene.
Take 4 ounces of rectified Spirit of Wine, of Mithridate and Venice Treacle,
of each one dram, of bay Salt 2 drams, dissolve them all in the Spirit of Wine,
bathe the Gangrene with it very well, and lay over it a Cloth dipped in it, in
12 hours it will cause perfect Flesh to appear; the Sore must be bathed twice
or thrice in the space of 12 hours; let the Sore be well cleans'd before it is
bathed.

For a Bruise on the Eyes or Face.
Take the White of an Egg, beat it well with Cream, dip Lint in it, and apply
to the Part that is bruised, it will take out the Blood, and give ease in a
very short time; renew once in 12 hours.

An Experienced Remedy for such as are subject to Bleeding at the Nose.
Take a dried Toad, sow it in a Bag, and sow it at the Pit of your Stomach,
being applied in a Flux it presently stops it; and continued there prevents its
return; the Moss which grows upon a Man's Skull is also much commended for
stanching of Blood.

To Cure a Pain of the Head; which returns at set times, like an Ague.
Take 2 scruples of Jesuits Bark, make it into a Bolus, with a sufficient
quantity of Syrup of Gillyflowers, to be repeated every 6 hours; being
constantly taken for 3 days; it seldom fails of success.

For Eyes that are troubled with an hot Rheum.
Take Rue, and stamp it with a little White Rose Water, press out the Juice,
let it stand and settle, with the clearest of it wash your Eyes often.

A very good Ointment for any hot Swelling or Burn.
Take of Unset Hysop, of Housleek, of the inner Rind of Elder, and of Ash, of
each one handful; put them to a quart of thick and sweet Cream, which set over
the fire, boiling it gently, and often stirring it; let it boil till it comes
to an Oil, then take from the sire, and press it out; dip a Rag in it, and
apply to the Sore, often shifting it.

For a Stoppage in the Stomach or Langs.
Take of Elicampane-root powdered half an ounce, of Flower of Brimstone, of the
Powder of Liquorish, and of Aniseeds, of each a quarter of an ounce, of
clarified Honey a quarter of a pound, mingle them all together, and take the
quantity of a Nutmeg every night when you go to Bed, drinking something warm
after it.

A very Effectual Remedy to appease Gouty Pains.
Take of the best Palm Oil 2 ounces, of Oil of Turpentine, and Oil of Toads, of
each one ounce, mix them very well, and with a warm Hand rub the Part affected
twice a day; afterward to strenghthen the Part, and discuss the remaining
Dregs of the Humor, apply a Plaster of Red Lead. Also Opium, dissolved in
Spirit of Wine camphorated, has been often found to give relief in the most
violent tortures.

To Cure the Strangury, occasioned by Blistering with Cantharides.
Take 3 drams of Gum Tragacanth, which boil in 3 pints of Barley-water to a
quart, then strain, and sweeten it with Syrup of Marshmallows, and let a
draught of it be drunk often.

An Excellent Sneezing Powder of singular use in an Apoplexy.
Take of the Root of White Hellebore one dram, of the Flowers of Lilies of the
Valley 2 drams, mix and powder them, and with a Quill blow some of it up the
Nostrils.

A Choice Medicine for the Dropsy, which powerfully evacuates the Watery
Humor.
Take of the Powder of Jalap half a dram, of Gambogium 10 grains, of Ginger 4
grains, make into a Bolus, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Buckthorn,
which is to be taken every morning for a Fortnight together: If the Bolus
cannot be swallowed, you may put the Powders into a quarter of a pint of
White Wind, adding to it half an ounce of the Syrup of Buckthorn.

To Cure an Asthma, or shortness of Breath, by Dr. H. S.
Take 3 ounces of Linseed Oil fresh drawn, of Balsamic Syrup one ounce, or
Sugar Candy powdered half an ounce, mingle them very well, and give a spoonful
of it often.

To make a Poultis of Turnips, which both ripens, and discusses any hard
Swelling.
Take 6 large Turnips, scrape them clean, and boil them in powdered Beef Broth
till they are tender, then take them out and scrape them again; and being
bruised, put them into a Pipkin, with a quarter of a pound of Mutton Suet shred
small, and an ounce of Venice Turpentine; boil them well together, adding 2
ounces of Oil of Roses, lay this to the part affected twice a day as hot as can
be endured; this will in a short time either discuss the Humor, or if it tends
to suppuration, will both break and heal it.

Dr. J -- 's Powder to prevent Costiveness, and help Digestion.
Take Cream of Tartar 2 drams, Tartar vitriolated one dram, mix and divide into
6 papers, of which let one be taken every morning in a mess of Water Gruel.

To make Astringent Pills for a Gonorrhea.
Take red Coral prepared, Mastich, Bolearmoniack, and Cuttle-bone, of each 2
scruples, of Crocus Martis restringent one dram, of Ceruss of Antimony half a
dram, make into Pills with Cypress Turpentine, of which take 3 every night and
morning. But first let the quantity of a large Nutmeg be taken of this
Electuary every morning for a fortnight or 3 weeks together. Take of Jalap,
Cream of Tartar, Sal-prunellae, and Powder of Rhubarb of each 2 drams, of washed
Turpentine 3 drams, of Lenitive Electuary an ounce and an half, moisten it with
Syrup of Buckthorn.

To make China Broth, an approved Remedy for a Consumption.
Take of the best China, sliced thin, half an ounce, let it steep 12 hours in a
quart of water, then boil it over a gentle fire to the consumption of half; and
take a large Chicken, bruise it and boil it in about 2 quarts of water; after
it has boiled a little, put to it the decoction of the China Root, together
with an handful of Endive, a sprig of Rosemary, a flake of Mace, and a piece of
a Manchet, let them boil till there remains but a pint and an half, of which
half a pint is to be taken every morning, and at 5 in the afternoon.

For a Bruise or Strain.
Take of Henbane 2 handfuls, of Dogstongue, Nightshade, Elicampane, and
Cinquefoil, of each one handful, bruise them, and boil them in 2 quarts of the
best Salad Oil; about the latter end of the boiling add half a pint of the best
Aquavitae, a quarter of a pound of Beeswax cut into small slices; let it boil
till it is very green, then strain and keep for your use.

To make an Ointment which speedily Cures the Itch.
Take an handful of the Red or Yellow Dock-roots scraped, clean and cut into
thin slices, stamp them and put them into half a pound of fresh Butter or
Hogs-lard, let them boil gently for almost an hour, then take from the fire and
press the Liquor out, and put to it a spoonful of Brimstone powdered, and half
as much Ginger; if you would have it more drying, put to it a spoonful of Red
Lead finely powdered, anoint where it is sore twice a day.

A present Remedy for a Pain in the Ears.
Take a little Honey, melt it in a Spoon, and drop it into the Ear that aches
as warm as may be endured, stoping the Ear afterward with a piece of
Black-wooll dipped in Oil of Bitter Almonds.

Dr. Lower's Electuary to cure a Cough, accompanied with a tickling Rheum.
Take conserve of Red Roses, and Hips, of each an ounce and an half, Olibanum
finely powdered 2 drams, of Spirit of Sulphur 12 drops, Syrup of White Poppies
as much as is sufficient to make it into a thin Electuary, of which the
quantity of a Nutmeg is to be taken every morning, afternoon, and at night the
last thing going to Bed.

To make Dr. M. S. Steel-Pills, which certainly cure the Green Sickness.
Take of Steel prepared with Tartar 2 drams, of Aloes and Rhubarb finely
powdered, of each one dram, of the Syrup of the 5 opening Roots, enough to make
them into Pills, of which 3 are to be taken every night and morning.

To make a Time-water which cures the Diabetes, or Pissing-evil.
Take a pound of Quick Lime, put it into a gallon of warm water, stirring it
very well; let it stand 12 hours to settle, then strain off the clearest, and
put to it of Sassafras, cut into very thin slices, 4 ounces, of Liquorish
sliced, and Aniseeds bruised, of each 2 ounces, of Raisins stoned 4 ounces, let
them stand 2 days, then strain and keep for your use; take a draught of it
every morning, noon and night.

To give ease in fits of the Stone, and to cure the suppression of Urine, which
usually attends them.
Take of Snails-shells, and Bees, of each an equal quantity, dry them in an
Oven with a moderate heat, then beat them to a very fine Powder, of which give
as much as will lie upon a Sixpence in a quarter of a pint of Bean-Flour water
every morning fasting, 2 hours after it; continue this for 3 days together;
this has been often found to break the Stone, and to force a speedy passage for
the Urine.

To make Dr. T -- 's Diet Drink for the Scurvy.
Take of Scurvigrass, Brook-lime, Watercresses, Agrimony, Cinquefoil, and
Woodsorrel, of each one handful, of Limon and Orange Peels, of each one
handful, of Horse-radish-root sliced thin 3 ounces, infuse 24 hours over warm
Embers, in as much strong Beer as will cover them; take also of Ginger, Long
Pepper, and Aniseeds bruised, of each one ounce, boil them in a quart of water
till it comes to a pint; which together with the Spices, put to the former
infusion, being strained off clear, adding 2 quarts of White Wind, keep close
covered for your constant drink.

To Cure the Dropsy.
Take of the Pills of Cochiae the lesser, Sal-prunellae, of each one scruple,
Gambogium 6 grains, make into Pills, with Elixir Proprietatis, to be taken
twice or thrice in a week. Take of Guiacum and Sassafras, of each 4 ounces, of
Winters-bark one ounce, boil in 6 quarts of water to a gallon, strain, and
while it is warm pour upon a pound of Quick Lime, let it stand 12 hours to
settle; pour off the clear, and put to it of the tops of Broom and Centaury, of
each one handful, of Horehound 2 handfuls, of Juniper Berries bruised, and
Gentian-root sliced, of each one ounce; after 2 days infusion it will be fit
for your use.

For an Inward Bruise.
Take of Irish-slate, Sperma Caeti, of each half a dram, make into a Bolus with
a dram of Venice Treacle, to be taken every night, drinking a draught of
Brunswick Beer after it.

For a Pain of the Side.
Take of Stone-Horse-dung half a pound, infuse 12 hours in a quart of the
distilled water of Carduus, strain and sweeten with Syrup of Violets, drink a
draught of it every 4 hours, till the Pain be abated.

An Experienced Water for a sore Mouth.
Take half a pint of White Wind Vinegar, of Roch Alum the quantity of a Nut, of
Red Sage, Columbine, and Violet Leaves, of each a small handful, boil them
together; about the latter end add a spoonful of Honey, strain and sweeten with
a little fine Sugar, and wash your Mouth with it every morning and evening.

To heal a Child's Face which breaks out with a Watery Humor.
Take Calves Feet, boil them very well, take off the Fat which swims at the top
of the Liquor, and mingle it well with Rose Water, anoint the Child's Face with
it often; let the Child purge once or twice a week with an infusion of Rhubarb,
till it is cured.

An Excellent Preservative against all Infectious Diseases.
Take Rue and Sage, of each an handful, boil them in 3 pint of Muskadine till
it comes to a quart, strain and put to it of Ginger, and Long Pepper in powder,
of each an ounce, Nutmegs half an ounce, set over the fire again, continually
stirring it; as soon as it boils, take off and put to it an ounce of
Mithridate, 2 ounces of Treacle, a quarter of a pint of the strongest Angelica
water, mix and keep it close covered; whenever you suspect your self to be
infected, go to Bed, and take from one to two spoonfuls of it, drinking
plentifully of Posset Drink made with Marigold-flowers, continue doing so every
night and morning for three days successively.

Dr. H -- 's Cordial Drops, to be used in all Fainting Fits, especially such as
are Hysterical.
Take a dram of Camphire, dissolve in half an ounce of rectified Spirit of
Wine, tincture of Castor, and Spirit of Lavender, of each 2 drams, mix and give
from 10 to 20 drops in a spoonful or two of Hysteric Water; you may give
either in the Fit, or just before to prevent its coming.

An Excellent Receipt to make Snail-water.
Take of Red Cows Milk, and Snails of each 2 quarts, of Green Broom, Balm,
Spearmint, Coltsfoot and Dandelion, of each one handful, of Aniseeds bruised,
and Liquorish sliced, of each 2 ounces, of Maiden Hair' Ground Ivy,
Scurvigrass, Meadow-sweet, and Chamomil, of each one handful, 3 Sevil Oranges
cut in slices, let them stand a whole night together, in the morning put them
into the Still, with a gallon more of Milk, draw off with a moderate fire,
sweeten with Sugar, and drink of it every Morning, afternoon and night.

For a Consumption.
Take of Polypody, Woodsage, and Red Fennel-root, of each one handful, of
Hysop, Betony, and Alehoof, of each 2 handfuls, boil them in a sufficient
quantity of Alewort, strain and drink a draught of it every morning and evening.

An Astringent Chyster.
Take 12 ounces of the water in which Smiths quench their Iron, dissolve in it
3 drams of Venice Treacle, and 2 drams of Bole Armoniack, give it every day
till the Looseness is stopped.

An Approved Cataplasm, to dissolve any Hard Swelling.
Take a pound of Marshmallow-roots, half a pound of White Lily-roots, of Figs,
and White Bryony-roots, of each 4 ounces, of Chamomil-flowers 2 handfuls, slice
them and boil in a sufficient quantity of Ale, till they are soft, then take
and stamp them, adding of Linseed, and Fenugreek-seed in powder, of each 3
ounces, make a Poultis, and apply to the part twice every day, moistning it
every time that you apply it, with Linseed Oil.

Dr. Lower's Hysteric Pills.
Take of Galbanum, and powder of Myrrh, of each one dram, of Castor 4 scruples,
of Volatile Salt of Amber 2 scruples, Assa Faetida half a dram, make into Pills
with Syrup of Paeony; of which give four twice every day, in 2 or 3 spoonfuls
of Rue water.

To make a Diet-drink for the Scurvy.
Take of choice Rhubarb, and Gentianroot, cut into thin slices, of each 2
ounces, Yellow Dock-roots, and young Elder-roots, of each one pound, Ginger,
and Aniseeds bruised, of each 2 ounces, Ground Ivy, Cypress, and Fir-tops, of
each 2 handfuls, boil in 6 quarts of water till it comes to a gallon, strain
and keep for your use.

To make Pectoral Pills.
Take of the Flowers of Benjamin, and Sperma Caeti, of each 2 drams, of Powder
of Aniseeds, and Japan Earth, of each a dram and an half, Balsam of Sulphur
anciated, what suffices to make into Pills, which roll in Liquorish powder, and
take 3 or 4 every morning and evening.

To cause Digestion.
Take an ounce of Cardamoms, half an ounce of Cubebs, a dram of Cinnamon, of
Cloves and Aniseeds, of each a quarter of an ounce, reduce to a fine powder,
and with Syrup of Gilliflowers, make into a soft Electuary, of which take the
quantity of a Nutmeg about an hour after Dinner, drinking a glass of White Wind
after it.

For a Sore Throat.
Take of Plantain, and Frogs-spawn-water, of each 2 ounces, Sugar of Lead a
dram, Syrup of Mulberries an ounce, mix and gargle your Throat with it often.

To strengthen the Bowels, and stop an Immoderate Looseness.
Take of best Rhubarb 2 scruples, wrap it in a Paper, and hold it against the
fire, rub it to powder, and make it into a Bolus with old conserve of Roses,
adding to it 4 drops of the Spirit of Vitriol, to be taken every morning and
evening till the Looseness is stopped, drinking a draught of the decoction of
burnt Hartshorn after it.

An Extraordinary Plaster, which being applied to the Nape of the Neck,
prevents the Rheum from falling on the Eyes, or any part of the Head.
Take of Gum Tragacanth, Mastich, Olibanum, and Bole Armoniack, of each 3
drams, Mirtle-seeds, and Pomegranate-flowers, of each one dram, Gum Elymi 3
drams, Burgundy Pitch half a pound Venice Turpentine half an ounce, melt the
Burgundy Pitch and the Gum Elymi together, then put in the other things being
powdered, and last of all the Turpentine; stir them well together, and make
into rolls, apply upon a piece of Sheeps Leather to the nape of the Neck.

For the Piles.
Take of the Tops of Parsley, of Mullet, and of Elder-buds, of each one handful,
boil in a sufficient quantity of fresh Butter till it looks green, and has
extracted the smell of the Herbs, strain and anoint the place with it 3 or 4
times aday.

An Experienced Remedy for a Sore Throat or Mouth.
Take of mild Ale 3 pints, of Celandine one handful, Honey half a pound, Roch
Alum enough to make it sharp, boil to the consumption of half, taking off the
Scum as it arises, strain and keep for your use. It is a most excellent thing
for the Small Pox, either in the Mouth or Throat. It is likewise a present
remedy for any old Sore or Ulcer, if you put to it of Sage, Hysop, and
Rosemary, of each one handful, and double the quantity of the Celandine; after
you have well washed the Sore, apply a Plaster of the Green Salve to it: The
Teeth being rubbed with a Sage leaf dipped in this water, will in a short time
grow white.

To make the Green Salve, which heals and cleanses Wounds in any part of the
Body, ripens and discusses Tumors.
Take of Green Tobacco-leaves, of Parsley, Rue, Rosemary, Red Sage, Celandine
and Fennel, of each a like quantity; bruise the Herbs, and boil them in fresh
Butter till they grow black; then put of Virgins Wax and Rosin, of each one
ounce, Roch Alum rubbed to powder a quarter of an ounce, fine Sugar 2 ounces;
after it has boiled gently for a little while, strain and pour into an earthen
Pot.

To make a Gentle Vomit, which will work safely and effectually in all cases
where Vomiting is required.
Take from one dram to two of White Vitriol, Oxymel of Squils 2 ounces, mix
them well together, and give a spoonful at a time of it in a draught of Carduus
water, give more or less according as there is occasion.

For the falling down of the Mother.
Take a quart of good old Canary, a handful of the Tops of young Broom, boil
them together till there remains but a pint, strain and drink of it, being
sweetn'd with fine Sugar.

To make Dr. S -- n's famous Worm-powder.
Take of Rhubarb, Coraline, burnt Hartshorn, and Wormwood-seed, of each 2
drams, mix into a fine Powder, mixing with it 6 drops of the Oil of Juniper;
give from a scruple to a dram, according to the Child's Age, every morning and
evening in any convenient Vehicle.

To make the red Balsam, which cures any Green Wound, Scald or Burn.
Take a quart of the best Salad Oil, of Rosemary and Betony-flowers, of the
Tops of St. John's Wort, of each 2 handfuls, put them into a Glass Bottle, and
let it stand a whole Summer in the heat of the Sun, the Bottle being close
stopped, strain and put to the Oil an handful of Alkanetroots bruised; when you
use it let it be blood-warm.

To make a very fine Cordial-water, which opens the Obstructions of the Liver
and Spleen, expels Wind, strengthens the Heart and Stomach.
Take of Aniseeds, Coriander-seeds, Lignum-vitae, Elecampane-roots, Liquorish,
and Rhubarb, of each 2 ounces, of Raisins of the Sun stoned one pound, slice
the Liquorish and Rhubarb, bruise the other things, and infuse for 14 days in 3
quarts of Brandy, let the Glass that they are infused in stand in a warm place,
be close stopped, and shak'd every day; strain and keep for your use; you may
take 3 or 4 spoonful of it at a-time.

An Excellent Ointment for Rheumatick, or Bloodshot-Eyes.
Take of fresh Hogs-lard 3 ounces, wash it first in Red Rose Water, then in
White Wind in which Lapis Calaminaris has been often quenched, mix with it an
ounce of Tutty prepared, of the Boodstone, and Red Coral, of each 2 Scruples,
of Aloes Succotrine one scruple, make into an Ointment with Fennel-water; if
your Eyes are very sore, you must put into each corner a piece about the
bigness of a Pins Head, otherwise you need only anoint the edges of your
Eyelids with a little of it melted in a Spoon; use it only at nights, if it
grows dry, moisten it either with Fennel or Rose Water.

For the Rickets.
Take a pound of May Butter, of Rue, Chamomil, Mallows and Balm, of each one
handful, stamp the Herbs with the Butter, and bake in a Pot with brown Bread;
as soon as it is drawn, press out the Liquor, and anoint the Child's Joints and
Back with it every morning, and evening keeping it in Bed an hour after each
time; continue to anoint the Child till the Liquor is all spent.

For Stinking Feet.
Take Roch Alum, burn it till it becomes white, rub it to powder, and strew in
the bottom of your Stockings for 3 or 4 days together.

To make Dr. H -- 's Cephalic Pills, which purge the Head, clear and preserve
the Eyesight.
Take of Aloes Rosata and Pills of Cochiae the greater, of each one dram, of
Rosin, of Jalap, and extract of Black Ellebor, of each half a scruple, Chemical
Oil of Fennel 8 drops; make into Pills with Syrup of Roses, take 4 or 5 of them
over night, once or twice in a Week.

An Extraordinary Ointment for Burns or Scalds.
Take of Red Dock Leaves, and Mallow Leaves, of each a large handful, 2 Heads
of Housleek, of Green Elder, the Bark being scraped from it, a small handful;
wash the Herbs and the Elder; which being cut small, boil in a pint and an half
of Cream, boil till it comes to an Oil, which as it rises up take off with a
Spoon, afterward strain, and put to it 3 drams of White Lead powdered fine.

A Medicine for the Stone.
Take of the Prickled Holly one handful, dry it and beat it to powder; give of
it from one dram to two in a draught of warm White Wind, with a piece of Butter
in it; take likewise 2 handfuls of Chickweed, put it into a piece of Linen,
and apply to the Patients Navel as warm as he can bear it, shifting it often.

For Costiveness.
Take of the Pulp of Cassia, newly extracted, one ounce and an half, of Cremor
Tartari 2 drams, mix and give the quantity of a large Nutmeg every day about an
hour before Dinner, continue taking it for a Week together.

A very good Drink to be used in all sorts of Fevers.
Take 2 ounces of burnt Hartshorn, boil it with a Crust of Bread in 3 pints of
Water to a quart, strain and put to it of Barley, Cinnamon Water 2 ounces,
Cochinele half a dram, sweeten it with fine Sugar, and let the Patient as often
as he is thirsty drink plentifully of it, rub the Cochinele in a Mortar
together with the Sugar.

A famous Sternutatory, which quickens the Senses, and preserves the Head from
all Diseases proceeding from Cold.
Take of Asarabacca-root one dram, of Castor one scruple, of Nutmegs, Rosemary
and Lavender-flowers, of each one dram, make it into a very fine Powder, using
it as often as you please.

To Cure a Running Sore, which comes either in the Legs, or any other part of
the Body.
Take of the Root of round Bithworth, and of Sugar Candy, of each 2 ounces,
slice the Root, and bruise the Candy, boil in a pint and an half of White Wind
till it comes to a pint, then take from the fire, keeping it close covered; as
soon as it is cold, strain and wash the Sore with it twice every day: When the
Sore is well cleas'd, take a piece of Lead, beat it very thin, and being
pricked full of holes, put into Quicksilver, and rub it with a Rag till it is
silvered over, apply to the Sore instead of a plaster, continuing the Water
till the part is quite well. A Gentle Purge or two will very much facilitate
the Cure by carrying off the Cause.

An Effectual Wrist Plaster for all sorts of Agues.
Take an handful of Rue, half an ounce of Olibanum, of Bay Salt and White Wind
Vinegar, of each 2 Spoonfuls, stamp and mix them well together, and apply to
the Wrists 3 or 4 hours before the return of the Fit; let the Patient take also
just before the coming of the Fit, of grains of Paradise, and Virginian
Snakeweed, of each half a dram, made into a Bolus with Venice Treacle, and let
him sweat plentifully.

To make Lozenges of Rhubarb, which strengthen the Stomach, open the
Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen.
Take half an ounce of Rhubarb powdered fine, 4 ounces of Sugar, of the
Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth dissolved in Rosewater, what suffices to make into
Lozenges.

A very agreeable Purge for such as abound with Phlegm, or Choler.
Take 2 Drams of Senna, of Mechoacan and Rhubarb sliced, of each one dram, of
Coriander Seeds bruised one dram, Tamarinds a quarter of an ounce, infuse in a
quarter of a pint of White Wind, for 12 hours, strain and add to it of Syrup of
Buckthorn, and Roses, of each half an ounce; mix and give in the morning
fasting, increase or diminish the quantities according to its operation.

For the Whites, or any other Flux.
Take half an ounce of Diascordium, of Venice Treacle and candied Ginger, of
each 3 drams, of Red Coral, Dragons Blood, and Pomegranat-peel, of each 2
drams, Crocus Martis, astringent, one dram, make into a soft Electuary with
Syrup of Coral, of which give the quantity of a Nutmeg every morning, at five
in the afternoon, and at night the last thing, drinking after it 6 spoonfuls of
the infusion of Red Roses, made acid with Spirit of Vitriol. Before the Party
makes use of the Electuary, let her be purged twice or thrice with some proper
Physic.

To make Dr. O -- 's Stomatick Electuary, being a most Excellent Medicine such
as are of a Cold Constitution.
Take 2 ounces of the Conserve of Roman Wormwood, of Candied Ginger half an
ounce, of Cinnamon 2 drams, of the lesser Galengal half an ounce, make into an
Electuary with Syrup of Wormwood; the dose is the quantity of a Nutmeg an hour
before Dinner, taking 6 spoonfuls of Gentian Wine after it.

For a Pain or Heat of the Back.
Take 3 drams of Red Saunders, an handful of Red Rose Leaves, steep a whole
night in a pint of Rose Water, strain and wash your Back with the Tincture
twice aday; after once or twice using you will find the Heat to diminish, and
your Back to be greatly refreshed.

For a Speck or Film in the Eye.
Take a New-laid-Egg, roast it till it is hard, slice it and take the Yolk out,
putting in its place a dram of burnt Alum, and 20 Woodlice; tie the halves
together in a thin piece of Coth, and press the Juice out betwixt your Fingers,
drop 2 drops of the Juice into the Eye that is grieved, twice aday; the Party
must lie a quarter of an hour upon his Back after each time.

For a Bruise in the Members.
Take an handful of Harts-tongue-leaves, dry them in a Paper before the Fire,
beat them to powder, and with Oil of Roses make a Cataplasm, to be applied to
the part affected, renewing it every 24 hours.

For the Itch.
Take of the Ointment of the Roots of the sharp pointed Dock 2 ounces, Sal
Prunellae, and Flower of Brimstone, of each 3 drams, mix and make an Ointment
with a few drops of Oil of Rhodium to perfume it, to be used every morning and
evening. A decoction of Tobacco Stalks, either in Urin or Vinegar, has alone
cured diverse.

An Excellent Gargle to preserve the Teeth, and prevent the Toothache.
Take of Pomegranat-bark and Cinquefolroot, of each half an ounce, of Vervein
an handful, of Galls and Acrons, of each 2 drams, of Alum the quantity of a
Nutmeg; boil in White Wind Vinegar, strain and wash your Mouth with it every
morning.

For rotten and Scorbutic Gums.
Take of the Powder of Myrrh, and Tobacco-ashes, of each 2 drams, of Alum one
dram, of Bole Armoniack and Dragons-blood, of each a dram and an half, Honey of
Roses 3 ounces, Spirit of Vitriol enough to make it acid, rub your Gums every
morning, and at night when you go to bed.

For Convulsive Fits.
Take of Red Nettle Seeds, and of Peacocksdung, of each equal parts, mix and
give to a Child as much as will lie upon a Sixpence every morning, in 2 or 3
spoonfuls of Poeony or Blackcherry-water, continue giving for a Month or six
Weeks together at least.

An Approved Medicine for the Stone, which is also very prevalent in Convulsive
and Paralytical affects.
Take 6 pound of Blackcherries, stamp them in a Mortar till the Kernels are
bruised, then take of the Powder of Amber, and of Coral prepared, of each 2
ounces; put them with the Cherries into a Still, and with a gentle fire; draw
off the Water, which if you take for the Stone, mix a dram of the Powder of
Amber with a spoonful of it, drinking 3 or 4 spoonful after it; if for the
Palsy or Convulsion, take 4 spoonfuls without adding any thing, in the morning
fasting.

For a Bruise.
Take the Powder of Jet, and let the Patient drink of it as much as will lie
upon a Sixpence every morning in a draught of any convenient Liquor, till such
time as he is perfectly well: Or take the tender Sprigs of an Oak, dry and beat
to Powder, of which give the same quantity in the same manner.

An Excellent Cataplasm to be applied to any part that is Bruised.
Take of the best Salad or Neatsfoot Oil, of each half a pint, of Honey and
Turpentine, of each 2 ounces, or Bole Armoniack powdered 6 drams, Hogs-lard 4
ounces, of White Wind Vinegar half a pound; let them boil together in a Pipkin;
about the latter end add of Bean or Wheat Flour, enough to make it thick,
spread and apply warm to the place that is hurt, removing once in 12 hours.

For St. Anthony's Fire.
Take of Sengreen and Cream, of White Wind Vinegar, and Boars Liver dried and
powdered, of each equal parts, beat them well together, and with the crumbs of
Whitebread make of the same thickness as a Poultis, apply to the part, renewing
it every 12 hours.

To make Captain Green's Famous Powder, which cures Cancers of the Mouth,
fastens loose Teeth, heals any old Sore or Ulcer; and being with a Feather
dropped into weak and sore Eyes, mightily strengthens them.
Take an ounce of Camphire scraped very thin, 4 ounces of Copperas rubbed to
powder, put them both together into a Crucible, and calcine them with a
moderate fire; let the Crucible be very close covered; as soon as it is
calcined enough it will become hard, then take the Pot from the fire; which as
soon as it is cold break to pieces, and take out what was contained in it, rub
it to a fine powder, and mingle with 4 ounces of Bole Armoniack likewise finely
powdered: When you have occasion to use the Powder, take half an ounce of it,
put it into a Basin, and pour upon it a quart of boiling water; as soon as the
water is cold, put it together with the Powder into a Bottle, and use it twice
aday; after each time of using shake the Bottle; this water being injected, in
a short time heals any sort of Fistule.

For the Black Jaundice.
Take an handful of the long Leaves which grow upon the Artichoke stalks, put
them into a Pot with 3 pints of Ale, let the Pot stand in a warm place, close
covered for 12 hours, take half a pint of the Liquor, with a quarter of a pint
of White Wind every morning fasting, for 9 mornings successively; let a dram of
Saffron, tied in a Rag, be hung in the Pot; the Leaves must be bruised before
they are put into the Ale.

An Electuary for a Cough or great Cold.
Take of Virgins Honey clarified, and strong Ale Wort, of each a pint, of the
best Malaga Sack half a pint, of the Juice of Liquorish 4 ounces, boil them
together almost an hour, then take from the fire, and put to it of the Powder
of Elicampane, Orris-root, and Benjamin of each half an ounce, mix and take a
spoonful of it at any time when you are troubled with your Cough.

For a Child that has the Falling Sickness.
Take of Dill, Featherfew and Savin, of each a small handful, bruise them, and
fry them in half a pint of the best Salad Oil, strain out the Oil, and anoint
the child's Stomach with it every morning and evening; apply the Herbs also to
the Child's Stomach as warm as you think it is able to bear them.

A Sovereign Oil for the Numb Palsy.
Take a Fox new killed, case him, and bowel him, and put into his Belly of
Dill, Mugwort, Chamomil, Ground Pine, Southernwood, Red Sage, Origanum, Hops,
Rosemary, Balm, Betony, Sweet Marjoram, and Lavender-flowers, of each one
handful, let them be all well bruised; take also of the Oils of Rue, Castor,
and Chamomil, of each 4 ounces, mix the Oils with the Herbs; as soon as you
have put the Herbs in, sew up his Belly close, and roast him with a quick fire,
save the Oil that drops from him, with which anoint the part twice aday,
rubbing it well in over a Chafingdish of Coals.

To make Dr. Lower's Gargarism, which cools all Inflammations of the Throat.
Take of Frogs Spawn, and Plantain Water, of each 2 ounces, Sugar of Lead one
dram, Syrup of Mulberries one ounce, mix and wash your Throat with it often.

For the Worms in Children.
Take of Mithridate and Honey, of each one Penyworth, Oil of Mace 2 Penyworth,
melt them together, and spread upon Sheeps Leather cut in the wape of an Heart;
Oil of Savin and Wormwood, of each 6 drops, of Aloes and Saffron in powder, of
each one dram, rub the Oils, and strew the Powders all over the Plasters, apply
it, being warmed to the Child's Stomach with the point upwards.

To make Dr. L's Cataplasm, which ripens Tumors, and cures Inflammations.
Take of Marshmallow-roots, half a pound, of White Lily Roots a quarter of a
pound, of Figs, and White Bryony-roots, of each 2 ounces, of Chamomil-flowers
one handful, boil in Ale-wort till they are soft, stamp them in a Mortar, and
mix with Linseed and Fenugreenseed in powder, of each an ounce, make into a
Poultis, to be applied warm to the part affected, put on a fresh one every 12
hours; every time that you apply it moisten it with Linseed Oil newly drawn;
let the Roots be cut into thin slices before you boil them in the Ale.

For Eyes that are troubled with a Hot Rheum.
Take an handful of Rue, 3 ounces of White Wind, stamp them together, strain
out the Juice, let it stand to settle, and with the clearest of it wash your
Eyes every morning and evening.

For a Consumption of the Lungs.
Take 50 Snails without their Shells, 4 handfuls of Ground Ivy, the Whites of 9
Newlaid-Eggs, of Whitebread-crumbs one pound, 4 Nutmegs sliced, 2 Orange Peels,
a gallon of Cows Milk, a quart of Sack, put them into a Rose Still, and draw
off with a moderate fire; take a quarter of a pint of the water twice aday
sweetened with Balsamic Syrup.

To make Dr. Lower's Pills, which open Obstructions, cause a good Complexion,
and strengthen the Stomach.
Take a dram and an half of the Stomach Pills, with the Gums, Gentian-root
powdered one dram, Salt of Wormwood half a dram, Steel prepared with Sulphur 2
drams, make into Pills, with a sufficient quantity of Elixir Proprietatis, of
which take 3 every night and morning.

FINIS.

