THE LOYAL COVENANTER, OR, Peace and Truth revived.

BEING Certain seasonable Considerations presented to the whole Kingdom in
general.

But more particularly intended for that Famous and Honorable City of London,
and therein in a more peculiar manner all those Citizens, As also, All other
Persons wheresoever, who have taken the Solemn LEAGUE and COVENANT.

Printed in the Year 1648.

To all true-hearted Englishmen, of what degree or quality soever, especially
to each particular Citizen of London.
Courteous and friendly Reader,
FOr so my believing charity persuades me to style you, although my mean and
inconsiderable deserts cannot hope to lay claim to the title;

As it is a certain truth for our comfort, that man's passive extremity, is
Gods active opportunity, deliverance then stepping in, when in our
apprehensions were are past hopes of being delivered; so it is as necessary a
truth to be practiced, that when Kingdoms, Cities, Families or friends are
most passive under the extremity of accumulative miseries, threatening ruin
and desolation; then to be most active in our assistance^ counsel, and to our
power, deliverance. Such like thoughts as these possessing me in these
unhappiest of unhappy times, wherein a generally-feared destruction hangs
over our heads like a sharp pointed sword, only by a small thread, persuaded me
with the poor widow (my abilities not being able to bestow more) to cast in
this my following mite; and if it shall (though in it self worthless) prove
by the concurring operation of Gods Spirit upon the hearts of men, in the least
manner, instrumentally contributary to the reformation of some, information of
others, and a desired restoration of the whole Kingdom in general, the City
of London in particular, where I received my first birth and being, to their
ancient honor, and former truth and peace, return your thanks to the Lord of
heaven and earth, the fountain of all Meroies, and pray for the Eternal
happiness of:

Your real friend Countryman, and fellow Citizen, Rexophilus Londinatus
Christianus Protestans.
Maii prim. 1648.
-- Ne inutilis olim
vixisse videar --
25 Proverbs 11. A word spoken in season is like apples of Gold in pictures of
Silver. 122 Psalm 8. For my brethren and companions sakes will I now say,
peace be within thy walls. WHen the Hebrew-tongued bells sadly invite the
Charitable assistance of others to a pacification of that rebellious Element,
Fire, Hebrew Letters must be read backward. A Custom in England to ring bells
backward when houses are on fire.
destructively active beyond its legal bounds, and a reduction of it to its
proper center and due obedience; who will not (unless some whose preventing
care is little about their own, and careful pity less employed about others
ruins) willingly contribute their quenching pains? Nay, who (except others as
miserably destitute of honesty as wealth, whose strangely malicious minds
repine at the fruitful industry, smiling prosperity of others, and whose
irregular expectations hope to supply the defect of their own wealth, and boy
up their almost irrecoverably sunk estates, by a generally concurring
destruction) will not subscribe to a voluntary demolition of their proper and
more peculiar buildings; only to anticipate the devastation of others by that
merciless raging tyrant?

When the angry winds begin to vent their spleen, and the passive surges which
not long before were united into one only unsurrowed face, like slaves forced
to a degeneration, are compelled by those powerfully Commanding Masters, into
high swelling frowns, and deep-furrowed wrinkles thereby menacing ruin to all
floating travelers in that uncertain watery region; Will not then all obliged,
and resolved guides, Vela moderantes p^r aequoris undas, unless some who with
too much ease can change engagements of public preservation, into permissive
i^ not active resolutions of desolation, or others whose winding limbs
embarked on gainful private hopes, or aguish losing feats can comply with
every rouling wave, thereby in vain expecting in a Fly-boat of neutralitie to
swim safely to a self-securing shore; will not all except such, consult a
prevention of such a universally-threaten'd destruction?

My dearest Countrymen, England hoc momento temporis (O that Fame could give
my Pen the lie ^^ut alas, alas, experience already has and still does afford
us too too certain grounds evidencing its truth) is at this very day become a
sad parallel of these preceding lines; England not long since famous abroad
happy at home, even beyond ( si foelicitatem novorit) desire of additionall
happiness, for its united domestic structures; I mean its Monarchical
government compacted into so sweetly agreeing, King, Lords and Commons in
Parliament.
disproportion^d proportion, that setting aside those Concomitantes Regnorum
devastatores, those destroyers of men and Kingdoms, Ambition, Envy, and
Sedition, which blind the judgments sight, enforcing it to a partial (if not
an envious) construction of the best things) the most prying eye could not
discern the Poorest men.
humblest stone remedilesly pressed by an oppressing Rich persons.
Superior, or highest advanced pinnacle proudly scorning inferior subjected
materials without a check from the master builder, I mean the established law,
whose enlivener fonsquerigo, is our Sovereign Lord, King Charles, etc. Sine
quo nulla nova fuit est Anglia lexque erit.

This England quis non talia scribendo lachrymarum flumina mittet? Jeremiah, 9.
chap. 1. v.
who can forbear wishing with the Prophet, That his head were full of water,
and his eyes a fountain of tears to weep for his Native Country? by the
beginning Sparcks of an unfortunate Northern firebrand (strange it is, that so
cold and almost benumming a climate should yield such nimbly-devouring fire)
intermixing in its consuming progress with unnaturally connaturalizing
materials, by degrees grown almost into one entire flame.

This winged Vessel truly styled Europ's Sovereign, whose swelling sails not
long since were filled even to envy, and admiration of all round about her by
long continuing, uninterrupted succesfull gales; At last by the enforcement of
rigid necessity, justly steering its powerfully commanding course for its
command proceeded from a Commission from his Majesty.
Just power, near the Scotland.
alidonian waters, met with some surly opposing gusts, high-working ambitious
and rebellious waves, which not wanting a concurring assistance, and
encouragement from other mutinous spirits (strange it is that children of the
same womb should rend the very bowels of their natural parent upon the
unreasonable invitation of aliens) accompanying the same Fleet with this Royal
Pilot, denied to strike sail, or express obedience to his lawful commands:
Which strange and unnatural opposition increasing like snow roul'd from place
to place, even to a monstrous heap (by the senslesly assisting and furiously
active hands of such persons) was soon, howsoever dissolved by the favorable
breath, and gracious condescentions beyond expectation of the Royal Co^mander;
himself, as it seemed, having a breast more affected with the loss of any under
his command, however in their obedience repugnant, although I cannot but
confess, that many of that Nation were, and by their loyal words and deeds
then did express themselves themselves repugnant to such a repugnancy, than
with the loss of part of his Commanding power. Soon after which these two
unequal opposites met in mutual embraces, and a pacification; and because
their reciprocal agreement was confirmed by the agreeing suffrages of the
supreamest Court, I will here Jilentium tenere, restrain my pen from being
further inquisitive, Whether or no it was an act lawful, and that warranted
also by religion, reason and law in them, not only to deny obedience unto, but
oppose the commands of their lawful (for now my expressions shall be plain to
the apprehensions of every one) and Native Sovereign; or Whether it were not
an action absolutely necessary in their Prince, both in respect of religions,
reasons, laws, and his honors vindication to demand a reason thereof, and
that not proving satisfactory, to oppose such an opposition.

However I shall be bold to add thus much, that if amidst the troubled waters
of another Nation, England then laboring with the almost unavoydable effects
of a long continuing peace (a supine security) with its adjuncts; as erroneous
practices, oversights, miscarriages in some particular Ministers of State, as
what Nation can plead a total freedom from some intervening corruptions and
Justice-perverting instruments? If by the additionalaggravations of these
Errors and mistakes by the Ambition and faction of some, who the better to
facilitate a progress in their own designs, loudly spoke to the
undistinguishing multitude, that such deviations from particular laws, were
but intentions (but upon what rational ground I know not) of subverting the
whole frame of the Law. If such like storms in England proved furthering
instruments to purchase them a Calm, and a Serene Kingdom; If they beyond a
probability of former hopes in this very opportunity of opportunity, obtained
their own desires from the unparalleled favor of their Sovereign; It were to
be wished that they then had rather remained satisfied with the possession of
so much happiness, returning to God, the fountain of all blessings,
thankfulness for so great a mercy, studying expressive gratitude by
obedientiall and loyal actions to their Prince, for such gracious
manifestations, than like phanatick people, who havving miraculously quenched
fire begun in their own houses, and thereby prevented a menaced ruin; Not
satisfied therewith (as if the misery of others could add perpetuity to their
procured happiness;) cast fireballs so long into their Neighbors dwellings,
until in it its furiously-devouring race it return where it first began;
Which, if God for ingratitude, and other concomitant sins, as he is just
without respect of persons, should in the revolution of future time permit;
what mercy (although his mercy is above his justice) can they with confidence
hope from him, who with so much neglect, I had almost written, impudence, have
slighted his favors. Or what pitying assistance can they expect others should
show unto them, who never supposed themselves comentedly happy in their own
particular interests, until they had endeavored, nay effected the general
unhappiness of others?

Deus necessitatis causam talis avertat oro;
O Lord prevent the occasion of such a necessitous assistance.
Further, all things considered, rather than expose themselves to future
hazards, it might have been, and still may be a consideration worthy their
thoughts, a little pravidere, Whether or no in after ages, when hot fiery
disputing passions shall be lulled a sleep, when men's imbittered spirits shall
by well poyzed impartial judgments be stopped from irregular verbal
excursions, when private interests shall freely and unanimously resolve
themselves into the generally real good of the pull like, Whether or no then
their Successors reflecting upon such past actions, and their Circumstantiall
means also made use of, probably may not both in their private discourses
esteem, and in public general Counsels censure, their favors, Examples to
this effect, our Nation has many, and it is believed theirs is not without
some few presidents.
or if they will reformation, or rather alteration in government (Now freely
theirs by the voluntary and graciously Confirming grant of his Majesty) to be
but the enforced issue of griping necessity, and the purchase of a menacing
brandished Sword, and because so enforced, resolve them as Null; and therefore
for the Prevention hereof, that in the judicious balances of after times they
may not (to their lasting dishonor) be found too light. It had been, and as
yet may be a well becoming policy in them to be fruitful in succeeding
actions of loyal thankfulness; Estote prudentes praestat, esse Promethium
quam Epimethium; Too late penitential experience is but a sadning mistress.

Therefore to this purpose before the hour glafle of such an opportunity is
irrecoverably past, and its sands quite spont; It were a seasonable wish that
they would take into their serious ednsiderations, even their own loving
Compellation and title of Brethren, and indeed we are no less, having one
political Father the King, who is amborum pater regnorum, to whom we owe
obedience by the law of God, and the lands, which being undoubtedly true;

That they would make good that title by affectionate fraternall actions
expressing themselves brethren, Affectione reali activaque non titulari
solummodoque professione.

That their deeds speaking the language of enemies, like Cain's dealing with
Abel, may no longer contradict their tongues expression, Ceremoniously, if not
treacherously tearming us brethren, that they Sub specie fraterni nominis, as
hitherto we have imd grounds to fuspect, may with more facility deceive the
credulous, and the racher now because it is murmured abroad, that Finglands
presant misories, by their ^ighting and Covenanting assistance have received
much addition; It concerns them, non verba solummodo, sed facta dicere, for
non prosunt verba quum coniraria facto videmus; Therefore it were to be
desired, that they would obey the command of Christ, to differ no longer, nor
fall into new fractions, or further factions, because we are brethren. And to
this purpose it is expected as well for their own vindication (I mean not the
whole Nation, for many thousands have made good their constant loyalty to their
King really, not verbally, but all such in that Nation whose consciences cannot
but whisper themselves necessarily concerned in such a vindication, as
requested, for their Brethrens assistance, that they would really and
positively not with intermixed, uncertain distinctions, doubtful expressions,
ambiguous terms, which like wax from the Seal, may be apted to any
construction, thereby owning the Jesuit (whom they seem so much to detest) for
their Parent; but on the contrary, that plene planeque sine equivocatione,
without mental reservation or premised evasion declare: and because mera
declaratio sine actu inutilis and ^^iosa, words in such a case are ayery
nothings, accordingly to act, for the restoration of our Protestant Religion to
its generally practical purity, unity and uniformity; his royal Majesty,
their and our dread Sovereign, now ( horresco scribere! a restrained Prisoner)
to his royal Prerogative and Rights by the Law of the Land, justly and
undoubtedly manifested to be his: his Subjects, singulatim, and their fellow
Subjects, to their ancient Liberties, Proprieties and Immunities, by the same
Law really theirs; and in the conjunction of such loyal affections, and really
performed actions, the three Kingdoms to an entire Peace and undeniable Truth,
according to the truest construction of their own solemn League and Covenant,
which being by their contributed assistance forwarded to a perfect
consummation, we shall return thanks to God for his exceeding bountiful
expressions of such a mercy and gratification to them, as Instruments conducing
thereunto; hoping that we shall not need to put them in mind, that our hopes
only are, that such kind of auxiliary affections will proceed merely out of
loyal affections to his Majesty, and love to us their Brethren, and not from
an intent commandingly to incorporate themselves into Englands Privileges,
Freedoms, Honors and Wealth; therefore at present shall have no occasion to
acquaint them, that Englands birthright will not be sold upon unequal terms,
to this purpose.

O thou God of all Spirits, grant to them and us thy assisting grace, that we
may obey thee O Lord, who art the King of heaven and earth, in all things, for
thy own sake, according to thine own rule, and King Charles our Sovereign, thy
substitute upon earth, for thy sake, that so all of us guided by one Law of
truth, thy will reveiled in thy Word, governed by him our King according to the
truth of Law established, and all our multiplied sins against thee being
pardoned, treason and rebellion against his Majesty buried in an unrepealable
Act of oblivion, we may for the future live in piety and godliness toward
thee our God, in obedience and loyalty to his Majesty, in unity, peace and
concord (like Brethren) one among another, Amem, Amen, Amen.

But I return to England, which still remains passive under a tyrannically
wasting fire, and like a Ship still tossed to and fro by raging tempestuous
winds; it is true Religion by Law established, it is really fundamental Laws,
respecting both Prince and People, his just Rights, and the Subjects most
certain and generally contenting Liberties approaching near to a dissolutio^,
though not a destruction, (for magna veritas and prevalebit, the gates of hell
shall never be able to prevail against truth) being ready to sink into an
Aristocraticall boundless, or Anarchicall bottomless Sea: Therefore (my dear
Countrymen) that I might not appear like an uncharitable Travellour, passing
through a Town contracted by fire into one flame, without observation, pity, or
according to my present poor ability, some assistance; or that I may not seem
careless to sail by a distressed Vessel, lost almost in the deep, by the
violent beatings of seditiously conspiring waves: I have here contributed some
buckets of water toward the asswaging of this devouring fire; sent some
affisting necessaries aboard the Kingdoms sinking Ship: In doing whereof, if my
zeal to the Protestant Religion, loyalty to my Sovereign, love and fidelity to
my native Country, affection and approbation of the well composed Laws
thereof, compassion and pity to all my misguided, misinformed and seduced
Countrymen, shall expose me to censure, condemnation, nay death it self, I am
resolved, by the help of God, in whom alone is my confidence, with the Apostle,
into whatsoever condition I shall be cast, therewith to remain content,
esteeming it dulce and decorum pro Religione, Rege Patria legibusque Angliae
mori.

Now because it concerns all who raise buildings, not so much to catch the
eyes-observance with insubstantiall shadows, as to remain lastingly
serviceable, to lay a sure foundation, least that declining or by opposing
force, enforced to a removal, each particular superstructure meet with the
same ruin, and suddenly sinking-fate: my intent therefore not being for
procuration of popular ayery applause, but information and reduction of those
into the good old way of the Christian Protestant Religion, Reason, Law and
Loyalty, who through ignorance and misinformation have been made pedes
instrumentales, the feet by which the Machiavilians of these times have walked
on toward the end of their designs; manus complicantes, the hands with which
Politicians have framed their Engines for an enforced alteration of Englands
government; without whose assistance their plots would have proved but like
statues without motion, or abortive Births, dead in the very womb: those I mean
whose intentions at first never aimed at a total change of Government, by a
diminishing, though in a petitionary, much less a bloody compulsive way, his
Majesty's royal Prerogative and just Regal power; but having been abused
through specious pretenses of Reformation, have been ignorant instruments of
Englands unhappiness.

As for the Initiatours, Contrivers, Plotters of this rooting design, who begin
at the end thereof, and accordingly have in England, per fasque nefas,
endeavored the attaining their ends, levelling all ancient bounds of Regal
Prerogative, just Parliamentary Privileges, private men's proprieties and
liberties, digging so deep in quest of the fundamental Laws, that they have
arrived at the Antipodes, and yet after six years endeavors, are as far from
finding that fundamental vein, as they were when their bloody designs opened
the first vein in the Kingdoms body: I cannot expect a smooth face from them
expressing favor to these lines, or remain satisfied with what is written,
therefore I shall only pray for them, that the God of heaven would open their
eyes, causing them to see, how with Jeroboam, they have not only sinned
themselves, but caused many thousands in England to fin; and grant them
repentance and pardon for all their accumulative offenses, before they go down
to the grave and be seen no more.

I shall therefore fundamina ponere, leaving discourses of the necessity of a
National government, the antiquity, rationality and precedence of Monarchy,
beyond any other form, the comparative excellency of the English Government, in
respect of others, practiced and bearing the same title, the Press having been
already fruitful in Writings of that nature: lay down some undeniable
positions and truths, ab omnibnsque concessa.

First, in respect of a Government already lawfully settled.

Secondly, in regard of those ligamenta fidelitatis, promissory, oaths, by
which religious engagements we oblige our selves to an acknowledgement of some
rights due to the supreme Governor, by the generally received and practiced
custom of a Nation; as also to maintain such rights against all violent
opposition, hindering any compelled diminution or alteration of the same, by
any persons whomsoever.

Hoping that in the result of all, nemo Christianus contra Religionem, nemo
Angli^ina contra leges Angliae, nemo sobrius contra rationem, nemo fidelis
contra Regem, nemo Pacificus contra pacem durabilem contendet, that all true
Protestants, rational men, faithful Subjects, lovers of their Religion, King,
Country and Peace, will condescend to what hereaster they shall find propounded.

Therefore by the way, first, let me request all such, whose thoughts cannot
but speak themselves intereshed in these lines, to lay aside all prejudicate
opinions, both of my self and others, hitherto practically different from them,
prejudice being like a partition wall, which will binder the judgments
yielding to what is proposed and really made good to be Reason, Religion and
Law.

Secondly, that they would banish from their breasts that Rebel to Religion and
Reason, a too confident tenaciousnesse of their own opinions, not because in
their appearance they still continue undoubted truths to their approving
judgments; but because the past insinuating Declarations of some cunning
Politicians, and rhetorical Jesuitized perswafions of others, have consonant
to their particular erroneous maxims, and pre-resolved upon designs urged
them to a former practice of unjust and unlawful actions.

Thirdly, therefore that they would cast away that desperately ruining
resolution of potius male currendo crimina criminibus addere, quam errorem
confireri recurrendo, veritatemque veritutis ^^^sa propugnare, being rather
willing to continue slaves to the commission of additionall sins, then by
repentance become triumphing Champions, for the sincerity of truth; when as it
is far greater and better policy humane and divine, by repentance to return
into the way of truth, then by a continuing progress in erronioue paths, to
expose themselves to a possible ruin here, and destrustion hereaster: Bosides,
the whole outrent of the Scriptures every where speaks merey and pardon to
the penitent (an argument in my judgment sufficient to induce all there unto
against contrary suggestions of the world and the Depil^; nay, Ezekiel. 18.21. to
the end.
the very end of Christ's Dirth, Death, Resurrection and Asoention only
proclaim an invitation of sinners to iome unto him, promising them pardon and
saivation: Now therefore if that any one in this respect, shall turn away his
ear, neglecting to hearken to the Charmer, charm he never so well, let them
take heed that that place of Beelpture, Zech. 1.4, 5, 6. prove not an evidence
against their obstindey, and the complaint and threats of our Savior in Mat.
23.37, 38. concern not them; O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which have killed the
Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have
gathered thee together, as a hen gathers her chickens, and you would nor;
Behold therefore your habitation shall be left defelate.

From which heavy judgment, O them preserver of men, keep and defend us all.

But I proceed to lay down my first fundamental positions, in respect of a
Government already established.

That all violent and irregular alteration of Government, contracy to the
fundamental customs and constitutions of every respective Nation: First, if
it receive its original from the supreme Magistrate, and prossed upon the
people, has always been branded with the names of tyranny and oppession; nor
have such sms, (although the Word of God permit not Subjects by arms to rebel
against him) passed impunished oftentimes here in this world; however, without
repentance, cannot escape in the world to come.

Secondly, if violently streamfing from the seditions, compulsive dombination
of the people, without and against the supreme Magistrates consent, has ever
been stigmatived with those odious titles of Rebellion and Treason; whose just
rewards are death here, which a successive never dying infamy, and unless the
mercy of Heaven inter pose, the eternity of death hereafter.

Therefore for the avoiding of Tyranny and Oppression on the one side,
preventing of Treason and Rebellion on the other, with all those bloody issues
and ruinous effects flowing from thence, tanquam a font sanguinolento, and
confequently those punishments which tanquam uncle sequuntur undas, tread on
the very heels of such offenses.

It must necessarily be granted an undeniable truth, that obedience
indispensable is due from every Subject of what degree soever, according to the
qualification of the persons, unto all Laws (not opposite to the Law and Word
of God) made and confirmed by the supreme power of any Nation; and that these
Laws, according to reason, ought and must remain in full force and virtue,
until the same lawful power, which first gave them the power of a commanding
law, shall repeal and nullify them: That all Christian Subjects do or should
yield obedience to Kings personal, and the Law his vertuall commands, if not
derogatory to the Law of God; not only because the King, quatenus Rex, or the
Law, quatenus Lex tantiem, commands the same, but because in his Word he has
laid a precept upon us, both in the fourth Commandment, and in Romans 13.1, 2,
3. where he enjoyneth every soul to be subject to the higher Powers, etc. and 1
Pet. 2.14. 15, 17. where he commands us by his Apostle, to submit our selves
to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake; whether it be unto the King, as
unto the supreme, etc. so that if we deny active obedience to his legal
commands, we deny it not to the King, and oppose the Law therein alone, but to
God himself, pen quem Reges regnant, Prove. 9.15, 16
acting contrary to his will revealed in his Word, and the practice of Christ
himself, who gave Caesar hi^ due.

But because peradventure a demonstration of my own judgment about passive
obedience (active to Kings, having already been discussed of) may be expected,
therefore that I might not leave my self to the uncertain interpretation of any:

I profess my self an English Protestant, and therefore in the truest sense,
shall not refuse the style of an English Catholic; disavowing all heretical,
idolatrous and superstitious Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome, and
all other Opinions different from, and contradictory unto the Doctrine of the
Church of England, established in the thirty nine Articles: not because it is
established only, but because it is consonant and agreeable to the Word of
God; the truth whereof has been, is, and hereafter will be made good against
all heretical and schismatic Opponents whomsoever.

In particular reference to a lawful King, and the continuance of his
government in peace and piety.

I detest and protest against all Jesuiticall distinctions, Vide King James
premonition to christian Princes, and his Apology for the Oath of Alleagiance,
page 50 51, 108, 109. alibique.
destructive tenants to all Religion and Government, of power reserved in Pope
or people, of what degree or number soever, whether they be a body
representative conjunctim (if a body can properly be termed a body without an
head) or any particular members divisim, under any pretense or intention
whatsoever, by force to dispose of, and change the Laws of a Kingdom, depose
Kings, divest them of their lawful power, dispense with Oaths, by which their
Subjects stand as well religiously as naturally obliged, refist their lawful
commands by the sword, persuading Subjects to follow their example.

I acknowledge according to the truth of the Word of God, 2 These. 1.4. Match.
26.51. Match. 9.54, 55, 56. Mat. 16.23. Book of Martyrs, 3. vol. Hom. Church
Engl. and Artie.
the practice and precept of Christ himself, the examples of the Prophets and
Apostles, the pattern of all the Martyrs, the generally concurring Doctrine of
the Catholic Church, now in profession continued in the Church of England.

That active obedience is to be yielded to the King as supreme in omnibus
licitis, in things lawful; but if God for the punish, meant of a Nation should
set over us a tyrannical King, secundam voluntaiem pravam non rationem rectam
regentem, governing by his depraved will against reason, and commanding things
contrary to the Word of God, we must not by force of arms rebel against him,
but rather then so (if not prevailing by Petition unto him, or escaping by
flight from him) patiently submit to the loss of our lives and estates
agreeing with the ancient Christians, that preces and lachrymae sunt arma
ecclesiae, that the pen rather then the sword, patience, prayers and tears,
then actively shedding blood best becomes Christians: Herein committing my
soul into the hands of my faithful Creator and merciful Redeemer, Revel.
2.10. Mat. 5.10, 11, 12. 1 Per. 3.14, 17. 1 Timothy 2.9.
who have pronounced them blessed that suffer for righteousness sake, and the
testimony of a good conscience.

But I know the Jesuit and others (too near him in opinion, though remote from
him in name) will contract their brows into a frown at this (though Christian
like) asseveration and resolution, Homily Chur. Engl. Sacred royal Prerogative
of christian Kings, printed Anne 1644.
interposing many ayery suppositions, distinctions, and I know not what
frivolous questions; all which I shall at present forbear to insert, much more
to answer; because they have sufficiently been (in the religious and rational
works of many learned Writers, both ^ncient and modern, refuted and matle to
appear but groundless, quickly vanishing into air.

Beside, his royal Majesty, since the beginning of this unnatural War, having
dommanded nor demanded any thing (as in the sequel will appear) contrary to
established Law, nor performed any action, which any other Prince as supreme
might not lawfully have done, se, sobolem, leges, Regnaque defendendo: It would
be a needless, and a labor in vain in me (although in my conscience I approve
the same) to spend paper in vindication of a Christians passive obedience, it
being a question not arifing from the past or present practice of our Sovereign
Lord the King; therefore without all question, at present stands not in need
either of mine, or any other his Majesty's Subjects defense: For he has been,
and is so far from commanding any unjust things, contrary to the Law of God and
the Land, that he has patiently suffered reproaches against his royal person,
deprivation of his noble Consort, dispersion of his Princely Son, hazard o^ his
own life, loss of his Revenues, with many thousands of his loyal Subjects,
nay, almost all the comforts which felicitates a man's life upon earth, being at
last after all these a restrained prisoner: O happy, thrice blessed walls
containing such a King, pattern of true Piety, president of religious
constancy, example of an unparalelled Patience! O unnatural men! Rebels to the
King, Reason, Religion and Law, whose traiterous commands thus turns Princes
Palaces into a royal Prison: And all this he undergoeth, because he would
govern only by Law, and preserve a power in himself, whereby he may be enabled
to preserve the Law.

But I proceed, passing by the general power of a King in Divinity, and in
that respect what he may do, and confider him only as he is King of England,
in a well settled Government, and therefore to this purpose shall lay down some
more fundamental positions, and unquestionable truths.

That our Sovereign Lord CHARLES, Vide all Acts of Ravliament confessing the 1.
Jac. cap. 1.9. Edw. 4 fol 8
by the grace of God, is lawful King of England, and of all other his
Majesty's Dominions and Countries, that he is supreme Governor over all
persons and in all causes, whether Ecolesiastical or Civil.

That is, There is (by the Law of the Land established, in which he is
vertually present) no commanding power above him, without him, much less
against him; nor can, ought or must any conjunctim or divisim, exercise any
governing power within his Majesty's Dominions, nor must any willingly express
subjection or obedience to such an unjust and usurped power, standing in
opposition to his lawful power.

That there are regales columnae, to support this Monarchical Fabric from
sinking or suffering any injury from any persons whomsoever, as summoning and
dismissing of general Counsels, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, making or
anulling of Laws, that is, his affirmative or negative voice in Parliament;
without which, the Building were rather a painted, then substantial Edifice.

Secondly, making of War or Peace, that is, disposing of the Militia, of arming
his Subjects to prevent foreign Invasions, or suppress domestic, rebellious
Insurrections; without which it would also soon fall by seditious and ambitious
underminers: nor could the King without this power be able to defend himself
from wrong, or his Subjects from oppression.

Thirdly, creating and disposing of Magistrates, power over life and death,
highest and last appeal; without which his title of Supremacy would be a title
of supreme mockery, the style of School boys know that Rex is but a derivative
of Rego, which signifies to Govern.
King a mere contradiction; nay, if he had not these additionals, whereby he is
only abled, Regis agere partem, he were rather Rex titularis quam realis; and
if so, rather regulatus; and therefore in the best sense, but a supreme Subject
then Rex regens, by virtue of his supreme power governing his Subjects: were he
deprived of these necessary adjuncts to a regal power, he then may (as his
Majesty has well observed himself) be waited upon bare-headed, have his hand
kissed, His Answer to the nineteen Proposition Anno 1^^^
his Authority declared by his Subjects; have Swords and Maces carried before
him, and please himself with the sight of a Crown and Scepter: but as to true
and real power, he should remain but the out side, picture and sign of a King.

Now that all these, with many more attributes of power requisite for a King to
have, do appertain (by the established Law of this Land) to our Sovereign Lord
King CHARLES his Heirs and Successors; I will not trouble the margin with
quotations from the Fountain, Lex terrae A. 1647. a principio ad siuem. Remonst
Feb. 21. 1647. alibique scriptis.
to make good, but refer the Reader to those pure streams flowing from thence,
those brief Collections of that Reverend Lawyer Judge Jenkins, who therein
Atlas like, has supported the true fundamental Laws of England, and like a
faithful Expositor, given the most religious, rational and lawful practiced
sense of them.

But for the clearing hereof, I shall propound some queries to all rational
men, which will (the premises confidered) answer of themselves, to which even
the knowledge of the meanest judgment, if he know any thing, cannot but assent
as real truth.

Whether ever in this Kingdom any new Law was enjoined or new Oath imposed upon
the people in opposition to the Law established; Presupposed the King not the
King in his minority, although it is as true then, for there is his tacit
supreme power implied his Protector. J Jenk. Remonstr. Febr. 21. 1647. Vide
Recordi.
by the two houses conjunctim, or by either of them seperatim, without, nay,
against the King's consent; and if none, as none can be produced, by what power
have they contrived Ordinances, and imposed them with a Vow and Covenant,
solemn League and Covenant, contrary to established Law, and his Majesty's
Proclamation?

Whether or no, turbulent, violent and irregular transaction in former
Parliaments, wherein Kings have been deposed or necessitated to unlawful
condescentions, through force or fear have not been by succeeding Parliaments
made null, and those Parliaments themselves esteemed but as traitorous
Assemblies: and so, as cannot be denied, Res pares cnm paribus comparemus; And
let us all pray, that England may enjoy the happiness of a free, lawfully
acting, Christian like, peaceable, unbyased, no private self ends respecting,
but the truly public and general good, cordially affecting, and really
effecting Parliament, To which let all true English men, with my self say,
Amen, Amen.

Whether ever formerly the Lords and Commons cenjunctim, or either of them
divisim, had the disposing of the Militia of the Kingdom, did create
Magistrates, had power over life and death, to whom highest and last appeal
were made, did make a great Seal, acting by virtue thereof, by any Law of the
Land established, without, nay against the King's consent? And if there be no
Law extant, interesting them in such a power, but on the contrary, it must
necessarily be confessed, that all these things (by the letter of the Law, and
the continual practice thereof, which is optimus leges interpres) do belong to
the King's Majesty, his Heirs and Successors: their own Propositions of the
second of June, 1642. confessing no less; First Book Col. Ordnan. 307.
for then they petitioned him for a resignation of all these insignia regalia,
for the removing of fears and jealousies between him and his people; which must
necessarily imply a tacit confession, that his Majesty is solely interested in
the disposing of them; for to what end should they petition for those things,
which without his consent they may claim as their own: and if so, let every
man's judgment speak, Quis reus?

Whether or no there be any Law remaining established, or any clause reserved
in the Law, by virtue whereof the Lords and Commons, or either of them are
authorized in any case whatsoever real, much less upon a pretense of any
case, to remove Counselors from his Majesty by force, to imprison his sacred
Person, to use the regal Power, to alter the Laws established, to impose new
Laws without his consent upon his Subjects, and the like, by force: All which,
and more then these, have been put in practice since these unhappy times began;
and if they cannot produce any Law, or the least resemblance of a Law, nay, of
Christian reason, to warrant such like actions, they must give us leave to ask
the question, Who are guilty of Treason? seeing all these particulars thus
usurped, are by the Law declared no less. Judge Jenkins Lex t^r^ae Remonstr.
Frb. 1647.


And here by the way, let me put them in mind of the different judgment of
former Ages, in Bishop Cranmer, a glorious Martyr for our Religion, from such
kind of positions or practices.

He would not admit of the Popes authority in England, because he was
pre-engaged to the King by Oath, Book Martyrs
according to the Law of the Land; affirming, that the Popes authority was
against the Crown, Custom, and Laws of the Kingdom: Now unless there be a
Law authorizing the People, under what notion soever, to do that which was
unlawful in the Pope to do (the offense being one and the same, committed only
by differing persons) I know not what to write more, but that Pope and People
begin both with one letter; praying God to deliver us from the Pope and
Papistical false Doctrines.

As for that old stalking-horse, the fundamental Law, which has so often and
so long been pretended, as an undeniable warrant, authorizing their beginnings
and proceedings in opposition to his Majesty: Truly loyal English hearts and
rational men will no sooner credit that there is such a Law, because of their
mere declarative affirmation, then that there is such an one as Atlas, really
supporting the Heavens with his shoulders, because Poets have delivered so much
to succeeding Ages, in their feigned writings.

There indeed not any such Law, warranting these kind of actions, for none
hitherto has appeared in view; it being a maxim, that quod non apparet jure
non est; therefore shall be bold to put them in mind of part of Master Pym's
speech at the beginning of this Parliament, leaving the application to their
consideration.

The Law is that which puts a difference between good and evil, between
just and unjust; if you take away the Law all things will fall into a
confusion, every man will become a Law to himself; which in the depraved
condition of humane nature, must needs produce many great enormities: Lust will
become a Law, Envy will become a Law, Ambition will become a Law; and what
dictates and decisions such Laws will produce, may easily be discerned. Thus
far Master Pym.

Now that these things may not come to pass in its height however, and
perfection in these our days: Let us pray, that the Lord would grant us all
grace to tread constant steps in the path of his Law, giving us loyal hearts
to the King, and causing us to express a real, not verbal obedience to the
Law of the Land.

Further, because humanum est errare, and omnis perfectio nostra est
imperfectio; all of us being full of original sin; by reason of which, the
suggestion of Satan, and the enticing pleasures and profits of this life, we
are alas ( quamvis Christiani, though styled Christians) yet ready to commit
sin with greediness against the God of heaven; as also, too too apt to prefer
our own private advantage and interest before the public good and benefit, not
minding the peoples happiness in practicing piety, and enjoying Peace the
mother of plenty, but oftentimes, spurred on by avaritious and ambitiously
aspiring thoughts; we neglect rendering to God his, and all other degrees of
men, from the Prince to the meanest of the people, their respective dues, which
often occasioneth that confusion, like a fierce torrent overfloweth, and ruin
like a boisterous storm, suddenly shipwracks a well governed Kingdom.

Therefore are Oaths tanquam Clavi religiost, framed to keep this building of
Government more firm and close together: To this end the Oaths of Alleagiance
and Supremacy are by the Law of the Land enjoined to be taken by all Persons
capable thereof, especially men employed in any, public Office, but more
particularly the House of Commons in Parliament, sine quo non est talis. 5.
Eliz. esp. 1.


In which they swear without Equivocation or mental reservation, to bear
Faith and true alleagiance to his Majesty his Heirs and Successors, to
defend him and them against all Conspiracies and attempts whatsoever against
their Persons, Crown and Dignity.

Now let all reasonable Men confider, and within their own judgments resolve
these questions themselves. Coll. Ordn. first book, 93.
Is it maintenance of his Majesty's crown and dignity, and defense against all
attempts, etc.

To force the Militia inseperably belonging to the Crown from him, under
pretense of groundless fears and jealousies.

Is it maintenance of his Crown and Dignity, First book Coll. Par. Ordn. page
309, 310. June 1642.
I mean his regal Crown of Government to demand, as they did, in their
nineteen Propositions, all governing Kingly power from him; plainly then
speaking, that their intent was not to maintain (not withstanding their
glorious pretenses) the Law, nor resolution ad errores reformandum, but regimen
Angliae mutandum. For had they really intended as they verbally often pretended
in their Ordinances and Declarations, Coll. Ordn. 130. alibique. Fo. 15. Coll.
Ordn. December. 1641.
Preservation of the Law of the Land, his Majesty's royal person, honor and
Estate, just Prerogative and Sovereignty; they should have provided (having
also declared in that grand Remonstrance to the Kingdom, that their intent was
to restore the ancient honor, greatness and security of the Crown.) More
walls of Brass, if it were possible to invent (which I must confess passes my
belief) more, and a more excellent one, for preventing any more shaking of the
Law established, by intrenching upon the Kings just Prerogative and the
Subjects Liberty, then the Trienniall Parliament, which they confess
themselves to be a perpetual Spring of remedies for the future. And not on the
first Onset, Magis Postulare quam Petere, totally require rather then desire
the Kings royal Power; Nineteen Propos.
for that end breaking all hedges of public and general liberty to preserve
or advantage some few private pieces of enclosed grounds.

Is it faith and alleagiance, Oath of Alleagiance and Supremacy.
and a Declaration in your Consciences, that none has power to discharge
Subjects from their Alleagiance and Obedience to his Majesty?

To frame Oaths wherein you engage your fellow Subjects, Coll. Ordn. 93, 138.
even in a manner to protest against their alleagiance and obedience to his
Majesty; by Covenanting to assist the Forces raised and continued by both
Houses, who are but Subjects (else why do they Petition to his Majesty in
those submissive styles, Of his Majesty's most humble and loyal Subjects)
against the Forces raised by the King; and that they shall nor directly nor
indirectly assist the Forces raised by the King, without the consent of both
Houses; witness their Vow and Covenant, Ordered die Sabbathi 1643. and and
their latter composed Negative Oath, much to the same effect.

Is it a Declaration in your Conscience, Oath of Supremacy.
that the Kings highness is the only supreme Governor of this Realm, and
all other his Majesty's Dominions. To deprive him of his Negative voice in
Parliament, to create Magistrates, to exercise a power over the life and death
of his Subjects, nay to do any thing, but what Subjects ought to do, and
Oaths oblige unto?

Is it a desence of all Jurisdictions and Privileges, Preheminences and
Authorities belonging to the Kings highness, his heirs and Successors, and
annexed to the imperial crown of this Realm?

To declare that the King is not in a condition to govern, Answer to the Scots
Declaration, November. 28.1647.
to imprison him, to affirm that they will make no more addresses unto him,
that they will settle the government of the Kingdom without and against him?

These considered, I appeal to all: hear O heaven, judge O earth, with ye
Inhabitants of England, Scotland and Ireland; who are guilty of perjury? I am
sure none but will confess that the Oaths of Alleagiance and Supremacy are
lawful in themselves, commanded by a completely lawful authority, remaining
enjoined and confirmed by act of Parliament, therefore ought to be taken by
all, according to the literal sense thereof, and endeavors used to perform
the same, according to each man's uttermost ability.

As for that exception savouring more of a Turkish or Jesuiticall, then of a
Christian Protestant's affirmative judgment; nay, it is contrary to common
reason, and altogether vain.

For any one to apprehend, that singular persons one by one, are obliged to the
observation of these Oaths, but a body representative is one; as if one man
alone could be perjured, and yet that the multiplication of that unite (equally
engaged both in the keeping and the breach thereof) to four hundred, gave a
dispensation from the guiltiness of the sin, as if an offender were an
offender, because quatenus home unicus per se peccans, sinning as one man
alone; and not because the offense committed was a deviation from the Law of
God, Reason or the Law; when as it is far more correspondent to reason, to
affirm that the more the Offenders are, the more guilty, because more
spreading; and the greater the Offenders are, as representitave bodies, or
Magistrates abusing a conferred power are more dangerous, because exemplary,
for citius ducti per exempla quam praecepta, we are too apt to follow sin in a
multitude, especially if they be great persons of repute, pretending assertours
and reformers, though they prove desertours and deformers of Religion, Laws
and Liberties. Besides, God in the Scriptures commands us not to follow a
multitude to do evil, which implies that a multitude may do evil; and what is
a representitative body but a multitude, in a grammatical sense, and therefore
if they do evil, they must not be followed: Nay, the whole current of Gods Word
runs with variety of judgments threatened against all that are in authority, if
they recede from his Commandments. The Prophet Micah, with others, are full in
this respect, You may see many more among the rest of the Prophets.
Micah 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Amos 6.11, 12, 13, 14. Hosea 5.9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15. O come therefore for the prevention of such like judgments, and the
removing from us what we already lie under, let us by a timely repentance,
return unto the God of heaven, humbly entreating him that he would forgive us
all our sins; more particularly that he would not lay this heinous sin of
Perjury to Englands charge, but give us grace to mourn and weep for that, and
all others which have occasioned our Land to mourn in misery, and weep in blood.

Now to contract the premised severals into a narrower compass, thereby to
make this rooting design appear plainly to all.

I shall desire all rational men to take notice, that the Lords and Commons in
that grand Remonstrance to the Kingdom, in December 1641. and their Petitions
to his Majesty, Declarations and Ordinances, Preambles to their Protestation,
Vow and Covenant, solemn League and Covenant, which were but as so many
applications to the people, for their information and procuration of their
approbations assistance and affections; always pretended a preservation of the
Kings Honor, Rights and Authority, the Law of the Land, the Protestant
Religion, the Liberty and Propriety of the Subject. To this purpose you shall
find many expressions.

In the grand Remonstrance they complain of the Jesuited Papists, etc. and a
malignant Party, Col. Ordnan. fo 3.
pernicious designs to subvert the fundamental Laws and principles of
Government, on which the Religion and justice of this Kingdom is established.

They confess the King to be trusted with the Ecclesiastical law, as well as
temporal, Coll. Ordn. fo. 19.
that next under God the people owe obedience unto him.

They profess, their intent was not to abolish all government, and leave every
man to his own fancy, for the service and worship of God, but to reduce within
bounds the exorbitant power which some Prelates had assumed to themselves,
contrary to the Word of God, and law of the land.

Where by the way takes notice, that then there was no mention made of
extirpating Episcopal Government, since that, as much as in them lies, by
their solemn League and Covenant, and Ordinances effected.

They profess to maintain the true Protestant Religion, Coll. Ordn. 281.
the Kings just Prerogative, the laws and liberties of the Land, and the
privileges of Parliament.

Resolved upon the Question, 12. July 1642 fo. 457.
That an Army shall be forthwith raised for the safety of the Kings person,
preserving of the true Religion, Laws, Liberties and Peace of the Kingdom.

There they express fears, Fo. 461.
that the true Protestant Religion and Laws will be extinguished, etc.

That they will maintain and support his Majesty's royal Honor and
greatness. Fo. 466.


But I will trouble the Reader with no more expressions of this nature; the
first Book of collection of Ordinances, if he please, will afford him variety.

Take a brief view of their Preambles to all their Oaths, which they pretend as
motives and grounds occafioning their framing and imposing them.

May 5. 1641.

We the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in Parliament, etc. having cause to
suspect endeavors still continuing to subvert the true re ormed Protestant
Religion in his Majesty's Dominions Observe that Established.
established, and the fundament all Laws, and to introduce an arbitrary and
tyrannical Government, etc. therefore make this ensuing Protestation etc.

June 1643. in their Vow and Covenant.

There they declare, That there has been, and is a Popish and traitorous Plot
for the subversion of the true Protestant Religion, etc.

Thus you may perceive how in all their applications to the common people, they
still urge intentions of preserving the King's just Prerogative and royal
Rights, true Protestant Religion, the Laws and Liberties of the Land: Now this
must necessarily, according to common sense, be construed by the common people
(whatsoever private reserved resolutions to the contrary, the framers of the
Oaths and Ordenances had to themselves) a preservation and defense of
Religion, Prerogatives, Rights, Laws and Liberties, which are established and
in being; for according to that old adage, ex nihile nil fit.

But alas, these specious pretenses were but Decoyes sent abroad to catch the
plain hearted people, and the less advised multitude into a complying
assistance; their hands and tongues must help toward the demolition of
England's andent and well compacted Monarchieal Fabric; their breathless
bodies must be isntrumental piles, to mount these Designers into the chair of
a new modelized, pre-intended Government.

To this purpose therefore (contrary to all their Paper intelligencers,
Nineteen Propositions.
daily diispersed among the people) they in their first Propositions to his
Majesty (as I have already observed) lay the foundation, though cunningly, of
this general alteration in Church and State, wherein they had left nothing
more to demand of him, but that (as a King, he had nothing more to grant.)

Which design of theirs has appeared in more legible, additionall demands in
their succeeding Treaties and Propositions, from that time unto this very day,
wherein they have violently deprived his Majesty of his regal power; he at
present being so far from commanding as a Being kept as a Prisoner in the I sle
of wight.
King, that his power in commanding is far below the commanding power of some
of his meanest Subjects: Proh dolor! usque quo domine usque quo; how long,
Lord, how long, holy and true, will thou suffer the Rod of the wicked to remain
upon the back of the righteous? how long shall the workers of iniquity triumph,
speaking fiercely, smiting down thy people and troubling thy Heritage? Deliver
our Sovereign thy servant King CHARLES from cruel men, who imagine evil things
in their heart, making war continually; whose tongues are sharper then a
Serpent, and under whose lips lie the poison of Adders, Amen.

Again, to make these Rooters defign appear plainer and plainer to every eye,
the Treaties at Oxford, and since at Vxbridge, (at which time nothing was left
ungranted by his Majesty, whereby his people might be satisfied) but that he
would have something left, I say, as King, to give; will evidence it to any
impartial judgment.

At Oxford, Anno 1643. the maine dispute between his Majesty and the two
Houses Commissioners was, who should have the Power of Nomination and Election
of State-Officers. The Right to both belonged to his Majesty; how ever, so
desirous was he of Peace and a Reconciliation (his heart bleeding in
tenderness within, for the loss of so much of his Subjects blood) did readily
and willingly condescend that the Power of Nomination should be theirs,
reserving choice of them to himself.

Now let us weigh the inequality, in reference to the prevention of the
effusion of more blood. It may be supposed upon grounds of reason, that if I
have the Power of Nomination, I will not name any one in whom I cannot
confidently repose my trust, and of whom I have not a good opinion; therefore,
if it be only Peace and a mutual agreement between two differing Parties,
where it is sometimes fitting that both should abate of the rigor of their
demands, what need I care who chooses, or upon whom the election falls,
seeing they are all equal in my esteem: But this would not do; they must
have the Kings Supremacy, Election too, all, or as yet no peace; otherwise
indeed the Civil Government cannot be altered from a Monarchy into an
Aristocracy; and so by degrees subdivide it self into a Democracy. The
Ecclesiastical cannot be changed from Episcopacy into Presbytery, and so
again into Independency or confusion; visibly at this day so appearing.
Whereas if these men preintended not these things, but had really intended
Peace, or resented the then bleeding condition and ruining Kingdom of England,
they would not surely have stood upon such unnecessary punctilioes, not any way
absolutely availeable to the general good of the Nation; though absolutely
necessary Rights belonging to his Majesty, with which he could neither in
Honor, Justice, or Conscience voluntarily part. O Lord forgive them, forgive
them such their unreasonable and unseasonable Demands, and lay not to their
charge those several bloody issues which (since that time) have gushed out in
many places of this Kingdom, Amen.

Again, let us take notice of the further progress, for nemo repent fit
turpissimus, of these destructive Engeneers.

Has not his Majesty resigned all his regal Power, since that, unto the two
Houses during his life, being only desirous that his royal Children may
receive no prejudice by his too gracious condiscontions, freely offering a
general Pardon, and an Act of Oblivion to every one. Yet this will not
satisfy them; they must have him forfeit his Honor and Reason, by
acknowledging himself the Fountain and original cause of their unnaturally
shedding of his Subjects blood; (strange action, that the gulty Offenders must
be justified, and the Offended guiltless desired unjustly to condemn
themselves) and wound his Conscience by pulling upon himself and Posterity
that eating sin of Sacrilege, by assenting unto an utter Extirpation of
Episcopal government, and a devastation of the Churches patrimony, contrary to
his Oath taken at his Coronation.

Thus still you see the Design of these Rooters at first, was to alter the
Government of this Kingdom; and to that end have to deprive his Majesty of
his regal Power, Fo. 20, 24, 30, 33.
which since has been openly avowed in their Declaration concerning the Scots
Papers 13. Mar. 1647.

But peradventure, some will say that they are zealous supporters of the
Subject Liberties, and quellers of wicked actions, as Swearing, immoderate
drinking, breaking of the Sabbath, and the like.

To which I return an answer in general, that nothing can be more desired,
either for the suppressing or punishing of all sinful words and deeds, and all
such viciously guilty Persons; or conducing to the liberty of the Subjuct; if
men desire only to enjoy liberty under a Law, and not live as libertines
without a Government than what was established and confirmed by Act of
Parliament, before ever they exposed their grand Remonstrance, that seed Plott
of -- to the view of the World; December. 1641
witness that Declaration it self, which recounteth several Acts of favor
condescended unto by his Majesty for the Subjects benefit; which with that
lasting Bulwark of preventing or remedying Errors, the Trienniall Parliament,
were enough to satisfy any but seditious and ambitiously aspiring thoughts. To
make this appear, It is worthy observation, that after the issuing out of that
Remonstrance, not one Propofition was ever tendered to his Majesty, really
tending to the general good and liberty of every Subject; but whatsoever were
presented unto him under the title of Propositions, contained nothing but
Demands, in ordine ad Causam, in order to this Design of alteration and change
of Government. Now at this very day (as every one not prepossessed with
prejudice, cannot but grant) the vifible purchase of Hypocrisy, Perjury, blood
and oppression; an ill foundation, and the worst lime to erect a building with,
and which most commonly is followed with succeeding heavy judgments; Micah
3.9, 10, 11, 12.
From which good Lord deliver us.

To this purpose further; you have already seen Ordinances framed, Oaths
contrived for the Eradication of Episcopal government; and least it should by
degrees, like a Flow. pressed down by the violence of a falling shower, rise
again in future times, when more favorable sunny days appear, they have
exposed to Sale its Lands, the Churches patrimony.

You have seen the Presbyterian Government also digested into Ordinances, the
preaching of it into approbation, the practice of it in several Churcher in
London, and other adjacent parts, the peoples obedience pressed thereunto by
Divines of the present Synod.

You have seen the civil Government also changed, Ordinances of one or both
houses supplying the place of Acts of Parliament, without the Royal assent;
Demands of a total resignation of his Majesty's regal Power; and because not
in every respect condescended unto (as what father will be so unjust to his
Posterity, though he may be uncharitable to himself, as to deprive them of
their Inheritance, contrary to the Law of Nature, Religion and Law) the King
therefore detained a Prisoner.

Tantumne potest sundere malorum religio! Thus you may see the Designers riding
triumphantly in the bloody Chariot of their compassed Ends, Revelling it at the
Helmes of the Church and State, whilst their Royal injured Master is forced
to a sad Cabin under decks.

O that my abused Countrymen would seriously consider of the Premises, and
that they would at length desert these Impostors, who by their glorious
pretenses of Reformation, have deceived them into a Ruining assistance of
themselves and others; not thinking it a shame to confess an error, and
return when their Judgments are informed, that their former Judgments and
practices have been erroneous.

Again, you have seen the means used by them toeffect their ends; by
Perjury, infringing their Oaths of Alleagiance, Supremacy, and their own
famed Protestation, by the effusion of Blood. And here I cannot choose but add
my fears, that some tall and gloriously spreading Cedars of Church and State,
have rather been hewn down, because they hindered the Prospect of others, or
prejudiced the rising growth of some Neighbor shrubs than fallen because
rotten, useless or cumbersome to the grounds; which if true, (as some in the
world best know) we had all need to pray that the Lord would even in the blood
of Christ Jesus wash this Nation, especially from such kind of
blood-guiltinesse.

You may read the sad effects of these Defignes, A wronged King in distress; A
discontented Nobility; A disconsolate and dispersed Gentry; A disgraced
disparaged and defamed Orthodox Clergy; A murmuring and repining Communalty;
An impoverished Country; A selfe-dishonouring Nation, Division, Ambition,
Sedition and Security, the forerunners of a general ruin and desolation.

Help O Lord least we perish; And it be said of us, What is become of that
glory of Nations, England? formerly feared and beloved by all, yet not for
fear expressing love to any, least what was omce spoken of Troy, be affirmed
true of our Kingdom

Jam seges est ubi Anglia fuit. You may every where see God dishonored, the
Church of God unfrequented; Schisms and Profaneness every where abounded,
and Heresies of all sorts, even to the denying of the Deity of Christ, the holy
Scriptures, the immortality of the soul, and all these if not publicly
maintained, yet connived at by those who pretend otherwise; you may see all
Religion contracted into tongue discourse, Sanctification swallowed up by
Justification; as if because Christ dyed to save Sinners, we must therefore
wilfully sin if we will be saved; you have many running so far from the
Papists meritorious hope of gaining heaven by good Works, that they expect in
haste to post thither by a barren Faith; arguing, nay esteeming good Works as
altogether unnecessary; whenas indeed they must both be concomitants; for such
a Faith without Works will prove but a lame Sacrifice; and Works without
Faith will be but a blind Offering, never find the way to heaven.

You may see London, an envyed City, declined in the affections of all abroad,
By assessements, Contributions, Exwise, etc.
because they were blinded in their affections by these deceivers at home, who
by degrees have eaten out the very heart of her Hononr, Wealth and Reputation.

You have seen many of her Citizens tossed too and fro with every wind of
Doctrine, steering their course with the current of each prevailing Faction,
rather yielding to a destruction, then endeavoring a preservation of the
Cities honor and wealth.

You have seen her well proportioned and admirable Government dashed in pieces,
the wisdom of some of her wise men degenerated into a self-contriving Interest
and Advantage, neglecting the Cities good in general.

You have seen her grand Counsel turned into a Counsel of War, combining with
the unruly Sword, to disturb, nay to destroy the Inhabitants with her civil
Government; many sacrificing their fellow-Citizens, to the disposal of
domineering Faction: spirits who eat the bread of extortion, Prove. 4.17.
and drink the wine of violence.

You have seen the Cities peace, (formerly even to the envy of their
Neighbors, dwelling only within her walls) whilst blood, want and poverty
ran like a devouring Lion up and down each Country) interrupted by those who
had most reason to preserve it in peace.

You have seen Swordmen, strangers unto you (if you confider your selves as
Citizens of that famous Metropolis) by some styled your servants, because
entertained and paid you; but howsoever, I say, not servants to the City, but
more truly servants to the factious vipers within the City, even glorying in
dying the stones of your streets with your own childrens blood.

Nay consider, I appeal to the whole City, what practical Law have you almost
left now in use, but the Law of imprisonment, whereby some men (first being
made pretendly guilty of that old ayery bugbear crime, ill affoction, or if you
will, that beldam fault malignancy, that is, that will not swim in the same
current of such heinous sins with the faction) are (to use their own word)
secured; or others by reason of their long continuing distractions, being
disabled so fully and speedily to satisfy some griping Creditors their debts,
are the sooner hastened by additionall necessity, want and grief, to a
satisfaction of the last debt they owe to nature in a loathsome prison.

Or else, that (in it self excellent) but (as it is now used) bloody lettered
Law, for suppressing and punishing pretended mutinies, which only like a Giant,
stands armed at the door, that so each successive Faction may the more freely
ruin within; in the mean time, denying the entrance either of justice, mercy,
peace or truth.

You have long since seen the Pulpit from whence nothing but the sincerity of
truth, religious admonitions, holy advice, perswasively tending to the practice
of godliness and true righteousness should issue forth, turned into a
sophistical Desk, to distract the brains of men with strange distinctions of
Government, new fangled Doctrines, persuading their Auditors persons and
Estates to an assisting compliance in the late Wars.

You have heard bitter expressions there against the established Government of
the Kingdom, some envying like mad, more more then rational men, much less
Christians against Episcopacy as Antichristian, and the book of Common Prayer
as unlawful and erroneous, their best arguments being but invective railings;
although one has stood the shock unmoved of the most frery opponents, and the
other a perfect pattern of true Piety, both of them receiving approbation and
applause from all other Protestant Churches beyond the Seas, being only
disgraced and defamed, though without just cause, at home, by children of her
own womb.

You have heard the Ceremonies of the Church styled limbs of Antichtist, and
others persuaded that they were imposed on tender consciences as necessaries;
whenas indeed their own consciences could not but inform them the contrary, and
that they were only ordained for order and decency sake.

Besides, His Majesty's Anlwer to the Kingdoms Remonstrance December. 1641.
if any one seemed offensive to tender consciences, his Majesty (long before
the Sword was unsheathed) graciously promised an exemption from observance of
them, and therefore needed not to have been made Arguments persuading to blood.

You have seen learned Divines, Doctor Featly, that brazen wall of our
Religion, who unrazed, has maintained his hold, retorting the Jesuits arrows
into their own breasts with shameful wounds: Doctor Holsworth, a lively pattern
of Piety: with many other religious and learned Divines, imprisoned and
disgraced.

And my dear Countrymen, ad quem finem haec omnia, to what end think you did
all these things tend? Pr^y consider, you may see the result of all quickly, in
what concerns you to whom I write, I mean you misled instruments, for I
intend not (as I have already written) the contrivers hereof no further then as
I am a Christian to pray for their repentance, conversion and forgiveness.

You have been pleased, like children, in lieu of things substantial, with
toys, as pulling down of M^y-poles, destruction of senseless stony crosses,
Reformation of Tavern signs by fantastical cringers inserted instead of Angels
pictured; I think least the sight of such shadows should put the misled people
in mind of those real Augels in heaven, and thereby fright or invire them
into a too soon repentance.

You have had as fruits of your endeavored Reformation, ignorant painted
glass windows broken, the Communion table removed, the Font locally changed,
though as by Baptism we are visibly initiated into the Christian Congregation,
it more significantly became the entrance into, then the body of the material
Church, yet neither of them so absolutely and merely necessary, as to
counterpoize blood.

Heu pro quantillo pacem perdidimus. You have had a new Directory, a piece made
like wax, apted for any impression, easily squeezed into any form by active
brains.

You have had a Catechism in a large Character, the issue of above six years
labor; which ever since King Edward the sixt's days, you might have furnished
your selves with, in a smaller print, at an easy rate.

And to knit all these together, you have the Presbyterian Government practiced
in place and opposition to the Episcopal, and what have you purchased by this?
only an intermixture of Laymen with the Clergy (as afterward I shall plainly
make appear) for the managing of Ecclesiastical affairs, both concerning
Doctrine and Discipline.

Heu pro quam parvis tantum sanguinis effudimus! Thus much I write (God the
searcher of all hearts is my witness) not to revile any Divines of the
Presbyterian Party, whom I honor as Ambassadors from Heaven, when they
dispense the truth of of God's Word: but they must give me leave to acquaint
them, that unless they can show any better grounds then I have hitherto read
or heard from any of them since these unnatural Wars, for the making good the
lawfulness of introducing this their mere alteration of Government by blood,
contrary to the Kings consent, and the warrant of the Law of the Land, and
having not the least ground for it in the Word of God: No ertours formerly in
Government being unreformed by his Majesty, no lawful means by a Synoy legally
called and elected for redress of what possibly could be found either
unnecessary or burdensome in the Church to really tender consciences, being by
him also denied; the Point of Government being then only, and still is the
difference between his Majesty and the two Houses; Therefore although the
Protestants and they mutually agree in the fundamentals of faith, and many
other necessary truths, yet I say, I cannot but certify them, that neither my
self, not any Protestant of ENGLAND have reason to believe that they have kept
so close to the rule of God's Word, Reason and the Law, as they should have
done, Malachi 2.7.
or perhaps may prend. Therefore,

If they have any Arguments now in this juncture of time, besides that of
merely ignorant persons professions of their good intentio^s, and good meaning,
which they know will not excuse a toto, though in some things in may a tanto.
It being a common excuse of many in these times, though they still persist in
their irregularly, first begun courses, they may perform a Christian like and
wise duty to themselves for their own vindication, and to others, for their
information, to divulge them to the world; or if they cannot produce any, that
then they would be persuaded even for Christ Jesus sake, the Bishop of our
souls, to return and do their first works, least God come against them and
us, and remove our Candlestick out of its place. But I proceed:

Because the introduction of the Presbyterian government in the Church, and a
proportionable alteration of the Civil Government in the State is by some
Ministers of that Party cried up as the unum necessarium, tending to their
preintended Reformation, and the fulfilling of their solemn League and
Covenant; I shall endeavor (although the Designers intents probably were to
lock fast the Common Peoples Consciences thereby unto them) to make good,
according to the rule of Reason, Religion and Law, that nothing less is
comprehended and contained therein; so that none stand engaged, unless they
wilfully will persist in sin, by their further assistance to endeavor a
completing of their Innovasion.

To this purpose I shall desire all a little to reflect back upon what I have
already premised; how that seeing the irregular faction of the two Houses
always applied themselves to the Common People as assertours and maintainors
of the Law, Religion and the Kings just rights: toward which the assistance of
many have been desired, and accordingly veelded; they themselves having
deserred their own Principles acted, in oppofition to the Law and their own
Oaths and Covenant, as I have made good they are not in these own sense
(though for my part I deny that they were ever at first in a lawful sense
engaged) to take notice of their Ordinances and Commands: But rather to use all
possible lawful means for the Restoring of his Majesty to his just Rights,
The established Religion both in Doctrino and Discipline, to its former purity
in practice, according to Law, the Parliament of England to its ancient genuine
freedom, and regular Privileges, and the reset ling of Peace and truth in
Church and State.

And to this effect, because some peradventure may apprehend themselves
conscienciously engaged by the solemn League and Covenant to continue their
aids in firmly settling the Presbyterian Government; I shall for the removing
of such obliging apprehensions (passing by the unlawfulness of contriving,
imposing, and indeed unwarrantablenesse of entering into it at first; in which
regard I acknowledge it contrary to the Laws of the Land and authority of
Scriptures) give a truly Christian and lawful construction thereof, as it did
at first literally, and still does only appear to the takers thereof, who at
first were not Concatenated Designers, and therefore for the better clearing of
Men's judgments herein, shall first propound some necessary Qualifications and
Limitations of Promissary Oaths; being bold to affirm, that if any afterward
shall obstinately persist in remaining Instrumentally Active for this
Innovasion; that I cannot see how they can free themselves from being wilfully
guilty of opposing Reason, Religion and Law, as also rending in pieces all holy
and obligatory Oaths and Covenants.

That all Promissory lawful Oaths being religious bonds, must be taken in a
literal and Gramaticall sense, and all lawful endeavors used for the
performance of each clause contained therein, as they plainly appear (not
admitting of alteration afterward, or a contradiction by the mental
Reservations of the Imposers) at the time of taking thereof to the judgment and
understanding of him that swears, otherwise a man cannot swear in Judgment.

That if any clause shall be inserted into any Oath directly opposite to the
Word of God, or if any part of an Oath cannot be observed and performed without
intrenching upon the breach of Gods Laws, the one ipso fucto is void, for Rei
illicitae nulla obligatio, and the other ingageth to a Impia p^nitenda
promissi^, non perfici^^da.
repentance only, and not to endeavors of performance; for per juramentum non
tenemur nisi ad bonum and legale, by Oaths men are bound to nothing, but what
is lawful and good, either in respect of the end to which Oaths have a
respect, or means conducing to that end; therefore in all such kind of Oaths,
their general conditions should be inserted, however are necessarily implied,
(if I can, if it shall please God, if lawfully I may) for nemo tenetur ad
impossible, and will possimus quod non de Jure possimus; both possible and
things lawful must be the substance of Oaths, otherwise we cannot swear in
righteousness.

That no particular sentence in a secondary Oath destructive unto, or different
from any former lawful engagement, ought to be kept; therefore any Oath
imposed by the irregular factions of the two Houses must not receive a
construction, or actions accordingly used in opposition to the Affirmatively
and Negatively Genuine, and commonly received and practiced sense of the former
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, both lawful in themselves, and still
according to Law resting established, least we add sins of Omission to
sins of Commission; but what is lawful in any second Oath we must perform,
what is not, we must forbear.

That in all clauses in Oaths concerning Reformation, preservation or defense
of any thing, that thing necessarily must be extant, must have a being,
otherwise we obliging our selves (if we can properly be said to be engaged to
nothing) to nothing, attest God as witness thereunto, thereby mocking him, and
taking his holy Name in vain, and in so doing err against his third
Commandment; therefore the Presbyterian Government not being particularly
mentioned in the Covenant, nor at the first taking thereof, now about four
years and an half since digested in England into any form, much less
obedience thereunto commanded, cannot be intended as a fulfilling of the
Covenant; but the words Reform, preserve, and defend, must have a regard to
the Doctrine, Discipline, and Government established: as for that evasion (that
the then takers of the Covenant dispensed with resolutions and actions of
preservation, etc. until the same should afterward be settled) it is
altogether unlawful and vain; nor can any one by so doing observe the
Prophets counsel in Oaths, which must be taken in Righteousness, Judgment
and Truth.

These things premised, I proceed to the Oath it self, -- only by the way, let
me put you in mind of your first Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, with your
Protestation, an Epitome of the former in these words, I promise, vow and
protest to maintain so far as lawfully I may, his Majesty's Royal Person,
Honor, and Estate; the true Reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the
Doctrine of the Church of England, etc. For explanation whereof I refer you
to what already has been said concerning the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, advising every one to consider seriously that place in 30. Numb. 2.
Ver. If a man vow a Vow unto the Lord, or swear an Oath to bind his soul with
a bond, he shall not break his word, he shall do according to all that
proceeds out of his mouth.

We Noblemen, Solemn League and Covenant.
Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgeffes, Ministers of the Gospel, and
Commons of all sorts in the Kingdom of England etc. by the providence of God
living under one King. Under one King, that according to common sense and
reason, must imply obedience and subjection in us unto him as a King enabled
with power to govern, and that obedience must presuppose a rule of reason, and
law, (now what that Law is, I have already handled) to square our actions of
obedience by.

O that the people of England, etc. would in in this respect obey the Precept
of Christ, -- Give unto Caesar what belongs unto Caesar; His Majesty never
expected more then what the Law manifests to be justly his, Witness all his
Declarations.
why then should we give him less? Nay, endeavor to deprive him altogether of
what we have neither reason, nor just power to attempt?

And being of one reformed Religion. The Covenant.
-- This must necessarily intend our Religion established, a Religion that is,
not that shall be, which Religion commands obedience to all His Majesty's
lawful commands, denies the Subjects Liberty to take up arms against their
lawful Sovereign, acknowledges him to be Supreme in all causes, and over all
persons, Vide homilies, and 37. Artic. Church Engl.
as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, etc. that to him properly and wholly
belongs the government of all Estates of this Realm, therefore without and
against his consent, no different Government can be introduced.

Having before our eyes the glory of God. Covenant.
-- God is never more glorified then when we express a willing obedience to
his commands. two whereof emphatically enjoyne obedience to Superiors, and
forbid wrong and prejudice to be offered by any to any one whomsoever. --

First, Honor thy Father and Mother, that is, all those that have authority
over us, as all Expositors upon good grounds render the meaning of it.

Secondly, Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors house, etc. nor any thing that
is his; -- that is, thou shall not wish thy Neighbors hinderance in any thing,
much less deprive him of the least thing properly belonging unto him, Vide the
Margent of the Bible.
or you shall not offer any wrong to any man whomsoever, whereby he may suffer
damage in person, estate, reputation, or otherwise; for the word neighbor,
must be taken in a more extensive signification in the Commandment, then we
commonly use it. O that every man with one eye fixed upon these two
Commandments would with the other view what by the Law is justly due to his
Majesty, and Posterity, and then consider, etc. Besides these you have the
Prophets and Apopostles, Pro. 27.29.30.
speaking the same truth as Ambassadors from heaven; Solomon advises us not
to withold the goods from the owners thereof, though there be power in thy
hand to do it, Prove. 3.27, 29, 30.
nor to intend hurt against our neighbor, seeing he does dwell by us without
Fear, that is, puts trust in us. Pro. 24.21. Eccles. 8.3, 4. Vide margent
in the Bible. Covenant.
fear, not to strive with a man causlesse, seeing he has done no harm, My
son fear the Lord and the King, and meddle not with those that are given to
change, says the same wiseman.

Take heed to the mouth of the King, and to the Word of the Oath of God, says
the Preacher, -- that is, obey the King, and keep the Oath that thou had made
for the same cause.

The advancement of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

His Kingdom is never more advanced then when we obey his Precepts, and
imitate his practice.

Now his Precepts will appear in part, Mat. 5.3.4 5.6.7.8.9.10.11.16.
if we consider that in his Sermon upon the Mount, after he had pronounced
blessedness to the poor in spirit, to those that mourn, to the meek, to
those which hunger and thirst for righteousness, to the pure in heart, to
peacemakers, to those which suffer for righteousness sake, to those that are
falsely reviled and persecuted; he adds this Exhortation to his Apostles, --
Let your light so shine, that is, let these things for which men shall be
blessed, practically appear in your lives and conversations, that so they may
see your good works, that is, others by your example of holiness may be
brought home to the fold of Christ, and glorify his Father which is in heaven.

And for his practice you may read it in respect of his paying tribute, Matthew,
22.21. as also how that being brought before Rulers whom (though causelessly
reviling of him) he reviled not again, being led as a sheep to the slaughter,
and obedient unto death, that thereby he might be a pattern for our
imitation, to which purpose he invites us, Follow me for I am lowly and meek,
etc. and in our imitation we must follow him, in obeying his Messengers the
Apostles counsels, for they are sent from him, and what their counsel was,
you may peruse, Romans 13. submit your selves unto the higher Powers, etc. 1 Pet.
2.13, 14, 17. be obedient to every Ordinance of man, for the Lords sake,
whether unto the King as supreme, etc.

Now what is this but to advance the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ?

The honor and bappinesse of the King, that is, Covenant:
honor him as a King of England by a cheerful obedience unto his Laws, in
which consists his greatest happiness: honor him by your assistance as
Subjects, supporting and sustaining him by your supplies according to his
important occasions calling for the same: For, as Christ advised his Apostles
to express their affections by keeping of his Commandments, if you love me
(says he) keep my Commandments, as if he should have said, if you love me you
will keep my Commandments, and if you do keep my Commandments, you then
evidence that you love me; so in this respect obedience to and assistance of
His Majesty are but expressions of honor, if you honor the King you will
obey and assist him, if you obey and assist him, you make it appear to the
world that you do really honor him.

And Royal Posterity, that is, Covenant.
what Honor and Rights were justly due to the Father render to his Children,
deprive not them of any part of their inheritance, their regal honor and
power.

The public liberty, safety and peace of the Kingdom. Covenant.


That must needs imply the Magna Charta.
Law; for, by that we are distinguished from slaves; and in that we have
security and safety with peace, the fruit of the observation of the Law.

Wherein every ones private condition is included. Covenant.


That is, Prince as well as people: O Lord bless the Kings Majesty and royal
Posterity, restore our Laws to their vigor, and this poor Kingdom to a
lasting peace. Covenant.


Calling to mind the conspiracies and practices of the enemies of God, against
the true Religion and professors thereof.

That is, against the doctrinall part of our Religion, Vide the qualification
of an oath behind.
expressed in the 39. Articles of the Church of England: for common reason and
your Protestation affirms it necessarily meant of our Religion established,
and against the maintainers thereof.

Calling to mind the treacherous and bloody plots against the Law of the
Kingdom, Covenant.
-- that is, plots by such ways and means, as the deplorable estate of
Ireland long since was a sad witness of whose rebellious and traiterous
courses against His Majesty's Royal Person, Crown of England and Ireland,
sufficiently then spoke their intentious to subvert both Religion and Law.

We have now at last for preservation of our selves and Religion from utter
ruin and destruction -- That again, Covenant.
I say, according to reason, must have a respect to a Religion and Law that is
established; for it is improper and absurd to say, much more vain to swear,
that I will preserve that from ruin and destruction which is not in being,
ruin presupposing something that is to be destroyed; and preservation something
that otherwise will be ruined.

Thus you have the ground of this Covenant, (without mental reservation and
equivocation, which if the contrivers had any, as since it appears they had,
non ad vos pertinet, it savoureth too much of the Jesuit, ipsi viderint, let
them look to it, it concerns, not you to whom I write) according to the
literal and Gramaticall sense and consonant to the Rules of Religion, Reason
and Law explained; I proceed to the Covenant it self, wherein I shall observe
the same religious, rational and lawful method.

That we shall sincorely, 1 Art. Covenant.
really and constantly (through the grace of God) endeavor in our sever all
places and callings.

That is, according to the station wherein God has placed us, the King in his
regal Power, Magistrates as derivatives from him in their places, Ministers in
theirs, private subordinate persons according to their several degrees in
theirs, none exceeding the rules proper to their peculiar Vocation; where by
the way take notice, that although Superiors may and often do at one and the
self-same time perform both their own duties and also actions proper to
Inferiors, yet it is unlawful for Inferiors to take upon them without
lawful Commission the duty of Superiors; Lay private men must not intermeddle
with what concerns the proper duty of a Minister, nor must Divines wilfully
entrench upon the bounds of the Civil Magistrates, nor they upon the Royal
Fuction of the King; for this were to authorize consusion, whereas God is the
God of Order. Covenant.


Endeavor ( That clause must be implied though not inserted. Befides it is
also confessed as needful in the exhortation for taking the Covenant, Ordered
by the House of Commons, Die Veneris Feb. 1643. Covenant.
so far as lawfully I may) the preservation of the Reformed Religion in the
Church of Scotland in Doctrine.

That is, if their Reformed Religion be not contrary to the Word of God: this I
add, because few in England know what it is in its Doctrinall part, but by an
implicit faith; and I add it the rather, because the practice of the
prevailing party there since these storms first begun, so contrary to
professions, may occasion suspicion of their doctrines sincere truth, witness
their Declarations, and therein Protestations to maintain the Kings Rights,
etc. contradicted by assisting end cavours to deprive him of his Rights.

In worship, discipline and government. That is, that Government which was
established, and so remained at the compiling of the Covenant, grant it the
Presbyterian, by the lawful and supreme power of that Kingdom, until that
government shall be altered by virtue of the self-same power.

Against our common enemies. Covenant.
That is, all who by unlawful means, contrary to the Word of God, the Laws
and customs of that Nation, and the consent of his Royal Majesty, shall
endeavor an enforced alteration thereof. And here by the way, as well for
vindication of my self and many others in England, as also seeing they esteem
the Presbyterian Government there so rich a purchased jewel, for their future
security; I shall add thus much, that since they enjoyed that government so
confirmed as they have by the Royal assent, we never would have disturbed them
in their desired possession of their Churchgovernment; as they have visited
(for I love mildness in expressions in what concerns my Countries interest)
us by oaths and arms for an extirpation of Episcopacy, and for the future
shall never intermeddle contrary to Reason, Religion or Law.

The reformation of religion in the Kingdom of England and Ireland, Covenant.
etc. in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government. according to the Word of
God, and the example of the best reformed Churches.

As for the doctrine of the Church of England expressed in the The doctrine of
the Protestant Church in Ireland agreeable to them.
39. Articles, being grounded on a sure foundation, the holy Scriptures (which
are only able to make us wise unto salvation) has even to this very day, by
the assistance, protection and efficaciously working of Gods Spirit in the
hearts of many glorious pillars of our Church (reverend Bishops and other pious
and learned Divines) stood like a rock unshaken, their tongues preaching, their
pens maintaining, their bloods confirming the irresistible prevailing truth
thereof, against Turk, Jew, Jesuit, and all other heretical and
schismatic opponents whatsoever.

Thus much I am confident all neighboring Protestant Churches will condescend
unto: therefore I shall proceed.

In Doctrine and Worship. Covenant.


That is, all erroneous tenants and practices (whether Papisticall,
Schismatic, or others) of those qui ambulant post spiritum suum, against
whom the Prophet denounces a woe, Ezekiel. 13.3.
who being departed from the 1 Timothy 4.1.
faith which they once professed, are guided by the spirit of error, leading
silly women, and unstable minds captive, by the whistling of every breath of
their windy doctrine, being clad in sheeps clothing, Mat. 7.15.
but inwardly ravenous Wolves: Examples of which nature, too too many offer
themthemselves in these unhappy times; wherein almost all things are
countenanced, or at least connived at as lawful, but lawful things; therefore
let us pray, That the God of Peace and Truth would bring into the way of Truth
and Peace all such as have erred and been deceive^, by seditious Schismatical
guids, and erroneous directions, and prosper thou, oh Lord, all their
endeavors tending to such a Reformation. Amen.

Discipline, Government according to the Word of God, Covenant.
and the best Reformed Churches. --

Now the question will be, which comes nearest to the Word of God.

That Episcopacy claims the nearest alliance, truly entituling it self to be
of Apostolical Institution, is a truth that has been made good in all ages.

That for 1500 years continuance of Christianity, there is no example of the
Church Governed otherwise: An Argument sufficient to suspect Novelties in
opposition unto it.

That it has been approved of by most of the Protestant Divines beyond the
Seas, Vide Ecclesiast Histories.
(who are rather induced by necessity to the practice of Presbytery, there
wanting means to maintain, or abilities lawfully to compass Episcopal
Government, then wills and desires to enjoy the same: A strong Argument,
persuading that our Church is the best Reformed:) is also an apparent truth.

That in all disputes, especially this latter, Doctor Hall against
1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.11. SMECTYMNVVS Since the War
of the reverend and learned Remonstrancer, against that odd Combination of *
Letters, Episcopacy has stood the field, triumphing in Reason and Religion,
which have only persuaded my judgment to an inclination thereunto, and an
approbation thereof; and I presume any one, not obstinately prejudicate in
their judgments, will soon be satisfied thereof, and agree with me herein; by
the perusal of that learned Bishops writings, or by any, whose learning and
judgments are able to inform them therein.

But to write truth, whether Episcopacy or Presbytery come nearest to the Word
of God, never was, nor at present is, the dispute between His Majesty and the
two Houses; but quis regnabit? Where the supreme power, in Gauses
Ecclesiastical and Civil shall practically remain for the future, either in
Prince or people: Nor indeed was it the end, that these Covenant-Contrivers did
aim a. Witness their second Article, wherein before trial and examination
(whereby truth or falsehood is made evident,) they, contrary to reason, pase
sentence of condemnation upon it; therein positively swearing, without respect
of persons, (a strange expression, whereas the King is the first moving wheel
of a new Law) to extirpate the Government it self, that indeed being a Marble
pillar, which first must be removed by them, before they can introduce their
bloody-colour'd post of Presbytery; endeavoring in that Article to engage the
common peoples Consciences, (though I shall by and by make good, that no man's
Conscience is thereby engaged) to assist them, I mean the Plotters, to attain
that which they had a pre-resolution to effect. si non Precibus tunc vi,
armisqne; -- Since that plainly appearing as I have already showed.

However that my deceived Countrymen may see how they have been abused into a
belief of enjoying I know not how much happiness under the term of Reformation
in Church, now generally rebaptized Presbytery; I shall present to your veiw a
short Parallel, collected out of the writings of a pious, learned and
conscientious Divine, of these two Governments, Episcopal and Presbyterian.
Doctor Fearne
For, as for that illegitimate thing, that newborn brat Independency, it has
such variety of shapes, and each of them also so monstrous, that I shall not
need to meddle with it at all, being Confident that it will soon be hissed out
of the Kingdom by a Universal Consent, or like Jonah's gourd vanish away,
unthought of, in a moment. And here I cannot but insert my admiration, to
perceive so many men still so firmly in their affections and Judgments,
adhering to the present conclusive determinations of that changeable-coloured
thing, nay, that word Parliament; when as it is that which has so much abused
even these first affecting persons, the City of London in general, their
mis-lead supporters: Witness in particular, the present continuing imprisonment
of the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen, and that strange and uncivil expulsion out of
the Leiutenan, cy of the Tower, that deserving Gentleman Col. Francis West
without the least pretended cause, even in the very midst of his expressed
courtesies, and feasting favors cofent'd upon their great Don, and his
followers; although he formerly was chosen by the general Vote, nay,
acclamation of the whole City, approved of by themselves, and indeed beloved by
all; Only to make way for that unfl^dg'd Titmouse of Manhood and Wit; that Imp
of Independency Tichbourn, fitter, by far, mimically, again in his Fathers
Chamber, to act a wanton girls part in a Commedy, then to have so great a part
of rust and commanding power, as he now has conterred upon him. Oh Lord open
the eyes of poor deceived England, especially the City of London, and suffer
them no longer to walk in darkness, and in the shadow of a senceless stupidi^y,
thus like blind men, groping for the path of peace and truth, even at noon day.

But I proceed to the Parallel of these Ecclesiastical Governments. And in the
first place, take their definitions in general.

Episcopacy, in it self considered, is a prelacy or superiority of one above
all the Presbyters, within such a precinct or diocese, which one is appointed
to have care of all the Churches within that compass, and furnished with Power
and Authority for Ordination and Jurisdiction (that Authoiity not being
Arbitrary, but bounded by Laws, and administered or exercised with advice
andassistance ofcertain choice Presbyters;) to the intent, that all Churches or
Congregations under him may be provided of able Pastors, and that both these
inferior Pastors and people may perform the duties required of them.

Pressbytery is such a form of Church Government, Doctor Fearn in his book of
Episcopacy and Presbytery considered.
as is administered by preaching, and Lay Elders jointly, with equal voice and
power in the several Judicatorics of their Parochial Sessions, of their
Classical or greater Consistories, of their P. ovincial Synods, and National
Assemblies. Page 3.


Now by this, if I mistake not, you may perceive that they both agree in ipso
regimine Ecclesiastico, -- in the Government it self, considered as itteferreth
to the Church, that is, all Members therein that are to be governed, though not
in the manner, number or qualification of the persons governing; both parties
confessing, that the power of Ordination, and of Judicature, (so far forth as
the keys left by Christ in his Church do extend) is of Divine Institution, and
that this power must be excecised or administered in his Church by some; so
that, I say, the difference is, whether the exercise or ministration of that
power be restrained to certain choice men, or indifferently left to all
Presbyters, and their assisting Lay Elders: -- For none will accuse themselves
guilty of so much ignorance and folly, as to affirm, that the decent
Ceremonies, and innocent Vestments of the Church, as Cross in Baptism,
Surpless, Cope and, the like, were practiced and imposed, as essential, and
inseparably necessary adjuncts to the Government it self: All which, rather
then contention for them, should have extended to blood, might, nay would have
been, by the condescension of His Majesty, quietly laid aside, needing not the
peremptormeis of the sword to silence them.

I. Under episcopal there is in every Parish a preaching Minister, with
Churchwardens; and in some Deacons or Curates, by these offenders are noted and
admonished, and the offenses presented to the Ecclesiastical Courts or
Consistories, where they may be heard and censured the Minister having power in
some cases of notorious scandal, to restrain from the Communion, until the
offense may be heard and judged in the Court and the party so offending, by the
censure of the Church brought to give public satisfiction. II. Under
Episcopal, in every diocese, there are several divisions, the lesser and the
greater, these being called Deanties, there is Arch-Deconries, in those the
Arch-Presbyters, in these the Archdeacons have power to call the Parochial
Ministers together to enquire of doctrine and manners, and see to the red
ressing of smaller abuses. In the Mother City is the Bishop residing with his
Presbyters, having the power of Ordination of judging and determining of all
matter of doctrine or seandal, reserevd to his hearing. by his Archdeacons,
and of rejudging what was judged amiss by them: This he does, either in his
Consistory, which he holds in his City, assisted by his Presbyters; or in his
Vsitiations, going through his diocese, and causing his Clergy personally to
appear, or in his diocesan Synod, which is made up of the City Presbyters, Dean
and Chapter, the Archdeacons, and other choice Presbyters under the presidency
of the Bishop. III. Under Episcopal Government are held Provincial Synods,
consisting of all the Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, and of certain choice
Presbyters from every diocese within the Province; these have power to order
all matters concerning the whole Province, to hear appeals from every Diocese,
to rejudg what is done amiss, that could not be well determined in a Di^cesan
Synod. IIII. Under Episcopal Government are also held National Councels,
consisting of the like Members as do the Provincial, these are of greatest
authority: they examine and judge any thing done amiss any in Province: they
consider and determine matters of Doctrine and Discipline inorder to the whole
National Church.
Under the Presbyterian Government there is in every Parish a Minister, with a
competent number of Lay Elders and Deacons, according to the largeness of the
Parish: These make the Parochial Session, and have power to censure scandalous
livers, contentious persons, and the like, to enjoin publke penance, and impose
upon the penitent, before he be received into the Church, a fine to be employed
on pious uses.

Under the Presbyterian in every County, there are also several divisions or
Classes, containing such a number of Parochial Ministers, who have their set
meetings for conference; and in the City, or more eminent Town, is the great
Presbyterian Consistory, commonly called the Presbytery, made up of all the
Parochial Ministers within its precincts; and of Lay Elders, from each Parish
one; in this is the power of Ordination, of censuring crimes of the higher
strain, with the greater Excommunication of hearing appeals from the Parochial
Sessions, and rejudging what was there judged amiss.

Under the Presbyterian also are held Provincial Synods, made up of
Commissioners, that is, certain preaching, and Lay Elders from every Individual
Presbytery, or Presbyterian Consistory, within the Province: These judge and
determine matters pertaining to the whole Province: Also, all difficult cases,
that could not well be determined within the Presbytery, they receive appeals
also from the Presbyyters, and examine what was there thought to be done amiss.

Under the Presbyterian, likewise, are held National Assemblies, consisting of
Commissioners from all the Presbyteries in the Kingdom, each of them sending
two preaching, and one Lay Eider; also from every Borough one, and he a Lay
man; and from every University one, and for the most part a Ley man too: In
these is the supreme and final determination of all complaints and
controversies, and unto the decrees that issue thence, all must obey under pain
of Excommunication.

Now these premises impartially considered, which of these two Governments have
the more effectual means to procure the end of Church Government, the
preservation of truth and peace, the suppression of Heresy and Schism, let any
rational unbyass'dminded man judge; For my part, I ingenuously confess that it
is contrary to common reason, in my upprehension, that Laymen, from whose
education no knowledge extraordinary beyond their trades and such like affairs
can be expected, (although it is true that many are furnished with knowing
parts, yet as true that the most in a Nation are altogether defective therein)
can be as ficinstruments for such kind of employments as grave and learned
Divines, whose only business it is to tread the path of all arts both humane
and divine; so that if this continue in England, what I once read alleged
against the Papal Consistory, that they did potius numer are suffragia quam
argumenta pond^rare; number rather their Votes, then weigh the solidity of
their Arguments; will, I fear, be our deserved censure.

From which justly meriting accusation
Good Lord deliver this Nation.
Again consider further, Bishops assume not the exercise of any power within
any Princes Dominions, or use it over his subjects but by permission and
authority from him, and that according to just Laws and Rules made by sovereign
Authority for the manner of external Ministration thereof, so that when the
Episcopal power comes to the holding of Courts and calling Assemblies, it
wholly depends on the sovereign power; 25 Hen. 8.19:
without whose Assent, signified by his writ, they cannot assemble for the
making of Canons and Constitutions, nor publish and put in ure any of them
being made.

Now Presbyterians take upon them to set up their Discipline in a Kingdom
(therein indeed shaking hands with Jesuited Papists,) maugre all opposition; It
is true for external peace sake they hold it fit to crave leave first and beg
the assistance of the Civil Power, but if denied, will proceed without it,
assembling together and making their own Laws without regulations from the
Civil Power, for the manner and form of exercising their Discipline, allowing
only the Prince, Potestatem Cumulativam (as they speak) a power to add more
strength and vigor, not Privativam, to interpose or hinder their assemblies or
decrees. And in this respect it were to be wished that England had never proved
exemplary, as now in these latter times it does by such kind of proceedings;
The fountain from whence has issued too ny bloody streams.

And here it will not be amiss to present the Reader with the grounds and
reasons enforcing his Majesty with his loyal Subjects assistance to defensive
Arms, and in that a Declaration of my own in particular and many thousand
English Protestant Judgments more, whose pens, tongues and hands only
endeavored a restoration of his Royal Majesty to his just regal honor and
authority.

Themselves and their fellow subjects unto their due liberties both
Parliamentary and private.

The preservation of the Protestant Religion in the Doctrine and Profession of
the Church of England against all Papists and Sectaries.

The maintenance of the Government of the Church of England, as it stands
still by Law established until the Law of the Land shall make alteration
thereof; not so peremptorily maintaining the continuance of Episcopal
Government, as to enforce the remaining of its general practice in England, by
force of Arms in opposition and against his Majesty's (suppose that the King
could or would dispense with his Coronation Oath) will and consent to that
purpose cheerfully and voluntarily ratified; (not by the pressing violence of
almost unavoydable necessity or tyrannizing power of the prevailing Sword) but
freely confirmed and declared by Act of Parliament, although peradventure they
may mourn the alteration and abrogation of so ancient and apostolical a
Government.

But because my Judgment pleads for Episcopacy, and it has been an argument
much urged against the Bishops, and in them the Government it self defamed --
That formerly they silenced several godly Ministers, prohibiting them and
others the exercise of holy duties; because they did only exercise duties that
were holy; I shall write my thoughts freely herein; For, far be it from me to
speak against, or any to forbid the Exercise of holy duties, as hearing,
praying, reading, living strictly, Endeavoring to have a Conscience void of
offense toward God, and toward Men: No, no, the practice of them in sincerity
is the high way to Heaven, for without holiness none shall see God; but in the
mean time, take heed what you hear, beware of swallowing poison wrapped up in
Leaves of gold; take heed of these who have a form of Godliness, a form in
Practice only; that under pretense of long Prayers and outside piety, devour
Widows houses, that deny the truth of the word of God, the holy Scriptures: by
their false Doctrines seducing many into erroneous Opinions, the parents of
worse succeeding actions.

For my part, if any did so forbid performance of holy duties, as I am
altogether ignorant of any such; nor can easily be induced to believe it,
howsoever were I assured of its truth, I would not minima defendere peccata,
plead an excuse for them.

But if then they did (as I believe they did) only by suspensions endeavor to
prevent the sowing of the seeds of sedition, schism and heresy, or the growth
thereof to any strength, either in public or in private, (as it was there) and
is the duty of all Ecclesiastical Governors, they did no more then what the
law of God and the land gave them a warrant for; therefore let every one as
well take heed of calling good, evil; as tearming evil to be good: for in all
probability, had such preventing-remedies as these been timely applied, when
sedition, schism and heresy first opened their black mouths, we never had
arrived at this high degree (as at this present we are) of variety of Errors
and pernicious destructive Opinions -- O Lord have mercy upon us.

But grant that some of them stretched the exercise of power beyond its lawful
bounds, and in that respect were guilty, deserving punishment.

What, is the fault of one or more Bishops to the Government it self? could not
the errors of particular persons be reformed, or punished but by an
extirpation of the whole Government? durus est hic sermo, it is hard indeed, if
God for the sin of two, Adam and Eve, nay of many thousands more, should have
therefore denied mercy and reconciliation to all mankind. How everlastingly
unhappy would the residue of the world have been! Deliver us good God from the
cruel dealings of men, and if affliction must be our portion, let us fall into
thy hands, O Lord, for thy mercy endures for ever.

As for the remaining clauses in the first Article, viz. Of bringing the
Churches of God in the three Kingdoms to the nearest uniformity, etc. these
things considered:

That the Discipline of the Church of God is most Consonant to the word of God,
Covenant.
approved of, and desired by foreign Divines, and therefore the best
reformed; not intrenching with the Papists upon the Civil power, nor with
them, denying the Kings supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, agreeing best with
Monarchy, confirmed by the Law of the Land. Other Churches therefore (according
to the rule of reason and religion) within His Majesty's Dominions, should
rather conform to ours, then the uniformity of ours in Religion, Government,
and Worship admit a change, or be transformed into any other form: To this
purpose, O Lord, inspire the universal Church with the spirit of truth, unity,
and concord, and grant that all that do Confess thy holy name may live in
peace and godly love one with another. Amen.

That we shall in like manner; Covenant. This limitation is approved by the
Parliament, as behind, fol. 53.
that is, in a lawful manner according to the word of God, endeavor the
extirpation of Popery, -- that is, their tenants of transubstantiation,
worshipping of Images, praying to Saints, Preaching good works as meritorious
to everlasting life and salvation, that Kings for diverse respects may be
Deposed by the people, that then Subjects Oaths of Alleagiance may be dispensed
with, King James Apol. Oath Alleg.
with their denial of the Kings Supremacy in all Canses as well
Ecclesiastical and Civil, and the like; Endeavor extirpation of these by
execution of good Laws already established against their Errors and
Professors thereof, by that means preventing their further growth, hindering
their seducing of ignorant and unwary people, and in case of Conspiracy and
Treason against the Kings Majesty, His Queen, or Royal offspring, the
disturbance of the Peace of Church and State, by complaining of their attempts
and deeds to the Magistrate, leaving them to the justice of the Law: and
lastly, by reovering them by strength of holy arguments (as with strong
physic) from that infection of their judgment and consciences, and their soul
poisoning heresies, praying continually in the fervency of the spirit for their
conversion.

But before I proceed to the next words ( Extirpation of Church Government by
Bishops, etc.) I must desire the Reader to reflect back upon what I have
already written concerning the Limitations of an Oath, briefly thus, That no
unlawful Oath binds, Vide fol. 46.
nor must unlawful means be used for the compassing or effecting any thing in
it self lawful, etc.

Extirpation of Government by Archbishops, Bishops, Covenant.
their Chancellors, etc. That is, by using all lawful means warrantable by the
law of God and the Kingdom, to that end, as petitioning the supreme Magistrate
the King, or any other way if any other way can be imagined, not I say,
intrenching upon the law of God.

For, were an abolition hereof absolutely necessary, conducing to the general
peace of the Kingdom as it is upon good grounds, believed, rather altogether
distructive thereunto; will you buy a temporal peace upon such unequal terms,
as to hazard your soul eternally (unless the mercy of God interpose) by
wilful perjury in the purchase, and gain an eating curse to your Posterity by
Sacrilege? Besides, it is against the Principles of all Governments, the Law
of God, and the Land, to enforce an alteration by bloody force, as I have
already showed.

Nay, you do not only hereby make your selves guilty of perjury, treason,
blood and sacrilege, but you endeavor to compel His Majesty to the breach of
His Oath taken at His Coronation, wherein He swore to Defend the Bishops, their
privileges, and Churches under their government.

Again, were the Presbyterian government absolutely good, and so out of
necessity the Episcopal must be removed, as it is not, yet a bloody eradication
is proculdubio, unlawful, for we must not do evil, that good may come
thereof; we must not like mad Mariners desperately steer our course amongst
Rocks, hoping to arrive at a rich freight, lest we shipwreck our selves here,
and lose the end of our voyage, our hopes hereafter; therefore let all men take
heed of pretending a necessity of keeping this one Article of extirpation,
because they have so Covenanted; unless they will make good also a necessity
of breaking all Gods Commandments; which is an high degree of Blasphemy to
maintain, for that is, impia promissio quae sine scelere impleri non potest,
nonque obligat; no Law obliges in opposition to the Gods Law; if it does
bind, it is to a repentance only; Therefore Recollect your thoughts now, for
your own Experience cannot but acquainte you, that a violent deprivation of
the Kings Regal power was at first the contrivers design; and now plainly
appears to be the Result of the War on their part; and reflect upon the
almost six years means made use of; or rather sins committed to effect the
accomplishment thereof; as Envy, Hatred, Malice, Hypocrisy, public pretenses
of Reformation, private intentions of Eradication, and Deformation, revilings
of His Majesty's Royal Person and Government, Scandalizing of the English
National Church, abominable Lying, contempt of Superiors, forceing of men's
Consciences, Disloyalty, Perjury, Theft, Bloodshedding, nay, all imaginable
Sins, with renewing of old Heresies, and raising of all manner of Schisms.
Now if you love your selves and your souls, and would not contract the guilt
of all these sins upon your own heads; and as it were set your Seal of
confirmation and approbation to the Sins of others; thus heaping up wrath
against the day of wrath, be persuaded to desert these Plotters, and their
Designs persist not; (contrary to Reason and Religion) in a rigid and sinful
keeping of that extirpating Article. Now seeing the day star appears, and
every one (who formerly were wraped up in the night of mistakes and
misapprehensions, or blinded with the silken veil of a good Opinion of the
Contrivers, (because outwardly they appeared in Angelical habits) may without
spectacles read that their pretenses were only to usher in the intention;
therefore the plea of ignorance and good meaning as formerly, can no longer be
used, but be persuaded to come out from among these progressive ROOTERS, lest
continuing with them in Sin; you also with them partake of punishment. For
God is just, as well as merciful.

Superstition, Covenant.
Heresy, Schism, and Profanesse, etc. For the residue of this second Article
having already written something (which also may aptly be applied to these)
when I handled the word Popery, I shall only turn it into a Prayer; yet
because Schism is joined with the rest; if it were a time in these sad times,
to jest, I should make it good, Rationally that your Contriving Presbyterians
have in that, Sworn against their own Practice; for although the Protestant
Church, like the Spouse in the Canticles is black; that is, not appearing
genuina gloria, by reason of stormy weather; yet still she is Comely; still in
her doctrine and discipline unaltered, remaining firm upon its old established
foundation, notwithstanding the violent Endeavors of their changing times; nor
was their Presbyterian Government then extant, and as yet but an infant, for
want of the Royal assent, being neither able to stand, go, or speak; they
themselves also very well knew, what the word Schism in an Ecclesiastical
sense means; how that ille Schismaticus qui a ritu Ecclesiae petulanter, and
ambitionis studio discedit; that Separateth himself upon a proud Pharisaicall
conceit of holiness from the Communion of the Church, in the performance of
Religions acts. But I pass that by, Praying that God, the searcher of all
hearts, would be pleased to root out of all our hearts and minds the
destroying blindness of Superstition, the spreading Leprosy of Heresy, the
peace-Eating Gangren of Schism, the tainting Corrupt humors of Profanesse,
and all other things displeasing unto him, and contrary to His word, that we
enjoy a blessed harmonious consent in Truth and Godliness, expressing the
power thereof in our lives and conversations, and that the Lord may be One, and
his name One in these three Kingdoms.

We shall with the same sincerity, etc. 3 Article. Covenant.
Endeavor to preserve the Rights and Privileges of Parliament: These are --
freedom of expressing men's judgments, and if taken in a comprehensive
complete sense, (King, Lords and Commons) power to repeal old, and Establish
new Laws; to which every Subject is bound to yield obedience: Only thus much
let me add, that no Privileges of one or both Houses can Patronize Treason,
Murder, Vide Lex terrae. J. Jenkens.
or breach of the Peace, by their own confession; nor is it indeed consonant to
reason; that they, whose first institution was ordained for preservation;
should themselves practice or command desolation; whose Consultations should
tend to the prevention of Treasonable and Rebellious excursions; and their
concatenated effects, dissolution of the band of a national Peace, effusion of
blood; by imposing (to that purpose) penalties and punishments upon the
offenders; should amidst such consultations be practically guilty themselves of
the same Crimes; they should be guiltless that condemn the guilty.

Quae culpare soles, ea tu ne feceris ipse:
Turpe est doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum.
Preserve the Liberties of the Kingdoms, That is, as Kingdoms having
liberties by the Law and Custom thereof distinct one from the other; Covenant.
to preserve each of them, free from any usurping power and unlawful
intrenching one upon the Other. And in this respect it were to be wished, that
our Northern friends had kept close in their practice: and that England for the
future, would take care to defend its particular Interests.

Liberties of the Kingdoms, not Libertinisme in a Kingdom. But Liberties,
that is, the Liberty of each man therein, which as Natives, or otherwise belong
unto them according to the fundamental Constitution and Law of each respective
Nation: now this Liberty must necessarily have a respect to all degrees of men
therein. Pray then let us not exclude the head of all, the King, as I have
touched in my observation upon the preamble, especially having sworn in the
next Clause to Preserve and Defend the Kings Majesty's Person, Covenant.
etc. That is, Not to hazard His Person by opposing Armies in the field, where
the ignorant Bullet cannot distinguish persons; Nor by administering the least
occasion of heart-grieving and melancholy sadness; the sly, yet certain
impairers of health, and menacers of the bodies ruin; nor by, and actions or
speeches derogatory to the honor of a King, and not becoming the duty of a
Subject; for you all know what greived David most; and who it was that said, At
quod tu facis, hoc mihi dolet -- Subjects insurrections against, and insolent
abuses of their King, (like the apprehension of an injury received from an
intimate friend) non tam cito tangit quam penetrat, like an arrow pierces the
very heart, upon an instant, therefore this is not the way to preserve the
Kings person.

And Authority -- Now, Covenant. Vide more to make this good backward.
what that is I have already showed, how that to Him belongs the power of
making and repealing Laws, War or Peace, etc.

In the preservation of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom.
Covenant.


This, upon Rational grounds must necessarily imply Religion and Liberties, in
esse, not posse or velle, as I have already observed; Now both this Religion in
esse by Law established, and the Kingdoms Liberties: His Majesty has
preserved, and still does, even with the loss of his own Defense, the Kingdoms
true Liberties. And for His Religion I attest His very Enemies confession, to
make good His constant Perseverance therein, and preservation thereof: my self
in this particular esteeming it, melius silere quam pauca dicere, admiration
supplying the place of Expression.

O therefore, that the world may bear witness with your Consciences of your
Loyalty, that is, Covenant.
faithful obedience to your Sovereign, (notwithstanding former aberrations
through ignorance) and that you, for your parts had no thoughts or intents to
diminish that just power and greatness which belongs unto him by the Law:
Use your best endeavors to free Him from this unparalled and unjust
restraint, and restore Him to His Regal power and possession of His Royal
prerogative. Thus you will be isntrumental restorers, of Englands Honor,
Peace, and Glory; and do not content your selves, (as too many do) that you
have only sworn to maintain the Kings Just Rights, when as your actions
Endeavor the contrary, or endeavor not at all the maintenance of them,
contrary unto this Clause of your Covenant.

We shall also with all faithfulness endeavor the discovery of all such as
have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, 4. Article. Covenant.
orevill Instruments by hindering the Reformation of Religion, etc. Who hinders
Reformation, and a reduction of Religion to the purity of practice, but those
who hitherto have countenanced and still connive at a Toleration of all
Erroneous practices, Schism, etc. contrary to the second Article of this
Covenant, hereby making themselves guilty; for Qui non vetat peccare cum
potest, Jubet.

Dividing the King from His people -- Are not they such dividers who have taken
up arms only to deprive His Majesty of His Regal Power? Declared him not in a
condition to govern; Covenant.
Answers to Scots Papers, November. 1647. Dec. Answer to Scots Papers, 13 March
1647.
band by imprisoment of Him, disabled Him from performing His duty as a King,
by protecting His Subjects; and by Proclamations enjoining their Obedience to
the established Laws? Who have divided the Kingdom from the King? but such,
as by their actions, Negat. Oath.
Oaths and Declarations have endeavored to frame Rem publicam in Regno;
Supreamacy in the people never heard of, nor ever practiced in this Nation
before, in opposition to His Majesty's justly Supreme power; going about to
transform this Kingdom into a body with two heads, which is monstrous and
contrary to nature, and to contrive two shining Suns in Englands Hemisphear,
which was ever ominous, and Prognosticatours of Destruction.

O Deus bone, in quae tempora reservasti!

Preserve us good God from confusion and sudden ruin.

Who divide one Kingdom from another, making factions among the people, and
causing fractions in their duties and affections, but they that invite the
assisting invasion of neighbor Nations, maintaining Armies within its one
bowels, to effect an alteration of Government by force? Who divide one
Kingdom from another, but they that neglect, nay, deny timely supplies,
whereby Ireland might have been reduced, in Obedience to His Majesty, and the
Law of the Land; the want whereof disabled the Protestant party there, and
enableth the Irish Papists to divide themselves from the Crown of England and
Ireland, endangering also the ruin of our own Nation; and all these contrary
to the common rules of Humanity, much more Christianity? and in opposition
also, to the Law of the Land and this League and Covenant, thus rightly,
Rationally and Religiously expounded.

That they, Covenant.
that is, Incendiaries, Malignants, etc. may be brought to public trial, and
receive condign punishment as the degree of their Offenses shall require.

For this part of the Article I have nothing to write but this. Secundum Leges
fiat Justitia, may Justice take place, running down like a stream; yet because
non sanguinis homo; Misericordia praevaleat opto, may they all find pardon for
their Treason and Rebellion against our Sovereign Lord the King, and the Laws
in this world, mercy and forgiveness for all their sins against the God of
Heaven in the world to come. To this purpose it were to be wished they would
follow the often reiterated advice of Reverend Judge Jenkens, to restore His
Majesty to His Throne, and procure a gracious Pardon from Him, with an
all-burying Act of Oblivion.

O that men would in this their day, perceive those ways which do lead to Peace
and Truth, and walk therein before they be hidden from their eyes.

And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms, 5.
Article. Covenant.
that is, by the union of the three Kingdoms under One King, professing the
truth of Religion, governing by His established Law; denied in former times to
our Progenitors, is by the providence of God granted unto us, etc. --

So that, now we are no more Aliens, nay Neighbors, but Brethren; not envying
one another happiness and prosperity, being not infested with offensive or
defensive Acts of hostility upon either of our borders, but reciprocally
endeavoring one another peace and welfare, mutually joying in the enjoyment
of one another happiness; Let each of us endeavor that the Kingdoms may
remain in such a firm peace and union, that is, by our mutual obedience to
our Sovereign, and the Laws of each respective Nation, and in brotherly love
one toward another.

Amen, O heavenly Father. Give us to this end powerful endeavors to make good
our Covenant accordingly. --

And may Justice be done to the wilful opposers in manner expressed in the
precedent Article.

We shall also according to our places in this common cause of Religion, 6.
Article. Covenant.
Liberty, and peace of the Kingdoms, assist and defend by all lawful means
all those that enter into this League and Covenant, etc. nor shall we make
defection to the contrary part, but shall oppose and hinder --

That is, all such who envying our blessed union thus religiously lawfully
cemented, shall oppose us and it, endeavoring by heretical erroneous divulged
positions to dishonor God and rob him of his glory; by seditious doctrines;
to infuse into the people a disloyal spirit of Treason and Rebellion against
the Kings Majesty His heirs and successors; of disobedience to Him and His
lawful Commands; whereby His honor is despised, the general good of the
Kingdoms not only neglected, out much endangered: all which we shall do as in
the sight of God.

And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins against God and his Son
Christ Jesus as by our present distractions and dangers too manifestly
appears. Let us all pray that the God of heaven and earth would give us his
grace of humiliation for our own particular, and the general sins of this
Nation, especially that we have not valued the inestimable benefit of the
Gospel, nor received Christ into our hearts: conforming our lives and actions
to his practice and precept; but rather have made use of the liberty and
freedom which we had by Christ from the rigorous exaction and condemning power
of the Law, Gal. 5.13.
as an occasion to neglect and altogether to deny our obedience to the Law as
the rule of direction. Notwithstanding that thou who art truth it self, have
told us that the end of thy coming was to fulfill and not to destroy the Law;
5 Mat. 17.
Nevertheless we despise it, running madly into sin as an horse rusheth into
the battle. Let us further pray that God would bestow upon us his grace of
assistance, whereby we may be enabled to amend our lives; to perform all holy
actions required by himself, to himself, according to his revealed will, all
our duties toward Men according to their several degrees and places, Honor
and obedience to the King as Supreme, to whom they primarily belong; to all
subordinate Magistrates as rivelets streaming from him the Spring; Forgiving
all our enemies, persecutors and slanderers, praying God (who has the hearts
of all men at command, winding them which way he please as he does the Rivers
of water) to pardon their sins and turn their hearts, and cause us to live in
love, peace and charity one with another. Thus let us show an example of a
real reformation, that the Lord may turn away his wrath and heavy
indignation, and restore truth and peace to these Churches and Kingdoms, which
God out of his infinite mercy grant. Amen. Amen.

To draw to a conclusion, I shall (by way of a brief recollection) propound
some few questions to my poor deceived Countrymen which their own knowledge
can answer.

Had the irregular faction of the two Houses intended as they only pretended a
reformation of some errors, which perhaps like Cobwebs in an uninhabited
house, were grown through too much security a crime incident to an
uninterrupted peace in Kingdoms, they might have been swep't down with the
mild beesome of Instruction, and care taken to prevent the like for future,
and needed not to have pulled down the building to take them away.

Did ever His Majesty in all His transaction by His Messages and Declarations
since these unhappy times, propose any new thing for the enlargement of His
own Prerogative, or derogatory to the Law of the Land, and more particularly
that part thereof which concerns the Subjects Liberty?

Did the King Patronize any Instruments who ran formerly beyond the just
bounds of the Law from condign punishment? Did He ever practice Popery truly
so called, or propose any thing that to the most jealous and suspicious
thoughts might in aftertimes have occasioned the introduction thereof?

Or did he ever administer the least ground to fear his recidivation from the
Protestant Religion, but rather has evidenced the contrary by His Practice,
Proclamations, Declarations and Commands?

Did not His Majesty ever first send Messages of Peace and reconciliation; Vid.
all His Messages. Col. Parl. Ordin.
Wooing His Subjects to the enjoyment of their own Tranquillity and happiness?

On the contrary, have not the irregular faction of the two Houses,
notwithstanding their pretenses of Religion and Law; subverted the ancient Law
and Liberty of our Nation, and defamed the Religion established abrogating its
forms of Worship?

This will appear if you consider

That in all their addresses though pretending Peace they never endeavored a
reconciliation between His Majesty and themselves in such a manner, whereby a
mutual satisfaction and security might have been given and received as it is
requisite, between two differing parties, but they must have all; giving His
Majesty no satisction at all?

Did they ever command the practice of the Religion and forms of worship
established (notwithstanding their pretended maintenance thereof?) or did they
ever so much as consult about preservation thereof, but on the contrary have
suffered heresies, Schismatic opinions openly to be Preached and Printed,
contrary to the same Government?

Did not His Majesty yield to the settling of the Presbyterian Government for
three years in a Legal manner, as flowing from the power of the Crown? But
this would not satisfy. -- They like strange gamesters, fling at all, they
must have totaliter totum. --

Therefore consider hereof, you have again the result of the design
Epitomized. -- Nolunt hunc regnare. -- Their Writings, Actions, past, present,
(although spiced over with never so many plausible pretenses) affirm no less.

O Angliginae, Angliginae, quae vos dementia cepit?

O Englishmen let me expostulate with you; Did all of you, nay did any of you
six years past by your first assistance, intend what you now see brought to
pass? -- The frame of your Government altered. -- Your King your Sovereign a
Prisoner. I am consident that few or none of you, (you I mean to whom I write,
contributers of your assistance, not knowing wilful contrivers) had then no
such intentions; Why then by silence will you suffer the guilt of these bloody
designers to be originally pinned upon your back?

Take notice that sin-guilty men are of a nature much like the Plague, they
love to have company in infection, avoid the one therefore as you would fly
from the other, follow the common Proverb, Set the saddle upon the right horse.

Weigh in your thoughts past and present actions; have they not sufficiently
abused you, you deceived, mislead, Londoners I mean?

Could you ever some years past, July 1647.
have supposed that an Army, formerly stiling themselves your protecting
friends, should by an opposing march come against you; slaying even at your
City walls some engaged for your and its defense? that the Cannons mouth should
by them be turned against your dwellings, that your defensive means of
preservation within your walls, your Chains I mean, by the prevalency of that
faction, should be knocked off?

Could you then expect or fear to be thus domineered over by such bucklers, and
the Lording swords? I am certain such thoughts could not then possess you.
Now, all this being true, why will you by your too too passivenesse be
continuers of your own Miseries?

Consider further, do you all expect Clavum regni tenere? do you all hope to
be Kings? to govern? none obey? you cannot entertain such vain conceits.

Do you expect that liberty should be granted in Civil affairs? Vitam sine
lege vivere to live without a Law. -- No no: deceive not your selves -- your
cunning Masters that have hitherto blind folded you and led you by the nose;
will, when they have gained the full command of the reins, make you passive in
any thing that their ambition, malice, and covetousness shall (though falsely)
suggest as necessary and convenient. -- Therefore be persuaded to a desertion
of them and their designs. What though you have got a scratch or two in your
reputation, by your former erroneous actions; would you rather have it fester
through neglect, and so endanger the loss of a member, then apply this salve
of a penitential return, which will heal you in a moment? Non est
perniciosum in praelio vulnerari, sed post vulnus acceptum vulneri medicamentum
non applicare; It is more madness to refuse a cure, then dishonor to receive
a wound.

Is it not a far better, happier Government, and freer from oppression to live
under our Sovereign Lord the King, Ruling His Subjects by a written Law, and
resigning the Ministers of that Law (if they neglect executing Justice and
Judgment according to the direction thereof) to the strictly searching
examination of a Parliament, (one of their proper works) and according to
their merit by them to receive Punishment, then under a company of Tyrannical
persons (quibus voluntates solummodo leges) governing according to their own
wills, and from whom there is no appeal?

Once more therefore, let me earnestly desire all my abused and deceived
Countrymen, to return to the God of heaven by a true and unfeigned repentance
to their Sovereign in Loyal affections, and obedienciall actions, to their
Country in a true hearted fidelity.

And here although I have not the least cause (knowing the principles of
Religion on which they stand, to doubt their contrary practice) yet for the
further advancement of His Majesty's Honor, their own reputations as English
Protestants, Vindication of the Kings so just a Cause, and stopping the mouths
of envious men, who watch for reviling opportunities, let me add this request,
to all those who by the assisting and directing power of the Almighty God have
ever since these dismal days of bloody disloyalty, been kept in the straight
path of obedience to His Majesty, That they would invite all former wanderers
out of that way, unto a return, by persuasive arguments of reason, sound
principles of Religion, alluring expressions of affection, laying aside all
bitterness of spirit, revenge and hatred, the bane of Peace and
reconciliation, forgetting all former deviations; putting a difference between
the efficient and isntrumental cause, I mean the contrivers of this Rooting
design and the Instruments, who were abused into unlawful actions by specious
pretenses, and know not the end to which these beginnings did tend; considering
that though Nature has equally bestowed eyes upon all birds, yet she has not
given to all, eyes alike qualified with the Eagles; therefore let us all rather
endeavor to clear their sight, then muffle them with the vailes of scornful
and reproachful words; Nay let us even to the most wilful persisters and
invenomed spirits imitate the example of blessed S. Steven, whose heart, hands,
eyes, and tongue then begged mercy and forgiveness of the God of heaven, for
his hard hearted adversaries, when they were knocking him down to the earth
with stones. And when in after times the wheel shall turn, placing their
expectations in the chair of power with a nunc fruimur votis, forget not to
use the reins of command with Moderation; still remembering that the irregular
deeds of State affairs, and Princes employed instruments, reflect always upon
their Royal Master; the Kings honor being then wounded when they do but slip
into the practice of unwarrantable, unjust oppressing actions, remembering also
that many thousands in England have almost for seven years time, been bred up
like wild Colts, by their Riders, unto stubbornness and disobedience, and
therefore in probability, may sooner be stroked then whipped into a
condescending compliance; for oftentimes we know, that the sense of an
immoderately beating hand, forces a penitential, (though formerly prodigal
child) to a backsliding, and re-excursions, unto more desperate undertakings.

Although England has been long troubled almost with a general phrenzie, yet
the Iron rod, Bread and Water are not properly to be given them as food, whom
Time the mother of Truth, and Instruction the Judgments Informer, has like
Physic recovered from that distemper.

Remember that England has been long sick of a Consumption, even to a feared
dissolution of the whole body, like a Patient (by the loss of much blood)
brought into an extreme weakness; and all know, that knowing Physicians
(although probably there may still remain some bad humor) administer not
strong Purges, but comforting Cordials then, when there is as it were an
interregnum inter mortem vitamque, not knowing which will be the Conqueror,
life or death; still having in your thoughts that it is the only glorious
property of mercy, for a man then to pardon and forgive injuries when it is in
his power to be revenged. Thus let us win all unto us, and being won, lock
their affections and judgments by such Christian-like examples, and like true
followers of Christ pray for all men, first for our Sovereign Lord King Charles
to this purpose.

O Thou Lord of Hosts, pitch thou thy tent hourly round about Him; be a shield
to defend Him from all violent attempts against His Royal Person, from cunning
insinuations against His Honor, Crown and Dignity, be thou good God His
comforter in this His day of Tribulation; permit not the waters of affliction
to overwhelme His soul with sadness, but continually supply Him with patience
proportionable to His sufferings: hasten, hasten good Father His deliverance.
Restore Him unto His Regal Power and just Rights, settle Him, settle Him fast
in His Throne; place the Crown upon His head, and suffer it not by the hands of
Treason or Rebellion to be shaked, or removed from Him, or any of His Royal
offspring until Shiloh come; Bless His Majesty's Royal Consort, our most
gracious Queen Mary, cause Her with Mary in the Gospel to choose that better
part which never can be taken from Her. Bless, protect and defend our Noble
Prince Charles, with the rest of His Majesty's Princely Progeny: Bless these
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and all degrees of men therein,
from the highest to the lowest: Forgive the iniquity of the people, turn us O
Lord, from our sins, and we shall be turned, take away the heavy judgment of
the sword from us, Restore our Peace, renew and continue our Plenty, comfort us
according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us, according to the years
that we have seen evil; Take away all bitterness of spirit, revenge, hatred,
and give us unity, brotherly love, and concord.

Bless the famuos City of London; grant the Inhabitants a serious
consideration of their former ways, repentance and pardon for all their
offenses; turn them, turn them O Lord into thy paths, Let thy word be a Light
unto their feet, and thy testimonies a guide unto their step. Restore unto them
their ancient Government, and to that end give them Governors, Magistrates,
and all other Officers according to thy own will; Religious, not Rebellious,
faithful, not factious, careful to discharge that trust which God and His
Scared Majesty shall entrust them with, propounding thy Law for their imitation;
the known Laws of the Land for their direction, studying only the glory of
thee our God, the Honor of our Royal Sovereign and His Posterity, The peace
and plenty, wealth and weal, prosperity and happiness of all their fellow
Citizens, from the greatest to the least and meanest. Preserve them and the
whole City from the boundless rage of devouring fire, from Plague,
pestilentiall diseases and f^mine, defend it from the ravenous violence of
maliciously ambitious men, from being tyrannized over and oppressed by the
insulting sword: let not, O let not the wealth and glory thereof, nor any of
the Inhabitants be exposed a prey to the unsatiable fury of avaricious,
revengefull, blood-thirsty men: purge it from all heresy, schism,
profaneness, and whatsoever is contrary to thy word and Commandments; and to
this purpose bestow upon them faithful dispensers of thy Word, feeing their
flocks with wholesome food; not leading them unto Rockie Mountains to famish,
nor leaving them amongst Wolves, killing heresies, to be destroyed, not giving
the children of thy family either for fear or hope, stones instead of bread,
Serpents in place of Fishes; not Preaching themselves but the Gospel of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in truth and sincerity. O Let not my Lord be
angry and I will speak but this once; Be thou, (O Almighty, Omnipotent God) a
strong tower of defense to all the particular Citizens. Members of that
Honorable Corporation, with all the rest of the people within His Majesty's
Realms and Dominions, high and low, rich and poor, young and old, even from our
Sovereign Lord the King, to the tender infant newly stepped into the world out
of the dark prison of the womb, and together with them all others belonging
to His Royal Eng. Scot. Irel.
Family and household wheresoever dispersed; Take thou every one of them into
thy all-securing protection, give them blessings proportionable to their
several degrees, conditions and necessities, shower down thy blessings upon
all men from one end of the earth to the other; Let the sunshine of thy Gospel
break forth in all dark corners of the world, dispelling the black clouds of
Judaisme, Turcisme, Paganism, and all other Errors whatsoever: Accomplish the
number of thy Elect, and then come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Grant these
Petitions O thou Father of all mercies and God of all consolations, for the
sake of thy Son our Savior, to whom with thee and thy holy Spirit, be ascribed
all Honor and Glory, now and for evermore. Amen. Amen. Amen.

Soli Deo gloria.
Si quid novisti rectius istis Imperti, si non, his utere mecu^^.
FINIS.

