AN APPEAL TO THE CONSCIENCE OF A FANATIC: SHOWING, That the KING of ENGLAND,
by the Fundamental Laws of it, is as absolute and Independent a Monarch, as any
of the Kings mentioned in Scripture; and consequently as free as any of them,
from any Humane, Coactive Power, to Punish, Censure, or Dethrone him.

Whereunto is added, A Short view of the Laws both Foreign and Domestic,
against Seditious Conventicles.

By a Barrister at Law.

LONDON: Printed by J. G. for John Walthoe, at the Black-Lyon in Chancery Lane,
overagainst Lincoln's Inn, 1684.

AN APPEAL TO THE CONSCIENCE OF A Fanatic, etc.
SIR,
YOurs I have received, wherein you are pleased to signify, that you have shown
the several Tracts which have been lately written, and exposed to public View,
in defense of the Doctrine of Non-resistance, to some of your Neighbors, who
are much inclined to Fanaticism, and they say, upon perusal of them, that
though they should grant to our Churchmen what they have endeavored to prove
out of Scripture, Viz. The unlawfullness of Subjects taking up Arms against
their Sovereign in what Case soever, yet they fancy, that the King of England
is not such a King as the Scriptures mention. It is (say you) an Evasion they
much boast of, whenever they read any pieces of this nature: What is all this
to us, who Live not under such a King as the Holy Scriptures makes mention of
Well, ^^^ing that this Evasion is the Diana they so much vaunt or, I am
resolved, out of the Zeal and Love I bear my King and Country, and for the
prevention of another Rebellion, (having been sufficiently sensible of the dire
and calamitous Effects of the former) to set forth the excellent and sweet
agreement, which the Municipal Laws of this Realm have with the Laws of God in
this particular, affirming, That the King of England is such a King as the
Scriptures mention, and that in a fourfold Respect.

In Respect
1. Of his Right to the Crown. 2. Of his Authority and Power. 3. Of his Charge,
and Duty. 4. Of the Rendering of his Account.
1st. The King of England 's Right to the Crown is by Birth, Descent, or
Hereditary Succession. And this shall be apparanted in these four
particularities.

First, By that part of the Oath of Allegiance which is used in every Leet, You
shall swear, that from this day forward, Co. Lib. 7. Calvin's Case.
you shall be true and faithful to our Sovereign Lord King Charles and his
Heirs, which demonstrates the Descent. And by the by, I presume it will not be
amiss to present to our Fanatics the whole scope and aim of this Oath of
Allegiance, as it is expressed in the Laws and Constitutions of our King
William the First.

Statuimus ut omnes Liberi Homines faedere and Sacramento affirment, quod
intra, and extra universum Regnum Angliae (quod olim vocabatur Regnum
Britanniae) Willielmo Regi Domino suo fideles esse volunt Terras and Honores
illius omni fidelitate ubique servare cum eo, and contra inimicos and
alienigenas defendere. Lex 52. De fide and obsequio erga Regem. Add hereto
another Constitution of the Conqueror, whereby all subjects are commanded, ut
Jura Regia illaesa servare pro viribus Conentur.

Statuimus etiam, and firmiter praecipimus, ut omnes Liberi homines totius
Regni nostri praedicti, sint fratres Conjurati ad Monarchiam nostram and ad
Regnum Nostrum pro viribus suis, and facultatibus contra inimicos pro posse suo
defendendum, and viriliter servandum, and Pacem and dignitatem Coronae nostrae
integram observandam. Lex 59. Both which Laws, and many others enacted and
granted by the Conqueror, were observed and kept in the Reign of King Edward
the Confessor.

Secondly, For that we do our Ligeance to the King in his natural Capacity,
that is, as he is Charles, the Son and Heir apparent of King Charles the
Glorious and Royal Martyr. For Ligeance, or Homage cannot be done to the King
in his Politic capacity, Coke Lib. 7. Calvin's Case.
for so the Body of the King is invisible. If this be true Law, as it is, what
shall we judge then of the new Coined distinction, to make a difference betwixt
the King and his Authority? betwixt his Personal Will, and his Royal and
Authoritative Will? to pursue the late Kings Person with a Cannon-Bullet at
Edgehill, and to preserve his Authority at London or elsewhere? I am sure it is
Evident by the 25. E. 3. C. 2. De proditionibus, that it is High Treason to
compass the Kings Death, by which must be meant to endeavor his Personal
ruin; because the Regal Authority never dies in England. Oh Fanatics! take
heed then for the future of Newcoined distinctions; take heed of the cunning
Wiles and Sleights of the Jesuits: There is no Wickedness but has some excuse.

In that great Insurrection, in Richard the Seconds time, the Commons had a
fair pretense. Their Intent was (as they said) to abollish the Law of
Velleinage and Servitude, and to slay the Corrupt Judges. And they took an
Oath, forsooth, to be true to the King and Commons, and that they would take
nothing but what they paid for; and they punished all Theft with death: yet in
the Parliament of 5. R. 2. N. 3, and 32. They were adjudged Traitors.

The Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth;
could in the Queens: Name command the Country to follow them in Arms: sometimes
pretending the safety of Her Majesty's Person; in danger (they said) by
Treasons in working; And sometimes in case of Conscience, for restoring their
former Religion. And in this Zeal they hasted to Durrham Minster, where they
tare the Bible (and Communion Book, and such other things as there were, says
Stow) in great Contempt. Yet these were mere Rebels and Traitors. Speed Lib. 9.
Cap. 24.

Wherefore examine, search diligently into the Cause, every thing is not as it
seems: All is not Gold that Glisters: I beseech you to look before you leap
into Rebellion, that Sin of Witchcraft.

Thirdly, It is expressly affirmed in the Case of Calvin, That the King holds
the Kingdom of England by Birthright Inherent by Descent from the Blood Royal;
Co. Lib. 7, Calvin's Cases.
whereupon Succession does attend, and therefore it is usually said, To the
King, his Heirs and Successors; wherein Heirs is first named, and Successors
attendant upon Heirs; but the Title is by Descent. By Queen Elizabeth's Death
the Crown and Kingdom of England descended to King James, and from him to King
Charles the First, and from him to the King that now is, and they were fully
and absolutely thereby Kings, without any essential Ceremony or Act to be done,
Ex post facto.

And by the way, how inseparable this Right of descent is from the next in
Blood, you may see in H. 4. who though he was also of the Blood Royal, and had
the Crown resigned unto him from R. 2. and confirmed by Act of Parliament; yet
upon his Deathbed he acknowledged he had no right thereunto, as Speed tells
us, Lib. 9. C* 14. Add to this acknowledgment the words of Sir Edward Coke; The
Dignity Royal (says he,) Co. Lib. 12. F. 28.
is an Inherent inseparable to the Royal Blood of the King, and descendable to
the next of Blood of the King, and cannot be transferred to another.

Lastly, By all the Judges 1. Jacobi, at the Arraignment of Watson and Clerk,
Two Seminary Priests, it was resolved, That immediately by descent His Majesty
was completely and absolutely King, without the Ceremony of Coronation, which
was but a Royal Ornament, and external Solemnization of the Descent. This is
plainly illustrated by several precedents taken out of our Histories.

King H. 6. was not Crowned till the 9th year of his Reign; Speed. lib. 9. c.
16.
yet diverse were attainted of Treason before that time, which could not have
been, had he not been King.

So Queen Mary Reigned Three Months before she was Crowned; in which space the
Duke of Northumberland and others were Condemned and Executed for Treason,
which they had committed before she was proclaimed Queen.

So King Edward 1. was in Palestina when his Father died, and in his absence,
the Nobility and Prelates of the Realm assembled at London, and did acknowledge
him for their King. In his return homeward he did Homage to the French King,
for the Lands which he held of him in France: He also repressed certain Rebels
of Gascoin, amongst whom Gasco of Bierne Appealed to the Court of the French
King, where our King Edward had Judgment, That Gasco had perpetrated Treason,
and thereupon he was delivered to the pleasure of King Edward. Walsingham in
Edw. 1. And all this happened before his Coronation, which was a Year and Nine
Months after he began to Reign.

Besides, we know, that so soon as the King departs out of this Life, His
Successor is forthwith proclaimed; all Writs go forthwith in his name; all
Courts of Justice exercised, and all Offices are held by his Royal Authority;
all States, all Persons are obliged to bear him Allegiance: Which things
plainly demonstrate, that the King has his Kingdom by descent, and stays not
to be made King by the People at his Coronation. Indeed the people are at that
time asked their Consent; not that they have power to deny, but that the King
having their Consent, may with greater Security and Confidence rely on his
people. Fides vestra and Conftantia (says King Alexander) ut Regem me esse
Credam, Curtius, lib. 5.
facit. Ferrum tuetur Principem, melius fides. Seneca.

Thus you see, That the King of England 's Right to his Emperial Crown is by
Birth, Descent, or Hereditary Succession.

As to the Second Respect, it is evident* That the Power of the King of
England, is by the Fundamental Laws of the Land as Great and Royal, as that
which our Divines have proved out of the Scriptures to belong unto the Kings of
Juda and Israel. For,

1. He has vested in his Royal person the power of making Laws, The Royal Power
set f^rth in Scripture; By it War proclaimed, 2 Chr. 13.4 By it Peace
concluded, 1 Kings 15.19. By it the people assembled and dismissed, Joshua
24.1. and 28. 1 Kings 8.1, and 66. By it a Law is made; By a Law repealed. 1 Samuel 14.24, 34. By it Offenders are pardoned, 2 Samuel 14.21. By it all Officers
are chosen, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, 1 Chr. 26.32. Genesis 41.33, 34, 41.
Exodus 18.25, 26. 2 Samuel 23.23. 1 Kings 4.3, to 20. 2 Chronicles. 17.7, 8. Nehemiah
5.14, 15. Hester 3.1^. Dan. 2.43, and 49. By it all Arms and Fortifications are
disposed, 2 Samuel, 8.14. 1 Kings 9.15, 17, 18, 19* and Chap. 26.9, to 16. Nehem.
7.1, 2, 3.
the Authority Legislative being a peculiar and incommunicable privilege of
the Supreme Power; so that the Office of the Two Houses of Parliament in this
affair is only Consultive, or Preparative; but the Character of the Power rests
in the final Sanction, which is in the K^^g of England.

2. To him belongs the power o^ Life and Death; He has the Sword of Justice to
punish them that transgress his Laws, and endeavor to cause Sedition; It Is he
that can remit the severities of the Penal Laws, by pardoning both the smaller
Breaches of them, and more Capital Offenses, which he might most justly punish.
Bracton, Lib. 1. c. 9. N. 3. Lib. 3. c. 8. N. 4. and lib. 3. c. 14. N. 18.
Fleta, lib. 1. c. 16. N. 3 Sir Thomas Smith, de Rep. Angl. lib. 2. c. 4.
Lambard inter Leges Edovardi, F. 143.9. E. 4.2. a. 27. H. 8. c. 24.

3. He only may Proclaim War, and he solely can establish Peace among his
people, Co. Lib. 7. Calvin's Case, F. 256. Smith's Common wealth, Lib. 2. c. 4.
19. E. 46. Co. 4. Just. f. 152. 2. H. 5. cap. 2.

4. There is no Lawful Assembly, Meeting, or Court, but by Authority from him:
Yea, the High Court of Parliament was at first devised, framed, and instituted
by him. Polyd. Virg. Lib. 11. Speed, Stow, Martin, Baker, and many others in
the Life of H. 1.

5. By him all the Officers of the Realm, whether Temporal, or Ecclesiastical,
are chosen and established; the Chief and Highest by himself immediately; and
mediately the Inferior Officers by Authority from him. Sir Thomas Smith, Lib.
2. Cap. 4, and 5. Bracton, Lib. 2. c. 24. Mirror c. 4. Sect. 2, and 4. Fleta
Lib. 1. c. 17.12. H. 7.17. b. Co. Lib. 12. Case of Conspiracy, f. 25.27. H. 8.
c. 24.

6. By him all Liberties, Franchises and Customs are granted and confirmed to
the people. Bracton, Lib. 2. c. 24. N. 2. Cowells Just. 1, 2, 5. Dyer 44. b.
Co. Lib. 11.87. Case of Monopolies.

7. He has the sole Power of ordering and disposing all the Castles, Forts and
strong Holds, and all the Ports and Havens, and generally all the Militia of
the Kingdom. Co. Litt. 5. a. Co. 2. Just. 30.13. Car. 2. c. 6.14. Car. 2. c. 3.
Co. 3. Just. 160, and 83. Co. Lib. 12. The Case of the Kings Prerogative in
Saltpeter.

In short, The Prince is the Life, the Head, and Authority of all Things that
be done in the Realm of England. Smith, Lib. 2. c. 4.

Cambden in his Britania of the King of England.
Supreman potestatem, and merum Imperium apud nos habet: Nec in Imperii
Clientela est, nec Investituram ab alio accipit, nec preter Deum, supremum
agnoscit: He has Sovereign Power, and Absolute Command among us; neither
holds he his Empire in Vassallage, nor receives the Investiture, or
Enstalling from another; nor yet acknowledges any Superior but God Almighty
above.

Bracton, That Wrote in the Reign of H. 3. says thus, Lib. 1. c. 8. N. 5.
Sunt etiam sub Rege Liberi Homines and servi ejus potestati subjecti, and
omnis quidem sub eo, and ipse sub nullo, nisi tantum sub Deo: And in another
place after says he, Rex habet Jurisdictionem supra omnes, Lib. 4. c. 24. N. 1.
qui in Regno suo sunt.

King H. 8. upon a Contest touching an Ecclesiastical Immunity, uttered these
very words; Doct. Burnet's Hist. of the Reformation, Lib. 1. part. 1. f. 17.
By the permission and Ordinance of God we are King of England, and the Kings
of England in times past had never any superior, but God only; Therefore know
you well, that we will maintain the Right of our Crown, and of our Temporal
Jurisdiction, as well in this as in all other Points, in as ample manner as any
of our Progenitors have done before our time. Add hereunto, That this
Sovereignty and Supremacy appertaining to our Kings, and to the Emperial Grown
of England, is asserted, not only by our Books of Law, but likewise those
Statutes that have been Enacted by our Princes and Nobles in Parliament, do
affirm the same; witness 16. R. 2. C. 5.24. H. 8. c. 12.25. H. 8. c. 21, and 22
1 Eliz c. 1. and 1. Jac. c. 1. All which Statutes you may peruse at your own
leisure. Now I would fain know of any Popeling or Fanatic, what greater or
more Royal Power can any Prince of Juda or Israel claim, than is here by our
Laws acknowledged to be in the King of England.

The Third Respect in his Charge and Duty, which consists in the observance of
the Law of God, the Law of Nature, and the Laws of this Realm.

To observe the Law of God, He is bound as a Christian; to observe the Law of
Nature, he is obliged as a Man; to observe the Laws of his Realm, he is bound
as a King: Nor is he only bound, vinculo Offieii, as he is a King, though this is
a strict tie, considering to whom he must one day render an Account of his
Stewardship; but he is also bound, Vinculo Juramenti, by an Oath taken at his
Coronation: The effect whereof is this, Of the Oath at the Coronation. see
Flesa Lib. 1. c. 17. N. 12, 13, 14, etc.
To keep, confirm, and defend all Laws, Customs, and Freedoms, granted by his
Predecessors to the Clergy or People; to preserve Peace and Concord, and cause
equal and right Justice to be done, according to his Power. Whence it is very
evident, that the King has his Duty enjoined him, and ought not to make his
Will the Rule of his Actions. Temperent igitur (says Fleta Lib. 1. c. 17. N.
11.) Reges potentiam suam per Legem, quae frenum est Potentiae, quod secundum
Leges vivant, quia hoc sanxit Lex humana, quod Leges suum ligent Latorem, and
alibi digna vox ex Majestate Regnantis est Legibus alligatnm se principem
profiteri: praeterea nihil tam proprium imperio quam Legibus vivere, and majus
est Imperio Legibus submittere Principatum.

The fourth and last Respect, is in the rendering of his Account; For as the
King's mentioned in Scripture were not, so the King of England is not
accountable for his Actions to any but God alone.

First, Because the King of England has not his Crown from any but God alone.
Not only Holy Prove. 8.15. Romans 13.2. Psalm 82.8. John 19.11. Psalm. 62.11.
Scripture, but the writings of Heathens have declared, that in Sovereign
Princes there is, (...) something divine, above the reach of man, which cannot
be derived from them; and therefore they are descended more immediately from
the gods, and more particularly depending on them. Kings are from Jupiter,
(says Callimachus,) and nothing ever descended more sacred from him. And
Homer^,(...); Ab Jove summus Honos. Omnis provectus, maxim Regius, ad
divinitatis munera referendus est Says Vitigis, apud Cassiodorum. M^terent.
apud Tacitum lib. 6.
Tibi summum Rerum Judicium, dii dedere, nobis obsequii gloria relicta est; no
Law could punish, nor any call Kings to account but the gods; who as they gave
them the highest Empire here, so did they leave their Subjects nothing but the
Glory of obeying.

But it may be said by our Fanatics, how can the Kings Power be thought to be
only and immediately from God, when it is derived to him by ordinary means of
Hereditary Succession?

It is answered, That Election, Succession, and Lawful Conquest, are Titles
whereby Princes receive their Authority; they are not the Original and
immediate Fountain of this Authority. Heat, Moisture, Cold, Dryness, and our
Temper arising from them (whilst we are miraculously fashioned in our Mothers
Womb) are preparations, whereby our Bodies are made fit Receptacles for our
Souls; but the Creator of our Souls is God: So Princes have just claim to their
Sovereign Power, by the titles of Succession and Conquest; but the Prime Author
of their Power is God. Cujus jussu (says Irenaeus) nascuntur homines, ejus
jussu Constituuntur Principes: By whose appointment they are born Men, and made
reasonable Creatures; by his appointment are they made Princes. And as they
receive their Power only from God, so for the good or evil Administration
thereof, they are accountable only unto God, as unto their Superior, and not
unto any mortal Creature. God only makes them Kings, and only can unmake them,
and deject them from their Thrones; according to the Rule of Law, Ejusdem est
destituere, cujus and instituere.

Secondly, The Oath that the King takes at his Coronation, binds him only
before God; for there is no Condition, Promise or Limitation, whereby he is
made Accountable to his People.

Thirdly, By the suffrage, and Testimony of our Lawyers, it appears, that the
King of England is unaccountable to any humane Power on Earth. And we begin
with Bracton, who tells us, that we have no Legal Remedy, we can only humbly
Petition His Sacred Majesty, Locus erit Supplicationi, quod factum suum
corrigat, Lib. 1. cap. 8. N. 5.
and emendet; Quod quidemsi non fecerit, satis sufficit ei ad praenam, quod
dominum expectet ultorem. Nemo quidem de factis suis, praesumat disputare,
multo fortius Contra factum suam venire. If he will not hearken to our just and
reasonable desires, satis sufficit, his punishment is more than enough; for he
must render an account to him that judges Righteously. Let not men presume to
question his deeds, much less to undo by force what he shall do, though not
according to Right. That our Fanatics may not think this dropped from our
Bracton unwariily, he repeats it in other places, and Lib. 5. Tract. 3. De
defaltis, Cap. 3. N. 3. He puts the Case, that the King should do injury, and a
Plea is brought against him, in whose behalf he did it; the King being
Petitioned and Persisting, and he rules it thus, Quo casu cum dominus Rex super
hoc fuerit interpellatus in eadem perstiterit voluntate, quod vellet tenentem
esse defensum injuria, cum teneatur justitiam totis viribus defensare, ex tunc
erit injuria ipsius Domini Regis, nec poterit, ei necessitatem imponere, quod
illam corrigat and emendet nisi velit, cum superiorem non habeat nisi deum, and
satis erit illi propaena, quod deum expectet ultorem. If the King, who is bound
to Administer Justice to his utmost power, will not recall the wrong he did
upon a false suggestion, in this case he injures his Subjects; but no body can
force him to do Right, because he has supreme Power; he has no superior but
God only, and it is sufficient that we shall have a day of hearing hereafter at
a just Tribunal, where he shall be punished for doing wrong, and we amply
requited for our patient suffering.

Gilbert de Thornton, Chief Justice under Edward the First, speaks in the
same manner; Cum provisum sit, Fleta Lib. 1. c. 17. N. 9.
quod quilibet in sui juris prosequutione potius judicio, quam viribus utatur,
and oportet Laesos Regem adire, ut ostensis sibi injuriis illatis, Celerem
justitiam petentibus faciat exhiberi, qui si noluerit de seipso, vel de alio,
^x tunc deum expectent conquerentes ultorem: Nemo enim de facto Regis praesumat
disputaare, nec contrafactum suum venire. Stamford in his Exposition of the
Kings Prerogative is of the same mind with Bracton and Thornton; for he says,
That by the Common Law, there lies no Action or Writ against the King, but
when he seizes the Subjects Lands or Goods, having no Title by order of Law so
to do: Petition is all the Remedy the Subject has, and this Petition is called
a Petition of Right.

With our Lawyers do concur two of our Parliaments, which have declared that
the King of England is, (...) accountable to none but God, and therefore no way
obnoxious to any humane coercive Power. Thomas de Walsingham mentions a Letter
written to the Bishop of Rome in the name of the whole Kingdom, from the
Parliament held at Lincoln, Anno Domini 1301, wherein are these words, Scimus,
Pater Sanctissime, and notorium est, a prima institutione Regni Angliae, tam
temporibus Britannorum, quam Anglorum, quod certum and directum dominium ad
Regem pertinuit neque Reges Angliae ex libera pre-eminentia Regiae dignitatis,
and Consuetudine cunctis temporibus observata, coram aliquo Judice
Ecclesiastico, velseculari responderunt, aut respondere debebant. We know most
holy Father, and it is manifest, from the very beginning of the Kingdom of
England, as well in the time of the Britains as of the Angles, that the
certain and direct dominion has belonged unto the King, neither have the Kings
of England (by reason of the undoubted pre-eminence of the Royal Dignity and
Custom observed in all Ages) answered, or ought to answer before any Judge
Ecclefiastical or Civil.

The other Parliament was held at Westminster in the Reign of the King that now
is, whereat the Lords and Commons have declared, 12. Car. 2. c. 30.
That by the undoubted, and Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, neither the Peers
of this Realm, nor the Commons, nor both together in Parliament, nor the People
collectively, or representatively, nor any other persons whatsover ever had,
have, has, or ought to have, any coercive Power over the persons of the Kings
of England.

You see, (Sir) that though there be Laws to guide and direct our Princes, yet
if they chance to forget themselves so much as to violate and break through
them, there is no Law whereby Subjects may resist and punish them; their
Ministers and Instruments are ever accountable, but as to themselves, it is a
known Maxim among our Lawyers, That they can do no wrong.

But after all that has been said, there are some Hunt-Scrap Lawyers and
Politicians ready to raise such objections as these following.

From whom the King receives his power, Object. 1.
to them he is accountable; but from the people the King receives his power;
as Fortescue delivers, Cap. 13. Ad tutelam Legis subditorum ac eorum Corporum
and Bonorum, Rex erectus, and hanc potestatem a populo estluxam ipse habet. A
King is ordained for the defense of the Law of his Subjects, and of their
Bodies and Goods; whereunto he receives Power of his People: Therefore to his
People, the King is accountable.

If the Makers of this Objection did rightly set down the words of Fortescue,
Solution.
they might easily Answer themselves; for it is not barely Rex a King, but Rex
hujusmodi, such a King, meaning a King whose Government is merely Politic. But
the Government of England is not merely Politic, nor merely Regal, but mixed;
partly regal and partly politic: as Fortescue says presently after, Regnum
Angliae ex Bruti Comitiva Trojanorum, in dominium politicum, and Regale
prorupit; The King of England out of Brutus his retinue of the Trojans, first
grew into a Politic and Regal Dominion. And in the Ninth Chapter, Rex Angliae
principatu, nedum regali politico, suo populo Dominatur: The King of England
Governs his People by Dominion, notonly Regal, but also Politic.

How it is Regal, and how Politic, does plainly appear by what has been
before spoken; for in regard all Power and Authority is derived from him, and
he holds his Kingdom, and there withal his Power from God only, it must needs
be, that his Government is Regal; and in regard he is tied to the observance of
the Laws of his Kingdom, (whereby Potestas Regia Lege politica cohibetur
Fortescue, Cap. 9. The Power Regal is restrained by a Law Politic) it must
needs follow, that this Government is Politic: So that in reference to his
Power, he is a Regal King; in reference to his Duty, he is a Politic King.

The Objection therefore being grounded upon Fortescues words, of a Kingdom
merely Politic, does not concern our Kingdom.

He who is under the Law, Object. 2.
may be called to account for his Actions; but the King is under the Law,
Bracton says, Ipse Rex non debet esse sub homine, Lib. 1. c. 8. N. 5.
sed sub Deo, and sub Lege, Quia Lex facit Regem. The King himself ought not to
be under man, but under God; and under the Law, because the Law makes the King.

In Answer to this Objection, Sulution.
we must call to mind that there is a two fold Power in the Law, a Directing
Power, and a Correcting-Power.

In respect of the former, the King is under the Law, That is to say, the Law
is the Line and Rule whereby the Will of the King is guided and directed; and
in this sense Bracton spoke.

In respect of the later, the King is not under the Law. For how can we
possibly conceive, that he who gives Life to the Law, should by the Law offer
force unto himself, and compel himself; for as with the Grammarians the
Imperative-Mood has no first Person, so with the Civilians; D. 4.8.51. d.
36.1.13. d. 24.1.7, 8.
neque imperare sibi, neque se prohibere quisquam potest, no man can Command or
forbid himself; at leastwise no man can impose such a Law upon himself, but
that he may recede from it when he pleases. D. 32.1.22. de Leg. 3.

He that is under the former power only, is accountable to God only for his
Actions; as the King. But he that is under both Powers of the Law, is
accountable both to God and the Law; as is every Subject.

Again, In respect of the Directing Power, the Law is the Object and Rule of
Justice, and so the King is under the Law: In Respect of the Correcting Power,
the Law is the Instrument of Justice, and so the King is not under the Law; but
the Law is a means, serving the King, to govern his People.

To illustrate this by an example; a Servant who guides and directs his Master,
as he is a Guide, is superior to his Master; but consider him as an Instrument
and Servant unto his Master, and though he be never so Wise and Upright, yet
his Master is above him.

And as the Law is said to be above the King, so in the same Sense His Council
may also be said to be above him; that is, in respect they guide, Bracton Lib.
2. c. 16. N. 3. Fleta Lib. 1. c. 17. N. 9.
direct and advise the King in the Governing of his People. For so say our two
ancient Lawyers; The King has Superiors in the Governing of his People, the
Law by which he is made, and his Council, to wit, The Earls and Barons.

But here a scruple may arise, what Bracton and Fleta mean, when they say, The
Law makes the King. It is answered, there are two singular and excellent
benefits, which by the Law redound unto the King. The one is, the Law does
declare and publish unto the People the Kings Right unto the Crown, so that
they quietly and willingly receive him as their King, and submit unto him. The
other Benefit is, the Law does support and strengthen him in his Emperial
Throne. In both which respects it may well be said, That the Law makes the
King, and so Sir Edward Coke spoke right when he told King James, That the Law
set the Crown upon his Head.

Sir, These Objections being fully (as I think) answered, I shall leave you,
and your Fanatic Neighbors, to compare what has been now by me proved, with
what has been by some of our Divines lately delivered out of the Scriptures;
and you will clearly find, That the King of England is such a King as the
Scriptures make mention of. And if it be so, how then can Fanatics take up
Arms against him? If he be wicked, what advantage will it be to them to be
worse? If he break his Oath, will they also break theirs? Or can they say, that
they swear Allegiance unto him on conditon of his good Behavior? Does the
Statute of 25. Ed. 3. C. 2. declare it to be Treason only, to Levy War against
a good, a just King? Why then did not the Protestants take up Arms against that
bloody Idolatrous Queen Mary? Why then is it Treason to compass the Death of an
Usurper of the Crown? Dalt. 227. Was not Spencer banished for the affirming,
Co. Lib. 7. Calvin's Case.
That if the King did not demean himself by Reason, in the Right of the Crown,
His Subjects were bound by Oath to remove him? Oh Fanatics! take heed of this
unhappy principle, which not long since ruined as Flourishing a Kingdom as any
in the Christian World. By the dire Effects of it, our Religion was abolished,
our Foundations over-turned, our Laws abrogated, the Government of Church and
State dissolved; instead of Religion, Atheism and Infidelity, Fanatic Rage,
and wild Enthusiasme; In short, instead of Liberty and Property, the voice of
Sequestrations, Plunders and Decimations were heard in the Land.

FLAGELLVM CONCILIABVLORVM: OR, A ROD for the FOOLS-BACK.
SHOWING What Laws, both Foreign and Domestic, have been framed for the
Prevention and Suppression of Conventicles.
THe gathering of Assemblies is reckoned as an especial Privilege of Sovereign
Princes; who in all times have been jealous of them, and provided severe Laws
against them; and good Reason for such Jealousy, for that it is impossible (be
the pretenses of Meeting never so specious and fair) to Govern People, and keep
them quiet long, if they have liberty to flock together at their pleasures: And
therefore there is a necessity, that all Assemblings of people, whether upon a
Sacred or Civil account, should be absolutely in the Power of Princes.

To which purpose, both remarkable and agreeable are those Laws and Edicts made
by the Policy of the Greeks and Romans, whereunto we will add those Laws,
Canons, and Constitutions that have been Enacted in our Parliaments and
Convocations. And we shall begin with those that are Foreign.

Isocrates, under the person of King Nicocles, thus instructs his Subjects;
(...) In English thus, Make no Societies nor Coventicles without my License:
Assemblies of this kind, as in other Governments they are hurtful, so in
Monarchies they are exceeding dangerous. Agreeable hereto is that of Mecenas in
Dio, who pronounces, (...). That is in English, Combinations, and Assemblies,
and Associations, are things that do not very well consist with a Monarchy.

Upon this account Arnoldus Clapmarius shows, how pernicious and dangerous are
Conventicles in a Government; L^b. 3. cap. 13. de Arcanis Donationis.
and gives us Tacitus's Note, In Rebellione Galliarum: Igitur (says Tacitus)
per conciliabula and Caetus seditiosa disserebant. From whence such unlawful
Assemblies are prevented and suppressed by the Decrees and Constitutions of the
Roman Princes, and Senators, which are to be found in the Body of the Civil
Law; which I now present to the Reader.

Sub praetextu Religionis, D. 47.11.2. de caetibus illicitis.
vel sub species solvendi voti Caetus illicitos nec a veteranis tempetare
oportet.

Mandatis principalibus praecipitur praesidibus provinciarum, ne patiantur esse
Collegia sodalitia neve milites, Collegia in castris habeant. D. 47.22.1. de
Collegii.
Sed permittitur tenuioribus Stipem menstruam Confer dum tamen semel in mense
caeant ne sub praetextu hujusmodi illicitum Collegium coeat. Quod non tantum in
urbe sed and in Italia, and in provinciis Locum habere Divus quoque severus
rescripsit Sed Religionis Causa coin non prohibentur, D. 47.22.2. de p^na.
dum tamen per hoc non fiat Contra Senatusconsultum quo illicita
Collegiaarcentur. Quisquis illicitum Collegium Vsurpaverit, ea paena quo
Tenetur qui hominibus armatis Loca publica vel templa occupasse judicati sunt.

In summa autem nisi ex senatusconsulti auctoritate, vel Caesaris; D. 47.22.3.1.
Collegium; vel quod cunque tale Corpus coierit, contra senatusconsultum et
mandata, and constitutiones collegium celebrant.

By these Texts of Law, we are informed, that unlawful Colleges, Corporations
and Assemblies, gathered together to bad uses, as to Eating, Drinking,
Wantonness, Conspiracy, are punished as public Routs and Riots. Thus much for
the Digests, I come now to what is said of Conventicles in those parts of the
Civil Law, we call the Codes, the Novels, and the Feuds.

In the Code of the Emperor Justinian, Cod. 1.3.15. de illicitis conventiculis.
you have this Text of Law; Conventicula illicita etiam extra Ecclesiam in
privatis aedibus celebrari prohibemus, proscriptionis domus periculo imminente,
si dominus ejus in ea Clericos nova, ac tumultuosa Conventicula extra Ecclesiam
celebrantes susceperit. For more of this matter of Conventicles, the Reader may
at leisure see. Cod. 1.12.5. Cod. 1.5.6. and 8.

In the Novels it is declared, That the sacred Mysteries or Ministeries be not
done in private Houses, but be celebrated in public places, least thereby
things be done contrary to the Catholic, and Apostolic Faith: unless they
call to the celebrating of the same, such Clerks of whose Faith and Conformity
there is no doubt made, or those that are deputed thereunto by the good will of
the Bishop. But places to pray in, every man may have in his own House; if any
thing be done to the contrary, the House wherein these things are done shall be
confiscated, and themselves shall be punished at the discretion of the Prince.

In the Feuds it is deereed thus; Feudorum, lib. 2. Tit. 53.
Conventicula quoque in Civitatibus, Omnesque Conjurationes, and extra etiam
occasion parentelae, and inter Civitatem, and Civitatem, and inter personam
and personam, sive inter Civitatem and personam, modis omnibus fieri
prohibemus: Et in preteritum factas Cassamus, singulis conjuratorum paena unius
Librae auri puniendis. Episcopos vero Locorum Ecclesiastica censura violatores
hujus sanctionis, donec ad satisfactionem veniant, voluimus coercere.
Receptoribus etiam malefactorum, qui praedictam pacem violeverint, and praedam
ementibus nostram indignationem subituris, and ejusdem paenis feriendis.
Praeterea bona ejus publicentur and domus ejus destruatur. By this edict it
appears, that Domus ubi conventicula, aut Conspirationes fiunt confiscatur, and
Receptans violatorem Legis pari cum eo paena punietur. The House where
Conventicles or Conspiracies are made, is to be confiscated; and he who
receives any offender against this Law, must be liable with him to the same
Punishment.

Thus much of the Foreign Edicts made against Conventicles and unlawful
Assemblies, I pass on to give an account what Laws, Canons and Constitutions
have been ordained both in the Church and State of England, for the preventing
and suppressing of the Conventicles of Sectaries. And we begin with the Laws
enacted in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, in whose name our Whiggs pretend to
cast out of the Kingdom those Devils the Jesuits, etc. but will not observe one
tittle of her Laws and Constitions made for the better Government of the Church
and State.

In the 35th. year of the Queens Reign are enacted two Laws:

The first is for the punishment of those persons that obstinately refuse to
come to Church, and persuade others to impugn the Queens Authority in
Ecclesiastical Causes, etc. For what end this Punishment and for what persons
intended, the preamble of the same Statute demonstrates; It is, For the
preventing and avoiding of such inconveniences and perils as might happen and
grow by the wicked and dangerous practices of Seditious Sectaries, and disloyal
Persons.

The Second Law is, 35 Eliz. c. 2.
to impose a penalty on a Convicted Popish-Recusant, removing above five Miles
from the House, etc. And for what end the penalty is imposed, and what persons
are meant by this Law, the preamble thereof will inform us, It is for the
better discovering and avoiding of such Traiterous and most dangerous
Conspiracies and Attempts as are daily devised and practiced against the Queens
Majesty, and the happy Estate of this Common Wealth, by sundry wicked and
Seditious persons, who terming themselves Catholics, and being (indeed) Spies
and Intelligencers not only for her Majesty's Foreign Enemies, but also for
Rebellious and Traytorous Subjects, Born within her Realms and Dominions, and
hiding their most detestable and divilish purposes under a false pretext of
Religion and Conscience, do secretly wander and shift from place to place
within this Realm, to corrupt her Majesty's Subjects, and to stir them to
Sedition and Rebellion.

From the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, we come to that of King James.

In 1. Jacobi Regis, Anno 1603. there is a Canon and Constitution whereby
maintainers of Conventicles are censured; the words of the Canon are these:

Whosoever shall hereafter affirm or maintain, that there are within this
Realm, other Meetings, Canon. 11.
Assemblies or Congregations of the Kings born Subjects, then such as by the
Laws of the Land are held and allowed, which may rightly Challenge to
themselves the name of True and Lawful Churches: Let him be Excommunicated, and
not restored but by the Archbishop, after his Repentance and public
Revocation of such his wicked Errors. And as the maintainers of Conventicles
are censured, so against the maintainers of Constitutions made in Conventicles,
there is ordained a Canon, which is the 12th. The words whereof are as follow.

Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, Canon 12.
that it is Lawful for any sort of Ministers and Lay-persons, or either of them
to join together and make Rules, Orders or Constitutions in Causes
Ecclesiastical, without the Kings Authority, and shall submit themselves to be
Ruled and Governed by them: Let them be excommunicated ipso facto, and not be
restored until they Repent and publicly revoke those their wicked and
Anabaptistical errors. Add hereto a Third Canon against Ministers holding
private Conventicles; the very words whereof are these:

For as much as all Conventicles, Canon 73.
and secret Meetings of Priests and Ministers, have been ever justly accounted
very hurtful to the state of the Church wherein they live; we do now Ordain and
Constitute, That no Priests or Ministers of the Word of God, nor any other
persons shall meet together in any private House, or elsewhere, to consult upon
any matter or course to be taken by them, or upon their motion, or direction by
any other, which may any way tend to the impeachment or depravation of the
Doctrine of the Church of England, or of the Book of Common Prayer, or of any
part of the Government and Discipline now established in the Church of England
under pain of Excommunication ipso facto. From King James's Reign I descend to
that of the Royal Martyr King Charles the First; by whose License and Authority
there was a Constitution and Canon Ecclesiastical framed and agreed upon, (in
the several Synods held at London and York, Anno 1640) against Sectaries; And
it is this; Whereas there is a Provision now made by a Canon for the
suppressing of Popery, and the growth thereof, by Subjecting all Popish
Recusants to the greatest Severity of Ecclesiastical censures in that behalf;
Canon 5.
This present Synod well knowing that there are other Sects which endeavor the
subversion both of the Doctrine, and Discipline of the Church of England no
less than the Papists do, although by another way; for the preventing thereof,
does hereby decree and ordain, That all those Proceedings and Penalties, which
are mentioned in the aforesaid Canon against Popish-Recusants as far as they
shall be applyable, shall stand in full Force and Vigor against all
Anabaptists Brownists, Separatists, Familists, or other Sect or Sects, person
or persons whatsoever, who do or shall either ob^^^nately refuse, or ordinarily
not having a Lawful Impediment, (that is for the space of a Month) neglect to
repair to their Parish-Churches or Chapels where they inhabit, for the hearing
of Divine-Service Established, and receiving of the Holy-Communion according to
Law.

And further, because there are sprung up among us a sort of factious people,
Despisers and Depravers of the Books of Common Prayer, who do not according to
the Law resort to their Parish Church or Chapel, to join in the public
Prayers, Service, and Worship of God with the Congregation, contenting
themselves with the hearing of Sermons only, thinking thereby to avoid the
Penalties due to such as wholly absent themselves from the Church. We therefore
for the restraint of all such wilful Contemners or Neglectors of the Service
of God, do ordain that the Church or Chappel-Wardens, and Questmen, or Sidemen
of every Parish, shall be careful to enquire out all such disaffected persons,
and shall present the names of all such Delinquents at all Visitations of
Bishops, and other Ordinaries; and that the same Proceedings and Penalties
mentioned in the Canon aforesaid respectively, shall be used against them as
against other Recusants, unless within one whole Month after they are first
denounced, they shall make acknowledgment and reformation of that their fault.
Provided always that this Canon shall not derogate from any other Canon, Law,
or Statute in that behalf provided against those Sectaries. From the Reign of
King Charles the 1st. I come to the Reign of the King that now is; wherein are
Laws enacted (besides those against Nonconformists) for the preventing and
suppressing of Conventicles. As for Example,

In the 16th. of King Charles the 2d. there is a Law, 16. Car. 2. c. 4.
Entitled, An act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles; and in the
preamble thereof are these words to be read;

Whereas an Act made in the five and thirtieth Year of the Reign of our late
Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, Entitled, An Act to retain the Queens
Majesty's Subjects in their due Obedience, has not been put in due Execution
by reason of some doubt of late made, whether the said Act be still in force;
although it be very clear and evident, and it is hereby declared, that the said
Act is still in force, and ought to be put in due Execution. For providing
therefore of further and more speedy Remedies against the growing and dangerous
practices of Seditious Sectaries, and other disloyal persons, who under
pretense of tender Consciences, do at their Meetings contrive Insurrections, as
late Experience has showed. As for the Punishment, etc. of this same Law, I
shall not mention, because it is expired.

In the 22d. year of the Reign of the King that now is, 22. Car. 2. c. 4.
there is another Law made, whereby it is enacted,

1. That if any of the Age of Sixteen years or upwards, being a Subject of this
Realm, shall be present at any Conventicle, under pretense of any Exercise of
Religion, in other manner than according to the Church of England, any Justice
of Peace, etc. on Proof, Confession, Oath of two Witnesses, or notorious
Evidence of the Fact, may make a Record of such offense, which Record shall be
a Conviction, and set a Fine of Five Shillings for the first offense, and for
the second, Ten Shillings, to be Levied by distress and sale of the offenders
Goods; or in case of Poverty, on the Goods of others then convicted of the like
offense at the same Conventicle.

2. That every person convicted of Preaching at any such Meeting, shall forfeit
for the first offense Twenty Pound; and if it be a Stranger, and his name and
habitation not known, or he cannot be found, or be unable to pay, the Justice
of Peace etc. may Levy it upon any persons that were present; and for the
second offense Forty Pound to be levied, and disposed, etc.

3. That every person convicted of wittingly suffering any such meeting to be
held in his House, Yard, etc. shall forfeit Twenty Pound; and in case of his
Poverty, upon persons convicted of being present at the same.

4. That if any Constable, etc. knowing, or being informed of such Meetings
within his Precinct, shall not inform a Justice of Peace, or chief Magistrate,
etc. but they or others called in their aid, shall wilfully omit their Duty,
and being convicted thereof, they shall forfeit Five Pound. and the Justice of
Peace and chief Magistrate, etc. omitting their Duty, shall forfeit one Hundred
Pound. Now for what end are these penalties imposed? Why the preamble of the
Law will tell you, That it is, For providing Remedy against the growing and
dangerous practices of Seditious Sectaries, and other disloyal persons, who
under pretense of tender Consciences, have, or may at their Meetings contrive
Insurrections, as late experience has showed.

Now, Reader, if this very last Statute be put in due execution, I should think
our Sectaries would not have long, Pocket Courage enough to frequent
Conventicles; and if they themselves would but consider, and weigh the
preambles of the Laws and Canons before mentioned, they would pronounce
themselves Guilty of the greatest folly and Impudence in the World, to be found
at such unlawful Meetings. Well, I have no more to say to our Sectaries not
only to desire them to read these following Lines, spoken by a most excellent
Doctor Laney late Lord Bishop of Ely, on 1 Thessalonians. 4.11.
Prelate of our Church in a Sermon Preached before his Majesty at White Hall,
12. Martii 1664.

A Man (says he) may go far in Religion, without troubling any; and if then
they fall into some Error, or Misbelief in Religion, they ought not to be
severely handled; but when they betake themselves to a Sect, that alters the
case, it will then be Compassion mistaken. A Locust alone is no such perilous
Beast to be feared or regarded by any; but when they come in shoals and swarms,
and cover the Face of the Earth, they are a plague to the Country where they
light. So to look upon a Sectary single, who out of simplicity and good
meaning, follows his Conscience, our Hearts should be every whit as tender for
them as their Consciences are; But if we look upon them in Company, they are as
ill and dangerous as the Company they are found in; and the danger of all
popular Meetings and Associations to a State, makes it the proper business of a
King and his Ministers to look to it, and to provide against it; wherein the
care has been taken, deserves a just Commendation.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and are to be Sold by John Walthoe at the Black-Lyon in
Chancery Lane, overagainst Lincoln's Inn.
AN Historical Account of the late great Frost, in which are discovered, in
several Comical Relations, the various Humors, Loves, Cheats, and Intreagues
of the Town, as the same were managed upon the River of Thames, during that
Season: In Twelves, price 1 s. The Kings Prerogative, and the Subjects
Privileges Asserted, according to the Laws of England: Together with
Observations on the Laws and Government of most of the Kingdoms and States of
the Universe; by J. N. in large Octavo: price 1 s. 6 d. The Religious Cavalier.
Done out of French: By Gideon Pierrevile Gent. price 1 s. Eve Revived: Or, The
Fair One Stark-Naked. A Novell. The Privilege of Cuckolds: Or the Cure of
Jealousy. A work necessary not only for those who are so, but those that may
be so. In Twelves: price 1 s.

