A REMEDY AGAINST TROUBLE: IN A DISCOURSE ON JOHN XIV.I.

Wherein something is also briefly attempted for clearing the Nature of Faith;
Of Justification; Of the Covenant of Grace; Assurance; the Witness, Seal and
Earnest of the Spirit. And Preparation for Conversion; or the Necessity of
Holiness.

By H. LUKIN.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Cockerill at the Three Legs in the Poultrey
over against the Stocks-Market. 1694.

TO THE READER.
THE ensuing Treatise is the Substance of some Sermons, which I transcribed at
the desire of a Friend. I designed chiefly a Practical Discourse; and if I have
sometimes fallen upon controverted Points, it is not from any delight that I
take therein. I am not of Abner's Temper, 2 Samuel 2:14.
to make a sport of Digladiations amongst Brethren; neither should I with
Alipius, have been tempted to be a Spectator of the Gladiators among the
Romans. As in passing through the Streets in London, I would not plod on
without minding my way, or resolve to go on in a direct Line, turning every one
out of the way, without giving the least place to them; but choose my way to
escape the Dirt so far as I could, and turn my self so as to pass with the
least trouble to my self, or offense to others; so in passing through the
World, I would not despise my way, walking at random, or at adventures; nor
rudely check all that I meet with, or that stand in my way; Prove. 19.16. Levit.
26.21. Psalm 39.1. Prove. 4.26. James 1.27. 2 Peter 2.20. Romans 12.18. 1 Cor.
10.32. 1 These. 3.12, 13.
but take heed to my way; ponder the paths of my feet, that I may (so far as I
can) keep my self unspotted of the world, and escape the pollutions of it, and
that I may (if it be possible) live peaceably with all men, giving none
offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God;
neither exasperating others, nor giving others occasion to exasperate my self.
Sharp Humors discompose the Soul, as well as the Body, and hinder the thriving
thereof. Therefore the Apostle prays for the Thessalonians, That the Lord would
make them to increase and abound in love one toward another, and toward all
men, to the end he might establish their hearts, unblameable in holiness. A
Charitable frame of spirit tending much to the promoting thereof. Yet we cannot
wholly avoid treating of things that are disputable; and it is an happy work,
if any could thereby allay the Heats that are amongst Christians, and set them
right in their thoughts about those things that are controvered, both to
maintain a good Understanding and Accord among themselves, and to direct them
in their Addresses and Applications to God. I have endeavored to bring Water,
not Oil to the Fire. I know Water will make unquenched Lime burn, but I hope I
shall not meet with any of that Temper. Prove. 20.18.
We should with good advice make war. We should consider whether we are able to
deal with those that we undertake a War against. But tho we think that we are
so, we should consider whether we have any just Cause to begin a War. There
were great Preparations against the Two Tribes and an half on the other side of
Jordan, the rest of the Tribes fearing that they would bring wrath upon the
whole Congregation of Israel, Joshua 22.18, etc.
but when matters came to be examined, they were pleased with the account that
the Two Tribes and an half gave of what they had done. So many are ready to
undertake a Religious War, or Dispute, against their Brethren, as if they were
subverting the Christian Religion, or undermining the Foundation thereof; but
when they come to examine matters, they find there is no cause of such heats or
emotions of spirit; but those things which they are offended at, are either the
private Opinions, or at least the rash and unadvised Expressions of some
particular Persons, which the rest of those that are supposed to be of their
Party do disown. This is very ordinary amongst all sorts of persons; and I know
no sort of persons that will vouch every thing which is spoken by all that rank
themselves among them; let every one bear their own burden, and let not others
answer any further for what they say, than they have given their consent
thereto. But sometimes we may mistake Persons, and impute such things to them
as they do not believe. Many do not read men's own Works, but judge of their
Opinions by what they read in those that write against them, who often choose
out such passages as may give them most advantage against them, or which they
can most easily answer, or will represent them as most blameworthy to others,
and justify their rough treatment of them. It is rare to find in Polemical
Writings, such Candor and Clearness as is observed in a late Writer, Mr. Le
Blanc, who in stating many of the Differences betwixt us and the Papists,
renders himself suspected by some on both sides; some Protestants thinking he
is too favorable to the Papists in representing their Opinions; And some
Papists have thought that he has been partial in the account that he gives of
the Doctrine of the Protestants; and yet both Papists and Protestants acquit
him from wronging them, in setting down their own Opinions. Now it is a great
disadvantage to any to have some Periods or Sentences taken out of their
Writings, when we do not see on what occasion they write such things, nor what
they write in other places, which may allay or qualify such harsh Expressions.
I have seen a Letter which was so written, that if it were read at length every
Line of it, did import one thing: but if it were so folded or turned down, as
to hide the end of every Line, it was of a quite different tenor or
signification. So a partial representation of men's minds, may subject them to
great mistakes or misconstructions; yea, we may mistake men many times, tho we
read their Writings our selves; we may say of the most Learned Writers, as is
said of the Egyptians, They are men, and not God; Isaiah 31.3.
they cannot see all things at one single view; and when men are intent on one
thing, they will call in the service of some Hypothesis which may be for their
present turn, and disown it at another time, when they see that it will not
well agree with some other Opinion which they would confirm. This is a weakness
that I have observed in some of the most Learned men that I have read;
especially when they write much, and forget at one time what they have written
at another; and it may be, have given an Interpretation of Scripture at one
time, when it might serve an Hypothesis, which they have answered themselves on
another occasion, when some other Point which they have been treating of would
not bear their former Interpretation. There must be an allowance made in such
cases, for men's over-sights and infirmities. Sometimes men do impute to others
the Consequences of their Opinions, and so represent their Opinions as very
dangerous; but we should not charge upon persons what they do not expressly own.
It is true indeed, that from truth follows nothing but truth; but from some
small Error, dangerous Errors may follow; and few can see the utmost tendency
of all their Opinions, or what Consequences may be knit to each other.
Therefore the Respondent, or he that Answers in Disputations, must always be
wary what he grants, or what Concessions he makes, lest he should be driven to
an Absurdity. As we cannot guard against all Accidents, so neither can we see
every thing that may be deduced from what we may maintain, nor the Inferences
which may be multiplied from it. Sometimes men love to express themselves in
Rhetorical Strains, which must not be brought to a rigid Test or Examen. It is
very natural to us to use Hyperboles, or Excesses of Speech; yea, God himself
frequently uses them; they serving to raise our minds to some adequate
conception of those things which plain words would not heighten them to. So God
promises that he would multiply the seed of Abraham, Genesis 15.15. Genesis 22.17.
Hosea 2.17.
as the dust of the earth, or as the sand on the sea shore. So he says, He will
take the names of Baalim out of their mouth, and they shall no more be
remembered by their name. Whereas Paul does afterward mention this name; Romans
11.4.
and it is impossible that it should wholly depart out of their mind. But he
would thereby signify their great detestation of Idolatry. So where our Savior
bids his Disciples that they should salute no man by the way: Luke 10.4.
it is not likely that he would forbid all expressions of Civility and
Courtesy: but he seems only to warn them against long and tedious Compliments,
and Conferences, which might retard them in their work which he sent them
about; the Prophet giving the like charge to his Servant when he sent him in
haste: 2 Kings 4.29.
so in controversial Writings there is something of like nature, which we call
(...) whereby men (that they may make it seem that their Adversaries depart far
from the truth) run as far as they can on the other side, or say more than in a
strict sense can be admitted. Hence it is that some of our first Reformers (the
more to exaggerate the opinion of the Papists of the necessity of good works)
have used such harsh expressions, which are so liable to just Exception; as,
that it is the first and the last, the worst and most damnable Heresy that ever
was on Earth, To teach that good Works are necessary to Salvation; and that
good Works are so far from conducing to Salvation, that they are rather
pernicious. When men will take such liberty to themselves in expressing their
minds, they subject themselves to great prejudices; but perhaps, if they were
to explain themselves in these things, they might be found to have a tolerable
meaning in them. It is too well known, what differences there have been betwixt
the Lutherans and Calvinists about the Real Presence of Christ in the
Sacrament. Yet about 160 years ago, when diverse Learned men of both Parties met
to confer about it, upon explaining their minds to each other in a calm and
peaceable way, they were so fully agreed and satisfied, that they embraced each
other as Brethren, and so parted. So that the differences among Christians are
not always from Error of Judgment, but a Strife of Words, through their unhappy
expressing themselves, and mistaking each others minds.

There is another thing which I have observed to be an occasion of many
disputes amongst us, and that is the use of School-terms, or terms of Art,
which indeed are very compendious, and set off men's conceptions in few words,
which would otherwise require a large circumlocution or compass of Speech. Yet
they have this inconvenience, while men would be brief, they many times prove
obscure; and as Abbreviations in writing (which were more used, as is most
likely, before Printing, when they were forced to write all) have occasioned
many errors, and multiplied various readings: so Abbreviations in speaking,
have multiplied Controversies, and more time has been spent about the meaning
of some terms of Art, or School-distinctions, than would have been necessary to
have expressed the same thing in many more words. Therefore it is rightly
observed by the Lord Verulam, and other Learned men, that the Volumes of the
Schoolmen are greater much than the first writings of the Fathers, from whence
the Master of the Sentences made his first Collection. For while they purpose
to abridge, they give cause to dilate. For the sum or abridgment by contraction
becomes obscure, the obscurity requries Exposition, and the Exposition is
deduced into large Commentaries, which grow to be more vast than the Original
Writings, from whence the sum was first extracted. And whosoever shall look
into Polemical Writings, shall find that a great part of them is taken up about
strife of words, and many of their questions about second notions, or fitting
School-terms to matters of Religion. Hence it is that Philosophy is made such a
necessary Handmaid to Divinity; as of old they would sometimes appeal to the
Heathen Philosophers in their Theological Disputations, because their questions
were about such terms as had been brought out of their Schools into Divinity.
And hereby they do (in a manner) keep the ordinary sort of Christians in
ignorance of many things, by involving them in School-terms: as others do by
locking them up in an unknown Tongue; even those Learned men from whose
Writings (as I have observed) the Sentences (which are the Text on which the
Schoolmen Comment) were first Collected, would be as much put to it to
understand their Writings, as they would be to understand the Language now
spoken in Italy, after it has suffered such changes through the concourse of
so many people to Rome, but especially through the Invasions of several
Nations. There are many things made unintelligible to ordinary persons, which
if divested of those terms of Art wherewith they are disguised, and clothed in
our ordinary Language, would be plain to all. Every one knows what it is to
ease Pain, to expel Wind, to cause Sleep, to provoke Sweat; but they know not
what is Anodyne, or Narcotick; what is Carminative, Hypnotick, Diaphoretick.
Those that well understand what is Red, or Blue, or Black, or Green, do not
know the meaning of Gules, or Azure, or Sable, or Vert. So in Religion, many
things that are plain, are made obscure by the terms that they are expressed
in. But if we see plainly that persons are in an error, let us not exaggerate
or aggravate their fault, as they do the Crimes of Malefactors in drawing up
their Indictments: as if every thing that they are charged with, were done
Feloniously, Traitorously, Maliciously, of Set-purpose, out of a wicked
intention; we should be cautious of charging every one with rebelling against
the light, Job 24.13. Tit. 3.11.
or as being condemned of himself, that has means which we think sufficient to
convince him. We can hardly imagine what influence the course of men's studies,
the company that they converse with, their prejudices, and interest, have upon
their judgments. Who knows the power of Interest? A gift blinds the wise, Exodus
23.8. Prove. 18.16.
and perverts the words of the righteous. It is more to blind the eyes, than to
pervert the Will, or sway the Affections. But it first commends a man to the
favor of another, and then it determines his mind to the study or
consideration of such things as do (unawares) beguile him into a good opinion
of his Cause, so as he pronounces sentence in favor of him. So Interest sways
men's studies, and chooses their company, and these insensibly determine their
judgments. Again, it should not seem strange to us if we do not see all men
rise up to some Learned men, which we think have so clearly demonstrated
things, that nothing can be further objected against them, nor any further
doubt made of them. For there are many that are not easily determined in their
judgments by the Writings of Learned men; while they consider, that such
persons may be (and often are) influenced by their Interest and Affections,
(which do easily beguiie their judgments) to say what they can, and can say
almost what they please. Simon Churmay at Paris, 1201.
As one that had made a Learned Discourse about the Trinity (for which he was
much commended and admired) said, he had much confirmed and advanced the truth
of Christ; but if he were minded to deal crosly, he knew how with stronger
Reasons and Arguments to confute the same. And a very Learned man (known to
many that are yet living) told one (who related it to me) that he could write a
Book as big as Suarez his Metaphysics, to prove a Deity, and then write
another as big to refute it. These things considered, would incline us to more
mutual forbearance, and Charity. Many that we look upon as erroneous (if we did
rightly understand them) might (perhaps) be found to be of our mind, and to
think the same things with our selves. Others that do err, yet (as one said)
will not be Heretics; that is, will not persist in their error, if they be
convinced of it: which it is not so easy a matter as many imagine to be; as
Augustine said to the Manichees, They rage against you, that know not with how
great labor the truth is found out, and with how great difficulty errors are
avoided. God has left many things in his word clear and plain wherein most
Christians do consent: but other things for the exercise of our diligence, and
mutual forbearance, in this state of Imperfection wherein we see but in part.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THE Introduction and Explication of the words. CHAP. II. What it is to
believe in God and Christ; why we are to believe in Christ as well as in God.
That Faith is the most Effectual Remedy against Troubles, because it is the
means of obtaining Pardon. CHAP. III. What pardon of sin is; How it is obtained
by Faith. Reasons why Justification and Salvation are suspended on believing.
The benefit of pardon of sin. CHAP. IV. What Assurance we have of pardon of sin
by Faith; how far Faith is attended with Assurance, and how it may be sometimes
without it. How Assuranc is lost. Objections against getting and maintaining it
by marks, answered. Why so rare a thing now. Not easy to be had, nor
impossible. Of the Immediate Testimony of the Spirit. The Spirits witnessing
with, or to our spirits, what? Of the sealing and earnest of the Spirit. CHAP.
V. General Observations to help men in the trial of their spiritual State.
Harder for some to know it, than for others. Men may at some times seem better
or worse than they are; respect must be had to natural temper, and to men's
Circumstances. CHAP. VI. How Christians that are sincere may be known from
others, tho they have their sinful infirmities. CHAP. VII. Some Characters
whereby to know our spiritual state. CHAP. VIII. Faith, an Effectual Remedy
against Troubles; because thereby we have the Comfort and Benefit of the
Promises. How we have it by Faith. CHAP. IX. Faith, an Effectual Remedy against
Troubles; because it gives us a view of the future state. CHAP. X. What is
required in order to believing. Nothing that may commend us to Christ for his
acceptance. Nothing to make the Grace of God effectual; yet something is
necessary, and what is so. Whether Preparations are in our our own power? What
God does toward Conversion. Of being rightly and sufficiently, and long enough
humbled. CHAP. XI. Of the necessity of Holiness on many accounts.
ERRATA.
Page 2. l. 12. for as r. us. p 23. l. 1. blot out the 2 d. and p 42. for
pleaded r. placed. p. 73. l 8. blot out and. p. 77. l. 25. for and r. so. p.
83. l. 28. r. Doctis. p. 89. l. 29. r Politian. p. 94. l 25. blot out he. p.
117. l. 4. for ecstasy r. excess. p. 119. l. 12. r. nearer. l. 28. for helps r.
hope p. 125. l. 16. for were r. are. There are some other literal faults which
the Reader may easily see to be the mistake of the Printer.

Books Printed for, and Sold by Thomas Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the
Poultrey, near Stocks Market.
A Seasonable Discourse, wherein is examined what is lawful, during the
Confusions and Revolutions of Government. Stitch. Geography Rectified; or a
Description of the World in all its Kingdoms, Provinces, Countries, Islands,
Cities, Towns, Seas, Rivers, Bays, Capes, Names, Inhabitants, Scituations,
Histories, Customs, Commodities, Government. Illustrated with about 80 Maps.
Third Edition. By Robert Morden. Quarto. Instructions about Heart-Work, what is
to be done on God's part and on ours, for the cure and keeping of the Heart,
etc. by that Eminent Gospel-Minister, Mr. Richard Allcyn. With a Preface by Dr.
Annesley. Second Edition. Octavo. The Evidence of things not seen; Or diverse
Spiritual and Philosophical Discourses, concerning the state of Holy Men after
Death: By that eminently Learned Divine, Moses Amyraldus. Translated out of the
French Tongue by a Minister of the Church of England. Octav. A Succinct and
Seasonable Discourse of the Occasions, Causes, Natures, Rise, Growth and
Remedies of Mental Errors. To which is added, (1.) An Answer to Mr. Carry
against Infant Baptism. (2.) An Answer to some Antinomian Errors. (3.) A Sermon
about Union. By John Flavel. Octavo. A Discourse of Christian Religion in
sundry points; Preached at the Merchants Lecture. By Tho. Cole. Octavo. A
Discourse concerning Liturgies, by the late Learned Divine Mr. Dav. Clerkson.
Octav. A Discourse concerning trouble of Mind, and the disease of Melancholy,
in three parts; written for the use of such as are or have been exercised by
the same; by Tim. Rogers. M. A. who was long afflicted with both. To which is
added some Letters from several Divines, relating to the same subject.
Geography Anatomized: Or a complete Geographical Grammar, being a short and
exact Analysis of the whole Body of Modern Geography, after a new, plain and
easy method, whereby any person may in a short time attain to the knowledge of
that most noble and useful Science: Illustrated with diverse Maps. By Patrick
Gordon. Octavo. Love to Christ, necessary for all to escape the Curse at his
coming, by Tho. Doolittle, M. A. Octavo. An Exposition of the Assemblies
shorter Catechism, with Practical Inferences from each Question; by John
Flavel, late Minister of the Gospel at Dartmouth in Devon. Octav. A Discourse
of secret Prayer, first Preached, and now published at the request of those
that heard it. By Sam. Slater Minister of the Gospel. Twelves. The Future
State; or a Discourse attempting some display of the Souls Happiness, in regard
to that eternally progressive knowledge, or eternal increase of knowledge, and
the consequences of it, which is among the blessed in Heaven; by a Country
Gentleman, a Worshipper of God in the way of the Church of England. Twelves.
The incomprehensibleness of Imputed Righteousness for Justification by Humane
Reason, till enlightened by the Spirit of God, in two Sermons, preached at the
Merchants Lecture in Broadstreet. By Tho Cole. Octavo. The Almost Christian, by
Ezekiel Hopkins, late Lord Bishop of Londonderry. Twelves.
A REMEDY AGAINST TROUBLE.
JOHN XIV. 1. Let not your heart be troubled; ye believe in God, believe also
in me.
CHAP. I.
THE design of Christ in these Words, is either to prepare his Disciples for
receiving what he had to say to them in this his last Sermon before his Death;
For sorrow had filled their hearts. John 16.6.
And till that is allayed men are unfit to receive Counsel. Therefore Job's
Friends staid some time till his grief was assuaged, when they saw it great
upon him, before they would speak to him. Job 2.13.
Or as Learned Men first lay down their Thesis, which they are to prove, and
when they have proved it, resume it again, as the Wiseman does. So here he
charges them, Eccl. 1.2. Chap. 12.8.
that they should not let their Hearts be troubled (those things affect as much
that reach the Heart either with Grief or Joy, John 16.22.); when therefore he
had prescribed Remedies against this Trouble, he concludes his Discourse to his
Disciples with the same in effect, telling them, that he spoke these things to
them, that they might have Peace in him, tho they had Tribulation in the World.
And as he there warns them that they should have Trouble in the World; so in
the close of the Chapter, before these words that I have recited, he forewarns
them of what should happen to them; yet here charges them that they should not
let their hearts be troubled. So that we may hence observe, That Christ would
not have his People too much lay to heart the Troubles and Discouragements that
they meet with in the World. Christ does not deal with his Hearers, as the
false Prophets of old used to do, seeing for them foolish visions, and causes
of banishment: Lam. 2.14. Jer. 8.11.
Healing their hurt slightly, saying, peace, peace, when there was no peace. Or
as Physicians of no value, that give Anodines to allay Pain, but do not take
away the Cause of it, or make their Patients believe the worst is over, and
that their Disease is declining, before it be come to its state; but he gives
strong Consolation, Heb. 6.18 Cant. 7.9.
such as will cause the lips of those that are asleep to speak; such as will
support the Soul under the greatest Troubles, or supposing the worst that can
happen. Christ does in the Scriptures deal faithfully with us, not flattering
us into vain hopes of Peace and Prosperity; but supposing the utmost that may
befall us, provides sufficiently against it. As when the Apostle would comfort
the Romans against Afflictions, he grants the worst, Romans 8.36, 37.
telling them how it had been with Good men in former times (and so what they
must look for) That for Gods sake they had been killed all the day long, and
appointed as sheep to the slaughter; and yet they were not only Conquerors, but
more than conquerors in all these things, through him that loved them, Phil.
4.13.
that is, through Christ strengthening them. We are Conquerors when we get the
Victory so far, as not to be foiled by Temptations. As Sulpitius Severus, an
Ancient Historian, says, Ad Annum 303. We never overcame with greater Triumph,
than when we could not be overcome with Ten Years Slaughter, which was the last
of the Ten Primitive Persecutions under Dioclesian. But we are more than
Conquerors, when we rejoice in our Sufferings; Acts 5.41. Col. 1.11, 24. 2 Cor.
4.17. Phil. 1.12. Psalm 68.10.
When our Sufferings enhance our future Happiness; working for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of Glory; and turn to the furtherance of the
Gospel: This is to lead captivity captive. Now our Savior does forewarn them
of several things which seem to be just cause of trouble, yet he would not have
them let their hearts be troubled. John 15.19.
He had chosen them out of the World, and thereby exposed them to the hatred of
the World. Now, while he was with them, he was (as is said of Job) continually
strengthening them by his Words, feeding them by Miracles when there was
occasion; so that they lacked nothing while he was with them. Luke 22.35.
The Jews would sometimes assault him with captious Questions, but he
confounded them so, as they durst ask him no more. Luke 20.40. John 7.44.
When they came to take him, they went a way, and nonedurst lay hands on him.
But when he was gone, they were left alone, and had none to stand by them; yea,
they thought their Hopes were gone, and they were disappointed in them.
Besides, Luke 24.21.
it could not but be a great trouble to them, that their Master should be
injuriously and shamefully entreated, when it was so great a Provocation to
them, to see him so slighted by the Samaritans; and then, Luke 9.54.
that one of them should betray him, the rest forsake him, and Peter himself
deny him. Judas was one of their Society, and they suspected him as little as
they did themselves; and tho he were a Son of Perdition, they might be grieved
for him, as Samuel was for Saul. And besides, 1 Samuel 15.35.
when they saw Judas betray him, and Peter deny him, they might not know what
they should do themselves: It was time for them that stood, to take heed lest
they should fall. 1 Cor. 10.12.
And that which would further aggravate their trouble, was, that they looked
for a Temporal Kingdom here on Earth, and could not endure to think of the
Cross; and would have had Christ to spare himself. Matthew. 16.22.
Now, after all this, it may seem hard that Christ should lay this Charge upon
them, that they should not let their hearts be troubled. They might think that
they ought to be troubled for these things; yea, that they could not but be
troubled for them. Heb. 12.5. Jer. 5.3. Isaiah 42.24, 25.
For we should not despise the chastening of the Lord, as we should not faint
when we are rebuked of him; We should take heed of both extremes. It was the
Sin of the Jews, that when God smote them, they were not grieved, and that they
did not lay his Judgment to heart: 1 Pet. 5.6. John 11.33.
We ought to humble our selves under his mighty hand: And we find that Christ
himself was troubled at the death of Lazarus.

Now to all this I answer, That we should not suffer our selves to be
transported by any Passion, neither should Sorrow too much affect our hearts;
but as it is said of Christ in the place now mentioned, He troubled himself,
(So it is in the Margent, according to the Greek) we should in our Passions be
not only Passive, but Active, ruling our own spirits, Prove. 16.32.
letting them out only so far as the matter requires; as it is said of Lot, 2
Pet. 2.8.
That he vexed his righteous soul. We use to say of Fire and Water, they are
good Servants if they be kept within their bounds; but they are bad Masters
when they exceed their limits. We may say the same of our Passions; we may
yield so far to sorrow as to ballast the mind therewith, and keep it steady, so
it will make the heart better. Eccl. 7.3.
But we must not so far give way thereto, as to overburden our spirits
therewith, so as to sink them, 2 Cor. 2.7. Psalm. 102. Prove. 15.13. Psalm. 77.4.
Job 2.13. Neh. 8.10. Job 15.11.
or overwhelm them; so as to break our spirits; so as to make us unfit for
Prayer, or incapable of Counsel; nor so as to weaken our hands in the Lords
works; nor so as to slight his consolations, or to give others occasion to
think that we have low thoughts of God, as if we could not satisfy our selves
with him, and his Favor (as David did in his Troubles, Psalm 63.3, 4.) without
the Addition of outward Comforts. 1 Samuel 1.8.
As Elkanah took it ill, that Hannah could not content her self with him, as
better than Ten Sons. Joab looked upon it in David, as a slighting of his
faithful Subjects, 2 Samuel 19.6.
when he was so out of measure troubled for the loss of Absalom.

For the Second Objection, That they are things of that nature which he had
forewarned them of, that they could not but be troubled at them.

I answer, That as Christ would not deceive his Disciples with vain hopes, but
tells them the worst beforehand: So he provides a sufficient Remedy against
the Troubles which he forewarns them of. He does not, as some that take upon
them to confute some dangerous Errors, when their Arguments are weak, and not
satisfactory, and so they do more hurt than good, while reciting such Errors,
they publish them to the World without a sufficient Answer, not sufficiently
fortifying persons against them. But as Christ told them such things as filled
their hearts with sorrow, so he provides Consolations for them answerable
thereto; as he does ordinarily proportion the Consolations of his People, 2
Cor. 1.5.
to their Tribulations. He does indeed in this and the following Chapters,
propound particular Remedies against those several Troubles which he had warned
them against: But the great Catholicon or General Remedy which he recommends to
them, is Faith in God, and in Jesus Christ. Ye believe in God, believe also in
me; which words are not only an opposite Command to what he warns them against
(as that of Christ to Thomas, John 20.27. be not faithless, but believing); but
also a means to prevent Trouble of Mind.

Some question how these words should be read, because the Greek word is the
same in both places, and may be taken either indicatively (as they speak) or
imperatively; that is, either declaring what they already did, or requiring
what they should do. So that some read them, Ye believe in God, ye believe also
in me. Therefore they should not let their hearts be troubled, Matthew. 1 16.
as indeed they had professed their Faith not only in God, but in Jesus Christ.

Others again read them both as a Command to believe in God, and to believe in
Christ; because they think it is not likely that he should commend them for
their Faith, or acknowledge that they did believe, when he blames them so often
for their unbelief, as Matthew. 6.30. and 14.31. Mark 2.40. But when there is
Faith, and that to a good degree, it may fail for a time under Temptation, as
Abraham did (tho he was the Father of the Faithful) both in Egypt, and in
Gerar. Genesis 12.13. Genesis 20.2. John 14.9. Heb. 1.9.


Some read it, Believe in God, and ye believe in me; as Christ tells them, He
that had seen him, had seen the Father; because he was the express Image of his
Person. So, he that did believe in the Father, John 10.30.
did believe also in him, because he and the Father were one.

But I think our Translation does best express our Savior's meaning. They did
not question God's Being or Veracity, but they were required further upon pain
of Damnation to believe on Christ. John 8.24.
And he saw what was like to befall him, would shake their Faith, as indeed it
did, and they were ready to give up their Hopes. John 16.32. Luke 24.21. 1 John
5.13.
So he may here press them still to believe, or to continue so to do; As the
Apostle says, These things have I written to you, that believe on the name of
the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may
believe on the name of the Son of God; that is, may continue still so to do.

What is objected against this Interpretation of the Words, is not
considerable, viz. That it is not likely that the same word should be taken in
two several Senses in one Verse. There is nothing more ordinary than to have
the same words in different Moods in the same Verse (which is the case here) as
Ezekiel. 3.27. He that hears, let him hear; and he that forbears, let him forbear.
So Matthew. 19.12. He that is able to receive it, let him receive it. But it is
more to translate the same words differently in the same place, which yet the
nature of the thing, or the matter in hand does sometime necessarily require,
as John 2.23, 24. many believed in his name, but Jesus committed not himself to
them, or durst not trust them.

CHAP. II.
I Will now proceed to show: 1. What it is to believe in God and Christ. 2. Why
it is here required that we should not only believe in God, but in Jesus
Christ. 3. What an effectual Remedy this is against Trouble of Mind. First, To
believe in God, or on God and Christ (for both these Expressions are frequently
used in the New Testament, as any one in reading may easily observe) is so to
believe God, or Christ, as to trust in him, to rely on him, to stay our selves
on him, Isa. 26.4. Phil. 2.19, 24. 2^ Chron. 13.18.16.7. Isa. 50 10.
to roll our selves on him, as Dr. Hammond expresses it in his Practical
Catechism, Lib. 1. Sect. 3. and before him our Translators of the Bible in the
Margent of Psalm. 22.8. To believe, we know (in its most proper signification)
is to assent to any thing upon the Authority of him that speaks it. Therefore
he that believes not, makes God a Liar: That is, accounts him such by
Interpretation, or deals with him as if he were so. 1 John 5.10.
Whereas on the contrary, he that does believe him, or receive his Testimony,
sets to his Seal (that is, owns and acknowledges) that he is true. John 3.33.
But this is such a Faith as wicked men may have, and not that saving Faith
which the Scripture so often speaks of; but that is a fiducial resting upon
him, for the accomplishment of what he has promised in the way, and upon the
terms whereon he has promised it, and no otherwise. For that would be an
unwarrantable presumption, not properly a believing in him, he having not
promised such things on any other terms.

Now for the further clearing of this, we may observe, that there are Words not
only in Scripture, but in Heathen Authors (many Instances of which I could give
you) which they call pregnant words, which include or comprise some other word
in them. As where it is said, all the People trembled after Saeul, as (you see
in the Margent) the Hebrew word signifies, 1 Samuel 13.7.
which our Translators well render, They followed him trembling. So Joab and
Abiathar helped after Adonijah: That is, following after Adonijah, 1 King 1.7.
helped him. So to wonder after the Beast, is to follow him wondering. Rev.
13.3.
So God heard David from the horns of the Unicorns. Which does not imply, that
God was there when he heard him, as he is said to hear from Heaven his
dewlling place; but to hear him so as to save him from the danger wherein he
was; which is set forth by that Metaphor, as in the foregoing words by the
Lions Mouth. Psalm. 22.21. Heb. 5.7.
As Christ was heard from his Fear, or that which he was afraid of. Neither do
we need to render it as it is in the Margent, for his piety: For the word does
not only signify a religious Awe, or fear of Reverence, but a fear of danger,
as is evident from Acts 23.10. In like manner, God loved the Soul of Hezekiah
from the Pit of Corruption: That is, as our Translators render it, in love to
his Soul, delivered it from the Pit of Corruption. Isa. 38.17. Acts 8.22.
So to repent from wickedness, as the Greek words imply, is so to repent of it,
as to turn from it, or depart from it; and to be corrupted from the simplicity
that is in Christ, is to be corrupted so as to depart from it. 2 Cor. 11.3.


I know some Learned men, observing how the prepositions both in the Hebrew and
Greek are redundant, or superfluous; that is, signify nothing in many places:
They conclude, that to believe in God, or Christ, signifies no more but to
believe them. I answer, that though we must suppose improprieties of speech,
defects, or redundancies where the nature of the thing in hand does necessarily
require it: yet there is no reason why we should so do, when the matter in hand
does not require it, but rather that we should take in such words, or make use
of them.

It is further to be observed, that some words signify a complex act made up of
many particular acts. For example, to Nurse a Child, though it signify in the
strictest sense to nourish or feed it, by giving it meat or milk: yet in the
larger and most ordinary sense it is to take care of it, in all that is
necessary to be done to it. So a Shepherd in most languages has his name from
feeding his Flock; but there is more belongs to it, than giving them Food, or
le^ding them into green Pastures. Psalm. 23.2. 1 Pet. 5.2.
Or if we understand thereby Spiritual Pastors that are to feed the Flock of
God, This signifies not only feeding them with the Doctrine of the word, as 1
Cor 3.2. And as some understand feeding with knowledge and understanding, not
of the manner, but the matter of feeding; Jer. 3.15.
but it comprehends the whole duty of a Shepherd, strengthening the diseased,
healing the sick, binding up that which is broken; bringing again that which is
driven away; seeking that which is lost; Ezekiel. 34.4.
Gathering the Lambs with his arms, carrying them in this bosom, gently leading
those that are with young. So tho Faith (in its most strict and proper sense)
be an Assent to the Truth, Isa. 40.11.
yet it comprehends many other Acts in it, when we speak of a justifying or
saving Faith.

I may further add, That there are some words in Scripture which are not to be
understood their in strict and precise Sense, but presupposing some other
things, and comprehending such things as should or may be presumed to accompany
or follow them. For example, Justification is sometimes ascribed to the
knowledge of Christ, as it is said, by his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many; and therefore does the Apostle so magnify the knowledge of him,
Phil 3.8. accounting all things but loss for the excellency thereof: Isa. 53.11.
But it is not a bare knowledge of him that is of such value and excellency,
but of his Work and Office, what he is, and for what he was sent into the
World; which does suppose what our own estate is, and of what use he is to us;
and such a knowledge of him as puts us upon making use of him for the end for
which he was given to mankind, and came into the World; then do we truly know
him; as we know that we know God when we keep his commands. 1 John 2.3. Tit.
1.16.
Otherwise we do but profess to know him, when in works we deny him. When
Josiah judged the cause of the poor and the needy, and did Judgment and
Justice, this was to know God. Jer. 22.15.16. Joh. 20.31. Acts 8.37. 1 John
5.1. Mark 1.24.
Thus Salvation sometimes seems to be suspended upon our believing that Jesus
is the Christ, the Son of God. But this faith will not save, if it go no
further: For the Devils believe this, as well as that there is but one God. But
as there must be such a knowledge of him supposed, as I have before spoken of;
so it must be such a belief as brings us to him, or makes us come to him, Joh.
6.35, 37. Isa. 45.24.
as having both righteousness and strength in him. This is believing with all
the heart, when we do gladly and willingly apply our selves to him for Grace
and Salvation. For thus to seek to God, Heb. 11.6.
or to Christ, is to come to him; That which is called coming to God, is in the
same verse expounded diligently to seek him; so they say, Jer. 2.31.
We are Lords, we will come no more unto thee. Psalm. 10.4 Joh. 1.12
The wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek after God. So we
must receive Jesus Christ, that is, accept of him for our Savior, submit our
selves to his way and method of Salvation; saying with Paul, Lord what will thou have me to do? Acts. 9.6. Gal. 5.6.
So our Faith must work by love, his readiness and willingness to save us at
the price of his own Blood, 1 John 4.19.
must make us love him who loved us first; And this love will constrain us,
while we judge, that he dying for us when we were dead, we should no more live
to our selves but to him that died for us, 2 Gor. 5.14.15.
and is risen again.

I will endeavor to make this more plain by a similitude. There may be some
Physician in the Country, whom we may reckon our selves happy that we ever knew
or heard of: Though there are many that know of such a person, and perhaps live
near him, yet do not regard him, because he is nothing to them, while they find
themselves well, and see no need of him. But we were sick of a dangerous
disease, which we never heard that any were cured of, till this Physician came
amongst us, but hearing that he cured all that he took in hand, that would
follow his directions: that he was so obliging, that he turned away none that
came to him; that he expected neither see nor present from the poor that had
nothing to give, but cured them Gratis; we chose him for our Physician, applied
our selves to him, followed his Directions, and find already such a change and
alteration in our selves, and so good success, that we resolve to stick to him,
and follow his directions, looking for perfect cure in time from him. This is
our case; Jesus Christ is come into the World to save sinners; many know this,
but are never the better for it, because they not finding themselves sick,
think they need not the Physician, Mat. 9.12. Romans 10.14.
and so never apply themselves to him. But we knowing the miserable condition
wherein we were, think our selves happy that ever we heard tidings of him; for
how should we believe on him of whom we have not heard? But we looked upon it
as worthy of all acceptance, That Christ came into the World to save sinners.
Hereupon we applied our selves to him, 1 Timothy 1.13.
though we had neither price nor present to find acceptance with him; yet did we
not seek his favor, that we might continue in Sin, but that he would save us
from our Sins, and bless us in turning us from our iniquities. Thus we see that
Faith, Mat. 1.21. Acts, 3.26.
or that saving act whereby we are justified and saved, is neither a bare
notional knowledge, nor a barren dead Faith, but such a belief of the Gospel,
as does suppose our miserable estate by nature, as brings us to Jesus Christ as
our only Savior, not only for pardon of sin, so as we may avoid the wrath to
come; but for entire and complete Salvation, Romans 6.14.
so as iniquity may not have dominion over us: but that we may be freed from
the bondage of it, and so redeemed from it, as to be a peculiar people to God,
zealous of good works. Tit. 2.14.
I shall have occasion to add something afterward which may more fully clear
up this point, and so shall at present proceed to the second thing which I
propounded to speak of, viz.

Why we are to believe in Christ as well as in God.

First, If we consider Christ as God, of the same Essence with the Father, Joh.
5.23. Joh. 10.30.
so we are to honor the Son as we honor the Father; for so he and the Father
are one. But if we consider him as Mediator, so we are to believe in him as the
immediate object of our Faith, and by him to believe in God. 1 Pet. 1.23. Joh.
17.3.
As the knowledge of Christ must be superadded to the knowledge of God for
obtaining Eternal Life; so Faith in Christ must be joined with our Faith in
God. We must come to God by him. Heb. 7.25.
None can come to the Son but by the Father, that is, Joh 6.44. Joh 14.6.
by his grace drawing them. But none can come to the Father but by the Son.
That is they must have access to the Father through his mediation. As the
Tyrians made Blastus their Friend when they came to desire Peace of Herod; Acts
12.20.
So if we would have Peace with God, we must have access to him by Jesus
Christ, it is he that must bring us to God. Romans 5.2. Ephesians 2.18. 1 Pet. 3.18.
Ephesians. 1.6.
We must first by Faith come to Christ, and he must introduce us to God, that
we may find acceptance with him. The Jews were so terrified at the giving of
the Law, that they were afraid of having to do any more immediately with God,
and therefore desired that Moses might come betwixt God and them. Exodus 20.19.
Now as the Athenians had an obscure notion of an unknown God, but the Apostle
declared to them him whom they ignorantly worshipped; Acts 17.23.
so here the Jews had some Conviction of the necessity of a Mediator, and they
pitched on Moses as the fittest person for it that they could think of: But God
answered to the ground of their desire, Deuteronomy. 18.15, etc. Ephesians. 3.20.
and promises them a Mediator (which they could never have thought of) that was
fit for that Office, doing for them above what they could ask or think. As God
does does many times in answering the Prayers of his people, grant the thing
which they desire, but not in such a way, or by such means as they might think
of, but by some more proper way or means which his wisdom finds out.

But further; before the Incarnation of Christ, they were to believe in the
Messiah to come; but now that he was come, and had given sufficient proof that
he was the promised Messiah, by doing these works which never any man did, they
were to determine their Faith on him in particular, Joh. 15.22. Joh. 8.24.
or dye in their Sins.

But he does likewise press this upon them, because he foresaw what
discouragements they were like to meet with, and how likely their Faith was to
be shaken in this particular. 1 Cor. 1.23.
A crucified Christ was a stumbling block to the Jews, and to the Greeks
foolishness. The Jews thought that the Messiah when he came, should abide for
ever; John 12.34.
therefore his Disciples when they saw his Death, gave up their hopes. Luke
24.20.
And the Greeks looked upon it as an absurd ridiculous thing, to believe in a
Crucified Person, and worship one as God that died the most Infamous death of
men. Therefore it was needful to caution them against such a Temptation, by
encouraging them still to believe on him, though he did leave them, and by such
an infamous Death; And does after his Resurrection upbraid them for their folly
in being so slow of heart to believe, because this was but according to what
the Scripture had foretold, that he must suffer before he entered into his
glory. Luke 24.26.
The Scripture was to be fulfilled in some thing which did not seem in
themselves so necessary, as the parting of Christ's Raiment and not breaking
his bones. Joh. 19.24, 35.
But But as we speak of some things that are necessary, not only by virtue of a
Command, or because they are required, but as a mean in order to an end: So the
Scripture was to be fulfilled in this, not only to save its veracity, or that
it might not be broken; Joh. 10.35. Heb. 2.10.
but in order to the bringing of his people to glory. For he had continued
alone, if he had not died and been buried, Joh. 12.24.
and would not have had such a numerous seed. As a Grain of Wheat if it die in
the earth, that is, corrupts, and spears, and brings forth much fruit,
otherwise it abides alone: Gal. 3.13.
So Christ was to be made perfect through suffering, and was to become a Curse
for us that he might deliver us from the Curse. So that they were still to
believe in him, notwithstanding all seeming discouragements.

Indeed we are ready to be troubled at many things which if well considered may
rather encourage our hopes. The Sense which we have of our own vileness and
unworthiness, and the conflict which we find in our own Souls, do many times
discourage us, as if it were not for such to come to Christ: Whereas the former
should (as the Law) be our Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ. The greater our
Sin is, the more need we have of pardon. Psalm. 25.10.
We may plead the greatness of our Sin, as an argument for the pardon of it,
and the pardon of great Sinners will best answer God's end in the Pardon of
Sin. Ephesians. 2.7.
Therefore this is the best qualification to fit us for Christ, which is not to
make him willing to accept of us, but to make us willing to accept of him; He
must not find us new Creatures, but make us such. Ephesians. 2.10.
And the conflict which we find in us (as it may be) is an evidence that there
is in us a Principle of Spiritual Life, resisting our natural corruption.

I now shall show you that Faith is the most effectual remedy against trouble.
The Apostle prays that the Romans may be filled with all joy and peace in
believing. Romans 15.13.
That is, that they might abound with the greatest measure thereof, as this
expression in Scripture frequently signifies, not all sorts or kinds of any
thing, but an high degree of any thing in its kind. So all Faith and all
knowledge, 1 Cor. 13.2.
are not all kinds of Faith, but the greatest measure or degree of that Faith
which he there speaks of, that is the Faith of Miracles: Or of such knowledge
as he there treats of: In like manner we are to understand all Wisdom. So by
believing we are not only kept in perfect Peace, Col. 1.9.3, 16.
but rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory. Joy is more than Peace,
Isa. 26.3. 1 Pet. 1.8. Psalm. 34.2. Psalm. 43.4.
we may thereby not only have our minds quieted and composed, but may make our
Boast of God, and with David call him our exceeding joy.

I will first give you some general Proofs that it is so, and then show you how
it is so. We find in the Old Testament that this was the chief remedy that the
People of God did in all their troubles betake themselves to; not only by what
virtue the Apostle ascribes to their Faith, Heb. 11.
but by the frequent use which David makes thereof when at any time he was in
any fear or trouble; when fear was on every side; Psalm 31.13, 14. Psalm 42.11.
while men took counsel together to take away his Life, he trusted in God, and
stirs up himself to this when he was cast down or disquieted. And what time he
was afraid, that is whenever he was so, he would trust in God. Psalm 56.3.
And whereas it may seem to some, that this does not so well agree with what he
says of the righteous man, Psalm. 111.7.
That he shall not be afraid of any evil tidings, his heart being fixed,
trusting in the Lord: These places show, that tho good men may unavoidably be
surprised with sudden fear, yet Faith is the way to cure it. We see by
experience, that there are some sudden motions of the affections, which prevent
all reasonings of the Mind. As we sometime start at what we do unawares hear or
see, but our fear is over as soon as we can recollect our selves, and either
see that there was no real danger, or secure our selves against it. So when we
apprehend any sudden danger which may alarm our fear, all is quiet when we can
by Faith betake our selves to God as our refuge, or cast all our care upon him.
And as this was the remedy which good men did then betake themselves to; Isaiah
12.2.
so under the New Testament Christ imputes the inordinate cares and fears of
his Disciples to the weakness or want of Faith. So he reproves the weakness of
their Faith when they were too sollicitous about the things of the World, or
the necessaries of this life. Matthew. 6.30.
One would think that it were one of the best uses or advantages of riches, to
free us from sollicitous cares, and that a man might with him in Luke 12.20.
dismiss all further care about these things, when he is richly stored with
them: But we have seen often, that Faith is more effectual for this end, Heb.
13.5.
and that a Promise is better security than a great Estate. So when Peter was
so afraid upon the Water, Christ upbraids him with the weakness of his Faith:
And when they were in a storm, and thereby put into a great fright, Christ asks
them according to one Evangelist, Mark 4.40. Luke 8.25.
How it was that they had not faith? and according to another, Where their
Faith was? they had it not actually at that time. As some Philosophers make
Knowledge to consist in Remembrance, as if that were not to be accounted
Knowledge which is only habitual, and not ctual. However tho they had Faith,
yet they had it to seek, as a Workman that when he should use a tool, it is
laid out of the way, and so at present wants the benefit of it. As a man that
is ready to faint, and may have a Cordial in his Closet, yet if it be not at
hand when he should use it, he may fall into a swoon if he do not take it.

I will now show more particularly how Faith is such an effectual remedy
against trouble of mind; and the chief reason thereof is, Because thereby we
have our sins pardoned. As sin is the Sting of Death, so it is also of every
affliction; therefore he is a Blessed man whose iniquities are forgiven. Psalm
32.1.


CHAP. III.
NOw for the more full clearing of this Point, I will, first, show you what
pardon of sin is. 2. How this is obtained by Faith. 3. How great a privilege
and happiness it is. Remission or forgiveness of sin is in its most ordinary
sense, freeing or exempting the sinner from the punishment of it. and sometimes
it has respect only to the temporal punishment; so God forgave the Israelites
in the wilderness when he did not punish them. Number. 14.19.
So it is said God would not pardon the Innocent Blood which Manasses shed, tho
it is supposed the Eternal punishment of it was remitted. 2 Kings 24.4. Matthew.
6.14. Ephesians. 4.32. 1 Kings 8.34. and 39.50. Amos 7.2.
In this respect we must forgive each other; in this sense we pray for the
forgiveness of the sins of a Nation; and no doubt in this sense those that are
in a state of Grace may pray daily for Pardon of sin. Though I doubt not but men
that are already justified may pray for the pardon of sin in the most proper
sense, as Christ by one Sacrifice perfecting for ever those that are
sanctified, Heb. 10.14.
does not prevent his intercession, or make that unnecessary: So neither does
our full discharge from the guilt of all our sins, discharge us from praying
daily for the forgiveness of them. When we are in the fullest possession of the
greatest abundance of the things of this Life, we are to pray for our daily
bread, that is, not only for the blessing and comfort, but for the continuance
of them. So though our sins be pardoned when we first believe, we may pray daily
for the continuance of the virtue and efficacy of the Blood of Christ upon our
consciences, for the continuance of our peace with God. But that remission of
sins which we have by Jesus Christ, is the discharging us from the eternal
punishment, and is the same thing in effect with justification. Acts 13.38, 39.
In the former verse the Apostle says, Through Christ is preached forgiveness
of sins; in the latter, that whoever believes on him, is justified. Not that
justification and forgiveness of sins are the same thing in the precise notion
of them; but where many say, that they are the same thing, they only intend
thereby to exclude that sense of the Word justifying, in which the Papists
sometimes take it, viz. for making righteous by Renovation, Sanctification, or
infusion of new habits. But there may be justification where there is not
Pardon of sin, when a person is acquitted or declared free from that which he
was suspected of, or charged with: So not only a righteous man may be
justified, but God himself. Deuteronomy. 25.1. Luke 7.29. Rom 3.4.
And as there may be justification without Pardon, so Pardon without
justification. I do not mean that actually, or de facto, there is Pardon, or a
remission of the Eternal punishment of sin, where there is not justification:
But we may conceive of a Pardon without justification; as there are some that
acknowledge a Pardon of sin merely out of mercy, without respect to any
satisfaction made to Divine Justice; and tho the Scripture speaks more
frequently of the justification of sinners, than to have it denied; yet they
say that justification is only by a Metonomy taken for pronouncing a sinner
just, and dealing with him as if he were righteous, freeing him from the guilt
and punishment of sin; and bestowing eternal life on him. Whereas in the sense
of the Scripture, to justify is to acquit or discharge a sinner from the guilt
and punishment of sin, upon the Imputation of righteousness to him. Romans 4.6.
But as we must not suppose that God only deals with us as if we were
righteous, which some suppose he might, tho Christ should not be supposed to
have died in our stead, or have born our sin: yea, tho he had not died at all.
So on the other hand, we must not imagine that God in imputing righteousness to
sinners, does think or suppose that they have not sinned, or have satisfied the
Law for their sin. Imputation does not imply any such thing. When Shimei
desires that David would not impute iniquity to him, 2 Samuel 19 19.
we cannot suppose that he desires that he would think or make account that he
had not done iniquity, but that he would not charge it upon him, or deal with
him according to it; and where it is said, the Sacrifice of him that should be
eaten on the third day, should not be imputed to him; Lev. 7.18.
the meaning of it is, that he should not have the benefit of it, or be dealt
with according thereto. But to keep the true mean between these, we must
suppose, that God deals thus with us, not imputing our sins to us, in
consideration of what Christ has done for us, or in our stead. Philem. 18.
As where Paul allows Philemon to put Onesimus his wrong or debt (for which it
is like he might be put into the same Prison where Paul was) on his account; as
he would not have him think that it was Paul, and not Onesimus, that had
wronged him; neither would he have him to punish it no more in Onesimus than if
he had not done it, but Paul. But he tells him, and gives it under his hand,
that he would repay it, or satisfy him for it. So God does not only deal with
us as if we were righteous, in remitting our eternal punishment: But he does
this in consideration of what Christ has done and suffered for us: He having
laid upon him the iniquities of us all. Isaiah 53.6. Gal. 3.13.
And God having by his Sovereignty so far dispensed with his Law, as to make
Christ a curse for us, he is now not only merciful and gracious, 1 John 1.9.
but faithful and just to forgive us our sins, he having set him forth to be a
propitiation for our sins, to declare his righteousness, that he might be just,
and a justifier of him that believes in Jesus. Romans 3.25, 26.
It is not only that he may be just, though he justify sinners, or that he may
justify them saving his justice: But it is just with God to justify or acquit
sinners, Christ having born our sins on the Cross, 1 Pet 2.24.
that we through his stripes might be healed.

I come now to show how we are justified by Faith; and that we are justified by
Faith, is evident beyond all contradiction, Gal. 2.16.
from that of the Apostle. Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of
the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ, we have believed in Jesus Christ,
that we might be justified. So that Faith is in order to justification; and the
decree of justification does no more infer our justification from Eternity,
than our glorification; and tho there were a foundation laid for our
justification in the Death of Christ, so as it is certainly future: Yet we are
not actually justified till we believe, but lie under the sentence of
condemnation. John 3.18.
And whatever the value of Christ's Blood might he in respect of the dignity of
his person, who was God as well as Man; yet his merit was not absolute, but
grounded upon an Act of Sovereignty, transferring our guilt to Christ, and his
righteousness to us: And upon the Covenant of Redemption (as many call it)
betwixt the Father and Jesus Christ, about the Salvation of sinners, the sum of
which we have, Isa. 53.10. God might appoint both terms and time of our
participation of the benefits of Christ's Death; and it is evident that our
Salvation is for a long time deferred, and the redemption of our bodies longer.
Why then should it seem strange to any, that our justification should be
deferred till we believe? And for that of justifying the ungodly, Romans 4.5.
it is true of those whom God does justify in a strict sense; for they cannot
plead perfect Obedience. But if we take ungodly in the ordinary sense wherein
it is taken, for an impenitent sinner: it shows what those have been whom he
justifies, such they were; in this sense it is said, 1 Cor. 6.11. Matthew. 11.5.
Matthew. 15.31. Matthew. 21.31.
the deaf hear, and the lame walk, the dumb speak, the blind see, Publicans and
Harlots go into the kingdom of God; and in that very place it is said, their
Faith is imputed to them for righteousness. Which words we need not understand
with the Papists, as if Faith being a work, John 6.29.
That, with other works, were imputed for righteousness: Nor with some
Protestants, by a Metonimy, for Christ (or his righteousness) the object of our
Faith, nor with the Socinians, that (by Acceptilation, as in the Civil Law it
is called, when some small thing is accepted instead of a Debt) Faith is
reckoned instead of perfect righteousness. As for those Protestants that call
Faith our Evangelical Righteousness, as being that which the Gospel requires,
as the Law did perfect obedience; they do not at all symbolize with the
Socinians (who do by their Acceptilation exclude the satisfaction of Christ)
for they hold a legal righteousness to be still necessary, but lying wholly
without us, as being performed by Christ for us, and so do not reckon
Evangelical righteousness to be instead of that righteousness, by, or for which
we are justified, or any part of it; but only a means of our being invested
therewith. But tho I would not, as some do, exagitate the Phrase, or those that
use it, while they thus explain themselves, for (not to say with Jerome,
Sceteratum est) minus Christianum est; cum nonis sensum sanum esse alicujus ex
verbis incommode dictis statuere errorem; yet it is not necessary to make use
of it for the interpretation of this place, there being another plain sense of
it; a thing is imputed to us, when we are dealt with according thereto, as I
have already said. So Faith is imputed to us, when we are dealt with or treated
as believers; and it is imputed to us for righteousness, though not instead of
it, or as the matter of it, but as it is a means of it, in any way whatever; as
it was said before, we have believed, that we might be justified. As it is
said, John Preached the baptism of repentance for remission of sins; Mark. 1.4.
or as Christ is said te be given for a Covenant of the People: not that he
might be a Covenant (as some have rashly expounded it) as if Christ in a strict
literal sense must be all in all. Isa. 42 6.
Whereas it was only that there might be a Covenant with the People; he being
the Surety or Mediator of it. So Faith is reckoned to us, Heb. 7.22.9, 15.
that so we might be righteous, or might be justified, God having suspended our
justification upon that. And it does result from thence (by virtue of the
Gospel Grant) as our guilt does result from our sin by virtue of the Law; tho I
would not be thought to ascribe the same causality to our Faith in
justification, that I do to sin in our Condemnation.

Now God is pleased to suspend our Justification and Salvation particularly
upon our believing.

1st. That we may return to him by the same way whereby we departed from him.
Genesis 3.6.
We fell from God by believing the Devil rather than God; and we are recovered
again, by believing God rather than the Devil, and setting to our seal that God
is true. Jo. 3.33.


2dly, God deals with us as with rational Creatures, and will not force his
favor upon us, but will have us accept of it: Jo. 1.12. Act. 8 37.
and by Faith we receive Christ and his benefits; and this is that believing
with all the heart which is required, when we do freely and heartily embrace
that offer which is made to us in the Gospel; 1 Timothy 1.15. Rom 4.16.
accounting the Gospel worthy of all acceptance.

3dly, It is of Faith, that it might be of Grace; Faith receiving all from God,
as Love gives all to him; so that thereby we give the whole glory of our
Salvation to him.

Now I come to show you what matter of comfort it is, to have our Sins
pardoned. Our Savior bids the sick of the Palsy, be of good cheer, Matthew. 9 2.
because his sins were forgiven. It is true, as Diseases are not always cured
when sins are pardoned. (For that saying, that where sin is pardoned the
punishment is remitted, it does not imply that all suffering is removed where
sin is taken away, but that what persons suffer after pardon of sin, is, not
properly Penal in the sense of the Papists, so as to make up what is behind of
the sufferings of Christ, to satisfy for our sin;) So neither is the removal of
Diseases, or other Afflictions, an evidence of the pardon of sin: but it is
likely Christ speaks not here of Pardon of sin improperly so called, or the
removal only of Temporal punishment, but of pardon in a strict sense; and as
when the King asked life, God gave it him, even length of days for ever and
ever. So Christ, Psalm. 21.4.
who does exceeding abundantly above what we ask or think. Ephesians. 3.20.
when he desired cure for the disease of his body, cured his Soul likewise;
which is a singular favor, and matter of great comfort.

1. It is a comfort in all our Afflictions. It is true afflictions are in
themselves part of the curse, (as death it self is) but a death having lost its
sting, is now ours, for our advantage or gain; so are all afflictions; 1 Cor.
3.22. Phil 1.21. Gen 49 7. Deuteronomy. 33.8. Rom 8.28. 2 Cor 4.17.
and as Levi's curse was turned into a blessing, so are our afflictions,
working together for our good, working for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory, I know some suppose that the merit of Christ being not
absolute (as I said before) the Law was relaxed only so far as was agreed on by
God and our Mediator, and so we were delivered only from everlasting
punishment, and not from temporal: but afflictions still remain properly
punishments. But I think the ordinary notion of Protestants about afflictions,
agrees better with the Scriptures, and so proceeding from love, they are as the
wounds of a friend, Rev. 3.19. Prove. 27.6. Psalm. 141.5.
or rather as the smiting of the righteous, which is not for wounding, but for
healing.

2. We have all our outward comforts hereby sweetened to us; we may eat our
bread with joy, and drink our wine with a merry heart, Eccles. 9.7.
when God accepts our work. There are two things wherein worldly men think they
have the advantage of good men, that is, wisdom and joy. But sure those that
are wise to salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15.
have the advantage of the wise men of the world, 1 Cor. 2 6. Eccles. 2.26.
who with all their wisdom come to naught. God gives to those that are good in
his fight, wisdom, and knowledge, and joy, for getting and using riches, and
comfort in the enjoyment of them. God does not only fill every man's Cup, or
assign him his measure of the things of this life: but he mingles their Cup as
he pleases, mixing it with Sugar, or with Gaul and Wormwood; so that every
condition, and every outward blessing is as God is pleased to make it. And
there is nothing does more sweeten these things to us, than the sense of God's
favor in the pardon of our sins, not only as we value gifts according to the
mind or good will of the giver; but when our sins are pardoned, all the
blessings of this life are but as the provision which Joseph had sent to his
Father, for the way, till he should come to Egypt, where he should have all
the good things of the Land: Genesis 45.18. etc.
whereas the greatest abundance that wicked men have, is but as the handful of
Meal, and Oil in the Cruse, which the Widow and her Son were to eat, and die. 1
King. 14.12.
Or like the Tyrant's Feast, to which he set the man that envied his greatness
and plenty, with a great Sword hanging over his head, in an horses hair, with
the point downward, which took away all the comfort of his Banquet. Israel was
not to rejoice for joy as other People when they had gone a whoring from their
God. Hos. 9.1.
So it is not for those to rejoice, that have not their sins pardoned, but are
subject to bondage continually through the fear of death. Heb. 2.15.


3. We have freedom of access to God; Romans 5.2.
may come with a filial boldness to him (as a Child to a Father) to find mercy,
Heb. 4.16.
and obtain grace to help in time of need, or for seasonable help: when ever we
put up our prayers to God, the answer comes in when it may be most seasonable;
as God heard not (that is, answered not) Abraham when he prayed; but when Lot
was in the greatest danger, whom Abraham seemed to have chief respect to in his
Prayers. Genesis 19.29.
When our sins are pardoned, God may (notwithstanding the strictness of his
Justice, and the severity of his Law) please himself in showing mercy, Mich.
7.18.
which he takes so much delight in.

4. We have the continual Feast of a good Conscience, which will be a rejoicing
to us not only in the time of affliction, 2 Cor. 1.12. Job. 18.14.
but in Death it self, which is so terrible to others. As Christ bids his
Disciples, lift up their heads because their redemption drew nigh, when the
hearts of others failed them, for looking for the things that were coming upon
them. Luc. 21.23, 28.
It is true, a good man's Conscience may accuse him as to some particular acts,
though his sins be pardoned: 2 Samuel 24.10.
as David's did for numbering the people; but there is provision made in such
cases, that every particular sin shall not break the peace betwixt God and us;
1 John 2.1, 2.
but it is not our Conscience accusing us in reference to some particular acts,
but in reference to our spiritual state, that is so terrible and affrighting,
Heb. 10.30.
when we are kept continually in a fearful expectation of judgment and fiery
indignation.

CHAP. IV.
NOW tho this be so great a privilege and happiness, to have our sins pardoned;
if we know it not, we cannot take the comfort of it. Therefore I will further
enquire, what assurance we have thereof by Faith. There is a great complaint
that many, (if not most) of our later Writers and Preachers have deserted the
first Reformers in the Doctrine of Faith; who commonly taught, that it was a
persuasion or confidence of our own Salvation in particular by Christ; and that
every believer in his first believing, was to apply the promise to himself. But
now it is commonly taught, that assurance is not essential to Faith, and that
Christians may live long in the want of it. And this they say does very much
weaken the hands of Christians, there being so many graces to be acted, so many
duties to be performed, so many afflictions to be endured, which do require
Assurance to encourage and enable us thereto. And if those that suffered so
much in the beginning of the Reformation, for the profession of the Truth,
should have had such a Faith as is now ordinarily taught, and not that
Assurance and confidence wherein they then pleaded the Essence of Faith, they
could not have gone so well through their sufferings. Again, they say by this
Doctrine, that men may have Faith without Assurance; we teach men to rest in
such a Faith, and to content themselves without Assurance, and then to plead
their own experience, to confirm their Doctrine, that Christians may believe
sincerely, tho they have not Assurance, tho against the experience of the
People of God both in the Old and New Testament, who did ordinarily profess
their own Assurance of Salvation. Now I will not go about to justify what every
particular person may say, in heat of Disputation, or when they speak of things
which they have only dry notions (but no experimental knowledge) of. But for
our encouraging persons to allow or indulge themselves in the want of
Assurance, by saying that there may be true Faith without it, we think they
have less reason for their complalnt, than those have that say we weaken the
hands of Christians by teaching, that perfection is not necessary to Salvation,
nor attainable in this Life, because Chistians generally concern themselves
more to endeavor after Assurance, than after Perfection, both as it is more
attainable and more necessary to the comfort of their Lives. As for the
profession of the People of God in Scripture, it is not universally true of
them; for as we meet with instances of many triumphing in the assurance of the
love of God, and the hope of future glory; so we do of some under doubts and
terrors; and as Moses wished (in another case) that all the Lord's People were
Prophets; so I wish that all the Lord's People had Assurance: yea, I hope that
if he call them to like sufferings, he will give them like Assurance, as his
People had under theirs formerly; it being his ordinary way to proportion their
Consolations to their Sufferings. 2 Cor. 1.5.
Yea, we ordinarliy teach, not only that Assurance is attainable (without
extraordinary Revelation) but that it is the Duty (as well as the Interest) of
Christians to endeavor after it.

Having premised thus much briefly, I will now proceed to enquire how far Faith
is attended with Assurance, and how it may be sometimes without it. I will not
say, there is a direct Act of Faith, and a reflex Act: I think not the terms so
proper; but I own, what they call the direct Act of Faith, is the most proper
Act of it; and that when a man has believed, or does believe, he may reflect
upon it, and say with him, Mark 6.24.
I believe; and thence he may infer his Interest in the promise of Salvation,
and so have Assurance; which some call Assurance of Faith; and we may call it
so, as it is inferred from our Faith, rather than as it is an act of Faith. The
Scripture speaks of a full assurance of understanding, Col. 2.2.
which is a clear and certain knowledge of Truths. Of a full assurance of hope;
Heb. 6.11. Heb. 10.22.
that is, a certain expectation of Salvation. Of a full assurance of faith.
Now. the Assurance which we are now speaking of, is indeed rather the Assurance
of Hope, than the Assurance of Faith; tho it is indeed grounded on the
Assurance of Faith, wherewith we should draw nigh to God, not only in
particular Acts of Worship, but in our first access to him in Conversion; as
the Prodigal first returned to his Father's House, and when he was received
into it, made his particular Addresses to his Father, as he had occasion. And
this full Assurance is not only such, as that of Abraham, That what God had
promised, Romans 4.21.
he was able also to perform. Nor as that of Sarah, That judged him faithful
that had promised. Heb. 11.11.
So as he will certainly make good his promise according to the true Tenor
thereof, whether we believe or no, he cannot deny himself. 2 Timothy 2.12. Romans
3.3.
And if some do not believe, their unbelief shall not make the faith of God
without effect. It shall be fulfilled to others that do believe. But there is a
further Assurance of Faith (even in the first direct Act thereof) whereby we do
apply the Grace of God to our selves in particular; which is not a believing
that our Sins are already pardoned, or that they shall be pardoned upon our
believing that they are so, but that they shall be pardoned upon our believing,
that is, upon our addressing our selves to God by Jesus Christ, upon our coming
to him, or casting our selves upon God's free Grace in Christ. This is that
boldness and access with confidence which we have by the faith of him; Ephesians.
3.12. Heb. 10.19.
that boldness which we have to enter into the Holiest by the Blood of Jesus.
Boldly adventuring our selves on God's free Grace in Jesus Christ for
Salvation, fleeing for refuge to lay hold on the hope that is set before us,
Heb. 6.18.
in the encouragement of the gracious invitation of the Gospel to all those
that are weary and heavy laden, Matthew. 11.28. Rev. 22.18. John 6.37.
to those that shall desire really the Water of Life, and the promise made to
such. And in confidence of the gracious promise made to all that come to Jesus
Christ, that he will in no wise cast them out. And tho it is true, Ministers in
their preaching do often make use of the example of the Lepers that sat at the
gate of Samaria, 2 Kings 7.3, 4.
who resolved to go into the Host of the Syrians, as the most likely way to
save their lives, because there was no other course that they could take
wherein there was any hopes of it; for if they went into the City, they should
dye there; if they continued where they were, they should dye. So that if there
were the least probability of saving their Lives by going to the Syrians, (this
being the only way which did afford them any hopes) it was the wisest course
they could take. So in this case, there being Salvation in no other, Acts 4.12.
Mark 16.16. John 3.18.
and Unbelievers being under Condemnation; If there were but the least
probability of finding mercy through him, it would be the safest course that
Sinners could take: They would certainly perish if they should not believe in
Christ, and they can but perish if they betake themselves to him. But all this
is spoken, not to discourage the hopes, or weaken the confidence of such as
flee to Christ for refuge (as if it were doubtful whether Christ would show
them mercy, or receive them to favor) but to meet with the Scruples of
Doubting Christians, that fear that Christ may reject them, tho we do not grant
that it may be so, while we have his promise that he will not do it. Yet
suppose such a thing possible, it is acknowledged by all, that we should take
the safest way; so that if there were only a possibility, much more if there be
a probability of Salvation by Christ, and no possibility thereof any other way,
it is certainly the best way for us to betake our selves to him. It is in this
case, as if a Physician should come to a sick Person, and tell him his
Condition is very dangerous, and there is but one Remedy that will save his
Life, but if he will make use of that, he does not doubt of his recovery. The
sick Person is apprehensive enough of his danger, but he has not much
confidence in this Remedy, but doubts whether it will cure him or no. His fears
may be such, and his Melancholy prevail so far, that the Physician can hardly
hope to free him from his fears at present, but may think it an unanswerable
Argument to persuade him to use such a Remedy, that if he do not use it, there
is no way but Death; but if he do use it, he may live. So, when Christians are
under Temptation, and the Power of Melancholy, we may more easily prevail with
them to venture their Souls on Christ for Salvation, tho it should be as they
imagine that Christ may cast them out, than convince them that he will not cast
them out. Yet we stand by it as a certain truth, that those that come to him
weary and heavy laden, shall find rest to their Souls; Acts 10.43.
and that whoever believes on him, shall receive remission of sins. And that in
confidence of this promise of God that cannot lie, Tit. 1.2.
a Sinner may draw nigh to him with full assurance of Faith. And in this
confidence, many are filled with all joy and peace in believing, Romans 15.13.
even in this first direct act of Faith.

But it is observed, That (as we have sometimes seen a clear Morning without
any Cloud, overcast and grow Dark and Gloomy; so) we have seen Clouds to darken
the clearest and brightest Comforts of Christians: And we make various
Conjectures at the reason of it. Sometimes thinking, that as God under the Law
did so far indulge new-married persons, as to exempt them from any business
(for the first year) which might occasion their absence from each other till
their Affections were firmly settled, and till they were well cemented together;
Deuteronomy. 24.5.
so God is pleased to indulge such as are newly betrothed to him, till their
Affections be fixed or knit; but afterward, tho he may retain the same
kindness to them, yet he does not make them fare deliciously every day.
Sometimes we are ready to think, that they have left their first love, and so
God has withdrawn the sense of his Love from them; and several other reasons
may be supposed thereof; but I question not, but the chief reason is, because
they do, as I said at first, flee to Christ for refuge, in confidence of the
Invitation and Promise of the Gospel; and this confidence does for some time
abide with them; but as those that fled from the wrath to come, were to bring
forth fruits meet for repentance; Matthew. 3.8.
so those that have by Faith fled to Christ for refuge, are to bring forth
fruits meet for Faith, or such as may be suitable to Faith in Jesus Christ: And
having a fresh and lively sense of the Love of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.14.
they think this should constrain them, so as they should for the future not
live to themselves, but to him that died for them: And that they should be such
manner of Persons in all Holy Conversation and Godliness, 2 Pet. 3.11.
as that for the future they think they shall live more like Angels than Men,
and that their conversation shall be in heaven. Phil. 3.20.
But we find our selves to fall far short of what we propounded to our selves,
and that there is a law in our members, warring, and rebelling, Romans 7.23.
against the law of our minds, so that we cannot do what we would; and we now
begin to reflect on our Faith, and to consider that there is a dead faith that
profits not; James 2.18, etc.
that there is a temporary Faith, through which a man may for a time receive
the word with joy, Matthew. 13.21. Luke 8.13. Gal. 5.6.
but afterward fall away in time of Temptation. And it is a faith which works
by love, which avails in Christ. And now Doubts and Fears begin to arise in our
hearts, lest we should deceive our selves. And those that require Assurance in
the direct Act of Faith, and that we should renew such Acts of Faith, tho we
are solicited by Doubts, yet acknowledge that Assurance will not continue
without the trial of our Faith by the inseparable Properties of a true Saving
Faith; and that we must examine the fruits of our Faith, and try whether we can
show our Faith by our Works, that we may be sure not to be deceived in our
Judgment concerning it. Now this does well agree with what the Scripture
teaches concerning Assurance, where the Apostle speaks of giving all diligence
(that is, the greatest diligence) to make our calling and election sure. He
does not mean, 2 Peter 1.10.
that this should be the immediate matter of our Care and Diligence; but having
exhorted them in the first Verse, to give all diligence to add one Grace to
another, and one degree of Grace to another, that they might not be barren or
unfruitful in the Knowledge of Jesus Christ; in this Verse he enforces the same
Exhortation, they should the rather give diligence to make their calling and
election sure; that is, to the end that they might hereby make them sure; our
calling first, and thereby our Election. Tho the Thunder be before the
Lightning, yet the Lightning gives notice of the Thunder. So, tho our Election
be from before the foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1.4.
yet we have first notice of it by our Calling. I know some do interpret that
place otherwise than Protestants do ordinarily interpret it: because, supposing
the word which is rendered to make sure, is rather to make firm, than to make
evident: And looking upon Election as conditional, or suspended on something to
be performed by us; they reckon that it becomes absolute, and so sure to us
upon our diligence. But as we are not chosen if we be holy, Ephesians 1.4
but that we may be holy; so the word here used, does not only signify making a
thing firm, Heb. 9.17. Mark 16.20. Heb. 2.3, 4.
but evident, or giving evidence of the truth of it. And whereas they say, our
calling is a thing so evident, there needs no such diligence for the making of
that sure. I answer, If our Calling were nothing, but making us Christians by
outward Profession, it might be easily known; but this is not the Calling that
will prove our Election: Matthew. 20.16.
For there are but few chosen of those that are thus called. But there is
another Calling spoken of in Scripture, which is termed Effectual Calling,
because men hearken to that Calling, and come in at it; and this is inseparable
from Predestination, Justification, Romans 8.20.
and Glorification. And it requires much diligence to know this. So if we would
have full assurance of Hope, or a confidence of future Glory, it must be by
diligence, and following those who through faith and patience have inherited
the promises. Heb. 6.11, 12.
For those words in the close of the Verse, may either be referred to our
showing the same diligence, or to the words, the full assurance of Hope; we
must persevere in our diligence, if we would maintain the assurance of our
Hope. We do not say as the Papists, (at least, in their sense) that Faith is
necessary to the beginning of our Justification, but Works to the continuance
of it; for they suppose, that they that are once justified, may cease so to be,
and fall again under Condemnation. But we may justly say, That tho the
beginning of our Assurance be from Faith in the direct act of it, yet the
continuance of it must be from Works; for we shall have too much ground to
suspect that our Faith is not an unfeigned Faith, 1 Timothy 1.5. 2 Timothy 1 5. Tit.
1.1.
or the Faith of Gods elect, if it do not work by love.

It is further evident, That Assurance must be maintained by Reflection, or
Self-Examination, because the Apostle makes that to be the scope of his
Epistle, That those who believe on the name of the Son of God, may know that
they have eternal life; 1 John 5.13.
and may still believe, or be confirmed in their Faith. If any doubt what those
things are that he refers to; doubtless, they are not the things immediately
going before, but the Epistle in general: In several places of which he shows
what does evidence a state of Salvation, and what is inconsistent therewith, as
Chapter 1.6, 7. Chapter 2.3, 15. Chapter 3.14. Chapter 5.1, 4.

Now, after all this, some are unsatisfied with this way of attaining
Assurance, or rather maintaining it, as being neither satisfactory nor
necessary; and it seems to found our Assurance and Comfort on something in our
selves. For this last Objection, (to dispatch it in few words) As fruit, tho it
grow from the Root, yet grows upon the Branches; so tho all our Hope and
Comfort be originally from the Grace of God, yet this manifesting it self in
its effects, we may comfort our selves in what God has wrought in our selves,
as well as rejoice in behalf of others, when we see them walking in truth, 2
John 4.
or see in them those things that accompany Salvation, Heb. 6.9.
or have Salvation following on them. And if any say, this may suffice for a
Judgment of Charity, which is all that is required of us in reference to
others; but it is not sufficient to that judgment of certainty which we should
have concerning our selves. This will receive an answer from what I have to say
upon the two other exceptions.

Now whereas it is said, that this way of self-examination leaves Christians at
great uncertainty about their Spiritual Estate; and the evidences that are
usually given for satisfying them, are not so convincing, but Christians are
perplexed still with fears and doubts. I answer,

That we should not go to Ministers either in hearing, or reading, or
conferring, as Naaman went to the Prophet to be cured of his Leprosy,
expecting that he should do it with a word of his mouth, and a stroke of his
hand. 2 King. 5.11.
We cannot expect that they should presently resolve us about our Spiritual
condition; but there is much diligence to be used by our selves, as there is in
all things of any worth, which are difficult. As this deserves our diligence,
so it requires our diligence, not only for the trial of our Grace, but for the
exercise of it. It is observed by some, that Christians in our days have not
ordinarily that Assurance which others have had in former times: and I doubt
the observation may be true: but I think it proceeds not so much from any error
about the nature of Faith, as from decay in Grace, and that manifest declining
that there is in the practice of Religion; and it is no wonder that professors
of Religion are such strangers to Assurance, and Spiritual Comfort, while there
is such a manifest difference betwixt the Christians of these days, and of
former times; and I desire that the words of one suspected by none to derogate
from the Grace of God, or the operations of his Spirit in reference to man's
Salvation, may be diligently heeded. It is (says he) impossible that many
professors whom we see and converse withal, should have any solid peace with
God. It is a fruit that will not grow on an earthly selfish frame of mind and
conversation. God forbid but that our utmost diligence and continued endeavors
to thrive in every Grace, should be required thereunto.

Now in this case, I neither think it so easy a matter as some do to attain
Assurance, nor such an impossibility as others do. Some Learned Men think that
Assurance does generally accompany saving Faith, because they suppose the Soul
must needs know its own acts, and so must necessarily know when it believes,
and when it repents, and consequently infer its own Justification. But tho it
be easy to know our own acts considered Physically or Naturally, that is, when
we put forth such an act in general, as when we believe, or repent, or know
God; yet it is another thing to know our own acts morally considered, or as
they ought to be qualified in order to such ends as they are appointed to.
There may be a Faith which is but temporary, Mat. 13.21.
or for a season; there may be a repentance like that of Nineveh, which may
avail to the preventing of temporal Judgments, but not to Salvation. There may
be such a knowledge, whereby we do not know things as we ought to know them: 1
Cor. 8.2. Tit. 1.16.
so we may only profess that we know God. But we must know that we know him, 1
Jo. 2.3. Jer. 22.16.
by our Obedience as the fruit or effect thereof: so it requires search and
self-examination, 2 Cor. 13.5.
to know whether we are in the Faith, or in the state of true believers. But on
the other hand, some suppose it impossible to attain Assurance by reflecting
upon any thing in our selves as an evidence of God's special Grace or favor
toward us: and that they may wholly disable Christians for inferring any
Assurance from any thing in themselves, they deny both propositions from whence
they should draw their conclusion. For example, we say, that those who love the
brethren are passed from Death to Life. 1 Jo. 3.14.
By reflecting upon our selves, we add further, that we love the brethren,
thence we conclude that we are passed from death to life. Now these men with
whom we have now to do, deny both the Propositions; that is, they deny we know
that we our selves are passed from death to life, by our love to the brethren;
making this to be rather a ground of a judgment of Charity concerning others,
than a judgment of certainty concerning our selves; for we may surely make a
better judgment of our own love to the brethren, than of the love of others;
only they think a judgment of Charity may suffice toward others; but we are
now speaking of Assurance of our own love; but in this argument they insist on
the second Proposition, denying absolutely that we can know our own love to the
brethren, or at least that Christians can ordinarily know it, there being so
many properties of it which it is hardly possible for any Christian to find in
himself: 1 Cor. 13.4, etc.
but further, we must know them to be brethren (they say) otherwise Papists or
any sort of persons love those of their own way, looking upon them as brethren.
Yea, we see such Divisions, and Animosities, and mutual Exacerbations among
Christians, as it seems impossible either to attain to a judgment of Charity
concerning others hereby, or to a judgment of certainty concerning our selves.

Now in answer to these things, I say first, That however Christians, or
Christian Graces may be described in their own nature, and as they should be;
yet when we consider them as they are ordinarily found, there is an allowance
to be made for human frailty: as Hezekiah prays that God would pardon every one
that prepared his heart to seek him, tho he were not cleansed according to the
Purification of the Sanctuary; that is, if they had endeavored to bring their
hearts into a right frame, tho they did not reach to that purity which was in
strictness required. 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19.
He may indeed speak there of legal or ritual Purification, but that was
strictly enjoined then. There are indeed several sorts of persons that plead
for Perfection, but none of them for absolute Perfection, as necessary to
Salvation. Grace must be sincere, and of the right kind, tho it may not reach
to that degree which is our duty (for if perfection were not our duty, our
imperfections were no sins). Gold must hold at the touchstone, though it may
not hold at the balance without some grains of allowance. If we will deal
plainly and faithfully with our own hearts, we may appeal to God for the
sincerity of our love to our brethren, as Peter did for the sincerity of his
love to Christ, Jo. 21.17.
Lord thou know all things, thou know that I love thee. And if our hearts
condemn us not, 1 Jo. 3.21.
we may have confidence toward God.

2dly, Brethren may deal unkindly with each other, when they meet in the dark,
or when they meet with each other in disguise: that is, through ignorance
Christians may mistake their brethren, or those that are their brethren may
sometimes appear unlike themselves. But where it is true love, it is not to
those of our own way or opinion only; it is not proportionable to what they
resemble us in, but according to their measure of Holiness, wherein they are
like to God: where love is right, Christians love others more that are eminent
in Grace and Holiness, tho differing in their judgments from us, than those
that are of our mind and way in some things of less importance, but more
defective in the more essential parts of Religion.

3dly, There may be differences among Christians, where there is a sincere love
to each other; and the more zeal they have for the Truth, and the Service of
God, the greater their differences may be. As differences may sometimes happen
in Families, betwixt persons that have an entire Affection to each other, and
these differences being about things that do nearly concern their Family, as
about the government and management of their Children; the greater their
Affection is toward their Children, or care for them, the warmer are their
debates about them. Thus it happens among Christians that cannot be of one mind
in things pertaining to the Honor and Service of God; the greater their zeal
is, the greater are their differences: and however Christian prudence and
meekness should make us forbear each other in love, yet that perfection is not
found among Christians, as always to make them carry it with due Calmness,
Tenderness, and Moderation to each other. We have an Example in Paul and
Barnabas, two excellent Persons, and dear Companions in Labors and Sufferings
for Christ: yet they were exasperated so against each other, that they parted
and went several ways, tho the thing which they parted about seems to be of no
great moment. Act. 1^ 36. etc.


I may not stand to examine particular objections, which they make against
other evidences of saving Grace: But consider what provision they make for the
satisfying of Christians concerning their Spiritual state. The Apostle's power
was given him not for destruction, 2 Cor. 13.10.
but for edification. We should at least, if we destroy the foundations on
which Christians build their hopes and comfort, teach them whereon they should
build them. Now for this they send them to that Spirit which is so often called
the Comforter, who does as they suppose speak particularly in the heart of a
Believer, Son be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee; and when the Spirit
says this to the Soul, this silences all objections which did before disturb
and disquiet it. I know God can when he pleases satisfy the Soul, so as there
shall no doubt remain to trouble our spirits: but tho he that is awake may know
certainly that he is so, and that he is not in a Dream: yet he that is in a
dream may verily think that he is awake. So he that has the witness of the
Spirit, may certainly know that it is no delusion: but he that is under a
delusion, may verily think that he has the testimony of the Spirit. Therefore
that we may not mistake in this matter, they say the Spirit of God never speaks
to the heart of any believer, but it speaks according to the word of Grace
revealed; and so I believe. But I know not well how to reconcile it to what was
before objected, against our inferring our Justification from our Love to the
Brethren. For if we cannot find in our selves that Love which the Apostle
speaks of, 1 Cor. 13.3.
all is nothing without it; therefore it is hard to receive any Testimony
concerning our Spiritual estate, where we have not ground to believe that we
have this Love in us, notwithstanding the many properties of it which are there
added. Far be it from me to derogate from the work of the Spirit in satisfying
and comforting troubled Souls, whose comforts are my greatest hope in the time
of trouble, and at the hour of death. I am not of those that the Philosopher
speaks of, that measure Virtue by themselves, and think none attain to that
which themselves have not attained to: therefore will not deny any such way of
Assurance as I have not had experience of. I desire (without the offense of
those, in comparison with whom I think of my self as the Spies did when they
saw the Giants, Numb. 13.33.) to speak my mind in this matter, after long
search and often renewed thoughts. I question not but God can speak, or
communicate himself to our spirits, as Angels do to each other: yea, I am fully
satisfied, that he does thus speak Peace to his people at the hour of death, or
before, or after some great Conflict or Temptation: as those may know that have
either conversed with serious experienced Christians, or but read the Lives and
Deaths of Martyrs, or sufferers for Christ. Such may observe what sudden
transports of joy eminent Christians have sometimes had, which have not been
the effect of more strict Trial, and Examination of their Spiritual Estate by
the Word of God, which they have not had freedom and presence of mind for,
under such Fears, Pains, Bodily-weakness, as they have labored under: much
less from any briskness of spirits, or working of fancy: but it must be imputed
to God's immediate support, putting Gladness into their hearts, Ps. 4.7.
shedding abroad his love in their hearts, by the Holy Ghost given to them.
Romans 5 5.
But to suppose this to be God's ordinay way of dealing with his People, and to
allow them no Assurance but what God gives them in such an immediate way, would
leave many, humble serious Christians, (that dare not boast of what God has
not wrought in them) under perpetual doubts and fears. And because many are
ready to think that what the Scripture speaks about the witness of the Spirit,
the seal of the Spirit, and the earnest of the Spirit, do imply some immediate
way of the Spirit, communicating himself to Christians: I will endeavor to
show you what may be the true and proper import of such Expressions.

As for that, the Spirit's witnessing with our spirits, or to our spirits, that
we are the Children of God, Romans 8.16.
supposing what I before said about his immediate Comforts in extraordinary
Trials and Temptations, which seems to be the state of Christians at that time;
the Spirit may ordinarily be said to witness with our spirit, or to our spirit.

1st, With our spirit; and for the clearing of this, we must consider, that
whatever is written in Scripture, is the Testimony of the Spirit, he does
therein testify; 1 Pet. 1.11.
and it is said particularly, that the Holy Ghost is a witness to us of the
perfection of Christ's Sacrafice; and this he is in the Scripture, Heb. 10.15.
or what he has there testified, as is evident from the words following. Now
it no where says in Scripture, that this or that person is the Son of God; our
Names may be written in Heaven, but not in the Scripture: so it is said to
testify of Christ, but not by Name; but describing him by his works, which
verse 36. are said to testify of him, or to bear witness that his Father had
sent him: Joh. 3.39.
these put together, the testimony of the Scripture, and his own works, did
witness that he was the Messiah. Thus the Spirit of God witnesses in general
who are the Sons of God; giving Characters whereby they may be known, as
walking after the Spirit, loving the Brethren, etc. This we know by the Spirit
of God speaking in the word: but that we do these things, we know by our own
spirits, which we must appeal to, and examine about it, this being the Candle
of the Lord which searches the hidden parts of the belly, Prove. 20.27. 2 Cor.
1.12.
that is, our most secret thoughts, and the witness thereof is the testimony of
our Consciences; therefore if we would have the witness of the Spirit, we must
see in the Scripture what that witnesses about those that shall be saved, and
then consult our own spirits, and if we find those things in our selves that do
accompany Salvation, the Conclusion follows, that we shall be saved.

But further, it may be said to witness to or with our spirits, as it witnesses
in its effects, which the Spirit it self may be properly said to do: things are
said to witness in Scripture, when they are a real proof of any thing, as the
rust of Silver and Gold witnesses against the owners. So men's wickedness
says, or testifies, Jam. 5.3. Psalm. 36.1.
that they have no fear of God before their Eyes. So persons are said to
testify or bear witness by their Works, as the Holy Ghost is a witness of
Christ's Exaltation, by the Miracles which he wrought; Act. 5.32.
and God did bear the Apostles witness both with signs and wonders, and diverse
gifts of the Holy Ghost: Heb. 2.4.
and thus the Spirit bears witness with our spirits, that we are the Children
of God, Ezekiel. 36.27.
by that filial frame or Spirit of Adoption which he puts in us. And by
bringing forth in us the fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 1.16.
she reveals his Son in us. We knowing that he abides in us, 1 Jo. 3.24.
by the Spirit which he has given us.

I will now proceed to speak of the sealing of the Spirit; and I desire this
may be observed, that whenever the Scripture speaks thereof, it does not speak
of the Covenant, or of our Salvation being sealed to us: but of our being
sealed. 2 Cor. 1.22 Ephesians. 1.13.4.30.
Now we must know, that a Seal is not a Natural, but an Instituted Sign: and it
being a particular mark belonging to some person, it signifies his ratifying or
confirming any thing that it is applied to. And Seals were used in three Cases:
1st. For the confirming of Writings, being an Evidence of a man's consent to
what he has set his Seal to. Esth 3 12. Jer. 32.10. Dan. 6.17.
2dly, It is for keeping a thing sure, as the Lions Den, and Christ's
Sepulcher, not by force; Wax is not proper for that; but for securing it so as
none can meddle with it but it will be known. 3dly, It was used for marking
things that they might be known to whom they did belong, and to distinguish
them from other men's; and they did not only mark things or Goods, but Persons.
We read in Heathen Authors, as Plutarch in Nicias, that they did sometimes mark
their Captives or Servants in the Forehead. And hence probably the Scripture
speaks so often of Marking and Sealing the Servants of God; Ezekiel. 9.4. Rev. 7.3,
4.9.4. Rev. 13.16. Ps. 4.3.
so the Beast is said to mark those that did enjoy any privileges under him.
Thus when God does set apart any for himself, as David expresses it, he seals
them, or marks them for his own. And as the Emperors had not only their
Superscription, but their Image impressed on their Coin; Matthew. 22.20. Col.
3.10.
so God impresses his own Image on his People, or renews them after his own
Image.

And if it be said, That they were sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise after
they believed; as if it were not the Impression of the Image of God upon us at
our first Conversion, but some work of the Spirit afterward.

I answer, Those that make this sealing to be the confirming or assuring our
Justification and Salvation to us, suppose it is done at our first believing in
the direct Act of Faith: So, if they make this Objection, let them Answer it
themselves. I add, that this is not an Act finished in a moment, as a Seal may
be set upon Wax; but a Progressive Work, and the Impression is made clear and
deeper by degrees: We being changed into his image from glory to glory. 2 Cor.
3.18.
And lastly, The Greeks take much liberty in the change of their Tenses, and
there is the same Tense used here, which is used where it is said, Mark 16.16.
he that believes shall be saved.

I will now add something briefly about the earnest of the Spirit, which the
Scripture speaks sometimes of. 2 Cor. 1.22. Chap. 5.5. Ephesians. 1.14.
By the last of which places it is evident, that by the earnest of the Spirit,
he means the Spirit as an earnest, as the sign of Circumcision is Circumcision
for a Sign. Romans 4.11.
Some take the word (which is borrowed from the Eastern Languages) in a large
sense, for a pledge, pawn, or earnest; but in this case it is properly rendered
earnest; for there is a great difference betwixt a Pawn, or Pledge, and an
Earnest: The former is something deposited or left with another for securing
what has been taken up or borrowed; and it is something of another kind, and
of greater (or at least equal) Value with what it is left in pawn for. But an
earnest is something given at the making of a Bargain, for the ratifying and
confirming of it; and it is of the same kind with what is afterward to be
paid, and but a small part of it. Now we can have no Pledge of future Glory,
there being nothing of equal value to it; but God gives us his Spirit, or as he
does sometimes express it, 1 John 3.24. Chap. 4.13.
of his Spirit; of the Gifts and Graces of it; and this is the Earnest of our
Inheritance, Grace differing from Glory in degree only, not in kind: As here we
know but in part, but then shall know as we are known; 1 Cor. 13.9, 12.
and as our Knowledge, so our Love and Joy shall then be perfected; and what we
receive here of the Spirit, does assure us of receiving the full sum of the
Glory promised. Phil. 1.6.
And as the Earnest that we receive at the making of a Bargain, does not only
confirm the Bargain, but is of some Use to us at present, tho it be but a small
part of the whole; so those Graces of the Spirit which he here works in us, are
(in the exercise thereof) our greatest Comfort and Happiness in this World, and
are Prelibations and Foretasts of our Future Happiness, and are therefore
called the first fruits of the spirit; Romans 8.23.
being a small part of the full Harvest of Glory, which we shall reap
hereafter. In short, We do by the Spirit of God know the things that are freely
given to us of God: He enabling us to discern Spiritual things, and to make a
right Judgment of them; 1 Cor. 2.12, 13, 14, 15. Ephesians. 4.23.
renewing us in the spirit of our minds, as well as in our inferior Faculties;
so, that as there is a saving work upon the whole Soul, which we are to make a
Judgment of, there is likewise Knowledge and Judgment, or Wisdom and Spiritual
Understanding, Phil. 1.9. Col. 1.9.
to determine concerning our Spiritual Estate: As those of full Age by reason
of use, have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil. Heb. 5.14.
But that communion of the holy ghost which the Apostle prays might be with all
the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 13.14.
and so with all Believers, whereby he communicates to us all those good things
which Christ has obtained for us, John 16.15.
is known only to those humble and circumspect Christians which love God, and
give proof of it by keeping his Commandments. John 14.23.
So that as it is the Blessing of the Lord that makes rich; yet the hand of the
diligent: Prove. 10.4, 22.
the blessing of the Lord going along with our diligence. So it is by the
Spirit of God, that we know the things given to us of God; yet by giving all
diligence, we make our Calling and Election sure; the Spirit of God both
exciting us to, and assisting us in the exercise of Grace, and encouraging such
diligence by Spiritual Comforts. And as those that do his will, shall know of
the doctrine whether it was of God, or whether he spoke of himself. John 7.17.
So they shall know the Work which they find in themselves, whether it be from
moral Principles, fleshly Wisdom, restraining Grace, or from renewing Grace,
and so of those things that accompany Salvation. Heb. 6.9.


CHAP. V.
THAT I may do something toward the helping of Christians in the trial of
their Spiritual state, I will first premise some general Observations.

1st, Some persons may have much advantage of others before their Conversion,
and by reason of Natural Temper, Fleshly Wisdom, Education, Restraining Grace,
or other things which keep them from the Polutions of the World, and bring them
to a form of Godliness. Now it will be harder for such to judge of their
Spiritual state, than for others. Sometimes the Nights are light by reason of
the Moon shining; and it is not so easy then to discern whether it be Day: Yea,
if the forepart of the Night be dark, and the Moon rise before morning, a man
may think it Day before it is so: and having found his error, he may (that he
may not be deceived again) be backward to believe that it is Day, when it is
really so. In like manner some may (as I said) be free from the more gross
Follies and Vanities of Youth; others may have been Profane and Wicked in their
Younger Years; but through some Affliction, or some special Providence of God,
or happening into some Religious Family, or into some place where the Word of
God is Zealously and Faithfully Preached, their Consciences are awakened, and
they leave those sins which formerly they lived in, and there is a great change
wrought in them, but not a saving-change: this is but as the light of the Moon
before Day; hereby they may be deceived into a false opinion of their own
state; and when they come to see their own mistake, may be more backward to
believe a real thorough change in themselves when it is wrought. There have
been those that have dated their Conversion after they have not only done much,
but suffered much in the service of Christ.

2dly, It may so happen, that persons may at some times seem better or worse
than they are. We are upbraided by some for painting Hypocrites, or showing
what they may attain to, so as to represent them better than we can ordinarily
find sincere Christians to be. And on the other hand in speaking of the
Infirmities of the Saints, we make them worse than most Hypocrites. But as the
Wiseman complains of it as a vanity upon the Earth, that there be just men to
whom it happens according to the work of the wicked, and wicked men to whom it
happens according to the work of the righteous; So it is in their Morals;
Eccles. 8.14.
if we read 2 Samuel 11. we should judge (looking no further) that David was a
grievous Apostate, considering what profession he had before made, which we may
easily see in the 34. and 63. Psalms, and that he had now sung away care, that
there was no fear of God before his eyes: but we see afterward by the 51.
Psalm, that the root of the matter was in him, and his Grace did again
flourish. We have other instances in Scripture, as Asa, Peter. 2 Chronicles. 16.
Matt. 26.70, 74. And on the other hand, we see what account Paul gives of
himself, Phil. 3.5, 6.
Tho he was then in the gall of bitterness and the bond of iniquity, and
reckoned that he was then the chief of sinners. So that in judging our selves
or others, we must use much caution, and have respect not to our present frame
or practice as it may be at some times, but to what is the ordinary habitual
frame of our hearts, or course of our lives. Gold may sometimes be so sullied
with rust and dust, as it may look worse than Copper does ordinarily; and on
the other hand, Copper may be so burnished and embellished, that it may look
more bright, and give a greater luster than most Gold does. So that there is
required both judgment and attention of mind, to distinguish the one from the
other.

3dly, We must have respect to natural temper in judging our selves or others.
As it is said, A little Sugar will serve for sweet Wine; and a little Grace
makes much more show in some than in others: it is true, all are defiled by
original sin. But whether there be, as the Philosopher says, a certain Genius
(as I may speak) or disposition to virtue, or rather something like virtue;
some men's natural temper is quick, and soon moved; others are as Doves or Lambs
in their natural temper; but meekness in these Creatures not being from choice
and judgment, is no virtue in them. In judging our selves, we must consider how
Grace falls in with Nature, or how it strives against it. A gentle gale with
the Tide or Stream, may make good riddance: but it must be a brisk gale to
carry a Vessel against them. One undertaking to tell what men's natural temper
was, by his skill in Physiognomy, he being asked what he thought of a certain
person, said, he was of a very ill temper, and natural disposition: those
present, derided him for being so mistaken in his conjecture, they looking upon
him as a person of such an excellent temper. But he himself did vindicate the
man, and told them he had judged right; for his natural temper was very bad,
but he had corrected it by Philosophy. Now there might be more of moral virtue
in him, than in Vespatian, who for the sweetness of his Nature, was called the
Darling of mankind. A little Grace will make a great show in some Natures, when
a far greater measure will make but a little show in others, where it has no
help from Nature.

4thly, We must consider the circumstances wherein persons are; what are their
temptations on one hand, and their advantages on the other hand. Some enjoy
more health than others, when it is not because they have stronger bodies, or
are of a more hail constitution; but it is by reason of their circumstances;
one can command his business, and that he goes out only at seasonable times, or
he is so accommodated as to secure himself against the injury of the weather;
they work only so as may be for their health, and need not tire themselves, or
over-heat themselves: they have wholesome Diet, and they have Cordials by them,
to relieve or fortify Nature when it is too hard put to it. And by these means,
those who are more weakly, prevent sickness; whereas others (tho they be
naturally stronger) are forced to be out at all hours, in all weathers, to
endure heats and colds, eat and drink what they can get, have little wholesome
diet; if they ayl any thing, have no Cordials or Remedies at hand to help
themselves. So it is with men in respect of their Souls; some have a competent
Estate, and are put neither upon the temptations of adversity, nor prosperity:
while others (through straits in their Estates) are put upon mean things, and
sometimes upon sinful shifts. And others are rich, and in great places; and
others are hardly able to judge of their temptations, how hard it is to be high
in the World, and not highminded; to exercise sobriety and temperance in plenty
and abundance. Some have little to do in the World, abroad or at home, in
trading or in their Families; have few to deal with, few Children or Servants;
others must go into all companies, converse with all sorts of persons, meet
with provocations from some, temptations from others to comply with their
sinful humors for their own advantage: they may have unfaithful Servants,
undutiful Children, and so more trial of their Grace, more exercise for it, and
so may discover some weakness of Grace, tho not the want of it. So some may
have the advantage of good conversation, may live in good Families or
Neighbourhoods, where they have good examples to provoke them to love and to
good works, and are often called upon and admonished if they fail in any thing:
they may live under a lively Ministry, whose Sermons may be as nails to fasten,
Eccles. 12.11.
as goads to excite or quicken; they may have good books to read, and time and
opportunity to read them, which is a great help to Christians: whereas on the
other hand, some persons are cast into profane places, or Families, or
company, where they meet with those that will be drawing and enticing them to
sin, scoffing at them, threatening, discouraging them; and it may be such as
they have some dependence upon: they seldom hear an awaking Sermon, or sound
doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.3. Ephesians. 4.29.
such as may breed good nourishment; or such discourse as may minister grace to
the hearers; seldom meet with a good book, or it may be if they do, cannot read
it. It is true, we must hold fast Christ's Name, and not deny his Faith, even
where Satan dwells, and has his seat. Rev. 2.13.
But we cannot expect that Grace should thrive much under such Discouragements
and Disadvantages.

CHAP. VI.
I Shall proceed yet further, to show how Christians that are sincere may be
distinguished from others, tho they have their sinful Infirmities. We sometimes
observe Persons of Good Families reduced to straits, and go meanly; but yet, if
they come to beg at our Doors, if we meet them in Company, we see something in
them which bewrays or discovers what they are, either in their Gesture, Speech,
Civility. So those that are born of God, it may be in show or appearance fall
far below their Rank, they may have sinful Infirmities; Romans 7.15, etc.
they may find Evil present with them when they would do good; they may be led
Captive to the Law of Sin which is in their Members; they may not do the Good
which they would, but the Evil which they would not; but yet the Spirit lusts
against the Flesh, they hate the Evil which they do; they would do the Good
which they do not; they bewail their Bondage to Sin; long to be delivered from
the Body of Death, and are thankful that they are so far delivered from it by
Jesus Christ. These things, I confess, discover our Spiritual State chiefly to
our selves, but it is that which I would help Christians in. Again, you may
observe a difference betwixt Persons that are nice and neat in their Nature and
Temper, and those that take care only to make a good show. The former would not
only appear neat outwardly, but they are uneasy if they have any thing about
them which is not neat and cleanly. Again, tho they may think themselves more
obliged to go according to their Rank when they are Abroad, or in Company, yet
you shall never surprise them in any sordid or unhandsome Dress. The latter
care not what they wear, so they have something that is fine to cast over all:
Their Natures will bear sordidness and nastiness, if they can hide it; and if
they can appear Fine abroad, care not what they wear at home. So sincere
Christians take heed to their spirits, Matthew. 2.15. Psalm 51.10.
and pray daily that God would create in them a clean heart, and renew in them
a right spirit. Their secret sins are a trouble and burden to them. Psalm 19.12.
They would especially let their light shine so before men, that seeing their
good works, they may glorify their father which is in heaven. Matthew. 5.16.
But yet they will walk in the midst of their Houses with a perfect heart;
carry themselves amongst Servants and Children, as remembering that they are
under the eye of God, and should be Examples of Holiness to those under their
own Charge. Psalm 101.2. Matthew. 23.27. Luke 11.44.
Whereas others are like painted Tombs, and whited Sepulchers, which within are
full of rottenness and dead men's bones. So they put on their best Dress when
they go out, that they may make a fair show before others; but surprise them at
home, when they do not study their Carriage, and they are quite other manner of
Persons, and care not how they appear in their own Families before their
Servants and Children. Again, We may observe, That some Persons have Tertian or
Quartan Agues; on the intermitting days they are ordinarily as well as other
Persons; but we must not therefore conclude when we see them wdl, that they
have lost their Ague, or are cured; for when the Fit-day comes, they are as bad
again as ever; yet he that is cured, may once in a long time, perhaps on
occasion (if he have some way neglected or disordered himself) have some
remembrance of his Ague (as we speak) in a Fit and away. So in this case we
sometimes see Persons abstain from Sin, and carry themselves very well for some
time together; but this is only an Intermission, they have been kept from
Temptations or Occasions of Sin; but when they meet with an Occasion or
Temptation, they are the same Persons that they were, and so toties quoties (as
we say) as often as they meet with occasion, they fall again into Sin; these are
not cured; but those that are freed from their Disease, may perhaps at some
time be overtaken with Sin, and we cannot determine how often; but if the general
tenor of their Lives be as becomes the Gospel, tho they do Sin, 1 John 2.1.
they have an Advocate with the Father.

CHAP. VII.
I Will now show you some Characters whereby you may make some Judgment of your
Spiritual State. And amongst many which others lay down, I shall insist only on
some few, which are most easy to be discerned in our selves. I never study to
speak (I will not say, all that may be said, but) all that I can say on any
Subject, remembering that of the Orator, Dictis est electio and modus; for tho I
reckon not my self among Learned men, yet I would follow them at a distance.
And,

1. Observe what it is that you are chiefly guided by in the general course of
your Life. What we chiefly mind, does influence us in all the passages of our
Lives: And they that are after the flesh, mind the things of the flesh; and
they that are after the spirit, Romans 8.5.
the things of the spirit. That is, those in a Natural state chiefly mind, that
is, savor and relish, set their affections on, are taken up in the pursuit of
carnal things. The same word is used, Matthew. 16.23. Phil. 3.19. John 3.5. Romans
8.1.
Col. 3.2. So those that are born of the spirit, walk after the spirit; are led
by the Spirit, Savor, and Relish, set their Affections on, seek after
Spiritual things. Now let us examine what it is that does chiefly influence us
in the several turnings of our lives. We consider what will stand with, what
will chiefly further that which is our great concernment; not what should be
so, but what we really make so. In choosing Callings or Employments, Relations,
Places of abode, let us consider what we look chiefly at, what sways us most
therein; whether we choose such a Calling, or way of Life, which will most
advance us in the World, wherein we are most like to get great Estates, to live
at Ease, in Pleasure; or whether in our choice we consider rather what will
most help us, or least hinder us in the way to Heaven; where we are like to
meet with fewest Temptations. I deny not, but we may consider how to live, so
as we may be in a capacity to give rather than to receive; Acts 20.35. 1 These.
4.12.
That we may walk honestly toward them that are without, having lack of
nothing: but may pay every one their own, and be burdensome to none. But that
which we should, and shall seek in the first place, if our hearts be right
within us, is the kingdom of God and his righteousness. Matthew. 6.33.
Not for worldly advantage, choosing for our selves, or ours, such Employments
or Callings as may take up our time, so as we cannot wait upon the Lord without
distraction; 1 Cor. 7.35.
or which may cast us upon Temptations to excess, man-pleasing, or other like
Sins, which may deprive us of the benefit of the Ordinances of God, and force
us to live amongst Idolaters or Heathens. If any say, some must follow such
Callings; leave them to such as mind earthly things, and govern themselves
thereby. So it is in choosing Relations; Let Persons deal plainly and faithfully
with themselves, and they may know what it is that makes Matches for them, by
their choice therein: We may see (to allude to the words of Joshua) whom they
choose to serve; Joshua 24.15.
Whether their God is their Belly, and they choose to live at Ease, and in
Pleasure; whether they be covetous Idolaters, and look chiefly after great
Estates; whether they do as those that choose chief rooms at feasts; Luke 14.7.
Crowding to get as high as they can, to get as near as may be toward the
upper end of the World. I allow it to be not only lawful, but prudent, for
Persons (so far as they can) to match within their own Rank; But as our Savior
says in another case, These things ought ye to have done, Matthew. 23.23.
and not to leave the others undone. God in Judgment often leaves Persons to
their own choice, so that they that will be rich, shall be so; and those that
seek Glory from men, shall have it. But where Men or Women set their Faces
steadfastly to go to Heaven (to allude to those words, Luke 9.51.) they will
consider what help or encouragement they shall meet with in the way thither;
Considering what the Apostle means by marrying only in the Lord; 1 Cor. 7.19.
with one that is going the same way with us, whose Examples, Counsels,
Prayers, we may have the help of, and with whom we may walk hand in hand to
Heaven, 1 Peter 3.7.
as being heirs together of the same grace of life. So in choosing Services,
what is it that you chiefly propound to your selves? Those that are most intent
on profit, will inquire what Wages, what Vails, what Way of improving what they
have; what Work for wearing and tearing their Clothes: If Persons chiefly mind
their Ease and Pleasure, their enquiry is what House they keep, what work they
hold their Servants to, what liberty they give, what merry Company there is in
the Family, or in the Neighborhood. But those that mind heavenly things, will
consider what help or furtherance they may have therein, whether God be served
or worshipped in the Family, what Ministry or Means of Grace they shall live
under; what Servants or Neighbors there are, by whose Conversation they may
gain any Spiritual Advantage, or be furthered in the way to Heaven. If we will
commune with our own hearts about these things, and deal plainly with our
selves, we shall easily see what is the bent and inclination of our minds.

2. Observe how you stand affected in hearing the word; many may take delight
therein, but there is no certain judgment to be made of persons thereby. There
are several Herbs or Plants in the same field, yea, several parts of the same
plant or herb, which several Creatures of different kinds may delight in, or
feed on; there are several Sermons, yea, several parts of the same Sermon,
which diverse persons may be taken with. The Sheep perhaps feeds only on the
tender leaf; the Horse may perhaps eat the stalks with it; the Swine may feed
on the root; the Be on the flower; the Bird on the seed: so in hearing the
word, some persons may be pleased with flashes of wit, and flights of fancy;
some with strength of Reason, subtilty of Argument, depth of Judgment; some
with Histories or Antiquities, some with Satyr or Invectives against those that
they are at variance with: 1 Pet. 2.2.
But others desire rather the sincere milk of the word, that they may grow
thereby; The plain truths of the Gospel, which may further them in the way to
Heaven; such things as may best discover their spiritual state to them, that
they may not be deceived in a matter of so great moment; such things as will
awaken him out of his drowsiness and security, as will direct him in the way
wherein he should go; Rev. 3.2.
as will strengthen in him those things which are remaining in him, and ready
to die; strengthen our faith, quicken our affections to heavenly things, build
us up on our most holy faith. Some that have good appetites, may love to have
their meat well dressed, and served handsomely in, but they can eat good meat
without sauce, and prefer the meat to the sauce, or a substantial dish to
newfangled dishes, which are rather for show and pleasing the palate, than
for nourishment. Some may love to have their spiritual food brought to them, or
conveyed to them in good and proper Language, who yet may more mind things than
words, and the matter rather than the manner of delivery. God is pleased
sometimes so far to condescend to men's Temper and Genius, as to convey the
saving-truths of the Gospel to their hearts in such words as are pleasing and
delightful to them; as Physicians convey their Medicines to the Stomach in some
vehicle that may be grateful to it: So Austin was a great Orator, and one that
taught Rhetoric; and Ambrose being an eloquent Preacher, he was much delighted
with his preaching, and it pleased God by those words which he chiefly minded,
to insinuate into him those things which before he minded not. He was very much
pleased with Tulli's Works, and (as Pelitian preferred Pindar's Odes before
David's Psalms, so he) preferred his Style to that of the Scripture, when he
first began to read them, but afterward he blamed himself for it; and when he
read his Hortensius, which before he had been pleased with above the rest of
his Works, he disliked it, because he found not the Name of Christ there. Mr.
Robert Bolton having heard the Fame of Mr. Perkins, going at a Commencement to
Cambridge, went to hear him preach, and having heard him, he said, he was a
passing mean Scholar, and a barren empty fellow: but when God changed his
heart, he changed his opinion of Mr. Perkins, accounting him as learned and
godly a Divine as this Church had for many years enjoyed, considering his age;
for he was born and died in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth: It is said of him,
That he taught England to preach; and a learned Prelate gives this Testimony of
him, that he excelled in a distinct Judgment, and a rare dexterity in clearing
the obscure subtilties of the School, and easy explication of the most
perplexed Discourses. A sick person that desires Cure and Health, is not so
much for a learned and ingenious Physician, that is good company, and one that
will discourse aptly and pertinently on any Subject; but he is for a skilful
and faithful Physician that understands his disease, and will apply proper
Remedies, and such Physic as will rather work effectually, than please his
Taste, or not make him sick. We value or choose things according to the tendency
which they have to the end which we aim at, or propound to our selves. So men
heap up to themselves teachers after their own lusts, 2 Timothy 4.3.
such as may please or gratify their corrupt inclinations. As if men be
addicted to Debauchery or Drunkenness; Mic. 2.11.
he that will prophesy of wine and strong drink, shall be the prophet of such a
person; he that will encourage him in his wickedness. So on the other hand, If
a man seek the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness in the first place, or
above all other things, he is for such an one, and for such preaching as will
direct and help him in his way thither.

3 Let us examine what it is that we chiefly desire of God in our Prayers; this
will discover much of the bent and inclination of our hearts, and what it is
that we chiefly mind. I speak not of the Prayers which we utter in the public
Congregation, or in our Families, or before others on any occasion: In these
cases persons do not always utter their own desires, but many times at best
such things as may express the desires of those with whom they pray, or the
desires which they know in their own Consciences they and others ought to have:
but many times men pray for ostentation, or for a pretense, to show their
talent in expressing themselves, or to seem more religious than they are: but
those Prayers whereby we may make a judgment of our selves, are the prayers
which we pour out to God in secret, not by rote or by book, but from the bottom
of our hearts, which we may know by dealing faithfully with our selves. Men
indeed ask for such things as they are convinced they ought to pray for, or as
they have accustomed themselves to pray for, or which they have learned to pray
for by hearing good Men pray, or out of good Books, it may be out of the Lord's
Prayer: But these are not their real desires, and they would not be willing to
be taken at their word, to walk so strictly as they pray that they may walk, to
do the Will of God on Earth as it is done in Heaven; to have their sins
forgiven, only as they forgive others: But what are our real requests which we
make known to God, Phil. 4.6.
which our hearts do sincerely concur with; or what are these requests uttered
by others with whom we join in prayer, that our hearts do close with, and which
we add our hearty Amen to; It is but a word of course with many, and they deal
with themselves as men deal many times with others, setting their hand to
petitions which they never gave their consent to: but what are the petitions
which we really own, and would gladly have answered? Are they for Solomon's
Leavings, Riches, long Life, the lives of our Enemies? Are they such as the
Sons of Zebedee asked, Matthew. 20.21.
Honors and Preferments? or rather such as Solomon's petition was, for Wisdom,
not to govern a Kingdom, but to get a Kingdom? to make us wise to Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. Prove. 16.32. Psalm 4.7. Psalm. 119.80. Psalm. 119.4, 5.
to rule our own spirits? that he would lift upon us the light of his
Countenance; that our hearts may be found in his Statutes? do we turn precepts
as well as promises into Prayers? desiring that God would direct or incline our
hearts to what he requires us? Do we pray rather for the fruit, or a sanctified
use of Affliction, than deliverance from it; Heb. 12.1. Psalm 89.15. Psalm
119.10.
that tho we cannot walk in the light of God's Countenance, yet we may walk by
the light of his Word; that though we may not with John, lie in Christ's bosom,
yet we may with Mary, Jo. 13.23.
sit down at his feet to hear his word, fearing the Lord, Luc. 10.39.
and obeying the voice of his servants, tho we walk in darkness, and see no
light, have nothing of comfort. Is 50.10.


4. Let us examine our selves by our company. Here the rule holds, Noscitur ex
socio, etc. If we know not what a man is, we may give a near guess by his
company; if a stranger come amongst us, we may conjecture at his temper, tho we
never come near him, by the company that he chooses, and ordinarily associates
himself with. It is true, it may be our unhappy lot to be cast among such whose
society may be a burden to us, Psa. 120.5.
and we may be necessitated by our worldly occasions to keep company with
profane and wicked persons: 1 Cor. 5.10.
But who are they in whose company we chiefly delight, or whom we choose to make
our familiar friends and companions? Psalm. 16.3.
all David's delight was in the Saints, those he accounted the most excellent
persons. He was a companion of those that feared God, and invited such to turn
to him; Psalm. 119.63, 79.
they are such that the sincere Christian makes choice of as his bosom
friends, not only as they are dear to God; 1 Jo. 5.1.
and so loving him that he begat, he loves him that is begotten of him, and
would show kindness to such for his sake, 2 Samuel 9.1.7.
as David showed kindness to Mephibosheth for Jonathan's sake. But like will to
like. It is natural in brute Creatures; and persons are in their element when
they are conversing with those like themselves. we may observe ordidinarily, at
any public meetings where there are several sorts of persons, who they are
that get together, and how they sort or divide themselves. If there be Scholars
or Learned Men, they will be together; Husbandmen will associciate together; so
Merchants or other Tradesmen: not only as they can best bear a part in such
discourse as persons of their own way have together, and are not, as the
Apostle says in another case, Barbarians to each other; but they relish such
discourse as is of things in their own element, as we speak: and which is more,
they may get a further insight into their own Calling or Business, by the
experience of others which they communicate to them; so it is with Christians,
when they meet with those that speak of things pertaining to the Kingdom of
God; It is like one fallen into the company of those that speak their own
Language, or Discourse of matters belonging to their own calling; we may gain
experience by conversing with such. As the Apostle longed to be at Rome, that
he might not only impart some spiritual gift to them, Romans 1.11, 12.
but that he might be comforted together with them, by their mutual faith.
Christians may be helpful to others that are far above them in gifts and
knowledge; as Junius says of himself in his own Life, tho he was a means of
increasing the knowledge of an honest Countryman that he accidentally met with,
yet the Countryman was a means of inflaming his Zeal; he speaking with such
feeling and such a savoury relish of the matters of Religion, as made him think
there was something yet further in Christianity than he had attained to; so
that Christians sharpen each other by their mutual converse, Prove. 2.7.17.
Psalm 66.16. Psalm. 34.2.
as Iron sharpens Iron. David would tell others what God had done for his Soul;
and the humble, (those that were brought low by affliction, and not too proud
to learn) should bear thereof, and be glad, that there had been others in like
condition with themselves, and yet had sound mercy and help; yea, they should
say, V. 6.
This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his
trouble. They should not consider him as a King, as a Prophet, as a man after
God's own heart, for the eminency of Grace; but as a poor man seeking shelter
among strangers, 1 Samuel 21.11, etc.
and (which is worse) using such poor mean shifts as he did; debating himself
so far below that Courage and Faith which he had at other times: for this Psalm
was composed upon his changing his behavior before Abimelech, when he drove
him away, and he departed; the story of which we have 1 Samuel 21.11, etc. on
such grounds a godly man will choose such for his necessaries, his near or
familiar friends.

These are the few things amongst many, about which I would have Christians to
examine themselves, that they may be the better able to make a judgment
concerning their Spiritual State, and to take the comfort of their Christian
Privileges, especially in times of trouble, and when we approach toward our
latter end.

CHAP. VIII.
FAith is yet a great help against Trouble, as we thereby have the comfort and
benefit of the Promises of God, which are so exceeding great and precious. 2
Pet. 1.4.


1. It is a great thing for God to oblige himself to us by promise, as Austin
says, Confess. L. 5. c. 9. Thou art pleased, because thy Mercy endures for
ever, to become a Debtor by thy promises, to those to whom thou have forgiven
all their Debts. We love to be free and disengaged, and would have others stand
to our courtesy for that which we intend to give them: but we would not give
them that advantage against us to challenge us upon our word. But it has
pleased God for our more abundant consolation, so far to condescend to poor
sinners, that we may, as Austin says (in the place before cited) of his
Mother, urge upon him his own handwriting, or plead as David, Psalm. 119.49. 1
Jo. 5.10.
Remember thy word to thy Servant, on which thou have caused me to hope. For we
make him a liar if we do not trust his promise.

2. The promises of God are exceeding great and precious in respect of the
matter of them: he having promised so many and so great things which we should
not have had the confidence to ask or think, if he had not encouraged us by
such promises. And as there are in Physic some Catholic remedies, and some
particular Medicines for particular Diseases; so there are some general
comprehensive promises, as that great promise in which all the promises of the
life that now is, and that which is to come are summed up, That God will be our
God, or that he will be a God to us. 1 Chr. 17.24. Heb. 8.10.
So that promise which occurs so often in Scripture, that God will be with us:
which is not to be with us as he is in all places, Jer 23.24.
or so as to be an unconcerned spectator of what befalls us; but so as to deal
well with us, as Jacob expounds it, as we shall see by comparing Genesis 31.3.
with Genesis 32.9. So there are some promises wherein several things are put
together as many ingredients into one Cordial: such is that promise, Ps. 84.11.
that God will be a Sun and Shield, that he will give grace and glory, and will
withhold no good thing from such as walk uprightly. ThiS promise comprehends
all the good things of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. And
I know not but the Apostle may have particular respect to this promise, there
being a promise of things Temporal, Spiritual, Eternal; 1 Timothy 4.8
of Comfort, Direction, Protection, Provision. But there are particular
promises suited to the several conditions of Christians, which are by some
reduced to several heads, and brothers summed together in the order wherein
they stand in Scripture. So that whatever circumstances we are in, we may find
promises suited thereto. And as they are exceeding great and precious in
respect of the fullness, and great variety of them; so they are precious in
respect of the truth and certainty of them. This is it that makes other
promises from men of so little value, that every man is a liar. Psalm. 116.11.
David indeed spoke that rashly, and it may be therein might have respect to
the promises which were made to him from God by Samuel or Nathan, as under
temptation he said he should one day perish by the hand of Saul, 1. Sam. 27.1.
and then the promise would have failed. But he did more deliberately say, men
of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree a lie; deceiving others either
through weakness or wickedness; Psalm. 62.9.
either not being able to make good what they have unadvisedly promised, or
willingly flattering them into vain expectations of what they never intended to
do for them. But these are promises of God that cannot lie. As he is faithful
that has promised, Tit. 1.2. Heb. 11.11. Romans 4.2. Psalm. 77.8.
so he is able also to perform; and tho we are ready to say sometimes, does his
promise fail for evermore? We do either through ignorance mistake the meaning
of them, as the Jews of Old, and many still are ready to expound many promises
too rigidly according to the letter: or we are ready to understand those things
absolutely, which are to be understood with that limitation so far as they are
for our good, Psalm. 34.10 84.11. Eccles. 6.12.
which we are not always competent judges of; or we are too quick and impatient
of delays: the vision is for an appointed time; Hab. 2.4.
and the things which God has promised shall be fulfilled in their season.
Luke 1.^0.


I will now show you how by Faith we have the comfort and benefit of these
promises.

1. By Faith we have an interest in the promises. We read of the covenants of
promise, Ephesians. 2.12.
whereby we may either understand the promises of the Covenant, there being the
like Hypallage often found in Scripture; Romans 9.31.
as by the Law of righteousness, is meant the righteousness of the Law. And the
Nations of those that shall be saved, Rev. 21.24.
are those that shall be saved of the Nations. And it may be called the
Covenants, because tho it be one in the substance of it, yet it is diverse in
respect of its administration; on which account it is called both Old and New.
Heb. 8.13.
Or it is called the Covenants of promise, as being founded on, and consisting
in promises. In Scripture we find promises frequently called Covenants, Gen
6.18. 2 Chronicles. 7.18. Ezr. 10.3. Neh 9.38.
Covenants consisting of mutual promises or engagements: and where the promise
on one side only is expressed, the engagement on the other side is ordinarily
implied. Now there is no case wherein the words Promise and Covenant may with
more reason be used promiscuously than in this case in hand, Gal. 3.17.22.
and so they are used by the Apostle; for tho this Covenant be not an absolute
promise, there being something to be done by the Mediator of it for the
confirmation thereof, as likewise by us for partaking of the benefit of it: yet
it is ordered in all things and sure; 2 Samuel 23.5.
and not suspended on any uncertain condition, depending on our fluctuating
will; but what is required on our part is likewise promised to be wrought in
us. Jer. 31.33. John 6.37. Ephesians. 2.8.
So that as there are promises to conditions, which I may speak without the
offense of those that understand what is ordinarily or properly meant by a
condition: so there are promises of those conditions. Now this promise or
Covenant by faith of Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.22.
is given to them that believe; Faith intitling us to the grand promise,
whereof all the rest are branches: all these being yea and amen, faithful and
true in Jesus Christ; 2 Cor. 1.20. Dan. 9.27.
who as Mediator of the Covenant, died for the confirmation of it. For the
further clearing of this matter, we must know, that many of the promises in
Scripture were made to particular persons, and on some special occasion: yet we
must not look upon such things as the cases of those persons only (as some call
them) that do not concern others: for what is put into the Canon of Scripture,
is there left on Record for our Instruction and Comfort. Romans 15.4.
So that we shall find the things therein spoken, applied to such as lived many
Hundred years after, as if they had been directed particularly to them. So the
Prophet says, Hos. 12.4.
that God spoke with them, that which he spoke to Jacob in Bethel, so many
Hundred year before. And that which was spoken to Moses is said to be spoken to
the Jews in Christ's time; Exodus 3.6. Matt. 22.31. Prove. 3.11. Heb. 12 5. Jos.
1.5.
and what was spoken in Solomon's time is applied to the Hebrews in the Apostles
time. And so the promise that was made to Joshua upon a particular occasion, is
applied to the Hebrews, tho in another case; God being always the same, and
bearing the same love to his People, and so is with them, as I said before, to
deal well with them, and to do for them as the matter requires. And tho we
cannot expect, that God should deal with us in every respect according to his
promise made to others, yet we may take encouragement from thence to hope, that
he will deal proportionably with us. Ministers of the Gospel cannot expect that
God should enable them to work Miracles, because of what he promised to the
Apostles when he sent them forth; Mark. 16.17.
or that he should secure them from the assaults of wicked men, because of what
he promised to Paul at Corinth. Acts 18.10.
But we may thence conclude, that his grace shall be sufficient for us: that we
shall have help and assistance from him according to the work which he calls us
to; Acts 26.22.
and that where he has any persons to save, he will find ways and means for
the effecting of it, and that he will work so as none shall let. Isa. 43.13.
Again, there are promises made to persons under some particular circumstances,
as to the Fatherless and Widows, to the Poor and Needy, to the Sick, to those
that suffer for Righteousness sake; and we may not be concerned in promises
made to such. Now it is in this case, as in those commands that are given to
several relations. Ephesians. 5.22, etc.
Tho such commands concern us not at present, as they cannot all reach to all;
yet as any come into such relations, they come under the obligation of such
commands. So as any come into such circumstances, they come under the influence
of such promises as are made to persons in them. We read, it may be, Books of
Physic, or Surgery, and there meet with receipts or remedies which we have no
need of: let us make use of those which we have need of, and thank God that we
are free from so many Diseases, as we perceive by such Books poor mortals are
subjects to: and that there are such remedies in readiness, in case we should
need them. So when we read such variety of promises in Scripture, let us bless
God that we are exempted from so many troubles as are there provided against;
that there are such promises laid in for such as do want them, and that they
are there in readiness for us, if we should be reduced to such a condition.
Some promises are made to persons under some particular character or
qualification, as to the meek, the humble, to those that fear God, or love him;
to those that trust in him, to the upright in heart, or of an upright
conversation. But all these are several Characters of the same persons: grace
being as leven that levens the whole lump; 1 These. 5.23.
tho some grace may appear more eminently in one than in another, and some more
eminently than another in the same person, as they meet or fall in with their
natural temper or inclination. For when these meet, they are as Wind and Tide
meeting together; or they are described by those graces which considering their
circumstances or temptations they have most occasion for the exercise of: and
therefore they may appear most eminently in them: and so such promises may be
made to such persons as are most suitable to them, or proper for them in the
circumstances wherein at present they are; and as I said in the former case, are
in readiness for us when our condition requires them. How we have the comfort
of the Promises by Faith, we may see partly by what I have already said: and it
is implied in that word whereby it is expressed in Scripture, relying or
resting on God, the Soul is then at ease. 2 Chronicles. 13.18.16.7. Ps. 37.7.
But as I there showed you, it is not the habit of Faith, but the actual
exercise of it, that expels fear and trouble, as light does darkness. But it
will appear further by what I have yet to add; and that is, that by Faith we do
as the Apostle says, obtain the promises; Heb. 11.33.
that is, the things promised; faith gives glory to God, in sealing to his
truth or veracity; Romans 4.20. Jo.3.33. Matt. 9.2.22.29.
therefore God honors Faith in dealing with men according thereto. And in many
other places, we see faith saved them from temporal Evils. The same we find in
the case of Asa; 2 Chronicles. 6, 7, 8, 9. 1 Chronicles. 5.20. Jer. 39.17, 18.
so God was entreated of the Rubenites and Gadites, when they cried to him
because they trusted in him; so he saved Ebedmelech from the men that he was
afraid of, because he trusted in him, according to that remarkable promise made
to the righteous, that the Lord shall help them and deliver them; Ps. 37.40.
deliver them from the wicked, and save them, because they trust in him;
whereas on the contrary, the noble man that would not believe the plenty that
should be in Samaria, did not eat of it. 2 Kings 7.19, 20.
Many of the Israelites entered not into the promised Land, because of their
unbelief. Zechariah, Heb. 3.19.
a good man, was dumb for a time, because he believed not the words of God
which were to be fulfilled in their season. Luke 1.20.
There is a season for many things to be fulfilled which we must wait for:
unbelief makes God a liar; 1 Jo. 5.10.
therefore he will show his displeasure against it. But it is so likewise in
Spiritual blessings; we read of great things ascribed to Faith; Acts 15.9.
as purifying the heart; overcoming the World, quenching all the fiery darts of
the wicked. 1 Jo. 5.4. Ephesians. 6.17.
Now it does not all these things in a moral way, as Moses overcame by looking
to the recompense of the reward: but we are thereby strong in the Lord, and in
the power of his might; Heb. 11.26. Ephesians. 6.10. 2 Timothy 2.1. 1 Peter 1.5. Col.
1.11.
or in the grace that is in Christ Jesus: and we are kept by the power of God
through Faith to Salvation. It is the Divine Power that keeps us, and we are
strengthened thereby, or according thereto; and not only morally by his word, as
men may strengthen each other; Job 43.4. Ezekiel. 13.22.
but it is Faith that takes in this aid or assistance of Grace, or the supplies
of the Spirit of Jesus Christ; Phil. 1.9.
which are communicated from him to the several Members of his Mystical Body,
as the Spirits are from the Head in the Natural Body; and as Christ dwells in
the heart by faith, Ephesians. 3.17.
so we derive Spiritual Life and Virtue from him, in the daily Exercise of
Faith; he leaving those usually to themselves that trust to their own strength;
as Youth and Young men are ready to do; when those that wait on the Lord, and
look to him for supplies of Grace, shall surmount all difficulties, and
persevere in well-doing without weariness or fainting. Isaiah 40.30, 31. Psalm
27.14.
He will strengthen the heart of those that wait on him, and give Grace to such
humble Souls, as distrusting themselves, rely upon him for strength and
assistance.

CHAP. IX.
THere is yet one way more whereby Faith becomes such an effectual Remedy
against Touble, and that is, as we thereby have a view or prospect of the other
World, or of the Future state. We thereby look to the things that are not seen,
which are eternal. And if any shall say, 2 Cor. 4.18.
the word there used, does not imply that he saw them, or had a view of them,
but only that he made them his scope or aim: I answer, The word sometimes
signifies to mark or observe, as well as to consider or have respect to. Romans
16.17. Phil. 3.17. Heb. 11.27.
And we do in a sort see the things which we aim at: Moses is said to endure,
as seeing him that is visible; which implies not the manner of his enduring,
but the ground of it; not as if he had seen him that is invisible, but because
he saw him that is invisible, or like one that saw the invisible God. John 1.14.
So as the glory of the only begotten Son of God, is a glory becoming such an
one. And if it be said, there is a Contradiction in the terms, to see him that
is Invisible: I answer, It is an Elegancy used frequently in Scriptures, where
a word in the same place is taken in different senses, as to believe in hope,
Romans 4.18. 1 Timothy 5.6.
against hope. And she that lives in pleasure, is dead while she lives. She
lives Naturally, but is dead Spiritually. So God is invisible to our bodily
Eyes, but we see him by faith, which is the evidence of things not seen. Heb.
11.1.
And if it be further objected, that Faith and Sight are opposed in Scripture;
as, We walk by faith, and not by sight. And in whom, 2 Cor. 5.7. 1 Pet. 1.8.
tho now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable, and
full of glory. For this latter place, distinguish of seeing as before, and the
sense is plain; and for the former place, Faith is there opposed, either to the
Vision of God which we shall have in the Future state, or to present sense;
implying that we should govern our lives not by Sense, or what we see, but by
what we belive, or hereafter hope for. And the Apostle when he would set forth
the virtue of Faith, and of what excellent use it is to support Christians
under Trials and Sufferings; he grounds it upon this, Heb. 11.1.
that it is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not
seen. It gives as it were a real and present subsistence to things that are yet
but future, and so hoped for; and gives us as full satisfaction concerning
those things which we do not see, as if we saw them clearly before our eyes.
And these two things make that which is future to affect us more, and work more
effectually upon us. We say indeed among men, that seeing is believing. And
they have Proverbial Speeches in other Nations, like this of our own; There is
so much deceit and falsehood to be found among men, that persons will hardly
believe till they see, or have sufficient ground for it; and so will not
venture much on uncertain hopes. But when we have to do with God that cannot
lie, believing is seeing; that is, when we have his Word to ground our Faith
upon, we are as sure as if we saw with our eyes, or as if things were proved to
us by a Mathematical Demonstration; that is, by such clear evidence as nothing
can be objected against. But tho we look upon things as certain, they do not
much affect us, if we look upon them as at a great distance of time: therefore
wicked men relieve themselves against the fear of future Evils, by looking upon
them as at a great distance; Ezekiel. 12.27. Amos 6.3.
or putting far away the evil day. We are likewise encouraged to patience by
the near approach of the recompense of reward; because he that shall come, will
come, and will not tarry: Heb. 10.37. James 5.8, 9. Luke 21.28.
The coming of the Lord draws nigh: The judge stands before the door. And our
Savior bids his Disciples lift up their heads when their redemption draws
nigh. If persons were going to some places, and tired with the tediousness of
their Journey, and discouraged with the Difficulties and Dangers that they meet
with in their way, questioning whether they should find the way to it, or hold
out till they come at it; should come to the top of an Hill, and before they
are aware, see the place that they are going to, a little before them, what
Courage and Life would it presently put into them? As Columbus that first
discovered the West Indies, when his men were ready to Mutiny, having been
wearied with a Voyage of Sixty days over the Ocean, he perceiving the Clouds to
look clearer, concluded that they were not far from Land; and so promised them
to return, if they did not within three days discover Land, which they did
before the end of the third day. So if we could get a sight of the other World,
as Moses did of the Land of Cannan, on the top of Pisgah; Deuteronomy. 3.27.
What Vigor and Life would it add to us, when we are ready to faint and be
discouraged? Now Faith (according to the Description given of it) serves us as
a Telescope or Perspective Glass, discovering to us the things which we see
not, and making things seem near which are afar off. We thereby have as full
certainty of the things of the other World, as if they were evidently set forth
before your eyes, to use the Apostles words. Gal. 3.1.
Yea, the things of eternity are hereby brought near to us, and seem to us as
at hand, and thereby our Affections are much abated to the things of this
World: The time being short, and the fashion of this World passing away, we may
rejoice in the good things of it, as if we rejoiced not, and mourn for the evil
things of it, as if we wept not; moderate both our Joy and Sorrow, the end of
all things being at hand, and we being even ready to enter upon the borders of
Eternity. 1 Cor. 7.29, etc.


And that we may the better understand how Faith brings things nearer to us, or
makes them seem at a less distance; let us consider, that God being Eternal,
and seeing all things at one single view, one day is with him as a thousand
years, and a thousand years as one day; and tho we are indeed finite Creatures,
and measure Time by Succession; yet taking a view of Eternity, and looking to
the things that are Eternal, the things of this World are nothing compared
therewith, and the time of this Life but as a moment in comparison with the
days of Eternity. We may observe, That Old men that have lived long in the
World, make nothing of Seven years, yea, reckon Twenty years but a short time;
when Younger persons look upon it as a long time. Those that are of narrow
minds, and consider no more than what they have seen, and have never gone far
from home, look upon Twenty or Thirty miles as a long way. But those that have
traveled to the Indies, or Thousands of miles from home, reckon Twenty or
Thirty Miles as nothing; yea, those that have by the Study of Geography, or
looking on Globes or Maps, observed the vast Compass of the World, would
account so many Miles as a very small matter; and a great Traveller would think
himself as good as at home, if he were within so many Miles of it. So tho we
were never taken up as Paul into the Third Heaven, yet the Description which we
have of it in the Scriptures, may sink the things of this World quite below our
Consideration. Those that write Descriptions of other Countries, give us an
Account ordinarily of the Situation of the Place, the Compass or Extent of it,
the Nature of the Soil, the Commodities that it affords, the Healthfulness of
the Air, the Genius or Temper of the People. But the Countries so described,
are sometimes found to be but imaginary Vtopia's, or mere Fancies: And others
when we come to see them, fall far short of the Description which we had of
them, and deceive our Expectations. But as we have by Faith a full Assurance of
future Glory; the Scripture being no cunningly devised fable; 2 Pet. 1.16.
so we are assured it will not deceive our Hopes, or fall short of the Account
which we have of it in the Scrpitures. As Luther would say, Christ and Heaven
are not capable of an Hyperbole. For tho it is true, that may be said of them
which is false; yet their true and real Worth will exceed whatever the Tongue
of Men and Angels can speak of them. The report which the Queen of Sheba heard
of the Glory and Wisdom of Solomon in her own Country, exceeded her belief; but
what she found when she came to see, far exceeded the Report; 1 Kings 10.7, etc.
The one half of it had not been told her. So glorious things are spoken of the
City of God. Christ tells his Disciples, There were many Mansions in his
Fathers house, enough to receive not only the innumerable Company of Angels, but
the General Assembly of that great multitude which no man can number, of all
nations, and kindreds, Rev. 7.9. Psalm 16.11.
and people, and tongues: There is fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore.
And it is not as some places, where there is plenty of all things, but the Air
is bad, so as the Inhabitants are but short-lived; Isaiah 33.24. Rev. 21.4.
but there the inhabitants shall not say they are sick: There will be no death,
nor sorrow, nor crying, nor pain.

I will not take upon me to set forth particularly the greatness of this Glory;
It being that which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has entered into the
heart of man. 1 Cor. 2.9.
And that which God has prepared, that he might therein show the riches of his
glory on the vessels of mercy, which he has before prepared unto glory. Romans
9.23.
We must not consider things absolutely, but comparatively, and this will much
alter our Account of them. Let us observe the Account which the Apostle gives
of his own Sufferings, and his Fellow Christians; they were pressed out of
measure, above strength, insomuch that they despaired even of Life; and for his
own part, Acts 20.23.
bonds and afflictions did abide him wherever he went; and we have a particular
Account of his Sufferings, 2 Cor. 11.23, etc. But when he comes to speak of
these things comparatively, see how he changes his style in one of the highest
strains of Rhetoric that is to be found in Scripture, or any other Author.
These afflictions which in themselves were so grievous, and did often return
upon them, as the clouds return after the rain, were but light, and for a
moment, 1 Cor. 4.17.
compared with that far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, which they
wrought for them; observe how he raises his strain, he begins high, yet how
many notes does he rise? Glory, a weight of glory, an exceeding weight of
glory, a more exceeding weight of glory, a far more exceeding weight of glory;
yea, once more, a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; and tho the
word Hyperbole be twice used in the Greek, there is no Hyperbole or Excess in
the Apostle's Speech; he does use the word again and again, to make an attempt
at expressing the greatness of glory, as if it were accumulated or heaped up,
yet he cannot thereby reach the thing it self which he would express: and tho
there seems to be a Meiosis or diminution in the former part of the verse, as
if he did not justly rate the sufferings of this life, he speaks only of what
they are comparatively, Number. 13.33.
as the Israelites were but Grasshoppers compared with the Giants; we should
learn from such language in Scriptures to Habituate our selves to lower and
meaner thoughts of the things of this world, and higher thoughts of those
things of the world to come. Zech. 1.12.
The Angels complain of the time wherein God had indignation against Jerusalem,
it was threescore and ten years, but when it is compared with the everlasting
kindness wherewith he has mercy on his people, it is but a little wrath, and
for a moment. Isaiah 54.8.
Children look but a little way before them, and it seems hard to them to be
kept to their books, and to School-discipline, or to hard labor under a severe
master; and they consider only the present ease and pleasure of others that are
left to themselves. But their wiser parents look further, and consider how
short a time they are at School, or at an Apprentiship, in comparison with the
rest of their lives; what Preferments, what Riches many attain to by a good
improvement of that time: and on the contrary, what Straits; what Miseries,
many are reduced to, that trifle away their younger years. But there is a far
greater disproportion betwixt the things of this life, and that which is to
come, and as great a difference betwixt their duration and continuance.

Now by Faith we take a view of the things that are not seen, which are
eternal, and are as sure of them, as if we saw them; as if we were with Paul
caught up into Paradise, 2 Cor. 12.4.
to see the glory of Heaven, or as if we had some place opened to us to look
into the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone for evermore, as the Prophet
had a place opened through the wall to see the Abominations that were done by
the house of Israel: Ezekiel. 8.7, etc.
Now while we do by Faith look to these things, and while we see the time of
this life but as an handbreadth to Eternity; Psalm 39.5. Romans 8.18.
we shall reckon the sufferings of this present life, not worthy to be compared
with the glory that shall be revealed in us, nor any way answerable to those
miseries which poor sinners must be tormented with night and day for ever and
ever. Rev. 20.10.
Therefore as in our spiritual combat we should take to our selves Faith as a
shield, to hold up against the fiery darts of the wicked; Ephesians. 6.16.
so we should take it to us as a Perspective-glass, through the help of which
we shall not only see afar off, beyond time to Eternity; but it will bring the
things of the world to come nearer to us, and make them seem as at hand; for
tho they be not really nearer, yet that distance of time which they are at from
us, will seem as nothing, when we compare it with that Eternity which is beyond
time, wherein we must be for ever happy or miserable, according to what we
propound to our selves as our chief end.

And let us but consider what is the principle that all the world is acted by,
what is the spring that moves the several wheels that are moving some one way
and some another; or what is it that (as it is said concerning Noah) does
comfort men concerning their work, and toil of their hands; but the hopes of
future Advantages, Honor, Riches: for these the Soldier exposes himself to a
thousand hardships and hazards: The Merchant leaves his Friends and Country,
try, and commits himself to the waves, runs the risque of suffering Shipwreck,
being taken by Pirates, and subjected to perpetual Slavery: And if we do run
the like hazards for the profession of Religion, which men seldom do; let us by
this Perspective look before us, not only to the recompense of Reward which
will abundantly answer all our losses and sufferings; but to the penalty that
we shall incur if we do not by patient continuance in well-doing wait for
Honor and Glory and Immortality, there being no middle place between Heaven
and Hell.

And let us but consider the difference betwixt our case and the case of those
that endure such hardships, and run such hazards for the things of this world.
The Apostle sets it forth in two things, borrowing a similitude from things
then in use amongst them; one did strive for a corruptible crown, 1 Cor. 9.25,
26.
a Garland of Flowers or Laurel: the other for a crown of Glory that fades not
away. 1 Pet. 5.4.
The one did run uncertainly, the other with more assurance of success. So here
there is no comparison betwixt what we shall receive through Faith and
Patience, and what men receive as the reward of their labors and sufferings
here in this world; either for the nature, or for the continuance of it, and we
are at greater certainties about it. Here the race is not to the swift, Eccl.
9.11.
nor the battle to the strong, nor bread to the wise, nor riches to men of
understanding, nor favor to men of skill; but time and chance happens to all.
But if we be steadfast, unmovable, abounding always in the Lord's work, we may
know that our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. 1 Cor. 15.58.


I should here conclude; but that as the Apostle would provoke the Jews to
emulation by the Gentiles, so I would by a Heathen, Romans 11.14.
provoke Christians to look by Faith to the things which are not seen, which
are eternal. Seneca in the beginning of his Preface to his Natural Questions,
shows, That as there is a difference betwixt Pholosophy and other Arts, so
there is a difference betwixt that part of Philosophy which respects men, and
that which respects God. This latter (he says) is more high and sprightly, and
supposes something greater and more beautiful, which Nature has placed out of
sight; and unless he might be admitted to these things, he should not think it
worth the while to be born, or to take such pains; and adds, O how contemptible
a thing is man, if he do not raise up himself above human things! If an Heathen
could speak thus, what a shame is it for us that have the help of Divine
Revelation, to fall under the reproach and censure of those that mind earthly
things? It is by faith alone that we can look to those things out of sight; let
us thereby raise up our selves to take a view of the other World, both the good
and evil things of it, and this will so raise and enlarge our minds, that we
shall have meaner thoughts of the things of this life, and not concern our
selves so far in the pursuit of the good things of the world, or in the
avoiding the evil things of it, as thereby to be taken off from minding those
things that are above; or so as to run the hazard of falling short of that
rest, which we have a promise left us of entering into.

CHAP. X.
HAving treated thus far of the nature of Faith, and the benefit and advantage
that Cristians have thereby: I shall now add something for encouraging persons
to believe, and for directing them the rein. And whereas some speak of the
Souls preparation for Christ, I will endeavor to show you briefly and plainly
what is required in order to believing. And first, there is nothing to be done
in order to our believing, which may commend us to Christ for his acceptance.
It is said, a man's gift makes room for him, Prove. 18.16.
and brings him before great Men; by means thereof, he has free access to
great Men, and finds favor with them. But we can bring neither price nor
present to Christ, Isaiah 61.10. Cant. 8.10.
nor come to him as a Bride adorned with Jewels, that we may be in his eyes as
one that finds favor: we must rather come to Christ that we may buy of him
Gold tried in the fire, Rev. 3.18. Isaiah 55.1.
that we may be rich, and white raiment to cover our nakedness, and eye salve
to anoint our eyes; and we must buy this without money, and without price. It
is (as they speak) the antecedent put for the consequent; Judge. 2.14. Psalm
44.12.
as God is said to sell his people, when he delivers them into the hands of
their Enemies, tho he sell them for naught; because in selling, there is a
delivering of what is sold, into the hands of the Buyer. So we are said to buy,
when we make a thing our own, or get it into our own hands. Ezekiel. 16.
Tho the Prophet speaks chiefly of the mean Condition of the Jews, when God
took them to be his peculiar people, and advanced them to such greatness; yet
that was a Representation of the State and Condition wherein God finds Sinners,
when he chooses them out of the World, and sets than apart for himself. Our
righteousness is but as filthy rags. Isaiah 64.6.
These do not reach to cover a man's Nakedness, but it is seen through them;
and if they be filthy rags, they rather make a person more loathsome, than
become an Ornament to him, so far as they do reach. So our best Works, or
Duties, reach but a little way, they extend but to a small part of our lives;
and so far as they do reach, they are polluted and defiled with sin. We must
not come with our own righteousness to Christ, but we must be married to
Christ, that we may bring forth fruit to God. Romans 7.4.
And if any say, we are married to Christ by faith, and so must receive that
Grace whereby we believe, before we are married to him. I answer, It is in this
case, as it happens in some Marriages. If a mean person marry one that is much
above her, tho she be entitled by Marriage to what is her Husband's, if she
has not wherewithal to bear the Charge of the Marriage, or to come to him, as
Rebecca did to Isaac, she must take on trust what will defray this Charge, on
the Credit she has by such a designed Marriage, or be furnished with what is
necessary from him. So, tho we are entitled to the benefits of Christ, by our
believing on him; yet it is given to us to believe on him for his sake; Phil
1.29.
through whom we receive the first Grace, as well as all the rest.

2. There is nothing required in us to make the Grace of God to become
effectual. He does not as those that make choice of such as nature has
qualified or fitted for improvement to great employments; or take the advantage
of any good humor which he finds men in, that may dispose them to Eternal
Life, as some interpret the words of the Evangelist, which in our Translation,
were ordained to eternal life. Acts 13.48.
Nebuchadnezzar, when he would take some of the Children of the Captivity to
train up for his Service, chose such as were well-favoured, or fightly; and
such as were skilful in all wisdom, and cunning in knowledge, and understanding
science, and such as had ability. Daniel 1.4.
But God does not seek out such for his Service; He makes the heart of the rash
to understand knowledge, and the tongue of the stammerers to speak plainly.
Isaiah 32.4.
The Carpenter indeed must look out such Wood as is naturally fitted for his
use; he cannot make a crooked piece straight by bending, or make a knotty piece
cleave. But a Founder can take any piece of Metal of what size or form soever,
or however rusty, or battered, and cast it into what Mold or Form he pleases.
So God can of stones raise up children to Abraham. Matthew. 3.9.
And as he shows the freeness and riches of his Mercy in choosing the worst of
Sinners; so he shows the power of his Grace, in making a thorough change in
those in whom he finds the most deep-rooted Prejudices against the Gospel. He
turned Paul when he was in his full Carreer toward Hell; while he was
breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the Church; Acts 9.1.
and verily thought he ought to do many things against the name of Jesus of
Nazareth; and 26.9. Gal. 1.23, 24.
so that they glorified God in him, when they saw such a wonderful change
wrought in him.

But tho there be nothing in us which may oblige God to bestow his Grace on us,
or facilitate his Work in our Conversion, or drawing us to Christ; yet as Faith
is our Act, there is something required in order thereto, that we may believe
with all our heart, Acts 8.37.
or freely and willingly take hold on God's Covenant. Prove. 27.7. Matthew. 7.6.
Matthew. 11.28. Revel. 22.17.
The full stomach loathes the honey comb, and swine will tread pearls under
their feet. Therefore only those that are weary and heavy laden, and those that
thirst, are invited to come to Christ, because none but such will come. John
asks the Pharisees and Sadduces, Matthew. 3.7.
Who had warned them to flee from the wrath to come; whereby he does not, I
suppose, mean the wrath that was to come upon that nation by the Romans: but
the damnation of Hell, Luke 21.23. Matthew. 23.33. 1 These. 1.10.
as our Savior elsewhere calls it: T^^s is the wrath to come, which Jesus
deliver^^^ from: The Sadduces did not believe that there was any Future state,
and consequently any wrath to come: The Pharisees trusted in themselves that
they were righteous, and so could not apprehend any danger of the wrath to
come. Therefore he seems to question their sincerity in the profession which
they made, and requires them to bring forth fruit meet for repentance, and not
to ground their hopes upon their Descent from Abraham. As men are to give a
reason of the hope that is in them, 1 Peter 3.15.
so they should have some reason for their believing, or coming to God by Jesus
Christ.

I shall take the liberty here to refer to what has been said by a Grave Sober
man on this Subject, he being a person that none will suspect of going too far
on this hand. Mr. Walter Marshal in the Gospel Mystery of Sanctification, p.
207, etc.
In the Instructions that he gives to prevent the defects that we are most
liable to in the first Act of Faith, he tells us, 1. We must believe with a
full persuasion, that we are Children of Wrath by Nature, subject to the Curse
of the Law, the Power of Satan, and insupportable misery to all Eternity. 2. We
must believe assuredly, that there is no way to be saved, without receiving all
the saving benefits of Christ; his Spirit as well as his Merits, Sanctification
as well as Remission of Sins by Faith: It being (as he says) the ruin of many
souls, that they trust on Christ for the remission of Sins, without any regard
to Holiness, when as these two benefits are inseparably joined in Christ [He
herein grants more than many will desire of him, that men should assuredly
believe this in the first Act of Faith]. 3. We must be fully persuaded of the
all sufficiency of Christ for the Salvation of our selves, and all that believe
on him. 4. We are to be fully persuaded of the truth of the general
Free-promise in our own particular case. 5. We are to believe assuredly that it
is the Will of God that we should believe in Christ, and have Eternal Life by
him, as well as any other. Now, without the two former of these, we shall not
mind coming to Christ, but shall make light of him; without the others, we
shall have little encouragement to come to him.

Now if any shall enquire whether these things which are perpatory to our
believing or coming to Christ, be in our own power, or are the effects of God's
Grace in us, and whether conversion do always follow thereupon; I Answer,

There are some things as much in our own power, as any of our natural or moral
actions are, that may have a tendency to our conversion: and therefore the
Prophet complains of Israel, Hos. 5.4.
that they did not frame their doings to turn to the Lord. And there is a
Sermon in the Morning Exercise, Published in the Year 1661.
reputed to be Mr. Greenhills (who was a person far from the suspicion of
ascribing too much to the power of Nature) which resolves the question, what
persons must, and can do toward their own conversion. Now it is certain that
men may as well go by their Natural power where the word is preached, as to
places of temptation. And there they are within the call of the Gospel; and so
are as the impotent persons at the Pool of Bethesda, Jo. 5.1, etc. 1 Cor. 3.5,
etc. Romans 10:17 Luke 8.12.
in a nearer capacity of cure, if it please God by his Spirit to give increase
to what is planted and watered: for faith comes by hearing: and therefore the
Devil endeavors to divert our minds from what we hear, lest we should believe
and be saved. We see further how much it is in man's power to bend his mind to
the study of any particular subject: we see it plainly not only in men's choosing
in general the study of Law, Physic, or Divinity; but those that addict
themselves to the study of Divinity, choose any particular point thereof to
treat on. And they who give not the least ground of hope, that there is any
saving work upon their own souls, will press upon others such things as the
consideration of, may incline and dispose them to believing; Ezekiel. 18.14, 28.
Psalm. 119.59. Romans 2 23.
and men have the same natural power to teach themselves, which they have to
teach others. But all this will not reach to conversion, any farther than God
is pleased to give to every one.

I will now show you what God does toward the conversion of sinners, or which
may have a tendency thereto; Some things he does by his Providence, which he
makes many times subservient to his Grace. Acts 17.26.
He that determines the bounds of men's habitation, casts them into such places
where they may hear the Gospel preached plainly, seriously, by such as persuade
men, 2 Cor. 5.11.
as knowing the terror of the Lord. And he may exercise them under some
affliction, which may be as a ground-rain soaking to the roots, and softning
the clods, and turning them to mold, that the seed that has been long buried
may spring up, of that which persons have a long time before heard, and never
thought of after; when some humbling affliction befalls them, they bethink
themselves, 1 Kings 8.47.
and repent. But such works fall short many times of true Conversion; Hos. 6.4.
Genesis 20.6. Jo. 16.8.
and this goodness proves but as the morning cloud, or early dew which passes
away. God does something further by his common grace, restraining men from much
evil. I confess, I think our Savior, where he speaks of the Spirit's reproving
or convincing the World, understands the World of such whom he chose his
Disciples out of, and distinguishes them from; but I think it is not intended
of any inward working of the Spirit upon their hearts, but of those Miracles
which he wrought, which confirmed the truth of Christ's Resurrection, and of
his Doctrine. By such means as I have now mentioned, men may be brought near
the Kingdom of Heaven, but never enter into it. Mark. 12.34. See Cassander's
consultation, p. 45.


But those preparations which Salvation does follow upon, are (as the soberer
Papists acknowledge) wrought by Gods Grace and Spirit. He enlightens the mind
so as we have a more clear sight of Heavenly things, and other apprehensions of
them than before we had when it pleases God to reveal his Son in us; Gal. 1.16.
Isa. 53.2. Cant 5.10. Jo. 6.44, 45.
he that before had no form nor comeliness in our eyes, nor any beauty that we
should desire him, is now the chief of Ten thousands in our account, and
altogether lovely. God draws us to Christ by teaching; tho I do not think that
all the efficacy of God's Grace consists in propounding things to the
understanding, or in enlightening the understanding to conceive aright of them.
But by a secret touch of his Spirit, he so effectually inclines our hearts to
him, 1 Kings 8.57. Phil. 2.20.
that we do in a sort naturally mind spiritual things: that is, freely, without
constraint. This of the Spirit's enlightening the mind, is not a peculiar notion
of Enthusiasts, but the commonly received Doctrine of sober Protestants. So
Bishop Pierson on the Article of the Holy Ghost, in his Exposition of the Creed
tells us, The work of the Spirit is double, external and general, or internal
and particular: By the former he reveals the will of God to the whole Church,
by the latter he illuminates the understanding of particular believers, that
they may receive the truth; the Holy Ghost working in us an assent to that
which is by the word propounded. Again, God does by his Spirit convince us
spiritually of our state and condition; and the word, Ephesians. 6.17. Heb. 4.12.
Acts 2.37.
which is the sword of the Spirit, and sharper than any two-edged Sword,
piercing to the dividing asunder betwixt the Soul and the Spirit, the joints
and the marrow; pricking sinners at the heart, so as it shall be as a Sword in
their bones; and those sins which they went lightly under before (as David did
under his) are now a heavy burden, 2 Samuel 11. Psalm. 38.4.
too heavy for them. And these convictions he makes as a bearded arrow, which
while men endeavor to shake off, torment them more, and they shall not be able
to put off the thoughts of their sins, but (as David's) they shall be
continually before them; Psalm. 51.3.
so that they shall have no rest in their spirits till they come to Christ.

But now doubts do ordinarily arise in the minds of Christians, whether they be
rightly humbled; whether they be sufficiently humbled; whether they have been
long enough under these preparations.

1. They are ready to suspect that their trouble for sin is not kindly, that it
is rather from self-love, and fear of punishments, than from love to God, and
sense of the nature of sin, as it is against God, and displeasing to him.

Now to this I answer, That God has placed our affections in the Soul, as
handles to take hold on it, and particularly, Jer. 32.40. Prove. 16.6.
Fear: and he does not only after conversion put his fear into our hearts (or
at least continue it there) that we may not depart from him, but may thereby
depart from evil; Genesis 2.17.
but he gave an intimidating threatening to man in the state of innocence, to be
a means to keep him from sin. And at first conversion we ordinarily flee from
the wrath to come; Matt. 3.7. Heb. 6.18.
or to avoid that, flee for refuge to lay hold on the hope that is set before
us. But there is a frequent exercise of Evancal repentance after Conversion.
Men espy a Tree in a storm, or in the heat, and betake themselves to it for
shelter or shade: but when they come at it, they find fruit which they did not
at such a distance see, or in such a fright or trouble consider; but having
found it, they are (at last) as much pleased with it, as with the covert or
umbrage of it. So we sit under the shadow of Christ with great delight, and his
fruit is sweet to our taste. Cant. 2.3.
In Marriage, Estate and Conveniences of Life are first treated of, and
conjugal love increases by society or converse; you have first betaken your
selves to Christ, or desire to come to him to save you from Hell, but does this
(upon second thoughts) satisfy you? Can you content your selves herewith? or
rather do you not desire that he would bless you in turning you from your
iniquities, and say with Paul, Lord, Acts 3.26. Acts 9.6.
what would thou have me to do? It matters not so much what is our first
motive to bring us to Christ, if it do not terminate our desires, when we have
occasion and opportunity more fully to consider things. A man may address
himself to a person at first on the account of her Portion, to pay his debts,
and keep him out of Prison, and answer some other occasions: but upon further
knowledge of her, when he is freed from his debts, and extricated out of his
troubles, he finds those accomplishments and qualifications in her which are a
more abundant satisfaction to him than all her Estate.

For the fear of Christians that they have not been sufficiently humbled, and
so that they should have the wounds of their consciences healed slightly,
before they be sufficiently searched or drawn; I answer, It is true when
persons have been thoroughly humbled for their sin, it may work in them a
greater aversion from it, and a more fixed resolution against it. As when
Ephraim had suffered much for their sin of Idolatry, Hos. 14.3, 8.
they would not say any more to the work of their hands, ye are my Gods: but
would rather say, what have I to do any more with Idols? and tho the Jews were
much addicted to Idolatry, yet the destruction of their Temple and City by the
Caldeans, and their Captivity in Babylon, did much reclaim them from it. Yea,
God is pleased to deal variously with persons, either according as their former
conversations have been; where men's sins have been notorious, God does many
times make their Repentance as notorious, or as the frame and temper of their
hearts is: Isa. 28.26.
he that instructs the husbandman to use several means for getting out his
Corn, as the nature of it requires, or as it is threshed with more ease or
difficulty; does himself exercise persons under affliction as need requires,
till he has brought their uncircumcised hearts to be humbled, to accept of the
punishment of their iniquity. Levit 16.41.
And so in bringing Souls to Jesus Christ, he exercises them under different
degrees of humiliation, as he sees their state to require; or as he intends for
the future to deal with them: But those that have to do with troubled Souls, or
such as are humbled under a sense of their sin, should take heed of tampering
too much in keeping them down, lest they do as Physicians; who that they may
thoroughly subdue a disease, bring their Patients so low, that they cannot
recover their strength, and raise them up again: and let Christians themselves
take heed, lest out of a mistaken modesty or humility, they think they can
never be sufficiently humbled, and so refuse to be comforted. It is not for us
to teach our Physicians, Psalm 77.2.
or to prescribe to God how he should deal with us: I have heard of an Eminent
Man, who (in a deep humility) desired that God would show him his sin in its
own colors; or let him see the deformity of it, that he might be yet more
humbled for it; and God did show it to him so as to make him go mourning to his
grave. And I have likewise heard of a wowan, that made the like request to God,
thinking she could never be sufficiently humbled for her sin. But it pleased
God to give her such a sight of her Sin, that (like Heman) while she suffered
his terrors, Psalm 88.15.
she was distracted; and in that Condition killed her own Child. It is the end
that determines the manner and measure of the means leading thereto. And that
Humiliation and Conviction is sufficient, that makes us willing to forsake our
Sin, and come to Christ. A kindly Sorrow and Trouble for Sin, Jer. 31.19. Ezekiel.
16.63.
may grow upon us (as I lately said) after Conversion, and Sense of Pardon.

For the other doubt of Christians, that they have not been long enough under
the pangs of the New Birth, (as they speak) and know not whether they may not
be too forward to believe.

I answer, That if by believing, we mean a persuasion or confidence, that our
sins are pardoned; we may believe too soon. P. 172.
And Mr. Marshall (in the forementioned Treatise) notwithstanding all that he
has said of Assurance being Essential to Faith, acknowledges, That many must
be taught to doubt, whether their present State be good, and that it is
Humility so to do; that we must find out the certainty and sincerity of our
Faith and Obedience, by Self-examination, before we can have a well-grounded
Assurance, that we are in a state of Grace and Salvation already; and that such
an Assurance belongs to the reflect Act of Faith, and is not of the Essence of
that Faith whereby we are justified and saved. But if by believing, we mean
coming to God by Jesus Christ, Psalm. 119.60. 1 John 3.23. Esther 2.12.
we should make haste and not delay to keep this command, as well as others. We
are not to think, that as the Queens of Persia were to be prepared Six months
with oil of myrrh, and six months with sweet odours, and other things, before
they might be admitted to the King; so we must continue such a time under
Humiliation, and so long under Contrition, before we may presume to come to
Christ. For tho (it is true) we should count the cost of being his Disciples,
Luke 14.28. Matthew. 13.21.
for want of which many (as it is in the Parable of the Sower) are forward to
hear the word with joy, and believe for a time, but afterward fall away; yet
it is not necessary that we suspend our believing till we have thoroughly
weighed every thing. It is not in this case as in ordinary Marriages, where
Persons should inform themselves well of every particular before they engage,
because when once engaged it will be too late to repent, or to make a better
choice. But it is herein, as if a Person had one propounded to her, that she
must Marry, or be undone; and one who (they know) will put her upon nothing, or
require nothing of her which she can justly except against, in whom there is
nothing that she can dislike; there can be no danger or inconvenience in
finishing such a Match, without further delay. So if there were any other Name
whereby we could be saved; if Christ did put us upon any thing, or require any
thing of us which Heaven will not countervail; or if he would not have us yet
come to him, we might defer our believing. And tho something is to be done (as
I have said) to make us willing to come to Christ, yet there is no long time
required for the Soul to continue in a State of Preparation; the whole Work
has been done at once, Acts 2. Acts 9. Acts 16. Vol. 2. 148.
as we see in those that were converted at Peter's Sermons, in Paul, in the
Jailer: As Mr. Charnock does ingeniously illustrate it: The preparation of the
Subject is necessary, but this preparation may be at the same time with the
conveyance of the Divine Nature. As a warm Seal may both prepare the hard Wax,
and convey the Image to it by one and the same touch.

CHAP. XI.
I Will finish all with a few words about the Necessity of Holiness, both for
the allaying of those heats that are amongst some about it, and for preventing
or removing the Prejudices of Men against it. There is no need of
distinguishing betwixt the Necessity of Holiness or Obedience, to the beginning
of our Justification, and to the Continuation of it, among those that
(according to the Doctrine of the Church of England) believe the Perseverance
of the Saints, and that there is no Intercision of Justification. But there is
a Necessity of Holiness in those that are justified; for tho we may be
justified at first by such a Faith as is only in tendency to obedience, but
wants time and opportunity to put it self forth; yet, where Faith is unfeigned
(and only such Faith justifies) it will, as there is occasion and opportunity,
work by love; so, Gal. 5.6. 1 Cor. 6.11. Heb. 12.14.
that whom God does justify in the name of Christ, he does also sanctify by his
spirit; therefore without holiness none shall see God; Yet we are not to think
that Holiness is required on the same account with Faith, much less in
co-ordination with the righteousness of Christ. I doubt it is a piece of
ordinary Christian's Divinity, that the righteousness of Christ serves only as
grains of allowance to make our righteousness current where it is too light.
But as Christ has no sharers in his Mediation, so neither is there any thing
needful to be added to his satisfaction; but we are acquitted only upon the
account thereof; and whatever we do, serves not for so much as grains of
allowance to make his satisfaction current with God for us.

But yet it is necessary upon other accounts, not only because God will insist
on it, as a thing condecent to his Holiness, who is of purer eyes than to
behold evil; Heb. 1.13.
but there is a natural necessity of it as a means to our chief end, which is
to glorify God, and enjoy him. As when Nebuchadnezzar chose some of the
Captivity to serve under him, Dan. 1.3, etc.
he would not only have them well-favoured, and fed with the King's Meat and
Wine, that they might appear sightly before the King; but had such chosen as
had good Natural Abilities, and had them taught the Learning and Language of
the Caldeans, that they might be fit to do him Service. So God does not only
delight in Holiness, but indeed without that, we are not fit to serve him; we
are naturally reprobate to every good work; Tit. 1.16.
and we must be God's workmanship, created in Christ Jesus to those good Works
which he has before ordained, that we should walk in them. But it is likewise
necessary, that we may enjoy that happiness which he has prepared for us. He
brings in the Highways and Hedges, Luke 14.23.
the meanest and most unworthy to partake of his Glory. But if a King should
invite those that are Sick, and that of some loathsome Disease, to eat at his
Table; if he would of his Bounty and Goodness dispense with the smell and
loathsomeness of their Disease; it would be no favor to them (in the Condition
wherein they are) to sit at the King's Table, while their Sickness makes them
nauseate every thing there, and the smell of Meat to be offensive to them: But
it would be a favor indeed, to be first recovered from their Disease, that
they might not be ashamed to appear in such a place, and that they might be
able to relish their Meat and Drink. This is our case, as we are unfit to
appear before God (in the state wherein we are) to whom our innerman is as
naked and open, as our outwardman is to men like our selves. So we are
alogether incapable of that Comfort and Happiness, which is to be found in the
Presence of God, or of the foretasts of it, which he gives his People in this
Life. Whatever Excellency there is in any thing, we must have a Sense or
Faculty correspondent therewith, or else we cannot understand or enjoy any
thing of it. There is a Beauty in a Rose, and in other Flowers, which those
that have their sight may enjoy the pleasure of; but there is further a sweet
smell, or fragrancy in them, which the sight intermeddles not with; and there
must be another sense, of Smelling, to enjoy the pleasure thereof. So neither
can we enjoy the pleasure of Wine without the sense of Tasting, or of Music
without the sense of Hearing. So likewise, if a man do not understand any thing
of Learning, or have no Genius thereto, he cannot take any pleasure in reading
Books, or in Academical Exercises, which are better than Wine and Music to
others. So, if a man be not sanctified or renewed after the Image of God, tho
he would dispense with his Sin, and admit him to Heaven, he would say of it (as
of the Service of God) what a weariness is it; Mal. 1.13.
he might be content to be there to be kept out of Hell, as here he might be
content to be in a place where there is a Sermon, to be sheltred from a storm.
It was to no purpose for Barzilla^ to go to David's Court, when nature was so
decayed in him that he could not enjoy any of the pleasures of it. 2 Samuel 19.35.


If it be said, this does not infer any necessity of Holiness here in this
life; for God can in a moment at death fit us for Heaven, which is easily done,
when we lay down this body, which is both a clog and a temptation to the Soul,
not only as it influences the Soul, but as most of our sins are in order to
provide for the body, or to fulfill the lusts of the flesh. I answer,

There is a necessity of Holiness here, partly as there is such an inseparable
connection betwixt that and Faith which works by love, and is dead without
works: this purifies the heart, overcomes the world; Gal. 5.6. Jam. 2.24. Acts
15.9. 1 John 5.4. Heb. 11. Isa. 43.21. Titus 2.14. Luke 1.74, 75.
and the Apostle spends an whole chapter in setting forth the virtue of it.
Besides, it is the pleasure of God to form a people for himself, that they may
in this world show forth his praise; and has redeemed us to be a peculiar
people to himself, that we may serve him in holiness and righteousness before
him all the days of our life: He would have our light shine so before men, that
they seeing our good works, may glorify our father which is in Heaven: so that
we do hereby keep up his Honor, and a Remembrance of him in the world. We have
hereby likewise some prelibations or foretastes of future Glory, which (as I
have already said) we are not capable of without Holiness; Numb. 13.23.
God would have some of the fruits of the Land of Canaan brought to the people
in the Wilderness, that (seeing what goodly fruit it was) they might be the
more encouraged to go to possess it, notwithstanding the difficulties and
dangers that they were to encounter with; and there is nothing that does more
raise our thoughts of future Glory, than the earnest that we have of it here;
which we can no more understand without Holiness, than we can the sweetness and
virtue of Wine by hearsay without tasting: We have hereby likewise a more
lively sense of the Goodness of God to us, in delivering us from the sinful
state wherein we are by nature; than we could have, if we were perfected at
once at death. If a man be suddenly surpised with an Apoplexy, and immediately
at once recovered from it, he has not such a sense of the Mercy that he has
received therein, as one that is recovered by degrees from a Fever, or some
other Disease, wherein he has felt much of pain, sickness, weakness; and has,
not only known what it was to be revived by Cordials, to be helped by Friends,
to to be eased by rest in his bed; but after his recovery he can reflect with
pleasure upon his former condition when it is past, and more prize his present
Ease and Health. So those who have with the Apostle groaned under a body of sin
and death, will not only reflect with pleasure upon the supplies of God's Grace
which they have had to strengthen them in their Spiritual conflict, and to
fortify them against temptations: but will afterward with more thankfulness
acknowledge the goodness of God, in giving them the victory through our Lord
Jesus, and bringing them into a state of perfection, where they shall be freed
from all annoyance of sin and temptations, which they could never have so well
understood, had it not been for the experience which they had in that middle
state, wherein they found such a conflict while they were under cure, and
recovering by degrees. So that it is a great mistake in any, to think that
holiness is not necessary, if we may be justified without it, or that
justification is our great privilege, and holiness a burden imposed upon us,
which we must be content to submit to, in consideration of so great a favor as
the pardon of our sins. Holiness is rather our honor and happiness, Romans 6.22.
1 These 1.10. Acts 3.26.
the pressed of fruit of our being the servants of God here; and Christ does not
only save us from our sins in delivering us from the wrath to come; but by
blessing us in turning us from our iniquities.

Thus have I briefly touched several things, which more Learned men have
treated of with more clearness and acurateness: but I have not written to
supply the defects of others, or to add to what they have done: but considering
that this small Treatise might fall into the hands of some, to whom it may not
happen to read larger and more learned Books, I have adventured to write
something, which I hope may be of some use to them for the right understanding
of the important truths therein handled: desiring my Readers heartily to
interpret what has been well intended, and to bear with that weakness which I
am as ready to own as any can be to charge upon me.

FINIS.

