FLANDERS.

OR, An Exact and Compendious Description of that fair, great, and fat Country
of FLANDERS.

Wherein the Inhabitants, Bounds, Length, Breadth, Division, Riches, Rivers,
Forests, Cities, Towns, and Villages, Castles, Principalities, Seaports,
Courts of Justice, Abbeys, with the chief ESTATES are observed.

As also a Distinct Relation of some Battles fought, and Towns won, unto the
now victorious Proceedings of the English and French Armies therein, with the
taking Mardike, Dunkerk, Winnoxbergh, Vuern, and D^^mude, to the present
besieging of Gra^eling.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Ratcliffe on Saint Bennets Hill near the Church.
1658.

To the Illustrious, and Renowned Peers, the Lord RICHARD CROMWELL, Lord
Chancellor of the famous University of OXFORD. And GILBERT Lord PICKERING, Lord
Chamberlain to his Highness the Lord PROTECTOR.
My Lords,
THe Sun affords his comfortable Rays, and Influence upon the lowest Valleys,
as the loftiest Hills, as well to shrubs, as Cedars; I hope the same from You,
who by Divine Goodness are placed such Glorious Lights in our Church and State.

I crave leave to Apologize, in rendering an account, for this Dedication, it is
not Presumptuous vainglory, or Sordid flattery, or Covetous desire of gain
that procured it; but first, this Country is in some measure come into your
possession; secondly, the weighty Actions on foot therein, have been, and are
steered, and guided by your prudent Heads, and victorious Arms. Thirdly, this
Country delineated, is that, in which you have good footing, and stout Forces:
being likely to shake off the Spanish heavy yoke, and acknowledge Obedience to
your Civil and Military Commands.

Fourthly, it is tendered to your hands as the first fruits of what you will,
it is hoped, comfortably enjoy: the first fruits have always been favorably
accepted of God, and good men.

Lastly, Princes Names, and fames are transmitted to posterity by writing:
Scripta manent, and how just it is to have your grave, wise, and Religious
Actings registered with eternal honor, this generation, if not utterly void of
reason and conscience, cannot but acknowledge, and succeding Ages reading them,
admire.

However should men turn ingrate, ye: God will not forget your labors, but
will justify his Word, that, such as honor him, He will honor; and he has
spoken it, of the righteous, his Name shall be exalted with honor, and the
upright shall be had in everlasting remembrance, 1 Samuel 2. 30. Psalm. 112. 6.

As God has made this good in our eyes at present upon your persons, so I
humbly pray his infinite goodness to continue it to your selves, and
posterities, even to the perfecting of it in the sight of Men and Angels; for
such honor have all his Saints, Psalm. 147.

Most Illustrious Lords, Your meanest servant DONALD LUPTON.

FLANDERS DESCRIBED.
IT is usual with Writers of these subjects 1. Name*
to begin with the Names of places, but where there is ambiguity and
uncertainty, and no real and absolute necessity to contend about it, it is
better to leave enquiry, and to rest satisfied with the common known name of
it, as it is at present called Flanders a Flando; from the various winds
blowing upon the coast.

It is one of the seventeen Provinces, which did 2. Country*
all formerly belong to the Emperor, and were given by the Emperor of Germany
unto the King of Spain; who held them till he brought in that bloody
Inquisition together with the Illegal oppressions, taxes and Spanish tyranny by
that insolent Duke of ALBA General of his Forces: Some of the Provinces
resolutely and unanimously joined themselves, and stood up in Arms for their
Lives and Liberties (for both were at stake to be lost) and did by the help of
the English, Scots, and French, defend themselves, and gained upon their Enemy,
and so cast out the Spanish Tyrannical intended slavery; these were called the
United States, or the States General of the United Netherland Provinces, by
name, Holland, Zealand, stift of Utretcht, OverIsel, East and West Friezland,
and have since their first contest gained a great part of Brabant, Gilderland,
Cleeveland, with some places of note in this Country of Flanders; as the
Scluice; the Dam, Hulst, strong places, and to the States beneficial, and
advantageous to curb the Spaniard.

The ancient Inhabitants and Natives were in 3. Inhabitants.
Caesar's time called Morini; as from the Moorish, fenny places, and Marshes,
which were then therein; now by good Husbandry, and skill, made rich, and fat
pastures and meadows.

The People being civilized, and reduced to 4. Made a County.
live under Government, this was formed into a County distinct by it self from
others, in the year of our Lord, 877. by Charles called and surnamed Le Chave
King of France, and then held its government from France.

It was anciently bounded by the Sea, and the 5. Ancient bounds of it.
Rivers Sum and Scheld, and then had these seven chief Cities, Arras, Gaunt,
Bruges, Ipre, St. Omer, Lile and Doway, but that is now altered by marriages,
and Wars; so that now the true bounds of Flanders are; first, Calais in
France on the West, the Sea on the North, and North-East; Zealand and part of
Brabant on the East, and Brabant, and Artois on the South.

It is richly seated, and large in it self, as having 6. Length and breadth of
it
about it for three parts, the Sea, and such rich Countries to trade to, as
England, France, Denmark and Holland, and by land all the Empire of Germany,
and Italy: It contains in length thirty five or thirty six leagues, amounting
to a hundred of our English miles; and that is from Antwerp to the New Fosse, or
Ditch toward France: In breadth it is full thirty leagues, or ninty English
miles from the Forest of Ninoven to Graveling. So that the Circumference of it
is three hundred English miles.

Some Countries are wholesome for air, but not 7. Air, fruitfulness of it.
rich; others are rich, but not wholesome; but Flanders is throughout both
pleasant, and healthy for air, and rich through all the parts of it, but the
air is the most pleasant further South, and the most rich toward France, and
the Sea.

It breeds large and able Cattle, as Horses and 8.* Cattle.*
Mares, so that it is grown into a proverb; to call a tall and lusty woman, a
great Flanders Mare, and so for cowes; and oxen, and other cattle.

Flanders is divided into three parts, viz. that* 9. Division of it into
Flanders, Flamingant, Gallicane, and Imperial.
which is called Flanders, Flaming-gant, the greatest and noblest, wherein are
three Capital Cities, as Gaunt, Bruges, and Ipre; as also the four Seaports
Scluice belonging to the States of Holland, Ostend, and Newport (as yet in the
Spanish power, but may ere long be rid of their old Masters, and come into the
hands of better. Duinkirk, victoriously won and strongly possessed by the
English, as the flourishing colors upon the Castles, Forts, and works do show;
and Graveline, which now lies grovelling ready to starve, and must ere long
without speedy relief (which is hard to come by) yield to his highness the
Lord Protector, it being beset at Sea with our stout Frigots, and at land by
Mardike on the East, Bourburgh on the South, and Calais on the West.

Flanders Gallican, the Name shows it lies upon France Westward, Artois on the
South, and the River Scheld on the East. Flanders Imperial is toward Brabant,
Flanders Gallican, and this are the richer for Wheat, but the other for Rye,
Oats, Peason, Fitches, Beans, Buck-wheat, flax and hemp, fruits and roots of
all sorts.

The Rivers in Flanders are many, which bring 10. Rivers and Forests.
in wealth, and are commodious for traffic, fishing, and pleasure, the chief
of them are the Lis, the Scheld, and Tender; there are many Forests, and
Woods, which do not only adorn and beautify it, but also breed infinite store
of cattle and abundance of foul, as Pheasants, Patridges and the like, but they
are also of singular use for building and fire, the chief are Neip and Nonnen,
the Country has no rocks or mountains but is even and flat, and so the more
fruitful, yet some pretty pleasant fruitful hills are intermixed, pleasant for
hauk and hound, and rather for prospect, then to tire the traveller in going
over them.

This County of Flanders exceeds most of her other 11. Cities and Towns walled
sixteen sisters for famous, beautiful, large, populour, strong, and pleasant
Cities and Towns; for there are no less then twenty eight walled Towns; which
because they are so many and so fair ones; I will name them, (viz.) Gaunt,
Bruges, Ipre the three chiefest: Lile, Doway, Tournay, Courtrick, Oudenade,
Aulst, Hulst, Termont, Biervleit, Scluice, Newport, Dunkerk, Graveling, Dam,
Burburgh, Dixmude, Vuerne, Ardenburgh, Ninove, Winoxbergh, Grammont, Cassel,
Demsee, Orchier, Lannoy.

Besides these, there are thirty other great 12. Unwalled Towns.
Towns, that had they Walls, they might be judged for their greatness to be
Cities; some of them have had Walls, but through the fury of War dismantled and
cast down, or else through time decayed, yet many, nay most of them have
Bulwarks, and Works, and Moats, and Draw-bridges to defend them from sudden
depredations, Some of them are mainly fortified, as Ostende and Mardike (which
place is happily now garrisoned by his Highness) and has been a pleasant
seat; but what by French and Spaniards has been reduced only to a strong, and
at present an impregnable Fort, so long as so many stout English hearts have it
in possession; they are as follow, Oudenburg, Messine, Belle, Poppering,
Torone, Ostburgh, Axeile, Middleburgh (there is one of the same name in
Zealand) Hoo, Werwick, Blanckberg, Houcke, Rosselor, Tielt, Giestle, Ecclo,
Lombarzide, Steechet, Honscot, Morcherede, Meenen, Haelvein, VVastein,
Steegers, Mergen, Haesbrook, Armentiers, which the other two of Ostende and
Mardike make up thirty fair, well peopled, and well traded Towns.

I cannot let two of the head Cities, and some of 13. Gaunt and Bruges briefly
described.
the others go or pass in silence, to wit, Gaunt and Bruges, Dunkerk and
Ostende. Gaunt was built by Julius Caesar four leagues distant from Sea, It is
seated upon three Rivers, the Scheld which runs by Antwerp, the Lis, and
Liette, which make within the City twenty six Isles, and fourscore and ten great
Bridges, under and through which goes small ships and Vessels with all sort of
wares, besides many smaller ones pleasant and profitable, It is strong by
nature and art, fortified by a strong and a large Citadel, Gallant in
buildings, stately, high and uniforme, the wall more then sixteen English miles
about; there be six principal water-mills; one hundred and thirty Windmils upon
the walls; fifty eight public Churches, four Orders of Friars, twenty six
Schools of literature, fifty two Companies of Trades, and twenty seven Orders
and degrees of Weavers, of Gold and Silver, Silks, Linnin, VVollen, Tapistry,
Sarges, Fustions, VVorsteds, Buckroms, and all other sorts of Stuffs; this City
is famous for the birth of the Emperor Charles the fifth, and that valiant
Prince-like John of Gaunt.

Bruges is little inferior, for it is a stately Town 14. Bruges.
and ancient, strong and healthy, the Wall is five Italian miles in compass,
has many Schools, in it are threescore and six Churches well built and
beautified, the chief of them is dedicated to Donatus: here are sixty eight
free Companies, besides abundance of Cloisters, Nunneries and Priories; the
City for health and pleasure is frequented by great persons of Nobles and
Gentry, it is well stored for all sorts of provision and at cheap rates, its
full of pleasant Gardens, Orchards and walks, you may guess of the rest by
these two, famous in building, riches, commerce and pleasure.

I will refer the story of Dunkerk toward the end 15. Villages in Flanders.
of this Treatise, and so I show you the gallantnesse of this County for the
great number of rich and pleasant Parishes and Villages that are in it, being
one thousand one hundred fifty four, wealthy and great as any in Europe,
besides 16. Castles.
the great number of Castles, Fortresses, Seigniories, Noble and Gentlemen's
Houses beautiful and large, and rich, and to augment the splendour of this
County there are forty eight fair 17. Castles, Abbeys.
Abbeys, besides Nunneries a vast number of Priories, Canonical Colleges, and
Monasteries, so that the Spaniards, when they came first into Flanders and
beheld the variety of buildings and multitude of Parishes (notwithstanding it
has been so harrassed by Wars for these sixty years) said that all Flanders
was but one entire City of pleasure and profit: and who knows not that old true
saying that France is the great and mightiest Kingdom of all Europe, Milan the
mightiest Dukedom, and Flanders the mightiest and greatest County.

Next observe that in this Country there 18. Dignities and Government and
Officers of State.
are five ancient Vicounties, viz. of Gaunt, Ipre, Vuerne, VVinnoxbergh, and
Haerbleck. The States of Flanders consist of four members, Nobles, Prelates,
Towns, Castleneues, or Commanders of Castles and Towns, here are in Flanders
thirty one Courts of Justice or Bayliwicks, four great Baronies which all give
the Bear for their Arms, but distinguished 19. Principalities.
by the fields, viz. Pamele, Cison, Heine, Boulaer; there are eighteen Baronies
of latter erection, yet of great Command: here are also twelve Preres in this
County in imitation of France: here also are three Principalities of
Steinhawse, Gauree, and Espinoy.

I will not omit to name the Earl of Flanders 20. Officers peculiar to the
Earl of Flanders.
chief Officers, such as follow him and are of his Court, and have Lordships
and Seigniories of inheritance in Flanders annexed to their office, there are,
first, a great Constable, two Marshals for Justice, a Master of his horse,
chief Master of his Game, a Chancellor, a Chamberlain: four Receivers of his
Revenues, a chief Steward, besides abundance of inferior Officers and
Ministers under these: he also has a set number of Chaplains, three
Secretaries, one for the Church-affaires, one for State-affaires, 21. The
Earls Revenues.
and one for his own special occasions, the Earls Revenues and estate in times
of peace were wondrous large, from his Churches and Religious persons, from his
own Hereditary Lands, and from his customs upon all Commodities by sea and
land, computed to amount to the sum of two millions of Rix dollers or Crowns
by the year in our moneys according to pound sterling, after this rate they
come to five hundred thousand pound per ann.

I promised ere I concluded to set down the State of Dunkirk and Ostend, both
of them have 22. Ostende.
been subject to the fury of War, and change of Lords and Laws: for Ostend
'twas a fishing Town, and lived by what they got at Sea, as well by labor as
by Pyracy; for they used both as well against us English, as against the
Hollanders, who once were Masters of it, and did by the valor of English
Commanders, especially Sir Francis Vere, and Horatio afterward Lord Vere his
valiant brother, and Sir John Ogle with other hardy Commanders hold out a
tedious siege of three years, three months, and odd days against all the
Spanish power and strength, who spared neither men nor bullets, to get it into
his hands; which at last (when it was not a Town, but an heap of battered
Rubbish) by the fury of his Cannon and Grenades) when it had cost him almost a
million of men and millions of moneys was honorably yielded into his hands; to
the never dying fame and honor of our Commanders and soldiers, and so the
Spaniard has kept, and builded it anew, so that at present it is a neat pretty
new town, but strongly fortified, and has done a world of mischief to our
Merchants, Fishermen, and Colliers, and would have been a sore nest of Pirates
had they not been valiantly kept prisoners within by our stately Men of War,
who have barred up this nest of pickeroons with good Cannon, and stout Seamen;
and who will (I hope) ere long roust them out of this Hole, and make them look
out another kennel; and reduce O end as Dunkerk is, to the obedience of his
Highness, to the benefit of all Merchants and honor of our Nation.

And now we are almost come to a period, only 23. Dunkerk.
this Place must not be omitted. It has the name from the Church Duin-kerk, in
Dutch signifying a Church in or near the Downs, or to be seen in the Downs as
a mark at Sea: there is a convenient Harbor for shipping, and a strong Castle,
the Town indifferent large, well built, too good for such vermin as are now
cast out of it, strong it is, and well Bulwark'd toward sea and land; it is
commodiously seated for pleasure and profit, the great Church is fair in
building, and will be fairer when as Popish superstition is removed, and the
Gospel preached in its with vigor, zeal, and purity which is already begun;
the Townsmen may praise God for so happy a change, it has been subject to many
alterations; I will only name some for brevities sake, it was sacked,
pillaged, and burned, Anno. 1558. by Monsier Terms. It was besieged and won
from the Spaniard by the French, Anno 1655. Again, the peace being not broke
betwixt England and Spain it was regained by the Spaniard (but he was beholden
then to us for it) and now this present year after a short siege, though hot
for the time; it was at first yielded into the hands of his Majesty of France,
who presently redelivered it into the Lord Lockarts possession for his
Highness, who now is sole owner of it and Mardike her strong neighbor; both
turned from Spanish and French fashion into English: So that at present
Flanders is under the Government of two free States, to wit, England and
Holland, and under two Kings, of France and Spain.

This Couutrey has been the seat of War for 24. Battles in Flanders.
sixty years and upwards, sometimes by the Dutch and Spaniards, who worryed one
another in this Country in several sieges, as that of Scluis, and that at Dam,
and two voyages to Hulst; the first time the Prince of Orange was glad to come
off with some loss, but the second time entering with a strong Army took that
Town of Hulst, and the States of the LowCountreys do keep it garrisoned at this
present, it is not far distant from sea.

It has also been the thorough-fair for the French and Spanish armies to range
and rove in, to the extreme harassing and impoverishing the husbandman and
trades.

The most famous battle that has been fought in Newport Battle.
this Country was that of Neiwport; great were the Armies as well that of the
States, as that of the Archduke Albertus, and almost for number equal, the
advantages of wind, or Sun, or ground little or none; the States had a sad
morning, and the ArchDuke a fatal evening, for the Spaniards cut off twelve
hundred stout and hardy Scots at a narrow passage, (a great loss for the
quality of the soldiers, or number at that pinch of time, for they were (with
the English) the flower of the States Army, the Spaniards followed their game
so furiously, that Prince Maurice left the field, all the Dutch ran a
shipboard, that valiant and wise Sir Francis Vere was shot in the morning,
which wound rendered him unable for Command that day, but he committed it to his
brother a prosperous, and religious Leader; who managed it so, that when the
Spaniard had gained so much ground that they possessed the Cannon, and cried
out Sancta Maria, Victoria, victoria, and all was given for lost, yet the
English Regiments (who only kept and won the field) did so pour their
bullets amongst the enemies, that they presently regained the Ordnance, and
charged them presently with small shot, and discharged them so successfully,
that the Spaniards were forced to leave the field in disorder; that night, and
their heels was their shelter. But the English pursuing their victory slew and
cut down all they overtook straggling, so that the day was gained by the
English, who did not only gain that field then, but from time to time have
upheld the Low Countries; who in truth had been totally ruined by the Spaniard,
without our help, this famous battle was fought with at least forty five
thousand men on both sides.

And now at present this County of Flanders is the Seat of War, wherein
England and France are tugging against Spain, and hitherto have performed
admirable service, as the taking of Bourburgh and Mardike, the surrender of
Dunkerk into our hands, that Town so infamous for Piracies; the great overthrow
given to the Spaniards striving to relieve it, with a great number of field
Officers and others, made prisoners, the speedy gaining of VVinnoxberg, Vuern,
Dixmude, Towns that have all of them titles added to their names; as Dunkerk
for trade, Winnoxbergh for a gallant Market, Vuern for pleasure, and Dixmude
for excellent butter.

And at this Instant that strong seated, deep moated and treble-walled Town of
Graveling is besieged, Newport and Ostend kept close In, which when gained will
cause the Spaniard to shrug and shrink in his bombasted titles and Bravadoes;
and be a just cause of Englands triumph, and rejoicing over the proud Spaniard.

FINIS.

