THE Assemblies SHORTER CATECHISM Drawn out into distinct PROPOSITIONS, AND
Proved by plain and pertinent Texts of Scripture at large.

With short Rules of Direction for Masters of Families, how to use this Book to
the best advantage.

By Thomas Lie, M. A. and sometimes Minister of the Gospel at Alhallows
Lumbardstreet.

London, Printed in the Year, 1674.

The Principles of the Christian Religion Comprehended in the Assemblies
Shorter Catechism; Drawn out into several distinct Propositions, and proved by
plain and pertinent Texts of Scripture.
Plain Directions for the more profitable use of this Book.
1. I Advise, That it may be gone through in a Family, constantly once a Month.
To that end, I have divided it into Thirty parts, and fixed the day of the
Month, at the head of every part in the Margent.

2. Let it be once, or twice distinctly read over, and that by parts, so much
only at a time, as is allotted for one day: As for example; from the first to
the fifth question, the first day; from the fifth, to the ninth question, the
second day; and so on to the end.

3. When your first begin to examine your Family, let them answer only within
Book; and after you have once, or twice, gone over the whole Catechism within
Book, and that you perceive their understandings to be somewhat enlightened,
then, and not till then, let them be required to answer without Book.

4. In all your Examinations, through every Answer of the Catechism, keep
close, and constant to these Questions.

Suppose the first Question.
1. Propose the Question, as it is in the Book, Thus;

Q What is the chief end of Man? Then let the learner repeat the Answer; Thus.

A. Man's chief end is to glorify God, and to enjoy him for ever.

2 Q. How many Doctrines, or distinct Truths, are in this Answer?

A. There are two.

3 Q. What is the first Doctrine in this Answer?

A. That, Man's chief end is, to glorify God.

4 Q. How is this Doctrine proved?

A. It is proved out of 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or
whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God.

5 Q. Where lies the force of this Text, to prove this Doctrine?

A. In these words, Do all to the glory of God.

6 Q. How know you, that the force lies in these words?

A. Both by the sense of the words themselves, and also because these words are
printed with a different character, or letter, from other words of the same
Text.

7 Q. But what if at any time, as it is often in the Catechism, all the words of
the Text are printed alike?

A. Then the force of the proof lies in the whole Text.

Having asked these seven Questions, then proceed to the second Doctrine; and
ask the very self-same Questions, and so of every Doctrine, that shall be found
in any Answer: Thus,

Q. What is the second Doctrine?

A. Next to the glorifying of God, to enjoy him for ever.

Q. Why say you so? This is no Doctrine, for it is not full and perfect sense;
therefore look narrowly into your Book, especially to the first Doctrine, and
there you will find some other words, which being added to what you have said,
the sense will be full and complete.

Note with all care, that when ever you ask the Learner a Doctrine, be sure, he
give you full, and complete sense, especially in second, third, fourth, or
fifth Doctrines, etc. Now then,

Q. 1. What is the second Doctrine in this Answer?

A. That Man's chief end, next to the glorifying of God, is to enjoy him for
ever.

Q. 2. Now indeed you answer right. How is this Doctrine proved?

A. It is proved out of Psalm. 73.25, 26. Whom have I in heaven, etc.

Q. 3. Where lies the force of this Text, to prove this Doctrine?

A. In these words, Whom have I in heaven but thee? none, that I desire besides
thee. v. 26. God is my portion for ever.

Q. 4. How know you, that the force lies in these words?

A. Both by the sense of the words themselves; and also because these words are
printed with a different character, from other words of the same Text.

Having thus gone over the whole Answer, and proved the Doctrines contained
therein; then proceed to the several Scriptures, and see, what Doctrines the
Learner can observe from them. Thus,

Q. 1. How many Texts of Scripture have you in this Answer?

A. Two.

Q. 2. Which is the first?

A. 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether therefore ye eat, etc.

Q. 3. What Docirine do you observe from this Text?

A. I observe from this Text, that Man's chief end is to glorify God.

Q. 4. From what words of this Text do you observe that Truth?

A. From these words, Do all to the glory of God.

Q. 5. Why from these words?

A. Because the force of the Text to prove this Truth, lies in them.

Then proceed to the second Scripture: Thus,

Q. 1. What is the second Text of Scripture in this Answer?

A. Psalm. 73.25, 26. Whom have I in heaven but thee? etc.

Q. 2. What Doctrine, or Truth, do you observe from this Text?

A. I observe from this Text, that Man's chief end next to the glorifying of
God, is to enjoy him for ever.

Q. 3. From what words of this Text do you observe that truth?

A. From these words, Whom have I in heaven, but thee? none that I desire
besides thee. 26. God is my portion for ever.

Q. 4. Why from these words?

A. Because the force of the Text to prove this truth, lies in them.

Q. 5. What if at any time you find all the words of the Texts of Scripture
printed alike, from what words then will you raise your Doctrine?

A. Not from any particular words of the Text, but from the whole.

In this familiar and rational method, you may easily proceed to examine upon
every Answer, and Scripture, in the whole Catechism.

The CATECHISM.
Q. What is the chief end of Man? First Day of the Month.


A. Man's chief end is, to glorify God, and to enjoy him for ever.

Man's chief end is,

1. To glorify God. Proved out of 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether therefore ye eat or
drink, or whatsoever ye do, Do all to the glory of God. 2. Next to the
glorifying of God, to enjoy him for ever. Proved out of Psalm. 73.25, 26. Whom
have in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth (...) desire beside thee,
v. 26. My flesh and my heart (...) eth, but God is the sirength of my heart,
and (...) portion for ever.
2. Q. What Rule has God given to direct us, how we may glorify, and enjoy
him?

A. The Word of God, which is contained in the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, is the only Rule to direct us, how we may glorify and enjoy him.

The word of God is, 1. Contained in the Scriptures of the Old, and New
Testarnent. Ephesians. 2.20. And are built upon the found ition of the Apostles, and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone. 2. The only Rule
to direct us -- How we may glorify God. 2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is prositable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness. 3. How we may enjoy God. 1 John
1.3. That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye also may
have fellowship with us, and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with
his Son Jesus Christ.


3. Q. What do the Scriptures principally teach?

The Scriptures principally teach, what Man is to believe concerning God, and
what duty God requires of Man. 2 Timothy 1.3. Hold fast the form of sound words,
which thou have heard of me, in Faith, and Love, which is in Christ Jesus.

4. Q. What is God?

A. God is a Spirit, infinite, eternal and unchangeable in his being, wisdem,
power, holiness, statice, goodness, and truth.

Qod is, 1. A Spirit. Joh. 4.24. God is a Spirit, from they that worship him,
must worship him in (...) it, and in truth. 2. Infinite. Joh. 11.7. Can thou
by searching find out God? Can thou find out the Almighty to perfection? 3.
Eternal, Psalm. 90.2. From everlasting, to everlisting, thou art God. 4.
Unchangeable. Jam. 1.17. With whom there is no variableness, neither shadow of
turning. 5. Infinite, Eternal, and Unchangeable in his Being, Exodus 3.14. And
God said unto Moses, I am that I am. And he said, Thus shall thou say unto the
Children of Israel, I am has sent me unto you. 6. Infinite, Eternal, and
Unchangeable in his Wisdom. Psalm. 147.5. Great is our Lord, and of great power,
his Understanding is infinite. 7. Infinite, Eternal, and Unchangeable in his
Power, and Holiness. Rev. 4.8. Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was,
and is, and is to come. 8. Infinite, Eternal, and Unchangeable in his Justice,
Goodness, and Truth, Exodus 34.6, 7. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful, and
gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth, keeping mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin, and that will by no means
clear the guilty.
5. Q. Are there more Gods than one? Second, Day.


A. There is but one only, the living and true God.

There is but one, 1. Only God, Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear, O Israel, The Lord our God is
one Lord. 2. Living and True God, Jer. 10.10. The Lord, he is the True God, he
is the Living God, and an Everlasting King.


6. Q. How many persons are there in the Godhead?

A. There are three persons in the Godhead, the Father, the Sell, and the Holy
Ghost, and these Three are one God, the same in substance; equal in power, and
glory.

1. There are three persons in the Godhead, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, Mat. 28.19. Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them, in
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 2. The three
persons in the Godhead are one God, the same in substance, equal in power, and
glory, 1 John 5.7. There are three that bear record in Heaven the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one.
7 Q. What are the Decrees of God?

The Decrees of God are his Eternal purpose, according to the Counsel of his
own Will, whereby, for his own Glory, he has foreordained whatsoever comes to
pass. Ephesians. 1.11, 12. Being predestined according to the purpose of him, who
works all things after the counsel of his own Will. 12. That we should be to
the praise of his glory.

8 Q. How dath God execute his Decrees?

A. God executes his Decrees, in the works of Creation and providence.

God executes his Decrees in the works, 1. Of Creation, Rev. 4.11. Thou have
created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created. 2. Of
Providence, Dan. 4.35. He does according to his Will in the army of heaven, and
among the inhabitants of the earth.


9 Q. What in the work of Creation? Third Day.


A. The work of Creation is Gods making all things, of nothing, by the word of
his power, in the space of sir days, and all very good.

The work of Creation is Gods making, 1. All things. Genesis 1.1. In the beginning
God created the heaven and the earth. 2. All things of nothing, by the word of
his power, Heb. 11.3. Through faith we understand, that the worlds were framed
by the word of God, so that things, which are seen were not made of things that
do appear. 3. All things in the space of six days, and all very good, Genesis
1.31. And God saw every thing that he had made, and behold, it was very good,
and the evening and the morning were the sixth day.


10. Q. How did God create Man?

A. God created Man, Male, and Female, after his own Image, in knowledge,
righteousness, and holiness, with dominion over the creatures.

God created man, 1. Male, and Female, after his own Image, Genesis 1.27. So God
created man in his own Image, in the Image of God created be him; male and
female created he them. 2. In Knowledge. Col. 3.10. And have put on the new Man,
which is renewed in Knowledge, after the Image of him, that created him. 3. In
Righteousness, and Holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. And that ye put on the new man, which
after God is created in Righteousness, and true Holiness. 4. With dominion over
the Creatures. Genesis 1.28. God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be
fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it, and have
dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every
living thing, that moves upon the earth.


11 Q. What are Gods works of Providence?

A. Gods works of Providence are, his most holy, wise. and powerful preserving,
and governing all his creatures, and all their actions.

Gods work of Providence are, 1. Most holy. Psalm. 145.17. The Lord is Righteous
in all his ways, and holy in all his works. 2. Most wise. Isa. 28.29. This also
comes forth from the Lord of hosts, which is wonderful in counsel, excellent
in working. 3. His powerful preserving all his Crcatures. Heb. 1.3. Upholding
all things by the word of his power. 4. His governing all his Creatures. Psalm.
103.19. His Kingdom rules over all. 5. His governing all his Creatures
actions. Mat. 10. 29. Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them
shall not fall to the ground without your Father.


12. Q. What special act of Providence did God exercise toward Man, in the
enate wherein he was created?

A. When God had created Man. he entered into a Covenant of life with him, upon
candition of perfect obedience, forbidding him, to eat of the tree of knowledge
of good and evil, upon pain of death.

1. When God had created man, he entered into a Covenant of life with him, upon
condition of perfect obedience, Gal. 3.12. The Law is not of Faith, but the man
that does them, shall live in them. 2. God forbade man, to eat of the tree of
the knowledge of good and evil, upon pain of death, Genesis 2. 17. But of the Tree
of Knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it; for in the day thou
eatest thereof, thou shall surely die.
13 Q. Did our first Parents continue in the estate wherein they were created?
Fourth Day.


A. Our first Parents being left to the freeedom of their own will, fell from
the state, wherein they were created, by sinning against God, Eccles. 7.29. God
has made man upright, but they have sought out many inventions.

14 Q. What is sin?

Sin is as any want of conformity unto, or transgression of the Law of God. 1
John 3.4. Whosoever commits sin, transgresses also the Law; for sin is the
transgression of the Law.

15 Q. What was the sin, whereby our first Parents fell from the estate,
wherein they were created?

A. The sin whereby our first Parents fell from the estate wherein they were
creared, was, their eating the forbidden fruit. Genesis 3.6. When the woman saw,
that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a
tree to be desired, to make one wise, he took of the fruit thereof, and did
eat, and gave also to her husband with her, and he did eat.

16 Q. Did all mankind fall in Adams first transgression?

A. The Cavenant being made with Adam not only for himself, but for his
posterity, all mankind, descending from him by ordinary generation, sinned in
him and fell with him, in his first transgresgression.

1. The Covenant was made with Adam. not only for himself, but for his
posterity. Genesis 3.28. and 2.16, 17. God blessed them, and God said unto them,
Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth.

Genesis 2.16, 17. The Lord commanded the man, saying, Of every tree in the
garden, thou may freely eat. V. 17. But of the tree of the knowledge of good,
and evil, thou shall not eat of it; for in the day thou eatest thereof thou
shall surely die. 2. All mankind, descending from Adam by ordinary generation,
sinned in him, and fell with him, in his first Transgression. Romans 5.18. By the
offense of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation.
17 Q. Into what estate did the fall bring mankind? Fifth Day.


A. The fall brought mankind into an estate of sin and misery. Romans 5.12. By
one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon
all men, for that all have sinned.

18 Q. Wherein consists the Sinfulness of that estate, whereinto man fell?

A. The Sinfulness of that estate whereinto man fell, consists in the guilt of
Adams first Sin, the want of Original Righteousness, and the corruption of his
whole nature, which is commonly called Original Sin? together with all actual
transgressions which proceeded from it.

The sinfulness of that estate whereinto man fell, consists in, 1. The guilt of
Adams first sin. Romans 5.19. By one man's disobedience, many were made sinners.
2. The want of Original Righteousness. Romans 3.10. There is none righteous, no
not one. 3. The Corruption of his whole nature, which is commonly called
Original sin. Ephesians. 2.1. Psalm. 51.5 You has he quickened, who were dead in
trespasses and sins. Psalm. 51.5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin
did my mother conceive me. 4. All Actual Transgressions, which proceed from
Original sin. Mat. 15.19, 20. Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders,
adulteries, fornications, theft, false witness, blasphemies. V. 20. These are
the things which defile a man.


19 Q. What is the misery of that estate, whereinto man fell?

A. All mankind by their fall, lost communion with God, are under his wrrath
and curse, and so made liable to all miseries in this life, to death it self,
and to the pains of Hell for ever.

All mankind by their fall, 1. Lost communion with God. Genesis 3.8, 24. Adam, and
his wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord, among the trees of the
garden. 24. So he drove out the man. 2. Are under Gods wrath. Ephesians. 2.3. We were
all by nature the children of wrath, even as others. 3. Are under Gods curse.
Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one, that continues not in all things, which are
written in the book of the Law to do them. 4. Are made liable to all miseries
in this life. Lam. 3.39. Wherefore does a living man complain? a man, for the
punishment of his sins? 5. Are made liable to death it self. Romans 6.23. The
wages of sin is death? 6. Are made liable to the pains of Hell for everMar.
25.41. Then shall he say to them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed,
into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.


20 Q. Did God leave all mankind, to perish in the estate of sin, and misery?

A. God having, out of his mere good pleasure, from all eternity, elected some
to everlasting life, did enter into a Covenant of grace, to deliver them out of
the state of sin, and misery, andto bring them into an estate of salvation by a
Redeemer.

1. God, out of his mere good pleasure, from all eternity, elected some to
everlasting life. Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us in him, before the soundation of
the world. 2. God did enter into a Covenant of Grace, to deliver his Elect, out
of the estate of sin iand misery, and to bring them into an estate of
Salvation, by a Redeemer. Romans 3.21, 22. But now, the Righteousness of God,
without the Law, is manifested, being witnessed by the Law, and the Prophets.
22. Even the Righteousness of God, which is by Faith of Jesus Christ, unto all,
and upon all them, that believe.
21 Q. Who is the Redeemer of Gods Elect? Sixth Day.


A. The only Redeemer of Gods Elect, is the Lord Jesus Christ, who being the
eternal Son of God, became man, and so was, and continues to be God and man,
in two distinct natures and one person for ever.

The Lord Jesus Christ.

1. Is the only Redeemer of Gods elect, 1 Timothy 2.5. There is one God, and one
Mediator between God and man, the man Jesus Christ. 2. Being the Eternal Son of
God, became Man, Joh. 1.14. The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us. 3. Was
God and man, in two distinct natures, and one person. Romans 9.5. Of whom Christ
came in the flesh? Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for ever. 4.
Continues to be God and man, for ever. 7.24. This man, because be continues
ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood.
22. Q. How did Christ, being the Son of God, become Man?

A. Christ the Son of God, became man, by taking to himself a true body, and a
reasonable soul, being conceived by the power of the Holy Ghost, in the womb of
the Virgin Mary, and born of her, and yet without sin.

Christ the Son of God became man, 1. By taking to himself a true body. Heb.
1.14. For as much then, as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he
also himself likewise, took part of the same. 2. By taking to himself a
reasonable soul. Mat. 26. 38. Then says he unto them, my soul is exceeding
sorrowful, even unto death. 3. By being conceived by the power of the Holy
Ghost, in the womb of the Virgin Mary, and born of her. Luke 1.31, 35. Behold,
thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a Son, and shall call his name
Tesus. 35. The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest
shall overshadow thee. 4. Christ was conceived, and born without sin. Heb.
7.26. Such an high Priest became us, who is holy, harmlese, undesiled, separate
from sniners.


23. Q. What Offices does Christ execute as our Redeemer?

A. Christ as our Redeemer executes the offices of a Prophet, of a Prieii, and
of a Ring, hoth in his estate of Humiliation, and Exaltation.

Christ as our Redeemer, both in the estate of Humiliation, and Exaltation,
executes the office of, 1. A Prophet. Acts 3.22. Moses truly said unto the
Fathers, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, of your brethren,
like unto me, him shall ye hear in all things, whatsoever he shall say unto
you. 2. A Priest. Heb. 5.6. Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of
Melehizedec. 3. A King. Psalm. 2.6. Yet have I set my King up in my holy Hill of
Sion.


24. Q. How does Christ execute the office of a Prophet?

A. Christ execuicth the Office of Prophet, in revealing to us, bohts Word, and
Spirit, the Will of God, for our salvatiou.

1. Christ executes the Office of a Prophet in veve aling to us the will of
God for our salvation, Joh. 15.18. No man has seen God at any time the only
begotten Son, which is in the besom of the Father, he has declared him. 2.
Christ reveals to us the Will of God, by his Word. John 20.31. These things are
written, that ye might believe, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and
that believing, ye might have life through his Name. 3. Christ reveals to us
the Will of God, by his Spirit. John 14.26. The Comforter, which is the Holy
Ghost, whom the Father will send in my Name, he shall teach you Allthings.
25. Q. How does Christ execure the Office of a Priest? Seventh Day.


A. Christ executes the office of a Priest, in his once offering up of
himself, a sacrifice, to satisfy divine Justice, and to recoucile us to God,
and in making continual intercession for us.

Christ executes the office of a Priest, 1. In his once offering up of
himself, a sacrifice, to satissie divine Justice. Heb. 9.28. Christ was once
offered, to hear the sins of many. 2. In his once offering up of himself, a
sacrifice, to reconcile us to God. Heb. 2.17. In all things it behoved him to
be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful, and faithful
High Priest, in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the suis
of the people. 3. In making continual intercession for us. Heb. 7.25. He is
able to save to the uttermost, them that come unto God by him, seeing he ever
lives, to make mtercession for them.


26. Q. How does Christ execute the office of a Ring?

A. Christ executes the office of a Ring. In subduing us to himself, in
ruling, and defending us, and in restraining, and conquering, all his, and our
Enemies.

Christ executes the office of a King.

1. In subduing us to himself. Psalm. 110.3. Thy people shall be willing in the
day of thy power. 2. In ruling, and desending us. Isa. 33.22. The Lord is our
Judge, the Lord is our Law giver, the Lord is our King, he will save us. 3. In
restraining, and conquering, all his, and our enemies. 1 Cor. 15.25. He must
reign, tall he has put all his enemies under his feet.
27. Q. Wherein did Christ's Humiliation consist?

A. Christ's Humiliation consisted, in his being born, and that in a low
condition, made mider the Law, underging the miseries of this she, the wrath of
God, and the cursed death of the cross, in being buried, and continuing under
the power of death for a time.

Christ's Humiliation consisted in his, 1. Being born, and that in a low
condition. Luke 2.7. She brought forth her first born Son, and wrapped him in
swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger. 2. Being made under the Law. Gal.
4.4. God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the Law. 3. Undergoing
the miseries of this life. Isa. 53.3. He is despised, and rejected of men, a
man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief. 4. Undergoing the wrath of God. Mat.
27.46. Jesus cried with a loud voice, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? 5. Undergoing the cursed death of the Cross. Phil. 2.8. He humbled himself,
and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross. 6. Being buried. 1
Cor. 15.4. That he was buried. 7. Continuing under the power of death for a
time. Mat. 12.40. As Jonas was three days, and three nights, in the whales
belly, so shall the Son of man be, three days, and three nights in the heart of
the earth.


28. Q. Wherein consists Christ's Eraltation?

A. Christ's Eraltation consists in his rising again from the dead, on the
third day, in ascending up into heaven, and sltting at the right hand of God
the Father, and in coming to judge the world at the last day.

Christ's Exaltation consists in his, 1. Rising again from the dead, on the
third day. 1 Cor. 15.4. That he rose again the third day, according to the
Scriptures. 2. Ascending up into heaven. Mar. 16.19. After the Lord had spoken
unto them, he was received up into heaven. 3. Sitting at the right hand of God
the Father. Mark 16.19. He was received up into heaven, and sat at the right
hand of God. 4. Coming to judge the world at the last day. Act. 17.31. He has
appointed a day, in the which, he will judge the world in Righteousness, by that
man, whom he has ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in
that he has raised him from the dead.


29 Q. How are we made partakers of the Redemption purchased by Christ? Eighth
Day.


A. We are made partakers of the Redemption purchased by Christ, by the
effectual application of it to us, by his holy Spirit.

We are made partakers of the Redemption purchased by Christ, 1. By the
effectual application of it to us. Joh. 1.12. As many, as received him, to them
gave he power, to become the Sons of God. 2. By his holy Spirit. Tit. 3.5, 6.
According to his mercy, he saved us by the washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost. v. 6. Which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus
Christ our Savior.


30 Q. How does the Spirit apply to us the Redemption purchased by Christ?

A. The Spirit applies to us the Redemption purchased by Christ, by working
Faith in us; and thereby uniting us to Christ, in our effectual calling.

The Spirit applies to us the Redemption purchased by Christ. 1. By working
Faith in us. Ephesians. 2.8. By grace ye are saved, through faith, and that not of
your selves, It is the gift of God. 2. By uniting us to Christ by Faith. Ephesians.
3.17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by Faith. 3. The Spirit unites us to
Christ in our effectual calling. 1 Cor. 1.9. God is faithful, by whom ye were
called into the fellowship, of his Son Jesus Christ.


31 Q. What is Effectual Calling?

A. Effectual Calling, is the work of Gods Spirit, whereby, convincing us, of
our sin, and misery, enlightening our minds in the knowledge of Christ, and
renewing our Wills, he does persuade, and enable us, to embrace Jesus Christ,
freely offered to us in the Gossel.

1. Effectual Calling is the work of Gods Spirit 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us,
and called us, with an holy calling. 2. In effectual Calling, the Spirit of God
convinces us, of sin, and misery. Act. 2.37. When they heard this, they were
pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, Men
and brethren, what shall we do? 3. The Spirit of God enlightneth our minds in
the knowledge of Christ. Act. 26.18. To open their eyes, and to turn them, from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God. 4. The Spirit of God
renews our wills. Ezekiel. 36.26. I will take away the stony heart, out of your
flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh. 5. The Spirit of God persuades,
and enables us, to embrace Jesus Christ, freely offered to us in the Gospel.
Joh. 6.44, 45. No man can come unto me, except the Father, who has sent me,
draw him. 45 Every man, that has heard, and learned of the Father, comes unto
me.
32 Q. What benefits do they, that are effectually called, partake of, in this
life?

A. They, that are effectually called, do, in this life, partake of
Justification, Adoption, Sanctification, and the several benefits, which, in
this life, do either accompany, or flow from them.

They, that are effectually called, do, in this life, partake of, 1.
Justification. Romans 8.30. Whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he
justified, them he also glorified. 2. Adoption. Ephesians. 1.5. Having predestined
us to the adoption of children, by Jesus Christ, unto himself. 3.
Sanctification, and several other benefits, which in this life, do either
accompany, or flow from Justification, Adoption, and Sanctification. 1 Cor.
1.30. Of him, ye are in Christ Jesus, who, of God, is made unto us, wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.


33 Q. What is justification? Ninth Day.


A. Justification is an Act of Gods free grace, wherein he pardons all our
sins, and accepts us, as righteous in his sight, only for the righteousness
of Christ, imputed to us, and received by Faith alone.

1. Justification is an Act of Gods free grace. Romans 3.24. Being justified
freely by his grace, through the redemption, that is in Jesus Christ. 2. In
Justification, God pardons all our sins. Ephesians. 1.7. In whom, we have
redemption, through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches
of his grace. 3. In justification, God accepts us, as Righteous in his sight.
2 Cor. 5.21. He has made him sin for us, that knew no sin, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him. 4. We are accepted, as Righteous in Gods
sight, only for the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us.

Romans 5.19. As by one man's disobedience, many were made sinners; so by the
obedience of one, shall many be made righteous.

5. The Righteousness of Christ, which is imputed to us by God, for our
Justification, is received by Faith alone. Gal. 2.26. Knowing, that a man is
not justified by the works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ, even
we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the Faith of
Christ.
34 Q. What is Adoption?

A. Adoption is an act of Gods Free Grace, whereby, we are received into the
number, and have right to all the privileges of the Sons of God.

1. Adoption is an Act of Gods Free Grace. 1 John 3.1. Behold, what manner of
love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of
God! 2. By Adoption we are received into the number of the Sons of God. Joh.
1.12. As many, as received him, to them gave he power, to become the Sons of
God, even to them, that believe on his Name. 3. By Adoption, we have right to
all the Privileges of the Sons of God. Romans 8.17. If children, then heirs,
heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ.
35 Q. What is Sanctification?

A. Sanctification is the worrk of Gods free grace, whereby, we are renewed in
the whole man, after the Image of God, and are enabled, more and more to die
unto sin, and to live unto righteousness.

1. Sanctification is the work of Gods free grace. 2 These. 2.13. God has from
the beginning, chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit.
2. By Sanctification, we are renewed in the whole. Man, after the Image of God.
Ephesians. 4.24. And that ye put on the new man, which, after God, is created in
righteousness, and true holiness. 3. By Sanctification we are enabled, more and
more, to die unto sin, and to live unto righteousness. Romans 8.1. There is no
condemnation, to them, that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh,
but after the Spirit.
36 Q. What are the benefits, which, in this life, do either accompany or flow
from Justification, Adoption, and Sanctification?

A. The benefits, which, in this life, do accompany or slow from Justification,
Adoption, and Sanctification, are assurance of Gods love, peace of Conseience,
joy in the Holy Ghost, increase of Grace, and perseverance therein, unto the
end.

The benefits, which, in this life, do either accompany, or flow from
Justification, Adoption, and Sanctification, are,

1. Assurance of Gods Love. Romans 5.5. Hope makes not ashamed, because the love
of God is shed abroad in our bearts, through the Holy Ghost, which is given
unto us. 2. Peace of Conscience. Romans 5.1. Being justified by Faith, we have
peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Phil. 4.7. The peace of God, which passes all understanding, shall keep your
hearts, and minds, through Christ Jesus.

3. Joy in the Holy Ghost. Romans 5.2. By whom also we have access, by Faith,
into this grace, wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God. 4.
Increase of Grace. Prove. 4.18. The path of the just, is as the shining light,
that shines more, and more, unto the perfect day. 5. Perseverance in Grace
unto the end. 1 John 5.13. These things have I written unto you, that Believe
on the Name of the Son of God, that ye may know, that ye have eternal life.

1 Pet. 1.5. Who are kept by the power of God, through Faith unto salvation.


37 Q. What benefits do Believers receive from Christ at their death? Tenth Day.


A. The souls of Believers, are, at their death, made perfect in holiness, and
do immediately pass into Glory, and their bodies, being still unsted to Christ,
do rest in their Graves, till the Resurrection.

At their death, Believers,

1. Souls, are made persect in holiness, Heb. 12.23. To the spirits of just
men, made perfect. 2. Souls do immediately pass into Glory. Phil. 1.23. Having
a desire, to depart, and to be with Christ. Luke 23.43. To day shall thou be
with me in Paradise. 3. Bodies, are still united unto Christ. 1 These. 4.14.
Them, which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. 4. Bodies do rest in their
Graves. Isa. 57.2. He shall enter into peace, they shall rest in their beds,
each one walking in his uprightness. 5. Bodies, do rest in their Graves, till
the Resurrection. Joh 19.26. Though, after my skin, worms destroy this body,
yet in my flesh shall I see God.
38 Q. What benefits do Believers receive from Christ at the Resurrection?

A. At the Resinrection, Believers being raised up in Glary, ^all be openly
acknowledged, and acquitted, in the day of Judgment, and made perfectly
blessed, in full enjoying of God, to all Eternity.

At the Resurrection, Believers shall be, 1. Raised up in Glory. 1 Cor. 15.43.
It is sower in dishonor, it is raised in glory. 2. Openly acknowledged, and
acquitted, in the da^ of judgment. Mat. 10.32. Whosoever shall confess m^^
before men, him will I also confess before my Father which is in Heaven. 3.
Made perlectly blessed, in full enjoying of God 1 John 3.2. When he shall
appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him, as he is. 4. Blessed in the
enjoying of God, to all Eternity, 1 These. 4.17. So shall we ever be with th^^
Lord.


39 Q. What is the duty, which God requires of Man?

The duty which God requires of man, is obedience to his revealed will. Mic.
6.8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord require
of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?

40 Q. What did God at first reveal unto Man, for the Rule of his Obedience?

The Rule, which God at first revealed to man, for his obedience, was the Moral
Law.

Romans 2.14, 15. When the Gentiles, which have not the Law, do, by nature, the
things contained in the Law, these having not the Law, are a Law unto
themselves. 15. Which show the work of the Law written in their hearts. 41 Q.
Where is the Moral Law summarily comprehended? Eleventh Day.


The Moral Law, is summarily comprehended in the Ten Commandments. Deuteronomy. 10.4.
He wrote on the Tables, according to the first writing, the Ten Commandments.

Mat. 19.17. If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments. 42 Q. What is
the sum of the Ten Commandments?

The sum of the Ten Commandments, is, to love, 1. The Lord our God, with all
our heart, with all our soul, with all our strength, and with all our mind,
Mat. 22.37, 38. Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with
all thy soul, and with all thy mind. 38. This is the first, and great
Commandment. 2. Our Neighbor, as our selves. Mat. 22.39. And the second is
like unto it, Thou shall love thy Neighbor, as thy self. 40. On these two
Commandments, hang all the Law, and the Prophets.


43 Q. What is the Preface to the Ten Commandments?

The Preface to the Ten Commandments, is, in these words. I am the Lord thy
God, which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of
^^ndage, Exodus 20.2.

44 Q What does the Preface to the Ten Commandments trach us?

A. The Preface to the Ten Commandments teaches us, That, because God is the
Lord, and our God, and Red^mer, therefore we are bound to keep all his
Commandments.

The Preface to the Ten Commandments teaches us, that we are bound to keep all
Gods Commandments:
1. Because God is the Lord.

Deuteronomy. 11.11. Thou shall love the Lord; and keep his Commandments always. 2.
Because the Lord is our God.

Deuteronomy. 11.11. Thou shall love the Lord thy God, and keep his charge, and his
statutes, and his judgments, and his Commandments always. 3. Because the Lord is
our Redeemer.

Luke 1.74, 75. That we, being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might
serve him without fear. 75. In holiness, and righteousness, before him, all the
days of our lives.
45 Q. What is the first Commandment? Twelfth Day.


The first Commandment is, Thou shall have no other Gods before me, Exodus 20.3.

46 Q. What is required in the first Commandment?

A. The first Commandment requires us to know, and acknowledge God, to be the
only true God, and our God, and to worship and glorify him accordingly.

God requires us,

1. To know him, to be the only True God.

1 Chronicles. 28.9. And thou S^lomon, my Son, Know thou the God of thy Father. 2.
To acknowledge him to be our God.

Deuteronomy. 26.17. Thou have avon^hed the Lord, this day, to be thy God, and to walk
in his ways, and to keep his statutes, and his Commandments, and to hearken to
his voice. 3. To worship, and glorify him, as the only true God, and our God.

Mat. 4.10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.
47 Q. What is forbidden in the first Commandment?

A. The first Commandment forbids the denying, or not worshipping, and
glorifying the true God, as God, and our God, and the giving that worship, and
glory, to any other, which is due unto him alone.

God forbids,

1. The denying of him to be the True God. Psalm. 14.1. The fool has said in
his heart, there is no God. 2. The not-worshipping and glorifying of him as God.

Romans 1.20, 21. ^^^y ^e without excuse, because that, when they knew God, they
glorified him not, as God. 3. The not-worshipping and glorifying of him, as our
God.

Psalm. 81.11. My people would not hearken unto my voice, and Israel would none
of me. 4. The giving that worship and glory, to any other, which is due to him
alone.

Romans 1.15. Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped, and served
the Creature, more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever.
48 Q. What are we especially taught by these words (Before me) in the first
Commandment?

These words, Before me, in the first Commandment, teach us, that God, who
sees all things, takes notice of, and is much displeased with, the sin of
having any other God.

Psalm. 44.20, 21. If we have forgotten the name of our God, or stretched out
our hands to a strange God. 21. Shall not God search out this? 49 Q. Which is
the second Commandment? Thirteenth Day.


The second Commandment, is, Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, or
any likeness of any thing, that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth
beneath, or that is in the water under the earth, Thou shall not bow down thy
self to them, nor serve them: for I the Lord, thy God, am a Jealous God,
visiting the iniquities of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and
fourth generation of them that hate me, and showing mercy to thousands ofthem
that love me, and keep my Commandments. Exodus 20.4, 5, 6. 50 Q. What is
required in the second Commandment?

A. The second Commandment requires the receiving, observing, and keeping pure
and entire, all such religious Worship and Ordinances, as God has appointed in
his Word.

God requires,

1. The receiving all such Religious Worship and Ordinances, as he has
appointed in his Word.

Deuteronomy. 32.46. Set your hearts unto all the words, which I testify among you
this day, which ye shall command your children to obsere^, to do all the words
of this Law. 2. The observing all such Religious Worship and Ordinances, as he
has appointed in his Word.

Mat. 28.20. Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded
you. 3. The keeping pure and entire, all such Religious Worship and Ordinances,
as he has appointed in his Word.

Deuteronomy. 12.32. Whatsoever I command you observe to do it, thou shall not add
thereto, nor diminish from it.
51 Q. What is forbidden in the second Commandment?

A. The second Commandment forbids the worshipping of God by Images, or any
other way not appointed in his Word.

God forbids the worshipping of himself,

1. By Images.

Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16. Take ye good h^ed unto your selves; for ye saw no manner of
similitude, in the day, that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb. 16. Lest you
corrupt your selves, and make you a graven Image. 2. By any way that is not
appointed in his Word.

Col. 2.18. Let no man beguile you of your reward, in a voluntary humility, and
worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things, which he has not seen,
vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind.
52 Q. What are the Reasons annexed to the second Commandment?

A. The Reasons annexed to the second Commandment, are Gods Sovereignty over
us, his propriety in us, and the zeal he has to his own worship.

1. Gods Sovereignty over us, should move us to keep the second Commandment.
Psalm. 95.2, 3. Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving, and make a
joyful noise unto him with Psalms. v. 3. For the Lord is a great God, and a
great King above all gods. 2. Gods propriety in us should move us, to keep the
second Commandment.

Psalm. 45.11. He is thy Lord, and worship thou him. 3. The zeal which God has
to his own Worship, should move us to keep the second Commandment.

Exodus 34.14. Thou shall worship no other God; for the Lord, whose name is
jealous, is a jealous God.
53. Which is the third Commandment?

A. The third Commandment is, Fourteenth Day.
Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless, that takes his name in vain. Exodus 20.7.

54. What is required in the third Commandment?

A. The third Commandment requires the holy and reverent use of Gods Names,
Titles, Attributes, Ordinances, Word and works.

God requires the holy and reverent use of his,

1. Names,

Psalm. 29.2. Give unto the Lord the glory due to his Name. 2. Titles and
Attributes,

Rev. 15.3, 4. Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just, and
true are thy ways, Thou King of Saints. 4. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and
glorify thy Name? 3. Ordinances,

Eccles. 5.1. Keep thy foot, when thou go to the house of God, and be more
ready to hear, than to give the Sacrifice of fools. 4. Word.

Psalm. 38.2. I will praise thy Name for thy loving kindness, and for thy truth;
for thou have magnified thy word, above all thy name. 5. Works,

Job 36.24. Remember, that thou magnify his work which men behold.
55 Q. What is forbidden in the third Commandment?

A. God forbids all profaning or abusing of any thing, whereby he makes
himself known.

Mal. 2.2, It ye will not lay it to heart; to give glory to my Name, says the
Lord of Hosts, I will even send a curse upon you. 59 Q. What is the Reason
annexed to the third Commandment?

A. The reason annexed to the third Commandment is, That however the breakers
of this Commandment may escape punishment from men, pet the Lord our God will
not s^ffer them to escape his righteous judgment.

Deuteronomy. 28.58, 59. If thou wiit not observe to do all the words of this Law,
that th as may fear this glorious and fearful Name, the Lord thy God. 59.
Then the Lord will make thy plagues wonderful. 5u Q. Which is the fourth
Commandment? Fifteenth Day.


The fourth Commandment is Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy, 9. Sir
days shall thou labor, and do all thy worst. 10. But the reventh day is the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God. In it, thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy
fell, n^r thy daughter, thy man servant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle,
nor thy stranger that is within thy gates. 11. For in sir days, the Lord made
heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day,
wherefore the Lord blesled the Sabbath day, and haflowed it, Erod. 20.8, 9, 10.

58 Q. that We required in the fourth Commandment?

A. The sourth Commandment requires the keeping holy to God such set times. as
he has appointed in his Word, erpresty one whole day in seven, to be a holy
Sabbath to himself.

God requires the keeping holy to himself,

1. Such set times as he has appointed in his Word.

Lev. 19.30. Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my Saactuary. I am the
Lord. 2. Expressly, one whole day in seven to be an holy Sabbath to himself.

Deuteronomy. 5.12. Keep the Sabbath day to sanctify it, as the Lord thy God has
commanded thee.
59 Q. Which day of the seven has God appointed to be the weekly Sabbath?

A. From the veginning of the world to the Resurrection of Christ, God
appointed the seventh day of the week to be the weekly Sabbath, and the first
day of the week, ever since, to continue to the end of the World, which is the
Christian Sabbath.

1. From the beginning of the World to the Resurrection of Christ, God
appointed the seventh day of the week to be the weekly Sabbath. Genesis 2.3. God
blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it, because that in it he had rested
from all his work, which God created and made. 2. Ever since the Resurrection
of Christ, God appointed the first day of the week to be the weekly Sabbath,
and to continue to the end of the world, as the Christian Sabbath.
Acts 20.7. Upon the first day of the week, when the Dis^iples came together,
to break bread, Paul preached unto them. Rev. 1.10. I was in the Spirit upon
the Lords day. 60 Q. How is the Sabbath to be cauctisted?

A. The Sabbath is to be sanctified by an holy resting all that day, even from
such worldly employments and recreations, as are lawful on other days, and
spending the whole time in the public and pri^ate erercises of Gods worship,
ercept so much, as ^^s to be taken up in the works of necessity and mercy.

The Sabbath is to be sanctisied,

1. By an holy resting all that day, even from such worldly employments and
recreations, as are lawful on other days.

Lev. 23.3. Six days shall work be done, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of
rest, an holy convocation, ye shall do no work therein. 2. By spending the
whole time in the public and prioate exercises of Gods Worship.

Psalm. 92.1, 2. A Psalm or Song for the Sabbath Day, v. 1. It is a good thing
to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy Name, O most high.
2. To show forth thy loving kindness in the morning, and thy faithsulness every
night. 3. Works of necessity, and merey may, and ought to be performed on the
Sabbath day.

Mat. 12.11, 12. What man shall there be among you, that shall have one sheep,
and if it fall into a pit on the Sabbath day, will not he lay hold on it, and
lift it out? 12. How much then is a man better than a sheep? wherefore it is
lawful to do well on the Sabbath Day.
61 Q. What is forbidden in the fourth Commandment? Sixteenth Day.


A. The fourth Commandment forbids the omission, or careless performance of
the Duties required, and the prosaning the day by toleness, or doing that which
is in it self sinful, or by unnecessary thoughts, words, or works, about
worldly employments, or recreations.

God forbids,

1. The omission, or careless performance of the duties required on the
Sabbath Day.

Mal. 1.13. Ye said also, behold, what a weariness it is, and ye have snuffed
at it, says the Lord of hosts; and ye brought that which was torn, and the
lame, and the sick; thus you brought an offering, should I accept this at your
hands, says the Lord? 2. The profaning the Sabbath day,

By idleness, or doing that which is in it self sinful.

Ezck. 23.38. They have desiled my Sanctuary in the same day, and have prefaned
my Sabbaths. 3. The profaning the Sabbath day.

By unnecessary thoughts, words, or works, about worldly employments, or
recreations.

I^u. 58.13. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy
pleasure on my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord,
honor thle, and shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine
own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words.
62 Q. What are the Reasons annexed to the fourth Commandment?

A. The Reasons annexed to the fourth Commandment are Gods allowing us fir days
of the Work for our employments, his challenging a special pr^^^^lew in the
seventh, his own erample, and his viessing the Sabbath Day.

Gods,

1. Allowing us six days of the week for our own employments, should move us to
keep the fourth Commandment.

Exodus 31.15 16. Six days may work be done, but in the seventh is the Sabbath
of rest. 2. Challenging special propriety in the seventh day, should move us to
keep the sourth Commandment.

Lev. 23.3. Ye shall do no work therein, it is the Sabbath of the Lord your
God, in all your dwellings. 3. Own example should move us to keep the fourth
Commandment.

Exodus 31.17. It is a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever; for
in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, on the seventh day he rested, and
was refreshed. 4. Blessing the Sabbath day, should move us to keep the fourth
Commandment.

Genesis 2.3. God blessed the Sabbath day, and sanctified it.
63 Q. Which is the fifth Commandment?

A. The fifth Commandment is, Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days
may be long in the land, which the Lord thy God gives thee, Exodus 20.12.

64 Q. What is required in the fifth Commandment?

God requires the preserving the honor, and performing the duties belonging
to every one, in their several places and relations.

1. As Superiors,

Ephesians 5.21, 22. Submitting your selves one to another in the fear of God. 22.
Wives, submit your selves unto your own Husbands, as unto the Lord. Ephesians. 6.1,
5. Children, obey your Parents in the Lord. 5. Servants, be obedient to them,
that are your Masters according to the flesh. Rom 13.1. Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers. 2. As Inferiors.

Ephesians. 6.9. Ye Masters, do the same things unto them, knowing, that your Master
also is in Heaven. 3. As Equals.

Romans 12.10. Be kindly affectioned one to another, with brotherly love, in
honor preferring one another.
65 Q. What is forbidden in the fifth Commandment? Seventgenth Day.


God forbids the neglecting of, or doing any thing against the honor and
duty, which belongs to every one, in their several places and relations.

Romans 13.7, 8. Render to all their dues; tribute, to whom tribute is due;
custom, to whom custom; fear, to whom fear; honor, to whom honor. 8. Owe no
man any thing, but to love one another. 66 Q. What is the reason annexed to the
fifth Commandment?

A. The reason annexed to the fifth Commandment, is a promise of long life and
prosperity, as far as it shall serve for Gods glory and their own good, to all
such as keep this Commandment.

Ephesians. 6.2, 3. Honor thy father, and thy mother, which is the first Commandment
with promise. 3. That it may be well with thee, and that thou may ^ive long
on the earth. 67 Q. Which is the sixth Commandment?

The sixth Commandment is, Thou shall not kill, Exodus 20.13.

86 Q. What is required in the sixth Commandment?

A The sixth Commandment requires all lawful endeavors, to preserve our own
life, and the life of others.

God requires all lawful endeavors, to preserve,

1. Our own life.

Ephesians. 5.28, 29. So ought men to love their wives, even as their own bodies. 29.
For no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it. 2.
The life of others. Psalm. 82.3, 4. Defend the poor and fatherless. 4. Deliver
the poor and needy.

Job. 29.13. The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me.
A. 69 Q. Eighteenth Day.
What is forbidden in the sixth Commandment?

A. The sixth Commandment forbids the taking way of our own life, or the
life of our Neighbor unjustly, and whatsoever tends thereunto.

God forbids the taking away of,

1. Our own life. Acts 16.28. Paul cried with a loud voice, saying, Do thy self
no harm.

2. The life of our neighbor unjustly,

Genesis 9.6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. 3. God
forbids whatsoever tends to the taking away of our own life, or the life
of our neighbor unjustly. Prove. 24.11, 12. If thou forbear to deliver them,
that are drawn unto death, and those that are ready to be slain. 12. If thou
say, behold, we knew it not, does not he that pondereth the heart, consider
it?


70 Q. What is the seventh Commandment?

A. The seventh Commandment is, Thou shall not commit Adultery, Exodus 20.14.

71 Q. What is required in the seventh Commandment?

A. The seventh Commandment requires the preservation of our own, and our
neighbors chastity, in heart, speech, and behavior.

God requires the preservation of,

1. Our own Chastity.

1 These. 4.4. Every one of you shall know how to possess his vessel, in
sanctification and honor. 2. Our Neighbors chastity.

Ephesians. 5.11, 12. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
reprove them rather. 12. For it is a shame, even to speak of those things which
are done of them in secret. 3. Our own and our Neighbors chastity in heart.

2 Timothy 2.22. Flee youthful lu^^s, but follow Righteousness, Faith, Charity. 4.
Our own, and our Neighbors chastity in speech.

Col. 4.6. Let your speech be always with grace seasoned with salt. 5. Our own
and our Neighbors chastity in behavior.

1 Pet. 3.2. While they behold your chaste conversation coupled with fear.
72 Q. Nineteenth Day.
what is forbidden in the seventh Commandment?

A. The seventh Commandment forbids all unchaste thoughts, words, and
actions.

God forbids all unchaste,

1. Thoughts.

Mat. 5.28. Whosoever looks on a woman, to lust after her, has committed
Adultery with her already in his heart. 2. Works.

Ephesians. 5.4. Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are
not convenient. 3. Actions.

Ephesians. 5.3. Fornication, and all uncleanness, let it not be once named among
you.
73 Q. What is the eighth Commandment?

A. The eighth Commandment is, Thou shall not steal, Exodus 20.15.

74 Q. What is required in the eighth Commandment?

A. The eighth Commandment requires the lawful procuring, and furthering the
wealth, and outward estate, of our selves, and others.

God requires the lawful,

1. Procuring the wealth, and outward estate of our selves.

Romans 12.17. Provide things honest in the sight of all men. 2. Furthering the
wealth, and outward estate of our selves.

Prove. 27.23. Be thou diligent, to know the state of thy flocks, and look well
to thy herds. 3 Procuring the wealth, and outward estate of others.

Lev. 25.35. If thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee, then
thou shall relieve him. 4. Furthering the wealth, and outward estate of others.

Pail. 3.4. Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the
things of others.
75 Q. Twentieth Day.
What is forbidden in the eighth Commandment?

A. The eighth Commandment forbids, whatsoever does, or may unjustly binder
our own, or our neighbors wealth, and outward estate.

God forbids whatsoever,

1. Does unjustly hinder our own wealth, and outward estate.

1 Timothy 5.8. If any provide not for his own, and especially for those of his
own house, he has denied the faith, and is worse than an Infidel. 2. May
unjustly hinder our own wealth, and outward estate.

Prove. 28, 19. He, that follows after vain persons, shall have poverty
enough. 3. Does unjustly hinder our neighbors wealth, and outward estate.

Prove, 21.6. The getting of treasures by a lying tongue is a vanity tossed to
and fro of, them that seek death. 4. May unjustly hinder our neighbors wealth,
and outward estate.

Job 20.19, 20. Because he has oppressed, and has forsaken the poor, because
he has violently taken away an house, which he builded not. 20. Surely, he
shall not feel quietness in his belly.
76 Q. Which is the ninth Commandment?

The ninth Commandment is, Thou shall not bear false witness against thy
neighbor, Exodus 20.16.

77 Q. What is required in the Ninth Commandment?

A. The ninth Commandment requires the maintaining, and promoting of truth,
between man and man, and of our own, and our neighbors good name, especially
in witness bearing.

God requires the maintaining, and promoting,

1. Of Truth, between man, and man.

Zec. 8.6. Speak ye every man the truth to his neighbor. 2. Of our own good
Name.

1 Pet. 3.16. Act. 25.16. Having a good conscience, that, whereas they speak
evil of you, as of evildoers, they may be ashamed, that falsely accuse your
good conversation in Christ. Acts 25.16. Paul said, I stand at Caesar's judgment
seat, to the Jews have I done no wrong. 3. Of our neighbors good name.

3 John 12. Demetrius has a good report of all men, and of the truth it self,
yea, and we also bear record. 4. Of truth, especially in Witness-bearing.

Prove. 14.5.25. A faithful witness will not lie. 25. A true witness delivers
souls.
78 Q. Twenty-ffrst Day.
What is forbidden in the ninth Commandment?

A. The ninth Commandment forbids whatsoever is prejudicial to truth, or
injurious to our own, or our neighbors good name.

God forbids whatsoever is,

1. Prejudicial to Truth.

Romans 3.13. With their tongues they have used deceit. 2. Injurious to our own
good name.

Job 27.5. God forbid that I should justify you, till I die, I will not remove
my integrity from me. 3. Injurious to our neighbors good name.

Psalm. 15.3. He that backbiteth not with his tongue, nor does evil^ his
neighbor, nor takes up a reproach against his neighbor.
79 Q. Which is the tenth Commandment?

A. The tenth Commandment is, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou
shall not covet thy neighbors (...), nor his man servant, nor his
maidservant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbors.

80 Q. What is required in the tenth Commandment?

A. The tenth Commandment reoutreth full cententment with our own condition,
with a right and charitable frame of spirit toward our neighbor, and all that
is his.

God requires,

1. Full contentment with our own condition.

Heb. 13.5. Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with
such things as ye have. 9. A right and charitable frame of spirit, toward our
neighbor, and all that is his.

Romans 12.15. 1 Co. 13.4, 5, 6. Rejoice with them, that do rejoice, and weep
with them, that weep. 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 6. Charity suffers long, and is kind;
charity envieth not; charity vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up. 5. Does
not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own is not easily provoked
thinks no evil. 6. Rejoices not in iniquity but rejoices in the truth.
81 Q. Twenty-second Day.
What is forbidden in the tenth Commandment?

A. The tenth Commandment forbids all coffeehouse, with our own estate,
en^^ing, or grieving at the good of our neighbor, and all inordinate motions,
and affections to any thing, that is his.

God forbids,

1. All coffeehouse with our own estate.

1 Cor. 10.10. Neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and were
destroyed of the destroyer. 2. Envying, or grieving at the good of our
neighbor.

Gal. 5.26. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another,
envying one another. 3. All inordinate motions, and affections, to any thing,
that is our neigbours.

Col. 3.5. Mortisie your members, which are upon the earth, sornication,
uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence and covetousness, which
is idolatry.
82 Q. Is any man able perfectly to keep the Commands of God?

A. No mere man, since the fall, is able, in this life, perfectly to keep the
Commandments of God, but daily does break them, in thought, word, and deed.

1. No mere man since the fall is able, in this life, perfectly to keep the
Commandments of God.

Eccles. 7.20. There is not a just man upon earth, that does good, and sins
not. 2. Every mere man, since the fall, does in this life break the
Commandments of God, in

Thought.

Genesis 8.21. The imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth. 4. Every mere
man since the fall does daily break the Commandments of God in word.

Jam. 3.8. The tongue can no man tame, it is an unruly evil, full of deadly
payson. 4. Every mere man since the fall, does break the Commandments of God in
deed.

Jam. 3.2. In many things we offend all.
83 Q. Are all the transgressions of the Law equally heinous?

Some sins, in themselves, and by reason of several aggravations, are more
heinous in the fight of God, than others.

Joh. 19.11. He that delivered me unto thee, has the greater sin.

84 Q. What does every sin deserve? Twenty-third Day.


A. Every sin deserves Gods wrath, and curse, both in this life, and that
which is to come.

Every sin deserves Gods wrath and curse, in,

1. This life.

Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one, that continues not in all things, which are
written in the book of the Law to do them. 2. That life, which is to come.

Mat. 25.41. Then shall he say unto them, on the left hand, depart from me, ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil, and his Angels.
85 Q. What does God requrre of us, that we may escape the wrath and curse due
unto us for sin?

A. To escape the wrath and curse of God due to us for sin, God requires of
us, Faith in Jesus Christ, repentance unto life, with the diligent use of all
outward means, whereby Christ communicatrth to us the benefits of Repentance.

To escape the wrath and curse of God, due to us for sin, God requires of us,

1. Faith in Jesus Christ.

Joh. 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. 2.
Repentance unto life. Act. 20.21. Testifying both to the Jews, and also to the
Gree^^ Repentance toward God, and faith toward our (...) Jesus Christ.

3. The diligent use of all outward (...), whereby Christ communicates to us
the benefits of Redemption. Prove. 2.1, to 6. My Son, if thou will receive my
words, and hide my Commandments with thee. 2. So that thou incline thine ear
unto wisdom, and apply thine heart unto understanding. 3. Yea, if thou criest
after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding. 4. If thou seek
for her as silver, and searchest for her, as for hid treasure. 5. Then shall
thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God.


86 Q. What is Faith in Jesus Christ?

A. Faith in Jesus Christ is a saving grace, whereby we receive, and rest upon
him alone for Salvation, as he is offered to us in the Gospel?

1. Faith in Jesus Christ is a saving grace. Heb. 10.39 We are not of them, who
draw back unto perdition, but of them, that believe to the saving of the soul.
2. By Faith we receive Jesus Christ. Joh. 1.12. As many, as received him, to
them gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to them, that believe on his
Name. 3. By Faith, we rest upon Jesus Christ alone for Salvation. Phil. 3.9.
And be found in him, not having mine own Righteousness, which is of the Law,
but that, which is through the faith of Christ, the Righteousness, which is of
God by Faith. 4. By Faith we receive, and rest upon Jesus Christ, as he is
offered to us in the Gospel. Isa. 33.22. The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our
Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will save us.
87 Q What is repentance unto life? Twenty-fourth Day.


A. Repentance unto life is a saving grace, whereby a sinner, out of the true
sense of his sin, and apprehension of the mercy of God in Christ does, with
grief, and hatred of his sin, turn from it unto God, with full purpose of, and
endeavor after new obedience.

Repentance unto life, 1. Is a saving grace. Acts 11.18. Then has God also to
the Gentiles granted Repentance unto life. 2. Arises out of the true sense of
Sin. Acts 2.37. When they heard this, they were pricked in their hearts, and
said unto Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, Men, and Brethren, what shall we
do? 3. Arises out of the true apprehension of the mercy of God in Christ.
Joel. ^.13. Rent your hearts, and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord
your God; for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great
kindness, and repents him of the evil. 3. By Repentance unto life, a sinner
does with grief, and hatred of his sin, turn from it unto God. Jer. 31.18, 19.
Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my God. 19. Surely
after I was turned, I repented, and after that I was instructed, I smote upon
my thigh, I was ashamed, yea even confounded, because I did bear the reproach
of my youth. 4. Repentance unto life is accompanied with full purpose of, and
endeavor after new obedience. Psalm. 119.59. I thought on my ways, and turned
my feet into thy Testimonies.


88 Q. What are the outward means, whereby Christ communicates to us the
benefits of Redemption?

A. The outward and ordinary means, whereby Christ communicates to us the
benefits of Redemption, are his Ordinances, especially the Word, Sacraments,
and Prayer, all which are made effectual to the Elect for Salvation. Acts 2.41,
42. Then they that gladly receive^ his word were baptized. 42. And they
continued dedfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and fellowship and in breaking of
bread, and in prayers.

89 Q. How is the Word made effectual to Salvation?

A. The Spirit of God makes the reading, but especially the preaching of the
Word, an effectual means of convincing, and converting sinners, and of building
them up in holiness, and comfort, through Faith, unto Salvation.

The spirit of God makes the reading, but especially the preaching of the
Word, an effectual means of, 1. Convincing and converting sinners. Psalm. 19.7.
The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul; the testimony of the Lord
is sure, making wise the simple. 2. Building up Saints in holiness, and
comfort. 1 These. 1.6. Ye became followers of us, and of the Lord, having
received the Word in much affliction, with joy of the Holy Ghost. 3. Building
up Saints, through faith unto salvation. Romans 1.16. I am not ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God unto Salvation, to every one that
believes.


90 Q. Twenty-fifth day.
How is the Word to be read and heard, that it may become effectual to
Salvation?

A. That the Word may become effectual to Salvation, we must attend thereunto,
with diligence, preparation, and prayer, receive it with faith, and love, lay
it up in our hearts, and practice it in our lives.

That the word may become effectual to Salvation, we must, 1. Attend thereunto
with diligence. Prove. 8.34. Blessed is the man, that hears me, watching daily
at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors. 2. Attend thereunto with
Preparation. 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. Laying aside all malice, and all guile, and
hypocrisies, and envies, and evil speakings. 2. As newborn babes, desire the
sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby. 3. Attend thereunto with
Prayer. Psalm. 119.18. Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wonderful things
out of thy Law. 4. Receive it with Faith. Heb. 4.2. The word preached did not
profit them, not being mixed with faith, in them, that heard it. 5. Receive it
with Love. 2 These. 2.10. They received not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved. 6. Lay it up in your hearts. Psalm. 119.11. Thy word have I hid
in my heart, that I might not sin against thee. 7. Practice it in our lives.
Jam. 1.25. Whosoever looks into the perfect law of Liberty, and continues
therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the word, this man
shall be blessed in his deed.


91 Q. How do the Sacraments become effectual means of Salvation?

A. The Sacraments become effectual means of Salvation, not from any virtue in
them, or in him that does administer them, but only by the blessing of Christ,
and the working of the Spirit in them, that by Faith receive them.

The Sacraments become effectual means of Salvation, 1. Not from any virtue in
them, or in him, that does administer them. 1 Cor. 3.7. Neither is he, tha^
(...), any thing, neither he that waters, but God that gives the increase.
2. Only by the blessing of Christ, and the working of his spirit, in them, that
by faith receive them. 1 Pet. 3.21. The like figure whereunto, even Baptism
does also now save us, not the putting away the (...) of the flesh, but the
answer of a good Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ.


92 Q. What is a Sacrament?

A. A Sacrament is an holy Ordinance, instituted by Christ, wherein, by
sensible signs, Christ, and the b^^e^^s of the New Covenant, are represented,
sealed, and aported to Believers.

A Sacrament is an holy Orainance instatuted by Christ, wherein, by sensible
signs, Christ, and the benefits of the new Covenant, are, 1. Represented to
Believers. Genesis 17.10. This is my Covenant, which ye shall keep between me, and
you, and thy seed after thee, every man child among you shall be circumcised.
2. Sealed, and applied to Believers. Romans 4.11. He received the sign of
Circumcision, a seal of the Righteousness of Faith which he had yet being
uncircumcised.


93 Q. Which are the Sacraments of the New Testament; Twenty-sixth day.


A. The Sacraments of the New Testament, are Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

1. Baptism is a Sacrament of the New Testament. Mar. 16.16. He, that
believes, and is Baptized, shall be saved. 2. The Lords Supper is a Sacrament
of the New Testament. 1 Cor. 11.23. I have received of the Lord, that which
also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus, the same night, in which he was
betrayed took bread.
94 Q. What is Baptism?

A. Baptism is a Sacrament, wherein the washing with water, in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, does signify, and seal, our
ingrafting into Christ, and partaking of the benefits of the Covenant of Grace,
and our engagement to be the Lords.

Baptism, 1. Is a Sacrament, wherein is the washing with water, in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Mat 28.19. Go ye, and teach
all Nations, baptizing them, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost. 2. Does signify, and seal our ingrafting into Christ, and
partaking of the benefits of the Covenant of grace. Romans 6.3. Know ye not, that
so many of us, as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his
death? 3. Does signify, and seal our engagement, to be the Lords. Romans 6.4. We
are buried with him by Baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised from
the dead, by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of
life.


95 Q. To whom is Baptism to be administered?

A. Baptism is not to be administered to any, that are out of the visible
Church, t^^ they profess their faith in Christ, and obedience to him; but the
Infants of such, as are members of the visible Church, are to be baptized.

1. Baptism is not to be administered to any, that are out of the visible
Church, till they profess their faith in Christ, and obedience to him. Acts
2.41. Then they, that gladly received his word, were baptized. 2. The infants
of such as are members of the visible Church, are to be baptized. Genesis 17.7. I
will establish my Covenant between me, and thee, and thy seed after thee, in
their generations, for an Everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to
thy seed after thee. 10. This is my Covenant, which ye shall keep between me,
and you, and thy seed after thee, every Man-child among you shall be
circumcised.
Acts 2.38. Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you, in
the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift
of the Holy Ghost. 39. For the promise is to you, and and to your Children, and
to all that a far off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. 96 Q. What
is the Lords Supper? Twenty-seventh day.


A. The Lords Supper is a Sacrament wherein by giving and receiving Bread and
Wine, according to Christ's appointment, his death is showed forth, and the
worthy Receivers are, not after a corporal, and carnal manner, but by faith,
made partakers of his body, and blood, with all his benefits, to their
spiritual nourishment, and growth in grace.

1. The Lords Supper is a Sacrament, wherein, by giving, and receiving bread
and wine, according to Christ's appointment, his death is showed forth. Luke
22.19. He took bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them,
saying, This is my body, which is given for you, this do in remembrance of me.
20. Likewise also the Cup after Supper, saying, this cup is the New Testament
in my blood, which is shed for you. 2. The worthy receivers of the Lords
Supper, are not after a corporal, and carnal manner, but by faith, made
partakers of Christ's body, and blood, with all his benefits, to their spiritual
nourishment, and growth in grace. 1 Cor. 10.16. The cup of blessing, which we
bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread, which we
break is it not the communion of the body of Christ?
97 Q. What is required in the worthy receiving of the Lords Supper?

A. It is required of them, that would worthily partake of the Lords Supper,
that the^ examine themselves, of their knowledge, ^ discern the Lords Body, of
their faith to feed upon him, or their renemance, love, and new obedience, lest
coming unworthily, they eat, and drink judgment to themselves.

It is required of them, that would worthily partake of the Lords Supper, that
they examine themselves, of their, 1. Knowledge to discern the Lords body. 1
Cor. 11.28. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and
drink of that cup. 29. For he, that ea^^th, and drinks unworthily cares, and
drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body. 2. Faith to feed
upon him. 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the faith. 3.
Repentance. 1 Cor. 11.31. If we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged.
4. Love. 1 Cor. 11.18. When you come together in the Church, I hear there be
divisions among you. 20. When ye come together therefore into one place, this
is not to eat the Lords Supper. 5. New obedience. 1 Cor. 5.8. Let us keep the
feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice, and wickedness,
but with the unleavened bread of sincerity, and truth. 6. They, that come
unworthily to the Lords Supper, eat and drink judgment to to themselves. 1 Cor.
11.27. Whosoever shall eat this Bread, or drink this Cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body, and Blood of the Lord. 29. He, that
eats, and drinks unworthily, eats, and drinks damnation to himself.


98 Q. What is Prayer?

A. Prayer is an offering up of our desires to God for things agreeable to his
will, in the name of Christ, with confession of our sins, and thankful
acknowledgment of his mercies.

Prayer, 1. Is an offering up of our desires to God. Psalm. 62.8. Trust in him
at all times, ye people, pour out your hearts before him, God is a refuge for
us. 2. Is to be made, for things agreeable to Gods will. Romans 8.27. He that
searches the heart, knows the mind of the spirit, because he makes
intercession for the Saints, according to the will of God. 3. Is to be made in
the name of Christ. Joh. 16.23. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name,
he will give it you. 4. Is to be made with confession of our sins. Dan. 9.4. I
prayed unto the Lord my God, and made my confession. 5. Is to be made with a
thankful acknowledgment of Gods mereies. Phil. 4.6. Be careful for nothing, but
in every thing by prayer, and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your
requests be made known to God.


99 Q. What Rule has God given us, for our Direction in Prayer? Twenty-eighth
day.


A. The whole word of God is of use to direct us in Prayer, but the special
Rule of Direction, is that Form of Prayer, which Christ taught his Disciples,
commonly called the Lords Prayer.

1. The whole word of God is of use to direct us in Prayer. 1 John 5.14. This
is the considence, that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to
his will, he hears us.

The especial Rule of our direction in Prayer, is that form of Prayer, which
Christ taught his Disciples, commonly called the Lords Prayer. Mat. 6.9. After
this manner therefore pray y^: Our Father, which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy
Name, etc.

100 Q What does the Preface of the Lords Prayer teach us?

A. The Preface of the Lords Prayer, which is Our Father, which art in Heaven;
teaches us, to draw near to God, with all holy reverence, and confidence, as
children to a Father, able, and ready to help us, and that we should pray with,
and for others.

1. The Preface of the Lords Prayer is, Our Father which art in Heaven, Mat.
6.9. 2. In prayer, we are to draw near to God, with all holy reverence. Isa.
64.9. Be not wroth very sore, O Lord, neither remember iniquity for ever;
behold, see, we beseech thee, we are all thy people. 3. In Prayer, we are to
draw near to God, with all holy confidence. Romans 8.15. Ye have not received the
spirit of bondage, again to fear, but ye have received the spirit of adoption,
whereby we cry, Abba Father. 4. In Prayer, we are to draw near to God, as
Children to a Father, able, and ready to help us. Luke 11, 13. If ye, being
evil, know, how to give good gifts to your Children, how much more shall your
heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them, that ask him. 5. We are to pray
with, and for others. Ephesians. 6.18. Praying always, with all prayer and
supplication in the spirit, and watching thereuto with all perseverance, and
surplication for all saints.
101 Q. What do we pray for in the first Petition?

A. In the first Petition, which is, Hallowed be thy Name; (...) that God would
enable us, and others to (...) him in all that, whereby he makes himself
^^^^on, and that he would dispose all things to his (...) gl^ry.

1. (...) is Hallowed be thy name, Mat. 6 9. 2. We (...) that God would enable
us, and others to glory (...) in all that, whereby he makes himself known.
Psalm. 67.1. God be mereiful unto us, and bless us, and cause his face to shine
upon us. 2. That thy way may be known upon Farth, thy saving health among all
Nations. 3. Let the people praise thee, O God, let all the people praise thee.
3. We are to pray, that God would dispose all things to his own glory. Romans
11.36. Of him, and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for
ever. Amen.
102 Q. Twenty-ninth day.
What do we pray for in the second Petition?

A. In the second Petition, which is, Thy Kingdom come; we pray, that Satan's
Kingdom may be destroyed, that the Kingdom of Grace may be advanced, our
selves, and others brought into it, and kept in it; and that the Kingdom of
Glory may be hastened.

1. The second Petition is, Thy Kingdom come, Mat. 6.10. 2. We are to pray,
that Satan's Kingdom may be destr^yed. Psalm. 68.1. Let God arise, and let his
Enemies be scattered, let them also, that hate him, flee before him. 3. We are
to pray, that the Kingdom of Grace, may be advanced. Psalm. 51.18. Do g^^d in
thy go^d pleasure unto Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem. 4. We are to
pray, that our selves, and others, may be brought into the Kingdom of Grace,
and kept in it. 2 These. 3.4. Brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord
may have a free course, and be glorified, even as it is with you.

Romans 10.1. My hearts desire, and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might
be saved. 5. We are to pray, that the Kingdom of Glory may be hastened. Rev.
22.20. Surely, I come quickly Amen: Amen, Even so come Lord Jesus.
103 Q. What do we pray for in the third Petition?

A. In the third Petition, which is, Thy will be done on Earth, as it is in
Heaven; We pray, that God, by his Grace, would make us able, and willing, to
know, obey, and submit to his will, in all things, as the Angels do in Heaven.

1. The third Petition is, Thy will be done on earth, as it is in Heaven, Mat.
6.10. 2. We are to pray, that God, by his grace, would make us able, and
willing, to know, and obey his will, in all things. Psalm. 119.34. Give me
understanding, and I shall keep thy Law, yea I shall observe it, with my whole
heart. 35. Make me to go in the path of thy Commandments, for therein do I
delight. 36. Incline my heart unto thy Testimonies. 3. We are to pray, that God
by his grace, would make us able, and willing, to submit to his will in all
things. Act. 21.14. When he would not be persuaded, we ceased, saying, the will
of the Lord be done. 4. We are to pray, that God by his grace, would make us
able, and willing, to know, obey, and submit to his will in all things, as the
Angels do in Heaven. Psalm. 103.20. Bless the Lord, ye his Angels, that do his
Commandments, harkening to the voice of his word. 22. Bless the Lord, all his
works, in all places of his Dominions, Bless the Lord, O my soul.
104 Q. What do we pray for in the fourth Petition?

A. In the fourth Petition, which is, Give us this day our daily Bread; We
pray, that, of Gods free gift, we may receive a competent portion of the good
things of this life, and enjoy his blessing with them.

1. The fourth Petition is, Give us this day, our daily bread, Mat. 6.11. 2. We
are to pray, that of Gods free gift, we may receive a competent portion of the
good things of this life. Prove. 30.8. Remove far from me vanity and lies, give
me neither poverty, nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me. 3. We are
to pray, that of Gods free gift, we may enjoy his blessing with the good things
of this life. Psalm. 90.17. Let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us, and
establish the work of our hands upon us, yea the work of our hands establish
thou it.
105 Q. What do we pray for in the fifth Petition? Thirtieth day.


A. In the fifth Petition, which is, And forgive us our debts, as we forgive
our debtors; We pray, that God, for Christ's sake, would freely pardon all our
sins, which we are the rather encouraged to ask, because (...) grace, we are
enabled, from the heart, to ^^^give others.

1. The fifth Petition is, And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors,
Mat. 6.12. 2. We are to pray, that God, for Christ's sake, would freely pardon
all our sins. Psalm. 51.1. Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving
kindness, according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my
Transgressions.

Dan. 9.17. Cause thy face to shine, for the Lords sake. 19. O Lord, hear, O
Lord forgive, for thine own sake. 3. We are the rather encouraged, to ask of
God, the free pardon of all our sins, because, by his grace, ^e are enabled,
from the heart, to forgive others. Mat. 6.14. If ye forgive men their
trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you.
106 Q. What do we pray for in the sixth Petition?

A. In the sixth Petition which is, And lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil; We pray, that God would either keep us from being tempted
to sin, or support and dellver us, when we are tempted.

1. The sixth Petition is, And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from
evil, Mat. 6.13. 2. We are to pray, that God would keep us, from being tempted
to sin. Mat. 26.41. Watch, and pray, that ye enter not into temptation.

Psalm. 19.13. Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins, let them not have
dominion over me. 3. We are to pray, that God would support, and deliver us,
when we are tempted. Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a clean heart, O God, renew a
right spirit within me. 12. Restore unto me the joy of thy Salvation, and
uphold me with thy free spirit.
107 Q. What does the Conclusion of the Lords Prayer teach us?

A. The Conclusion of the Lords Prayer; which is, For thine is the Kingdom, and
the power, and the glory, for ever, Amen, teaches us, to take our
encouragement in prayer, from God only, and in our prayers, to praise him,
ascribing Kingdom, Power, and Glory to him, and in testimony of our desire, and
assurance to be heard, we say, Amen. 1. The Conclusion of the Lords Prayer, is,
For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, for ever, Amen, Mat.
6.13. 2. We are to take our encouragement in Prayer, from God only. Dan. 9.18.
We do not present our Supplications before thee, for our righteousnesses, but
for thy great mercies. I^. O Lord, hearken, an^ do, defer not, for thine own
sake, O my God. 3. We are in our Prayers, to praise God, by a^^cribing Kingdom,
Power, and Glory, to him. 1 Chro^ 29.11. Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and
the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the Majesty^ for all that is in
Heaven, and Earth is thine. 13. N^^ therefore, O God, we thank thee, and praise
thy g^^^ous Name. 4. In testimony of our desire, and assurance, to be heard in
prayer, we say, Amen. Rev. 22.20. Amen, Even so come, Lord Jesus.


FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside,
near Mercers-Chappel; and at the Bible on London-Bridg.
THe Child's Delight together with an English Gramer.

Reading and spelling English made easy, wherein all the words of our English
Bible, are set down in (...) Alphabetical order, and divided into their
distinct ^^^llables.

A Plain and Familier Method of Instructing the ^^^unger sort. All three by
Tho. Lie, Minister of (...) Gospel.

A Little Book for Little Children. By Tho. White. (...) A Memento for young
and old: By Mr. Maynard


