An Advertisement to the Reader.
THe spirit of Luther, whereby he did Beat down the strong Holds of sin, and
over came both the False-hood and the Pride of the Church of Rome, was the
Spirit of Truth, there being as great an Antipathy betwixt Truth and
False-hood, as between Heaven and Hell, GOD himself being the Author of Truth,
and the Devil the Father of Lies; By the same Spirit of Truth, by which Luther
Convinced the Corruptions of the Church of Rome He Compiled his Prophecies and
foretold those sad Events which should fall upon Rome, and the Impire of
Germany, unless they would for sake their sins, the Inviters and Procurers of
the Wrath of God These Prophecies we have here presented to the View, and the
Readers are to take Notice that with much Industry and Diligence, they have
been carefully Collected out of the Book of Dr. Martin Luther, Entitled
Colloquia. Mensalia, which Book being of Excellent Use, as may appear by the
Approbation of the most Reverend Father in GOD, Doctor Land, Late Archbishop
of Canterbury, (as in the last page of this Book is specified;) Is to be sold
by Andrew Kembe at Saint Margarets-Hill in South-warke; And Edward Thomas, at
the sign of the Adam and Eve in Little Britain.

The Book is Admirable for Instruction and Reproof; the Prophecies are many,
and some of them already Accomplished, as may more Largly Appear by the Book it
Self, of which we have here given You but a Short View. The Reader also may be
pleased to take Notice, that the two Abovementioned Booksellers. have both of
them to Sell, that most Incomperable Book of Mr. John Seldom, Translated into
English, called Mare Clansim, or the Interest and Propriety of His Sacred
Majesty, on the Narrow Seas.

THE PROPHECYES Of the Incomparable Dr Martin Luther, Concerning the Downfall
of the Pope of ROME, and the Subversion of the German EMPIRE; to be Overrun by
the Armies of the TVRKS. Together with the many Reasons that he gives for it.

AS ALSO, The Remarkable Prophecy of the Learned and Reverend MVSCVLVS, to the
same Effect.

Collected by R. C. M. A.

London, Printed for Andrew Kembe, and Edward Thomas, and are to be sold at
their Shops at Saint Margarets Hill in Southwark, and at the Adam and Eve at
Little Britain, 1664.

The Prophecies of Martin Luther, concerning the Downfall of the Pope of Rome,
and of the Germane Empire, that will be overrun with the Armies of the Turks;
together with the Reasons that he gives for it, etc.
THe Name of Martin Luther is so Famous throughout all Europe, that he cannot
be unknown either to the Papist, or the Protestant, having deeply obliged the
One, by opposing the Errors, and the False-hoods of the other; Indeed, there
were some others before Him that did write against the Corruptions of the
Church of Rome; As John Hus, Jerome of Prague, who were the First Fruits of the
Reformation, and were both Honored with the Crowns of Martyrdom; Martin
Luther, as he came after them, so having a higher Spirit to imbolden him, and a
more Powerful Number of Friends to assist him, did give a greater blow to the
Church of Rome; and fulfilled his own Prophecy, which was, That the longer
Popery continued, the more it should be every day contemned: See Luther
colloquia Common alis, page 537.
The Prophecies of this great Reformer of the Church were Remarkable,
foretelling the Ruin of the Pope of Rome, and of the German Empire, which
should be brought unto Confusion by the Formidable Powers of the Turk: But
before I represent unto you the Prophecies of Martin Luther, it will not be
amiss to give you a short View of his Life, and of the Prophecies of others
concerning him; that so by reading of their Prophecies in Relation to himself;
His own Prophecies concerning the Downfall of the Pope of Rome, and of the
German Empire may gain the greater Confirmation.

In the first place, I shall give you the True Presage of John Hilton, who was
himself a Friar by Profession; He Prophesied, that much about the Year, one
thousand five hundred and sixteen (which was at the same time when Luther began
to Declare himself against the Church of Rome the Mystery of Ungodliness would
begin to be Discovered, and the Son of Righteousness shine forth in the Truth
of the Gospel, and that Popery would at that time find in Germany and in other
parts of Christendom a general Declension; which Prophecy was by Martin
Luther, who flourished in those times most undoubtedly fulfilled.

But the Testimony of John Hus, who being condemned to suffer the Flames of
Martyrdom at Constance, is most remarkable; It was almost one hundred years,
before that Luther did openly profess himself an Enemy, to the Errors and
Idolatry of the Church of Rome; John Hus being brought unto the Stake, Inthers
Coloquia, page 534. The Belief of the Church of Rome, 203.
expressed himself in these words. This day, said he, you do roast a Goose, (for
so the word Hus signifies in the German Tongue) but one hundred years hence,
you shall hear a Swan to Warble, whom you shall not be able to roast nor
overcome; and this at the end of the Time prescribed was effectually made good,
for then Martin Luthers voice was effectually heard, who Preached so powerfully
with his Tongue, and wrote so sharply with his Pen, as not any one before him,
since the time of the Apostles, did the like; and notwithstanding all the Fury
and Violence of the Papists, who with elabourate Malice endeavored to
suppress him, he continued Preaching and Writing against them many years
afterward, and departed this Life in Peace to the Praise of God, and the great
Shame and Derision of the Pope and his Accomplice: We may instance many other
Prophesyes of the like Nature, which we purposely forbear, being to contract
much into a little Volume.

Of the Parentage, and Life of Luther.
Martin Luther was the Son of a Farmer, he was born at Isleben, in the County
of Mansfield, in the year one thousand four hundred and eighty three, on the
10th day of November: His Father, his Grand Father, and his Great Grandfather
(as he says himself) were Farmers; His Father abandoning his Farm upon some
discontents, and finding some Profitable Employments at Mansfield, he addressed
himself to that place, where he was one of the Miners in the Silver Mines; In
the mean time Luther had his Education in the same Town where he was born, and
being fitted for the University at Ersurd, he took there the Degrees of
Bachellour, and Master of Arts, and in a short process of time, he took upon
him the Habit and Formality of a Friar, at which his Father was much
displeased; But it pleased God by this means to make use of him for the
over-throwing of the Power of Antichrist; Luther having found how directly
opposite the Supremacy of the Pope was to the Doctrine of the primitive times,
there grew on it the first contention, which being bandyed up and down with
Animosity, it gave Luther the occasion more strictly to examine some other
Corruptions in the Church of Rome, which he did with so much vigor, that Pope
Gregory the 13th, understanding what great hurt and prejudice he received from
it, and fearing it might bring a further Contempt upon him, he did exasperate
Rodolphus the second, at that time Empire, that all the Books of Martin Luther
should be burned, and that it should be Death for any man to keep them in his
House, which Edict was not only suddenly put in Execution by himself, but it
was continued also by Ferdinand the second, who was a severe Enemy, and a
Persecutor of the Protestant Religion.

Luther, long before this had Esponsed a Virgin, whose Name was Katherine Bora,
she had sometimes entered hen self into a Cloister of the Nuns, but disliking
many abuses she found therein, before her year of Probation was expired she
relinquished it.

This gave an occasion to the Monks and Friars to exclaim against Luther as
having broken the Vow of Chastity; Luthers Colloqua. 445.
but Luther had abandoned the Office of a Friar before; nevertheless he thus
far declared himself, That a Preacher of the Gospel being orderly called
thereunto, ought above all. things to purify himself before he teaches others,
and if he be able with a good Conscience to live unmarried, it is his safest
course to continue so, but in case he cannot abstain, and live chastely, he is
then to marry, and to take a wife, for God has provided such a Remedy for that
Infirmity; I could here insert Luther's own Prayer before his Marriage, Vide
Luth. colloq. 452.
and the Reason why he took a Wife, which was, as he himself said to upbraid
the Devil, and to confound the filthy incontinent life in Popery, which was so
odious and abominable, that Pope Leo himself was taken out of the World at that
time when he was committing Buggery with a Prostituted Boy. I could here also
insert the lamentable Fruits of an unmarried Life in Priests and Nuns, which
have been so notorious, that not only in Rome and Germany, but in England
also, and many other Places, there have been found in Ponds and Cellars many
thousand heads of Infants, who thus desperately have been thrown away to
preserve the Reputation of the Chastity of the Nuns and Friars: But I must
return from whence a little I have digressed.

Luther's Name growing Famous in Germany, for the great overthrows which he
gave to many of the chiefest Professors of the Church of Rome, and to the
Supremacy of the Pope himself, he was summoned by the Emperor to appear at the
Imperial Diet at Worms, which when the Prince Electour of Saxony understood, he
did earnestly dissuade him from it, alleging that he should have the whole
Christian world against him; and although he was ready and willing to defend
him, yet Luther and he being but two persons, they were unable to oppose so
great a Multitude; he there advised him not to undertake so dangerous a
Journey, but to be warned by the example of John Hus; who although he had the
Emperors Letters of safe Conduct to preserve him, yet he was surprised there,
and consumed by fire to ashes. Luther having heard the Elector to give him this
council, made answer to him, that he must confess, Luthers Colloqu. 433.
that (as the case now stood) he was too weak to defend him; nevertheless he
was resolved to go, and to defend the Elector; for although (said he) there be
in Worms as many Devils as there be Tiles on all the Houses of the City; yet I
am resolved to go thither, and to maintain what I have done and undertaken.

Many more such examples may be given of his Courage, and his Confidence; at
the last when he saw that by his endeavors the Gospel began to flourish and to
be preached not only in Germany but other Countries, and that he had reaped
the comfert of his Industry and his Study it pleased God to visit him with
sickness, at which time, giving thanks unto God who had delivered him from so
many Deceits and Assaults of his Merciless Enemies, he composed these following
Verses in Latin.

Quaesitus toties, toties tibi Roma petitus,
Ille ego per Christum vivo Lutherus adhuc,
Vna mihi spes est qua non fraudabor Jesus,
Hunc mihi dum teneam perfida Roma cave.
Which are thus in English, Behold! through Christ, I Luther yet do live,
By Rome so often sought, but I believe
Christ Jesus is my only hope, by whom,
Whilst I do live, take heed perfidious Rome,


Being a little recovered, he was advised to take the Air which accordingly he
did, Luthers Prophecy on his own Death
on the sixteenth of February in the year, 1546. at what time, he said, when I
come again to Wittembergh, I will be lodged in a Coffin, and will surrender to
the Worms a sat Luther to feed upon, and so it fell out; for two days
afterward he was translated from this life unto a better, and perceiving
himself to grow fainter and draw near unto his end, he called for Pen, Ink,
and Paper, and wrote this verse following to lie as it were an Epitaph upon his
own Tomb.

Pestis eram viven, moriens ero mors tua Papa.
Living, I was a Plague to thee,
Dying, O! Pope thy Death I Will be.
Which by Philip Melancthon was rendered in a Distich much after the same sense,
and manner.

Quidum vixit erat tua pestis (Papa) Lutherus,
Hic tibi causa, suo funere, mortis erit.
Luther who living was thy Plague, he shall,
Cause by his death, O Pope! thy utter fall.
He lived sixty and three years, and was buried at Isleben (where he was born)
on the 19th. of February 1546. Having given you this Account of his life, we
shall now pass unto his Prophecyes.

The Prophecies of Luther.
And above all, His Prophecy conceining the Turk page, 518.
this is most remarkable; The Turk, says he, shall give a great Clap to
Germany; Me thinks I see him Marching through and through the whole Body of the
Empire; who so lives one hundred years and upwards, will see the same
accomplished, I oftentimes do contemplate thereupon, and thinking on the great
misery which will ensue upon the Empire, I do sweat thereat; Nevertheless
Germany goes on in sin, and refuses to be helped: No humane power or
potentate can beat the Turk, but only that Man who is named Christ; as for the
Emperor, King Ferdimand and the Princes, they can accomplish nothing.

It is observable, that although Luther had Prophesied this of the Turk, yet he
had no good opinion of him; How the Turk makes War and prevails in it,
Luthers Colloq. 519.
for there being a great Commotion at that time in Germany concerning Religion,
the Turk desired to know what manner of man Luther was, and of what years: when
it was told him that he was a Corpulent man, and of about fifty years of age,
the Turk replied, I could wish he were younger, for he shall have of me a
gracious Lord; which when it was brought to Luthers ear by the Prince Elector
of Saxony; God preserve me (said Luther) from such a gracious Lord as the
Emperor of Turkey is, for the Turk is a Crafty and Subtle Enemy, who makes
War not only with great Courage, The Turk able to maintain a yearly Army of
two hundred thousand men, which amounts to above 15. millions, Luth. Col.
page, 5198.
and a Formidable Number of Soldiers, but also he manageth it with many
Stratagems, and much Craft and Sub tilty; he is always beating up the Quarters
of his Enemies, and by that means makes them faint and weary; he keeps them
waking with often Skirmishing, and seldom ingageth with the whole Body of his
Army, unless he be assured of the Victory; He is ready to take all advantages;
His Power is great, being able in Luthers Time to maintain and pay yearly two
hundred thousand Soldiers, which at the least amounts to fifteen Millions of
Rix Dollars.

By Degrees the Turk suppressed the Sarazens, who before were Conquerours, and
Lords of all, in Syria, Asia, and Jerusalem, and in the Land of Promise, and
has also great Dominions in Africa and Greece: Much about thirty years before
Luthers time he utterly over-threw the whole Army of the Sarazens, and killed
the Sultan in that Battle.

The German Princes, said Luther, ought to be well Quallified and Armed to
encounter with so powerful an Enemy as the Turks. The Princes themselves ought
in their own Person to advance into the field, and not encounter the Turk with
any inconsiderable number, for the Turk is an Enemy that ought not to be
Undervalued, or Contemned; The Prophet Daniel says, It is given unto him to go
against the Saints of God, Dan. II. And therefore his Fortunes and his
Victories are so great: He makes three Thrones or Seats in his Religion; In
the midst, he places God himself, and Christ on his left Hand, and Mahomet on
the right; He takes his Oath by God who Created Heaven and Earth; by Mahomet
his Servant, The Turks Oath, Luther, 520.
and by the Four score and four Prophets sent from Heaven. I am afraid (said
Luther) it will go with Germany (which is one of the best Countries in the
World) as heretofore it went with Troy, Fuit Ilium and ingens Gloria Teucrorum,
says the Poet; Heretofore there was a Troy, and great was the Glory of the
Trojans; So heretofore there was a Germany, and great was the Glory of the
Germans; but now a short time will see it brought into streights and
Devastation.

The great Overthrows which the Turks shall give to the Forces of the Emperor,
The overthrow which the Turks will give the Emperor foretold by the Prophet
Daniel, page 520.
was not only foretold by the Prophet Daniel (said Luther) but also it was
delivered in the Revelation of St. John; to the end that Godly and Upright
Christians should not be affrighted at his great Power and Tyranny. Daniel
excels in his Prophecies which shall continue to the end of the World; He
most clearly describes the Kingdoms of Antichrist, and the Turk, in the
Revelation of St. John, Chap. 13. It is Written; That it was given unto him to
make War with the Saints, and to overcome them; which words are expressly spoken
of the Turk, and not of the Pope; for the Saints overcome not by their
Sanctity, but by their Patience, and in their overcoming by Faith, when their
Bodies are Murdered: The Prophet Daniel proceeds further, and says, It shall
be for a Time, Times, and half a Time. If Time signifies a Year, as
peradventure it may, then this Prophecy was first of all fulfilled in
Antiochus, who Tyrannized three Years and an half, over the Nation of Israel,
after which time he miserably rotted, and most lamentably died in such an
intolerable stench. occasioned by his Disease, that not any were able to endure
the most noysomesavour of it, or to remain about him.

Luther would oftentimes complain of the great negligence of the Emperor
Charles, in giving an Advantage to the Turk always to overcome him, and to
tax in one Town after another; whereas the Emperor should always have kept a
Gallant and a Resolute Army in the Field, or to have them in a readiness in
their Winter Quarters to be drawn forth into the Field upon the Emergencies of
any Advantage or Opposition, for this is the vigilant Custom of the Turks in
all his Enterprises, whose Ja^izaries (the most Resolute and most Experienced
of all his Soldiers, are always ready at the beat of a Drum for any
Enterprise.) Mahomet began to Appear in the World in the Year, Six hundred and
thirty, after the Incarnation of our Savior, which is now above one thousand
years ago.

The Turks (says Luther) do swell as much with their Lies, as with their
Victories, they acknowledge that Isaac was the first and the True Son of the
Promise; but when he should be Sacrisiced, he conveyed himself away from his
Fathers sight, pretending that he would go and fetch a Knife, and other
Utensils for the Sacrifice; whereupon Ishmael came, and of his own Accord did
offer up himself to be Sacrisiced; upon which Account he became the Child of
the Promise; This (said Luther) is as gross a lie, as that of the Papists
concerning the Administration, only under one kind in the Sacrament. And as
Antiochus above mentioned, was struck by God with a loathsome Disease, and
killed without hands; Even so (said Luther) shall it go with the Pope; He shall
fall and be destroyed without any Blow of the sword, or without any Hands to
manage a Sword; he shall Famish himself, for he has never used any great or
powerful Armies whereby to Defend or Enlarge his Dominions, The Pope to fall
without any blow of the Sword, Luther, page, 520.
but has subsisted only by Lying and Superstition, and pretended Scripture to
maintain him in his Falsehoods, as in one place, Thou art Peter, and in another,
Feed my Lambs; Upon such deceitful grounds he has Increased, and so shall he
fall again; Therefore this Prophecy in the Scriptures, He shall fall without
Power belongs properly to the Pope; For all other Potentates and Tyrants
proceed, with Power and Force; Nevertheless this prophecy (says Luther) in
some manner may reflect as well upon the Turk as upon the Pope, for they began
both of them almost at one time under the Emperor Phocas, for then Mahomet
began to show his Blasphemous Tongue, and the Pope to Rule Spititually; But the
Popes Temporal Kingdom (says Luther) has scarce continued three hundred
Years, since he began to Rule over Kings and Emperors.

Luthers Admonition to the Germans, how they ought to make War against the
Turks.
LVther understanding that the Emperor Charles had sent eighteen thousand.
Spaniards into Austria, to defend the same against the Turks; He sighed, and
said, These are strange Designs, when the Spaniards shall come to defend the
Germans.

The Greatest part of the Spaniards, and their Neighbors Adjacent to them are
Moorans, Luthers Colloq. p. 521.
Baptized Jews, that believe in nothing at all; Hereupon Luther wrote a Letter
to the Generalissimo of the Emperors Army, at that time in Hungaria,
diligently admonishing him to consider that he had four Great Enemies to
Encounter with: The first, was with the Devil: The second, with the Turk: The
third, with Gods Wrath: And the fourth, with the Sins of that Nation.


He told him that all the Kingdoms of the Earth had Fallen, and been Destroyed
by Homebred Dissentions; So fell the Empires of the Medes and Persians; So
fell the Empires of the Greeks and Romans; and so likewise will it go with
Germany, said Luther; For the Princes of the Empire will not Agree amongst
Themselves; And so at last will it go with the Turk himself, for the Higher he
climbeth, he is in the greater Danger to Fall; When his Time comes, then it
will be done in a Moment, and the Lord God will lay his Kingdom in the Ashes.

I made mention in the Life of Luther, that some Eminent Persons presaged of
his Birth, and what a Scourge he should prove to the Licentious Discipline of
the Church of Rome.

In the Year one thousand five hundred and eleven, a Capuchin Friar (in the
presence of Doctor Staupits, and diverse others at Rome) related a Dream, which
on the night before he had Dreamed; which was, That a Hermit should arise
under Pope Leo the tenth, and should be a bitter Enemy to tho Church of Rome;
Whereupon Melancthou said, This Hermit is Luther, for the Austine Friars were
called Hermites. When many years afterward, I was at Rome (said Luther) they
showed me for a precious Relic the Halter wherewith Judas hanged himself,
which ought not by me (said he) to be forgotten, to show in what a thick
darkness of Ignorance our Forefathers lived; Rome was once a Holy City, but
now she is the Spouse of the Devil, and the Enemy of Christ.

Luther Discoursing of the Fathers of the Church; Ambrose (said he) was the
Chiefest and the Eldest; after him St. Jerome; next unto him St. Augustine; and
after him Gregory the Fourth: I have seen St. Augustine (said Luther) painted
in some Books like a Friar with a Hood, by which that Holy Man was much
injured, for he lived a public kind of life, like a Common Citizen, he used
Silver Spoones and Cupps; he lived in ordinary amongst the people, and
conversed with them, he lived no such Monkish kind of life, as the Papists have
feigned of him. The Old Fathers taught better, The Abominable Innovations in
Religion brought in by the Pope Luther, p. 350.
and with a greater power of Godliness then they Wrote. After the Fathers,
came the Pope, and fell in with his mischievous Traditions, and humane
Ordinances, and like a Deluge that bears all before it, he over-flowed the
Church, and ensnared the Consciences touching the eating of Meats, and
concerning Masses, and Friars Hoods, and Impertinent and Profane Decrees and
Laws, insomuch that he daily induced and brought in Abominable Errors into the
Church of Christ, and to serve his own turn, perverted the Holy Scripture, and
either expunged many things that were Written directly against him in the
Fathers, or else did interpret them to that sense which might serve best for
his own Advantage; Insomuch, that upon these and some other Considerations like
unto them, Martin Luther Composed a little Tract, of the birth and Generation
of the Desolation of Antichrist, which because he took some pains in the
Forming of the Extract, I have in this place inserted it, hoping that you will
receive some pleasure in the Reading of it.

The Devil begat Darkness; Darkness begat Ignorance; Ignorance begat Error,
and his Brethren: Error begat Free Will, and Presumption out of Self conceit;
Free Will begat Merit; Merit begat Forgetfulness of God; Forgetfulness begat
Transgression; Transgression begat Superstition; Superstition begat
Satisfaction; Satisfaction begat the Oblation of the Mass; The Oblation of the
Mass, begat Unction; Unction begat the Priest; Unction begat Misbelief;
Misbelief begat Hypocrisy; Hypocrisy begat trading with Offerings for Gain;
Trading begat Purgatory; Purgatory begat the Yearly Solemn Vigils; The Yearly
Vigils begat Church Livings; Church Livings begat Mammon; Mammon begat
Superfluity; Superfluity begat Excess; Excess begat Rage; Rage begat
Licentiousness; Licentiousness begat Dominion; Dominion begat Pomp; Pomp
begat Ambition; Ambition begat Symony; Symony begat the Pope and his Brethren;
The Pope begat the Mystery of Iniquity; the Mystery of Iniquity begat
Sophistical Divinity; Sophistical Divinity begat the Rejecting of the Holy
Scripture; the Rejecting of the Holy Scripture, begat Tyranny; Tyranny begat
the Murdering of the Saints; the Murdering of the Saints begat the Contempt of
God; the Contempt of God begat Dispensation; Dispensation begat Wilful Sin;
Wilful Sin, begat Abomination; Abomination begat Desolation; Desolation begat
Anguish; Anguish begat Questioning; Questioning begat the searching out of the
Grounds of Truth; out of which the Pope, called Antichrist, is Revealed.

Thus have you out of Martin Luther, in his own words, the Genealogy of the
Pope, and by what a concatenated Race this Mystery of Iniquity came to be
Revealed; the time will come says St. Paul, 2 Timothy: 4. When they will not
endure sound Doctrine, but after their own Lusts they will heap unto themselves
Teachers; having itching ears, and they shall turn away their ears from hearing
of the Truth, and shall be turned into Fables.

But amongst all the Fables, and Idolatries in the Church of Rome, there is
none more Remarkable then the Mass; Luther in his Tract hereof declares,
Luther Colloq. 330.
that no Tongue is able to express the Abominations of the Mass, neither can
the Heart of man comprehend the same; and he says it were no wonder, if that
God should destroy the World for the Masse-sake, and the Abominations therein
committed with Fire and Brimstone from Heaven.

When I was a young Friar (says Luther) at Ertfurd, and was constrained to go
out into the Vilages For Puddings and Cheeses, I came to a little Town where I
heard Mass; now when I had put on my Vestments and my Ornaments, and made my
approaches to the Altar, the Sexton of the Church began merrily to play upon
the Lute, at which I could hardly forbear from Laughing, for I was unaccustomed
to such Music.

The Pope must fall, says Luther, and Popery with him, for it is the Devil
himself, and all manner of Blasphemy to hold the sinal cause of the institution
of humane Traditions to be the true Service and Worship of God and that it is
necessary to Salvation; One cause of the fall of the Pope and Popery. page, 328.
and this Assertion is most monstrous, for suppose such humane Traditions were
the best and most esteemed works of Christianity, which they are not, yet to
affirm that they are necessary to Salvation, or do give God any satisfaction
for sin, and that by that means they do purchase Grace, is to make our best
works to be of God utterly rejected. Wherefore Christ says, In vain do they
serve me, teaching such Doctrines which are the Commandments of Men; and St.
Paul says, If either we, or any Angel from Heaven preach any other Doctrine to
you then that which we have preached, let him be accursed.

Antichrist must fall, and it plainly and clearly appears, says Luther, The
Pope true Antichrist, and must fall, page, 312.
that the Pope is true Antichrist; those that transgress his Decrees and
Statutes, are far more severely and diligently punished, then those who offend
the Laws and the word of God: In such a sort does the Pope exalt himself over,
and above God, and he is therefore most properly called Antichrist, in regard
that he sits in the Temple, and in the Church of God, and boasts himself
above all that is called God. The Turk is not this Antichrist, says Luther,
for the sits not in Gods Church; he is but the Battle-Axe of God, whereby he
executes his Vengeance upon the Nations, he is a wicked Beast; out of Gods
Church, there is no Antichrist; now the Pope sits in the Holy Church, and
takes unto him that Honor and Worship which is due unto God only, therefore
the Pope must be the true Antichrist. It is but a cold, and an idle dream of
the Papists, that Antichrist should be a single, and an unattended person that
should govern in a wild way by suborning, and scattering of moneys in the
streets, and that he should do Minacles, and carry about him a fiery Oven, and
that he should destroy the Saints, Eliah, and Enoch. There are too many (said
Luther) who complain and think, I am too fierce and too violent against the
Pope, when alas I conceive my self to be too mild; I do wish that I could
breath out thunderbolts against the Pope and Popery, and that every word were
a clap of Thunder.

I do believe, says Luther, that the Pope out osspecial consideration,
ordained and appointed the Feasts of St. Silvester, and of St. Thomas Becket of
Canterbury, to be Celebrated eight days after the Nativity of our Savior, in
regard that St. Thomas of Canterbury brought unto the Pope the Kingdom of
England, and St. Silvester the Empire of Rome.

In the year one thousand five hundred and thirty, in the Reign of Henry the
eighth; the Pope endeavored by money to corrupt some of the Kings
Counselors; and promised one of them who was of the Blood Royal, and near
unto the Kings Person, that he would give that Kingdom unto him. The Pope
boasted in Luthers days that he was Heir to the Kingdom of England.; page, 310.
The Pope boasted that he himself was Heir unto that Kingdom, by reason it was
held as from him per feodum, but the Popes pride is so great, that he must
fall; and it is no great wonder (says Luther) that even in his time, the
Majesty of the Pope was already fallen. All Monarchs, Emperors, Kings, and
Princes before Luthers time, did ever tremble at the Majesty and the Power of
the Pope, none durst mutter so much as one word against him. This great god is
now fallen, his own creatures the Monks and Friars do begin to be his Enemies,
and they only adhear unto him for their Lucres sake.

Popery must needs be brought to the stake and pay for all; the Pope shall be
devoured by Monks and Friars, which are his own Vermin and Creatures; It is
they who do shake and make loose the fairest Monarchy of Popery, which with
great Advice and Consideration was erected. He has forbidden them to enter
into the State of Matrimony, when notwithstanding he has commanded the same to
be observed as a Sacrament; but if Matrimony be a Sacrament, says Luther, then
it cannot be observed by the Heathen; for the Unbelieving Gentiles who are the
Heathen, have nothing to do with the Sacraments.

The Pope (says Luther) must and shall fall; Another Reason of the Popes Fall.
the blindness of the Papists is great and horrible, and is much to be
admired, because in the Reconciliation for the living and the (and though they
would pretend it is a Sacrisice of Thanksgiving) yet all their Cannonists and
School-Divines, and their Preachers in their Pulpits do apparently disprove it;
you may observe the impudence of some Popelins, that go about to prove this
horrible Error; every Lieutenant say they, has the same full and complete
power as his Lord and Master: Peter was Christ's Lieutenant, therefore he has
the same power that Christ had; and because Christ says, To me is given all
power in Heaven, and in Earth; therefore they conclude, that the Pope who is
Peter's Lieutenant, has the same Power as Christ himself.

To this Luther answers, That suppose it be granted, that Peter was Christ's
Lieutenant here on Earth, so long as he demeaned himself according to Christ's
word? yet it does not hereupon follow, that Peter is Christ's Lieutenant in
Heaven; for Christ that said unto him, what thou bindest on Earth, does not say
unto him, what thou shall bind in Heaven. He says unto Peter, follow me, feed
my sheep, my kingdom is not of this World; that is to say, it is not gotten by
humane strength and power, neither will it be maintained thereby.

The Pope therefore (says Luther) is a Right Jew, who boasts to enjoy by
Christ a temporal Kingdom, he alone will have all the Power and Authority, he
will Rule and Determine all Councels, and Encroach upon them under the Name of
God; If one should have defloured the Virgin Mary, or have crucisied Christ;
yet the Pope for money could pardon and forgive the same; therefore his
Dominion is but short, Page, 306.
and will be brought to Confusion in the year, 666. according to the Number of
the Beast, in the thirteenth Chapter of the Revelations.

Again, Popedom (says Luther) must fall; Another reason of the Popes Fall.
It has been always managed by wicked persons, and Correspondent to their
Doctrine; for as the Creator is, such is also his Creature. Pope Alezander was
a Moran, that is to say a Baptized Jew, he believed nothing at all; he had a
Concubine called Lucretia, to whom he afterward espoused his own Pon: the Pope
that succeeded him was so great an enemy to him, that he caused all the Gates,
Doors, and Windows on which his Name was Written, or his Arms Pourtrayed, to
be broken down and defaced; when God speaks the word Jerusalem fall; Rome be
destroyed and lie in the Ashes, Pope come down from your Throne, the word of
God will be obeyed, and must be accomplished immediately.

Pope Julius the second, Page 302.
celebrated a fair Mass to the Devil upon Easter day in the morning, at which
time he made a lamentable Slaughter, and Massacre with the French, in which
twenty thousand Christians were slain. The Pope and his accomplices (says
Luther) strive not for the benefit or the advancement of the Church, but only
to purchase Wealth, and to overcome Kingdoms and Countries. Therefore the
Legal and Just proceedings of God, will fall upon the Pope and his Retinue, as
already it has begun; for against him, the three first Petitions in the Lords
Prayer may justly be inverted; Blasphemed and Accursed be the name of the Pope,
his Kingdom be destroyed and thrown down, his will be disappointed and
confounded; I hope (says Luther) the numbers of his Friars and of his Nuns
shall no more increase, when the Popes feet are chopped off, then he must creep,
Page, 307;
for he cannot stand long as he now stands.

Again the Pope must fall, for he can neither be Primate, nor chief Head in
Christendom, and no ways possibly can visit and govern all the Churches, no
not although he were Elias, Elisha, Peter or Paul. Meloncthon put a question to
Luther, and said, In case the Emperor should give over all his Right and
Interest to the Pope, whether ought we to show obedience to the Pope or not?
Whereupon Luther replied, The Emperor as an ordained Governor, has no power
to resign over his Interests to the Pope who is no Magist are nor Governor;
For the Pope is a thing which stands upon no ground, neither could it be
called a Resignation to turn over the Emperors Right, and Titles to the Pope,
but it would be rather a Devastation whereby the Empire would be lessened and
extenuated. The Emperor has neither Right nor Power to do it, for the Empire
is not his own; it is not Successive but Elective. To conclude, when it is
denied that the Pope is a Governor (as in truth he is not) then is he bereaved
of all, for whatsoever he has, he has it not by Right, but has Stolen and
usurped it. When it is spoken; therefore that the Emperor received the Empire
of the Pope, Page, 309.
it is of no valve, for he could never give that which he never had; And it is
a mere Fable, that either Constantine the Emperor, or Charles the Great, gave
to the Pope such great Possessions as is boasted off; It was the Avarice of the
Popes, and not any great Donations of the Emperors, by which the Popes have
acquired such great Possessions; In former times the Popes were not Lords over
Emperors and Kings, but the Popes were instituted and ordained by Emperors.

Pride again must have a fall, and so undoubtedly must the Pope; The Pope in
one day (said Luther) made thirty Cardinals, which on the other side of the
River of Tiber were Met and Received by a gallant Body of Horse, whereat, all
the Cannons in the City of Rome were discharged, and the Acclamations and the
Joys of the People did strive to out-voice the Thunders of the Cannons; at the
last the Pope himself came into the Field, at which the Great Guns in Rome were
all discharged; and what with the noise of the Cannons, and the hurry of the
People; the Confusion begat a Terror and a Trepidation, which was so great in
the City, that the Temples also were sensible of it; insomuch, that in one of
the Churches, the Child fell out of the arms of the Blessed Virgin; and (if we
may believe Pasquil) he ascended up into heaven, fearing that amongst the rest,
he also should be made a Cardinal. On the same day and at the same time, a
Priest saying Mass at the Altar, did drop the consecrated Host, and for fear
spilled the Cup, which being brought on the next day to the care of the Pope;
he said, that one of those whom he had Created a Cardinal, would prove a
Plague to the Church of Rome; which not long afterward, did fall out
accordingly: not long afterward the Gospel began to be Revealed again, and
brought to light by the Pen, and by the Preaching of Martin Luther; some time
after that when the Positions of Martin Luther concerning the Popes
Indulgences, were brought unto the Pope: He said, A Drunken Dutch man wrote
them, and when be has taken a good Nap, and is sober again he will then be of
another mind? no more did he valve that Blow from Luthers Hand, which has
made his Chair to totter ever since.

I would willingly (says Luther) fall upon the Popes Decrees and Canons; no
name or style, is bad enough for him, his Wickedness cannot be Sounded or
Expressed; therefore Christ in one word shows it, and calls him an
Abomination of Dessolation that stands on the Holy Mount. St. Paul names
him, An Opposer or Adversary, that exalts himself above all that is called
God. Daniel also Prophecyeth the same, and says, He shall be proud, and not
regard the God of his Fathers.

The Pope and his accomplices relying on their great Power, The Pope falling in
Luthers time, p. 314.
and presumption that they shall never fall; do thereby Confound themselves: the
Idolatry and Superstition in Popery, had for a time great Power and Operation;
For Daniel touching Antichrist said, And he shall prosper till the Indignation
is now near accomplished, for the Pope in Gods good time will most undoubtedly
fall; God will overthrow him, and suddenly, if our own Secureness, and the
contempt of Gods Word does give no hinderance to it. Let us pray, that even the
same misfortune may light upon Their Heads, which They intend ogainst Us, and
that They may fall into that Pit, which They have dug for Us. We have
humbled our selves and suffered enough; They have Burned, Hanged, Drowned and
Banished those that were amongst Us. They will no ways suffer themselves to be
recalled from their Devilish Practices.

But we have one Remedy, Christ Jesus, the Son of GOD, and of the Blessed
Virgin; It is he who is by GOD Anointed King; He will, and shall stand fast to
defend his own Cause in spite of all Opposition; He has Overcome and Destroyed
many Great Kings, and laid them in the Dust; For my part I will hold with Him,
and fight under his Banners, rather then join with the Turk, with the Emperor,
or the whole Universal World; The sighs of GODS People do cry up unto Heaven
against the Pope, as Jesus the Son of Sirach says; The Tears of the Destressed
do fall downwards, yet nevertheless they do ascend upwards.

Another Reason, and a Great one too, of the Infallible Fall of the Pope is,
Page, 319.
the wilful and obstinate Darkness on which the very Foundation of Popery is
laid, and the wicked Superstition reared; I know not what (says Luther) to
think of it, but only by the words of St. Paul. where he says, 2 Thessal. 2.
Because they Received not the love of the Truth that they may be Saved; GOD
will send them strong delusions, that they shall believe a Lie: The Pope has
two Pillars, on which the greatest part of his strength does lean; The one is,
Whatsover you shall bind on Earth, the same also shall be bound in Heaven; And
the other, the command which our Savior gave to Peter, Feed my Sheep. These
two Sentences, the Pope has wrested so far, that thereby he assumeth the
Authority and Confidence to Govern, and Manage all things in the Church, and
not in the Church only; but in Temporal Governments also, according to his
own will and pleasure; Upon this account he has altered both the Form and
Substance of the True Doctrine, he has damned, and saved whom he pleased. He
has deposed Emperors, Kings, and Princes; as if our Savior when he said,
Whatsoever you bind, or whatsoever you loose, had confined the sense and
interpretation of those words only to a Temporal Jurisdiction, which indeed
most properly belongs, to broken and to contrite Spirits, and to the Doctrine
of Faith. The Decretalls of the Pope also are full of Errors and of Tyranny,
in which the Pope deprived of all shame, speaks in this manner, Non est
praesumendum quod upex tantae Celsitudinis erraro possit; It is not to be
presumed that the top of so great a Highness can err: In this the Decretalls
make half a GOD of the Pope; Amongst whose Canons also it is to be Read, Quod
Authoritas Sacrae Scripturae pendeat a Sede Romana, which is, That the
Authority of the Holy Scripture does depend on the Sea of Rome; Now when the
Pope had persuaded the people to believe this, he made them afterward believe
what he himself pleased, and brought it so far, that a Christian denied the
Merits of the Blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and put on the Hood
of a Friar seeking therein his Salvation. Luther, pa. 319.
This was such an abominable Fall, and an Apostasy (said Luther) that had it
bin done by a Heathen it had been too much: These powerful Errors suffered no
man to come to the Knowledge of the Truth, as Daniel prophesied concerning the
same; Erit Tempus quo prosternetur Veritas; A Time there will be, when Truth
shall be trod under feet. The Infidelity and Superstition of the Jews is not
so great as the Popes, for they maintained their Worship by the Law of God,
although but supersticiously and unbelievingly they understood it; But the Pope
proceeds directly against GODS Word, and treads on the same with his feet,
for which he shall be trod upon himself by the feet of the Indignation of GOD,
he shall perish and be seen no more.

The Kingdom of Christ, says Luther, Of the Kingdoms of Christ, and of the
Pope, and the Turk, p. 322.
is a Kingdom of Mercy, of Grace and Happiness. The Kingdom of the Pope is
Lies and Damnation; The Kingdom of Mahomet is a Kingdom of Revenge, of Wrath
and Devastation; The Kingdom of Christ shall know no end, but will continue
for evermore; The Kingdom of the Pope, is a Kingdom of Incontinency, as well
of Lies, and will undoubtedly come unto perdition with the Children of
perdition. A Reformation being lately made at Wortzburgh amongst the Divines,
they were constrained to put away the Maiden and the Woman Cooks, which
continued but for a Fortnight, for the Prebends did find the inconvenience so
great, that they had leave to take them and to receive them again; But the
Woman-Cooks refused to live with the Precends unless they would take and defend
them, as if they were their own Wives; whereupon they took them on such
Conditions, and were Apparelled in such a Habit, that they might not be known.
I have heard (says Luther) a Lock-Smith say, that for the space of a
fortnight, day, and night he had work enough to do in making Keys for them,
for every one of these Women would have a Key to her Prebends Chamber, Luther,
page 322.
because formerly they put them away as their Whores, but now they took them as
their Wives again. Such wicked wretches must Popery have for her Rulers and her
Governors.

In the time of Leo the tenth, there were two Augustine Friars in a Monastry,
who being much troubled to observe the Errors, Idolatries, and Voluptuous
lives of their Associates, did in their Sermons preach against them, and
mentioned, with all, some particulars against the Pope himself; But in the
Night time two secret Murderers we sent to dispatch them, who first cut off
their Heads and then pulled out their Tongues, and stuck them in their
Fundaments; for such Murders, Idolatryes, and Highest Profaneness, God is at
Enmity with the Church of Rome, and will undoubtedly bring it to Destruction.

If I had not been a Scholar (said Luther) I could never have given such a
Fall to the Church of Rome, for Satan had made me work enough, it was no easy
Task for me to subvert, and to alter the whole Religion of Popery, which was so
deeply rooted; but I promised, and did swear in Baptism, that I would cleave
fast to Christ and his Word, and that steadfastly I would believe in Him, and
utterly renounce the Devil and all his Works; This Oath I renewed in all my
Tribulations, without which they had overwhelmed and made an end of me; In some
particulars I could willingly have showed Obedience to the Bishops, but they
would have had me roundly to deny Christ, make God a Liar, and say the Gospel
is Heresy.

The first blow that Luther gave to the Church of Rome, was by the Oppositions
to the Positions of that great Papist Tecelius, in which Tecelius was so
profanely bold, as to compare the Pope with Peter, and the Cross Erected by
the Pope to the Cross of Christ; These Assertions (amongst many others of the
like Nature) being brought to Wittenbergh, they were burned by the Students in
the Market place, of which Luther himself gives this Account to a Friend of
his in these words; The Students in the University, being extremely weary of
their old course of Studies, and most desirous of the Sacred Bible, out of
their love to me they came unto Tecelius, and made themselves merry with him,
and some of them being more violent then the rest, demanded of him how he dared
to bring thither such paultry and chaffy stuff; At the last, they took the
Positions from him, and publicly burned them in the Market Place about two of
the Clock in the afternoon. All this (says Luther) was immediately known to
the Prince, the Senate, and Rector, and to all of Us. This great Injury done,
did much displease me, and although I am blameless, yet I fear the whole
proceeding will be laid to my Charge.

After this Johannes Hogostratus, a Dominican Friar wrote bitterly against
Luther, and did excite the Pope to prosecute Luther with more violence, and to
use with him the rounder Course of Fire and Faggot, whereupon Luther not long
afterward Addressed himself to Hidelbergh, and in the College of the
Augustinians, now called the College of Sapience, he Disputed about
Justification by Faith; The Learned Bucer was there present, and Imparted all
to Beatus Rhenanus, who gave Luther much deserved Commendations; whereupon,
Luther himself acknowledged, See Luther, Tom. 1 Epist. page 60.
All the Doctors there, in the Doctrine, concerning Grace, and good works, are
of my Judgment, yea almost the whole University, the Prince himself, and, our
Bishop in Ordinary, and all the Ingenious Citizens with one consent affirm,
that before they neither knew, nor heard of the Gospel, nor of Christ.

After this, Luther was summoned to Rome to maintain some thing which he had
written against Indulgencies, but Luther used his best endeavors, that the
Cause might be heard in Germany under Competent Judges, and at length he
prevailed by the Mediation of the University of Wittenbergh to the Pope,
whereupon it was Determined that the Council should be held at Auspurg, where
Luther being Admonished by Cardinal Thomas Cajetan to Revoke his Errors which
tended only to Disturb the Peace of the Church; He made Answer, That he could
Revoke no Errors, being as yet not Convicted by any Scripture of any, and
thereupon did Appeal to the Judgment of the Church; But the Cardinal observing
the strength of his Arguments, and Commanding him not to come into his
presence, unless he would Recant; Luther was enforced to depart, which Cardinal
Cajetan took so ill, that he wrote unto the Duke of Saxony, That he would
either send Luther to Rome, or Banish him out of his Territoryes, and Exhorted
him not to Adhere to Luther's Defenders, nor stain the Illustrious Family of
which he was Descended: But the Elector Returned Answer, That it was not in his
Power to do it, because Luther was not Convicted of any Error, and had done
much good Service in the University, and Offered his Cause to Trial and
Disputation.

At this time the Heroical Courage of Luther was very remarkable, for when
Luther came at first to Auspurg, he by the Advice of such as the Prince Elector
sent with him, did attend three whole Days to have the Emperors Letter for
his safety; The Cardinal in the mean time did send a Gentleman for Luther to
come to him, which Luther denied, until the Emperor had granted what he
desired, whereat the Gentleman being much offended, said unto Him; Do you
presume that Prince Frederick will take up Arms in your behalf? I desire it
not (said Luther) in any wise; whereupon the Gentleman replied, Where then will
you abide? Luther made Answer, Under the Cope of Heaven; whereupon the
Gentleman being almost amazed at his Confidence, said unto Him; Suppose you had
got the Pope, and the Cardinals in your own Power, what would you do with
them? I woul (said Luther) give them Honor, and Reverence; but the fall of
Popery is already Begun, and I shall see it Accomplished.

Upon these Considerations, Luther's heart fainted not, and he Appealed from
the Pope to the Council; and much about the same time the Bohemians sent a Book
to Luther, which was written by John Hus, which Encouraged him to Constancy, and
Patience, and manifested that the Divinity which he Taught, was Sound and True,
and which in its due time would procure the over throw both of Pope and Popery.

A Disputation after this was held at Leipswich, a City in Misnia, and Famous
since, for the memorable Battles that were fought betwixt the Forces of the
Emperor, and the Army of the King of Sweden; here Luther was invited by John
Echius to a Disputation; The Argument, or Chief Question was, Whether the Pope
is Head of the Church by Divine Right? which Echius Affirmed, and Martin Luther
Denied; The Chief Argument of Echius was, That the Church could not be without
a Head, seeing it was a Body consisting of several Members; and the better to
Confirm himself, he produced the place in St. Matthew, Thou art Peter, and some
Sentences of St. Jerome, and St. Cyprian, and the Judgment of the Council of
Constance, in which it was Concluded, That it was necessary to Salvation, that
men should believe that the Pope was the Oecomenical Bishop, or Christ's Vicar
over the whole World; but Luther did Refell his Arguments with so much Vigor
and Acuteness of Spirit, that his Adversaries were amazed to find him so well
prepared; After that they entered into Disputation concerning Purgatory and
Indulgencies; concerning Repentance, and Remission of sins, and the punishment
of them, and concerning the Power of the Priests; This Disputation, Epist. Tom.
1 page, 176.
was afterward set forth by Luther himself, to his great Commendation.

Luther finding that by so many over-throws which he had given to the Church of
Rome, he had contracted the Envy, and the Hatred of several Persons of
Eminency, he Addressed himself in a Letter to Charles the Emperor, in which he
Humbly besought him, That he would so long vouchsafe him his protection as that
he might give an account of his proceedings to the World, and either be known
to overcome himself, or to be overcome by others, he declared himself, that it
would not become his Imperial Majesty to permit that the Innocent should be
violently handled, and be trampled on by their Wicked Adversaries. To the same
Effect he Directed his Letters to the Marquises, Earls, and Lords of the
Empire; Not long afterward he did write to the Archbishop of Meniz, and
Represented to him how he was Condemned by two sorts of Men, By some who never
did Read his Books and by Others, Who had Read them but with hearts full of
Hatred and Prejudice; The Arch Bishop returned him a Civil Answer, That he
heartily Desired that all matters in Religion should be handled by Luther, and
all Others, Religiously, Reverently and Modestly, and without any Envy, Tumult,
and Contumely, to which Luther Answered, That if the work be of GOD, it will
stand firm, and unmovable, but if it were out of sinister respects, it would
easily le blown away.

The Pope at this time proceeding violently against Luther, some Noble Men of
Germany, who were of the same Judgment with Luther, did offer him
Intertainment, and Protection; Amongst whom Sylvester de Schavenburgen did
write a Letter to him, to desire him not to depart into Bohemia, nor into
France, or any other Country, but to have recourse to him, during the time of
the Popes Exasperations and Threatenings, and promised that a Troup of French
Horse should be ready to attend his safely; Hereupon Luther reassuming new
Courage did admonish Spaletenus of it in a Letter to this Effect; I have here
sent you the Letter of the French King Knight Sylvester de Schavenburgen, Tom.
1. Epist
and were it not displeasing to you; I do desire that by a Letter from the
Prince, notice may be given to the Cardinal of St. George, whereby he might
understand. that should they with their Courses, and their Threatenings ox pell
me from Wittenbergh, they should Effect nothing else, but make a bad matter
much worse. For now there are such, and so many Princes not only in Bohemia,
but in the midst of Germany, who both can and will defend me from the threats
thundered out against me by my Adversaries. This unless God prevent it, will
doubtless be the issue of his matter, concerning myself, I am ready to
Adventure upon all Dangers, and equally Contemn both the Favor of Rome, and
the Fury of Rome: Let them Censure and Condemn all that I have written to the
Fire, I will not be reconciled to them, nor at any time will I join with them,
but if I can get any fire where I am, I will burn all the Pontifician Law, the
sink of Heresies, yea I will make no more Addresses wherewith the Enemies of
the Gospel, are more and more incensed.

Luther understanding that the Popes Bull was coming forth against him, did
publish his Book of the Babilonian Captivity, and that Indulgences were the
wicked tricks of the flattery of Rome; He wrote also against the Execrable Bull
of Antichrist, and called the Pope Antichrist, and confirmed the thirty
Articles censured by the Bull.

It is remarkable, that Erasmus being promised by the Advocates of the Pope,
the greatest favors if he would but write against Luther; Erasmus did mildly
Answer, That Luther was a man too great for him to write against, and that he
Learned more from one short page in Luther, then from all the Books of Thomas
Aquinas; Nevertheless Erasmus being afterward overcome by some great persons
to write against Luther, did perform his Task with much lenity, and candor,
although Luther could never after afford him any good word, but according to
the disposition of his Temper and Complexion would be very hot and violent
against him, which he always expressed, as often as any occasion was given to
make mention of him; And indeed this inclination he condemns in himself;
Almost all men (says Luther) do reprove me for too much eagerness; But I am of
a mind, Tom. 2. Epist page 6.
that it is GODS will to have the inventions of men in this manner opposed, for
I see many things in this our Age that are quietly handled to be soon
forgotten, and no man to regard them; I do not deny but that I am more vehement
then is fit, and this is the reason why I have always been so averse in
showing my self in Public, but grievous wrongs were done to the word of GOD,
and to the Truth thereof; whereupon it fell out, that had I not been apt by
Nature to Vehemence, and Imbittering my style, the very Indignity of the matter
would have urged a dead and stony heart to have written sharply, how much more
my self who am of an ardent spirit, and write not a heavy style, Monsters of
Men carried me beyond the due temper of Modesty.

For the warrant of this sharpness he used to allege the Example of Christ,
who called the Jews an Adulterous, and Perverse Generation, a Generation of
Vipers, Hypocrites, Children of the Devil; he would also allege the Example
of Saint Paul, who calls them Dogs, Vain-bablers, Seducers, and Illiterate;
whereupon Erasmus, who was all Candor and Mildness, and did bear no great good
Affection to the Chair of Rome, was wont to say of Luther in regard of the
Diseases of this last Age of the World. GOD has sent them a sharp Physician;
and Charles the Emperor of Germany would say of him; If the Pope and his
Priests were such as they should be, they would never need a Luther.

Luther being diswaded by many of his Friends from going to the Council that
was held at Worms who told him, That by the burning of his Books he might well
guess what was the Popes Censure concerning himself; He with a Resolute Courage
said, These discouragements are cast into my way by Satan, who knew that by the
profession of the Truth, especially in so Illustrious a place, his Kingdom
would be shaken, and indammaged; It is recorded that the Duke of Bavariare's
Jester, whether suborned by others, or by Accident, it is uncertain, did meet
Martin Luther at his Entrance into the City of Worms with such a Cross as is
accustomed to be carried in Funerals, and with a loud voice he said unto him,
Welcome hither, O thou much desired of us who sat in Darkness.

In this Council Luther being demanded of Ecchius to declare his Resolution
concerning his Books, he humdly Desired of the Emperor, and Princes to grant
him their Gentle Attention, which being accorded to, he said, Of the Books
which I have written, some of them do tend unto Faith, and Piety, to these my
Adversaries, of then selves do give ample Testimony; Should I recant these, I
may justly be censured as a wicked man: Others of my Books are against the Pope
of Rome, and the foul Corruptions of the Church of Rome, which so much does
trouble the Christian World, and brings so much mischief; These should I
revoke, I should confirm their Tyranny; The third sort of my Books are against
those persons who defend the Papists Cause, against which I must confess I
have been very Vehement, and yet I cannot Recant those Books, unlesso I will
set open a gap to the Impudency of many; And unless I be Convicted by
Testimony of Scripture, or by Evident Reason, I may not I evoke anything which
I have Written or Spoken; for I will not in any wise wound my Conscience, I
neither can nor will do any thing to the Offense of my Conscience; This will I
stand to, and vary from this I may not; GOD Help me, Amen. This will I defend,
though I was presently to dye: Concerning this, he not long afterward
published this Excellent Protestation.

I Martin Luther, An Unworthy Preacher of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ
do profess, The Excellent Protestation of Luth. r.
and Believe that Faith alone without Respect to our Good Works does Justify
us before GOD, and that this Article cannot be overthrown by the Roman
Emperor, or the Turk, or the Tartarian, or the Persian, nor by the Pope, nor
all his Cardinals, Bishops, Sacrisizers, Monks, Nuns, Kings, Princes,
Potentates of the World, nor all the Devils in Hell. This Article will they,
nill they, will stand, the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against it. The Spirit
of GOD does Dictate this unto me; This is the True Gospel, For thus the Article
in the Mouth of all Christian Children has it; I Believe in Jesus Christ
Crucified and Dead; Now no man dyed for our Sins, but Jesus Christ the Son of
GOD, the One, and Only Son of GOD; I say it again and again; Jesus, the One,
and Only Son of GOD, Redeemed us from our Sins. This is the most surely
Grounded, the most Undoubted Doctrine; This the whole Scripture aloud
proclaims, though the Devils, the Pope, and the World do storm, and burst
with Anger at it; And if Christ alone does take away the sins of the World, we
verily cannot do it with our own Works, and it is impossible that I can lay
hold on Christ, otherwise then by Faith. He is never apprehended by my good
Works; and s^eing Faith alone lays hold on our Redeemer, and not our Works
which are but the Concomitants of our Faith; it is a most undoubted Truth, that
Faith alone before our Works, or without our Works does this; for it is nothing
else to be Justified, but to be Redeemed from our Sins; Goods works do follow
our Faith, as the Effects, and Fruits thereof. This Doctrine do I Teach, in
this will I persist; Amen, Amen.

Not long before, Luther confuted Nicholas Storke, Thomas Muncer, and other
Phanatick persons, who called themselves Prophets, and broaching new Doctrines,
pretended Evangelical Revelations, and Conferences with God himself: These were
they who denied the Baptism of Infants, and thereby sowed the seed of
Anabaptisme, and were powerfully and Victoriously opposed by Luther; Some few
years afterward, the Anabaptists finding Wittenbergh too hot for them, did
spread themselves over all Helvetia, and other parts of Germany, and began to
broach their Fancies at Antwerp; whereupon Luther by an Epistle full of
Christian Direction, did Advertise the Reformed Church at Antwerp to take heed
of such Erroneous Spirits, Luther Tom. 4. Jen. p. 461.
who had very much afflicted him. In the same Letter, he recited the Impostures
of false Spirits in Popery, and of other seducing Spirits of the present times.
And in another Letter he again described the Erroneous Articles of the
Tumultuous Spirits at Antwerp, and clearly opened the Inconstancy, boldness and
secret Pride, lurking in that profession, and entreating them to abandon the
Question concerning Gods Hidden Will, he desired them to attend unto, and to
follow the necessary precepts set before them by GOD himself in his own word.
The Articles of the Anabaptists were these; 1. That every Man has the Spririt.
2. That the Spirit was nothing else but our Reason and Understanding. 3. That
every man believes. 4. That there was no place of Torment for men souls, but
that the Body only was condemned. 5. That every Soul should be saved. 6. But
even by the Law of Nature, we are taught to do good to our Neighbors, as we
would they should do unto us, and that this Will in us was Faith. 7. That we
sin not against the Law, by desiring any thing, if our Will consent not to our
Desires and Lusts. 8. That he who has not the Spirit, has not Sin, because he
wants Reason, which Reason these Anabaptists do call the Holy Ghost.


Luther wrote a Letter of Consolation to John Hessius of Breshaw, to vindicate
himself from the Scandal raised by the Heretic and the Sectaries, and they
fighting against the Articles of the True Faith. Hitherto (says Luther) The
Dispute has been about the Pope, and Purgatory and the like, being all about
differences not grounded on the Scriptures; but now we come to more serious
matters; now we shall see the Draggon fighting, or rather we shall combat with
the Draggon, Michael being our Captain in these Heavenly Fights. Now when the
Draggon does endeavor to pull down the third part of the stars with his Tail
to the Earth; now the Cause will call for our strength in Christ; now you shall
see what manner of a Warrier, and how strong a Champion Satan is, whom yet we
have not tried, nor have had sufficient Evidence of him; but the Foundation of
God, stands firm, having this Seal, that God knows who are his, and in
this, let us be confident to prevail against the Gates of Hell. The wicked
desires of some of the Reformed Ministers in Germany, and others, who rather
then endure the Papists, desired the yoke of the Turk; declared against by
Luther. Tom. 4. Epist. Jon.


It is very Remarkable, that some Preachers of the Reformed Churches in the
difficulty of their times proceeded to that height of Folly, that they desired,
that the Turk might come and lay his yoke upon them, which they conceived would
be more easy then the Burden of the Pope; and other Pastors vainly persuading
the People, that War was not to be Weighed against the Turk; Luther at the
same time, did put forth a Book against the Turk in the German Tongue, the
Turks being then with a great Army before Vienna the chief City of the Empire;
In this Book Luther spoke words of Consolation to the Emperor, and by way of
Prophecy did assure him; That the Turk should not at that time prevail against
that great City, which shortly after, to the great improvement of the
Estimation of Luther, did come to piss.

In the Year, One thousand five hundred and thirty, there was held a Solemn,
and a Numerous Assemby before the Emperor and the States of the Empire; at
which Melancihon knowing the Rage of the Papists, and the Threats of the
Emperor did seem to be very Solicitous; Luther having notice of it, desired
him to be Resolute and Secure for the Protestant Cause, because he was assured
that it was Just and True, and that it was the Cause of God and Christ, and not
stained with the least Sin; If we fall (says Luther) Christ the Lord and the
Ruler of the World falls with us, and suppose the Cause of Christ does fall,
I had rather (says Luther) fall with Christ, Psalm. 55. Psalm. 27.
then stand with Caesar, I entreat you therefore not to forget Gods promises;
Cast thy Care upon the LORD; Have thy Fyes fixed on him, play the Man, let thy
Heart be Comforted! and in the Gospel of St. John, Be of good Comfort, for I
have overcome the World. if Christ be the Conqueror of the World, why should we
fear it, ar if it would overcome us. I extremely dislike your excessive cares
with which you say you are consumed, that these Sorrows prevail so much upon
you, is not from the Weakness of our Cause, but from the Greatness of your
Incredulity; for there were more grounds of Fear and of Trepidation in John Hus
his time, then ours; But grant that there be a great cause of Doubt; God who is
the Agent and the chief mover in it, is of greater power, for it is not our
cause but his; Why then do you afflict your self? If the cause be faulty, let
us revoke it; but if it be good, why do we make God a Liar, who has made us so
great promises? saying, Cast thy Care upon the Lord, the Lord is near unto all,
who being of a troubled Heart do call upon him; Is it possible for you to
effect any thing with your unprofitable Fears and Jeloufies, I pray you tell
me; What can the Devil do more unto us then kill us? I beseech you, seeing in
all other things you are a good Christian Soldier, The Christian Resolution of
Luther.
that you would endeavor to overcome your self as being your self your
Greatest Enemy, nor proside any Armor to arm Satan againg your self, Christ
dyed once for sin, but for a Just and true Cause he shall never dye, but live
and reign in triumph. Tell me then what fear is there for the truth, if Christ
reign; if it be cast down by the wrath of God, let us be cast down with it, but
let it not be done by our selves. He who is become our father, will become the
father of all those that put their trust in him. God is able to raise the Dead.
He is powerful to maintain his own Cause ready to fall, yea to raise it again
if it were fallen, and to promote and advance it as it now subsisteth. If he
think us unworthy to be his instruments in so great a work, let it be done by
others. And if we be not intrested in his promises, I pray you, who are they in
the world whom they belong unto?

The Protestants Confession was afterward cheerfully subscribed by John Duke
of Savoxy, George Marquis of Braxde^burgh, Ernestus Duke of Brunswick, and
Francis Duke of Lunenburgh, Philip Landgrave of Hassia, and Wolfgany Prince of
Anhalt, such great and eminent persons had the Gospel in a short time procured
to maintain the purity thereof, it was also acknowledged and subscribed to, by
two Imperial Cities, the City of Norimburgh, and the City of Reutlin, the
papists were commanded to confute it if they could, which confutation was at
the last drawn up and engrossed, and presented to the Emperor, but a Copy of
it being not to be procured, but upon conditions that it should not be
published, nor transcribed, nor any Reply made thereunto, the Marquess of
Brandenburgh, and the Duke of Brunswick besought the Emporour that he would
permit them to take a friendly course for the composing of the Controversy,
Luther as well the great Instrument as the great Prophet of the Downfall of the
Pope of Rome.
which accordingly was granted, and of each party there were seven Arbitrators
chosen who were to provide for the establishment of a political peace. In which
when the protestant party seemed to condescend too much unto the papists,
Luther who was ordained the scourge of the Pope of Rome, and to be as well the
Instrument as the prophet of his downfall, desired those who were Arbitrators
for the protestants to be very circumspect in what they gave unto the papists,
for said he, they will take our grants in the large, in the larger, and in the
larger sense and will exhibit and interpret their own in a strict, in a
stricter nay in the strictest sense that possibly they can; In brief said
Luther, I dislike this Arbitration for an agreement betwixt the Papists and
protestants in point of Doctrine, as being a thing utterly impossible, unless
the Pope will abolish his Popedom: Christ is come, and reigns, let the
Devils if they will, turn Monks, and Nuns, nor does any shape better become
them, then that in which they have hitherto set forth themselves to be adored
by the world.

But the Issue of the Arbitration came to this, that although the Protestants
desired peace of Casar, yet their petition could not be granted and a war was
threatened or banishment to fall on those who would not be obedient to the
Decrees of Casar wherefore Luther with an undaunted spirit did publish a Book
to the whole nation of Germany in the German tongue, in which he showed them
that they ought not to obey a wicked Edict, or by arms be assistant to the
persecution of the true Doctrine of the Gospel, nor fight for Idols and other
abominations of the Papists. Howsoever he did advise the protestants not to
take up Arms before the Popish party under the Emperor should invade them
with war, but if they then should resist their enemies and defend themselves by
force of Arms, he said, they were to be excused, so long as they stood upon
their Desence and maintain the Truth of the Gospel of Christ.

In the mean time diverse of the Protestants were banished by the Edict of
Caesar, to whom Luther directed a letter to comfort them in their banishment,
and advised them cheerfully to undergo their present calamity and to give God
thanks who endued them with patience, and who also vouchsafed them courage and
constancy. He acquainted them that this triumphing of their Adversaries was
neither sound nor lasting, and that it would perish sooner then they immagined;
He found (he said) that all the attempts of the enemies of the Gospel were
hitherto frustrated, and by the singular mercy of God fallen to the ground.

In the year one thousand five hundred thirty and seven the Pope pretended a
serious reformation of abuses crept into the Church; The meeting was at
Vintcentia (a large and renowned City of the Venetians) at which time Luther
published another book in answer to the Popish reformation; The picture in the
frontis-peice of his book did show the Argument of it, for he represented the
Pope sitting in a high throne, with many Cardinals round about him, the
Cardinals carried in their hands long poles, on the tops whereof they had
fastened great Fox-tails, with which as with so many brushes they endeavored
to cleanse all parts on both sides of them, and every corner about them and
beneath them.

Here, as if the Church had not contentions enough already, the sect of the
Antinomians startled up; They held that repentance was not to be taught by the
ten commandments, and they disputed against those Divines who declared that
the Gospel was not to be taught to any, but to such as were humbled by the
law. And themselves held that whatsoever a man's life was, though never so
impure, yet he was justified if lie verily believed the Gospel. Luther who
wrastled with the Papists at Rome, and in Germany and gave them many falls,
until the heartstrings of their Religion cracked again, did willingly enter
into the lists with them, and did easily throw them on their backs, He showed
that the law was not given that we might be justified by it, but to show us our
sins, and to terify our Consciences, The law was therefore first to be taught
and the Gospel afterward, which shows us our Mediator Jesus Christ blessed
for evermore.

Much about this time, or not long afterward it was that Luther composed a
Treatise, concerning a defense of this Reformed Church lawfully, approved, and
not contrary to Gods will, and now because the Names of this Council and of
the Church were in every man's mouth, How the Pope does play with the Church of
Christ.
Luther did publish a Book in the Cerman tongue concerning both of them, in the
preface whereof he says that the pope by calling Council, does play with the
Church of Christ as they do with a Dog who offer him a crust of bread on the
point of a knife, and when the Dog does put his head forth to take it, they
knock him on the nose with the haft of the knife to procure laughter in those
who do behold it.

In the year one thousand five hundred forty and two Luther published something
in relation to the Turkish Alcoran which was translated into the German toungue
by one Richard a Dominican Friar to which Luther added a faithful admonition
concerning the abandoning of the Turks Doctrine; and affirmed that not the Turk
but the popre was Amichrist, and upon a diffirence between the Elector of
Saxony, and prince Monurice concerning the teritoryes, and City of worcen,
Luther with weighty reasons dissuaded both princes form there designs; he also
further declared himself concerning a position propounded by him in reference
to the war against the Turk, for Luther foresaw that to punish the sins of
the Cermans the Turks in due process of Time should make formidable and
fortunate Incursions into the Empier of Germany, to the Ruin thereof, which
made him to prophecy, that upon such accounts to make war against the Turk, was
nothing else but to fight against God who does use him as his whip to scourge
them for there; sins he therefore much lamented many great personages of
Germany who sought obstinately to opresse this Gospel, To make against the
Turk is to to fight against God who makes the Turk his scour gets punish the
German Nation.
for which they must expect severe punishments to fall upon them.

Luther set forth a form of public prayer and Communion wherein he retained
all the usual Rites which were not plainly repugnant to the word of God, as
his preface out of the psalnes, the Confession, the Collect, the Epistle and
Gospel, the Creed, the prayers, the Lords prayer, the words of the Lords
supper the thanksgiving etc: This was the first chance of the Rites in the
Church though attempted before by Carolostadius and when two Monks of the
profession of the Augustins were taken by the Inquisition and burned for
neglecting the old form, The monks and Nuns began to fall from the Pope.
being the first that shed their blood for the reformed Doctrine for the Faith,
Luther renowned their Constancy with a Hymn or Psalms, and extolled them as
the first Martyrs of his time, of which Erasmuss Roterodamus also makes
mention, thus both Morks and Nuns began to fall from the pope; many monks, at
this time began to abondon there monastaries being, Illuminated with the bright
rays of the Gospel, which now began to shine forth in perfect Lusters, to
whom Martin Luther sent Letters as consolation as also to the three noble
Virgins of Friburg other Nuns also left their cloisters elsewhere; whereupon
Luther wrote thus to Spalatinus, there came to me nine converted Nuns who left
the monastrey of Nimpschen they were conducted by honest Citizens I much pity
them and many others like unto them who every where in great number perish by
their accursed and incestuous Chastity.

The sacrifices of the mass did now begin to be every where cried down; the
Emperor indeavored to make a decree to suppress the growth of the protestant
Religion but all in vain, for this business was far beter concluded of in Heaven
t^^n (...) Norimberg, and the princes and chief Cities of the Empire strove
who first should intertain the Reformed Doctrine.

The mass (said Luther) must undoubtedly fall, Three years since here was a
Moorean who showed me for certain that in Asia, and all the Eastern Countries
(where are many assemblies of the Christians) there is no celebratation of the
mass at all, and although that in Italy there are many who are much addicted
to my Doctrine which would find a good party there, were I not so violent
against the Idolatry of the mass, yet it finds a great Influenes in France,
and other Countries and undoubtedly it will fall with Popery it self (as being
a great pillar of it) as God in the bright Rays of his Gospel shall shine upon
the heart, and rectify the understandings of the poor deluded people.

The Head of Antichrist is the Pope, and the Turk and as every living Beast
must have a soul and a body, The Head of Antichrist is the pope 298
so the spirit and soul of Antichrist is the Pope, and the body is the Turk.
The Turk is the battle axe and scourge of God (as I have already said) he
comes to execute vengeance upon those who profane his holy name, and do
destroy the Nations (as Cyrus sometimes did) who being Gods Instrument God in
the Prophecy of Isaiah is pleased to call him his servant. The Pope destroys
the Church of God spiritually, yea, and corporally too, with hanging, murdering
and with burning. And as in the Apostles time, the Church had, and kept the
victory, so it shall at this day maintain, and keep the Field against the
Hypocrisy, and Idolatry of the Pope, and Turk, and against the power of all
Enemies whatsoever.

Of Luthers expounding the Prophecy of the Prophet Daniel. chap. II. concerning
Antichrist.
ANd He shall do according to his will, and he shall exalt himself, and magnify
himself above every God, and shall speak mervailous things against the God of
Gods, and shall prosper till the Indignation be accomplished, for what is
determined shall be done; Neither shall he regard the God of his Fathers, nor
the desire of women, nor any God for he shall magnify himself above All.

This prophecy (says Luther) as all Teachers do interpret does point directly
at Antichrist, who neither regards God, nor the love of women, that is the
state of Matrimony Antichrist shall condemn these two on Earth, First God, that
is Religion, and secondly woman, he will contemn all the laws of Wedlock, all
house government, for by women Children are begotten, and brought up to the
preservation of Humane society, and the replenishing of the world, therefore
when that shall be disregarded, and contemned, then of necessity all the
conjunction of political government which established in the laws of Matrimony
must fall with it, nay Kings and Emperors, and all their laws and Ordinances
must fall to the ground with it.

Daniel (says Luther) was so high a Prophet, that Chirst especially loved him,
and of whom he said, who so reads him let him mark; He spoke so clearly of
that Antichristian Horror, as if he had been at that time an Eye witness of
it, Read Chapter II. throughout.

He says in express words, The Pope directly Antichrist page 2^9.
that Antichrist shall plant the Tabernacle of his palace between the Seas upon
the glorious Holy Mount, that is to say, at Rome in Italy. The Turk also does
rule over the two Seas at Constantinople but he does not strengthen nor advance
the worshipping of Maosim neither does the Turk prohibit matrimony, but
offends in the contrary by his polygamy, which is by permitting too many
marriages to one person. Therefore in this text Daniel points directly at the
Pope who does accomplish both with great eagerness, and security.

The prophet says further, He shall be forsaken of his Lord which is already
come to pass, (says Luther), since Kings and Princes do leave him; I do
advise therefore (says Luther) that in any case we should do it for most sure
and certain that the Pope is the true Antichrist.

As concerning the manner of the Religion betwixt the Turk and the Pope there
is no great difference, but only in Ceremonies. The Turk observes the
Mosaicall, but the Pope the Christian Ceremonies, yet both of them do falsify
and sophisticate in their Ceremonies; for as the Turk does force and defile the
Mosaical washings and bathings even so the Pope staineth the right use of
Baptism, and of the Sacrament of the Altar.

In the like manner the Pope shall be destroyed without hands and shall die in
himself, for he began his Kingdom in Superstition, and external shinings and
the prerended Authority of Scripture; This is the ground on which Popery is
builded, and through which it is fallen and every day will fall more and more.
It is therefore spoken in the Prophecy of Daniel that he shall be broken
without hands, and this aymeth directly at the Pope, for all other Tyrants and
Monarchs do use Temporal power, and strength.

But why (says Luther) does the Pope name himself an Earthly God, as though
the true only, and Almighty God in Heaven were not also a God on Earth. Truly
(says Luther) The Popes Kingdom is a horrible wrath of God, an abomination of
dessolation which stands in the Holy place, as Christ speaking directly of it
says, Who so reddeth let him understand. Mat. 24.

It must indeed be a great wrath of God, that a humane Creature dares presume
(Christ being come and revealed in the flesh) to exalt himself in the throne of
God, if it had been done amongst the Gentiles before the coming of Christ it
had not been so great a wonder, And although the Trophet Daniel, St. Paul, and
St Peter, and Christ himself have given us warning of this Beast, yet we
Christians have been still so foolish, as to adore and worship all his
Idolatries, and to believe that he is a Lord over the universal world under
the Name and title of the successor of St. Peter, when as neither Peter nor
Christ himself left any Dominion pon Earth.

To conclude, the Pope is the last blaze in the lamp which ere it be long will
go out, and be extinguished, He is the last Instrument of darkness, who
lighteneth, and thundreth with sword and Bull, who makes and maintains war
through the power and the strength of others. It has heretofore been, said,
The Pope in one finger has more power then all the princes in Germany, but he
begins now to be no more regarded. He is powerful but not in his own
strength (says Daniel.) He begins every day to lose his estimation which no
Emperor with sword and power had been able to accomplish; when he is struck
with Gods word, the Pope is turned to a puppet. But who is he (said Luther) who
about thirty years ago durst so much, as to have had such a thought of the
Pope, for in those days the Pope would have cast whom he pleased head long
into hell, let him fetch himself out again, as well as he could.

The pope, The horrible insolence of the Pope page 301.
says Luther) has done his worst and although he falls not all together,
yet every day he will decrease more and more. He boasts in his decretals that
he has power and Authority over all Rule and Government both in Heaven and
Earth, and that he is a Lord over all Lords. How dares any humane Creature
speak in this manner, surely, says Luther, neither God nor King can endure it.
He must undoubtedly fall, His Tyranny has climbed up too high, he has
presumed to tread Kings and Emperors under his feet, with such powerful
errors God has so blinded the world until the Indignation be accomplished.

Any thing is lawful at Rome, In England (says Luther) was a Cardinal
(Cardinal Woolsy I believe) who was the son of a Butcher, concerning whom a
merry person said, God be praised we have got such a Cardinal, who when he
comes to be Pope we may cat flesh freely in lent, and on other forbidden
days, for St. Peter being a fisher he forbade eating of flesh to the end that
he might sell his fish at a higher rate, but this Cardinal being a Butchers
son will he give us a dispensation for flesh to gain more money thereby, Pope
Adrian caused two Cities to be painted on his table the one was the City in
which he was born, the other was the City of Lovain where he commenced Master
of Arts, page 305.
near unto the side of the City of his Nativity he wrote these words, I have
planted, and close by the other, he wrote these words, I have wattered; under
the two Cities the Emperor was pictured with these words, but J gave the
blessing thereunto; whereupon another wrote underneath, God did nothing here.

And indeed what may be expected from a place where God is not, but ruin, and
confusion, and utter desolation. The Pope is full of hell and damnation, as the
promises of God are full of mercy; How the Pope does play with the Church of
Christ.
we ought not to doubt (says Luther) nor to despair of such a sinner that
repents, and is sorry for his sins and confesses them, and desires
forgivenes for them, allthough he sall continually into sin again. But we must
have reguard unto this, that if such a one dies in his sin then his case is
doubtful, and dangerous, In the year 1539 on the eighth day of January, a
Comet was seen at Wittenbergh about six of the Clock in the evening; it shot
its threantning trayn from the West to the North, and toward che East. The
comet was beheld by Philip Melanncthon, by Instus Jonas, and Martin Luther and
others; Whereupon Luther said, I will prophecy over Germany, Luthers prophecy
against Germany. 522.
not out of the planets, or this dreadful comet but I will decare unto her the
Anger of God, out of his own word for it is impossible that Germany should
escape unpunished, she must recive a great scourge there is no remedy, for God
is daily provoked to destroy her, the Godly with the ungodly must be visited
and both of them taste of the rod. Germany is like unto a gallant horse that is
high of metal, and well fed, but wants a good rider, now, as astrong and
fiery horse will not obey the bridle but drives on forward, and bears down
all before him, except he has an expecienced rider to command him, so for want
of a head and good governor Germany will betray her self, and leave her self
open to the Incursions of her Eni^nyes the Turks who in formidable numbers will
come in like a deluge upon them to overwhelm them.

And ancient Minister who supped with Lnther, spoke all the tiwe he was at
supper very much of Rome, whereupon Luther demanded of him how often he had
bin there, he answrered four times, and why so often said Luther he replied,
first I sought a knave there, at my second iourny to Rome I found him, on my
third journey I brought him from thence and in my last journey I carried him
thither again, and placed him behind Saint Peter's Altar.

We find God rejected the Nation of the Jews, because they resused to hearken
to Moses, and the prophets, nor would receive them, insomuch the same was
uerisyed of them of which the prophet Isaiah speakteh: Chap: 9. The people
turns not unto him that smites them, neither do they seek the Lord of
hosts, Therefore the Lord will cut off from Israel head, and tail, branch and
root in one day. Even thus (says Luther) they were dipersed accordingly
toward the East, toward the West, and the South, All Histories do show that
by God they were expelled, and now ^o live without Christ and Comfort because
they gave so little a regard to the prophecies, The Germans for their sins to
be dispersed as the Jews page. 535.
and Doctrine of the Prophets, and the Apostles. Even so will it go with Us
Germans likewise, who now at last are called, and invited to the supper of the
All-saving Gospel, because we acknowledge not the time of our Visitation. God
of his infinite mercy preserve us from the same, Amen.

Alas I fear the Gospel will too too soon be removed from us Germans, for how
should peace, and quiet, and Religion be there, where licentiousness, and
profaneness raineth, and where all are mortal Enemies to the Gospel.

Of the Turkish preparations.
LEt us truly repent (said Luther) let us pray, and attend the will of God, for
Humane Help and Assistance is too weak. Some years since, the Emperor was well
able to resist the Turk, and to make a war upon them, but then he would not,
and therefore many good people as sheep in the shambles were lamentably
butchered, and slaughtered by the Turks, I fear all things go not right, The
Turks proclamtion this prophecy came to pass this last year.
for our own pride and tyranny will give us over to the Turks and make us
subject to them.

If the Turk shall cause Proclamation to be made that every man shall be free
from Taxations and tributes for the space of three years, then the common
people with joy will surrender themselves unto him; But when he has once
gotten them into his claws he will then make use of his tyranny, as his
custom is, for he takes the third son from every man; He is always the Father
of the third Child. Truly this is a great tyranny which chiefly concerns the
Princes of the Empire themselves. I ever held the Emperor suspected, he can
deeply dissemble. Let us call upon God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, let
us pray, it is high time.

Sigismund the Emperor was in a manner captivated by the Pope and Papists,
they had him in their power, and he was constrained to do what they pleased, he
was compelled by them to put on, and to wear a Deacons coat, and in Christ-mass
Holidays to read the Gospel to the Pope, Insomuch that every Emperor since is
a Deacon of the Romish Church, and the King of the Romans is a Subdeacon, and
he is to read the Epistle before the Pope, so that the Emperor and the King
are both the Popes Mass-servants. This is remarkable Luthers page: 412


The Emperor after he had performed this Ceremony to the Pope had never any
good success against the Turks in Germany, the Kingdom of Bohemia is fallen
which was before a very fair Kingdom.

This is the sum of Luthers Prophecies in relation to the Downfall of the Pope,
and of the Empire of Germany I shall conclude with his prophecy on himself
which is in these words. Those who in my life do resuse the kernel of my
Doctrine, will after my death be glad to enjoy the shell if they can get it.
Let every one in time prepare himself to reap whiles it is yet harvest, for as
Christ says, He that follows me shall not walk in darkness. John 8.


Luther was often heard to deplore the ungodly Invocation, or praying unto
Saints departed, and said, There were many Reasons why that Invocation was
execreable, and this was one, namely that by that profane Custom, the
Testimony of Christ's Divinity was obscured to whom alone the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles attribute the Honor of invocation. Invocation of Saints
the Idol that whetteth the barbarous sword of the Turk to cut our throats.
Melanthon, Tom. 6.
These are the Idols which sharpen the barbarous sword of the Turk to cut our
throats except in a more speedy and Godly manner these things be reformed, for
how wicked and how impious are these Hymus which are daily sung in the popes
Chapel. O Mary thou Mother of Grace, defend us from our Enemies, and in the
hour of Death receive us: And these Hymns, Saint Dorothy create a new Heart
within us, and Saint Catherine translate us from the troublesome sea of this
world to the pleasure of paradise. Open paradise for us.

It being brought to Luthers ear how much the Gospel began to flourish for
all the malicc of the Pope and the vain endeavors of the princes to suppress
it, and that the Papists, and the Emperor himself were so violent against him
that they sought to take away his life, I had rather said Luther, dye by the
hands of the Pope, and would by no means, (if I could help it) that the
Emperor or any of his Counselors should interpose themselves in putting me to
death. I know what misery befell the Emperor Sigismund, after the Martyrdom of
John Hus at Constance, and that nothing prospered afterward with him, how he
dyed without Issue Male, and how his daughters Son Ladislaus also dyed, and how
in one Age he had his Name quite extinguished, and how his Empress Barbara by
name, became a dishonor to the Royal Throne: That Kings and Princes rage
against Christ or the Anointed of God I esteem it as a good sign, and think it
much better then if they flattered, for thereupon it comes to pass that he that
dwells in Heaven laugheth them to scorn, And when our Lord and King laughes,
I see no reason that we should weep before their faces, he laugheth not for his
own sake but for ours, that we trusting in him, and nothing else, might laugh
at their vain Designs, so much need is there of Faith, that the Cause of Faith
may not be looked upon without Faith. It was he who began this work of
Refotmation without our Contrivance or our Counsel, and he himself will
advance it and accomplish it without our Assistance.

The Pope (says Luther) makes use of the Mass even for souls departed, He has
gone with his Mass not only into all Corners of the World, The Prophecy of
the learned Musculus that Rome shall be taken by the Turk page 378.
but even into purgatory it self. His Indulgence-Mongers are his purse
thrashers and he winnoweth good money out of that chafe, most excellent is the
speech and prophecy of the Reverend and learned Musculus which, to conclude
this Discourse I will exhibit to you in his own words Magnis Indulgentiis
coarceuerunt Insinitos thesauros praetextu fabricarum Ecclesias ticarum
presertim, sancti Petri, quae sic aedisicatur Romae ut ad plenum aedificata sit
nunquam, citiusque destruenda sit a Turcis quam ad finem structurae perducenda
a Romany.

With great Indulgences they have amassed into one Bank infinite sums of
money under the pretense of the building of Churches; especially the Church of
Saint Peter, which is so builded at Rome, that it will never be fully finished,
and will sooner be destroyed by the Turks, then be brought by the Romans to
the perfection of its structure.

It is observeable that the late Archbishop of Canterbury who was beheaded on
Tower Hill, having heard of the transla^^on of this Book of Luther into the
English tongue, had a great desire to see it in the manuscript, and it being
sent unto him, he some few days afterward commanded his Chaplin Doctor Bray
to give the Gentleman a Visit, and to acquaint him that he had never read a
more excellent Divine work which was worthy of eternal Memory; At that time he
sent the Gentleman that translated it ten pound in gold, And about a year
afterward having had the leisure fully to peruse the work he returned it back
with this Approbation, that he would make known unto his Majesty what an
excellent work he had rendered into English and that he would have it printed
and dispersed throughout the whole Kingdom, Luther. Col. loq. meant in the
Epistle Dedicatory.
And in token of his respect unto the Gentleman he presented him at that time
with forty pound in gold, by the same Chaplain whom before he had sent unto him.

FINIS.

