The Shepherd,

Or The PASTORAL CHARGE And OBEDIENCE due to it; Instituted By God as a
necessary means to preserve the Sheep from Straying.

LONDON, Printed for Timothy Garthwait, 1668.

A SERMON Preached before His Majesty at Whitehall, March 9. 1661.
1 PET. 2.25. For ye were as sheep going astray, but are now returned unto the
Shepherd and Bishop of your Souls.


THE condition of those in the Text, both for what they had been once, and for
what they now were, that is, for their straying and returning again, looks so
like our case of late, (who, if ever any, had erred and strayed from all the
ways of duty both to God and man, but are now happily returned to the Shepherds
and Bishops of our Souls) you may perhaps imagine this Text to be chosen of
purpose to pursue those two Blown Arguments.

And therefore before I proceed farther, it will be necessary to deliver you
from those thoughts, and perhaps that fear. For though the mischiefs in the
one, and Blessings in the other be such, as deserve never to be forgotten; yet
possibly may not endure a perpetual importunate Remembrancer.

And the truth is, the very words and phrase of the text, which only at the
first blush carries us upon those thoughts, will leave us, if we look a little
nearer to them. For the Straying here will prove to be of another kind, and the
Return will be found to be to another Bishop. The straying here was of such as
had erred like Sheep, whereas ours had little or nothing of the Sheep in it,
save the Sheeps clothing; for dressed up they were with pretenses as soft as
wool, Gods glory, Purity of worship, Christian liberty, nothing worse then
these, and so indeed they erred like Sheep, as if they had been such; but the
truth is, it was liker the ranging of Wolves, tearing and devouring, then the
straying of weak and silly Sheep. And for the returning likewise here, though
it was to a Bishop, yet I dare not be so bold with him that bears that name in
the text, directly to apply it to our Bishops, nor advance our return to this.

The Bishop here was no doubt our blessed Lord and Savior, whom God himself
had consecrated and ordained to that office; but our Bishops are not otherwise
concerned here then as they can make their title from and under him; but if
that may be done hereafter, I trust you will not be against it. In the mean
time, if there were no more in it, me thinks this should be enough to reconcile
the Presbyterians to the name of a Bishop, which our Savior himself has
vouchsafed to take upon him. But having laid aside that argument, which the
words at first sight seemed to offer, I bespeak your attention to one of a more
common interest, which concerns all that would be Christians, whose character
it is. Who from the ways of sin and error, are returned to the faith and
obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ, who to reduce us from those ways has taken
upon him to be our Shepherd and Bishop.

The main point is, That God of his mercy complying with the necessities and
infirmities of nature, has erected an Office of trust and confidence in his
Church, under the quality of a Shepherd and Bishop, to direct and guide us, who
otherwise would err and stray like sheep, and so be lost for ever.

THe particulars incident to this are, first. The necessity of it, impli'd in
our natural condition, who like Sheep are of themselves apt to err and go
astray. 2. The accommodation we have for it. For what should they do which are
out of the way, but return? and to whom should Sheep return but to a Shepherd?
and lost Sheep, but to him that came to seek and save that which was lost? and
where should they find so safe and sure a retreat, as in him who purchased them
with his own blood? All these are accomplished in our blessed Lord Jesus
Christ, whom we shall consider, first in his office of Shepherd or Bishop; then
in his Flock or Diocese; the Souls of men. We are returned, etc.

THe first thing we meet with in the text, is our natural condition. That we
were as Sheep that had gone astray. And the confession of this is the first
thing we meet with in our Liturgy. We have erred and strayed like lost Sheep.
And though it were fit and necessary it should be there, for, sure I am, we
never erred worse then since we laid that by; yet here we look upon it in
another relation and use; it is the first stone to be laid in this building, in
the erection of the office of a Shepherd and Bishop. The infirmities of the
Sheep are the ground of the necessity of a Shepherd.

But now that while we are speaking of our errors, we do not commit one, we
must know, first what kind of erring this is, and then how we fell into the
fatal necessity of it. What it is, the Bishop that must lead us out of it, will
tell us; for he is the Bishop of our souls: and therefore our Straying here
must be that of the Soul. For though our natural infirmities do expose us to
error in many things else, yea almost in all other things, even those that are
within the reach of sense and reason: there is not any thing in Nature, in Art,
in Philosophy, though commonly received for truth, which of late time is not
charged with error, and it may be sometimes not without cause; yet without any
great regard here, if the Soul be not concerned.

Now if we be so liable to error in the things of this life, where both the end
and the way to them are within the compass of the eye, in which we err, as it
were, in our own Country, where we are bred and born; we must certainly lose
our way, where we are strangers, being Citizens of another Country, as those
blessed Saints, who best knew the ways of the soul, confessed, that they were
strangers and pilgrims here. Heb. 11.14. And they which say so, show plainly
that they seek a Country, and that a better, that is, a heavenly, where God
has prepared for them a City. They must needs be disappointed that seek for
Heaven upon earth, where there is nothing fitted and proportioned to the Soul,
either for the nature or the desires of it. The Soul is immortal, and cannot be
provided for, where all things are liable to change and mortality; for when it
shall survive them, it will be at a loss, till it find a Country like it self,
that is everlasting and immortal.

And as the nature, so the desires of the Soul are unsatisfied here; the eye is
not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing, nor the understanding with
knowledge, nor the heart with the best and choicest delights of it. We are soon
wearied and tired with what we have, and are as thirsty of that we have not. In
our plenty as craving, as others in their greatest wants. The goods of this
world are Hydropick all, quo plus bibuntur plus sitiuntur. They that have the
greatest share and portion in them, of Wealth, of Honor, of Power, do not
sleep the better, nor are their bodies less comber'd with diseases, nor their
minds freer from vexations and troubles. And therefore as the Saints I named
before, did by what they willingly suffered here, show plainly that they sought
another Country; so by this is shown as plainly, that they had cause to do so.

Now here lies the fatal necessity of erring, they seek a Country and City
that is invisible and unknown to nature, either what the state of that Country
is, or by what laws the Citizens thereof are to be governed. And when we walk
in the dark it is not strange we should lose our way.

A chief part of that way lies, first in the knowledge and worship of that God,
who had prepared for them a City, by what Sacrifices, Rites and Ceremonies he
will be served. How much of that may be had by nature, we learn by those, who
were most likely to know, but did not, who were the masters of knowledge to
most other Nations, for of such S. Paaul speaks Romans 1. Romans 1.
Who when they professed themselves to be wise, as well they might in many
other things, yet in this of Gods worship, they became fools. For they turned
the glory of the uncorruptible God, Romans 1.23
into the similitude and image of corruptible Man, and of birds, and fourfooted
beasts, and of creeping things.

The right way of worshipping God (since revealed to us to be by Jesus Christ)
was not only unknown to them, but to those to whom God had more peculiarly
imparted himself. Ephesians. 3.5.
The mystery of Christ Ephesians. 3.5. in other ages was not made known to the
Sons of men, until he was revealed unto his holy Apostles and Prophets by his
Spirit. Yea it was unknown to the very Angels, who when it was first revealed,
in a kind of admiration and curiosity (...) desired to look, 1 Pet. 1.12.
the word signifies earnestly to pry into. And that which the Angels of Heaven
did not know, certainly the sons of men could not.

The other part of the way to that heavenly Country in which we may naturally
seem to have some skill, the way of virtue, that is, in the style of Scripture,
Tit. 2.12.
to live godly, righteously and soberly in this present world, appeared to the
very Heathen to be the only way to happiness. Yet these natural impressions
were so dim and imperfect, both through Original corruption, and the
overruling power of passion and lust, that of those things they knew, they
held the truth in unrighteousness, even to the very perverting of the course of
nature as the Apostle observes of them in the same place, Romans 1. Romans 1.


Besides, many virtues they knew not, which are the glory of Christianity, as
Humility, Denying our selves, Taking up the Cross, Forgiving and Loving our
enemies, in their eyes looked more like follies then virtues, and so they would
have done in ours too, if we had had no better guide then our selves to lead us.

By this we may see the necessity we have of Leading; let us now see the
accommodation we have for it in the Leader. Our blessed Lord Jesus Christ, a
person every way fitted for the purpose, both for his skill, and good will; He
knew best the Heavenly Country, whither we are going, and the way to it; for
he came from thence, from the bosom of his Father. And for his good will to his
own, we cannot doubt they are the Sheep which he had purchased with his blood,
and by that had a just title to govern in what Lordly way of Secular domination
he pleased; yet chose that easy gentle way as Shepherds use to lead their
Sheep. And such he professed himself to be. John 10.11.
I am the good Shepherd: the good Shepherd gives his life for the Sheep, and
He made it good in every point while he was upon earth; He went about doing
good, preaching the Gospel, healing the diseases of the Sheep, forgiving their
sins, till he came to the last and hardest work of a good Shepherd, He laid
down his life for his Sheep.

Yet his Pastoral care died not with him. As he was a Priest for ever; so he
was a Shepherd for ever; for after he had in person ascended into Heaven, he
took care for his flock that he left behind Him, that they might not be as
Sheep without a Shepherd. And from thence gave gifts unto men, some Apostles,
some Prophets, Ephesians. 4.
some Pastors and Teachers, etc. to continue still his Pastoral charge upon
earth: and they were the same persons which before he went he had designed for
it, and for the same reason that the Father sent Him, Mar. 15.24
to seek and save the Sheep that were lost; as appears in the preamble to the
commission given to the Apostles. Mat. 9.36.
Mat. 9.36. When he saw the multitude he had compassion on them, because they
were dispersed and scattered abroad like Sheep having no Shepherd. This
commission indeed was only to the lost Sheep of the house of Israel while he
was alive; but when he rose again from the dead, He renewed and enlarged it to
the lost Sheep of all the world. Mat. 28.19.
Go and teach all Nations.

And as he assigned the persons, sicut misit me Pater. Joh. 20.21.
As the Father sent me so send I you. He Instituted likewise the office it self
in all the points and parts of it.

1. Go and teach all Nations, baptizing, Mat. 28.19.
etc. there he gave the power of preaching and baptizing. 2. He commands a
perpetual memorial of his death, in the Sacrament of his blessed body and
blood. Hoc facite, etc. 1 Cor. 11.24.
3. He gave them at the same time the power of the Keys, Joh. 20.23.
Whose sins ye remit they are remitted, etc. 4. And before that in case of
contumacy he gave power to excommunicate offenders, If he will not hear the
Church, Mat. 18.17.
let him be as a heathen and publican. 5. He ordered them how and what to pray.
When ye pray say, etc. Mat. 6.9.
6. He gave them power and jurisdiction over false Shepherds, to expel them
from the flock. Mat. 7.19.
Beware of false Prophets which come to you in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly
are ravening Wolves. These and the like are the parts of the Shepherds office.
third place he gave besides a divine virtue and efficacy to work supernatural
effects upon the Soul. Not only the institution, but the power also is from
him. And therefore by S. Paul he is called the great Shepherd, 1 Pet. 5.4.
and by S. Peter(...) the chief Shepherd. The cure of Souls was originally in
him, (...), but (...) ministerially and derivatively in the Shepherds under him.

fourthly, that their leading might be taken and acknowledged for his, He
appointed that all should be done in His name. That they should Preach in his
name, Pray in His name, Assemble together in His name, Cast out Devils in His
name. And accordingly S. Paul, when he judged the incestuous Corinthian to be
delivered unto Satan, 1 Cor. 5.4. he did it in the name and power of Christ.
And when 2 Cor. 5.10. he absolved him, it was in persona Christi. All was His.

To the Apostles it may be all this was allowed, but not therefore to all other
Shepherds after. Yes, to all that can rightly claim from Him. Mat. 28.20.
His promise was to be with them to the end of the world, that is, longer then
any Apostle could live. I am sure the necessities of the Sheep will be the same
for ever; for Sheep we shall be still wheresoever we are. When God distributed
to the Church the several parts of the Pastoral charge, some Apostles, some
Prophets, Ephesians. 4.
some Pastors and Teachers, he adds, that it was, ad consummationem Sanctorum,
and adificationem corporis Christi; that is, so long as there should be Saints
to be perfected, and so long as Christ should have a Church, a body upon earth,
and that is so long as there should be Sheep Christ had provided there should
be Shepherds. And these he has taken to that nearness and conjunction, that
the obedience or contempt done to them, he takes it as done to himself. Qui vos
audit me audit, etc.

The benefits and advantages we have by this are many; first, it is an honor
and encouragement to the Shepherds, that the work they do is Christ's, who will
bear them out in what they do according to their duty, and reward them for what
they suffer for it.

2. It removes all discouragement from the Sheep, that make a stand at the
infirmities and frailties of their Shepherds, that they look through and beyond
all them at the power of Christ under whom they serve.

3. Another great benefit it is, that in all doubtful and difficult cases we
may secure our selves upon the conduct of Christ in his Ministers. For if
possibly men should be misled by them into error, when in simplicity of heart,
not knowing any thing to the contrary, they shall submit to them; I dare
promise them at least a favorable hearing from him that commanded the
obedience.

But I dare not, nor can say that for all Shepherds; for every congregational
herd has their Shepherd too; but such as have no part in that power, which is
derived from Christ and his mission; that gave it immediately to the Apostles
only. Joh. 20.
Sicut misit me Pater, sic, etc. And all others that have it must receive it
from them, or from such as derive it from them by succession. It is but reason
that Christ should have the choice of his own Ministers. The Sheep that belong
to those other Shepherds, can plead nothing for their obedience to them. Heb.
13.17.
S. PAUL'S obedite praepositis, belongs not to them, they obey not those that
are set over them, but either those that set themselves over the flock, or the
flock themselves set them, and that not of necessity, which some vainly plead
for them; but as necessary, professing there is no lawful calling for a
Minister, quem non misit populus, where the Shepherd is not chosen by the
Sheep. If these fall into an error by the misguidance of their Shepherds, they
are in a sad and worse condition, which admits no plea of excuse or extenuation
from the Shepherd. They must bear their own faults, and the misguiding of the
Shepherds, which they make their own by choosing them. In a word, the favor
that Christ does is to his own, not the peoples Shepherds.

Duty. To return to Christ the Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls. And that is to
submit our selves to be led and guided by him. To turn to Christ is in effect
to turn Christian. We are no less concerned here. And that must be in two
respects: in his office of Shepherd and Bishop, and in the execution of it by
Shepherds and Bishops.

The good Sheep says our Savior John 10.27. hear the voice of the Shepherd
and they follow him. Joh. 10.27.
If they turn their ears only to him, and hear him, and not follow him, they
turn short, for follow him they must through all the parts of his office. It Is
so with us, who for the most part like nothing in the Shepherd but his pipe,
and a pleasant tune. His rod and his staff we can spare. The Prophet Ezekiel
describes us right, chap. 33. an old humor it seems it was. Ezekiel. 33.31.
They come unto thee, And sit before thee as my people, to hear my words, v.
31. just as we do here come and sit us down as the Lords people to hear his
word. But what follows in the next verse? Verse 32.
And lo thou art unto them as a very lovely song of one that has a pleasant
voice, and can play well on an Instrument; for they hear thy words, but do them
not.

And what will come of this at the last, our Savior tells us in the Parable,
where some had the boldness to plead for their entrance, that they had eat and
drunk in his presence, Luke 13.26.
and had heard him in their streets. Citizens it seems they were by the
streets, and by their devotions, a Sermon and a Dinner, they eat with him, and
they heard him. But what came of it? by hearing him it is like they knew him
well; for all that, he tells them plainly, He knew not them. If the Sheep
wanted nothing but knowledge, I should pardon them if they desired nothing of
the Shepherd but a Sermon. But this is not that which I principally intended
here.

secondly, That our turning to Christ be in the full execution of his office,
as in person, so by commission. Princes, as well they may, think themselves
contemned in their Ambassadors and Ministers. And so does our Savior for his
Shepherds, who are his Ministers and Ambassadors too. Qui vos spernit me
spernit.

I shall not enclose this power or favor to Bishops only, because I find that
name in the text; but lay it in common to all such to whom Christ has
committed under him the government of the Church and the cure of Souls; so as
Presbyterians may have a share here, when they can prove their Ordination and
Mission.

This part of our duty to obey Christ in his Ministers is with many of very
hard digestion, who not regarding the necessity there is of it, nor the benefit
we have by it, nor the authority and commission we have for it, nor the gentle
conduct we have in it, lay it aside as a thing of no use, and that God has
provided other means to lead us many and more certain then any Shepherds can
be. We have first our own Reason to lead us. 2. We have Scripture a surer guide
then that. 3. We have the Spirit besides, Joh. 16.13
and that will lead us into all truth. Lastly, we have our own Consciences,
which in the commission of Leading is of the Quorum, nothing can be done
without it.

We cannot deny but that all these have a part and share in the guiding of our
souls. But as no one of them does exclude or bar the other; so nor do all of
them the Shepherds. For allowing to every of these that which is peculiar to
them, there will be still found something to remain, which is proper for the
Shepherds to do.

I am now, I confess, in a discourse not so smooth and easy as best befits
popular Sermons; yet because many whom it concerns to weaken the hands and
power of Church-governors, do with their importunate clamours fill the Pulpit,
you will be pleased to allow of a short Answer from thence too.

first for REASON; It is not to be denied, that it ought to be admitted even in
matters of Religion, where it has least to do; for Religion is the object and
employment of Faith, and not of Reasoning, and yet naturally no man will
believe any thing unless he sees Reason for it. But how? not a Reason of the
thing that he believes; for that works Knowledge, not Faith; but yet a reason
of believing it, for the credit of the Author that relates it; for nothing can
be more unreasonable, then not to believe God that cannot ly. But to admit
reason in matters of Faith for any other use then that, is to set up a Religion
without Faith, which would be as strange a thing as to have a Religion with
nothing else.

There are in Religion some things to be known as well as believed, and to
these Reason and Discourse is proper; for though the Articles of Faith, and
whatsoever shall appear to be contained in Scripture are without all doubt and
reasoning to be received, because God has revealed them; yet that this or that
Article or Proposition is contained in Scripture, is a thing to be known, and
lies within the compass of sense, we may see whether it be there or no, that
is, for the words. And for the meaning of those words we must understand the
language in which they are written, the proper import and idiom of the phrase,
the force and consequence of the discourse, the coherence and consent it has
with other points better known. We must besides discover the fallacies and
inconsequences of those that would obtrude a different sense from that we
receive. All these difficulties, though in matter of Religion, are within the
conduct of Reason; but it is Reason so exalted with skill of Arts and
Languages, with Prudence and Diligence, that we shall be forced to find work
for the Shepherds too. The greatest part of Christ's flock, I am sure, must
perish if they may not trust others in those things, to which their natural
inabilities or course of life has made them incapable. And for the best of the
flock, whom both Nature and Art has fitted to master the greatest difficulties
of themselves; if they shall seriously consider how much and how often Prejudice,
Education, Custom, Passion and Interest does corrupt our Reason, we would in
prudence sometimes suspect our own, and seek better security from the Church;
where though we shall not infallibly find the truth, we may always safely
presume it. This will serve to reconcile our obedience with Reason.

next pretender against the Shepherds leading is the SCRIPTURE. I confess the
Scripture to be a surer guide then Reason, for the Authors sake; and yet, by
what ye heard even now, it works little without it, but yet surer for all that.
The ignorance of Scripture is a cause of erring. Ye err, says our Savior,
Mat. 22.29
not knowing the Scriptures. And to keep us right in our way Gods Word is a
lantern to our feet, Psalm. 119.105.
and a light unto our paths. We cannot say too much of the excellency and
benefit of it. It is a perfect record of all that concerns Heaven, or the way
to it. It has all the perfections that a law or rule can have to guide us; yet
those perfections are confined within the limits and nature of a law, to do no
more then is proper for a law to do, which is very little without a Judge to
apply it. Though the rule be sufficiently straight and perfect, yet it measures
nothing out of the hand of him that has skill to use it. Bring what
controversy you will to the laws, they pronounce nothing either for the
Plaintiff or Defendant. This is the true reason why, though all sects pretend
to Scripture, there is yet no end of controversies, because there is no common
Judge to end them. And the reason why every sect for all that seems to rest
satisfied, they are guided by the Scripture, is because they carry their Judge
a-long with them, themselves.

So as if together with the Scriptures there be not a Shepherd too, or some as
little to be trusted, our selves I mean, it cannot lead at all. Heb. 4.12.
It is indeed a two-edged sword, but cuts nothing, but in the hand of him that
uses it.

Third pretender to avoid the Shepherds is the SPIRIT. That without question
will lead us into all truth. Joh. 16.13.
But for the manner of the Spirits leading, the Scripture points out two ways,
The one Divines call (...), the other may be called (...) i. e. as it led the
Prophets of old, by revealing to them the truth and matter of the Prophesy, the
object. And by this way it led all the Apostles, to whom the whole doctrine of
the Gospel, and mystery of salvation by Christ was revealed. 2 Pet. 1.21.
And thus holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. To this
way of leading none can pretend, that does not prove his commission from God by
a miracle, who sends none of such an errand that cannot make it appear some
way, that he came from him. If the Enthusiastic would have his dreams believed
to be the dictates and revelations of the Spirit, let him show his letters of
Credence from Heaven sealed with a miracle, and I shall not doubt to set him
above all the Doctors and Shepherds of the Church. Otherwise he may deceive
himself by his spirit, he shall not deceive me.

The other way of the Spirits leading is (...), i. e. not by revealing any
thing to us, but by cooperating with us, by fortifying the soul and the
faculties of it, to all supernatural actions, by assistance of grace to
inlighten the understanding to comprehend divine truth, to inflame the
affections with the love of it, to support our endeavors in all difficulties
and temptations. To this assistance of the Spirit all the faithful have a
right. And though in this way the Spirit cannot deceive us, yet we may be
deceived in it, because it never works but with us; if we fail in what we are
to do, then that fails us.

And by this way not only private persons, but public Councels are governed.
To whom the Spirit does not reveal the matter of their Decrees (...), but by
way of cooperation assists their endeavors to find out the truth from the
proper Topics of it, the Scripture and Antiquity; for so all the force of
their decrees depends upon the reason and grounds upon which they are made. For
if any Council might pretend to that other way of revelation, sure that first
famous Apostolical Council might, Act. 15. But that did not otherwise determine
the matter in controversy then (...), Acts 15.7.
v. 7. when there had been much debate and disquisition out of the Scriptures,
were the decrees made and signed accordingly. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost
and to us. Verse 28.
The Apostles and Elders were in joint commission with the Spirit; the same
Lord that sent the Spirit, sent the Apostles also, and therefore no
contradiction to be led by the Spirit, and by the Shepherds too.

fourth and last leader which is brought in to avoid the Shepherds, is the
CONSCIENCE. This is the Presbyterians strongest fort against Obedience. If he
can get his Conscience about him, he thinks himself so safe that he may bid
defiance to all Authority.

In the Commission of leaders, I confess, as I said, the Conscience to be of
the Quorum. We are to do nothing without it, and much less against it. But then
we must be sure we mistake not somewhat else for the Conscience. Every disease
and distemper of the mind, causless scruple, slight persuasion, groundless fear
is not the Conscience, against which we are bound not to act.

The tender Conscience, for which so much favor is pleaded, may prove in some
no better then a disease of the Soul, a spiritual Spleen. For though it be good
to be tender of offending God in any thing where it proceeds from the good
temper and constitution of the soul, which is the same constantly in all cases,
and is not affected or taken up for a purpose, as the sturdy beggar carries his
arm in a string, that it may be a Patent to beg and be idle.

You may know it certainly to be a disease if it comes upon us by fits and
starts, as to be tender of offending God when we obey men, and not to be tender
of offending God when we disobey them. If they be not as tender of one side as
of another, as I never find them to be, it is but a Paralitick Conscience that
is dead of one side. For tell him the Church commands it, he presently shrinks
and startles at it; and well so, for possibly he may sin against God. But tell
him on the other side that God commands obedience to those that rule over us,
it moves him not at all, you may thrust a needle into his side and he feels it
not. It shows plainly the Conscience has a dead Palsy on that side.

But a right and sound Conscience against which certainly we ought not to act,
is a constant and well governed judgment; for not to amuse you as the manner is
with frivolous distinctions and definitions of Conscience, in this case the
Conscience is nothing but every man's private judgment; for he ought not to
attempt the doing of any thing, till he has framed this judgment to himself,
that it is lawful for him to do it. Now seeing our private judgment has so
great power and influence as to interrupt the course of public, it had need be
a true and regular judgment. As first,

arbitrary, for that we think we have reason to decline in the public
Magistrate, to govern by Will and not by Law. Many a Conscience if it were well
examined, will prove to be nothing but will, not judgment.

full hearing of the cause of both sides, all evidences duly weighed and
examined, then resolves; this is a Conscience against which we ought not to
act, though possibly it might prove to be erroneous; yet for all that we must
know that it does not set us free from the guilt of disobeying our Governors.
And then this is all the benefit our Conscience will do us in case of error,
that it casts us into a necessity of sinning, by obeying against our selves, by
disobeying against our Governors. We shall do well therefore to take care, that
we make not every slight persuasion, doubt or scruple, a Conscience, trusting
to be discharged of our obedience by that, which indeed binds it faster upon
us, for that is the very end and benefit for which is instituted the Pastoral
charge, that when we are so weak we can not safely trust our selves, we may
rely upon that: unless we think it a good plea, I am blind and therefore I will
not be led. I am weak and sickly, and therefore I will not be ruled by the
Physician.

Now to sum up all, if not Reason, nor Scripture, nor the Spirit, nor
Conscience will discharge us of the duty we owe to the Church, in the name of
God, let us not rashly fling away so great a blessing, that in all our doubts
and fears, for our quiet and security, we may have recourse to the Shepherds
and Bishops of our Souls.

THis is the last point, the Shepherds Flock or the Bishops Diocese: the Souls
of men. And here we meet with another quarrel from the Presbytery. That they
may be sure to spoil the Bishops of all authority, they take away their
Diocese, the cure of Souls, that they may be Bishops sine titulo; for Bishops
they are not either of our bodies or estates. And why not of our Souls? Christ
indeed the great Shepherd that purchased them may rule them, but they are too
precious for any other Shepherds to Lord over: which they say is done by
binding the Souls with Church-laws and censures, which Christ has set at
liberty. And thus they set up Christ against himself, and Christian liberty
against Christian duty.

S. Paul, I confess does earnestly press this point of liberty, Gal. 5.1.
Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and be not
entangled again with the yoke of bondage. But what liberty? It is not simply
from obedience either to men or Laws, for that were destructive to Humane
Society as well as Religion. What then is it? It is no more then that
Christians have a liberty not to be Jews. I dare be bold to say, this is all
that can be made of it. And the reason why S. Paul did so earnestly press it is
evident. The Jews that were willing enough to entertain the doctrine of Christ,
yet were not so easily drawn to part with those Rites and Ceremonies, to which
they had been so long accustomed, and upon so good authority. To humor these
Simon Magus and his Disciples set up a medly of both Religions, that they might
be Christ's Disciples and Moses too. Against this doctrine S. Paul sets himself,
especially in his Epistles to the Romans and Galatians. If they have taken upon
them to be Christians let them stand to that, and not look back again to the
flesh having begun in the Spirit. Gal. 3.3.
For behold, I Paul say unto you, if ye be circumcised, Gal. 5.2.
Christ shall profit you nothing. To claim from hence liberty from any other
men or laws then the Jews, they might as well say Christ has here given them
liberty not to be Christians. For Christians we cannot be, unless we obey the
Laws and Government of those that Christ has set over us. To use our liberty
in this case our Apostle in the 16. verse of this Chap. has adjudged it to be
no better then a cloak of malitiousness. 1 Pet. 2.


And for those Consciences which are so tender that every Church-law pinches
and galls them, they do without reluctance bind their own Souls. Every private
man can do that which we will not endure the Church should do. He that
promises any thing is bound in conscience to perform it, though before he took
that bond upon him, he had his Christian liberty not to do it. Before Ananias
promised to sell his estate, and give it to the Church, he was free, S. Peter
told him so; Was it not in thine own power? Act. 5.4.
Yet after that it was not in his power to make use of that liberty; for his
conscience was bound. And if a promise may do this, much more a vow or an oath.
If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, Number. 30.2.
or swear an oath to bind his Soul, Numb. 30.2. (the Soul may be bound) he
shall not break his word, he shall do according to all that proceeds out of
his mouth.

If a man should be so unreasonable as to say, his conscience may be bound by
himself, but not by any else. Do not they themselves, as their manner is in
their Sermons, bind over their hearers to answer for them at the day of
judgment? and what a heap and load of Sermons must then ly upon their
Consciences? though the truth is, they bind none but themselves, and that to
repent for corrupting Gods Word, and misleading the people into Faction,
Sedition and Disobedience, to say no worse.

Let us seriously consider and compare that which they would avoid, with that
which they endeavor to set up in the room of it. They would avoid first the
power of the Church in her Laws and Censures as a domineering over men's
consciences, and a lording it over Gods inheritance. But if they look upon it
with an impartial eye, they shall find all contrary, nothing but moderation; as
first in the very style of the Church, that there might be no harsh words. The
laws by which they govern, are not called laws but canons, that is, rules to
guide, rather then force. 2. Church-punishments are not called poenae but
censurae, not that they are sweetened with good words only, but with real
benefit; for they are not as temporal punishments ad vindictam but ad
disciplinam, for the amendment, not revenge of sin. 3. The temporal judge, if
not Sovereign, cannot pardon the felony though he would. The Ecclesiastical
judge cannot but pardon though he would not. Ecclesia non claudit gremium
redeuntibus, is a rule in the Court Christian. The Church refuses none that
will return and repent. There is no such rule in secular Courts, that the thief
or murderer upon repentance may be pardoned. And by Church-Canons in elder
times it was deemed an irregularity to be present at a sentence of blood. Not
that it is a crime to be so, but as the Canon speaks, propter defectum
lenitatis, that nothing in them might seem to be of harshness or cruelty. The
highest and most terrible of all Church Censures, of which men seem to be most
impatient, how harmless and gentle is it, Excommunication? If he be not guilty,
clavibus errantibus, he is never the worse for it; the bonds fall off
themselves; if he be guilty, he may be the better for it if he will. When S.
Paul judged the incestuous Corinthian to be delivered unto Satan, 1 Cor. 1.3.
and this was thought to be Excommunication and somewhat more; yet this was for
his benefit, for the destruction of the flesh, Verse 5.
that the spirit might be saved in the day of our. Lord Jesus, verse 5. What is
there in all this that should fright us from our obedience?

But now let us see what on the other side they would set up in the room of
this. A liberty of Conscience, forsooth, from the fetters of laws, that they
might not serve God in bonds like slaves, but freely. That they may preach what
they will, and as long as they will. That they may pray how they will, and fast
when they will. That they may stand and kneel where and when they will. Indeed
a true arbitrary Will Worship; instead of a lawful orderly serving of God, a
confusion of all.

But they hold themselves wronged to be charged with will worship, for that
they do all by Reason and the Scripture and the Spirit. Yet for all that
pretense they are still under that charge; because all these are at their own
wills; what sectary is there that with a wet finger cannot, nay does not
challenge Reason, the Scripture, the Spirit and Conscience to be for him, when
he will?

And why do they allow these to guide them and not the Shepherds, but because
these are at their beck and will, but the Shepherds are not? And therefore
because they cannot command them, they would be rid of them, that so they might
without control, Lord it as they will.

But I shall trouble you no longer with our Shepherds or their Adversaries, but
for a conclusion and caution reflect upon our selves: for though Christ has
committed the cure of our souls to others, he has not taken it from our
selves. The Shepherds were given for a help to ease us in it, not to ease us of
it. Every one may and must be by a concurrent care a Shepherd and Bishop to
himself; and then here I shall take leave only to put you in mind of your
Diocese, your Souls, that ye be not our Apostles (...) in this Epistle, 1 Pet.
4.15
that we mistake not our Cure; for there be other things we have as great
affection for as our Souls, I wish we had not. The rich glutton in the Gospel,
when he said to his Soul, Luke 12.19.
Soul take thine ease, thou have much goods laid up for thee, etc. sure he
mistook his body for his Soul, for there was nothing in his barns that could
feed that. This is no greater an error and mistake then we daily commit our
selves; to go no farther then this present time. Lent, if there were any thing
left of it among us but the name, charges the soul by prayer and fasting to fit
and prepare it self to meet our Lord at the Resurrection. When we plead our
constitution and health against it, it shows we are no ill Curates of our
bodies, whatsoever we be of our souls.

Yea that which has a better title to be our souls will not lie within this
Cure; the intellectual and principal part of the soul, and the enriching it
with the knowledge of Arts and Sciences, speculative and practick, by which all
our affairs and the greatest of all the affairs of the world are governed,
which employ the souls best virtues and indowments, and for which none but
great and noble souls are fit. Yet this is not the soul for which Christ died,
and is to be our Cure. For when we have gained this and all the world besides
we may lose our souls. The Holy Ghost takes no other notice of these then as if
they were but bodies, and indeed for their continuance they are no better, for
they perish with our bodies; the greatest wits and wisest conduct lie buried in
their dust with them, nor will they appear again for us in that world where the
soul is most concerned. In a word, the Scripture owns no losing or saving to
the soul but in that condition which must live and continue for ever. Nothing
is worthy that name that is not immortal. Yet I must recall my self when I said
these mortal souls, that is, in their temporal condition, are not within our
Cure; to get, it may be not, but to use they are. The meanest of them all our
Savior expressly commits to our charge, Luke 16.9.
Make you friends of unrighteour Mammon, that they may receive you into
everlasting habitations. Things everlasting are proper for the soul. And if you
shall make you friends likewise of your honor, powers, and knowledge, for the
advantage of Gods honor and service, certainly they will do as much for you as
Mammon can. For thus these mortals do put on immortality, these corruptibles do
put on incorruption. 1 Cor. 15.54.
You may in this sense make a soul out of your bodies by the chaste, sober and
temperate use of them. And so our bodies and all else become the proper Cure of
our souls, and in the discharge of that care, we may expect the blessing of
good Shepherds as well as that of good Sheep. 1 Pet. 5.4.
And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of Glory
that fades not away.


