Presbyter's Antidote CHOKING HIMSELF. Or Stephen Scandrett confuting himself
in his Erroneous Bundle of Confusion and Absurdities, stilled, An Antidote
against Quakerism: Being a brief Collection of some of his Errors, Blasphemies,
and Self-Contradictions. Together with some Interlineary Notes upon them.
Observe S. Scandrett's Contradictions thus placed in his own words.
S.S. I Asserted the Scriptures to be a most Certain and Infallible Rule to
Guide us to Heaven, Epist.

God only can enlighten and lead us into all Truth, Epist. -- the In-dwelling
Spirit of God -- to lead into all Truth, to Quicken, Comfort, etc. Antid. page
1. and 2.

Our Notes thus.
Note, [ God only then is our Guide to Heaven; the Scriptures ought not to be
set above God: But in what Language or Copy are they Infallible? This he tells
us not.]

S. S. Try Doctrines by the Scriptures, Epist. -- a Full Rule, a Trying Rule,
Antid. p. 3.

Look up to God for Illum^nation, to examine the grounds of our own and others
Opinions, Epist.

Note, [ What need of this if the Scriptures be the chiefest, highest, full
Trying Rule, as in page 21? Now God's Illumination is the chief Trying Rule.]

S. S. Uncouch Speeches -- that the Light in its common Operations is given to
Unbelievers, none of my sayings, Epist.

The Spirit by common Convictions strives with Unbelievers, who do resist the
Holy Ghost -- some have sinned away the Motions and Strivings of God's Spirit,
Antid. p. 38.

Note, [ What? not given a Unbelievers, and yet both convict, and strive with
them?]

S. S. G. W. would have inpudently fastened upon me this Assertion -- that I
said, Water Baptism is necessary to Salvation, Epst. p. 8.

Baptism with Water -- a Means of Sanctification, a Means of Salvation, p. 81.
Errors.
Baptism is Gospel, page 80, and 77, and 5, and 10.

Note, [ If not Necessary to Salvation, how then a means of it?]

S. S. Nor is the Illuminaton of the Spirit a Rule at all A gross Error.
The Artificer's Rule is one thing; the clearness of his Eye to see the Rule,
another, p. 33.

By a Rule understand not an Artificial Rule, by which Artificers are guided,
Antid. p. 1.

The Spirit's Illumination brightens our Understanding, enlightens us to
understand God's Mind in Scripture, p. 33.

Note, [ Then the Illuminaton of the Spirit is the Divine Rule of the
Understanding, and so above the Scriptures, though not an Artifi^al Rule.]

S. S. The Light that is in every man without the Scriptures cannot be any Rule
at all to Salvation, Error.
Epist.

Christ lights every man that comes into the World -- this Principle
therefore is in the Disobedient as well, as the Obedient, Iom. 1.18. whereby
they know much of Truth -- it will render the whole World of Ungodly Men
unexcisable at the last day, even those that have not the Scriptures, Antid. p.
2.

Note, [ This is, because this Light of Christ in every man is sufficient to
guide, and be a Rule to Salvation; so they opposing it as such, are inexusable
therein.]

S. S. This Light in every man is nothing else but Man's Reason Error.
none of the four Lights, viz. not the saving Illumination of the Spirit -- 2.
not the in-dwelling Spirit of God -- 3. not the Light of the Gospel -- 4. not
Christ, for he personally is in Heaven, Antid. p. 1, 2, 3. [ Contradiction
still] yet it is a Light of Christ (or his Illumination that will render the
whole World of Ungodly men unexcusable.

Note, [ In him was Life, and the Life was the Light of men, Joh. 1.4. which
being Divine and Spiritual, as of Christ, of a Gospel and Sav^ng Property, does
therefore render the Ungodly unexcusable.]

S. S. The Scriptures are a f^ll Rule, discovering all things necessary to
Salvation, the whole Mind and Will of God, etc. Antid. p. 3, 4.

The Spirit enlightens us to understand God's Mind, etc. p. 33. looking up to
God for Illumination, etc. Epist. ded.

Note, [ The discovering of all things necessary is by the Spirit, or Anointing
within, 1 John 2.27. the Scriptures being inferior to this, refer us to it as
the full Rule and Enlightner of the Understanding.]

S. S. If the Scriptures (or Will of God revealed in them) be the only Rule,
then all other Rules are false Blasphemy.
Rules, and no Rules, Epist.

Neither of these ( viz the Light in every man, nor the Scripture) is wholly to
be cast off -- the Light in every man is not wholly to be cast off -- nor the
Voice of Conscience, Antid. p. 3, 5.

Note, [ Hereby he has confessed the Light in every man to be a Rule, however
not to be cast off; but then his excluding all but Scriptures, as false, and no
Rule, is grossly Erroneous and Blasphemous.

S. S. The Scriptures are as the Sun, Error.
a full Light to guide us to Heaven, Antid. p. 6.

God by his Spirit enlightening, gives and increases the saving Knowledge of
Christ, and thus first they become Believers, p. 7. enlightening us to
understand God's Mind in the Scripture, p. 33.

Note, [ See how he clashes against himself here; can the Sun be added unto, or
made brighter by the shining or reflection of any Light counted inferior? but
God is a Sun and a Shield, and the Scriptures are not God.]

S. S. The Light in every man convinces not of justifying Righteousness -- it
reveals not Christ at all, p. 7. no full Light to travel by, p. 6. the Light in
every man never grew up to make of it self, and without the Scriptures any
discovery of Christ, p. 8. cannot possibly be an infallible Rule to Heaven
Errors.
p. 26.

I yield, that without the Scriptures this Light is able to discover something
of God, and his Mind and Will unto us -- it can reveal there is a God, that he
is to be feared, loved, trusted in, worshipped, that his Name is to be
reverenced, etc. Antid. p. 6. and its Christ that enlighteneth every man,
Antid. p. 2.

Note, [ What! no Discovery of Christ, nor justifying Righteousness, and yet so
much of God and his Love? What strange Contradiction is this, and what gross
Error, thus to divide God and his Son, as if they were not both one Substance,
or nothing related!]

S. S. His chief Argum. contradicted.
S. S. This Light cannot reveal Christ (can make no discovery of Christ) -- it
cannot speak one syllable of Christ, p. 15, 30, 31.

It can reveal there is a God, that he is to be worshipped, loved -- that we
are to love one another -- it can without Scriptures teach moral Duties, etc.
p. 6, 30.

Note, [ Can the Light within reveal God, and not Christ? and Piety, but not
Christianity? What strange Impiety and Confusion is this against Christ's
Light? see Luke 10.21.]

S. S. The Light in man is real Darkness -- is but Darkness, it is mere Darkness
-- it both can, and does misguide, Blasphemies.
p. 29, 30, 31.

And in these things (abovesaid) because the Light in every man speaks
according to Scripture, we are to attend unto it, etc. p. 6.

Note, [ And what? must we attend upon real Darkness? Oh great Darkness! How
great is his Darkness, that thus puts Darkness for Light, and Light for
Darkness!]

S. S. Nor is the Illumination of the Spirit a Rule at all -- the Spirit not a
Rule, False Doctrine.
etc. p. 33.

The Light within was not their full or whole Rule, p. 13. it discovers but
part of God's Will, p. 35.

[ In Contradiction again] Pray that God's Kingdom might come, his Spirit might
govern within us, and Cause us to bring forth Fruit, p. 14. the Spirit shall
lead them into all Truths necessary to Salvation, etc.

Note, [ Not a full Rule, implies, it is some Rule; but if the Spirit within
govern, lead us into all Truth, and cause us to bring forth Fruit, then it is a
full Rule; For, need there be any fuller, then to lead into all Truths
necessary?]

S. S. My second Assertion to set forth the Scripture's worthiness, to be
embraced as the chief and highest Rule Error.
[ Mark] p. 21. only Rule, 39. guiding to Glory, 12. the Only Rule; all other
Rules false, and no Rules, Epist.

The Inspiration of the Almighty gives Understanding, and this in all Points
necessary to Salvation -- the Spirit says, Christ shall lead you into all
Truth -- the Duty of all is to look up to God by Prayer for his Spirit, in a
right manner to understand the Scriptures, p. 24.

Note, [ And its no better then Blasphemy, to account the Inspiration of the
Almighty a false Rule, or no Rule; or the Scriptures a Rule higher then it, or
a higher Rule then Christ, who is the Way, etc.]

S. S. The Scriptures are a sufficient Guide to Salvation, p. 35.

The Spirit says, Christ shall lead you into all Truth.

Note, [ The Scriptures are not Christ.]

S. S. Paul's Conscience put him on to persecute -- did act not against his
Light, p. 28. all his best present Light was positively for persecuting the
Church Blasphemy.
p. 29.

God sets up Conscience in man, to act according to the best Light in him, p.
29. the Spirit by common Convictions strives with Unbelievers, p. 38.

Note, [ Its horrid Blasphemy thus to accuse that, that God sets up, or his
best Light with Persecution; which the Light of the Spirit strives against as a
Work of Darkness, and not of Light.]

S. S. The Light in us meets with much Darkness and Vice to corrupt it -- a
Corrupt Judge Error.
will pass a wrong Sentence, p. 38.

[ Yet] It is a Light of the Spirit of God, wrought by the Spirit of God in
every man, p. 27, 28.

Note, [ Its Blasphemy to count the Light of the Spirit of God a corrupt Judge;
the Light is incorruptible.]

S. S. The Spirit dwelling in all Believers is sometimes a sweet Mover to Duty,
though no in-dwelling Spirit, Confusion.
p. 38.

The in-dwelling Spirit of God, the truly-Sanctified have him dwelling in them
to help their Infirmities, to lead them into all Truth, to quicken, comfort,
strengthen, etc. p. 1, 2.

Note, [ What gross Confusion and Scribbling is this! What? no in-dwelling
Spirit? Yet the in-dwelling Spirit, the Spirit dwelling in them?]

S. S. The Light in every man cannot of it self guide us one step toward
Salvation, p. 6, 21. nor is it any Rule at all to Heaven, Gross Errors.
p. 20.

Without the Scriptures this Light can reveal, that there is a God, that he is
to be feared, trusted in, worshipped, loved, etc. p. 6, 30.

Note, [ And are these no steps toward Salvation and Heaven? Let the Christian
Reader judge, and see Luke 10.27, 28.]

S. S. The Light in every man, and immediate Revelation and Teaching, is no
Rule to Heaven, because they reveal not all, or the whole Duty, p. 54, 61, 62.

And the Spirit is NOT A RULE, nor its Illumination, p. 33, 26, 35.

The Spirit does not immediately reveal the WHOLE Bible to Believers, therefore
he does not immediately reveal to them all their Duty; for its their Duty to
believe all that is there taught, and to practice all A strange Imposition.
that is there commanded, p. 61.

None ever did, none ever could live up to the Light, p. 46, 44. [ and yet
Contra.] it reveals but a small part of their Duty, p. 35, 62.

Note, [ See what an impossible Way and Rule to Heaven he has here prescribed,
not the Light in every man, which he says, None ever could live up to; and yet
says, It reveals but a small part of their Duty; and how then should they
believe and practice the whole Bible, or all their Duty, if not a small part?
Do you think, S. S. makes it his Duty to practice all that is commanded in the
Bible? What say you Professors to this Doctrine? But the Law of the new
Covenant of the Spirit of Life in Christ is to be kept, wherein God's Children
shall not depart from him.]

S. S. None ever could live up to the Light, False.
p. 46.

God's good End in giving this Light is, to reveal moral Duties, and Sins
against Nature, that avoiding these Sins, and practizing these Duties, etc. p.
47.

Note, [ Manifest Contradiction again: Does not God afford Power to answer his
own Good End?]

S. S. Darkness cannot savingly enlighten; the Light in every man is Darkness,
p. 42 -- a false Rule, p. 39 -- Sand, p. 62 -- real Darkness, Blasphemies.
p. 29.

If a man improves his Light within him, he may be saved, p. 49.

Note, [ But Darkness and Sand cannot save him.]

S. S. This Teaching (to wit, of the Spirit) is no Rule at all, p. 53.

He teaches us Physically, by enlightening our minds; thus God's Spirit
assures our Hearts that Jesus is Christ, p. 53.

Note, [ How then no Rule at all? Is his Teaching no Teaching?]

S. S. With the use of Reason the Spirit teaches the Heathen moral Duties (
viz. To love God, etc.) p. 54.

Note, [ And is the Light of the Spirit no Gospel Light?]

S. S. The Illumination of the Spirit is no Rule at all, p. 33.

It makes for our safety to earnestly look up, and to pray for the Illumination
of God's Spirit, p. 55.

Note, [ What Safety, if no Rule at all?]

S. S. Immediate Teachings not to be expected Error.
for continuance by the Church, p. 59.

The Anointing that ye have received, abides in you; and ye need not that any
man teach you -- the Comforter shall teach you all things -- we hear a Word
behind us, 1 Jo. 2.27. Jo. 14.26. Isa. 30.31. p. 53.

Note, [ All which proves Immediate Teachings continue in the true Church,
though not in the false; nor do they consist with the Trade of Hireling
Priests.]

S. S. It is God's good Pleasure, that he will not remove the Being of Sin in
this Life Blasphemy.
p. 63. (...) a Soul that knows God, but he keeps his Commandments, p. 43, 42.

Note, [ Its the Devil's Pleasure, to have the Being of sin unremoved in this
Life, and not God's.]

S. S. He sees good to suffer Corruptions in part mortified in his Saints, to
keep them humble False Doctrine.
page 6, 3.

The God of all Grace open your Understanding, to see your Duty, and obey
fully, p. 52.

Note, [ Do you think this man does Heartily pray for such a full Obedience,
when he has such an high esteem of Corruptions?]

S. S. Sin is not done away in this Life, False
it shall in the next, p. 64.

A Believer dies unto sin by degrees -- so at his Death sin is forever totally
abolished, p. 64.

Note, [ See their Confusion here, one while after Death, another while at
Death.]

S. S. To the Last Trump will sin be in the Saints, p. 64. which Last Trump is
at the end of the World, when the Dead shall arise, p. 85.

No unclean thing shall enter the Kingdom of Heaven: Christ is to present us
Holy, Unblameable Unreprovable, a Glorious Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle,
p. 64.

Note [ Where then are all the deceased Saints since the beginning? And where
must they be till this last Trump he speaks of, if sin shall be in them in the
mean while, wherewith they cannot enter the Kingdom; does not this Doctrine
imply a Purgatory herein? judge Christian Reader and Protestant]

S. S. Faith it self can be imperfect, 1 These. 3.10. imperfection is sin Page
67, 68.

The work or thing wrought is always perfect for its part, nature, or kind, as
a Bud is a perfect Bud -- the least Dram of Grace true, Page 68.

Note [ Faith which is the Gift of God, is of a pure and sinless Nature, so
imperfection (where it imports only the want of full growth, or maturity of
that which in its kind is pure) is not sin]

S. S. Job abhors to entertain such a thought (as being perfect) Page 72.

Job 23.10, 11. I shall come forth as Gold -- my foot has held his steps, Page
72.

Let not any pretend, to be well grown in Grace, that will not look on himself
as imperfect, Page 72.

God speaking true, Job was perfect, that is, well grown in Grace, Page 72.

Job denying himself to be perfect, if he speak truth; was not perfect: if
falsehood, he was perfect, see what Bedlam stuff is here against Perfection.
Page 72.

God speaking true, he was perfect, that is, upright, sincere, well grown in
Grace, Page 72. Cum multis alijs, quae nunc perscribere longum est.

S. S. his Definitions and Titles he puts upon the Light in every Man (viz.)

Dictates and Directions of every man's Heart -- a created mutable light
revealed by the Spirit, which may dictate Sin and Error, P. 25, 28, 29. a
corrupt Judge, P. 28. Paul's thoughts, Where will you believe S. S? here?
his present best light was positively for persecuting the Church, Page 29.
Real Darkness, Page 29. fallible it self, P. 35. the Dictates of men's dark
Understandings; their own Apprehensions, P. 36. A false Rule, page 39. Shallow
dim light, p. 46. Sand p. 62. Law of Nature; Scanty light page 35.

But in plain contradiction to these; see what better Titles he gives the Light
in every man (viz)

Reason; a Principle of Knowledge, P. 3. a common Operation of the Spirit of
God; a Light wrought by the Spirit of God, Page 24, 27, 28. common Convictions
of the Spirit, or here?
Page 38. common Illuminations, to taste of the heavenly Gift, and Powers of
the World to come, Page 41. Christ lights every man, etc. Page 2. Here he
has a little mended the matter, but in Page 35.36 he again blasphemously
opposes the Light within, in this manner, (viz.) If this be a trying Rule,
then a man may do whatsoever is right in his own Eyes; then Heresy is no Sin,
nor Drunkness, nor Whoredom, nor Theft or in these Blasphemies here? which to
us are no wonderments; seeing he cannot discern between the Counsels of Light
and Darkness in the heart, not having an Infallible Spirit, as he confesses in
p. 27, and 31. so the Reader may judge, whence his Book came.
nor self Murder, by fasting as long as done according to his light within. And
S. S. adds, That the Light within may approve of sin, as it did of Persecution
in Saul, Page 36. [ See what horrible Blasphemies these are, and what Trust or
Confidence is to be had in this man, who thus says; and unsaith; one while
confessing to the Illumination of Christ in every man; another while thus
horribly accusing it of Heresy, Drunkenness, etc. as approving thereof, and of
Persecution; What are these Doctrines, but Fruits of a Dark, Envious,
Blasphemous, Drunken Spirit; let all unbyassed Readers judge.

And let the Heathen judge S. S. with their light so much despised by him.
Sperne repugnando tibi tu contrarius esse: Conveniet nulli, qui secum dissidet
ipse. Cato. Scorn, to thy self by thwarting Cross to be, Who falls out with
himself, with none can 'gree.

We desire to know, which of you S. Scandrett' s Brethren, the Presbyterians,
do own his Antidote against Quakerism, as he calls it: and whether any of you
Nonconformist Teachers dare stand by him in all his Doctrines recorded in the
said Book, for we have a further Answer reserved unto it, which if need
require, we can divulge: but it were better for him, and you, that some of you
did persuade S. Scandret, to call in his said Book (or otherwise show your
dislike of it) it being such a bundle of confusion, Errors, Lies, and Abuses
against Truth, and as called Quakers; that it would be more ingenuous, and less
disparagement to you and him, to call it in again; for the light of Truth is
over it all, and People are so wearied, and grown to s^ of such pretended
Antidotes, that many are wiser then bestow 16. or 18. pence upon such a B^le of
(...) Confusion, and gross Darkness, which the Light of Truth has discovered,
and will expel to the (...).

From some of us concerned in the Narrative of the two Disputes in Essex,
Entitled, The Glory of Christ's Light within expelling Darkness.


