A SERMON Preached before HIS MAJESTY at Whitehal, April 5. 1663.

By the Right Reverend Father in God B. Lord Bishop of Lincoln, Elect.

Published by His Majesty's Special Command.

blazon or coat of arms

London, Printed for Timothy Garthwait, 1663.

Heb. xiii. Verse. xv. By Him therefore let us offer the Sacrifice of Praise to
God continually; that is, the Fruit of our Lips, giving thanks to His Name; or,
Confessing to His Name, as the Margin reads more agreeable to the Greek.
WE have an Altar in the Tenth Verse, and in this we have a Sacrifice: But what
Altar, and what Sacrifice? for they are scandalous words. For the Altar, let
that fall, if the Sacrifice cannot support it: But for the Sacrifice, whereof
we are now to treat, it is, I confess, a word of offense, because there goes
under the name of a Christian Sacrifice, that which our Church calls a
blasphemous fable, Art. 31.
and dangerous deceit. Should I leave you without any Caution upon that fear
and danger in Sacrificing, it would be to little purpose to offer at the
commending of any: For we are too often troubled more with words, than what
they signify. And therefore as the Orator advises, when such a case shall
happen Mitigandas esse prius aures; somewhat must be said beforehand to remove
a prejudice that will fall upon all that shall be said after. That which the
Article speaks of is the Sacrifice of the Mass, wherein the Priests of that
Sacrifice say, That Christ himself is really sacrificed for the quick and dead:
And for want of this, our Church is not by them allowed to have either Priest
or Sacrifice.

It Is true, we pretend not to that Mystical Art and Chemistry, to turn the
Elements of Bread and Wine into the Natural Body and Blood of Christ, by which
alone they make themselves Priests, and Him the Sacrifice. I put in no claim
therefore from this Text, either to that Priest, or this Sacrifice, but yet to
a right in both, but both of another kind: For the Sacrifice, the Text is
clear, and the Priest follows of course; there can be no Sacrifice without him.
And it is as clear too, That it is not the Sacrifice of the Mass, though Christ
himself be in it; for it is he whom we first meet with in the Text, By him.]
Here indeed he is, but not in the quality of a Sacrifice to be offered, as in
the Mass, whereof he is the Matter, but as a Mediator only. It is not Him, but
By him we are to offer.

Now seeing we may be secure, it is not that we might possibly fear; let us see
what it is we may safely, and must necessarily perform.

We are first to offer a Sacrifice to God.

2. That for the kind, is Eucharistical, not Propitiatory. 3. The Matter of it
is to be, not the Fruit of our Fields, or of our Flocks, but of our Lips. 4.
Not every fruit that grows upon the lips, but (...) lips Confessing to his (i.
e. Gods) Name. 5. This confessing here is not of him, (though that be otherwise
necessary; for he that denies him, shall be denied by him) but To him, and that
makes it a Sacrifice. 6. It must be to Him, and not to any Creature, Saint, or
Angel. Praise them we may, but offer a Sacrifice of praise, we must not. 7. It
is not a Sacrifice to be done at starts, and upon occasions, but continually, a
daily Sacrifice. 8. It is to be offered by Him, that is, by Christ's merits and
mediation It Is that which gives power and efficacy to this and all our
services, which would be nothing worth, if we came in our own names.
Lastly, You have the Reason, why all this, Therefore; and that sends us back
to the Twelfth Verse, Wherefore Jesus, that he might sanctify the people by
his Blood, suffered without the Gate. That he suffered for us, and that he
suffered without the Gate, are the reasons, why by him, and why of us. By him,
because by the sacrificing of himself, he made our peace with God. By him
therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God for it. And why of us?
Because he suffered without the Gate; whither the Jews that were within the
Gate must go out and follow him, in the next Verse, leaving their City and
Sanctuary. And we the Gentiles that are without the Gate already, may find him
in our own Territories, that so both Jew and Gentile (...) jointly together, as
the word imports, May confess to the honor of his Name.

And as Therefore carries in it the reason of our duty, so it does in that some
accommodation it has to the time: For this is Passion Sunday; and why so
called, we learn from Rupertus and others, because the Jews on this day met
together, to consult of, and contrive the death of our Lord; which, not many
days after, they effected.

It will not be fit (I confess) for that reason, to anticipate the Meditations
proper to that Solemnity. Yet as now the Passion was in preparation and
conception by them, it will be so far a keeping of time with it, if we also now
shall prepare a Sacrifice of praise for it, that we may be fit then to honor
God by confessing to his Name, the wonderful mercies and unspeakable benefits
we receive by the Passion and Resurrection of our Lord.

By him therefore let us offer the Sacrifice of Praise to God continually, that
is, the Fruit of our lips confessing to his Name.

And that we may the better perform our Sacrifice of Praise, Let us by him also
offer a Sacrifice of Prayer, etc.

THat we are to offer a SACRIFICE to God, is here so plainly enjoined, and so
punctually described, both for matter and manner in every circumstance, that
one would think it strange it should be neglected, and more strange it should
be contemned by any. But for our selves, if we would be clear in this matter
(as every good man should desire to be) it is fit we call our selves to account
when, and how we perform it.

The Ancient and Frimitive Church (of whom this may best be learned) did, in
conscience of their duty herein, compose several Liturgies, that by them they
might have a Public daily Sacrifice for the honor and worship of God; as that
of St. James at Jerusalem, St. Marks at Alexandria; after that, St. Chrysostoms
at Antioch, St. Basils at ^aesaria, St. Gregory's at Rome; and indeed, there
was no Church without one. They that wrote Apologies for the Christians, being
of the Heathen accused of Atheism, because they were never seen to offer
sacrifice to the Gods; for answer to that, had recourse to this Sacrifice of
Praise in the Text.

The Copies of those Ancient Liturgies, as they come now to our hands, have no
doubt suffered the fate of time, that is, some changes, by which the
preposterous zeal of some has overcharged them with numerous, and sometimes
superstitious Additions; yet the substance and intendment of them was to
perform this duty. And therefore our Church, that never was of the mind to
fling away Chaff and Corn, both at once, That they might not want what all
Churches ever had; so ordered our Liturgy, that by it we might wi^h safety and
true devotion, daily Sacrifice to the praise and honor of God Wherein they have
followed, not only Precept, but ^atern also from this Text, as by a short
parallel between them, may visibly appear; as first,

Sacrifice, and the Liturgy is that Sacrifice. Antioch was the place where
Christ's Disciples were first called Christians; and Antioch is the place where
the Christian Service is first called a Liturgy. Acts 13.
We find the Disciples met together at their Liturgy (...), Verse. 2.
which we translate, Fasting and Ministering to the Lord; for (...) properly
signifies a Public Ministration; to which, the word used by the Church, fits
well, calling it Common Prayer; and is so expounded by St. Luke himself in the
next Verse, Verse. 3.
When they had Fasted and Prayed. This Liturgy or Ministering to God, must needs
be in something for His honor and service, which is properly a Sacrifice.

God, so to none but God: We call it Divine Service, and so we use it. No
Creature, Saint, or Angel, has any part in it, as in some they have. Praise
them we may for the good service they have done the Church; but offer a
Sacrifice of Praise we may not. It was never heard, says St. Augustine, Offero
tibi Sacrificium, Petre, or Paul, or Cypriane. And though the invocation of
them simply be not a Sacrifice, yet it is such, when used in Divine Service in
the place of one. And that it is not heard in our Liturgy, it is no doubt, with
their good leave and liking too. The Angel Rev. 19. will answer for that Order:
When St. John would have worshipped him, Do it not (says he) I am your fellow
servant. And the Apostles Paul and Barnabas for their Order, when the men of
Lystra would have sacrificed to them, Acts 14.15.
they cried out, Sirs, why do you these things? we also are men of the like
Passions with you. That they are Gods friends, intitles them to no more than a
place in his Court to do him service, not in his Throne to receive any. And
therefore that honor which God has not given to another, we have not given to
them in our Liturgy. Eucharistical, a Sacrifice of Praise, and so is our
Liturgy. We pretend to no expiation or satisfaction for sins, either of quick
or dead: We ow that to a better Sacrifice. The price of Redemption is greater
than any service we can do: It cost more to redeem our souls, we must let that
alone for ever; and therefore in the Liturgy, our Sacrifice is set to no higher
key, than, We praise thee, O God, Psalm. 49.
etc. the fruit of our Lips: For though the Root of this and every good
service, must be in the heart, yet the fruit must sprout outwardly in the lips.
For though a virtue may sometimes be accomplished in the heart only, yet
neither this nor Prayer it self, if private or mental only, (though otherwise
of excellent use) will amount to a Sacrifice, till it come into the lips; for
no proper Sacrifice is invisible: And therefore in our Liturgy, as we pray,
that God would open our lips; so we practice when we join with the Priest in
the Confessions and Psalms, and in such things where he alone is not concerned.
lips that confess to his Name. But how comes confessing more than any thing
else, to relate to a Sacrifice? It is thus. The end and import of every thing
offered to God in Sacrifice Eucharistical, is a Profession and Acknowledgment
of some blessing bestowed upon the Sacrificer; and so either expressly or
implicitly is joined with it. As for instance; At the offering of the
first fruits, they are commanded to make a Confession in this form. Thou shall
go unto the Priest, Deuteronomy. 26.3.
and say thus unto him, I confess this day unto the Lord thy God, that I am
come into the Country which the Lord swear unto our Fathers to give us; That
is, in the first fruits they confessed the Land that bore them to be of Gods
gift. Now of such confessions as these, the whole body and matter of the
Liturgy is framed.
Gods presence is, by a Confession of our sins, which is a putting off our
shoes with the defilements we have contracted in our ways; for the place and
presence is holy. And by this we make Profession and Acknowledgment of Gods
perfect purity and holiness, in that we presume not to come into his presence,
till we first put off our uncleanness.

Absolution; and this is another Confession of his infinite mercy, that he is
willing to forgive our sins, and to use the ministry of sinful man, to confer
it upon us.

Hymns and Psalms, which is a third Confession to his Name, whereby we do with
cheerful and thankful hearts, acknowledge him to be the Author of all the good
we enjoy, or hope for.

Lessons we have the Scriptures read, and they are written for our learning: In
that we confess, God to be our infallible Teacher, to whose Oracles we submit
to be guided, both in faith and manners.

And because the Rules of both lie diffused through the whole body of
Scripture, we have them summed up in the Creeds and Decalogue. In the Creeds we
acknowledge our faith in his wisdom, who has so mysteriously contrived the
means and way of our Salvation, before unknown to Men and Angels: And in the
Decalogue we confess his Dominion, That he is our Lawgiver; and to that our
Patron also, not only gives us Laws but Grace, and hearts to keep them.

Collects, Prayers, and Supplications, for the supply of our wants and
necessities, as well temporal as spiritual, we acknowledge every good gift, and
every perfect giving to come down from the Father of lights.

But the chief of all the Confessions is that, for which our Savior instituted
a Sacrament. Do this in remembrance of me; that is, in Commemoration and
Acknowledgment of what he by his blood has purchased for us: For we must not
think, as some do, that a Sacrament should be instituted for relief only of a
bad memory, like a thread tied about the finger; but solemnly to celebrate the
memory of the greatest of blessings that God ever bestowed upon men; the
Redemption of our Souls by the blood of his dear Son: And therefore this
Confession carries away from all the rest, the name of an Eucharist, a
Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving.

By this we see the matter of the Sacrifice of the Text fulfilled in the
Liturgy by Confessing to his Name.

the circumstance of time when this Sacrifice is to be offered, and that is
continually. In conformity to this, our Service is a continual daily sacrifice,
a Morning and Evening Prayer. And though the greatest benefit of this belongs
to those that daily attend it; yet because it is the Public Sacrifice of the
Church, all that are Members of that have their part and interest in it, though
they be absent, yet not in equal measure. The present are entitled to the
benefit as a Sacrifice offered by them; the absent as a Sacrifice offered for
them. For this is our juge Sacrificium that is perpetually burning upon the
Altar, for the service of God, and in behalf of every member of the Church,
that does not ponere obicem, set a bar upon himself by his wilful neglect of
it, and opposition to it.

By him we are to offer; It Is his merit and mediation that crowns the
Sacrifice. In vain should sinful man approach so great a Majesty in his own
Name; but by him who has made our peace with God, and sanctified us by his
blood, we may find access to him. This by him gives the Characteristical
difference of the Christian sacrifice from all others; for otherwise the
Sacrifice of Praise was common to all times before, and under the Law. You
find in many Psalms a Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving, but in none of
them by him, in Christ's name. St. Joh. 16.24.
Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my Name (says our Savior) but hereafter his
Name will give virtue and efficacy to all our services: And therefore to gain
so gracious an Advocate with the Father, our Prayers and Supplications are in
the Liturgy offered up in his Name, concluding always, By the merits of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

THus you see the Text exemplified throughout in the Liturgy; and the Liturgy
therefore warranted by the Text. I could not promise my self time enough to
take a view of all the particulars, I have therefore reduced that I have to say
at this time, to this one Observation in gross.

That our Liturgy or Common Prayer is a true Sacrifice to God, for the praise
and honor of His Name.

And to this I shall not beg the assent of those that like it not, but require
it; and by the authority of the same Apostle in an other place, Romans 15.8.
where we read, That Jesus Christ was a Minister of the Circumcision for the
truth of God, to confirm the promise made unto the Fathers. Now what that
promise was, he tells us in the next Verse. That the Gentiles might glorify
God for his mercy, as it is written, For this cause I will confess to thee
among the Gentiles, and sing praises unto thy Name. Here are Confessions, and
Praises, and Singing, by which God is to be glorified among the Gentiles: They
that will be Christians upon other terms, do in effect make God a lier, who
promised it should be so.

And yet they that would not have it so, are very many, and of many sorts; and
though I cannot think the worse of it, that it lies under a popular dislike;
yet because it is no ill way of learning our duties by the folly of those that
oppose it, I shall give you a short account of them*

ATHEIST first charges it with such weapons as he has, scorn and drollery:
That these Forms, and Ceremonies, and Pageantry of worshipping God in
Liturgies, is but a trade invented by the Priests, to get their living, and
according to the privilege of Inventors, they claim a Monopoly, that they
only may have the offering of that Sacrifice.

It is not strange, that they who have not God in their hearts, as the Prophet
David speaks of those fools, should have any sacrifice in their lips for him.
In this only, I confess, they are no fools. If there be no God, we need not
trouble our selves about a Sacrifice; but if there be a God, let them take the
fool again; for Sacrifice is his due. Never was any Nation so barbarous, that
fancied a Deity, but thought it necessary to make some testification and
acknowledgment of it by Sacrifice

Herd of SECTARIES, who are but a kind of godly Atheists. When the late storm
that raged amongst us, brought with it those Locusts that overspread the
Nation; though their whole business was to destroy, yet of all most virulently
the Public Service of the Church. And hence it is, that in the practice of
their devotions, you shall find nothing that looks like the offering of a
Sacrifice of praise for the honor of God: But their meeting together, is only
to tell one another their dreams and ridiculous phansies, belying the holy
Spirit an hour or two, and then depart. And so I leave them.

And come to another sort of enemies, whom I intend more particularly to call
to an account, and the rather, because they seem to allow of a Public
Sacrifice of praise, as far as a free Directory will go; but for a set and
stinted Liturgy (as they call it) they have it in abomination, as appears by
the heap of accusations they bring against it.

1. That it is a polluted unclean thing. 2. That it is a dead Sacrifice. 3. A
Book-service of the Letter, and not of the Spirit. 4. A Childish. 5. Confused.
6. Improper, impertinent service. 7. A tedious service. 8. A lame sacrifice,
full of defects.
And lastly, A blind one, that edifies not.

All this dirt and filth they cast upon it, is easily wiped off with a right
understanding of this only general Doctrine of the Text, That it is a
sacrifice of praise to Gof for the honor of His Name.

Popish Missal and Breviary: But if it be truly according to the pattern in the
Text, as ye have heard, a Sacrifice of praise to God, we need not be troubled
through what hands it passed before it came to us: For as we are not ashamed to
confess that our Religion is not a new, but Reformed Religion; so, nor need we
be ashamed to say, We worship God, not by a new, but Reformed Liturgy: And so
our Faith and Religion are both of a piece, and both as old as the Text. Forms
and Ceremonies, void of that life and affection which is necessary in Gods
service. If there be that want of affection in our Prayers, it is a fault, lie
where it may: But certainly the Forms are not guilty of it. It is injustice to
require that in a Sacrifice, which belongs only to him that offers it. The
Church that composed the Forms cannot create affection. If we come to this
Sacrifice and leave our hearts behind us, I know where the blame must lie.
But you will say, you do not accuse Set Forms, for want of life in themselves,
but that by the continual repetition of the same things, they be-dead affection
in those that should have it. And how, I pray, should that be? If the sense of
real wants and blessings, which are always the same, cannot keep up our
affections, how should a new set of words do it? Can we imagine that God should
be taken with variety and shift of phrases, or that the affection that takes
heat from them, will render the service more acceptable to God?

And therefore, when they complain that their devotion is tired with nothing
but Almighty and most merciful Father, in the Morning; and Almighty and most
merciful Father, in the Evening; and the same over and over again every day:
That complaint did never lie against the Jews daily Sacrifice, which was a type
of ours; that there was a Lamb in the morning, and a Lamb again at evening; and
the same over again every day in the year. When our Savior at his last agony
in the Garden, three times retired himself from his Disciples to pray, he used
still the same form of words without any change, St. Matthew. 26.44. And who
dares say he wanted ability to vary his prayer, or can say, he wanted
affection, though he did not? For as St. Luke relates it, He prayed so
earnestly, St. Luke 22.44.
that his swet was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground;
and then sure there was no want of affection; for when our zeal is at the
hottest, we do not use to swet at our prayers.

Libel their Governors, or whom, or what they please to bring into hatred with
the people: But for the true Spirit of Prayer, that cannot be tied with words:
For they are utterly mistaken that think the Spirit of Prayer, supplies any
defect of words or phrases; for that very Text of St. Paul, whereon they ground
it, confutes them; Romans 8.26. The spirit helps our infirmities. But in what?
not in words; for what the Spirit supplies are there said to be (...), not
spoken at all; or, as we translate it, which cannot be uttered. What then does
it supply? It makes intercession for us with groans, which cannot be uttered.
The true Spirit of Prayer consists in groans, in zeal, and fervency; and that,
where it is, will animate and put life into any Form of Prayer. They who call
Forms of their own making, or borrowing, con'd without Book, Praying by the
Spirit, do both cheat the people, and blaspheme the Holy Ghost.

God should require a harder thing of us, as no doubt there are many harder
things to be done, do them we must. The easiness lays the greater obligation
upon us: How ridiculous would this exception appear against the Legal
Sacrifices! A Butcher could kill and dress a Lamb, as well as a Priest. This is
a false, deceitful weight. Gods service is not to be weighed by the labor of
doing, but by the relation to him, for whom it is done: And therefore King
Solomon, when, by the advice of his Father upon his deathbed, he called to
account the chief Leaders in the rebellion of Adoniah, as Joab that commanded
in chief, and Abiathar the High Priest, made no question of putting Adoniah and
Joab to death; but for Abiathar, though he deprived him of his office, yet he
spared his life. And why? he gives no other reason but this, Because he bore
the Ark before his Father David. But was that a work of such merit and
difficulty? Could not any Porter do as much? it was but carrying of a Chest.
Solomon did not take his measure by that. That Sacred Chest, the Ark was a
Symbol of Gods presence; it had relation to his Service, and that he preferred
before his own; for Adoniah was his Brother of the half-blood, and Joab his
cosin-german.

You that are the Kings servants here in Court, do not weigh the merit and
honor of your places, which you justly have, by the pains and difficulty of
your service, which we know in many is little enough, but by the greatness of
the Master for whom you do it. Children may be able to read the Book, but not
therefore fit to offer the Sacrifice.

Confessions and Psalms. It seems their ears are as tender as their
consciences, and both alike out of tune: For this is a Public Sacrifice, (...)
in the Text, i. e. a Confessing together. Now there can be no communication of
men together, but by speech, and therefore of necessity it must be the Fruit of
our Lips. But while we, in obedience to that, pray God to open our Lips, they
teach the people to shut them. They take it very ill, that they are silenced,
though they deserve it, and yet stick not to silence the whole Congregation,
without any offense or fault of theirs.

Hymns and Psalms for our Praises and Thanksgivings as are not proper and
appliable to us: For how can any one that is a Man, say in the Magnificat, Thou
have regarded the lowliness of thy handmaid? Or how can it be seasonable for
all, especially young men, to say in the Nunc dimittas, Lord now let thy
servant depart in peace.

For answer to this, and the rest of that kind: It is but turning to the
Doctrine of the Text, as we have done in all the rest. The Liturgy is the
Churches Public Sacrifice of Praise; and in that we are not only to give
thanks for blessings immediately conferred upon our persons, but upon us with
the whole Church, by the intervention of others. For in the Blessed Virgin we
do all partake of the grace done to her, being taken to be the Mother of our
Lord. And in old Simeon we rejoice at the sight of that salvation, which was a
Light to us Gentiles, as well as a glory to the people of Israel.

Sermon. To measure the length first: If we lay our line to it, you will not
find it so. It takes up but a very short part of the whole time which God has
bestowed upon us; of which enough we have, and too much we take many times for
our rest and sleep, enough for our own necessary business, and a good portion
besides for our pleasures and lawful delights. Can we think an hour or two
spared out of all this, too long for Gods service? or a Lamb too much for him,
who has bestowed the whole flock upon us? The tediousness which is caused by
the length of the Service, is cured by the end. It must needs be a less trouble
to us, if we consider it to be an honor for God. To say no more, How can we
think those Prayers too long, in which we our selves sue for eternity?

Nevertheless, if the length of the Liturgy should, as they say, prove a
hinderance to Preaching, I had so much the less to say for it: But how that
should be, I understand not. The Wise man assures us, there is a time for all
things, and sure then there is a time for two things, Prayer and Preaching
both. But possibly we may be so surprised, that there is not time for both; The
Case of Conscience here will be, which of them may best be spared. The Prayers
are to God, the Sermons to us; the Prayers for Gods honor, the Sermons for our
profit. In this case, I think I may safely leave every man to be his own
Casuist, and go on to the next.

Confession of sins, in the Thanksgivings, in the Collects, many material
things omitted. The Scriptures read in broken pieces, and not in order.

These would not be counted defects, if we considered their end and use in the
Liturgy, which is to be a Sacrifice of praise to God, for that is sufficiently
attained by them as they are there used.

It is true, if we respect these duties in reference to their immediate proper
effects, the common Forms are insufficient; for no man may presume of Remission
of sins, unless he confess to God the particulars wherein he has offended. Nor
can be truly thankful to him for the blessings, whereof he makes no particular
acknowledgment: Nor can attain to a full and clear knowledge of the Scriptures
that reads not all, and in order. All this is easily granted.

But they are utterly mistaken in the use of a Liturgy, that would have it to
be a common store to furnish out every duty and virtue, and further than to
serve for the public honoring, and praising of God: For if particulars should
be named, wherein all are not concerned, how can they truly and heartily say,
Amen? And likewise, when some portions only of Scripture are read, it is to
suit the present occasion and solemnity. And for particular Confessions and
Thanksgivings, if men were so well-affected, and so well-acquainted with their
own Souls, as they should be; when general words are used, they may if they
please, reflect upon their own particulars; and so render the Public Service,
an advantage also to their private interest and profit.

faith or godliness; and then not edifying, the meaning must be, that it is
good for nothing. And truly, if it be so, it is but reason we should part with
it.

But possibly when they say, It does not edify, it may have some other meaning
in it. They may say it edifies not, because they like it not, or are not
pleased and satisfied with the use of it, or, which is nearer; the true meaning
of the word, there is nothing of instruction in it, which they have not heard a
thousand times before.

They who come to Prayers for these ends, may indeed be disappointed, because
they come without their errant. This is a Sacrifice for the praise and honor of
God; if it edifies that, we have no cause to complain. A Sermon, I confess, may
fit our turns better in both these respects, if it be as it should be: It is no
doubt a more pleasing entertainment of the time, if it be to edify our liking;
and fitter for instruction, if it be to edify our learning. But then to say,
Divine Service does not thus edify, is to blame the Prayers, because they are
not a Sermon. You would take it ill, as well you might, if I should except
against Sermons, because they are not Prayers, i. e. a Sacrifice of praise for
the worship of God, as certainly they are not. But let both have their dues,
and they are both good edifiers; The Sermon of Faith and Knowledge, the other
of the Praise and Worship of God.

Yea, that part, which, of all the rest, seems least to edify, The Hymns, and
Psalms, and Anthems with Music, edify the praise of God. I will praise the
name of God with a song, and magnify it with thanksgiving, Psalm. 69.30. Yea,
the very instruments themselves have their part in praising God. Therefore will
I praise thee, and thy faithfulness, O God, playing upon an Instrument of
Music. Unto Thee will I sing upon the Harp, O thou holy One of Israel, Psalm.
71.20. This perhaps may be allowed to David, to use the Art wherein he
excelled, and may agree with the Jewish service, but not with the Christian.
Nay St. Paul, in the place I named before, assures us, Romans 15.8.
That it was a promise made to the Fathers, that Christians should so glorify
God, by Confessing to Him, and Singing to His Name, the very Singing is not
omitted; and that not of Him only, but to Him; which seems so ridiculous to
some, to sing our Prayers, or any thing that is offered to God: But it did not
so to him that knew it better; Psalm. 104.33. I will sing unto the Lord, as long
as I live; I will sing praises unto my God, while I have my being. What ever
others think, he was resolved to live and die in it.

I shall trouble you with no more of their Objections: These only I have taken
out of a greater heap, because they are such as confront the Plain Doctrine,
and Letter of the Text, and are the most popular insinuations wherewith unwary
people have been deluded

But you will say, though we see no reason to approve of these men, yet have we
not reason to pity them? For they are content to loose their Livings for their
Consciences. What they loose, I cannot say; but for pitying them, I should be
apt enough, if I did not see some Gallants venture more for a young wanton
Mistress, than others for a chaste and sober wife. If they be so fond of their
new Directory and Covenant, as young lovers are in the first heat of their
affection, who say, That they had rather beg together, than part; who can help
it? Yet I will hope that a little more time, and a little less Indulgence,
which uses to make the one, will make the other wiser too.

And so I leave them, and come to Our selves, whose Judgments have not been so
far corrupted as to be enemies to the Liturgy; yet, I know not how, something
has so poisoned our Affections, that we are not so good friends to it as might
be wished. We care but little to come to it, and have as little respect when we
are at it; we sit it out, or talk it out, so as nothing seems to be more
impertinent, and wherein we are less concerned, then in this Service. Why will
you go to Church? say they; there is nothing but Prayers. That is in words at
length. There Is nothing but praising and honoring God.

It is not possible, that any could be thus bold with their Creator, if they
did not deceive themselves with a persuasion that a full amends may be made him
another way. That obedience to Gods Commands, a virtuous and godly life is the
best Sacrifice He that keeps the Law, Ecclus. 35.1.
says the Son of Sirach, brings Offerings enough. Psalm. 4.5.
And David, an Author of more credit, tells us of a Sacrifice of
Righteousness. And the Apostle in this chapter, To do good and to communicate
forget not, Verse. 16.
for with such sacrifices God is well pleased. These are, and every other act
of Virtue, may be a Sacrifice, and God honored by them: But yet not such as
will serve to satisfy the Duty of the Text. The Sacrifice of obedience is
Metaphorical, i. e. God accepts it as well as if it had been a Sacrifice, that
is, something given to himself. But the Sacrifice of praise is proper without a
Metaphor. The original word (...), I confess, imports something to be
destroyed, but that is mere accidental to the notion of Sacrifice. It does
distinguish the kind, but not constitute the nature of it, which is
accomplished by offering something to God in acknowledgment of him. And for
this use, the fruit of our lips is as proper, as the fruit of our flocks, or of
our fields, ever were.

So likewise the honor which God receives from our obedience, differs from that
of Sacrifice; for that is only of consequence, and by argumentation, i. e. It
suits with the nature and will of God; as we say, Good servants are an honor to
their Masters, by reflection: But the honor by Sacrifice is of direct and
special intendment, it has no other use, and is a distinct virtue from all
other acts of obedience, and of a different obligation.

I should not trouble you with these nice distinctions, if they did not carry
with them matter of important consequence; least a necessary service should be
shuffled up, and quite lost in the crowd of other duties. For, though God has
the honor of obedience and a virtuous life, if we deny him the honor of a
Sacrifice besides, we rob him of his due; and a greater Sacrilege we cannot
commit: For that which goes upon the common account of Sacrilege, robs God
only of things dedicated for his service; (and yet that crime has fired the
nests of those, that took Coals from the Altar, to warm their own harths) but
this is the robbing God of the Service it self, to which the other is but an
accessory.

It is a fallacy, and piece of practick sophistry that cozens the world, for
men to think themselves discharged of one duty by the zeal they bear to
another; as if God were not robbed so long as we leave him any thing.

Now, as it is well worth our care, that this Service be not lost in the crowd
of other duties, so will it be much more, that it be not lost in worse company,
in a throng of Vices. And lost it will be, when the virtue of it is gone. Psalm.
107.34.
A fruitful land is made barren by the sins of them that dwell therein. The
same cause will make our Prayers as fruitless as our fields. To honor God with
our lips, and dishonor him with our lives; to be strict at Prayers, and loofe
to all disorders; The Presbyterian pretensions cannot make our Sacrifice so
abominable as our sins can: They make God complain of that which he himself
commanded, Isai. 1.11. To what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices unto
me, says the Lord; I am full with the burnt offerings of Rams, and the fat of
fed Beasts. And again, Bring no more vain Oblations; Incense is an abomination
unto me: So it was with the Jews Sacrifice; and the Christians will fare no
better, ver. 15. When ye spread forth your hands I will hide mine eyes from you:
yea, and when ye make many Prayers I will not hear: Whence grows the
displeasure that God takes against his own Service, but from this? Your hands
are full of blood. He will accept no Sacrifice from polluted hands. And
therefore, to reconcile him to his own Service, he puts us into this course,
verse. 16. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from before
mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek Judgment, relieve the
oppressed, plead for the widow.

If we come thus minded and prepared to Gods Altar, and offer the Sacrifice of
Praise to the honor of his Name, we may with confidence expect, what God in
the same case promised, 1 Samuel 2.30. Them that honor me, I will honor.

To conclude. All that I have said hitherto is only to vindicate Gods Service
from contempt, and to restore it to some of the respect due to it. And this,
though the froward times did not need, cannot I hope be thought an ill office
for a Sermon, once to be an Advocate for Prayers, seeing Prayers will always
do as much for the Sermon, be an Advocate to God to bring down a blessing upon
it. As the Church teaches us to do, so let us pray, That the words which we
have heard with our outward ears may, etc.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 19. Line 26. for Faith and Religion, read Faith and Worship, Page 25.
Line 24. for portion, read proportion.


