COLONEL LVNSFORD HIS PETITION TO THE Honorable Assembly of the Knights,
Citisens, and Burgesses, in this present Parliament; Now going under Bail by
favor of the Honorable House of Commons.

ALSO, THE HUMBLE PETITION OF THE MAYOR Iurates, and Committee of the Town and
Port of Dover, in the County of Kent, presented to the Honorable the House of
Commons, Feb. 15. 1641.

LONDON: Printed for LAVRENCE HORTON, 1641.

COLONEL LVNSFORD HIS Petition to the Honorable Assembly of the Knights,
Citisens, and Burgesses, in this present Parliament Assembled.
The humble Petition of Sir Thomas Lunsford Knight, now prisoner in the custody
of the Sergeant at Arms.
Most humbly shows,
THat on Saturday the fifteenth of this month, he was apprehended by a
messenger from this Honorable House, and remains still in custody.

That Thursday the seven and twentieth, he was examined before diverse Noble
Gentlemen, and worthy Members of this Honorable House; touching several
things laid to his charge: to which he gave such ready Answers, as the Truth
of the Fact, and his own Innocence, did prompt him unto, And he hops will
be so satisfactory to every Member of this honorable House; as he shall
thereby regaine their good opinion, which he valueth above his life and
fortunes: and would choose to dye, rather then live without it.

That the streights of his fortunes, by reason of some engagement for moneys;
makes this restraint extreme prejudicial to him, and the sense of the
displeasure of this honorable house: his Sufferings almost intolerable, and
his wife now great with child, and dangerously ill; is no small Additions to
his Afflictions.

And therefore, as he humbly begs his enlargement upon bail, to prevent the
ruin of his Estate, and comfort his afflicted wife; So most especially, the
restoring him to your honorable favor, and good opinion. Which he will leave
no means unattempted, to continue and devote himself for ever a ready Servant
to obey all your Commands; to the loss of his life and fortunes.

THO: LVNSFORD. H. Elsing. Cler. Parliament, d. Com.


TO THE HONORABLE ASSEMBLY OF THE COMMONS HOUSE OF PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of the Mayor Jurate and Committee of the Town and Port of
Dover, in the County of Kent.
HVMBLY SHOWS,
THat the Castle of Dover, Moates and Bulwarks, under the said Castle, are in
great decay, and most of the Ordnance lie on the ground, the Carriages and
Platforms being all decayed, and broken, and little or no powder, shot, or
ammunition, for defense of the said Castle, and Fort is there; as we are
credibly informed.

Whereby both your Petitioners, other places of the County of Kent, are in
great fear to be exposed to the sudden Invasion of the Enemy.

Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray, that you will be pleased to take the
same into consideration, and to order that some speedy course be taken, as well
for repair of the said Castle and Forts, as also for furnishing the Ordinance
with carriage: repairing of the Platforms, furnishing the said Castle and
Forts, with shot, powder, and ammunition; for defense and security of the said
Castle, County, and Kingdom.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc.
^INIS.

