CHRISTIAN LIBERTY Not to be ABUSED: OR, Ancient and Primitive Truth Correcting
some Modern, or New Abuses, of that which is so much Pleaded for, and so little
Understood, viz.

Christian Liberty, IN A SERMON Preached in the Church of Bridport within the
County of Dorset, on Sunday the Forenoon, being November 3. 1672. before the
Magistrates of that Borough.

By Rich. Luce, a Presbyter of the Church of England by Law Established.

London, Printed for Rowland Reynolds at the Sun and Bible in the Poultry, 1673.

To the Reverend, and his much honored Friend and Neighbor, Mr. Nathaniel
Godwyn Rector of Bridport.
Reverend Sir,
YOur benevolent Admission of me to Preach in your Church, to gratify my good
Friend Mr. George Spencer, one of the present Bailiffs of your Town, has put
me upon a little more Labor then I expected. Yet I do not so much lay the
blame upon your Admission, which I pronounce free from blame; as upon the
over-imprudence of some, whose Tongues being liquoured with the Oil of
Confidence, have charged me with Railing against the Kings Churches in my
Sermon. An odious Contumely indeed. What! for a son of the Church of England to
revile the Gods, and speak evil of the Ruler of his People? To fault the Edicts
of his Sovereign, The Father of his Country: And in a word, the the nursing
Father of this Church? Sir, now I declare unto you plainly, whom I am bound
notwithstanding to honor as a Father; that you are highly concerned. Concerned
indeed, that you would let me pass unchastised for profaning your Pulpit by so
rude a Declamation, wherein as is reported, I was so unpardonably faulty. But
Sir, seeing it is the usual practice of those who neither understand their duty
to God, or the King, to abuse and traduce with all malice imaginable those who
hinder the building of their Babel: I am resolved, in steed of any other
Apology, to expose my Sermon to your own judicious Examination. And lest you
should be thought to be over partial to your friend, I know not what you can
do less, then bring the Author and his Sermon to a fair Trial. So without any
more words; when you have perused the Sermon which was preached before your
self, If you think it worth the Publication, you may do as you think fit with
it, and in order thereunto you may Command,

Chediock, Nov. 18. 1672. Your most affectionate Friend and Fellow Laborer in
the service of God, King, and Church, Richard Luce.

To the Worshipful, and Loyal Bailiffs and Magistrates of the Borrough of
Bridport, in the County of Dorset, Salvation in Christ.
Gentlemen,
I Here present that Sermon unto your eyes, which was Preached unto your Ears
in your Parish Church, on the 3d. of this instant November. I might have saved
my self and you that labor, had not some Tongues charged me with railing at
the Kings Church; for some so are pleased to call their New Erected
Congregations in Contradistinction to the Church of England, Established by the
known Laws of this famous Kingdom. Sirs, If I have spoken amiss in any part,
or parcel of the ensuing discourse, bear witness against me: but if I have
discharged my Conscience so far as became a Loyal Subject to his Majesty, and
an obedient Son of the Church of England, no way Thwarting his Majesty's
Declaration in indulging his loving Subjects, and wherein Himself has declared
his express Resolution, Meaning, and Intention to be, That, the Church of
England be preserved, and remain entire in its Doctrine, Discipline, and
Government, as now it stands Established by Law. And this be taken to be, as it
is, the Basis, Rule, and Standard of the general and public worship, etc. You
will be pleased to take this my humble Prostration of this ensuing Sermon, as a
sincere acknowledgment of my Obedience to his Majesty, and all that are put in
Authority under him, both in Church and State; and as a pledge of my hearty love
to the public Peace, as well as to your selves, whom with all that call upon
the Name of the Lord Jesus. Christ in sincerity, I commend to your gracious
direction and protection of Almighty God, in whom I Rest

Chediock, November the 18th. 1672. Your most affectionate Friend and Servant,
R. Luce.

CHRISTIAN LIBERTY Not to be ABUSED.
1 Pet. 2.16 As free, and not using your (or as the Original imports) not
having the Liberty for a Cloak of Malitiousness, but as the Servants of God.
HE that goes about to Persuade a Multitude (says the most renowned and
judicious Hooker) that they are not so well Governed as they ought to be, Mr.
Richard Hooker, lib. 1. Eccles. Polit. page 1.
shall never want attentive and favorable Hearers. Which comes to pass, (as
that learned and godly Divine observed) because they know the manifold defects
whereunto every kind of Regiment is subject; whiles yet they have not the
Judgment to consider the secret Letts and Impediments, or Difficulties, which
in public proceedings are innumerable and inevitable. And because (as he adds)
such as reprove supposed disorders of state, are taken for principal friends to
the common benefit of all; and for men that carry a singular freedom of mind
under this plausible pretext, whatsoever they utter, passes for good and
current. That which wants in the weight of their speech, is supplied by the
aptness of men's minds to accept and believe it; whereas on the other side, if
we maintain things that are established, we have not only to strive with a
number of heavy prejudices rooted in the hearts of men, who think, that herein,
we serve the Time, and speak in favor of the present State for our own
advantages, but also to bear such exceptions, as minds so prepossessed with
prejudice, usually take against that which they are loath should be poured into
them.

However, it may happen to my self at this time in such a Chrysis of
distempered humors in the minds, both of the Masculine and Faeminine Gender, I
shall not be curiously inquisitive.

Though I durst not stand in Corahs Tents, nor with his Rebellious Associates,
affront Moses and Aaron, the King and the Priest, Prince and Prelate with, Ye
take too much upon you, seeing all the Congregation is holy: And though I
presume not in the least to Cavil against Acts of Parliament, nor Edicts of
Council Table, nor rudely to declaim against my Superiors or their sanctions,
to vent crude Politics, and impose them upon the Weak and Credulous: Yet as
the case stands, you cannot take it amiss at his hands, who has very much
Charity for your Souls, if whiles he bespeaks you as Christ's Freemen; yet
admonishes you in the Language, not of himself, but of the Holy Ghost, by
blessed St. Peter in my Text, as free, and not using (or not having) the
liberty for a Cloak of Malitiousness, but as the Servants of God.

If you look back into the precedent part of this Epistle, you will find the
Apostle setting forth the Privileges and Dignity of our high and Heavenly
calling of Christianity. For that we are a Chosen Generation, a Royal
Priesthood, an Holy Nation, etc. by reason of our Redemption purchased by
Christ Jesus our Lord. To this end compare the 9th. verse of this Chapter, out
of which my Text is selected with the first Chapter throughout, especially with
the 18th. and 19th. verses, etc. of that same Chapter.

Now lest that these privileges should make us grow Proud and Insolent, and
forgetful of our duty toward men, under pretense of our near Relation unto
God: The blessed Apostle St. Peter, after he had pressed the Exercise of our
Sanctification, both in abstaining from, and utter Renuntiation and Detestation
of all fleshly Lusts, and Infernal Powers which War against the Soul; as also
in leading of an honest and upright Life and Conversation amongst the very
Gentiles, to the glory of God, and the vindication of the Doctrine of the
Gospel of Christ, from the virulent Tongues of all malicious Detractors, and
pernicious Calumniators, ver. 11, 12.

He proceeds in especial manner to give us direction, so well as command,
concerning submission or subjection, and obedience to all lawful Authority;
whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors as sent by him for the
punishment of Evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well, verse 13,
14. and to this purpose he adds his Reason, verse 15. For so is the Will of
God, that with well doing, ye should put to silence the Ignorance of Foolish
men, and not without need; seeing that no sooner was the Christian Religion
planted in the World, but on a sudden the Prince of Darkness, the Devil, and
Satan, finding his Dominion broken and routed, endeavored by all means
possible to disturb the free and happy passage of the Gospel, both by procuring
open Persecutions to be raised against the Church, and true Professors of our
most holy Christian Religion; as also by raising and stirring up diverse false
Brethren from at home, and within the very bowels of the Church, who spoke and
vented diverse perverse things, both contrary to the Dectrine and Fundamental
grounds of the holy Christian Faith, so well as to the Peace and tranquillity
of the Communion of Saints. Neither had he any device more apt for his purpose,
then a pretense that Christianity was destructive to Magistracy, whereby he
incensed all that were in Authority, with a very severe jealousy against the
Truth of Christ, though yet our Lord himself, had declared openly, that his
Kingdom was not of this World, John 18.36. But of all the Impostors that ever I
meet with in this kind, I find none more notorious and dangerous, then Simon
Magus: who, (as the Learned and Pious Dr. Hammond notes in his Proenical
dissertation concerning Antichrist, Chapter the ninth) was the ringleader of
the Sect of the Gnostics.

This is he who in the Acts of the holy Apostles, Chap. 8, 10. was held in high
esteem amongst the People, who blasphemously called him the great power of God.
By him they had been long and long deceived, and bewitched with Sorceries and
Magical. Enchantments. And now he finding his Trade of Imposturage, or
Cousenage, to decay by the propagation of Christianity, this very Simon enrolls
himself under the Banner of our Lord Jesus Christ by Baptism, Act. 8.11. Simon
himself (says that Scripture) believed also, and when he was baptized, he
continued with Phillip, etc. This he did as appears by the Sequel of that
Chapter, not so much out of any true. zeal, or love, which he did bear toward
Christianity, as in hopes to have made a gainful Trade of it: For when he saw
that his expectation was frustrated this way, he with his Followers, forsook
the way of Christ; and first of all, they relinquisht all the Orthodox, and
pure Professors of the Christian faith; and by this Schism, they break the
Union of the Church. (...) They went out from us, says St. John in his first
Epistle, Second Chapter, ninteenth Verse. Neither would they remain any longer
in the bosom of the holy Christian Catholic and Apostolic Church. And thence
having broken the Churches Unity, they did forthwith cast off all Charity
toward their Brethren, and Fellow Christians.

From whence the Apostle and beloved Disciple of our Lord concludes, 1 John
4.8. compared with the second Chapter of that Epistle, Ver. 9. That however
they did pretend to greater light and knowledge in Heavenly Mysteries, etc. then
others; yet that they were a Company of self-conceited, blind, sottish, and
prodigious ignorants. Hence says Saint John, He that loves not, knows not
God: for God is love. And he that says, he is in the light, and hates his
Brother, is in darkness; even until now.

And indeed, against these (...) kites, rather then Gnostics; Ignorants,
rather then Persons of Knowledge; we find both Saint Paul, and Saint Peter,
Saint John, and Saint Jude, directing their discourses throughout their several
Epistles. Amongst many others, take that in 1 Timothy 6.3. etc. If any man teach
otherwise, and consent not unto the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the
doctrine which is according to godliness, He is proud, knowing nothing: but
doting about questions, and strifes, of words whereof comes Envy, Strife,
Railings, Evil-surmisings, perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and
destitute of the truth, supposing that Gain is Godliness: from such withdraw
thy self. Such men these were, who turned the grace of God into lasciviousness,
Jude the fourth verse. Insomuch that they denied the only Lord God, and our
Lord Jesus Christ: These were the Monsters, in the says of whom, Saint Peter
fore-warns the Christian flock, 2 Pet. 2.1. etc. when he says, There shall be
false Teachers amongst you, who shall privily bring in damnable Heresies, even
denying the Lord. that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift
destruction. And many shall follow their pernicious ways; by reason of whom,
the way of truth shall be evil spoken of. And through Covetuousness shall they,
with feigned words, make Merchandise of you: whose judgment now of a long time
lingreth not, and their damnation slumbereth not. These were the ^avening ^or
devouring Wolves, of whom our Savior speaks, Matih. 7.15. And the false
Christ's that should come and deceive many, Matthew. 24.24. Those are the Dogs
Saint Paul bids us beware of, This Ignatius was, as is said, that Child which
our Lord took up in his own Arms, Mar. 10 13. Eusebius. lib. 1. Eccles. Hist.
in Philip. 3.2. And Ignatius in his Epistle to the Ephesians, calls them
(...), Ravening Dogs. These are the Concision; because, whiles they feigned
themselves to be Jews (i. e.) Circumcised, and Zealots for the Mosaical
Circumcision; yet did they not keep the Law, but only under this pretense, tear
in pieces the Church of Christ: And therefore it is most plain what St. Peter
drives at, both in my Text, and in 1 Pet. 4.17. when he says, The time is come
that Judgment mast begin at the House of God, (i. e.) wherein the more Orthodox
and purer Christians and Professors of the Holy Catholic Faith were to suffer
all manner of Evils, both from the Jews and Gnostics, for the sake of the
Gospel of Christ. Justin Martyr in Quest. and Respons ad Orthodoxos.
For as Justin Martyr notes, It was usual for the Heretics of those times, to
Condemn those that would not say, and think as they did. And therefore St. Paul
in his Valedictory. Sermon to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, calls them
(...), grievous Wolves, Act. 20. who by their Heretical Doctrines, and
Seditious practices did make spoil of the Flock of Christ. For whiles they
pretended nothing more than Liberty, they did the more entangle themselves and
their followers in the bondage of Corruption, 2 Pet. 2.18, 19. And hence four
Principal Errors in those Gnostics offer themselves to Correction so well as
Observation.

First: Their Magical Enchantments.

Secondly: Their allowance of all manner of Sensualities, and fleshly Lusts,
and mixtures, even to the Community, or rather desilement of the Marriage Bed.

Thirdly: Their Exempting themselves from the Yoke of all Authority, both Civil
and Sacred.

Fourthly and lastly: They held Circumcision to avoid Persecution for the Cross
of Christ. By all which they prostituted the Holy Christian Religion, both in
its Doctrinals and Devotionals, Morals, and Evangelicals to shame and contempt,
under pretense of Liberty. And to hold you no longer from the design of our
Apostle in my Text, St. Peter here wipes off the Reproach which these Impostors
endeavored to cast upon the Name of Christ, under pretense of Liberty
purchased by him; when he says, (...). As free, and not using, or not having
the Liberty for a Cloak of Malitiousness, but as the Servants of God. Wherein
you may hear our Apostle speaking unto us to this effect; namely, Let none of
you whom Christ has purchased by his most precious blood, to enjoy so many
high and eminent privileges, as to be an Holy Nation, a Royal Priesthood, a
peculiar people, etc. Think that hereby you are exempted from your duties,
whether with reference toward God in the duties of the first Table, or toward
men, required in the duties of the second Table of the Ten Commandments, to the
performance of all which, we are firmly bound by Divine injunction. In especial
manner, assure your selves, that the Doctrine of Christianity teaches nothing
more effectually, then that you ought to submit your selves unto every
Ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or
unto Governors, as sent by him for the punishment of Evil doers, and for the
praise of them that do well; for so is the Will of God, etc. If you plead your
Freedom; know that your Freedom, in, and by Christ Jesus our Lord, does not
consist in believing, and living as you list your selves; nor in any exemption
from Obedience unto lawful Authority. No! For our Lord himself, though Heir in
Right to the Crown and Scepter of Judah, by temporal descent from the loins of
David, so well as Prince of the Kings of the Earth by his Eternal Power and
Godhead; yet rather than he would give occasion of offense whiles he was
living, or leave a suspicious Example of any ill-meaning in his Doctrine or
practice after his departure from this world (as to Personal or Corporeal
presence) Himself I say, would rather work a Miracle, and pay Tribute unto
Caesar, for himself and Peter, Math. 17.25. etc. to the end of that Chapter. To
show that his Disciples after him, under no pretense whatsoever, should plead
immunity in that or the like Case: much less may any Christian under any
pretense of Liberty, vail or cover over Treasonable Imaginations or Practices
against their Superiors; but as Holy Church has taught us devoutly to Pray,
so let us be careful to practice, (i. e.) We must faithfully serve, honor, and
humbly obey the King, and all that are put in Authority under him, in, and for
the Lord, according to his blessed Word and Ordinance: As duly considering that
the King is Gods Vicegerent, and that all other Magistrates, who are
Commissionated by, and under him, do bear derivatively and subordinately an
Impress of the Divine Image and Superscription; As free, and not having the
Liberty for a Cloak of Malitiousness, but as the Servants of God.

Many Observations offer themselves to our Consideration out of this Portion of
Holy Writ, but I shall confine my self to show you briefly.

First: What Christian Liberty is, and wherein it does consist.

Secondly: How it ought not to be abused as a Cloak or Covering of any lewd
Principles or wicked Practices. And for the better help of your memories, I
shall reduce both into one Doctrine or Proposition.

Doct. That it is altogether inconsistent with, and contrariant unto the Holy
Christian Religion, for the Professors thereof, under pretense of Liberty to
Cloak and color over Malice and Wickedness. Or more briefly, Christian Liberty
must not be Abused to any wicked practices; especially against lawful Authority.

This position flows naturally from the Text, which is inserted by way of
Anticipation to prevent an obvious Objection.

Object. If we are Christ's Freemen (i. e.) Purchased and Redeemed by his most
precious Blood, and free Denizons of Heaven, etc. What obedience or subjection
do we owe to any person, or power upon Earth, etc? The Apostle Answers this by
showing, Solut.
from the Rule of correlatives, what our Christian Liberty is, and wherein it
does consist: For,

Our Christian Liberty is this; Quaenam sit libertas Christiana.
namely, that we being delivered from the hands of our Enemies (i. e.) from
Sin, Hell, and Satan; we should serve God truly in Righteousness and Holiness
all the days of our lives, Luke 1.74, 75. So that if any one would be informed,
what is our Liberty? my answer would be: It is a Freedom to serve God; to
observe and do what he has commanded us. This is the sum and scope of the
Gospel of Christ: to teach us to walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith we are
called, Ephesians. 4.1. so Tit. 2.11, 12. The Grace of God which brings Salvation,
has appeared unto all men, teaching us, that denying Ungodliness and worldly
Lusts, we should live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this present World:
and this in especial manner is one way whereby we vindicate the honor of our
high and holy Calling, and show forth the praises of him that has called us
out of darkness into his mavelous light; namely, by submitting our selves
unto every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake; whether it be to the King as
Supreme, or unto Governors, as sent by him, etc. As free, and not having
Liberty for a Cloak of Malitiousness, etc.

Freemen we are indeed! But we must rememmember, that the Liberty of the Lords
Freemen in this life, is spiritual and inward; not bodily and outward, until
the life to come. And therefore the best definition which can be given of our
Christian Liberty, with relation unto this present life, is that which our Holy
Mother, the Church of England has taught us, and fitted to my hands in her
Collect for peace, where-after she teaches us to pray; O God who art the
Author of Peace, and Lover of Concord in knowledge, of whom stands our Eternal
Life; she adds, whose Service is perfect Freedom: whence it is easy to
define, That the service of God, is the Christians perfect Freedom, or Liberty
in this present world; or, a Christians most perfect Liberty in this world, is
Gods service; and this is agreeable to the Apostolical Dialect in my Text,
where St. Peter calls Christians, Gods Servants, or the Servants of God. And
St. Paul takes it as the height of his glory on this side of Heaven, that he
had God for his Witness, whom he served with his Spirit in the Gospel of his
Son, Romans 1.9. and good reason, seeing, as he says elsewhere, Where the
Spirit of the Lord is, there is Liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17. And surely Beloved, it
was never better with Christianity, then when Pliny the Heathen wrote to Trajan
the Emperor, Plinius Junior
to whom he could give no other description of her Professors, than that they
did rise before day, and sing Hymns unto Christ, whom they Worshipped as God;
and for better discipline among them, they prohibited Murder, Theft, Adultery,
Fraud, Rebellion, Perfidiousness, and the denial of goods Committed to their
trust, with other such like dishonest and ungodly pranks. And for this Reason,
Justin Martyr in his second Apology for the Christians in his time, complains
of over-hard measure and usage against the poor Christians, in that after the
Ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Devils had produced some men, who
affirmed themselves to be Gods; and those, says he, of you Gentiles, (...).
Not only do not suffer Persecution, but are dignified with Honors and
Promotions. In a word then, the Holiness of Christianity, is such, that it does
not admit so much as an evil thought against the Magistrate, whether Supreme or
Subordinate. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, nor the Rich in thy
bedchamber, etc. was good Doctrine in Solomon's days, and is, and should be so
in ours, Eccles. 10.20. It forbids all irreverent speeches toward them, or
concerning them. Hence St. Paul corrects himself, Act. 23.5. I wist not,
Brethren, that he was the High Priest; for it is written, Thou shall not speak
evil of the Ruler of thy people; and concerning Resistance of them by
Treasonable Plots, or open Arms, there can be nothing more directly said
against it, than what the Holy Ghost has left upon Scripture Record, under the
hand of the same Apostle St. Paul, Romans 13.1, 2. etc. Let every Soul be subject
unto the Higher Powers; for, there is no power but of God; the Powers that be,
are Ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of God; and they that resist, purchase to themselves Damnation. We
have frequent instances to this purpose of Gods justice in cutting off Rebels
from the Land of the Living; we see it in Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, Numb. 16.
at large. Who ever took the Sword in hand, 2 Samuel 20.3. etc. 1 King. 1. and 2.
Chapters.
without Gods Command, but he perished by it? What Sheba, or Adonijah, ever
blew a Trumpet of Sedition, or Rebellion, but they did this against their own
lives? When David would have spared Rebellions Absalom, 2 Samuel 18.9. etc.
The Lord caused him to be hung in the midst of an Oak, between Heaven and
Earth, as unworthy of either, because he Rebelled against his Royal Father:
Yea, Wicked Jezabel had so much observed the method of Divine Juhice, that she
could demand boldly, Had Zimri Peace, who slew his Master? 2 King. 9.31. Our
own Chronicles (as Doctor Thomas Tailor observed long ago) are full of rare
examples of Gods judgments, Dr. Tailor, in his Comentary on Tit. 2.1.
upon not a few of such Monsters and Miscreants. The strange discovery of the
Percyes Conspiracy, See the Elder-Eishop Carleton's thankful remembrance of
Gods mercy.
and that of the Gunpowder Treason, are such remarkable Monuments of Gods
Vengeance against Traitors, as may never be forgotten, to the perpetual shame
of the new Romish-Religion; but will stand upon record, (unless Posterity be
over-ungrateful) to the end of Time. Neither let that unparalled Villainy,
committed against the Sacred blood of our late Royal Martyr King CHARLES the
First, of blessed Memory, nor the just vengeance of God upon the Actours, in
that horrid Tragedy, be ever blotted out from under Heaven. Neither is this
only an humane invention, or observation, but an infallible extract, and
conclusion expressly set down in the Holy Scriptures of Almighty God, Prove.
24.21, 22. My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them
that are given to change, or with the seditious. For their destruction shall
arise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both?

Were I minded to commonplace it at large on this Theme, I should be
over-burthensome to your patience: wherefore for brevities sake, I shall lay
down, two or three of the most pertinent Arguments, to press home what has
been said, and so proceed to the Application.

Reason 1. God himself has ordained Magistracy, By me Kings reign, and Princes
decree justice, Prove. 8.15. So Nebuchadnezzar confesses, Dan. 4.14. That the
most High has power over the Kingdoms of men, and gives them to whomsoever He
will. And Saint Paul lays it down for good Christian Doctrine, the Powers
that be, are ^^dained of God, Romans 13.1. Who then can without prodigious guilt
take the sword out of the Princes hand? or deprive him of that which he owes to
none but God himself alone, namely, his Crown and his Life?

Reason 2d. God has been pleased to honor them with his own Name, whom he
has raised up unto place of Authority; that so they might be had in due
honor, and esteem, according to their place and dignity, Psalm. 82.6. I have
said ye are Gods, and all of ye children of the. most high. Wherefore how durst
any presume without horrid impudence, to affront, or withstand, those whom the
King of Heaven has so highly honored? Note, only let the Magistrate here
remember, that though he be as it were a God by Office, yet that he is but a
man by Essence; and therefore I may be bold to put you in mind of that too, Ye
shall dye like men.

Reason 3. God sets a stamp upon Magistracy, no less then an Impresse of his
own Majesty, Mercy, Justice, and Wisdom on those visible Deities, and little
Gods on Earth; yea, a great part of his Image shines upon every one of them.
As for instance, let me begin with the State of Sovereign Princes. And here
what a radiant body of a kind of Omnipotent Splendor, like as in the solar
beams, displayes it self, and spreads its rays, from the Seat and Throne of
Majesty? both in that so many Hundred Thousands are subjected to the power of
o^e, and in that, the whole administration of a numerous People is in one hand,
and that the good estate of all, depends on one alone under God. So the
inferior Magistrates, or rather, those whom the Sovereign Power of the Prince,
has put in Authority under him, according to the Laws, and Statutes, Customs
and Constitutions of his Realms. Those, I say, by virtue of their Commissions,
and Charters, receive a kind of an Impress of the Princess Majesty and
Authority, which as loyal Subjects, and faithful Administrators, of Law, and
Justice, they are to improve for the glory of God, the preservation of the
public peace, according to the Laws of God, and the known Laws of the Realm.
And who then is that Son of Belial, that durst set himself in opposition to so
solemn and sacred a sanction? or what company of men, durst violate so Divine a
constitution? Surely God will take this one day, as an high affront done to
himself: and if any will be so impudent as to despise their Superiors, whether
in Church or State, they may exspect to hear. that in 1 Samuel 8.7. applied
against themselves, They have not rejected Thee, (i. e.) the lawful Superior,
But they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them. God takes the
dishonor which is done to those, whom he has placed in Authority over us, as
done to himself; and this Refractory, disobedients shall know one day, both to
their great grief, and extremest horror; unless God of his infinite mercy,
grant them repentance, unto the humble and hearty acknowledgment and amendment
of their most lewd and wicked Error.

Object. But what need all this ado? Ad quid perditio haec? To what end is all
this wast? we are Freemen, we have a liberty, etc. to serve God according to
our Conscience, and what has any man to say against it?

Solut. Ay! and have you a Liberty indeed? A Liberty, I say? Well said. But for
what I pray you? What! to say and do what you list? I hope not so. But if any
of you durst think so, or take it so: I pray God you may see your mistake in
time before it be too late. You have a Liberty you say, to serve God according
to your Conscience. I pray God when He shall call us all to a strict account,
and reckoning, that, that same thing which some call Conscience, do not appear
to be mere Humor and Obstinacy. For they can show us no grounds in all the
World, why their Enthusiasmes should be called the service of God. And now I am
come so far; as to meet some who are hugely taken up with their New-erected
Meetings, neither may I baulk them; though I must tell you, I quarrel not with
his Sacred Majesty's Indulgence: yet I cannot choose, but pity their ignorance,
who so manifestly abuse it. For let me demand of any Person breathing, who
dislikes the public communion of the Church of England: that refuse to join
with us in prayers and praises, in the service of God, appointed in this
Church, in the hearing of the Word of God read and preached, and in the
participation of the blessed Sacraments? I pray you upon what terms do you hold
Communion one with another, in your New erected Congregations, or Societies, if
you do not openly and solemnly declare in the same societies, and solemn
Meetings of yours, That you do renounce the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps
and Vanities of the wicked World, all the sinful lusts of the flesh, all the
carnal desires of the same, so as not to follow, nor be lead by them? do you
profess openly, and solemnly, your belief of all the Articles of the holy
Christian Faith? And do your Speakers read unto you the Moral Law? Do they call
you to the obedience of Gods holy will and commandments? And do they press you
earnestly to walk in the same all the days of your lives? do they press you,
and call upon you, to confess daily and hourly your sins unto Almighty God,
with an humble, lowly, penitent and obedient heart; to the end, that you may
obtain forgiveness of the same by his infinite goodness and mercy? do they
teach you to pray, and sue earnestly and heartily, for the pardon of the many
breaches and violations of Gods Law, whereof you stand guilty before him, and
in the Courts of your own Conscienes? do they teach you to pray unto God, in
and through the merrits and mediation of our Lord Jesus Christ for his special
grace, that He will incline your hearts to keep his Laws, better for the time
to come.

For mine own part, I do declare my self freely to all the World, how
indifferent soever, I am contented to be accounted in other matters, which are
but merely circumstantial and arbitrable by common Authority; yet without
prejudice to any Person, or Party, I do solemnly declare it in the presence of
God, and in the face of this Christian Congregation, That I cannot see good
grounds for my self, or any other Person professing Christianity, to hold
Communion with any Society whatsoever, where the People are not put in
continual remembrance of the Vow and Covenant which they have made with God in
their Baptism: where they have neither Creed, nor Lords Prayer, nor Ten
Commandments, nor the Doctrine of the Sacraments expounded: much less the same
Sacraments, I mean of Baptism and the Lords Supper, administered accordding to
the order and form, the judgment and practice of the Primitive Church. For how
can I, or any man or woman, seriously and in good earnest professing
Christianity, venture our Salvation in such a Communion, where the faith once
delivered unto the Saints, is not openly confessed with the mouth, so well as
they pretend to believe it in their hearts? especially, seeing the great Apostle
speaks it so plainly, That with the Heart Man believes unto righteousness, and
with the mouth confession of faith is made unto Salvation, Romans 10.10.

I abhor such foolish Whimses, to say no better; and such horrid and dangerous
Enthusiasmes, to call them no worse, which prefer every odd and idle fancy of
any particular man or Minister whatsoever, to the received Doctrine and
Practice of the Universal or holy Catholic Church. And so much the more for
that the Apostle Saint Peter tells us plainly, that, no Prophesy of Scripture
is of any private interpretation or resolution, 2 Pet. 1.20. And surely, if it
be an absurd imposition of the Council, or rather Conventio^ of Trent, to
change the Rule of the Christian Faith, Sess. 4.
by Equiparating unwritten Traditions, Decreto 1.
with the very written word of God, can we judge it less absurd in our
Novellists at home, who will have so many Creeds, as Heads, though never so
contradictory each to other. Beloved, says Saint Jude, when I gave all
diligence^ to write unto you of the Common Salvation; it was needful for me to
write unto you, and exhort you that you should earnestly contend for the faith
which was once delivered unto the Saints, Ver. 3. It was ever held for a good
Rule, whereby to understand the legality of any practice, or to try the truth
of any Doctrine, which Vincentius Lerinensis gives. Id tenendum quod semper,
quod ubique, quod ab omnibus Creditum est, Id tandem facimus, si sequamur
Antiquitatem, Universalitatem, Consensum. That is to be held, which has been
believed always, every where, and of all. And that we do, if we follow
Antiquity, Universality and Consent.

When Simon Magus, Ebion, Cerinthus, Menander, Carpocrates, with the Gnostics
and other heretics, forsook the communion of the holy Catholic Church, Justin
Martyr and St. Irenaeus tells us what became of them; Justin Martyr Secunda
Apologia per Christianis.
how they ran into those excesses that the followers of Simon Magus worshipped
him as the Son of God that appeared unto the Jews in Samaria. And Irenaeus,
after Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, lib. 1, cap. 20.
says, that Simon Magus is said to be honored of Claudius Caesar; of many he
was glorified as God; he Taught, that himself was he, who, as the Son appeared
amongst the Jews, that in Samaria he descended as the Father, and amongst other
Nations, he came as the Holy Ghost. That himself also was the highest Power,
(i. e.) him who above and over all things, is the Father, ((...)) so exalting
himself above all that is called God, he also suffered himself to be called
whatsoever men called him, Who is the Father Eternal. Moreover that his Trull
Helena, whom he called his (...), or prime conceit, or principle did with him
generate Angels and Powers, of whom he also said, that this world was made;
that according to his Grace men were saved; that the God of the Jews was one of
the Angels Created by him the said Simon; and the said Holy Father St. Irenaeus
in his 22 Chapter of his first book against Heresies, charge the aforesaid
Simon Magus to have said, that he was the only Father, who has made Angels and
Archangels, Virtues and Powers; that his Picture or Figure was made according
to the figure of Jupiter, and of Selena ( or without doubt of Helena, as Dr.
Hammond notes) after the figure of Minerva; and these were to be worshipped,
Chap. 21. So Tertullian in his Tractate de Anima, or of the Soul, tells us, How
that Simon Magus was called of his followers, The Highest or Sovereign Father.

Beloved, I beseech you in the bowels of our Lord Jesus Christ, to consider
with your selves the dangerous and pernicious consequents of making Rents and
Schisms in the body of Christ, which is the Church. It is a wonder if the
Schismatic do find center till he become an obstinate Heretic, or desperate
Blasphemer; witness that of Hacket, who at his very Execution in the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, died Blaspheming. What should I speak of others in our own
times? know, that out of Church, there is no Salvation. That the Church is
known to be a true Spouse of Christ, by that Faith and true Allegiance which
she bears unto Christ. This Faith is the Faith of Christ Crucified, which she
is not ashamed to confess with open mouth in the face of all the world. Into
this Faith she Baptized all them whom she lists under the banner of our Lord
Jesus Christ. In the defense of this faith, which our holy Mother the Church of
England professes, at this time dyed all the holy Apostles and Martyrs, viz.
Saint Peter, St. Paul, Saint James, Saint John, and Saint Jude, and all the
rest of the Apostles. This is that same faith which was born witness unto by
the first four General Councils. Namely, Council of Nice consisting of 318.
Bishops. Anno Dom. 326.
the first Council of Nice, called under Constantine the great, wherein Arius
and his adherents, who denied the Divinity of the Son of God, Of Constantinople
400. Bishops and upwards. Anno Dom. 383.
were condemned for Heretics. So the Council of Constantinople, holden forty
years after that first Council of Nice, under the Emperor Theodosius the
Elder, against Macedonius the Heretic, who denied the Godhead of the Holy
Ghost. Of Ephesus 200 Bishops. Anno. Dom. 451.
And the first of Ephesus, summoned by Theodosius the Younger, against
Nestorious, who affirmed two Persons in Christ. Lastly, the Council of
Calcedon, At Calcedon 600 Bishops. Anno Dom. 451.
called and convened under Martian the Emperor, against Eutyches, who asserted
that there was but one Nature in Christ, made up of the Divine and Humane.

All these Councils held and determined the same most holy Faith; which is
received in the Church of England, which we have in our Liturgy, or Public
Service, under the Names and Titles of the Apostles, Nicene and Athanasian
Creeds. In the defense and maintenance hereof, dyed the renowned Saint
Athanasius, Saint Cyprian, Iereuaeus, and other the Holy and Learned Fathers of
the Primitive Church. And to come nearer home to our own times, Cranmer was
Arch Bishop of Canterbury. Ridley Bishop of London. Latimer of Worcester.
Hooper of Gloucester. Farrar of St. David's.
these Goly Learned Bishops, Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Hooper, Farrar, and
those Godly Ministers also, Saunders, Tailor, Bradford, and many others under
the Marian Persecution, sealed this same holy Primitive Catholic and
Apostolic Faith, with their dearest heart-blood.

Not to trouble you with the instances of many faithful Confessors, and
Martyrs, of a more Modern date, whose blood cannot choose, but run fresh in most
of our Memories.

All these I assure you dyed in the same faith, which our Church has taught
us, and does still continue in teaching us to believe: though hereunto too many
I fear in our times, who would be thought, to be somewhat more wise then their
Neighbors, are too great Strangers. This is that Faith upon which our Church
is built, and against which the Gates of Hell shall never be able to prevail.

Though the Church be shaken by many confusions and disorders: yet her Faith,
the best Hae revelatio Patris est: hoc Ecclesiae fundamentum est: ^aec
securitas aeternitatis est. Hinc Regni coelorum habet clavem 2 hinc terrena
ejus judicia coelestia sunt. Hillac. lib. 6. de Trinit.
security of Eternity, is not shaken. No! that remains still the same, and so
will do by the grace of God, until the Angel in the Revelation shall proclaim
that time shall be no more. And now to conclude,

If any will forsake our Communion, while we stand upon these terms, I may
justly say of them, as Saint Ignatius said of the old Gnasticks, and Disciples
of Old Simon the Witch, once and again before mentioned, (...). If they had
been true and genuine branches of God the Father, they would never have been
Enemies of the Cross of Christ.

But if in nothing else, I may prevail with those who do dissent from us; yet
let them be persuaded whiles they have a Liberty, not to use it, or rather not
to abuse it as a Cloak of Malitiousness, Treason, or Rebellion; nor to Maintain
any lewed Principles: nor to set on foot any Malignant Practices against God,
or the King; Church, or State, Friends or Foes; But rather as becomes good
Christians, so let them demean themselves in all Places, and upon all
occasions, and amongst all Companies as the Servants of God. As free, and not
using, or not having the Liberty for a Cloak of Malitiousness, but as the
Servants of God.

I know you expect somewhat to be said unto Persons in Authority, by way of
Advice; but I have not had time to tumble over a Concordance according to the
new mode of those who are hugely affected with the long-winded Cant. howbeit, I
shall not refuse to commend unto you two or three very pertinent places of
Scripture to the purpose of your expectation.

The first shall be that in Exodus 18.21. which contains Jothro's Counsel unto
Moses, which shows you, that you must endeavor to approve your selves able
men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating Covetousness.

The second shall be that of David, 2 Samuel 23.3. He that Rules over men must
be Just, Ruling in the fear of God: Remember you bear not the Sword in vain,
Romans 13.4. The Magistrate is Custos utriusque tabulae, the Keeper of the two
Tables of the Ten Commandments: and however your Sword may not reach all
causes; yet so far as lies in your power, let not disorderly living pass
without such punishments as are confistent with Christian Charity.

You need not that much more should be said by me at this instant; the Laws of
God, and the known Laws of the Land, and the Constitutions of your own Society
must direct you when this discourse of mine may be forgotten. Let your own good
example in frequenting the house of God, together with your own Families,
according to the Order of the Church of England by Law established, and your own
Grave, unblameable, and discreet deportment, put a blank upon dissenters. And
if the Rabble will needs cast scorn upon the Wisdom of God, shining forth upon
you in the Ministry of your Lawful Pastor Ordained and Constituted amongst you
in due form and order of Law, according to the known Laws of this Realm, and
the Canons and Constitutions of the Church of England, piously and wholsomely
made and provided; It is your part and duty in especial manner to support and
countenance him against all affronts and indignities, which a factious and
headstrong, a Slanderous and Scandalizing Generation may cast upon him.

And for you that are sub potestate Constituti, under the command of Authority;
I shall give you that same wholesome advise which follows immediately after the
words of my Text: Honor all men; Love the Brotherhood; Fear God, Honor the
King: On which words I shall make no other Paraphrase than what the Church of
England has made to my hand in her most excellent and plain Catechism. You
shall next to the performance of your Duty toward God in believving in him,
Fearing him, Loving him above all, Worshipping him, giving him Thanks, putting
your whole Trust in him, Calling upon him, Honoring his Holy Name, and his
Word, and serving him truly all the days of your lives. You shall, I say, next
to the performance of your duty in this manner toward God, not forget your
duty toward your Neighbor; (that is to say) You shall love your Neighbor as
your self, and do unto all men, as thou would he should do unto thee. Thou
shall Love, Honor, and Succor thy Father and Mother. Thou shall Honor and
Obey the King, and all that are put in Authority under him. Thou shall submit
thy self to all thy Governors, Teachers, Spiritual Pastors, and Masters. Thou
shall order thy self Lowly and Reverently to all thy Betters. Thou shall hurt
no body by Word nor Deed. Thou shall be True and Just in all thy dealings. Thou
shall bear no Malice nor Hatred in thy heart. Thou shall keep thy Hands from
picking and stealing, and thy Tongue from Evilspeaking, Lying, and Slandering.
Thou shall keep thy Body in temperance, Soberness and Chastity. Thou shall not
Covet nor desire other men's Goods; but shall learn and labor truly to get
thine own Living, and to do thy Duty in that state of Life, unto which it has
pleased God to call thee. This is pure Religion and Undefiled before God and
the Father indeed. Will thou then not be afraid of the Power? do that which is
good, and thou shall have praise of the same, Romans 13.3. For as St. Peter
says, 1 Pet. 3.13. Who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that
which is good? I beseech you Consider what is spoken, and the Lord give you
understanding in all things necessary, in order to the Attainment of
Everlasting Salvation through Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom with the Father,
and the Holy Ghost, Three Persons, and but One God, be ascribed and rendered,
as of all due belongs, all Honor and Glory, Praise, Power, Might, Majesty,
Thanksgiving, Dominion, and Obedience, both of us, and of every Creature, both
now and for ever more. Amen.

FINIS.

