SIX SERMONS Preached before His MAJESTY at WHITE HALL.

Published by Command.

Tending all to give Satisfaction in Certain Points to such who have thereupon
endeavored to unsettle the STATE, and Government of the CHVRCH.

By the Right Reverend Father in GOD, BENJAMIN LANEY, Late Lord Bishop of ELY.

Nadah and Abihu Offering strange fire Lev 10.12


LONDON: Printed for Henry Brom and Walter Kettilby, in S. Paul's Churchyard.
1675.

The Shepherd,

Or The PASTORAL CHARGE And OBEDIENCE due to it; Instituted By God as a
necessary means to preserve the Sheep from Straying.

LONDON, Printed for Timothy Garthwait, 1668.

A SERMON Preached before His Majesty at Whitehall, March 9. 1661.
1 PET. 2.25. For ye were as sheep going astray, but are now returned unto the
Shepherd and Bishop of your Souls.


THE condition of those in the Text, both for what they had been once, and for
what they now were, that is, for their straying and returning again, looks so
like our case of late, (who, if ever any, had erred and strayed from all the
ways of duty both to God and man, but are now happily returned to the Shepherds
and Bishops of our Souls) you may perhaps imagine this Text to be chosen of
purpose to pursue those two Blown Arguments.

And therefore before I proceed farther, it will be necessary to deliver you
from those thoughts, and perhaps that fear. For though the mischiefs in the
one, and Blessings in the other be such, as deserve never to be forgotten; yet
possibly may not endure a perpetual importunate Remembrancer.

And the truth is, the very words and phrase of the text, which only at the
first blush carries us upon those thoughts, will leave us, if we look a little
nearer to them. For the Straying here will prove to be of another kind, and the
Return will be found to be to another Bishop. The straying here was of such as
had erred like Sheep, whereas ours had little or nothing of the Sheep in it,
save the Sheeps clothing; for dressed up they were with pretenses as soft as
wool, Gods glory, Purity of worship, Christian liberty, nothing worse then
these, and so indeed they erred like Sheep, as if they had been such; but the
truth is, it was liker the ranging of Wolves, tearing and devouring, then the
straying of weak and silly Sheep. And for the returning likewise here, though
it was to a Bishop, yet I dare not be so bold with him that bears that name in
the text, directly to apply it to our Bishops, nor advance our return to this.

The Bishop here was no doubt our blessed Lord and Savior, whom God himself
had consecrated and ordained to that office; but our Bishops are not otherwise
concerned here then as they can make their title from and under him; but if
that may be done hereafter, I trust you will not be against it. In the mean
time, if there were no more in it, me thinks this should be enough to reconcile
the Presbyterians to the name of a Bishop, which our Savior himself has
vouchsafed to take upon him. But having laid aside that argument, which the
words at first sight seemed to offer, I bespeak your attention to one of a more
common interest, which concerns all that would be Christians, whose character
it is* Who from the ways of sin and error, are returned to the faith and
obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ, who to reduce us from those ways has taken
upon him to be our Shepherd and Bishop.

The main point is, That God of his mercy complying with the necessities and
infirmities of nature, has erected an Office of trust and confidence in his
Church, under the quality of a Shepherd and Bishop, to direct and guide us, who
otherwise would err and stray like sheep, and so be lost for ever.

THe particulars incident to this are, first. The necessity of it, impli'd in
our natural condition, who like Sheep are of themselves apt to err and go
astray. 2. The accommodation we have for it. For what should they do which are
out of the way, but return? and to whom should Sheep return but to a Shepherd?
and lost Sheep, but to him that came to seek and save that which was lost? and
where should they find so safe and sure a retreat, as in him who purchased them
with his own blood? All these are accomplished in our blessed Lord Jesus
Christ, whom we shall consider, first in his office of Shepherd or Bishop; then
in his Flock or Diocese; the Souls of men. We are returned, etc.

natural condition. That we were as Sheep that had gone astray. And the
confession of this is the first thing we meet with in our Liturgy. We have
erred and strayed like lost Sheep. And though it were fit and necessary it
should be there, for, sure I am, we never erred worse then since we laid that
by; yet here we look upon it in another relation and use; it is the first stone
to be laid in this building, in the erection of the office of a Shepherd and
Bishop. The infirmities of the Sheep are the ground of the necessity of a
Shepherd.

But now that while we are speaking of our errors, we do not commit one, we
must know, first what kind of erring this is, and then how we fell into the
fatal necessity of it. What it is, the Bishop that must lead us out of it, will
tell us; for he is the Bishop of our souls: and therefore our Straying here
must be that of the Soul. For though our natural infirmities do expose us to
error in many things else, yea almost in all other things, even those that are
within the reach of sense and reason: there is not any thing in Nature, in Art,
in Philosophy, though commonly received for truth, which of late time is not
charged with error, and it may be sometimes not without cause; yet without any
great regard here, if the Soul be not concerned.

Now if we be so liable to error in the things of this life, where both the end
and the way to them are within the compass of the eye, in which we err, as it
were, in our own Country, where we are bred and born; we must certainly lose
our way, where we are strangers, being Citizens of another Country, as those
blessed Saints, who best knew the ways of the soul, confessed, that they were
strangers and pilgrims here. Heb. 11.14. And they which say so, show plainly
that they seek a Country, and that a better, that is, a heavenly, where God
has prepared for them a City. They must needs be disappointed that seek for
Heaven upon earth, where there is nothing fitted and proportioned to the Soul,
either for the nature or the desires of it. The Soul is immortal, and cannot be
provided for, where all things are liable to change and mortality; for when it
shall survive them, it will be at a loss, till it find a Country like it self,
that is everlasting and immortal.

And as the nature, so the desires of the Soul are unsatisfied here; the eye is
not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing, nor the understanding with
knowledge, nor the heart with the best and choicest delights of it. We are soon
wearied and tired with what we have, and are as thirsty of that we have not. In
our plenty as craving, as others in their greatest wants. The goods of this
world are Hydropick all, quo plus bibuntur plus sitiuntur. They that have the
greatest share and portion in them, of Wealth, of Honor, of Power, do not
sleep the better, nor are their bodies less comber'd with diseases, nor their
minds freer from vexations and troubles. And therefore as the Saints I named
before, did by what they willingly suffered here, show plainly that they sought
another Country; so by this is shown as plainly, that they had cause to do so.

Now here lies the fatal necessity of erring, they seek a Country and City
that is invisible and unknown to nature, either what the state of that Country
is, or by what laws the Citizens thereof are to be governed. And when we walk
in the dark it is not strange we should lose our way.

A chief part of that way lies, first in the knowledge and worship of that God,
who had prepared for them a City, by what Sacrifices, Rites and Ceremonies he
will be served. How much of that may be had by nature, we learn by those, who
were most likely to know, but did not, who were the masters of knowledge to
most other Nations, Romans 1.
for of such S. Paaul speaks Romans 1. Who when they professed themselves to be
wise, as well they might in many other things, yet in this of Gods worship,
they became fools. For they turned the glory of the uncorruptible God, Romans
1.23.
into the similitude and image of corruptible Man, and of birds, and four
footed beasts, and of creeping things.

The right way of worshipping God (since revealed to us to be by Jesus Christ)
was not only unknown to them, but to those to whom God had more peculiarly
imparted himself. Ephesians. 3.5.
The mystery of Christ Ephesians. 3.5. in other ages was not made known to the
Sons of men, until he was revealed unto his holy Apostles and Prophets by his
Spirit. Yea it was unknown to the very Angels, who when it was first revealed,
in a kind of admiration and curiosity (...), 1 Pet. 1.12.
desired to look, the word signifies earnestly to pry into. And that which the
Angels of Heaven did not know, certainly the sons of men could not.

The other part of the way to that heavenly Country in which we may naturally
seem to have some skill, the way of virtue, that is, in the style of Scripture,
Tit. 2.12.
to live godly, righteously and soberly in this present world, appeared to the
very Heathen to be the only way to happiness. Yet these natural impressions
were so dim and imperfect, both through Originaly corruption, and the
overruling power of passion and lust, that of those things they knew, they
held the truth in unrighteousness, even to the very perverting of the course of
nature as the Apostle observes of them in the same place, Romans 1.
Romans 1.

Besides, many virtues they knew not, which are the glory of Christianity, as
Humility, Denying our selves, Taking up the Cross, Forgiving and Loving our
enemies, in their eyes looked more like follies then virtues, and so they would
have done in ours too, if we had had no better guide then our selves to lead us.

By this we may see the necessity we have of Leading; let us now see the
accommodation we have for it in the Leader. Our blessed Lord Jesus Christ, a
person every way fitted for the purpose, both for his skill, and good will; He
knew best the Heavenly Country, whither we are going, and the way to it; for
he came from thence, from the bosom of his Father. And for his good will to his
own, we cannot doubt they are the Sheep which he had purchased with his blood,
and by that had a just title to govern in what Lordly way of Secular domination
he pleased; yet chose that easy gentle way as Shepherds use to lead their
Sheep. And such he professed himself to be. John 10.11.
I am the good Shepherd: the good Shepherd gives his life for the Sheep, and
He made it good in every point while he was upon carth; He went about doing
good, preaching the Gospel, healing the diseases of the Sheep, forgiving their
sins, till he came to the last and hardest work of a good Shepherd, He laid
down his life for his Sheep.

Yet his Pastoral care died not with him. As he was a Priest for ever; so he
was a Shepherd for ever; for after he had in person ascended into Heaven, he
took care for his flock that he left behind Him, that they might not be as
Sheep without a Shepherd. And from thence gave gifts unto men, some Apostles,
some Prophets, Ephesians. 4.
some Pastors and Teachers, etc. to continue still his Pastoral charge upon
earth: and they were the same persons which before he went he had designed for
it, and for the same reason that the Father sent Him, Mat. 15.24.
to seek and save the Sheep that were lost; as appears in the preamble to the
commission given to the Apostles. Mat. 9.36.
Mat. 9.36. When he saw the multitude he had compassion on them, because they
were dispersed and scattered abroad like Sheep having no Shepherd. This
commission indeed was only to the lost Sheep of the house of Israel while he
was alive; but when he rose again from the dead, He renewed and enlarged it to
the lost Sheep of all the world. Mat. ^8.1^.
Go and teach all Nations.

And as he assigned the persons, sicut misit me Pater. As the Father sent me so
send I you. Joh. 20.21
He Instituted likewise the office it self in all the points and parts of it.

1. Go and teach all Nations, baptizing, Mat. 2^.1^.
etc. there he gave the power of preaching and baptizing. 2. He commands a
perpetual memorial of his death, in the Sacrament of his blessed body and
blood. Hoc facite, 1 Cor. 11.24.
etc. 3. He gave them at the same time the power of the Keys, Joh. 20.23
Whose sins ye remit they are remitted, etc. 4. And before that in case of
contumacy he gave power to excommunicate offenders, If he will not hear the
Church, Mat. 18.17.
let him be as a heathen and publican. 5. He ordered them how and what to pray.
When ye pray say, Mat. ^.9^
etc. 6. He gave them power and jurisdiction over false Shepherds, to expel
them from the flock. Mat. 7.19.
Beware of false Prophets which come to you in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly
are ravening Wolves. These and the like are the parts of the Shepherds office.
third place he gave besides a divine virtue and efficacy to work supernatural
effects upon the Soul. Not only the institution, but the power also is from
him. And therefore by S. Paul he is called the great Shepherd, 1 Pet. 5.4.
The cure of Souls was originally in him, (...), but (...) ministerially and
derivatively in the Shepherds under him.

fourthly, that their leading might be taken and acknowledged for his, He
appointed that all should be done in His name. That they should Preach in his
name, Pray in His name, Assemble together in His name, Cast out Devils in His
name. And accordingly S. Paul, when he judged the incestuous Corinthian to be
delivered unto Satan, 1 Cor. 5.4. he did it in the name and power of Christ.
And when. 2 Cor. 5.10. he absolved him, it was in persona Christi. All was His.

To the Apostles it may be all this was allowed, but not therefore to all other
Shepherds after. Yes, to all that can rightly claim from Him. Mat. 28.20
His promise was to be with them to the end of the world, that is, longer then
any Apostle could live. I am sure the necessities of the Sheep will be the same
for ever; for Sheep we shall be still wheresoever we are. When God distributed
to the Church the several parts of the Pastoral charge, some Apostles, some
Prophets, some Pastors and Teachers, he adds, that it was, Ephesians. 4.
ad consummationem Sanctorum, and adificationem corporis Christi; that is, so
long as there should be Saints to be perfected, and so long as Christ should
have a Church, a body upon earth, and that is so long as there should be Sheep
Christ had provided there should be Shepherds. And these he has taken to that
nearness and conjunction, that the obedience or contempt done to them, he takes
it as done to himself. Qui vos audit me audit, etc.

The benefits and advantages we have by this are many; first, it is an honor
and encouragement to the Shepherds, that the work they do is Christ's, who will
bear them out in what they do according to their duty, and reward them for what
they suffer for it.

2. It removes all discouragement from the Sheep, that make a stand at the
infirmities and frailties of their Shepherds, that they look through and beyond
all them at the power of Christ under whom they serve.

3. Another great benefit it is, that in all doubtful and difficult cases we
may secure our selves upon the conduct of Christ in his Ministers. For if
possibly men should be misled by them into error, when in simplicity of heart,
not knowing any thing to the contrary, they shall submit to them; I dare
promise them at least a favorable hearing from him that commanded the
obedience.

But I dare not, nor can say that for all Shepherds; for every congregational
herd has their Shepherd too; but such as have no part in that power, which is
derived from Christ and his mission; that gave it immediately to the Apostles
only. Joh. 20.
Sicut misit me Pater, sic, etc. And all others that have it must receive it
from them, or from such as derive it from them by succession. It is but reason
that Christ should have the choice of his own Ministers. The Sheep that belong
to those other Shepherds, can plead nothing for their obedience to them. S.
PAUL'S obedite praepositis, belongs not to them, Heb. 13.17.
they obey not those that are set over them, but either those that set
themselves over the flock, or the flock themselves set them, and that not of
necessity, which some vainly plead for them; but as necessary, professing there
is no lawful calling for a Minister, quem non misit populus, where the Shepherd
is not chosen by the Sheep. If these fall into an error by the misguidance of
their Shepherds, they are in a sad and worse condition, which admits no plea of
excuse or extenuation from the Shepherd. They must bear their own faults, and
the misguiding of the Shepherds, which they make their own by choosing them. In
a word, the favor that Christ does is to his own, not the peoples Shepherds.

Duty. To return to Christ the Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls. And that is to
submit our selves to be led and guided by him. To turn to Christ is in effect
to turn Christian. We are no less concerned here. And that must be in two
respects: in his office of Shepherd and Bishop, and in the execution of it by
Shepherds and Bishops.

The good Sheep says our Savior John 10.27. hear the voice of the Shepherd
and they follow him. Joh. 10.27.
If they turn their ears only to him, and hear him, and not follow him, they
turn short, for follow him they must through all the parts of his office. It Is
so with us, who for the most part like nothing in the Shepherd but his pipe,
and a pleasant tune. His rod and his staff we can spare. The Prophet Ezekiel
describes us right, chap. 33. and old humor it seems it was. Ezekiel. 33.31.
They come unto thee, And sit before thee as my people, to hear my words, v.
31. just as we do here come and sit us down as the Lords people to hear his
word. But what follows in the next verse? Verse 32.
And lo thou art unto them as a very lovely song of one that has a pleasant
voice, and can play well on an Instrument; for they hear thy words, but do them
not.

And what will come of this at the last, our Savior tells us in the Parable,
where some had the boldness to plead for their entrance, that they had eat and
drunk in his presence, Luke 13.26
and had heard him in their streets. Citizens it seems they were by the
streets, and by their devotions, a Sermon and a Dinner, they eat with him, and
they heard him. But what came of it? by hearing him it is like they knew him
well; for all that, he tells them plainly, He knew not them. If the Sheep
wanted nothing but knowledge, I should pardon them if they desired nothing of
the Shepherd but a Sermon. But this is not that which I principally intended
here.

secondly, That our turning to Christ be in the full execution of his office,
as in person, so by commission. Princes, as well they may, think themselves
contemned in their Ambassadors and Ministers. And so does our Savior for his
Shepherds, who are his Ministers and Ambassadors too. Qui vos spernit me
spernit.

I shall not enclose this power or favor to Bishops only, because I find that
name in the text; but lay it in common to all such to whom Christ has
committed under him the government of the Church and the cure of Souls; so as
Presbyterians may have a share here, when they can prove their Ordination and
Mission.

This part of our duty to obey Christ in his Ministers is with many of very
hard digestion, who not regarding the necessity there is of it, nor the benefit
we have by it, nor the authority and commission we have for it, nor the gentle
conduct we have in it, lay it aside as a thing of no use, and that God has
provided other means to lead us many and more certain then any Shepherds can
be. We have first our own Reason to lead us. 2. We have Scripture a surer guide
then that. 3. We have the Spirit besides, Joh. 16.13.
and that will lead us into all truth.
Lastly, we have our own Consciences, which in the commission of Leading is of
the Quorum, nothing can be done without it.

We cannot deny but that all these have a part and share in the guiding of our
souls. But as no one of them does exclude or bar the other; so nor do all of
them the Shepherds. For allowing to every of these that which is peculiar to
them, there will be still found something to remain, which is proper for the
Shepherds to do.

I am now, I confess, in a discourse not so smooth and easy as best befits
popular Sermons; yet because many whom it concerns to weaken the hands and
power of Church-governors, do with their importunate clamours fill the Pulpit,
you will be pleased to allow of a short Answer from thence too.

first for REASON; It is not to be denied, that it ought to be admitted even in
matters of Religion, where it has least to do; for Religion is the object and
employment of Faith, and not of Reasoning, and yet naturally no man will
believe any thing unless he sees Reason for it. But how? not a Reason of the
thing that he believes; for that works Knowledge, not Faith; but yet a reason
of believing it, for the credit of the Author that relates it; for nothing can
be more unreasonable, then not to believe God that cannot ly. But to admit
reason in matters of Faith for any other use then that, is to set up a Religion
without Faith, which would be as strange a thing as to have a Religion with
nothing else.

There are in Religion some things to be known as well as believed, and to
these Reason and Discourse is proper; for though the Articles of Faith, and
whatsoever shall appear to be contained in Scripture are without all doubt and
reasoning to be received, because God has revealed them; yet that this or that
Article or Proposition is contained in Scripture, is a thing to be know, and
lies within the compass of sense, we may see whether it be there or no, that
is, for the words. And for the meaning of those words we must understand the
language in which they are written, the proper import and idiom of the phrase,
the force and consequence of the discourse, the coherence and consent it has
with other points better known. We must besides discover the fallacies and
inconsequences of those that would obtrude a different sense from that we
receive. All these difficulties, though in matter of Religion, are within the
conduct of Reason; but it is Reason so exalted with skill of Arts and
Languages, with Prudence and Diligence, that we shall be forced to find work
for the Shepherds too. The greatest part of Christ's flock, I am sure, must
perish if they may not trust others in those things, to which their natural
inabilities or course of life has made them incapable. And for the best of the
flock, whom both Nature and Art has fitted to master the greatest difficulties
of themselves; if they shall seriously consider how much and how often Prejudice,
Education, Custom, Passion and Interest does corrupt our Reason, we would in
prudence sometimes suspect our own, and seek better security from the Church;
where though we shall not infallibly find the truth, we may always safely
presume it. This will serve to reconcile our obedience with Reason.

next pretender against the Shepherds leading is the SCRIPTURE. I confess the
Scripture to be a surer guide then Reason, for the Authors sake; and yet, by
what ye heard even now, it works little without it, but yet surer for all that.
The ignorance of Scripture is a cause of erring. Ye err, says our Savior,
Mat. 22.29.
not knowing the Scriptures. And to keep us right in our way Gods Word is a
lantern to our feet, and a light unto our paths. Psalm. 119.105.
We cannot say too much of the excellency and benefit of it. It is a perfect
record of all that concerns Heaven, or the way to it. It has all the
perfections that a law or rule can have to guide us; yet those perfections are
confined within the limits and nature of a law, to do no more then is proper
for a law to do, which is very little without a Judge to apply it. Though the
rule be sufficiently straight and perfect, yet it measures nothing out of the
hand of him that has skill to use it. Bring what controversy you will to the
laws, they pronounce nothing either for the Plaintiff or Defendant. This is the
true reason why, though all sects pretend to Scripture, there is yet no end of
controversies, because there is no common Judge to end them. And the reason why
every sect for all that seems to rest satisfied, they are guided by the
Scripture, is because they carry their Judge a-long with them, themselves.

So as if together with the Scriptures there be not a Shepherd too, or some as
little to be trusted, our selves I mean, it cannot lead at all. Heb. 4.12.
It is indeed a two-edged sword, but cuts nothing, but in the hand of him that
uses it.

Third pretender to avoid the Shepherds is the SPIRIT. That without question
will lead us into all truth. Joh. 16.13.
But for the manner of the Spirits leading, the Scripture points out two ways,
The one Divines call (...), the other may be called (...) i. e. as it led the
Prophets of old, by revealing to them the truth and matter of the Prophesy, the
object. And by this way it led all the Apostles, to whom the whole doctrine of
the Gospel, and mystery of salvation by Christ was revealed. 2 P.t. 1.21.
And thus holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. To this
way of leading none can pretend, that does not prove his commission from God by
a miracle, who sends none of such an errand that cannot make it appear some
way, that he came from him. If the Enthusiastic would have his dreams believed
to be the dictates and revelations of the Spirit, let him show his letters of
Credence from Heaven sealed with a miracle, and I shall not doubt to set him
above all the Doctors and Shepherds of the Church. Otherwise he may deceive
himself by his spirit, he shall not deceive me.

The other way of the Spirits leading is (...), i. e. not by revealing any
thing to us, but by cooperating with us, by fortifying the soul and the
faculties of it, to all supernatural actions, by assistance of grace to
inlighten the understanding to comprehend divine truth, to inflame the
affections with the love of it, to support our endeavors in all difficulties
and temptations. To this assistance of the Spirit all the faithful have a
right. And though in this way the Spirit cannot deceive us, yet we may be
deceived in it, because it never works but with us; if we fail in what we are
to do, then that fails us.

And by this way not only private persons, but public Councels are governed.
To whom the Spirit does not reveal the matter of their Decrees (...), but by
way of cooperation assists their endeavors to find out the truth from the
proper Topics of it, the Scripture and Antiquity; for so all the force of
their decrees depends upon the reason and grounds upon which they are made. For
if any Council might pretend to that other way of revelation, sure that first
famous Apostolical Council might, Act. 15. But that did not otherwise determine
the matter in controversy then (...), Acts 15.7.
v. 7. when there had been much debate and disquisition out of the Scriptures,
were the decrees made and signed accordingly. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost
and to us. Verse 28.
The Apostles and Elders were in joint commission with the Spirit; the same
Lord that sent the Spirit, sent the Apostles also, and therefore no
contradiction to be led by the Spirit, and by the Shepherds too.

fourth and last leader which is brought in to avoid the Shepherds, is the
CONSCIENCE. This is the Presbyterians strongest fort against Obedience. If he
can get his Conscience about him, he thinks himself so safe that he may bid
defiance to all Authority.

In the Commission of leaders, I confess, as I said, the Conscience to be of
the Quorum. We are to do nothing without it, and much less against it. But then
we must be sure we mistake not somewhat else for the Conscience. Every disease
and distemper of the mind, causless scruple, slight persuasion, groundless fear
is not the Conscience, against which we are bound not to act.

The tender Conscience, for which so much favor is pleaded, may prove in some
no better then a disease of the Soul, a spiritual Spleen. For though it be good
to be tender of offending God in any thing where it proceeds from the good
temper and constitution of the soul, which is the same constantly in all cases,
and is not affected or taken up for a purpose, as the sturdy beggar carries his
arm in a string, that it may be a Patent to beg and be idle.

You may know it certainly to be a disease if it comes upon us by fits and
starts, as to be tender of offending God when we obey men, and not to be tender
of offending God when we disobey them. If they be not as tender of one side as
of another, as I never find them to be, it is but a Paralitick Conscience that
is dead of one side. For tell him the Church commands it, he presently shrinks
and startles at it; and well so, for possibly he may sin against God. But tell
him on the other side that God commands obedience to those that rule over us,
it moves him not at all, you may thrust a needle into his side and he feels it
not. It shows plainly the Conscience has a dead Palsy on that side.

But a right and sound Conscience against which certainly we ought not to act,
is a constant and well governed judgment; for not to amuse you as the manner is
with frivolous distinctions and definitions of Conscience, in this case the
Conscience is nothing but every man's private judgment; for he ought not to
attempt the doing of any thing, till he has framed this judgment to himself,
that it is lawful for him to do it. Now seeing our private judgment has so
great power and influence as to interrupt the course of public, it had need be
a true and regular judgment. As first,

arbitrary, for that we think we have reason to decline in the public
Magistrate, to govern by Will and not by Law. Many a Conscience if it were well
examined, will prove to be nothing but will, not judgment.

full hearing of the cause of both sides, all evidences duly weighed and
examined, then resolves; this is a Conscience against which we ought not to
act, though possibly it might prove to be erroneous; yet for all that we must
know that it does not set us free from the guilt of disobeying our Governors.
And then this is all the benefit our Conscience will do us in case of error,
that it casts us into a necessity of sinning, by obeying against our selves, by
disobeying against our Governors. We shall do well therefore to take care, that
we make not every slight persuasion, doubt or scruple, a Conscience, trusting
to be discharged of our obedience by that, which indeed binds it faster upon
us, for that is the very end and benefit for which is instituted the Pastoral
charge, that when we are so weak we can not safely trust our selves, we may
rely upon that: unless we think it a good plea, I am blind and therefore I will
not be led. I am weak and sickly, and therefore I will not be ruled by the
Physician.

Now to sum up all, if not Reason, nor Scripture, nor the Spirit, nor
Conscience will discharge us of the duty we owe to the Church, in the name of
God, let us not rashly fling away so great a blessing, that in all our doubts
and fears, for our quiet and security, we may have recourse to the Shepherds
and Bishops of our Souls.

THis is the last point, the Shepherds Flock or the Bishops Diocese: the Souls
of men. And here we meet with another quarrel from the Presbytery. That they
may be sure to spoil the Bishops of all authority, they take away their
Diocese, the cure of Souls, that they may be Bishops sine titulo; for Bishops
they are not either of our bodies or estates. And why not of our Souls? Christ
indeed the great Shepherd that purchased them may rule them, but they are too
precious for any other Shepherds to Lord over: which they say is done by
binding the Souls with Church-laws and censures, which Christ has set at
liberty. And thus they set up Christ against himself, and Christian liberty
against Christian duty.

S. Paul, I confess does earnestly press this point of liberty, Gal. 5.1.
Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and be not
entangled again with the yoke of bondage. But what liberty? It is not simply
from obedience either to men or Laws, for that were destructive to Humane
Society as well as Religion. What then is it? It is no more then that
Christians have a liberty not to be Jews. I dare be bold to say, this is all
that can be made of it. And the reason why S. Paul did so earnestly press it is
evident. The Jews that were willing enough to entertain the doctrine of Christ,
yet were not so easily drawn to part with those Rites and Ceremonies, to which
they had been so long accustomed, and upon so good authority. To humor these
Simon Magus and his Disciples set up a medly of both Religions, that they might
be Christ's Disciples and Moses too. Against this doctrine S. Paul sets himself,
especially in his Epistles to the Romans and Galatians. If they have taken upon
them to be Christians let them stand to that, and not look back again to the
flesh having begun in the Spirit. For behold, Gal. 3.3.
I Paul say unto you, if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. To
claim from hence liberty from any other men or laws then the Jews, Gal. 5.2.
they might as well say Christ has here given them liberty not to be
Christians. For Christians we cannot be, unless we obey the Laws and Government
of those that Christ has set over us. To use our liberty in this case our
Apostle in the 16. verse of this Chap. has adjudged it to be no better then a
cloak of malitiousness. 1 Pet. 2.


And for those Consciences which are so tender that every Church-law pinches
and galls them, they do without reluctance bind their own Souls. Every private
man can do that which we will not endure the Church should do. He that
promises any thing is bound in conscience to perform it, though before he took
that bond upon him, he had his Christian liberty not to do it. Before Ananias
promised to sell his estate, and give it to the Church, he was free, S. Peter
told him so; Was it not in thine own power? Acts 5.4.
Yet after that it was not in his power to make use of that liberty; for his
conscience was bound. And if a promise may do this, much more a vow or an oath.
If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an oath to bind his Soul, Number. 30.2
Numb. 30.2. (the Soul may be bound) he shall not break his word, he shall do
according to all that proceeds out of his mouth.

If a man should be so unreasonable as to say, his conscience may be bound by
himself, but not by any else. Do not they themselves, as their manner is in
their Sermons, bind over their hearers to answer for them at the day of
judgment? and what a heap and load of Sermons must then ly upon their
Consciences? though the truth is, they bind none but themselves, and that to
repent for corrupting Gods Word, and misleading the people into Faction,
Sedition and Disobedience, to say no worse.

Let us seriously consider and compare that which they would avoid, with that
which they endeavor to set up in the room of it. They would avoid first the
power of the Church in her Laws and Censures as a domineering over men's
consciences, and a lording it over Gods inheritance. But if they look upon it
with an impartial eye, they shall find all contrary, nothing but moderation; as
first in the very style of the Church, that there might be no harsh words. The
laws by which they govern, are not called laws but canons, that is, rules to
guide, rather then sorce. 2. Church-punishments are not called poenae but
censurae, not that they are sweetened with good words only, but with real
benefit; for they are not as temporal punishments ad vindictam but ad
disciplinam, for the amendment, not revenge of sin. 3. The temporal judge, if
not Sovereign, cannot pardon the felony though he would.
The Ecclesiastical judge cannot but pardon though he would not. Ecclesia non
claudit gremium redeuntibus, is a rule in the Court Christian. The Church
refuses none that will return and repent. There is no such rule in secular
Courts, that the thief or murderer upon repentance may be pardoned. And by
Church-Canons in elder times it was deemed an irregularity to be present at a
sentence of blood. Not that it is a crime to be so, but as the Canon speaks,
propter defectum lenitatis, that nothing in them might seem to be of harshness
or cruelty. The highest and most terrible of all Church Censures, of which men
seem to be most impatient, how harmless and gentle is it, Excommunication? If
he be not guilty, clavibus errantibus, he is never the worse for it; the bonds
fall off themselves; if he be guilty, he may be the better for it if he will.
When S. Paul judged the incestuous Corinthian to be delivered unto Satan, 1
Cor. 1.3.
and this was thought to be Excommunication and somewhat more; yet this was for
his benefit, for the destruction of the flesh, Verse 5.
that the spirit might be saved in the day of our Lord Jesus, verse 5. What is
there in all this that should fright us from our obedience?

But now let us see what on the other side they would set up in the room of
this. A liberty of Conscience, forsooth, from the fetters of laws, that they
might not serve God in bonds like slaves, but freely. That they may preach what
they will, and as long as they will. That they may pray how they will, and fast
when they will. That they may stand and kneel where and when they will. Indeed
a true arbitrary Will Worship; instead of a lawful orderly serving of God, a
confusion of all.

But they hold themselves wronged to be charged with will worship, for that
they do all by Reason and the Scripture and the Spirit. Yet for all that
pretense they are still under that charge; because all these are at their own
wills; what sectary is there that with a wet finger cannot, nay does not
challenge Reason, the Scripture, the Spirit and Conscience to be for him, when
he will?

And why do they allow these to guide them and not the Shepherds, but because
these are at their beck and will, but the Shepherds are not? And therefore
because they cannot command them, they would be rid of them, that so they might
without control, Lord it as they will.

But I shall trouble you no longer with our Shepherds or their Adversaries, but
for a conclusion and caution reflect upon our selves: for though Christ has
committed the cure of our souls to others, he has not taken it from our
selves. The Shepherds were given for a help to ease us in it, not to ease us of
it. Every one may and must be by a concurrent care a Shepherd and Bishop to
himself; and then here I shall take leave only to put you in mind of your
Diocese, your Souls, that ye be not our Apostles (...), in this Epistle, 1 Pet.
4.15
that we mistake not our Cure; for there be other things we have as great
affection for as our Souls, I wish we had not. The rich glutton in the Gospel,
when he said to his Soul, Soul take thine ease, thou have much goods laid up
for thee, Luke 12.19
etc. sure he mistook his body for his Soul, for there was nothing in his barns
that could feed that. This is no greater an error and mistake then we daily
commit our selves; to go no farther then this present time. Lent, if there were
any thing left of it among us but the name, charges the soul by prayer and
fasting to fit and prepare it self to meet our Lord at the Resurrection. When
we plead our constitution and health against it, it shows we are no ill Curates
of our bodies, whatsoever we be of our souls.

Yea that which has a better title to be our souls will not lie within this
Cure; the intellectual and principal part of the soul, and the enriching it
with the knowledge of Arts and Sciences, speculative and practick, by which all
our affairs and the greatest of all the affairs of the world are governed,
which employ the souls best virtues and indowments, and for which none but
great and noble souls are fit. Yet this is not the soul for which Christ died,
and is to be our Cure. For when we have gained this and all the world besides
we may lose our souls. The Holy Ghost takes no other notice of these then as if
they were but bodies, and indeed for their continuance they are no better, for
they perish with our bodies; the greatest wits and wisest conduct lie buried in
their dust with them, nor will they appear again for us in that world where the
soul is most concerned. In a word, the Scripture owns no losing or saving to
the soul but in that condition which must live and continue for ever. Nothing
is worthy that name that is not immortal. Yet I must recall my self when I said
these mortal souls, that is, in their temporal condition, are not within our
Cure; to get, it may be not, but to use they are. The meanest of them all our
Savior expressly commits to our charge, Luke 16.9.
Make you friends of unrighteous Mammon, that they may receive you into
everlasting habitations. Things everlasting are proper for the soul. And if you
shall make you friends likewise of your honors, powers, and knowledge, for the
advantage of Gods honor and service, certainly they will do as much for you as
Mammon can. For thus these mortals do put on immortality, these corruptibles do
put on incorruption. 1 Cor. 15.54.
You may in this sense make a soul out of your bodies by the chaste, sober and
temperate use of them. And so our bodies and all else become the proper Cure of
our souls, and in the discharge of that care, we may expect the blessing of
good Shepherds as well as that of good Sheep. And when the chief Shepherd shall
appear, 1 Pet. 5.4.
ye shall receive a crown of Glory that fades not away.

Two SERMONS, Of PRAYER to GOD, and Of HEARING his WORD;
Preached at WHITEHALL before the KING in LENT.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, B. Lord Bishop of ELY.

To rectify some misunderstanding, through which the Use and Benefit of Two
Necessary Parts and Duties of Religion is much perverted.

Are by Command now published.

London, Printed for T. Garthwait, 1668.

A SERMON Preached before His Majesty at Whitehall, April 5. 1663.
Heb. xiii. Verse xv. By Him therefore let us offer the Sacrifice of Praise to
God continually; that is, the Fruit of our Lips, giving thanks to His Name; or,
Confessing to His Name, as the Margin reads more agreeable to the Greek.


WE have an Altar in the Tenth Verse, and in this we have a Sacrifice: But what
Altar, and what Sacrifice? for they are scandalous words. For the Altar, let
that fall, if the Sacrifice cannot support it: But for the Sacrifice, whereof
we are now to treat, it is, I confess, a word of offense, because there goes
under the name of a Christian Sacrifice, that which our Church calls a
blasphemous fable, Art. 31.
and dangerous deceit. Should I leave you without any Caution upon that fear
and danger in Sacrificing, it would be to little purpose to offer at the
commending of any: For we are too often troubled more with words, than what
they signify. And therefore as the Orator advises, when such a case shall
happen Mitigandas esse prius aures; somewhat must be said beforehand to remove
a prejudice that will fall upon all that shall be said after. That which the
Article speaks of is the Sacrifice of the Mass, wherein the Priests of that
Sacrifice say, That Christ himself is really sacrificed for the quick and dead:
And for want of this, our Church is not by them allowed to have either Priest
or Sacrifice.

It Is true, we pretend not to that Mystical Art and Chemistry, to turn the
Elements of Bread and Wine into the Natural Body and Blood of Christ, by which
alone they make themselves Priests, and Him the Sacrifice. I put in no claim
therefore from this Text, either to that Priest, or this Sacrifice, but yet to
a right in both, but both of another kind: For the Sacrifice, the Text is
clear, and the Priest follows of course; there can be no Sacrifice without him.
And it is as clear too, That it is not the Sacrifice of the Mass, though Christ
himself be in it; for it is he whom we first meet with in the Text, By him. Here
indeed he is, but not in the quality of a Sacrifice to be offered, as in the
Mass, whereof he is the Matter, but as a Mediator only. It is not Him, but By
him we are to offer.

Now seeing we may be secure, it is not that we might possibly fear; let us see
what it is we may safely, and must necessarily perform.

We are first to offer a Sacrifice to God.

2. That for the kind, is Eucharistical, not Propitiatory. 3. The Matter of it
is to be, not the Fruit of our Fields, or of our Flocks, but of our Lips. 4.
Not every fruit that grows upon the lips, but (...) lips Confessing to his
(i.e. Gods) Name. 5. This confessing here is not of him, (though that be
otherwise necessary; for he that denies him, shall be denied by him) but To
him, and that makes it a Sacrifice. 6. It must be to Him, and not to any
Creature, Saint, or Angel. Praise them we may, but offer a Sacrifice of praise,
we must not. 7. It is not a Sacrifice to be done at starts, and upon occasions,
but continually, a daily Sacrifice. 8. It is to be offered by Him, that is, by
Christ's merits and mediation. It Is that which gives power and efficacy to this
and all our services, which would be nothing worth, if we came in our own
names.
Lastly, You have the Reason, why all this, Therefore; and that sends us back
to the Twelfth Verse, Wherefore Jesus, that he might sanctify the people by
his Blood, suffered without the Gate. That he suffered for us, and that he
suffered without the Gate, are the reasons, why by him, and why of us. By him,
because by the sacrificing of himself, he made our peace with God. By him
therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God for it. And why of us?
Because he suffered without the Gate; whither the Jews that were within the
Gate must go out and follow him, in the next Verse, leaving their City and
Sanctuary. And we the Gentiles that are without the Gate already, may find him
in our own Territories, that so both Jew and Gentile (...) jointly together, as
the word imports, May confess to the honor of his Name.

And as Therefore carries in it the reason of our duty, so it does in that same
accommodation it has to the time: For this is Passion Sunday; and why so
called, we learn from Rupertus and others, because the Jews on this day met
together, to consult of and contrive the death of our Lord; which, not many
days after, they effected.

It will not be fit (I confess) for that reason, to anticipate the Meditations
proper to that Solemnity. Yet as now the Passion was in preparation and
conception by them, it will be so far a keeping of time with it, if we also now
shall prepare a Sacrifice of praise for it, that we may be fit then to honor
God by confessing to his Name, the wonderful mercies and unspeakable benefits
we receive by the Passion and Resurrection of our Lord.

By him therefore let us offer the Sacrifice of Praise to God continually, that
is, the Fruit of our lips, confessing to his Name.

And that we may the better perform our Sacrifice of Praise, Let us by him also
offer a Sacrifice of Prayer, etc.

THat we are to offer a SACRIFICE to God, is here so plainly enjoined, and so
punctually described, both for matter and manner in every circumstance, that
one would think it strange it should be neglected, and more strange it should
be contemned by any. But for our selves, if we would be clear in this matter
(as every good man should desire to be) it is fit we call our selves to account
when, and how we perform it.

The Ancient and Primitive Church (of whom this may best be learned) did, in
conscience of their duty herein, compose several Liturgies, that by them they
might have a Public daily Sacrifice for the honor and worship of God; as that
of St. James at Jerusalem, St. Marks at Alexandria; after that, St. Chrysostoms
at Antioch, St. Basils at Caesaria, St. Gregory's at Rome; and indeed, there
was no Church without one. They that wrote Apologies for the Christians, being
of the Heathen accused of Atheism, because they were never seen to offer
sacrifice to the Gods for answer to that, had recourse to this Sacrifice of
Praise in the Text.

The Copies of those Ancient Liturgies, as they come now to our hands, have no
doubt suffered the fate of time, that is, some changes, by which the
preposterous zeal of some has overcharged them with numerous, and sometimes
superstitious Additions; yet the substance and intendment of them was to
perform this duty. And therefore our Church, that never was of the mind to
fling away Chaff and Corn, both at once, That they might not want what all
Churches ever had; so ordered our Liturgy, that by it we might with safety and
true devotion, daily Sacrifice to the praise and honor of God. Wherein they
have followed, not only the Precept, but Pattern also from this Text, as by a
short parallel between them, may visibly appear; as first,

Sacrifice, and the Liturgy is that Sacrifice. Antioch was the place where
Christ's Disciples were first called Christians; and Antioch is the place where
the Christian Service is first called a Liturgy* Acts 13.
We find the Disciples met together at their Liturgy. (...), Verse 2.
which we translate, Fasting and Ministering to the Lord; for (...) properly
signifies a Public Ministration; to which, the word used by the Church, fits
well, calling it Common Prayer; and is so expounded by St. Luke himself in the
next Verse, When they had Fasted and Prayed. Verse 3.
This Liturgy or Ministering to God, must needs be in something for His honor
and service, which is properly a Sacrifice.

God, so to none but God: We call it Divine Service, and so we use it. No
Creature, Saint, or Angel, has any part in it, as in some they have. Praise
them we may for the good service they have done the Church; but offer a
Sacrifice of Praise we may not. It was never heard, says St. Augustine, Offero
tibi Sacrificium, Petre, or Paul, or Cypriane. And though the invocation of
them simply be not a Sacrifice, yet it is such, when used in Divine Service in
the place of one. And that it is not heard in our Liturgy, it is no doubt,
with their good leave and liking too. The Angel, Rev. 19. will answer for that
Order: When St. John would have worshipped him, Do it not (says he) I am your
fellow servant. And the Apostles Paul and Barnabas for their Order, when the
men of Lystra would have sacrificed to them, they cried out, Sirs, why do you
these things? Acts 14.15.
we also are men of the like Passions with you. That they are Gods friends,
intitles them to no more than a place in his Court to do him service, not in
his Throne to receive any. And therefore that honor which God has not given to
another, we have not given to them in our Liturgy.

Eucharistical, a Sacrifice of Praise, and so is our Liturgy. We pretend to no
expiation or satisfaction for sins, either of quick or dead: We owe that to a
better Sacrifice. The price of Redemption is greater than any service we can
do: It cost more to redeem our souls, we must let that alone for ever; and
therefore in the Liturgy, our Sacrifice is set to no higher key, than, We
praise thee, O God, etc. Psalm. 49.


the fruit of our Lips: For though the Root of this and every good service,
must be in the heart, yet the fruit must sprout outwardly in the lips. For
though a virtue may sometimes be accomplished in the heart only, yet neither
this nor Prayer it self, if private or mental only, (though otherwise of
excellent use) will amount to a Sacrifice, till it come into the lips; for no
proper Sacrifice is invisible: And therefore in our Liturgy, as we pray, that
God would open our lips; so we practice when we join with the Priest in the
Confessions and Psalms, and in such things where he alone is not concerned.

lips that confess to his Name. But how comes confessing more than anything
else, to relate to a Sacrifice? It is thus. The end and import of every thing
offered to God in Sacrifice Eucharistical, is a Profession and Acknowledgment
of some blessing bestowed upon the Sacrificer; and so either expressly or
implicitly is joined with it. As for instance; At the offering of the
first fruits, they are commanded to make a Confession in this form. Thou shall
go unto the Priest, Deuteronomy. 26.3.
and say thus unto him, I confess this day unto the Lord thy God, that I am
come into the Country which the Lord swear unto our Fathers to give us; That
is, in the first fruits they confess the Land that bore them to be of Gods
gift. Now of such confessions as these, the whole body and matter of the
Liturgy is framed.

Gods presence is, by a Confession of our sins, which is a putting off our
shoes with the defilements we have contracted in our ways; for the place and
presence is holy. And by this we make Profession and Acknowledgment of Gods
perfect purity and holiness, in that we presume not to come into his presence,
till we first put off our uncleanness.

Absolution; and this is another Confession of his infinite mercy, that he is
willing to forgive our sins, and to use the ministry of sinful man, to confer
it upon us.

Hymns and Psalms, which is a third Confession to his Name, whereby we do with
cheerful and thankful hearts, acknowledge him to be the Author of all the good
we enjoy, or hope for.

Lessons we have the Scriptures read, and they are written for our learning: In
that we confess, God to be our infallible Teacher, to whose Oracles we submit
to be guided, both in faith and manners.

And because the Rules of both lie diffused through the whole body of
Scripture, we have them summed up in the Creeds and Decalogue. In the Creeds we
acknowledge our faith in his wisdom, who has so mysteriously contrived the
means and way of our Salvation, before unknown to Men and Angels: And in the
Decalogue we confess his Dominion, That he is our Lawgiver; and to that our
Patron also, not only gives us Laws but Grace, and hearts to keep them.

Collects, Prayers, and Supplications, for the supply of our wants and
necessities, as well temporal as spiritual, we acknowledge every good gift, and
every* perfect giving to come down from the Father of lights.

But the chief of all the Confessions is that, for which our Savior instituted
a Sacrament. Do this in remembrance of me; that is, in Commemoration and
Acknowledgment of what he by his blood has purchased for us: For we must not
think, as some do, that a Sacrament should be instituted for relief only of a
bad memory, like a thread tied about the finger; but solemnly to celebrate the
memory of the greatest of blessings that God ever bestowed upon men; the
Redemption of our Souls by the blood of his dear Son: And therefore this
Confession carries away from all the rest, the name of an Eucharist, a
Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving.

By this we see the matter of the Sacrifice of the Text fulfilled in the
Liturgy by Confessing to his Name.

the circumstance of time when this Sacrifice is to be offered, and that is
continually. In conformity to this, our Service is a continual daily sacrifice,
a Morning and Evening Prayer. And though the greatest benefit of this belongs
to those that daily attend it; yet because it is the Public Sacrifice of the
Church, all that are Members of that have their part and interest in it, though
they be absent, yet not in equal measure. The present are entitled to the
benefit as a Sacrifice offered by them; the absent as a Sacrifice offered for
them. For this is our juge Sacrificium that is perpetually burning upon the
Altar, for the service of God, and in behalf of every member of the Church,
that does not ponere obicem, set a bar upon himself by his wilful neglect of
it, and opposition to it.

By him we are to offer; It Is his merit and mediation that crowns the
Sacrifice. In vain should sinful man approach so great a Majesty in his own
Name; but by him who has made our peace with God, and sanctified us by his
blood, we may find access to him. This by him gives the Characteristical
difference of the Christian sacrifice from all others; for otherwise the
Sacrifice of Praise was common to all times before, and under the Law. You find
in many Psalms a Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving, but in none of them by
him, in Christ's name. St. John 16.24.
Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my Name (says our Savior) but hereafter his
Name will give virtue and efficacy to all our services: And therefore to gain
so gracious an Advocate with the Father, our Prayers and Supplications are in
the Liturgy offered up in his Name, concluding always, By the merits of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

THus you see the Text, exemplified throughout in the Liturgy; and the Liturgy
therefore warranted by the Text. I could not promise my self time enough to
take a view of all the particulars, I have therefore reduced that I have to say
at this time, to this one Observation in gross.

That our Liturgy or Common Prayer is a true Sacrifice to God, for the praise
and honor of His Name.

And to this I shall not beg the assent of those that like it not, but require
it; and by the authority of the same Apostle in another place, Romans 15.8. where
we read, That Jesus Christ was a Minister of the Circumcision for the truth of
God, to confirm the promise made unto the Fathers. Now what that promise was,
he tells us in the next verse. That the Gentiles might glorify God for his
mercy, as it is written, For this cause I will confess to thee among the
Gentiles, and sing praises unto thy Name. Here are Confessions, and praises,
and Singing, by which God is to be glorified among the Gentiles: They that will
be Christians upon other terms, do in effect make God a lier, who promised it
should be so.

And yet they that would not have it so, are very many, and of many sorts; and
though I cannot think the worse of it, that it lies under a popular dislike;
yet because it is no ill way of learning our duties by the folly of those that
oppose it, I shall give you a short account of them.

ATHEIST first charges it with such weapons as he has, scorn and drollery:
That these Forms, and Ceremonies, and Pageantry of worshipping God in
Liturgies, is but a trade invented by the Priests, to get their living, and
according to the privilege of Inventors, they claim a Monopoly, that they only
may have the offering of that Sacrifice.

It is not strange, that they who have not God in their hearts, as the Prophet
David speaks of those fools, should have any sacrifice in their lips for him.
In this only, I confess, they are no fools. If there be no God, we need not
trouble our selves about a Sacrifice; but if there be a God, let them take the
fool again; for Sacrifice is his due. Never was any Nation so barbarous, that
fancied a Deity, but thought it necessary to make some testification and
acknowledgment of it by Sacrifice.

Herd of SECTARIES, who are but a kind of godly Atheists. When the late storm
that raged amongst us, brought with it those Locusts that overspread the
Nation; though their whole business was to destroy, yet of all most virulently
the Public Service of the Church. And hence it is, that in the practice of
their devotions, you shall find nothing that looks like the offering of a
Sacrifice of praise for the honor of God: But their meeting together, is only
to tell one another their dreams and ridiculous phansies, belying the holy
Spirit an hour or two, and then depart. And so I leave them.

And come to another sort of enemies, whom I intend more particularly to call
to an account, and the rather, because they seem to allow of a Public
Sacrifice of praise, as far as a free Directory will go; but for a set and
stinted Liturgy (as they call it) they have it in abomination, as appears by
the heap of accusations they bring against it.

1. That it is a polluted unclean thing. 2. That it is a dead Sacrifice. 3. A
Book-service of the Letter, and not of the Spirit. 4. A Childish. 5. Confused.
6. Improper, Impertinent service. 7. A tedious service. 8. A lame sacrisice,
full of defects.
And lastly, A blind one, that edifies not.

All this dirt and filth they cast upon it, is easily wiped off with a right
understanding of this only general Doctrine of the Text, That it is a sacrifice
of praise to God for the honor of His Name.

polluted unclean thing, taken out of the Popish Missal and Breviary: But if it
be truly according to the pattern in the Text, as ye have heard, a Sacrifice of
praise to God, we need not be troubled through what hands it passed before it
came to us: For as we are not ashamed to confess that our Religion is not a
new, but Reformed Religion; so, nor need we be ashamed to say, We worship God,
not by a new, but Reformed Liturgy: And so our Faith and Worship are both of a
piece, and both as old as the Text.

a dead Sacrifice, made up of empty Forms and Ceremonies, void of that life and
affection which is necessary in Gods service. If there be that want of
affection in our Prayers, it is a fault, lie where it may: But certainly the
Forms are not guilty of it. It is injustice to require that in a Sacrifice,
which belongs only to him that offers it. The Church that composed the Forms
cannot create affection. If we come to this Sacrifice and leave our hearts
behind us, I know where the blame must lie.

But you will say, you do not accuse Set Forms, for want of life in themselves,
but that by the continual repetition of the same things, they be-dead affection
in those that should have it. And how, I pray, should that be? If the sense of
real wants and blessings, which are always the same, cannot keep up our
affections, how should a new set of words do it? Can we imagine that God should
be taken with variety and shift of phrases, or that the affection that takes
heat from them, will render the service more acceptable to God?

And therefore, when they complain that their devotion is tired with nothing
but Almighty and most merciful Father, in the Morning; and Almighty and most
merciful Father, in the Evening; and the same over and over again every day:
That complaint did never lie against the Jews daily Sacrifice, which was a type
of ours; that there was a Lamb in the morning, and a Lamb again at evening; and
the same over again every day in the year. When our Savor at his last agony in
the Garden, three times retired himself from his Disciples to pray, he used
still the same form of words without any change, St. Matthew. 26.44. And who
dares say he wanted ability to vary his prayer, or can say, he wanted
affection, though he did not? For as St. Luke relates it, He prayed so
earneslly, St. Luke 22.24.
that his swet was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground;
and then sure there was no want of affection; for when our zeal is at the
hottest, we do not use to swet at our prayers.

hinder the Spirit by which we should pray. The truth is, Such as the Spirit
may be, and too often uses to be, it ought rather to be bound with chains,
than left at liberty; under a Form of Praying, to Libel their Governors, or
whom, or what they please to bring into hatred with the people: But for the
true Spirit of Prayer, that cannot be tied with words: For they are utterly
mistaken that think the Spirit of Prayer, supplies any defect of words or
phrases; for that very Text of St. Paul, whereon they ground it, confutes them;
Romans 8.26. The Spirit helps our infirmities. But in what? not in words; for
what the Spirit supplies are there said to be (...), not spoken at all; or, as
we translate it, which cannot be uttered. What then does it supply? It makes
intercession for us with groans, which cannot be uttered. The true Spirit of
Prayer consists in groans, in zeal, and fervency; and that, where it is, will
animate and put life into any Form of Prayer. They who call Forms of their own
making, or borrowing, con'd without Book, Praying by the Spirit, do both cheat
the people, and blaspheme the Holy Ghost.

Reading-Service, which any child may do. They complain it seems of case: If
God should require a harder thing of us, as no doubt there are many harder
things to be done, do them we must. The easiness lays the greater obligation
upon us: How ridiculous would this exception appear against the Legal
Sacrifices! A Butcher could kill and dress a Lamb, as well as a Priest. This is
a false, deceitful weight. Gods service is not to be weighed by the labor of
doing, but by the relation to him, for whom it is done: And therefore King
Solomon, when, by the advice of his Father upon his deathbed, he called to
account the chief Leaders in the rebellion of Adoniah, as Joab that commanded
in chief, and Abiathar the High Priest, made no question of putting Adoniah and
Joab to death; but for Abiathar, though he deprived him of his office, yet he
spared his life. And why? he gives no other reason but this, Because he bore
the Ark before his Father David. But was that a work of such merit and
difficulty? Could not any Porter do as much? it was but carrying of a Chest.
Solomon did not take his measure by that. That Sacred Chest, the Ark, was a
Symbol of Gods presence; it had relation to his Service, and that he preferred
before his own; for Adoniah was his Brother of the half-blood, and Joab his
cosin-german.

You that are the Kings servants here in Court, do not weigh the merit and
honor of your places, which you justly have, by the pains and difficulty of
your service, which we know in many is little enough, but by the greatness of
the Master for whom you do it. Children may be able to read the Book, but not
therefore sit to offer the Sacrifice.

confused noise that is made by the people, in answering to the Confessions and
Psalms. It seems their ears are as tender as their consciences, and both alike
out of tune: For this is a Public Sacrifice, (...) in the Text, i. e. a
Confessing together. Now there can be no communication of men together, but by
speech, and therefore of necessity it must be the Fruit of our Lips. But while
we, in obedience to that, pray God to open our Lips, they teach the people to
shut them. They take it very ill, that they are silenced, though they deserve
it, and yet stick not to silence the whole Congregation, without any offense or
fault of theirs.

improper and impertinent Service: We use such Hymns and Psalms for our Praises
and Thanksgivings as are not proper and appliable to us: For how can any one
that is a Man, say in the Magnificat, Thou have regarded the lowliness of thy
handmaid? Or how can it be seasonable for all, especially young men, to say in
the Nunc dimittas, Lord now let thy servant depart in peace.

For answer to this, and the rest of that kind: It is but turning to the
Doctrine of the Text, as we have done in all the rest. The Liturgy is the
Churches Public Sacrifice of Praise; and in that we are not only to give
thanks for blessings immediately conferred upon our persons, but upon us with
the whole Church, by the intervention of others. For in the Blessed Virgin we
do all partake of the grace done to her, being taken to be the Mother of our
Lord. And in old Simeon we rejoice at the sight of that salvation, which was a
Light to us Gentiles, as well as a glory to the people of Israel.

tedious in it self, but injurious also by hindering the Sermon. To measure the
length first: If we lay our line to it, you will not find it so. It takes up
but a very short part of the whole time which God has bestowed upon us; of
which enough we have, and too much we take many times for our rest and sleep;
enough for our own necessary business, and a good portion besides for our
pleasures and lawful delights. Can we think an hour or two spared out of all
this, too long for Gods service? or a Lamb too much for him, who has bestowed
the whole flock upon us? The tediousness which is caused by the length of the
Service, is cured by the end. It must needs be a less trouble to us, if we
consider it to be an honor for God. To say no more, How can we think those
Prayers too long, in which we our selves sue for eternity?

Nevertheless, if the length of the Liturgy should, as they say, prove a
hinderance to Preaching, I had so much the less to say for it: But how that
should be, I understand not. The Wise man assures us, there is a time for all
things, and sure then there is a time for two things, Prayer and Preaching
both. But possibly we may be so surprised, that there is not time for both; The
Case of Conscience here will be, which of them may best be spared. The Prayers
are to God, the Sermons to us; the Prayers for Gods honor, the Sermons for our
profit. In this case, I think I may safely leave every man to be his own
Casuist, and go on to the next.

defective, and so a lame Sacrifice. How inconsistent are their complaints, and
how hard are they to be pleased? It is both too long and too short. They mean
it is too long in the whole, and too short in the parts. In the Confession of
sins, in the Thanksgivings, in the Collects, many material things omitted. The
Scriptures read in broken pieces, and not in order.

These would not be counted defects, if we consider their end and use in the
Liturgy, which is to be a Sacrifice of praise to God, for that is sufficiently
attained by them as they are there used.

It is true, if we respect these duties in reference to their immediate proper
effects, the common Forms are insufficient; for no man may presume of Remission
of sins, unless he confess to God the particulars wherein he has offended. Nor
can be truly thankful to him for the blessings, whereof he makes no particular
acknowledgment: Nor can attain to a full and clear knowledge of the Scriptures,
that reads not all, and in order. All this is easily granted.

But they are utterly mistaken in the use of a Liturgy, that would have it to
be a commonstore to furnish out every duty and virtue, any further than to
serve for the public honoring, and praising of God: For if particulars should
be named, wherein all are not concerned, how can they truly and heartily say
Amen? And likewise, when some portions only of Scripture are read, it is to
suit the present occasion and solemnity. And for particular Confessions and
Thanksgivings, if men were so well-affected, and so well-acquainted with their
own Souls, as they should be; when general words are used, they may if they
please, reflect upon their own particulars; and so render the Public Service,
an advantage also to their private interest and profit.

edifies not. To edify is to contribute to the building of us up in faith or
godliness; and then not edifying, the meaning must be, that it is good for
nothing. And truly, if it be so, it is but reason we should part with it.

But possibly when they say, It does not edify, it may have some other meaning
in it. They may say it edifies not, because they like it not, or are not
pleased and satisfied with the use of it; or, which is nearer the true meaning
of the word, there is nothing of instruction in it, which they have not heard a
thousand times before.

They who come to Prayers for these ends, may indeed be disappointed, because
they come without their errant. This is a Sacrifice for the praise and honor of
God; if it edifies that, we have no cause to complain. A Sermon, I confess, may
fit our turns better in both these respects, if it be as it should be: It is no
doubt a more pleasing entertainment of the time, if it be to edify our liking;
and fitter for instruction, if it be to edify our learning. But then to say,
Divine Service does not thus edify, is to blame the Prayers, because they are
not a Sermon. You would take it ill, as well you might, if I should except
against Sermons, because they are not Prayers, i. e. a Sacrifice of praise for
the worship of God, as certainly they are not. But let both have their dues,
and they are both good edifiers; The Sermon of Faith and Knowledge, the other
of the Praise and Worship of God.

Yea, that part, which, of all the rest, seems least to edify, The Hymns, and
Psalms, and Anthems with Music, edify the praise of God. I will praise the
name of God with a sung, and magnify it with thanksgiving, Psalm. 69.30. Yea,
the very instruments themselves have their part in praising God. Therefore will
I praise thee, and thy faithfulness, O God, playing upon an Instrument of
Music. Unto Thee will I sing upon the Harp, O thou holy One of Israel, Psalm.
71.20. This perhaps may be allowed to David, to use the Art wherein he
excelled, and may agree with the Jewish service, but not with the Christian.
Nay St. Paul, Romans 15.8.
in the place I named before, assures us, That it was a promise made to the
Fathers, that Christians should so glorify God, by Confessing to Him, and
Singing to His Name, the very Singing is not omitted; and that not of Him only,
but to Him; which seems so ridiculous to some, to sing our Prayers, or any
thing that is offered to God: But it did not so to him that knew it better,
Psalm. 104.33. I will sing unto the Lord, as long as I live; I will sing praises
unto my God, while I have my being. What ever others think, he was resolved to
live and die in it.

I shall trouble you with no more of their Objections: These only I have taken
out of a greater heap, because they are such as confront the Plain Doctrine,
and Letter of the Text, and are the most popular insinuations wherewith unwary
people have been deluded.

But you will say, though we see no reason to approve of these men, yet have we
not reason to pity them? For they are content to lose their Livings for their
Consciences. What they lose, I cannot say; but for pitying them, I should be
apt enough, if I did not see some Gallants venture more for a young wanton
Mistress, than others for a chaste and sober wife. If they be so fond of their
new Directory and Covenant, as young lovers are in the first heat of their
affection, who say, That they had rather beg together, than part; who can help
it? Yet I will hope that a little more time, and a little less Indulgence,
which uses to make the one, will make the other wiser too.

And so I leave them, and come to Our selves, whose Judgments have not been so
far corrupted as to be enemies to the Liturgy; yet, I know not how, something
has so poisoned our Affections, that we are not so good friends to it as might
be wished. We care but little to come to it, and have as little respect when we
are at it; we fit it out, or talk it out, so as nothing seems to be more
impertinent, and wherein we are less concerned, than in this Service. Why will
you go to Church? say they; there is nothing but Prayers. That is in words at
length, There Is nothing but praising and honoring God.

It is not possible, that any could be thus bold with their Creator, if they
did not deceive themselves with a persuasion that a full amends may be made him
another way. That obedience to Gods Commands, a virtuous and godly life is the
best Sacrifice. He that keeps the Law, Ecclus. 35.1. Psalm 4.5.
says the Son of Sirach, brings Offerings enough. And David, an Author of
more credit, tells us of a Sacrifice of Righteousness. And the Apostle in this
chapter, To do good and to communicate forget not, for with such sacrifices God
is well pleased. Verse 16.
These are, and every other act of Virtue, may be a Sacrifice, and God honored
by them: But yet not such as will serve to satisfy the Duty of the Text. The
Sacrifice of obedience is Metaphorical, i. e. God accepts it as well as if it
had been a Sacrifice, that is, something given to himself. But the Sacrifice of
praise is proper without a Metaphor. The original word (...) I confess, imports
something to be destroyed, but that is mere accidental to the notion of
Sacrifice. It does distinguish the kind, but not constitute the nature of it,
which is accomplished by offering something to God in acknowledgment of him.
And for this use, the fruit of our lips is as proper, as the fruit of our
flocks, or of our fields, ever were.

So likewise the honor which God receives from our obedience, differs from that
of Sacrifice; for that is only of consequence, and by argumentation, i. e. It
suits with the nature and will of God; as we say, Good servants are an honor to
their Masters, by reflection: But the honor by Sacrifice is of direct and
special intendment, it has no other use, and is a distinct virtue from all
other acts of obedience, and of a different obligation.

I should not trouble you with these nice distinctions, if they did not carry
with them matter of important consequence; least a necessary service should be
shuffled up, and quite lost in the crowd of other duties. For, though God has
the honor of obedience and a virtuous life, if we deny him the honor of a
Sacrifice besides, we rob him of his due; and a greater Sacrilege we cannot
commit: For that which goes upon the common account of Sacrilege, robs God
only of things dedicated for his service; (and yet that crime has fired the
nests of those, that took Coals from the Altar, to warm their own harths) but
this is the robbing God of the Service it self, to which the other is but an
accessory.

It is a fallacy, and piece of practick sophistry that cozens the world, for
men to think themselves discharged of one duty by the zeal they bear to
another; as if God were not robbed so long as we leave him any thing.

Now, as it is well worth our care, that this Service be not lost in the crowd
of other duties, so will it be much more, that it be not lost in worse company,
in a throng of Vices. And lost it will be, when the virtue of it is gone. Psalm.
107.34.
Afruitful land is made barren by the sins of them that dwell therein. The same
cause will make our Prayers as fruitless as our fields. To honor God with our
lips, and dishonor him with our lives; to be strict at Prayers, and loose to
all disorders; The Presbyterian pretensions cannot make our Sacrifice so
abominable as our sins can: They make God complain of that which he himself
commanded, Isai. 1.11. To what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices unto
me, says the Lord; I am full with the burnt offerings of Rams, and the fat of
fed Beasts. And again, Bring no more vain Oblations; Incense is an abomination
unto me: So it was with the Jews Sacrifice; and the Christians will fare no
better, ver. 15. When ye spread forth your hands I will hide mine eyes from
you: yea, and when ye make many Prayers I will not hear: Whence grows the
displeasure that God takes against his own Service, but from this? Your hands
are full of blood. He will accept no Sacrifice from polluted hands. And
therefore to reconcile him to his own Service, he puts us into this course,
verse 16. VVash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from before
mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek Judgment, relieve the
oppressed, plead for the widow.

If we come thus minded and prepared to Gods Altar, and offer the Sacrifice of
Praise to the honor of his Name, we may with confidence expect, what God in
the same case promised, 1 Samuel 2.30. Them that honor me, I will honor.

To conclude. All that I have said hitherto is only to vindicate Gods Service
from contempt, and to restore it to some of the respect due to it. And this,
though the froward times did not need, cannot I hope be thought an ill office
for a Sermon, once to be an Advocate for Prayer, seeing Prayers will always do
as much for the Sermon, be an Advocate to God to bring down a blessing upon it.
As the Church teaches us to do, so let us pray, That the words which we have
heard with our outward ears may, etc.

A SERMON Preached before His Majesty at Whitehall, March 27.1664.
St MARK 4.24. -- Take heed what you hear.


TO take heed is always good, but most necessary when danger is least
suspected; we have therefore more need to look to our hearing, because of all
other things we may think that has least need of it. If it had been a Caveat
upon the Tongue, Take heed what you say; there is reason enough for that; for
the tongue is a world of iniquity, Jam. 3.6.
it defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the course of Nature. But for
hearing, that seems a harmless innocent thing, merely passive, no man the worse
for it: And this makes us sit down securely to hear any thing: But take heed;
Hearing is no such harmless thing: Though hearing ill, be not doing ill, yet at
length it may bring us to it; it is a door to let it in upon us. We are all set
in the midst of Temptations and Enemies, and cannot be safe unless we have a
watch and guard upon the passages.

As David, considering the mischiefs that came by intemperate and unadvised
speaking, wisely resolved to set a watch at the door of his lips; Dixi,
Custodiam; I said, I will take heed to my ways, that I offend not with my
tongue: So another guard will be as necessary at the ear, that nothing go in or
out, in at the ear, or out at the mouth, that may betray us to our Enemies. If
we look not to our ears, they will soon become guilty of the corruptions of the
heart; as when we hear the slatterer it corrupts our judgment of our selves;
the talebearer or slanderer, it corrupts our judgment of others. If we hearken
to prosane, silthy, atheistical communication, it poisons the whole man; for
evil words corrupt good manners. Thus the ear by letting in, may prove as ill
as the tongue by letting out, a world of iniquity too. A little care here will
prevent a great deal of mischief; take it at large; for it is good for a^
Persons, for all Places, for all Times. But the Caveat of the Text comes nearer
to us; it follows us to Church, where we think our selves out of all danger;
and yet nearer to the very business we come about, the hearing of Gods Word; an
employment so safe from danger, that we think no care is to be taken unless it
be to get a place to hear in: For concerning this hearing is the advice given
upon occasion of the Parable of the Sower, that went before, wherein our
Savior himself interprets the Seed to be God's Word, and the Soil in which it
was sown to be the Hearers. Of four several sorts, but one came to good. It is
a great odds, and yet I wish it were not often greater; three to one of the
Hearers miscarried, and the fault was only in the hearing. It is therefore very
seasonable for us that are come to hear, and especially at this time of Lent,
when there is more of this Seed sown than at any other time of the year. Where
the loss will be more, the care should be greater. Take heed what you hear.
This is the Argument whereof with Gods blessing we are now to treat.

COncerning our care about hearing, it will not be amiss to bestow the first
part of it about the meaning of the Words. St. Luke relates the same passage
with some difference.

Tade heed how your hear. That which is quid here, is quomodo there. The
difficulty will be, Whether St. Mark should expound St. Luke, or St. Luke St.
Mark? for in relating matter of fact, the truth must be one, though the words
differ: And yet the words do not so differ, but that in Scripture the one is
sometimes taken for the other, quid for quomodo, and quomodo for quid: Genesis
2.19. God brought all the beasts of the field and fouls of the air to Adam, to
see what he would call them. What, that is How; there is quid for quomodo. On
the other side, Luke 10.26. we have quomodo for quid: What is written in the
Law? how read thou? How, that is, What read thou?

Though this promiscuous use of the phrases will serve to reconcile the
Evangelists, that they might mean the same thing in different words; yet will
it not serve to find out which that meaning should be. It will be a safe course
therefore to take both in; for though vi verborum we can not, yet, which is
lawful in a Preacher, vi consequentiae we may; for they are so close woven
together, that one cannot well go without the other. It will be to no purpose
how we hear, unless we hear what we should: and it will be to as little to hear
what we should, if we care not how we hear it. If we take them both in, they
will complete our care in the two parts of it, and also make two Points of the
Sermon, What we hear, and How we hear.

1. Take heed what --

But how can that be given in caution to the Hearer which is not in his power?
for it is wholly at the choice of the Speaker what we hear: When the Ear is
open it must hear what is spoken, whether it be good or bad. True, if the
Precept had been given to the Ear, so it must be; but it is given to the
Hearer, to him that has an Imperium and ruling of that and all the other
senses. If the reason or will shall command, the Ear will open or shut, like or
dislike. It is not simple hearing, the Sense it self is not capable of advice,
but mixed. Heb. 4.2.
St. Paul gives the reason why the Gospel being preached to the Jews did not
profit them, because not mixed with Faith in them that heard it. It is not
simple hearing, but mixed with a more noble part of the Soul that guides it.
And so to take heed what you hear, is in effect to take heed what Faith and
Credit you give to that you hear; for so it follows in the Verse, With what
measure you mete it shall be measured to you, the benefit will answer to the
care, measure for measure. But what different measure can there be of that
which differs not? Gods Word is from everlasting unchangeable. The grass may
wither, and the flower thereof may fade away, says St. Peter, but the word of
the Lord endures for ever; and this is the word which by the Gospel is
preached unto you, 1 Pet. 1. ult.
1 Pet. 1. ult.

Though Gods word be one in it self, yet that one has been made known to the
world in different ways and Degrees, and so requires a hearing proportionable
to them. God who at sundry times, Heb. 1.2.
and in diverse manners spoke in times past to the Fathers by the Prophets, has
in these last days spoken by his Son. And likewise that which the Son spoke in
those last days, the days of the Gospel, was in diverse manners. For first he
spoke by himself self in person, Luke 4.18.
The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the
Gospel to the poor. That which he preached was certainly Gods word. And when he
left the world to go to his Father, he sent the Holy Ghost from Heaven, who in
the mouth of the Apostles preached the same Gospel; for those holy men spoke
not by the will of man, but as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. And therefore
this also was truly the word of God. 2 Pet. ^ 24.
And when the Church was thus founded by the preaching of the Holy Ghost, for
the propagation of it to all times after, it pleased God to give it in
VVriting, in a Scripture, and that by inspiration of the same Spirit which
before preached it. So as now we need not ascend to Heaven to fetch Christ
down, nor the Holy Ghost, as some pretend to do to know Gods will, but to
receive it only from that Scripture. Thus far we have the Word of God in
Proper, (i. e.) immediately out of the mouth of God, and our hearing must be
absolute for the matter, we must say with Samuel, Speak Lord, for thy servant
hears.

But when it pleased God to commit the dispensing of that word to the Pastors
of the Church, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
for the edifying of the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.12. Now the word of God was
come* into the hands of men subject to infirmities and error, who may both
deceive themselves and others. And here our Saviors advice comes in season,
Take heed what you hear. Before, Gods word was in the Original, but here only
in the Transcript, or Copy; and some Copyings are more happy than others, and
come nearer the Original, and therefore not all of the same value and esteem.
All Preachers are not to be heard alike, nor all Sermons. The word of God in
them is so the water of Life, that it often tastes of the mineral, through
which it runs, and has a tincture from the earthen Vessel that brings it, and
therefore not to be received with that measure of trust which belongs to the
pure and proper word of God. For, take a Sermon at the best, the most you can
make of it is, that it is Gods word only in a qualified sense, because the
Church intends it should be so; and it is the Preachers judgment and opinion
that it is so; and possibly it may be so indeed. But then because possibly it
may not be so, we had need take heed what we hear.

We learn from St. Paul that it was more than possible, it was truly so then;
for he warns Timothy of Preachers that will strive about words to no purpose,
but to the subversion of the hearers, 2 Timothy 2.14. And verse 16. By profane
and vain bablings do increase to more ungodliness. And verse 17. Their word
will eat as does a Canker, or a Gangrain; for so the Greek word is; and that is
a dangerous Disease, and by all means possible to be avoided, and especially to
be taken heed of. Thus it was in the early times of the Church, we have reason
then to look for worse after, and so we of late times found it by sad
experience: Not only profane and vain bablings, but Sedition, Treason,
Rebellion were dressed up and appeared in the likeness of Sermons. It is too
plain, we have but too much need of caution to take heed.

But alas! what should private men do? must they, or can they call all
Preachers and Doctrines to account? The Scriptures indeed which are the
undoubted Word of God would do it if well managed, but how can that be hoped
from every hand? wherein wise, that is, learned men, are mistaken, and from
whence every Sect seeks Patronage, and persuades it self to have it. What means
is there then left by the help whereof we may take heed what we hear. Truly
none that I know, but this still, the Scriptures are the only infallible rule.

But how! Not left loose to the prejudices and fancies of every man; for then
it will fall out, as with those that look in a Glass, in which every one sees
his own face, though not another; the reason is because he brings his face to
the Glass, not because it was there before. So every Sect sees the face of his
own Religion in the Scripture, not because it was there before, but because his
strong fancy and prejudice brought it thither; he thinks he sees that in the
Scripture, which in truth is only in his own imagination.

But how then can we have any help from the Scriptures to take heed what we
hear? Not as Gods word lies diffused through the whole body of them; but as
prepared and fitted up in a summary and short form of wholesome words by such to
whom the care of the Church is committed.

If any shall think this a humane invention derogatory to the sufficiency of
the Scriptures. Let him implead St. Paul first, who made the same use of it,
finding what mischief false Teachers had done, charges Timothy with the care of
it, 2 Timothy 1.13. (...). Hold fast the form of sound words which thou have heard
of me. This form he calls in the last verse of the former Epistle (...), a
depositum committed to his trust, and for that very purpose that he might avoid
profane and vain bablings, and oppositions of Science falsely so called; and
that is plainly, that they might take heed what they hear.

The same course was taken by the whole Church after considering how hard, or
rather impossible it was for every one out of the Scriptures to work out to
himself an assurance of the knowledge of as much as was necessary to salvation,
and with that a consent with the rest of the faithful, who are commanded to
speak and think the same things, which cannot be done but in a certain form of
words. Such a form, 1 Cor. 1.10.
if not the same with S. Paul (...), was the Apostles Creed, the use whereof
has ever since continued in the Church to be a help to take heed what we
believe.

The same course was of later times held by diverse particular National
Churches, who weary with the insolence and domineering of their Sister at Rome,
did suo jure uti, and provide for themselves, which sell out in a time when the
world was filled with Controversies and Disputes of Religion. That the people
might not be carried about with every wind of doctrine, that blew from all
corners, it was their care, and wisdom to compose a form of wholesome words in
their several Confessions, to be a rule what to hear.

Now following our Saviors advice, you have reason to ask, With what measure
of Faith are these confessions to be received; for, Quis custodiet ipsum
custodem? What credit must be given to that which must be a rule how far we
credit others? That we mistake not, They are not to be received with that faith
which is due to Gods word, or any thing out of it as necessary to salvation;
but with such as wise men would give to the means of settling unity and consent
in matters controverted, as the title of our Confession imports; that is, That
they are Articles of Peace not Articles of Faith. They make no new Religion or
new Faith.

This, by the way, gives an easy Answer to the Papists hard Question, as they
think; Where was your Religion before Luther? Where was your Church before the
39. Articles? We do not date our Religion from those Articles. The Church of
England (I grant) is called so from their Confession, but by an accidental
denomination; i.e. It is that Church which for preservation of unity and peace
in it, injoyns nothing to be taught or heard for God's Word which is repugnant
to them in the particulars there mentioned. But for the essential denomination
of our Faith, whereon Salvation depends, it is the Faith of God's Word, summed
up in the ancient Catholic and Apostolic Forms; as is evident from our
Constitutions and Practice. For when any is received as a Member into the
Church by Baptisin, the Laver of Regeneration, no other Faith is required but
that which is comprised in the Apostles Creed. And when by a confession of our
Faith and Sins, we prepare to receive the other Sacrament of the Body and Blood
of our Lord, our Faith is that according to the ancient Nicene Creed. And in
the Office of Visiting the Sick, the Absolution (a comfort at all times, and
most of all when we give up our Souls into the Hands of God) is not to be
administered but to those that make confession as well of their Faith as of
their Sins; and that Faith is only according to the Apostles Creed. Thus are we
born, nourished, and dissolved by the same Faith, according to the ancient
Catholic and Apostolic Forms. A Faith of this age neither ought they to
reproach, nor we to be ashamed of.

To return to our particular Church Confession; it has another end and use;
they are Articles of peace and consent in certain Controversies to instruct and
help us to take heed what we hear.

But it will not be so taken by all; for the Churches Remedy is the Sectaries
Disease, who complain, That by this means the liberty of the Spirit and of the
Conscience are penned up in those Forms; and, which is a worse mischief, if it
were true, a binding of God's Word, which ought to be free: But for that God's
Word neither is nor can be bound. The Forms are no more but the gathering
together some of those Waters which flow all over the Scriptures, into a
stream, to fit them for the ease and use of all. But they say, they take a
better course to fetch all from the Fountain. The Fountain indeed is purer; but
I see no reason why the Water should be purer in their Pitchers than in the
Churches Stream, seeing both claim immediately to the same Fountain.

They say again, That these Forms are no better than snares, to hinder many a
painful Preacher of the Gospel. They would seem careful to unbind God's Word;
but I see it is to set themselves at liberty. As for painfulness in Preaching,
if it be not to some good purpose, I shall not much reckon upon.

The Pharisees compassed Sea and Land, Mat. 23.13.
but it was to make Pharisees, Proselytes of their Faction, not of Religion.

Nay, but they preach the Gospel. The Gospel is a glorious Word; but what
Gospel? A Gospel you may perhaps have enough of, and too much: S. Paul informs
Timothy of perilous times to come, 2 Timothy 3.1.
when men will be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers,
incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady,
high-minded.

How think you comes it to pass that there should be such a general Apostasy?
was it not for want of preaching? They had no Sermons, or perhaps no great
affection for them; they were some cold hearers, that were content with one
Sermon a day. No, that was not the matter; if we read on to the next Chapter we
shall find they had hearing enough; for they were such as heaped to themselves
Teachers, and so had heaps of Sermons, and affection for them too; for they had
itching ears. What was it then? They could not away with sound Doctrine, but
would have Teachers after their own lusts; they had the Gospel in plenty, but
it was Evangelium (...), not (...); after their own lusts, not of sound
Doctrine.

But what is sound Doctrine? S. Paul does not say here, because a little before
he had given Timothy a form of it, Keep the Form of sound words which thou have
heard from me; and because their Gospel did not agree to that, he charge him
to avoid it. So should we do too with such a Gospel as will not stand within
our form of wholesome words: Or if it be such as was preached here for twenty
years together, we have little reason to be fond of it, or any pains that is
taken about it. If they will not hear the Churches Gospel, what reason has the
Church to hear theirs?

To end my first point, If it was wisdom in St. Paul to commend a form of
words, and in the whole Catholic Church to use one; if the same was practiced
by every reformed Church, and all that people might with peace and security
know what to hear: I do not understand what wisdom it can be to lay all common
again for any man's pleasure; for this is to legitimate Schism, and entail
division to the Church for ever. As you love your selves, your quiet, and look
to receive benefit by the immortal seed of Gods Word, if you would be good
Christians, that is, be advised by Christ, and in that way which all Christians
have used, to Take heed what you hear.

WE come now to the second point of our care, Take heed how you hear, and this
no less necessary than the former; for when we have provided for the Matter
what we hear, we may yet offend in the Manner how; and so lose the benefit of
both.

That which is here set down in proper words, is by our Savior illustrated in
a Similitude, verse 21. Is a candle brought to be put under a bushel, or under
a bed, and not to be set on a Candlestick? that is, and so St. Luke expresses
it, A candle is not brought to be put under a Bushel, but to be set on a
Candlestick. This makes two points in the manner of our hearing, one negative,
that we do not so hear Gods Word that we put it under a Bushel, another
affirmative, that we set it on a Candlestick.

For the first, Gods Word is a light, we can do nothing more contrary to light
than to hide it, to put it under a Bushel, i.e. to do any thing that will
intercept the light and benefit of it. Now this may be done several ways.

First, By perverting the proper end and use of hearing. Hearing Gods word is
certainly a good point of Religion; for it is a duty commanded, verse 23. If
any man have ears to hear let him hear; yet if he hear as he should, he must
not mistake one kind of duty for another. Duties are of diverse kinds, some
essential parts of Religion, some instrumental, and some both. The two chief
duties of this time, fasting and hearing, are instrumental only. That Fasting
is so, we learn from St. Paul. The Kingdom of Heaven is not meat and drink,
i.e. consists not in it; yet if well used is a help to it. Instrumenti vis in
usu consistit. If fasting attains not the end and use of it, it is good for
nothing, not to be reckoned in the order of Religious duties. So hearing Gods
Word, if it work no amendment in us, is but a Cipher alone that stands for
nothing, no better than a Candle under a Bushel.

Instrument, not as Stone and Timber, the essential parts of it. The Ax and the
Hammer, the Square and the Level, are instruments without which there can be no
building: but we would think him mad that should therefore lay them in the
Walls or the Foundation: They are as much guilty of folly, who make their
ordinary worship of God to be nothing but to go hear the Sermon; yea, and the
extraordinary, a solemn Fast and Humiliation to hear a Sermon; A public
Thanksgiving to hear a Sermon, and that is all. If any business extraordinary
fall out, whereunto we think fit by our Devotion to engage Gods blessing and
protection, all we do for his sake we sit and hear a Sermon. If the Sermon does
the work of an instrument it is well, to fit and enable us to perform those
duties, it self is neither stick nor stone in the Building. We must not think
all is done when the Sermon is done.

Instruments are of an indifferent nature, may be well or ill used; so are not
essentials, as Faith, Repentance, and Charity, are constantly the same.
Fasting, I said was an instrumental duty, and so was as well used for strife
and debate, as for Humiliation and Repentance. We may remember many of those
fighting Fasts. He that hewed Timber before out of the thick Trees was known to
bring it to an excellent work; Psalm. 74.
but now they break down all the carved works thereof with Axes and Hammers,
that is, with the same tools that built it. As Sermons are instruments to build
up, at another time they pull down as fast. It is therefore very necessary we
take heed how we hear them.

As we must not mistake in the kind of the duty, an instrumental for an
essential; so nor in the kind of the Instrument: for some are natural, as the
eye is of seeing, the ear of hearing; these naturally do their work. Others
positive of Divine Institution, which have no virtue or power but from that;
and such are the Sacraments. I confess I never heard any say, that hearing of
Gods Word was a Sacrament of Faith: yet I know there is more virtue ascribed to
it than natural, and by some more than Sacramental; for no Sacrament they think
effectual without a Sermon.

If there be a mistake in the manner and kind of operation in the Instrument,
it will prove another putting the Candle under a Bushel. I hope you will not
think it a fruitless curiosity to enquire a little farther into it.

Hearing and Preaching both, for they always go together, are so proper to the
Gospel, that by them it is distinguished from the Law; for St. Paul arguing for
the Christian Faith against the Jewish, calls it the Hearing of Faith, Gal.
3.2. He that ministers to the spirit, and works miracles among you, does he
it by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? The like propriety in
the Gospel has preaching; for whatsoever way the wisdom of the world may take,
It pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe, 1
Cor. 1.21. And thus by way of distinction the Gospel is called the ministration
of the Spirit, because preached by inspiration of the Spirit, and the Law the
ministration of the Letter, because given in writing, 2 Cor. 3.6. Who has made
us Ministers of the New Testament, (...), not of the Letter, but of the Spirit.

But was there then no hearing nor preaching under the Law? That cannot be said
neither. They have Moses and the Prophets, says Abraham to Dives, let them
hear them. And the Priest's lips could not preserve knowledge unless it were
received from his mouth by hearing. It was commonly practiced in the Synagogues
after the reading of the Law in the time of the Apostles to exhort the people.
When St. Paul and his company went into the Synagogue at Antioch in Pisidia,
they were desired to give the people a word of exhortation. Acts 13.15.


How then comes it to pass that by hearing and preaching, the Christian
Religion is distinguished from the Jews, which are common to both? And why is
the Law called the ministration of the Letter, by way of distinction, seeing
the Gospel is written as well as the Law?

It Is plain that these things are spoken, not simply, and universally of
either, but in relation to their beginning and first publishing to the world.
Because the Law was then given by writing, though afterward preached; it is
called the ministration of the Letter: So the Gospel, though afterward
written, yet because it was then only preached by revelation of the Holy Ghost,
it is called the ministration of the Spirit.

That likewise which St. Paul speaks of the hearing of Faith, and of saving men
by the foolishness of preaching has a peculiar relation to Christianity in the
manner of founding it at first. For certainly Preaching in it self was not in
the eye of humane wisdom a foolish way to persuade, but such as the wisest of
them all used: when they would persuade the people any thing, they did it by
orations and speeches, which are of the same kind with preaching.

But if we look at that preaching by which the Christian Religion was at first
introduced, it had in the eye of humane wisdom something of folly in it. For to
introduce a Law or Religion to any people, these two things among others are
necessary.

That they give it in Writing, that they might more certainly know what they
had to do, and that it be by such as have authority and power. And this way God
himself took in giving the Jews a Law: for first, he wrote it with his own
fingers, and then published it by the Ministry of Moses who was their leader
and governor.

But for the introduction of the Gospel, it pleased God to take a far different
course, that is, to commit all to the preaching of a few poor despicable
Fishermen, who were only private men, of no authority; and of whose Gospel
they had no knowledge, but from what was to be taken from their mouths. And
that when first preached, was by some esteemed no better than a distemper, yea,
plain drunkenness: yet, thus it pleased God to put the words of eternal life
into these earthen vessels, and by that means to make his own power known, and
by that folly to confound the wisdom of the world.

But for our preaching, though it may have many times too good a title to
foolishness in preaching, yet not to the foolishness of preaching: for, those
obstacles removed, it is the ordinary way by which all knowledge, humane as
well as divine is communicated: My meaning is, that hearing now is to be looked
upon as the common natural instrument to receive instruction, and therefore no
benefit to be reckoned on from it, but what is common to all other learning and
knowledge, that is, by serious studying, and diligently pondering the things we
hear; for if we trust to any secret, sacramental, mystical virtue in hearing:
that profit we should get by the Word we may lose by the Hearing. Therefore
take heed how you hear; for this is a second way of putting Gods word under a
Bushel.

confine it to the Sermon: whereas that is of little use, if Gods word be not
in it; they say, The word is of as little, if it be not in a Sermon, which is a
derogation to the goodness and bounty of Almighty God, who has dispensed his
Divine Truth so many ways besides: as,

First by Reading; for though when Gods Word was preached only, it could be
only heard; yet when it was a Scripture, it might be known, as all other
Writings, by reading also: for this reason St. Paul sets Timothy to his Book, 1 Timothy 4.13.
Till I come give attendance to reading; Search the Scriptures, for therein you
think you have eternal life; and search we cannot unless we read them, that by
reading we may find the way to eternal life: yea, though all were to be done by
preaching, Reading is that too: For Moses had in old time them that preached
him, being read in the Synagogues every Sabbathday, Acts 15.21.

Secondly, By writing, Gods Word works Faith in us, if S. John was not mistaken
when he said, 1 John 5.13.
These things have I written unto you, that ye may know ye have eternal life,
and that ye may believe in the name of the Son of God. Good writers are in
their kind good Preachers. Why then should any be scandalized at the Preacher,
that looks upon his Book where his Sermon is written. Indeed, if men now were
to speak as the Apostles did, as the Spirit gave them utterance, it were a
great mistake to look for him in a Book: But if we, as all must take Gods Word
out of the Scripture; and every Preacher, if he be not too bold with God and
his Auditors, that he may speak from thence what is both true and seasonable,
prepares by writing that which he is to preach; the Sermon is the same in the
Pulpit that it was in the study, and though the Preacher that looks in his Book
be the worse, the Sermon I am sure is not.

Thirdly, We may receive the fruit of God's Word in the virtuous life and
example of others; for this St. Paul calls the holding forth the Word of Life,
Phil. 2.16. That ye may be blameless, the Sons of God, without rebuke, holding
forth the Word of Life; i. e. it is visible and legible in all our actions and
demeanor. Thus a Man may be a Preacher of God's Word, though he be not in
Orders: Yea, Women, that are forbidden to speak in the Church, may thus convert
their Husbands at home. Likewise, ye Wives be in subjection to your Husbands,
that if any obey not the Word (that is, 1 Pet. 3 1.
when it is preached) they also may without the Word be won by the conversation
of the Wife. So powerful and effectual is God's Word, that it works by example,
though in the weakest Vessels.

public or private, as we learn from St. Paul, Acts 20.20. where he gives
account to the Elders of Ephesus of himself, That he had taught them publicly,
and from house to house. Sure he did not make a formal Sermon in every house he
came into, but as occasion and opportunity was given, by Conference he made
known to them the Will of God.

laying the Foundation, the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, as the
Apostle calls them, Heb. 6.1. which we call Catechizing. If this be not
Preaching, if laying the Foundation be not edifying, we shall make but a sorry
Building. If this Foundation of Faith be not well laid, every new wind of
Doctrine that rises blows it straight down again.

In these several ways, besides the Sermon, is God's Word effectual. Now if we
put all these under the bushel, and set up the Sermon only, we had need take
heed how we hear that; for if that wherein all our hope and confidence lies
should go under the bushel too, we are in a sad case.

It will therefore nearly concern us to take heed, That God's Word be not lost
in the Sermon, i. e. that the power of it, which consists in the evident
conviction of truth, be not lost in formalities and impertinences, commonly
used in Sermons.

As when little regard is given by some to God's Word, unless the Sermon
presents it self dressed up with all the curiosities of Art, Language, and
Fancy too; which sometimes so disguises it, as it can hardly be known from a
Poem. But for the true use of Ornaments of Art and Speech, if they make us love
our duties the more, as they make us more in love with hearing, I should think
it well bestowed. But if painted Sermons be like painted Glass, that makes' a
Room beautiful, but intercepts too much the light, it may well go in the rank
too of those things which put God's Word under the bushel.

The same is done too with a courser sort of Forms, which have no title to be
divine, but that they want humane Learning. And yet if God's Word be not in
that jejune formal dress, it will not be so kindly received by those who out of
a seeming tenderness of the liberty of God's Word, are afraid that the Churches
Form should bind it, and spare not to fetter it in cold formalities of their
own, in which it languisheth to nothing.

Again, God's Word must needs be put under a bushel, when it is put into the
bushel; I mean, when it is heard by Measure; I do not mean the measure of Faith
here in the Text, the measure of the Sanctuary; but the common Market-measure;
as when we must have an Hourglass full at least, and somewhat running over, to
make a just Sermon; though the particulars be as incoherent both with the Text
and themselves, as the sand that measures them; yet if it runs on smoothly, and
fills up the time, all is well.

There is as little good from Sermons when they are heard by Tale; if we have
not our full number, as well as our full measure, two at the least a day, the
poor people are starved.

They would pity my simplicity, if I should take upon me to confute it out of
vain Philosophy, and tell them out of it, That quantitatis nulla est efficacia:
I shall, with their good leaves, 1. Tim. 3.1.
from St. Paul, (out of the place I named before) to Timothy, show them, That
there is no efficacy in quantity: What a bedroll of sins does he lay at their
doors that heap to themselves Teachers? There was a heap of sins under a heap
of Sermons. And no wonder; for being after their own lust, the more commonly
the worse.

There be many other things to be taken heed of in hearing, which intercept and
obstruct the light of God's Word: But because the time wears away, I will add
but one more.

That out of ignorance or ill will we do not misconstrue what we hear; as St.
Peter observed some to do with St. Paul's Epistles, which they wrested to their
own destruction.

And this I rather add in my own defense, lest that which is spoken in favor
of hearing, should be interpreted a discouragement to it; because people
generally are not so well affected as they should be to so good a duty, who had
more need of fire to heat them, than Water to cool them.

It had been to better purpose, you will say, if I had taken my Text out of St.
James; Be swift to hear.

But I beseech you not to be mistaken. That which has been said does not take
us off our speed: We may be still as swift to hear as our Zeal can carry us. It
puts us only in our right way, that we do not run in vain. It is only to take
God's Word from under the bushel, where it does no good; that we may set it on
the candlestick, from whence we may receive the light of it, and in that the
benefit of our Savior's advice, to take heed how we hear; which is the second
part of our care in the affirmative, by setting Gods Word on the candlestick.

TO set God's Word on the Candlestick, is to set it where we may receive the
light of it; and that is, first,

particular use and application of it to our selves that hear; for though
Preachers have commonly these words in their Sermons, Uses, and Application,
and they know best why they use them, I do not; for sure I am, they are more
proper to the Hearers. The Preacher gives the Doctrine, but the Hearers must
make the Use and Application. No Preacher can say, as Nathan to David, Thou art
the Man; unless he have a special Commission, as he had from God. No Preacher
has access to our Consciences; at that Bar every man must be his own Judge and
VVitness, and as there shall be cause, pronounce Sentence against himself, Thou
art the Man.

If we sit at the Sermon as men unconcerned for any thing but the hearing of
it, to us it is all one as if it had been still under the Bushel, and not upon
the Candlestick.

If we hear, and make no use of it, we leave out the best part of the Sermon;
for the Hearers make bad Sermons, as well as Preachers.

But when a fault or error is reprehended, must every Hearer pronounce himself
guilty! Certainly No; for that were injustice to condemn the innocent. Though
the Sermon condemns not every man that hears it, yet it puts every man upon his
trial, to let the light into his own bosom, to see whether he be guilty or not.
If guilty, let him do as guilty men do, sue for mercy, and pardon, and
amendment: If not guilty, let him enjoy the comfort of that, If our heart
condemns us not, then have we confidence toward God, 1 John 3.21. And happy is
he that condemns not himself, Romans 14.22. Guilty, or not guilty, we have
benefit by the light that actually shines upon us; for so it does in the
Candlestick.

inlightens every one alike that comes into the room. If a light be brought to
us which none can see but he that brings it, it may very well be suspected to
be none of God's Lights, because it will not stand in a Candlestick, so as to
be seen by others. And many such there be, who must be allowed to hold special
intelligence with God, and by private illumination from the Spirit, see clearer
and farther into the darkest Mysteries than any of the Doctors or Rabbis.

They put me in mind of some, though not the best sort of Creatures, yet in the
dark see better than others; as the Owl, the Cat, and the Bat: of which I have
known Philosophers give this reason: That rays of light do naturally stream
from their eyes, by which the Medium and Air about is enlightened; This at best,
if there be any such, is a light which none sees but themselves. Now if those
illuminated seers be such that their light is not where Gods Word should be in
a Candlestick, where it may be seen of all, it is indeed no better than Owls
light that shines only out of their own eyes.

persons, but all the parts also of the room, every corner, the darkest and
most secret places: it shines not only upon our clothes and faces, (i. e.) our
outward fashion and demeanor, but as God requires truth in the inwards parts,
Psalm. 51.6.
thither must the light go too, to the most retired Closets and Cabinets
within, to the very thoughts and intentions of the heart. It is sharper than
any two-edged Sword that enters between the joint and the marrow. Heb. 4.12.
Light will pierce through where no Sword can go, at the least hole and
crevise. If all our actions of greatest secrecy receive not light and direction
from Gods Word, we do not set it in a Candlestick, for there nothing is hid
from the light thereof.

all the work and business in it. It shows not only the end of all eternal rest
and happiness, but is a light unto the paths that lead to it. It holds us not
only upon the gaze of the glory and joys of Heaven, but carries us through the
darker mysteries of faith, and the more unpleasing ways of Repentance and
Mortification. The Gospel is not the power of God to salvation, unless it be
also the power of God upon all the steps and degrees to it. In a Candlestick it
is a light all over, from one side of the room to the other.

Totam lucem recipere, take the benefit of the whole light in all the effects
and operations of it. It is a word of instruction, a word of exhortation, a
word of comfort, a word of reproof, a word of promise, and a word of command,
and so serves us in all our necessities. It instructs the ignorant, corrects
the obstinate, comforts the dejected, dejects the proud, quiets the passions,
invites by promises, binds by commands.

If we pick and choose, lay hold on the word of consolation, not of correction;
of promises, not of commands. We take the light as men do out of a dark
Lanthorn, from one side only, no more than looks toward our private ends and
interest. But in a Candlestick the light dilates if self impartially in all the
several powers of it; there is no parcelling or dividing in that, all or none;
we must totam lucem recipere.

So much difference we see there is between Gods Word in a Candlestick, and
under a Bushel; and how much benefit comes by the one, and how little by the
other. If we take not heed to this, we fall into the common, but dangerous
error. That when we have heard the Sermon, we have done our duty for that time,
though we neither heed what or how we hear. And yet according to that only,
Sermons are, as St. Paul speaks of them in the person of the Preacher, A savor
of life, or a savor of death. As the evil servant was judged out of his own
mouth, so shall the careless hearer out of his own ears. And more I could not
say, if I had more time. It is that whereon life or death depends; therefore
Take heed what you hear.

(...) THE Study of Quiet,

In two SERMONS Upon the same TEXT, Fitted to give an allay to the Heats of
these Unquiet Distempered times.

In which are particularly conteyn'd necessary Instructions to the Student
about Way and Means of attaining the fruit of his Study, and setting him out of
the danger and necessity of seeking it by the New device of COMPREHENSION.

London, Printed 1668.

A SERMON Preached before His Majesty at Whitehall, March 12. 1664/5.
1 THESSALONIANS. 4.11. And that ye study to be quiet.


AND] is a word that takes hold of something that went before, without which
the sense of that which follows is not full. That which went next before is, We
beseech you to increase more and more. We beseech you, is that we are to take
into the Text, and then it runs thus, We beseech you to study to be quiet.

But all the use I shall make of it, now we have it here, is but to give you a
taste beforehand of the nature and quality of this duty, That it is no trivial
thing little to be regarded, but that which obliged S. Paul, Sylvanus, and
Timotheus, for they all joined in it, to be so earnest, as to beseech them to
study to be quiet. 2. And that which commends this duty the more is, (as we use
to say, Men are best known by the company they keep) And brings in this Duty in
the company of the best of Virtues, Charity, for that place S. Paul gives it
above all; Col. 3.14.
Above all things put on Charity, which is the bond of perfection. To study to
be quiet, and to increase in brotherly love and charity, for that led the way
before, are two duties bound together in the same Exhortation. 3. Quiet is not
only a fit companion for Charity, but an Allie to it, and grows out of it, as
the branch out of the stock; for where brotherly love is, there will be always
quiet too. 4. To make all suit the better with Charity, the Exhortation is
advanced by a Dialect of Love, We beseech you. Paul, Sylvanus, and Timotheus,
were all Apostolical men, and might command, as S. Paul of himself in another
case to Philemon, Though I might be bold to enjoin thee, yet for loves sake I
rather beseech you.
And lastly, that which might very well set this edge upon their affections,
was, that which happened to the Thessalonians at their first conversion; for
this Epistle was written immediately after. The story we have in the 17. chap.
of the Acts: When S. Paul had preached the Gospel to them, and with good
success; for v. 4. Some of them believed, and consorted with Paul and Salas,
and of the devout Greeks a great multitude, and of the chief women not a few,
But v. 5. The Jews who believed not, moved with envy, took unto them certain
lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and set all the City in
an uproar, and assaulted the house of Jason, and sought to bring them out to
the people; mad enough of themselves; but the more to ferment and enrage them,
they charge the Apostles with the fault that they themselves were acting; These
are they that turn the world upside-down. S. Paul having escaped this fury by
going to Athens, and there considering in what a case he left his new Converts,
both them and their Doctrine; them in a furious tumult, and their Doctrine
under the reproach of troubling the world; out of a zeal, no doubt, and desire
to remove that scandal from the Faith, of all things begs and beseeches them
to study to be quiet.

But how will this concern us? I wish we never had, and had not still the same
occasion. It is not so long since, that we should forget how our late troubles
first brake in upon our quiet: We had unbelieving Jews then amongst us too, and
some, as was thought, in the literal sense; who moved with envy of the times,
took unto them likewise a company of lewd fellows of the baser sort, set the
City in an uproar; and we may remember whose houses they beset (as the Jews did
Jasons) none of the meanest, and cried out for that justice which themselves
deserved. And there were Religions in the world then too many, to the scandal
of the true, who led on, and blew up those tumults: And even now, though (God
be thanked) they dare not be so bold to assault us in the streets, and beset
our houses as they did then; yet still keep their quarters and leaguers within
doors, with more secrecy, but no less danger.

It will not therefore be unseasonable for us now, who have the same cause the
Thessalonians had, with the same affection the Apostle did, to beseech you to
study to be quiet. We have all need of quiet, and quiet it seems has need of
study, and study has need of Gods blessing, and therefore before we proceed
further, Let us pray, etc.

THe parts of the Text are two; What we are to study, And That we are to
study. First, What? That ye study to be quiet.

Quiet is here commended under the notion and quality of an Art or Science; for
we are enjoined to study it. And in them we are to look, first, to the object,
the nature and quality of it; and then to the Principles and Theorems whereon
the Art is grounded.

1. For the nature and kind of this Quiet first: For there be many things lay
claim to this word, which are either unfit for our study, or improper to this
place. As first, there is a quiet from all motion or action that is good or
useful; to do nothing but eat and drink and sleep, or worse; Away with that
quiet; it neither deserves our study, nor needs it. This is Negotiosa quies; we
are commanded in the words following to be busy as well as quiet; we are both
to study to be quiet, and to do our own business.

2. There is a Quiet, not simply from all, but public business; when men
retire themselves for private study or devotion. This may be allowed, and
commended too, when the necessities of their Countries requires them not. But
because public employments are seldom forced upon any, nor need to be; for no
man's parts or abilities are so great, which may not truly, and certainly will
be thought such as can very well be spared. They therefore who affect that
privacy, may be secure from that necessity; they who have a will to be quiet
for devotion or study, need not study to be quiet, the access to that is easy
enough.

3. There is another Quiet, more commendable in its self, and needs our study
too; To compose our unruly and disordered passions and affections, which raise
tumults and commotions within us, that will not suffer us to be at rest or
quiet day or night. In the midst therefore of all the temptations of good, or
storms of ill fortune to rest securely and contentedly, whatsoever happens to
our private, is certainly an admirable temper, and well worthy our best care
and study; and was that which S. Paul himself it seems studied, for he said he
learned it; Phil. 4.11.
I have learned in what estate soever I am, therewith to be content.

But the quiet we are here to study is not properly within us, but without us;
it is not simply a quiet from motion, but commotion, a troubling of others.

4. And that I may contract my argument and bring it into as narrow a compass
as may be, I shall not take in every of the disturbances of the quiet of
others: No not that which is the greatest of all, and most contrary to peace
and quiet, Civil Wars and broils. The mischiefs of that we have learned so
lately to our cost, and so perfectly, that I hope we need not be set to study
that now: when every good man was put to his study how to live, and when vile
and contemptible wretches ranted in plenty and power.

The horrid fruits and consequences of that great disturber of quiet, War, have
induced some learned men as well as others to think all wars unlawful; I should
have been much inclined to that opinion upon the strictest rules of
Christianity, if War were not sometimes necessary to Peace. A foreign War for
that reason may be lawful, but a civil and domestic never. And the reason of
this difference is, because for the composing of all quarrels that may arise
between subjects, God has by his Ordinance provided a remedy in Princes and
Magistrates, from whom alone we are to seek for revenge or defense. But for
such differences as arise between free Princes and States, because there is no
Judge on earth, to whom they may have recourse for their relief, being destitute
of the common remedy, they may, without question, make use of that sword which
God has put into their hands to defend their subjects from the injuries as
well of strangers as their own. Nor are they in this Judges in their own cause,
which has some appearance of injustice; for a foreign War, for defect of a
competent Judge on Earth, is but an appeal to the supreme Judge of Heaven and
Earth. And when they go into the Field, it is but to plead their cause before
God, with whom are the issues of War. Only they had need be careful, that the
cause they bring before him be good; For shall not the Judge of all the world do
right? But we must leave this to Princes and their Ministers, who are the only
proper students of that quiet, which is disturbed by War, and come to that
which may and must be the study of us all: That is, a quiet from troubles that
arise from different judgments and persuasions in matters of Religion, which
cause sects and divisions in it, though they break not out into an open War.
Not that War be quite left out of the Sectaries reckoning. For though Civil
Wars and Rebellions have their beginning for the most part from the ambition or
discontent of a few, yet because the people, who are the necessary instruments
of that mischief, be not apt to serve the ambition of others, if it comes
barefaced to them, the mask of Religion is always put on, wherein all people
are concerned, which makes it a common and popular interest. And therefore you
shall scarce hear of a Rebellion of late times, in which Religion did not carry
the Colors at least, if not command in chief.

But I shall nevertheless at this time forbear to make that any part of the
Schismatics charge, but treat them upon their own terms, that they are as
great enemies to War as any that object it to them: Yet I must charge them all
to be guilty of the breach of peace and quiet in the Church, and that not
accidentally, which may sometimes bear excuse, but necessarily; it is
connatural and incident to the very nature of Schism, which is a rent or
division, so the word signifies. It is the worst disturbance that can be to any
body, to be torn in pieces. It dissolves the bonds by which the parts are
joined together, especially that which unites them to the Head; for schism in
the Churches notion is properly a separation from the Head and authority, and
is the same in the Church that Rebellion or Treason is in the State. Now as
every disobedience to the King and the Law is not Treason, though against the
King, but the disclaiming the right and power the King has to govern, and the
practice of such things, by which his Regalia and rights are usurpt by others,
as to make War, to make Laws, to thrust Officers upon him, to order the Coin,
these and of the like kind are only Treason. So every error or disobedience in
Religion makes not a schism, but the disclaiming the right and power the Church
has to govern them, and a usurpation of a right to themselves, to order and
frame points of Belief, and Forms how to serve and worship God, apart from the
Church, for so went the style of the ancient Church for Schism, altar contra
altar, which in our modern dialect is a Conventicle against the Church. For
though Schism be formally a separation from the Head, yet consequently it works
upon the members; for that which was at first but difference of opinion, soon
begets a disaffection, and from that grows to hatred and contempt, and so falls
into the practice of such things as destroy the very being and power of
Religion, which consists in the mutual offices of Charity; and though this
mischief breaks not out into an actual War, yet is always accompanied with most
unnatural and unchristian practices, as S. James long since observed, Jam.
3.16. Where envy and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work. Now to
avoid all this, it will highly concern us to study to be quiet.

Having cleared the first Point, the Object of our study, Quiet, and wherein
the formalis ratio of it consists, and how it comes to be disturbed by Schism:
The next Point is, to enquire into the Principles whereon we are to ground our
study; for if there should be an error or mistake in them, all our labor and
study is lost, or worse; for an inveterate, grounded, studied error is so much
the harder to be reclaimed. It was no unreasonable demand therefore of the
Philosopher, who asked a double reward for those Scholars that had been already
entered into the study of Philosophy, because his pains would be double with
them, to undo first, and cast out those false prejudices which they had already
learned.

Now if it should happen, that they which are otherwise studious and desirous
of peace, should not do the things that make for peace, Romans 14.10.
as the Apostle requires, our study will grow upon us, first to unlearn those
false deceitful principles of peace, before we enquire into the true: Of some
of the chief of these therefore I shall give you an account in the first place.
It will conduce much to the peace of the Church, they say, First,

1. If Religion were free, and all compulsory means forborne. 2. If mere
Errors in Judgment howsoever were not punished as crimes, which is not in the
power of any to help. 3. Or if that, yet (Thirdly) That omission of Forms and
Ceremonies were not more severely and frequently punished, than notorious and
scandalous crimes. 4. If fewer Articles and Points of Religion were defined, it
would make more room in the Church for those that dissent. 5. Another is, If
men of moderate Opinions were only employed in the Church. 6. The last, and
most importunate pretender to peace, is, Liberty of Conscience.
But that none of all these are things that make for peace, I shall show with
as much brevity as the matter is capable of; as first.

1. Not the forbearance of all compulsory means by punishments, which, they
say, is repugnant to that freeness with which Religion should be entertained,
and only forces men to an hypocritical obedience to that which in in their
judgments they detest.

Religion, I grant, should be free; it is no Religion which is not so; But it
is as true, that every other act of virtue, and obedience to the Laws should be
free likewise; but therefore not to punish them that transgress, were to
proclaim a perpetual Jubilee, and set open all prison doors: God would never
have enjoined the Magistrate to punish temporally, nor himself threatened to
punish eternally, if the fear of that did corrupt our obedience: For our
Savior in the Parable, when the guests came not to the banquet at his
invitation, Luke 14.23.
commanded his servants to compel them to come in. And where they say, the
fruit of that is but hypocrisy; Hypocrites they are like enough to be, but
from a worse cause, not from the punishment, but their own frailties, because
they prefer their temporal safety before the eternal blessing which Christ has
promised to all that suffer for his sake and the truth. Secondly, It is true,
that punishments reach not directly the inward man, nor do they teach or inform
the Judgment, that is, they do not perfect the work; but are nevertheless a
good beginning to it: For, Fear is the beginning of Wisdom, which Love must
perfect. Though the Needle stays not in the Garment, yet it must lead the Thread
that makes it up. The Rod indeed does not teach the child, yet scares him to
his book where he may learn: So though punishments do not perfect and
accomplish our duty, yet they set us to our studies, to consider that we do not
rashly cast our selves upon danger, which otherwise possibly we would never
think off, but run on whither our wild vain fancies and groundless persuasions
led us: For Spes impunitatis est illecebra peccandi. Punishments therefore are
both justified for the good they do, and are absolved from the evil they are
pretended to do; and therefore wholly to forbear them in matters of Religion is
no good principle whereon to ground the Churches peace.

That howsoever it be in other matters of Religion, it would make much for the
quiet of the Church, if Errors in Judgment were not punished as crimes, because
no man can be abler and wiser than God has made him.

It is true, that an Error, so long as it stays in the Understanding, and goes
no further is not properly a sin; for the Understanding is not agens liberum,
but passive. In that the eye of the mind is as the eye of the body; if that be
naturally short-sighted, it is no fault that it sees not so far as another: But
if the weakness of the Understanding participate with the Will, which is agens
liberum, and so the Error comes within our power, then it may be properly a
sin. This is the case of all that dissent in Sects; for though in speculation
the Understanding is distinct from the Will, yet in practice they are seldom
severed. For it is morally impossible, that after a man has conceived an
opinion, he should not be well pleased with it, and have a will as occasion is
to defend and propagate it too. And when it is Voluntarium, no doubt but it is
Peccatum, and when error grows to be a sin, I know no reason why it may not be
punished; for interest reipublicae peccata puniri. But for all that it is, they
say, a great disturbance of quiet to be tied to assent to that we cannot know
nor comprehend. That Is a great mistake. I know there is much exception taken to
the too punctual desinitions of some mysteries of the faith, and particularly
in the Creed commonly called by Athanasius, where there are many particulars
which they cannot know nor comprehend. Whereas in truth it is not required of
them, they are not bound to know them, but to believe them; for it is the mercy
of God, that the defect of our knowledge may be supplied by the knowledge of
others; for to believe is to see with other men's eyes, as knowledge is with our
own.

But may we safely trust others in that which so nearly concerns as a Creed?
Yes sure, and it is as well the mercy, as the command of God, that we should
trust those that watch over our souls; yet still that must be to supply the
defect of our knowledge, not otherwise; for the Church is not Lord of our Faith,
but helper of our Ignorance. It supplies the defect of our sight, it does not
put it out: for if a man knows the contrary, he is not bound to believe others;
for if he can see with his own eyes, why shall he be tied to see with other
men's?

But then we must distinguish betwixt not knowing the negative, and a positive
knowing the contrary: for if we refuse to believe merely because we do not know
or understand, we leave no place for Faith at all, which is the benefit to see
by others. And for that, positive knowledge which discharges us of believing
others that we be not mistaken, it is not every conjectural or probable
persuasion will do it, but certain knowledge: and when that is, we may safely
learn from the Schools; Ubi non est for mido contrarii, after diligent search
and enquiry, when there remains no scruple, doubt, or fear of the contrary,
when the understanding is fixed, we are said to be certain.

If this knowledge will serve to discharge us of believing others, every one
that dissents will say he knows the contrary, yea, and if need be will swear to
it too; for that is an expedient lately found out to obtain that liberty, That
they may be admitted to swear they know the contrary to that which is
commanded. Truly, if they will say it, and think so too, whether they swear it
or no, I think we may safely absolve them from the guilt of disobedience: but
that must be in foro Conscientiae only, and let them make the best use they can
of that; yet in foro externo we cannot; for there the Judge must give sentence
according to his knowledge, and not according to the knowledge of the party, if
he will do justice. And that course can be no good friend to Peace, which is an
enemy to Justice.

the omission of Forms and Ceremonies is more severely punished then some foul
and scandalous crimes.

To this I answer, First, That they who object this, are not to be trusted with
the balance of sins, for we know how the Market went for them when they held
the Scale: Obedience to the King and the Laws, and serving God according to
them, were the great scandalous crimes.

2. Allowing it to be true as they say, That omission of Forms and Ceremonies
is by the Church more frequently and severely punished then greater faults. But
how greater? It may be in their proper and natural guilt and obliquity,
according to which sentence shall be given at the day of Judgment, and to death
eternal. But our earthly Tribunals are not erected to anticipate the day of
Judgment, to bring all sinners to trial for whatsoever they have committed in
the flesh, and according to the proper measure of their guilt; but for a
particular end and use; that people, while they live here in the world, and in
society, may be kept in good order and quiet, from doing or receiving injuries.
And to this end is the degree of their punishments commensurate: Treason and
Rebellion are more severely punished in the State then many other heinous
crimes, because they destroy the very foundation of government and Society. And
for the same reason, a schismatical disobedience, though but in matters of Form
and Ceremony, is pursued with more care and strictness, because it destroys the
very end for which the power is given the Church to punish, which is, the
preservation of peace and unity.

For though the Pastors of the Church may and must by way of Instruction, the
better to prepare us for our account at the great and general Judgment, give
every sin the proper weight and measure of guilt, that is by way of
Instruction: But by way of Correction the Church is bound up to certain causes,
and if they keep not their bounds, they shall be sure to hear of a prohibition;
and those causes are especially such, for which the power is only given, That
the peaceable orderly Worship and service of God be not disturbed.

For though they are ever telling us, it is for trifles, ceremonies, or
indifferent things, it is but the same quarrel the Atheists have against God
himself, for being so much offended for an Apple, a trifle which scarce any man
that has an Orchard would have been troubled with; and one Answer will serve
both in effect. In that forbidden fruit, Gods authority in commanding, and
Adams duty in obeying, were symbolically engaged for him and his, and there was
venom enough in that to infect both. The Rites and Ceremonies of the Church,
in like manner, though not in like degree, though in their opinion as
inconsiderable as the paring of Adams apple, yet when discord and disobedience
is found with them, there is poison enough in that for the strongest antidote
the Church does at any time make use of. Let not that therefore mislead or
disturb our Student of Quiet.

If fewer Points and Articles of Religion were defined, that so the Church-door
may be wider open to let in those whose dissent now troubles the peace of the
Church.

It is fit, I grant, the Church-door should stand always open, but for such as
shall be fit to enter; for it would be a dangerous thing to set any door so
wide open to let in an enemy upon us. But to what purpose would we have the
Church-door so wide, when the Gate of Heaven is strait? why should they be
taken in here, if they shall be turned back there? The Church is a City, as
Jerusalem, a City that is at unity in it self; so it is a City too that has
gates and walls to shut out others.

He that came to a little City, where there was a great Gate, merrily warned
the Citizens to take heed lest their City went not out at the Gate, may soberly
be said to those that would have the Church-door so wide to let in all Sects,
to take heed lest the Church gets not out at the door: For where so many
Religions are, it may be feared, that soon there will be none at all. If we be
not, as the Apostle commands, built up in the same Faith, it will avail us
little to be found within the same walls.

It is therefore a perverse remedy for peace, to abate or diminish the Articles
and definitions of the Church, which were made of purpose to take away
controversies; it would be a strange course to end controversies, to take away
the definitions. Our Student must read his Books backward, if he seek for peace
from hence. We might as well say, all the world would be quiet, if there were
no Judges nor Laws to determine differences.

If men of moderate opinions were only taken into employment in the Church.

Moderation, I confess, is an excellent virtue, and much to be desired; Let
your moderation be known unto all men, Phil. 4.5. But then it must be in a
subject capable of it, wherein there are extremes and excesses to be moderated,
as there is certainly in our passions, there it is proper. S. Paul gives it for
a Lesson to all Students in Religion, Ephesians. 4.31. Let all bitterness, and
wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking, be put away from you, with
all malice; and be ye kind one to another, and tenderhearted, forgiving one
another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. This no doubt is a
very fit temper for quiet, and none more unfit then angry, waspish, and
domineering spirits.

Only this caution is to be observed in lenity, That it be such as may win men
into the Church, not such as may secure and encourage them to stay without. Yet
lenity and gentleness is so good a Virtue, that I am loath to cast water upon
it, or seem to temper it.

But for men of moderate opinions, I am at a loss to know what they should be;
for moderation there cannot be, but between extremes: Now what extremes are
there of opinions in a settled Church, unless the Church be one extreme, and the
Schismatic another? and then the man of moderate opinions is he that is part
Churchman, and part Schismatic. I hope none are so unkind to their Mother the
Church, to charge extremities upon her Doctrine or Laws. If there be any such,
they are but Hybrides in Religion, and make a new sect in the Church, as
pernicious to the peace of it as any of the rest. The truth is, moderate
opinions are a Chimaera, a fancy; either nothing, or somewhat worse then
nothing: for possibly they may bestow that good word (Moderation) upon such as
care little either to observe the Law themselves, or to require it of others.
If these be the men of moderate opinions, I wonder how they will be able to
give account of their justice and fidelity to the trust committed to them. Yes,
they say, very well; It is rather prudence then injustice, to mitigate and
sweeten the sharpness and rigor of the Law. But if the Law it self be too
rigorous, in God's name let it be amended, and not left to the arbitrary power
of others to do it, for that is known to be a remedy ten times worse then the
disease. It is said in Physic, I know not how truly, that an error in the
first concoction, is not mended in the second: It is certainly true here, an
error or excess in the Law, which is the first concoction of justice, will be
ill cured afterward by an arbitrary partiality in the execution. I hope
therefore no wise Student of quiet, will take such Moderators for the best
Ministers of peace. But I leave them, and come to the most popular, and
therefore most dangerous principle in the study of quiet; that is, Liberty of
Conscience.

New Philosophical Divines, as well as others, press hard for it, knowing
without a free Market, they cannot vend their new bold speculations; I shall
resume the point again a little more largely, yet within the compass of these
two particulars.

First, That there is a great deal of reason to restrain the Conscience, and
Secondly, That there is no reason to give it liberty.
1. There is reason enough to restrain the Conscience, for the mischief it does
to Quiet when it is at liberty; for all the discord and divisions of the Church
grow from hence, and that is a mischief we have reason to avoid. Mark them
(says S. Paul) which cause divisions among you, Romans 16.17.
and avoid them. There is reason then to mark that which causes them to make
divisions, and that is the Conscience. It is no quietter in the Commonwealth,
where it destroys the very Foundation of Government, and frustrates the
Ordinance of God for it in Princes and Magistrates; for what is left for them
to do, if every one must follow the dictate of his own Conscience, that is, in
plain terms, be bound only to obey himself.

This is no slander to the pretenders of Conscience; they will say as much
themselves, if ye ask them. Ask the Schismatic why he joins not with the
congregation of Gods people? and he will tell you, His Conscience will not
suffer him. Ask the Rebel in the State, why he takes up Arms to the ruin of
his King and Country? and his Conscience will answer for him, That it is Gods
cause, and it is to do him service. Ask him again, why he does not repent of
the mischief done by it? (for that they seldom do) and the Conscience will
serve that turn too. It is Gods cause, and the Conscience will not suffer them
to repent of that. Thus we see, the Conscience, as it is used, does not only
open a door to sin, but shuts the very door to mercy, that is Repentance.

If S. John said true, as no doubt he did, That there were many Antichrists,
then possibly the Conscience thus improved may be one of them. For, it sets it
self in the Church above all that is called God, yea, and God himself too, in a
sense; for his Laws are not to be obeyed, unless the Conscience first allows
them to be his: and thus all is resolved into the Conscience, as the dernier
resort and last appeal.

While the King and the Pope are contending for Supremacy, the Conscience
without scruple puts in for it against both, and takes it for her right to be
supreme in all causes as well Ecclesiastical as Civil. There is great complaint
in the world of domineering over the Conscience; but have we not rather cause
to complain of the domineering of the Conscience? And if any list to see the
Conscience acting all this, we need go no further then our late times, when the
Conscience was loose for a while; one would think Hell had broke loose, so
filled was on a sudden the Church with sects, and the Commonwealth with
confusion. There is reason enough therefore to restrain the Conscience that
acts all this, if we knew how.

The next thing I undertook to show, is, That there is no reason why it should
have liberty; and particularly, not that which gives the fairest color to it:
Neither the duty we owe to Truth, which seems to have some right to liberty;
nor that we owe to the Will of God, that nothing be done against the
Conscience. For the first.

Truth is that (I confess) which no consideration of peace may warrant us to
desert; for I could never be of that opinion, That Truth in smaller matters may
for Peace sake be either denied or prejudiced. Magna est veritas etiam in
minimis; in Gods name let it prevail over all. But then it must be Veritas in
rebus, not Veritas in intellectu. For though Truth be defined to be a
conformity of the understanding to the thing as it is indeed, yet takes the
name from both; from the thing where Truth is originally, and from the
understanding where it is only represented. Truth in that first reference to
the thing, admits no qualification; things must be taken as they are, be they
never so small: but as the things come to be represented to, and entertained by
the Understanding, by reason of the mistakes and errors that may happen in
that, though Truth it self, or Truth in the thing cannot, yet my apprehension
of it may both yield to better, and may sometimes be waved for peace sake. To
argue from Truth in the thing, to Truth in the apprehension only, is a fallacy
against the Rules of Reasoning, we call it Petitio principii, or a begging of
the question. If a Sectary should beg an alms, I wish he may have it; but he
shall beg long ere it be granted him, that he has the Truth. How then can he
presume upon that truth, to which he has no other title but his own
persuasion, which can be no better then any man's else, who is as strongly
persuaded to the contrary? And this is all the service that Truth can do the
Conscience for liberty.

2. The second thing whereupon the Conscience especially bears it self so high,
is the Will of God that nothing be done against the Conscience. That no doubt
is a great offense, and made so by the greatest Authority: Yet the same God
that requires our obedience to the Conscience, commands us likewise to obey our
Parents, our Princes and Governors, and all these stand upon as good authority
as the Conscience. If we cannot reconcile our obedience to that with our
obedience to these, we may sin against God, when we do not sin against the
Conscience. For though God has erected a Tribunal in every man's breast, and
there set the Conscience to be a Judge of all our actions, there be other
Tribunals of Justice besides, of Gods erection too, and to which he has
subjected the very Conscience. Ye must needs be subject (Romans 13.) not only for
wrath, but also for conscience. And after both these, there is another Tribunal
in Heaven, to which all Judges, Conscience and all must give an account one
day. For the Conscience is no Court of Record; the Decrees and Acts passed
there, will be no good evidence at that Bar; there all must be re-examined, and
tried over gain. Though I know nothing by my self, (says S. Paul) yet am I not
thereby justified. Though he could not charge his Conscience with any offense,
he knew a further trial must pass upon him before he could be absolved. My
Conscience indeed may be pleaded there in evidence against me as a Witness to
condemn me, but not as a Judge to absolve me. It is a great mistake in the power
and operation of the Conscience: That it will condemn us, if we do any thing
against it, the Text is clear for that; but that it will absolve us for that we
do according to it, there is no Text, I am sure, for that. We must then be
tried by the Law, and not by the Conscience: For how the proceedings will be at
that Bar, we have a record, Matthew. 5.31. When the Son of Man shall come in his
glory, and all the holy Angels with him; Then shall he sit upon the throne of
his glory, and before him shall be gathered all nations. When the Court was
set, the Charge was given to those on the left hand; I was an hungered, and ye
gave me no meat; I was athirst, and ye gave me no drink; I was a stranger, and
ye took me not in; naked, and ye clothed me not; sick and in prison, and ye
visited me not.

To this Charge the Conscience (no doubt confidently enough) pleaded Not
guilty; Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, or athirst, or a stranger, or
naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee? Their Conscience
could accuse them of none of these things; for all that, the Sentence went
against them upon a point of Law and Equity; In that ye did it not to these
(says the Judge) ye did it not to me. And for this they were condemned to
eternal punishment.

If they that stand so much upon their consciences did seriously consider this,
they would find as little cause to desire that liberty, as there is to grant
it, seeing it stands them in so little stead when they have most need of it;
for when they think their conscience shall answer for them, they must then
answer for their conscience, and upon trial, the conscience may prove the great
offender. Thus have I hitherto given you an account of some of the vulgar
mistaken principles of Quiet, which our Student is first to unlearn; which are
all but the patching up of a false deceitful peace, condemned in the Politics
under the name of a Syncretismus, when all the Factions in Crete joined
together in a common danger, which lasted no longer then the cause of it: like
the bonds of a hard Frost, that binds Earth and Water, Sticks and Stones all
together, till the Sun comes to shine upon them, and then they all presently
return to their proper place and nature again.

But I fear I have run out all my time almost in these mistaken ways of peace:
I presume it will be a greater offense to leave you here now, then to beg a
little more time to set you in the right way, though I shall not go beyond the
office of a Mercury, to point the hand where it lies.

There is the Kings highway to peace, and the Students private way, and both
good in their kind. With the Kings way I shall not meddle, as being sitter
matter for our thankfulness then instruction, who has already paved the way
for us by wholesome Laws for that purpose. But because oft-times Vitia sunt
remediis fortiora, the compulsory way by Law, though always necessary, is not
always effectual; to the Kings way we must add the Students also: That every
one in his particular makes it his care and business to contribute to it, that
it be an artificial studied peace, to which not Fear only, but Conscience of
Duty and Religion obliges us.

Now every good Student of any Science searches into the true and proper cause
of things; for, Scire est per causas cognoscere. If the cause of all division
in the Church, be differing in judgment, nothing can cure that but a consent.
S. Paul therefore prescribes that for the remedy, 1 Cor. 5.10. That there be no
divisions among you; how may that be helped? it follows, But that ye be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. This is
the true Apostolical Principle, whereon we are to ground our Study of Quiet:
For all the fine things and sentences that are spoken for peace and quiet, will
little move those that are, and may very well be confident, they ought not
howsoever have peace with Sin, or Error. Unless therefore we can be first
persuaded that we ought not to charge the Church with either, we do nothing for
Peace, This I confess is the great difficulty, yet if this be not done, there
can be no hope of Peace.

And to do this, I shall not send our Student to the Polemick School, to
convince him out of speculative Principles of Reason and Divinity; for to that
study, some have not capacity, others not leisure: I shall only commend to him
some practical Principles of Religion, obvious to all, and denied by none, that
out of them he may learn not to dissent from, or condemn the Church of Error.

To prevent the passing that sentence, let the Student, 1. Study himself, his
own condition. 2. Let him Study the Church against which he passes sentence.
3. Let him study the nature and quality of the things whereupon upon judgment
is given. 4. Let him consider well the manner of proceeding in judgment. In all
which we shall find some known Principle of Religion to direct us.


1. First, In the study of our selves, and our own condition: Religion teaches
us to have an humble, lowly, mean opinion of our selves; and not without cause
whether we respect our Understandings, or our Affections: Our Understandings
are naturally weak, imperfect, short-sighted, we know but in part, the best of
us; and our Affections too are disloyal to our Understandings, The heart of
man, says the Prophet, is deceitful above all things, We have little reason
then to trust our selves much in either. He that is truly conscious of his own
weakness or lameness, will be content to be supported by others. If we study
this point well, our own infirmities, we should learn more willingly to assent
to, and take support from the Church.

Especially, if in the second place, we study that too whose Governors Religion
likewise teaches us to obey, For they watch over our souls, Heb. 13.17. If it
be a good point of Religion, in lowliness of mind to esteem others better then
our selves, Phil. 2.3. it is Religion and Reason son both, to think our
Governors wiser too; for there is a presumption always in favor of them. S.
Paul gives it for a rule to Timothy, Not to receive an accusation against an
Elder, 1 Timothy 5.19.
but before two or three witnesses, because it is to be presumed on the part of
Age and Authority, to know more, and offend less. But when it comes to be the
whole Eldership, all our Governors jointly, the presumption is so much the
stronger. If we add this study to the former, how little reason we have to
trust our selves, and how much we have to trust our Governors, we will not
rashly pass sentence against them, if we have either Reason or Religion is us.

3. And yet we have more work for our Student; Let him, in the third place;
consider the nature and quality of the things whereupon judgment is given, how
apt they are to deceive us. Truth is many times so like an Error, and Error
comes so near to Truth, that he had need be careful and circumspect that shall
distinguish them in some cases. And in others again, Truth lies hid under many
folds, especially ambiguity of words, the common cheat of all Students, who are
more often deceived into opinions then convinced. It is not strange to see so
many go astray from the Church, to whom the things of it are represented under
the covert of false names, when they hear the Government of it called Tyranny;
obedience, slavery; contempt, courage; license, liberty; frenzy, zeal; order,
superstition. How easily thus may simple people mistake their way, and fall
into the pit that is covered over with shadows and false names of things? When
he has studied this point well,

4. Let him, in the fourth place; be well advised in what manner he proceeds in
judgment, and upon what evidence: For, allowing the Conscience to be a Judge, it
must not trespass upon the Rules of good Judicature, as, both sides must be
heard impartially, which is seldom done; the Conscience must not be misled no
more then other Judges, by prejudice, passion, or favor; for what can that
judgment be worth which is perverted by any of these. Now if we examine how
most men come to pass sentence against the Church, we shall find it to be upon
very slight evidence: It may be their Education, they have been always brought
up that way; for Sects commonly run in a blood, in a family: Or they have been
so taught, they say, by good men; that indeed is the sum and upshot of the
Faith of most that dissent, the credit given to some weak, private, ignorant
Instructor, whose person they have in admiration, without any great cause, God
knows; whereas their private judgments, because they are parties, ought always
to be suspected, if we be wise; and because against their Governors, to be
contemned, if we be obedient.

All these well studied, may make for peace when possibly Arguments, and
Disputes, and Punishments too will not do it. And yet if still none of these
will make our Student quiet,

Let him, in the last place, make trial of a common remedy that prevails in all
cases of difficulty: Let him but study his own security, the sasest course, and
he shall find that better provided for in the Churches judgment, then in his
own; for, if he should err in following the Church, or his Governors, for that
is possible, the greatest part of that guilt, some say all, I say only the
greatest part, must lie at their door that command that which is unlawful: But
if they should err in following their own judgment, or a Judge of their own
choosing, for that makes it their own too, and that is more then possible, all
the blame and guilt then must of necessity and inexcusably fall upon
themselves. Upon these principles, setting aside all those that may convince
our judgments in particulars, from these alone, I say, we see how safe, how
prudent, how religious a thing it is to submit our private judgments to the
public, for the peace of the Church.

It remains only now, that we employ our best endeavor and study for it, which
is the second part of the Text, and the last thing to be considered,

That ye study.

STudy is an earnest intention of the mind, by diligent search and enquiry.
Wishing well to Quiet, or speaking well of it, will not serve; the greatest
disturbers of Peace will do that many times, give it a good word, when they
will not part with the fancy for it. And yet Quiet is a thing that requires
care and pains somewhat more then ordinary: For when S. Peter likewise speaks
of peace, it is in the words of the same import, Seck peace, 1 Pet. 3.11.
and ensue it. If it be hidden, seek it out; if it flies from you, pursue after
it. It is a busy thing to be quiet. The word here translated, Study, is in the
Original (...), Be ambitious of it; that is, pursue and study it as you would
do Honor and Preferment: And that, I think, is as much as can be desired; and
yet no more then Quiet both deserves and needs.

First, It deserves it. For though quiet be rather Status vita, then Virtus; it
is no Virtue it self, yet the best soil to plant Virtue in. The fruits of
righteousness are sown in peace, Jam. 3.18. So are all the fruits of Industry;
Learning, Arts, Sciences, Traffic, Commerce, flourish most in the calm
temperate clime; but in troubles and dissentions every good thing goes
backward, only mischief thrives. It fares with troubled times, as in troubled
waters; all the filth, dirt and mire in the bottom gets them up to the top. We
saw as much when our waters were lately troubled; what a deal of filth, dirt
and mire, what fordid stuff was then got up to the top and highest place of
rule and command? So much are we the more obliged to study that peace and
quiet, which has sunk them to their proper place again, the bottom: And there
let them lie, if you would be quiet.

2. As it deserves therefore our study, so it needs it too; for it is a
difficult thing to be quiet, the way to it lies through so many parts and
duties of Religion, and not the easiest of them neither: To deny our selves, by
humility and lowliness of mind to acknowledge our own weakness and frailty, to
submit our judgments to others, as better and wiser then our selves; to subdue
our passions and lusts, from whence the Apostle observes Wars and Contentions
to come, from our Lusts; and to all these the Flesh has naturally a
reluctance. Our Student therefore has need to contend with himself to be at
peace with others.

S. Paul was at Athens when he wrote this Epistle, a famous University for the
study of all liberal Arts and Sciences. I cannot say he had these in his
thought, when he commended this study to the Thessalonians, as an Art of more
use then any he found at Athens: Yet when I see him so passionately earnest for
it, to beseech them to study, we have reason to value it as an Art well worthy
of Schools, and Professors, and Students. And they would make a Royal Society,
whereof the King himself is Master, who is our Peacemaker by office, and by a
care equal to that, has by Law provided, 1 Timothy 2.2.
that under Him we may live a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness and
honesty. He has little sense of Honor, that will not enter himself a Student
under that conduct. The very word for Study, (...), carries Honor with it.

And yet I can tell them of a higher School for it then this, and wherein Kings
themselves are content to be Students. Our Lord Christ, the great Mediator of
our eternal peace with Heaven, would not be brought into the world without a
Song of Peace on Earth, by Angels: S. Joh. 14.27.
And when he left the World, bequeathed it as a Legacy after him, My peace I
leave with you. And when he comes again to judge the world, we have reason to
look that he will call us to a reckoning how we use his Legacy. And so he will
too; for he is That Lord, Matthew. 24. that when he came and found some smiting
their fellow servants, commanding them to be cut asunder, and have their
portion with hypocrites: A punishment well sitted to the offense; there was a
schism in the fault, and there shall be another schism in the punishment; they
who sundred and divided from their Brethren, should themselves be cut asunder,
and have their portion with hypocrites. But for the Peacemakers, when he
comes, he will provide better company, Matt. 5.9.
for they shall be called the Children of God. Blessed are they then whom the
Lord when he comes shall find at their studies of that Quiet, which gives them
so fair a Title to Eternal Rest and Peace in Heaven with Christ, and all the
Children of God.

A SERMON Preached before His Majesty at Whitehall, March 18. 1665/6.
1 THESSALONIANS. 4.11. -- And to do your own business.


THE whole Verse, whereof these words are a part, is an Exhortation to the
study of Two Lessons; One for Quiet, the other for Business: That ye study to
be quiet, and to do your own business.

Of the former, the last time I had the honor to be called to this Service, we
treated particularly; and it was a point well worthy our care and study. But
the Lesson we are now to learn, seems not much to deserve or need it.

I have not (I confess) sought far for a Text, but took that which came next to
hand. Nor does the Text put you to seek far what you are to do; It is but your
own business. In both respects it may be thought unfit for this Audience, which
is not of that quality to be entertained with no better Provision than what
comes next to hand; and especially, if that should prove plain and homely, as
this is, To do our own business; and as it follows, To work with our own hands:
This is but a kind of Mechanical Doctrine; and what should that do here in
Court?

Not to leave my self and the Text under this prejudice; That I sought no
farther for it, was not of easiness or neglect, but Choice; Because I found it
not only in conjunction and company with the excellent Study of Quiet, to which
any kind of retainer at large might deserve respect; but also, Because I saw it
set by the Apostle, in a place of near and intimate relation, a Principle and
Foundation to it. The next way to be quiet abroad, is to be busy at home. And
though it be but plain Doctrine, it is never the worse for that use; for
Foundations are best, when plainest. It is noted as a cause why men make little
proficiency in Arts and Sciences, that the Principles and Elements are not so
well studied as they should be. And the reason why they fall under that
neglect, is, Because none of the great things which the Art it self promises,
are seen in the Principles at first. And therefore Quintilian, that the
Scholars of his Art might not be discouraged with the meanness of his First
Elements, tells them, that Latent Fundamenta, conspiciuntur aedificia; there is
little to be seen in the Foundation, that lies hid under ground; all the beauty
and luster is in the Superstruction. This doing our own business, (...) is a
practical principle, whereupon depends much of the business of our whole lives,
and so has the fate of other foundations, to be little seen and regarded; It
lies low under ground, and we overlook it, as a thing not worthy any man's
thought or care. But to give it the due, we must not look upon what it is in
Sight, but what it is in virtue; a Principle and Foundation whereupon is built
that, which is the desire of all good men, the public peace and quiet of the
Church and Kingdom. And then we may allow it to be good Doctrine which has so
good a Use. It is a good tree that brings forth good fruit.

But then you will say, It must be in season too. Now the wise man tells us,
Eccles. 3.9.
There is a time for war, as well as a time for peace. And can it then be
seasonable again and again thus to importune the study of such things as make
for peace, at a time when we are all, and have cause to be in preparation for
war? Indeed if it were such a peace, as would weaken the hands of any in the
pursuit of that Just, Necessary and Royal Expedition, it were a most
unseasonable Solecism: But we must know, As there is a War that makes for
Peace, so there is a Peace that makes for War. Unity among our selves, binds us
close together; we are the stronger for it. Vis unita fortior; in divisions and
discord, strength is distracted and scattered; Dum singuli pugnant, omnes
vincuntur. Domestic Peace then, though it comes not out of the Artillery, is
good Ammunition for War: And it falls in well too, with the express Letter and
Doctrine of the Text, It is our own business. As it is the proper business of a
King to protect His Subjects from the Insolences and Injuries of proud
insulting Neighbors; so it is the business of every good Subject too, to
assist Him in it with their Lives and Fortunes. Whether therefore we seek for
Peace at home, or have cause of War abroad, the duty of the Text is for us. We
are doing our own business. But though it be a good Foundation to build on
every way; yet, except the Lord build the house, their labor is but lost that
build. Let us therefore before we go farther in the work, go to him for a
blessing upon it, etc.

That ye study to do your own business.

I Take in the word (study,) being forced by the necessary construction of
Grammar and Reason. For an object without an act, imports nothing: to do our
own business, may be as well a fault, as a duty; but if study be taken in, the
sense is certain and perfect, it is that wherein we shall do well to employ our
study. As we are to study to be quiet, so we are to study also to do our own
business.

The words will bear two senses; as there are two sorts of offenders about
business, nihil agentes, and aliud agentes, And in the words of the Apostle,
(...), and (...), 2 These. 3.11.
the idle that work not at all, and the busybodies; so we translate (...):
The Text will reach them both, for either it sets every one awork, to find
himself some business, or it restrains and confines him to that which is his
own.

The former against Idleness, is a good lesson, that, to awaken the lazy
sluggard out of his dead sleep; for, they are, as S. Paul speaks of his idle
wanton widows, 1 Timothy 5.6.
dead while they live. There is no more life in an idle man, then in an
Idol-god, that has eyes and see not, ears and hear not; but the other sense
seems to agree better with the scope of the place, and will afford work enough
for this time; the Apostle seems to have observed some among them too much
busied in matters that brought trouble and disquiet to themselves and others;
for remedy whereof he enjoins them to look to their own business.

But how their own? For it may be a fault, and a great one too, so to do our
own business, as not to regard what becomes of others; that if our own turns be
served, and we get, no matter who loses. This is deservedly forbidden by our
Apostle himself to the Philippians, chap. 2. ver. 4. Look not every man on his
own things, but every man also on the things of others. And in the 21. v.
complains of it too, that every one seeks his own, and not the things which are
Jesus Christ's. But our own here, and our own there, are two different things:
That which he blames there, is our own of interest; there may be too much of
our own in that: but that which he commands here, is our own of duty and
office. In this it must be so much our own, that it must be none but our own.
Having reduced the words to their proper genuine sense, in this Lesson there
will fall to be learned these particulars.

1. That, there is and ought to be a propriety in business; that to every one
there belongs something that he may properly call his own. 2. The Obligation of
Duty and Religion to confine himself to that which is his own. 3. The Operation
it has had in the World upon our Quiet or Disquiet. 4. From these is inferred
a Necessity to Study it; That ye study to do your own business.
First, That there is a Propriety in Business. This must be laid for a ground;
all the rest else will fall to nothing. It will be no Religion to keep it; no
Sin to break it; no need to Study it.

That which S, Paul spoke of the Doctrine of the Gospel in general at Ephesus,
A great door, and effectual was opened to him, 1 Cor. 16.9.
and there were many Adversaries; is true also of this particular Doctrine of
Propriety, It is a door open to all wise and sober men; yet it has many
Adversaries.

There is a busy humor in the world, to lay all common; and it is grown to be
a Sect of Religion; yea, more than one; as many as there are kinds of
Propriety, so many Sects endeavor to fling down the Enclosures.

Propriety in Goods and Possessions; and against this, there rises a Sect of
Levellers, who tell us from the Psalmist, The Heavens are the Lords; but the
Earth has he given to the Children of men: Psalm. 115.16.
That to which every man has a Right by the Gift of God, the Pride and
Covetousness of a few have engrossed, and made their own.

Propriety of Respect and Honor due to some above others. Against this arises
another Sect of Levellers they call Quakers, who refuse to give Honor to whom
Honor belongs: Though this looks like a Religion against good manners only, or
were but some Quarrel with the Grammarians against proper Names; the Mischief
of it lies deeper, and is of the spirit of Anabaptism, who oppose the very
Powers and Dignities themselves, which they despise in their Titles; for they
cannot be so foolish, though simple enough, as to make a Religion of Names
only. These are dangerous Sects of Levellers both; but they lie not in our way.
The Text touches only Levellers of Business, who think they are not to be
barred the liberty of doing any thing that is good; bonum quo communius eo
melius, and ought not to be impropriate to any. But that there is a Title and
Propriety in some to business, wherein it is not permitted to every one to
interpose, a necessity in Nature requires, The World is replenished with
infinite variety of things, and a great deal of work is to be done to make them
useful and serviceable to us. Now it is not possible for every one to do all,
and hardly all, in any one thing, to gain the full use and benefit of it. But
when the works are distributed severally to some, the benefit may redound to
all.

All the business of the world resers either to a Spiritual End, the good of
the soul; or to a Temporal and Civil, our well-being while we live here upon
earth: And to both these Ends God has appointed and assigned particular
persons; he did not leave them in common. In the Temporal there is private
business and public. For private use, as in Families, there is the business of
the Husband and Wife, the Parent and Children, the Master and Servants: And out
of Families, for private use likewise, there is the business of Physicians and
Advocates, Husbandmen, Merchants and Mariners, Mechanics and Laborers; and
all these are of private nature, though of common benefit. Then is there the
public business, by whith all these are ordered and governed, 1 Pet. 2.13.
and they are by S. Peter distinguished to our hands, as that of the King as
Supreme, and of Governors sent by him; and they are Magistrates and Judges for
Peace, Captains and Commanders for War, And besides these, there is the
business of Ministers and Assistants to the Supreme Power, Counselors,
Lawyers, Officers and Servants; and all these are for that temporal end.

And for the Spiritual, whose business refers to the soul there is likewise a
Propriety; as in Bishops to Ordain, Institute and Order the rest of the Clergy
specially, and of the whole Diocese occasionally, as the necessity of it shall
require. Then is there the business of the Presbyters, in the several parts of
the Diocese, in a more particular and immediate Cure and Charge, to be directed
by, and accountable to the Bishop. There be others Diaconal and Ministerial to
both. And all together, Temporal and Spiritual, as several Members, make one
Body; and every Member, says the Apostle, has not the same office, Romans 12.4.
God divided his Gifts to every one severally as He will, 1 Cor. 12.11. he did
not scatter them in common, but divide them, and all hold in severalty.

And as that Severance and Propriety stands upon good Authority; so Authority
was, no doubt, induc't upon reason of Profit and Interest. It conduces more to
the common good, than Community it self could.

Order into the common business of the world, and that takes away confusion,
which never did any thing well. To avoid fornication, 1 Cor. 7.2. let every man
have his own wife. Upon the same Equity, to avoid the promiscuous lust and
curiosity men have to mingle with any business, Let every man likewise have his
own.

peculiar and proper. Artifici in sua art credendum. Men are most trusted in
their own Trades. We trust the Lawyer with our Estates, the Physician with our
Bodies. I say nothing of our Souls; we are so wise at that work, as to trust
none but our selves.

nature and condition of the business it self, may require it: Some are so
difficult, that every one cannot do, though he would; and some are so mean,
that every one would not do though he could: and all are such, as through the
mercy of God we need not do if we will, unless it be our own business.

We are now fallen upon the Second Part, that as every one has some business
that is his own, so Duty and Religion obliges him to take upon him no business
but his own.

concurrent jurisdiction with others in any thing that is otherwise good,
though that be to govern with the King, to pray and preach, or what they
please, with the Priest. And they have as much of propriety as any can have to
business; yet even to these, they think any man may make a sufficient title,
that has understanding to know what is to be done, as well as any other, and
affection to do it, perhaps more then others. And all have right and interest
in the public, especially that wherein Religion and the soul is concerned; how
God may be best served, and wherein His glory may be most promoted. Will not
all these make a Title good enough to any business?

The Glory of GOD, indeed, is a high and overruling Title; if we do not set it
on our own heads, as the manner is, to make Gods glory serve our own. Otherwise
that, and the rest are such things, as all men of wisdom or conscience should
have regard to, in any business they undertake; provided yet it be their own.
In that every one has liberty to improve his understanding and knowledge for
the best, as well for his own soul as the public good: In that let the glory
of God be the Star to guide him. But all these do not make the business ours;
they are a good qualification in any for business, yet give no right or Title
to it. Great knowledge and skill in the Laws will not set a man upon the Bench;
nor of Divinity, in the Bishops Chair; nor will the dexterous glib-gifted
tongue put a man into the Pulpit. There must be besides a Title and Commission
to make them ours.

But must all the obligations we have to the Public good, and to Gods honor,
stoop to Commissions, Titles and proprieties, which are but the creatures and
constitutions of men?

To this question, I answer in the words of Job, 13.7. Will you speak wickedly
for God, and talk deceitfully for him? It is deceitful talking, to plead for
God against himself; for though it should be granted, that the sorting of
several employments and functions have something of man in them; yet the
confirmation and approbation of God makes it his, and so divine: for as God
has founded a divine Moral law, upon the propriety of goods and possessions,
Thou shall not steal; yea, Thou shall not covet that which is another; and yet
it comes not to be another, but by humane Laws: So though different states of
life and employments have somewhat in them by disposition of Law, or our own
choice; yet upon them is also founded this moral duty, to keep within those
bounds: For though men laid the Landmarks, yet God commanded They should not
be removed, Deuteronomy. 19.15.

It is a kind of Burglary to break into another man's business, as well as into
another man's house: or if you will not allow it to be theft to have another
business found with you, as it is to have another goods; it is as ill as theft
in S. Peter's opinion. The Murderer, the Thief, the Evil-doer, the Busie-body;
there is a Mess of them, he puts them all alike together, 1 Pet. 4.15.

To shut up this point, If the glory of God, and the public Good, and such
like fair pretenses, might let us loose upon one another business, it would
quickly bring us round, where we were, to that confusion and disorder, for
remedy whereof, the Apostle added this Lesson to the former. We shall never
learn to be quiet well, unless we learn also to keep within our own business.

Yet I deny not, but that Discord and Dissension have other causes besides;
for, of Pride comes contention, says Solomon, Prove. 13.10. And from
covetousness, says S. James, they desire, and have not, James 4.2. It is true
of other Lusts, Wrath, Revenge, Envy, Slander, and Curiosity too, break the
peace too often, and had need be bound to their good behavior all: Yet we may
observe it, That none of all these do actually any great mischief that way,
till they first bring it to this, till it draws us from our own station, and
fling us upon some thing that is none of our own business.

Third Part, which comes next to be considered, The Operation it has had in
the world, by disturbing the Peace and Quiet of it. Meum and Tuum has not
filled it with more Suits and Contentions in our Goods and Possessions, than it
has in the actions and business of our lives, What is our own, and what is not
our own.

To arraign all that are guilty of breaking this Rule in several kinds, would
ask a long process. We will therefore take notice only here of the attempts
upon Government and Religion, by those whose business it was not; because the
most and greatest tempests and storms in the Christian World, have blown from
that Coast.

The Wars and Combustions over all Italy and Germany, in the time of the
Emperor, HENRY the 4th, had their beginning from hence. Pope Hildebrand, GREG.
vij. not content with that which his Charge and Office of Bishop allowed him,
began to measure out to himself a Greatness equal to the City he served in,
which had been Domicilium Imperii; first brake in upon the Temporal Power, not
heard of before in the Church, though then a Thousand years old: Where, for the
better support of his Greatness, he endeavored to get into his Disposing, all
Church-Promotions; and for that end, called a Council at Rome of a few Bishops
for his purpose, and there Decreed all Patronages and Donations by Laymen,
Princes not excepted, to be void, and of no effect in Law. What could be
expected from so Unjust a Decree, but vehement Opposition, and a bloody
Dispute? What troubles the same Patronage and Investiture of Bishops brought
presently after into this Kingdom, our Stories are full of. But the angry Pope,
when he saw he could not quietly enjoy the Rights of the Crown, falls fiercely
upon the Crown it self, and would be Master of that too; and then he thought he
should Rule to purpose for the Catholic Cause. And for an Essay of this bold
Usurped Power, fairly Deposed the Emperor, and absolved his Subjects of their
Obedience. This was certainly no Bishops business. He may bless the Coronation,
not dispose of the Crown. He may pray for a Godly and Peaceable Government
under it, not make a prey of it. To absolve Penitents of their Sins, is a
Bishops work; not of their Duties; that is not to remit their Sins, but to make
them Sinners. Now what was likely to be the effect of all this, but that which
happened, Wars and Combustions over the whole Empire?

Though that Pope did not long outlive that Feite of his, yet his Successors
and their Parasites have so plied the Cause ever since that time, some
directly, some indirectly, that the fire is not yet extinguished. Now if the
Pope met with some Princes that would not endure his Ranging thus in their
Dominions, but thought it high time to quit his Miter, to secure their Crowns,
he may thank himself for it. They may call it a Schism, if they please; but it
is a Schism without a Sin. That word will hurt none so much as the Causers and
Authors of it; For it is but reasonable and just, That if the Pope would not
know his business, that Princes should know theirs. This is my First Instance,
of the Troubles that by this means brake into the whole Church.

another. We were in a sad case not long since in this Kingdom by a Civil War.
I meddle not with the fault, let that sleep under the Act of Oblivion. We may,
I trust, without offense, enquire into the cause of it. What were they doing
that gave us that disquiet? Look upon the Standard set up for the War; I mean,
the most Execrable COVENANT, Quomodo legis? how read you there? was it not
meddling with business was none of their own? They Covenanted first to extirpate
the Government of the Church established by Law, That Law, with hands lifted up
to Heaven, they swore they would abolish. The Legislative Power we know in whom
it is, to make or mend Laws; it was none of their business. In this they were
certainly too bold with the Kings Scepter. At the next turn they take hold of
his Sword too, and engage themselves to a mutual Defense against all
Opposition. This also was none of their business. For though a Self-defence may
be allowed as natural to all; it is against private, not public Opposition;
and then too, as Divines generally resolve, Cum moderamine inculpatae Tutelae;
never to the hurt of others; that is, Every man may defend himself clypeo, but
not every one gladio. The Sword is the Kings, and He that takes it from any
hand but His, where God has placed it, shall perish with the Sword. In this
the Covenanters, as ill as they like Bishops, would be, in the Apostles phrase,
(...), 1 Pet. 4.15.
the worst sort of Bishops, that is, medlers in business was none of their own.
The Worshippers of the Covenant have therefore been well dealt with, as the
worshippers of the Golden Calf were by Moses, Exodus 32.20. As he made them
drink that, so have they been made to eat this; though some of them be found of
so foolishly distempered stomachs, that they choose rather to part with that
which is their own, than renounce a Business was none of their own. But the
Covenant is past, and let it go. I wish for quiet sake, we may never hear of
the like again.

transient: But there still remains a permanent and habitual Disturbance of our
Peace, in the multitude and swarms of SECTS and Factions in Religion, to which
it is naturally and inseparably inherent: An incurable mischief; like the
Leprosy on the walls, that could not be cleansed, but by pulling down the
House. From these we have felt already but too much, and have cause yet, to
fear more.

But can we charge them with doing a business is none of their own? Can any
thing be more properly our own business, than the care of our souls, and to
serve God in the best manner that our understandings and Consciences shall
direct us?

They are mistaken that think the Charge lies upon this issue, what every man
may do for himself and his own salvation. He may without question do very much,
for he may keep all Gods Commandments, if he can; and when he cannot, he may be
truly contrite and penitent for breaking them; and then he may assuredly
believe his sins shall be forgiven him by the merits and passion of our Lord
Jesus Christ. And again, He may serve and worship God with as much fervency and
devotion as he can and will; he may abound in Charity, Meekness, Humility,
Patience and Temperance, and all other Christian virtues: And so long as ye
thus follow that which is good, says S. Peter, who will harm you? And I may
say too, 1 Pet. 3.13.
who can hinder you in all this? but if he makes himself a party in a Sect, if
there be assembling together in companies, gather Congregations, incorporate in
a Body, module Churches, give Laws of Doctrine and Worship, set up Teachers and
Leaders of their own; to all this they have as little Right, as they have need.
A man may go far, ye see, in Religion, without troubling any; and if then they
fall into some Error or Misbelief in Religion, they ought not to be severely
handled; but when they betake themselves to a Sect, that alters the case, it
will then be compassion mistaken. A Locust alone is no such perilous beast to
be feared or regarded by any; but when they come in shoals and swarms, and
cover the face of the earth, they are a plague to the Country where they
light. So to look upon a Sectary single, who out of simplicity and good meaning
follows his Conscience, our hearts should be every whit as tender for them, as
their Consciences are. But if we look upon them in Company, they are as ill and
dangerous as the company they are found in; and the danger of all popular
Meetings, and Associations to a State, makes it the proper business of a King
and his Ministers to look to it, and to provide against it; wherein the care
has been taken, deserves a just commendation.

And yet when I assert and refer this business to the KING, I look to be called
to an account for that; For they take the boldness by way of recrimination, to
turn the Text upon, the King himself, That His Power is Civil, and Matters of
the Church and Religion are Ecclesiastical, and so none of his business.

This is, I confess, too weighty a matter to be here thrust into the corner of
a Sermon; yet it will be necessary to say so much as may somewhat lay that loud
clamor against it: For the Papists and Presbyterians both, how ill soever they
may agree in other matters, hunt in couples against the Kings Power and
SUPREMACY. But as we deny not all to others in their places; so we claim not
all for the King. If I shall but only now set out His Part in matters of the
Church, it will appear sufficiently, that he is Rectus in Curia, stands right
in the Text, and takes not upon him business which is not his own.

We acknowledge the Civil and Ecclesiastical to be two distinct Powers; and
though they may be both in one Person, and were originally so; yet by the
Divine, positive Laws both of Jews and Christians, they were so distinguished,
that though one person were capable of both, yet not without a lawful Title and
Investiture to either. I cannot therefore think, That the King is an
Ecclesiastical Person, who was never Ordained or Consecrated to be so.
Therefore when some Learned in our Laws affirm, That the KING is Supreme
Ordinary, and mixta persona, it must be understood in some other sense, and for
some other purpose; for we do not find that he attempts the doing any thing
that is the proper act of an Ecclesiastical Person.

Yes, they say, he claims by his Title of Supremacy, To govern all persons in
all causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil.

We acknowledge this to be his just Title; but deny, that he does any thing by
it, which is not properly his own business, and in Right of his Crown. That he
is the Fountain also of all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, though it be not
expressly in his Title, we acknowledge to be in his Power. But here I must crave
leave to say something of the nature and notion of JURISDICTION, though it
shall taste somewhat of the race and harshness of the School; yet much of the
Case depends upon it, and no little mistakes there are about it.

It is agreed generally, That there is in the Church a Power of Orders, and a
Power of Jurisdiction distinct; that is, for the Power, though not distinct in
the object and matter of that power; for that is the same in both: As,
preaching Gods Word, administering the Sacraments, or the Censures of the
Church, are of the power of Orders. And the putting all, or any of these in
execution, is by a power of Jurisdiction. The former, as Divines distinguish,
is a power in habitu, the other in actu. So that Jurisdiction is nothing else,
but a power to do actually, what was potentially or habitually received in
Orders.

I do not here take Jurisdiction in the strict vulgar sense, to be a power jus
dicendi inter parts litigantes only, as the word imports; but more largely, as
it reaches to any act of Order, without which it cannot lawfully be put in
execution.

Now the Question here will be, How a King can be the Fountain of the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction used in his Dominions, who neither givs Orders
himself, not executes any; that is, has neither power of Orders, nor Power of
Jurisdiction?

My Answer to this Question, is, That the Kings Power lies without both these,
and is that which gives Commission and Faculty to persons ordained to execute
their Orders within his Dominions. And the Reason, Ground and Necessity of that
is, Because the Ecclesiastical Function cannot be put in execution, but by such
ways and means as are absolutely and originally in the King, and in Right of
his Crown. As first,

Subjects upon whom they may execute their Ecclesiastical Orders; now all the
Subjects within his Dominions, are the Kings, who must of necessity lose so
much of the Right he had in them, as any other assumes without Him. From hence
grows his Right to order and constitute Diocesses and Parishes, and to set them
their bounds and limits; that is, upon which of his Subjects, and how far he
will allow them respectively to execute their Orders; for without those bounds,
it is not, nor is used to be taken for any part of their business.

public exercise of Religion the people must meet together. And all
assemblings of people together, are absolutely in the Power of Princes; all
States in all times have ever been jealous of them, and provided severe Laws
against them; for it is impossible, be the pretenses of meeting never so fair,
to govern people, and keep them quiet long, if they may have liberty to flock
together at their pleasures.

instruct them. How dangerous a thing it is promiscuously to suffer Harangues
and Orations to be made to the people by such who possibly may be Trumpets of
Sedition; who by slandering the Government, and speaking evil of Dignities, may
inflame people to Rebellion? We have known such things done. It is therefore
necessary, that none be allowed that liberty to speak to Multitudes assembled
together, but such with whom a King may safely trust his people. And this gives
him a Right and Capacity of Patronage and Nomination to Ecclesiastical Charges?

Doctrine which they teach the people, should be such as would amuse them with
Novelties, or occasion Alterations, and foment Divisions, or any way disturb
the Peace of the Kingdom; it is just and reasonable that the King should
confine them within the compass of certain Articles and Doctrines of Religion,
which gives Him a Right to that, which in other respects, no doubt, belongs to
the care of the Church.

Articles of Peace, we find that the King in His Laws declares what is Heresy:
That, if any thing, seems to be the proper work of the Ecclesiastical Power;
yet even in that he is not out at his own Civil business. For seeing mere
Ecclesiastical Censures are found not to be of sufficient force to suppress
dangerous and Heretical Opinions, without the use of the temporal Sword: Out of
the care the King has of the Lives and Estates of His Subjects, he will not
let His Sword loose to the will of others, who by declaring what they please to
be Heresy, may bring them in peril; He therefore confines them to such cases
only, wherein He is content His Sword should be made use of. This is all, and
is that which must be allowed to be the proper business of the King to assign,
how far, and in what cases His Temporal Power and Sword shall be employed, and
can be no invading the Ecclesiastical.

Pope with, who in order to his Spiritual End, Usurps the Temporal Power; so
the King in order to his Temporal Government, invades the Ecclesiastical?

No, the case is far different; If the Pope did order temporals by spiritual
means only, i. e. Ecclesiastice, we had the less to say against him; he is not
out of the way of a Bishops power, though he should abuse it. But he for his
spiritual end, usurps temporal means, and takes upon him to dispose of temporal
Estates, that is none of his business. But the King in ordering Ecclesiastical
things to His temporal end, uses no Ecclesiastical means, but temporal only,
which are his proper business, He does not excommunicate the Pope out of the
Church, as the Pope would do him out of his temporal Dominions. But the King,
if he see cause, may banish him and his Emissaries out of his Kingdom. That
cannot be denied to be the proper business of a King to secure and free his
Kingdom from any thing that is destructive to it. Now if in all this the King
moves not out of his own civil Sphere, to return to our Sectaries, who put us
upon this digression, they still remain as we left them, guilty of doing much
that is none of their own business.

What then is to be done with them? According to a late Statute, a Mittimus (I
think) might be made to send them to prison; but the Apostle here deals more
kindly with them, and sends them only to School to study better, which is my
Fourth and last Point.

study to do your own business. I will take no more out of the word Study, then
what any one understands to be in it; A serious weighing and considering of the
matter; and there is need of it.

he takes in hand any matter of importance, to set down and consider whether it
be his own business, or no; what Title he can make to it. It is utterly a fault
amongst us, to think that no part of our business, to consider whether it be
our business or no. If a qualm comes over the stomach, that we begin to grow
Government-sick, or that the Ceremonies and Superstitions of the Church offend
us, presently without further dispute, what ever comes of it, it is resolved we
will have a better Government, and a more pure and reformed Church. That is
commonly concluded, before this be disputed. No good Student will do so,
conclude without premises. We must see whether it be our own business first,
how we can derive a Title to it.

We know, that Government and Religion come both originally from God; to which
none can have Right, but they to whom God has set over, and entrusted the Care
and Charge of either; Our part is to see by what mean Conveyance it comes from
them to us. If we have nothing to show that either of them have been
particularly committed to us, we may safely and certainly conclude, it is none
of our business.

method in his study; whereof one Rule is, To proceed a manifestis ad
obscuriora: Let him begin at that which is without question his own business.
Has he done all that belongs to his proper place and Function, which is
certainly his own? Or has he a Family at home to govern, that no doubt is his
too? Are his Wife, and Children, and Servants well ordered, all as they should
be? S. Paul gives a charge to Timothy, not to set a Bishop over the Church, who
has not governed his own Family well. Though some have not a Family without,
yet every one has a Family within, and a large one too: To rule his passions
and inordinate desires only, ask a world of work, and they will find it so,
when ever they set themselves upon it.

What a preposterous method and course is it to hunt eagerly after Liberty from
some imaginary Pressure in Government, or some poor Ceremony in the Church,
while in the mean time we are true slaves to some base, vile lust within us.
Here we should begin to set our selves at liberty from our selves. And this the
method of Charity requires, as well as the method of Art. Charity begins always
at home, at our own business. Tantumne ab re tua otii est tibi, was well said
in the Comedy, Aliena ut Cures. True Charity will find no leisure for other's
work, till her own be done. If this method were carefully observed, the world
would be a great deal quieter then it is.

Study will be therefore needful in this case, because otherwise unconsidering
men are apt to be carried away with the fair show of Zeal and Religion in
reforming others; they take it for a wrong from any that think not so of it:
But by considering well, they will find they are disappointed of that hope; for
whatsoever sets them on work, it cannot be true Religion, that is not contrary
to it self. All Students know, that One truth is not repugnant to another; nor
one virtue to another.

fools, to employ themselves in that whereof there comes no good. All we do in
other men's business, runs wast. S. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 3.11. calls it idleness;
(...), working not at all; but are busybodies; busy, and yet not work at
all. He says the same of his Widows of pleasure, 1 Timothy 5.3. That they were
(...) and (...), idle, and busybodies both. He thinks that not worthy to be
called business, which is not our own.

charges our account more than needs; and there is no Wisdom in that; for when
the Conscience brings us in more work than either God or Man particularly
requires, though it be not our own of Duty here, it will be our own in Account
hereafter: For the conscience of doing it, makes it ours howsoever; and so
guilty both of it, and all the mischief that comes by it.

Justice: That does suum cuique tribuere. Justice lets every man enjoy his own.
He that takes upon him another man's business, because he can do it better, (for
that is the great pretense, to do that which is best) may as well take another
man's Purse, because he will spend the money better. I think we will hardly
allow of that Justice.

Hope, that Christian hope which supports us in all our Sufferings and
Afflictions. Whereof, when S. Peter, 1 Ep. 4. c. had for the consolation of his
Contrymen, scattered abroad, poured out a plentiful measure, v. 13.14.
Rejoice, in as much ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory
shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy. Ver. 14. If ye be
reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of Glory, and
of God rests upon you. But presently in the very next words, ver. 15. he puts
in an exception to busybodies; they have no part or share in that
consolation: Let none of you suffer as a Murderer, or a Thief, or a
Busie-body. They have as little right to the comfort in suffering, as they had
to the business for which they suffer.

Lastly, As it disappoints them of the hope of that Mercy from God; so it casts
them into the snare of the Devil. It was safe and wise Counsel the Apostle
gives, Ephesians. 4.27. Not to give place to the Devil. He whose busy thoughts
carries him abroad, to pry into, and meddle in others business, gives place to
the Devil in the mean time to enter in, ransack and disorder all at home, where
there is none to resist him: There is no better fence against the Devil, than
this, si invenerit occupatos, if he finds us diligently employed at home in our
own business.

If for all this, the meddling Reformers of others would be thought the men of
Religion, and of the first rate too; Let them know, That it is of such a
Religion as has neither Prudence in it, nor Charity, nor Justice, nor Hope,
nor Safety. And when he has weighed all these mischiefs that follow the
breaking this Rule;

Let him in the next place, consider the benefit that comes by keeping it. At
that I began, and with that I will conclude. This Lesson was set us of purpose
by the Apostle to second and enforce the other of Peace and Quiet. The best way
to be quiet with others, is to be busy with our selves. It is the natural and
genuine effect of it. All discord and dissension must be between two, either
persons or parties; and that which commonly kindles the fire, is envy, or some
supposed injury; now he that intends his own business only, can give no
occasion to others, of either envy or complaint; and so in recompense of
keeping to his own business, he shall quietly sit under his own Vine, and under
his own Fig tree; he shall have own for own.

Lastly, Besides this outward quiet with others, it will produce another within
us, the quiet and tranquillity of the Conscience, without which outward peace
may prove to some but a quiet passage here, to eternal misery hereafter. But
this makes it a thorough quiet, both sides alike, within and without; for it
lays those busy, unsatisfied thoughts within us, which otherwise gives
trouble both to our selves and others: That when we see not, or think we see
not all things so well carried in the Church and Government, as we could wish;
yet having gone as far to mend it, as the line of our own business will reach,
and the farthest end of that is, having peaceably moved for it, and heartily
prayed for it, we may with a safe and quiet Conscience, leave the rest to God,
and those to whom he has committed that Care and Charge, whose proper business
it is. And as many as walk according to this Rule, Peace be on them, and Mercy
from the God of Peace and Mercy; To whom be all honor, glory and praise, for
ever. Amen.

FINIS.
A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE HALL.

Being the last Sermon preached at COURT, By the Right Reverend Father in God
BENJAMIN LANEY Late Lord Bishop of ELY.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun at the West end of S. Paul's. 1675.

Imprimatur,

Ex. Aed. Lambethanis Maii 18. 1675.

THO. TOMKYNS.

A SERMON Preached Before His MAJESTY AT WHITE HALL.
GAL. vi. v. 7.8. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, for whatsoever a man
sows, that shall he also reap.

For he that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he
that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.


BEfore we look into the particulars of the Doctrine of this Text, we may from
the Preface [Be not deceived] learn so much of the nature of it, that we are
either in danger to be deceived, or in great danger if we should be deceived,
or both. It will therefore be necessary, first to implore the aid and
assistance of Gods grace, which is the best Guide to lead us through the
intricate ways of Error and Deceit, etc.

The Text it self seems not at first sight to answer the expectation which the
Preface has raised of Danger to us. It has but one purpose, but that is
carried upon two Propositions; One General, That whatsoever a man sows, he
shall reap. The other Particular, of what shall be reaped, from the Flesh, or
from the Spirit.

For the General, I must confess, it is a truth wherein few or none are
deceived, not any Gardener or Plough-man, never so simple, that looks to reap
what he has not sown. God gave that virtue in the Creation to all living
things to bring forth after their kind. And our Savior himself made use of it
to a higher purpose, we cannot gather Grapes of Thorns, nor Figgs of Thistles.

So far we may possibly digest this truth in the General, and fear not much to
be deceived, but when we come to Particulars, where it touches our own flesh
and spirit, though it be as true as the General, and must be so, being
contained in it: yet because in this case it mixeth with our own Interest and
Affection, what we wish may not be true, we are easily misled to think it so.

To this therefore, at least the Caution in the Preface is proper and
necessary, though not in the General. For this reason I shall lay that aside,
as less liable to fraud, and bestow our care at this time upon this to which
the Apostle directs his, where we are in danger to be deceived; He that sows
to the flesh, etc.

And here our first care must be that we be not deceived in the meaning of the
words; which look so like a Description of the Day of Judgment, that some
Expositors have taken them for it, and to be the same with that 2 Cor. 5.10. We
shall all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, that every man may receive
the things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good
or bad.

I do not refuse this Exposition for any danger that might come by mistaking,
for it would howsoever lead us to a point of great consequence, and not a
little necessary for these times in which our beloved Liberty has rifled so
far into the Mysteries of Religion, and dug so much about the Foundation,
that the House is in danger; where, they say, all depends upon the report of
others, who know as little as our selves whether there be a Heaven or Hell, or
Day of Judgment or no. The detection of so dangerous a Deceit had been
necessary, if the occasion had been as fit; I shall therefore leave it to other
Texts, which are more proper for it then this is, knowing well, that Truth
receives not more prejudice any way, then when it is set upon weak and
uncertain Foundations.

to the Flesh, and to the Spirit, (...), and so must have another meaning.

Sowing, so the Reaping also differs from that at the Day of Judgment; for he
that sowes to the flesh shall reap corruption; and it will be hard to find
Everlasting burnings in that word, which naturally signifies no more then
privation of Life or Being. Now they that give themselves over all their lives
to the lusts of the flesh without remorse, would be content with this doom, and
hear no quit all scores with Dying, if they might more of it.

What other sense then will the words more properly bear? To the flesh, and to
the spirit, imply rather the soil wherein they are to sow, then the seed, and
are as two Fields in which God sets all men to work. Every one has two Ploughs
going, one to the flesh, and another to the spirit.

Flesh first, it must be taken abstractly from the sins of the flesh, though it
be hard parting them, as the best of us know; yet we may consider them apart,
and so we saw them in our Savior, who took our flesh upon him, that is, our
natural and civil condition of life, he had all the infirmities of the one
except sin, and the burdens of the other; he was born under the Law, and paid
obedience and tribute to the Civil Power. This is that flesh which God has
given us as a stock to be employed, but upon account. He has not given us our
natural lives to fling away at our pleasures, by disorders, distempers, or
quarrels. Nor has he put us here into the World into the societies of men, to
live in want and contempt, but to improve our industry to the best advantage
both to our selves and others; and may by that attain to some luster and
splendour of riches, honor, and command, to which no oppression, or extortion,
or any lucky sin has advanced us, and that is, though we have brought no
corruption into the flesh, yet we shall reap corruption from it. This is a
Doctrine, which our daily experience abundantly confirms, by the frequent
turnings, changes and vicissitude of things.

But that our desires should be so unchangeably fixed upon things so mutable,
must be some great delusion, or in the Apostles phrase in a like manifest case,
a bewitching, not to trust our own eyes in what we see every day. But because
though the World be full of Deceivers, we are still the greatest deceivers of
our selves; let us take it upon the credit of others, and those the wisest
Kings, Solomon, and his Father David, who may be the better trusted in this,
for that neither of them were any great enemies to the flesh. Solomon, when he
had run through all the glories, pleasures, and delights of the world, never
any King drank deeper in that cup; yet he at last wearied, sat down to write a
Book to teach others, that all was Vanity, and that is but another word to
signify Corruption. And David, as well of observation as experience, I my self
have seen the ungodly in great power flourishing like a green Bay tree; I went
by and lo he was gone, I sought him, and his place could no where be found,
Psalm. 37.36. And least we should think this the portion only of the ungodly,
Psalm. 49.9. Wise men also die and perish together, as well as the ignorant and
foolish, and leave their riches for others: and it may be not that neither; For
riches (says the Wise man Prove. 23.) make themselves wings and fly away from
the owner. And at another time the Owner too makes himself wings and flies away
from them. All things in the World are upon the Wing. And it is a strange
deceit the Prophet observes ( verse. 11.) And yet they think that their houses
shall continue for ever. And to give themselves a kind of Immortality, they
call them after their own names. But they are often times deceived in that too;
so far does Corruption eat into all our designs. The lewd people will be the
Gossips and name the Child in despite of the Father; and that little to his
liking or honor. We are not sure to enjoy that poor vanity to leave a name
behind us upon that which cost us so much care and expense. Lastly, How well
soever he speeds here, and that the Glory of his house be increased, yet this
will be certain, ( verse. 17.) He shall carry nothing away with him when he
dies, neither shall his pomp follow him.

I do not think by this, or any thing that can be said more, to make you our of
love with the flesh, it is neither possible nor needful. I shall only for a
conclusion of this first part beg in the Apostles name, that ye would not be
deceived, as all are who give more for a thing then it is worth. To spend all
our time and cost upon that which will be worth nothing; or as ill, no better
then rottenness and corruption.

I make the more haste through this Field of the Flesh, that we may stay the
longer in that of the Spirit, where our labor and tillage will be to better
purpose, for ye see the best that can be hoped for from the other, is but to
flourish as a Flower of that Field, and that Psalm. 103.19. as soon as the wind
goes over it is gone. Nullus flos nisi novus. Corruption blows upon the most
florid condition in it. But the growth and increase from the field of the
Spirit is incorruptible, that fades not away, reserved in heaven for us, 1
Pet. 1.4. for he that sows, etc.

When we see so great a Harvest, and yet so few Laborers in the Field, some
strange delusion there must be, wheresoever it lies; we must confess the
Apostles caution here was no more then needs: Be not deceived, God is not
mocked. For is it possible where so good wages are, so few should set
themselves at work? unless they either mistrusted their pay, Eternal Life, and
so mocked God that promised it; or mistook the sowing, and so deceived
themselves. Both these would deserve to be well considered, but because they
who have some diffidence of a life hereafter to come, have not the confidence
to say so; I have not so much spare time as to spend in proving that which they
will be ready to say they do not deny. I shall therefore now endeavor only to
undeceive them, if it may be, in the vain pretenses they make to it in the
sowing.

And here, first it will be necessary, that whatever else deceives them, to
see, that a misunderstanding of the words give no occasion to it, to know what
this sowing to the Spirit is, and how it comes to make a Title to Everlasting
Life, for there are no mean Competitors in the same Claim. For,

Christ is the Author of this life, For as in Adam all die, so in Christ shall
all be made alive, 1 Cor. 15.4. And 2 Timothy 1.10. Our Lord Jesus Christ has
abolished death, and brought life and immortality to light. Being born again by
the Word of God, which lives and abides for ever, 1 Pet. 1.23. It is the
Power of God to Salvation. Faith puts in to the same Claim, The Just shall live
by Faith, Romans 1.17. And 1 Timothy 1.16. St. Paul professes that Jesus Christ had
set forth him as a Pattern to all them who should hereafter believe on him to
everlasting life.
Is there yet another way to Everlasting life by sowing to the Spirit? It is
happy for us that there is any way to it, but yet we may be at a loss and
confounded where there are so many.

To remove that fear, we must know, that all these are but several name of the
same thing, though in diverse appearances, and Phases, as the Astronomers word
is, Christ, the Gospel, Faith, and the Spirit, do all relate to life
everlasting.

Christ as the Author of it, provided all things necessary to it. The Gospel,
as the Register of all that is to be known or done to attain it. Faith is our
submission and obedience to the Gospel. The Spirit is the publisher and
preacher of it, Ephesians. 3.5. The mysteries of Christ which in other ages was not
made known to the sons of men, as it is now revealed unto the Apostles and
Prophets by the Spirit. And for this reason the Apostle expressly calls the
Gospel the Spirit, Gal. 3.3. For whereas they having already embraced the
Gospel, fell back to Circumcision and other rites of the Law, severely charges
them with* folly; Are ye so foolish having begun in the spirit, are ye now made
perfect by the flesh? The Spirit is the Gospel, and the Law the Flesh: they are
so called Heb. 9.10. Carnal Ordinances; and the reason why is intimated,
because they were temporal, imposed upon them, until the time of Reformation
and no longer; whereas the Gospel abides for ever, 1 Pet. 1.23.

Thus we see that Christ, and Faith, and the Gospel, and the Spirit must all
meet in the title to everlasting life; if we separate and divide them, we are
certainly deceived; it is a fallacy a compositis ad divisa, dividing those
things which the Spirit has joined together. And by this we may try and
examine the sufficiency of their Pleas apart and divided.

Mark 10.29. and will not own them for his friends that do not all that he
commands them, John 15. and they shall find more Work-commandments in the
Gospel then a fantastical name of Christianity. Whilst by this means they
think to avoid Schism, they make one, for they are Schismatics upon record, 1
Cor. 1.10. It is declared (says Saint Paul) that there are divisions, the
Greek word is Schisms among you; every one of you says I am of Paul, I am of
Apollos, I am of Cephas, I am of Christ. Is that a Schism to be for Christ? Yes
sure, it is dividing of him; for he adds, Is Christ divided? and how could that
be, but from his Apostles, whom he had appointed to instruct them in the
Gospel, and had made them as it were one person with himself, He that hears you
hears me. And thus was Christ divided.

What could probably be the cause of this separation from them, but that they
were not satisfied either with their Doctrine, or* severity of their
Discipline, sought to shroud* themselves under the name of Christ, not out of a
great respect to him and his Doctrine, which we may well presume could not
differ, but because it was a more plausible way to shift off their Authority,
by appealing from the Servants to the Master.

Much after this Copy do our Christians of the Latitude write. They believe in
Christ without a Creed, they obey him without doing his Will; they worship him,
no man knows how, but every man as he likes; and if he likes that better, not
at all.

John gives a charge, that if there come any that bring not that Doctrine, not
to receive him, nor bid him God speed, 2 John 10. This Doctrine serves not many
men's purpose, they must have other Doctrines, and to credit them, other Spirits
too. Every one will have a Familiar Spirit of his own to teach him.

But are we to look for no other Instruction from the Spirit, but what is
already taught in the Gospel? that is to depose him of his Office from the time
that the Gospel was first revealed, and leave him no work to do after. God
forbid, there are many other excellent Offices of the Spirit besides
Revelation; there is the Spirit of Sanctification, whereof we have continual
need, to infuse all divine Graces and Virtues into us, to assist and strengthen
us in all our infirmities, to lead us out of temptations, troubles, and
dangers, which every day surround us; yet not to reveal anew what we are to
believe or do, which is already done in the Gospel. And yet the Spirit will
help us in that too; For when any difficulty or contention arise about them, we
may and must pray for the Spirits assistance, to clear our understandings, by
removing pride and prejudice that obscure it; to inflame us with a true love of
truth, not to dictate and reveal, or whisper any thing which is not to be seen
in the Gospel, as well by the eyes of others as our own.

But does not the Spirit bear witness to our spirits that we are the children
of God? This can be no other but a private Spirit. That this Text stand not in
our way ( Romans 8.16.) we must distinguish, not only, as I have said already,
the Spirit by the several operations of revealing and sanctifying: So of the
several kinds of bearing witness, which is either proper, by affirming or
denying any thing expressly, or improperly, by proof and argument from the
Nature and Incidents of the matter in question; as Acts 14.17. God left not
himself without witness in that he did good, and gave us rain from heaven, and
fruitful seasons. Rain and fruitful seasons affirm nothing of God, yet prove
sufficiently his Godhead, Power, and Providence in governing the World.

Now the Spirit in both these senses does bear witness to our spirits, that we
are the children of God, without the help of private Revelations. For if we
speak of bearing witness properly, the public Spirit in the Gospel will effect
that where it gives this testimony, That whosoever believes, repents, and
amends his life, is the Child of God, when our spirits can experimentally
assume that we are so qualified, then the Spirit in the Gospel bears witness
with our spirits that we are the children of God. And if we speak of bearing
witness in the other sense, of proving by argument and reason, then the Spirit
of Sanctification working a real change in us, a detestation of Sin, and a true
love and practice of Virtue and Godliness, bears witness to our Spirits that
we are the children of God. Here is therefore no place in this Text for private
Revelations, and I wish they had none amongst us; for under color of them,
every one will have a private Spirit, though of his own making. No Chemist can
extract Natural Spirits out of any thing with more ease, then they can Divine;
any vain Dream or Imagination, nay any wicked devilish suggestion shall be an
impulse of Gods Spirit. It were happy for this Kingdom and Church if we could
lay these Familiar Spirits; No Schism in the Church, no Mischief in the
Commonwealth; no Rebellious Practice which was not carried on by the conduct
and impulse of these Spirits. Thus by them they trouble the World, deceive
simple men, and work despite to the Spirit of God.

Life-everlasting upon the same fallacy, by Faith divided from the Gospel.

Faith has been an unhappy word of contention; but I shall only take notice
here of the insufficiency of the Plea of that Faith, which by those that
invented it, is called, Fides specialis misericordiae, that no man is
justified, and by consequence, has right to Life Everlasting, but he that
believes by a special mercy to him in particular, his sins are forgiven; or
which is all one, that he is elected, for without that there is no remission.

The Faith of the Gospel they think is too general, without life, and common to
the Devils, who believe and tremble; they are Believers and Quakers too, and
yet are Devils. I cannot say how much of the Gospel they believe, but by their
trembling, and their own confession to our Savior, Art thou come to torment us
before our time? that they believed the Article of the last Judgment; that they
shall be one day tormented for their sins. By the way, the Devils may shame
them that have not learned so far in their Creed.

But notwithstanding this, we must not be so kind to the Devils, as to think
they have the Faith of the Gospel, because that works by love; Circumcision
avails not any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith that works by love,
Gal. 5.6. I think no man has so much charity for the Devils, as to think they
have any. There is no reason therefore why the Faith of the Gospel should
suffer for their sakes. The word of Faith, says St. Paul, Romans 10.8. is that
which we preach, and that was the Gospel. Our particular election may be
written in the Book of Life in Heaven, but it is no where to be found written
in the Book of the Gospel. True Faith is that which we preach, says the
Apostle, but this Faith of Election no man can preach; for who can say and say
truly of his own knowledge, that I, or you, or any man by name is elected. Now
if this Faith cannot come by hearing, what will become of our Sermons? indeed,
of any thing that can be called Religion or Sowing to the Spirit? for that
leads us a way to Heaven through believing some mysteries we understand not,
through many a heavy and hard law of mortification and denying our selves;
whereas this Faith cuts off all that, and may well go for sowing to the flesh.
For first, in favor to this, it shrinks up all the duties of the Gospel into
Faith; and then all Faith into one Article, and that not in the Creed neither:
and something they pare from that too, it works not as an act which we may call
ours, for that will prejudice Gods free Grace, but as a relation to Christ; and
in the Logic Schools it is disputed, whether Relations have any real being or
no. And thus all hangs upon a Pins point, and leaves not a Corn to be sown to
the Spirit. We may therefore conclude that this, and the other Pretenders are
all deceived, mistake the Field of the Spirit, which is the Gospel, and sow
quite beside it.

It will be now time to enter into the Field it self, and see what work the
Spirit there sets us to. It is a large Field, and reaches as far as the Gospel;
indeed too large to be passed through at one time. But this as a great Country
may be seen in a little Chart.











One thing more I have not yet named, which seems at a farther distance from
the great duties of the Gospel, and yet has the advantage above the rest, that
it is here expressly called, sowing to the Spirit; and what that is, we shall
learn from the Verse precedent; where

him that is taught in the Word, to communicate to him that teaches in all
good things. If there be any coherence in the discourse, any reason in the
rational Particle [for] For he that sows unto the Spirit. The communicating
our Goods for the Gospel, is true sowing to the Spirit.

This duty therefore together with those already named, are all Sowing to the
Spirit, and have a joint tendency to life everlasting. For the meaning is not
that any of them apart make a full Title to it, but according to their quality
and degree carry us their part in the way toward it.

It is therefore but a piece of fraud and Sophistry to discountenance one duty,
by setting up a greater against it, as the manner is, that the main purpose of
the Gospel looks another way. And so run down one duty with another, the less
with the greater, as Great Persons do their Inferiors. This is not only a
Deceit, but plain mocking of God, who commands both, and a setting him against
himself.

I note this Fallacy in common, that it be not made use of here on our
particular, to mislead us from the due regard ought to be given to the
maintenance of those that minister in the Gospel; though it be not the
accomplishment of the great duties, yet has a remote influence upon all. Set
it in as low a place in Gods House as you please, but for the Spirits sake, let
it not be turned out of doors.

I single out this duty from the rest, that may deserve our care more, and need
it less. It has fewer friends to speak for it I confess, but the true reason
why I do it, is because it was the particular occasion of the Apostles
delivering this doctrine; and in this I shall keep both a better measure with
the Time, and with the Apostles intention, and it is a point too, wherein we
are as much deceived as in any.

Our worldly Goods by nature and kind are Carnal, yet being sown to the Spirit,
become spiritual, they are infranchised and incorporate into the Family and
Retinue of the Spirit, they alter their property, not by imprinting any real
indelible character into them, as envy and ill will objects, but giving only
the respect that persons of low birth have, when they are adopted or affianced
into a more noble Stock. When the Flesh serves the Spirit it is advanced above
her condition, the Volatile nature of the Flesh is fixed by the Spirit, and
helps to make up the title to everlasting life.

This is warrant enough for me to make a Suit, and reward enough for those that
grant it: That for Gods sake and the Spirits, when the Church Revenue comes
into your thoughts to cast an eye, if not of duty, of compassion upon such
miserable places, where there is but too much necessity for it. I can speak of
my own knowledge, that there are many hundreds of Parishes in this Kingdom,
where there is not so much yearly maintenance for serving the Cure, as one of
your Footmen stand you in.

If so great a scandal to Religion, and real obstruction to it, be in these
indigent Times too heavy a burden to be removed, and therefore unseasonable
also to be moved. Though this be no time of sowing to the Spirit, it can be no
season to pull up that which has been already sown by the devotion of others.

It Is strange that the Church maintenance should be thought to hang so loose,
more then other men's Estates, as that any man, when the sullen humor takes
him, can think to blow them away with a Motion, Let the Church Lands be sold.

If they were held only upon Frank almoign, it is as firm a Tenure as any is
in Law. But it is more strange, that they should think to mock and elude God,
who once declared it to be a robbing of him also. When he charged the Jews for
detaining Tithes and Offerings from the Priests of that Altar. What reason can
be given that the Ministers of a better Covenant should have a worse title?
There are not many Estates in the World besides which God himself owns; this
bears the Image and Superscription of the Spirit. It must be a desperate
boldness to break into his peculiar, to stir any thing that is sown in his
Field.

And that it may not seem strange that Carnal things should be thus advanced to
spirituals; for by a like conversion Spiritual things degenerate into Carnal.
This likewise will be worth our observation.

Religion is out of doubt a Spiritual thing, yet if that spread and run into
Schisms, it grows Carnal. For while one says, I am of Paul, and another I am
of Apollos, are ye not carnal, 1 Cor. 3.4. So Romans 16.17. They who cause
divisions among you serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Bellies; if
any thing be flesh sure the Belly is.

If there be so much malignance and sowreness in Schisms and Divisions to turn
Religion into Flesh, what shall we think of a Religion, in Design, that is made
up all of Sects and Divisions? that must be all Flesh. I say no more, it is in
private Design only; as when St. Paul charged the Corinths with strife, and
schism, it was but upon report only. It is reported (says he) by them of the
house of Cloe, that there are contentions among you. So I say, only, it is
reported from a house of Cloe, how these Schisms shall be disposed of. A Church
shall be contrived that will give room and Liberty to them all.

But if the Church must be new modelled for their sakes, they must new model
the Rules of Wisdom and Government too; For by that it was ever thought
necessary that the People should conform to the Laws of the Church; never that
a Church should conform to the humors of the People.

This is so irregular a thing, that it will not be labor lost to take a little
farther notice of it. And first that you may know it by name, it is to be
called, a Comprehensive Church; a name, I must confess, not unfit for the
purpose, though I think it might have been better called a Drag-net, that will
fetch in all kind of Fish, good or bad, great or small, there will be room
enough for Leviathan to take his pastime therein. But how shall the Church be
drawn out to such a breadth and latitude?

That will be no hard matter to do. It is but pulling down the Old Walls, the
Confession of Doctrine, and Canons of Discipline. Lay all common, and then no
doubt there will be room enough for all.

But will these prove so good company when they are in, for whose sake this
should be done? Will they not rather give us cause to fear what the poor
Trojans found, when they broke down the old Walls of their City to let in a
Horse with a Comprehensive Belly, that carried armed enemies enough to ruin
them and their City.

And least we should think this done for love of their company, they let us
know they have no meaner inducement to it, then that which governs all the
World, Gain and Profit, advancement of Trade, and increase of Money. This is
plain dealing, they profess to sow the Spirit to the Flesh. They will make a
Church that shall make us rich. But can there be any blame or harm in this? Can
we not be Religious and rich too? I will not dispute that, if we bring riches
up to Religion. But I will dispute it, and deny it too, if we bring Religion
down to Riches. Godliness may be Gain, but Gain will never be Godliness. Riches
may be a good Nurse to cherish it, but an ill Mother to bring it forth, for
whatsoever is born of the flesh is flesh.

It is the greatest dishonor that can be to the Spirit to make it serve for
Compost, only to lay in the Field of the Flesh.

But these, you say, though carnal things, may be secondary ends, which do not
make void the spiritual. Peace and Charity are the two Pillars whereon this
Church is to be built, and they will serve to keep up the Spirit in it.

We cannot deny but that they are true spiritual things, but if both these
Pillars should fail, there would nothing be left in the Church but Flesh.



For answer to this, we must distinguish the quality of the persons for whom
this room is to be made. And they are either such as will be content to leave
their faults and errors behind them; and to those we shall do well to set our
gates wide open, and need not pull down our Walls. Or they are such as bring
their errors, animosities, and divided judgments along with them. And to
pacify these, the taking away the Walls will do no good, for they bring their
Divisions with them into the Bowels of the Church, where the flame will be more
fierce and dangerous, then when it burnt only without. All the benefit can be
hoped for by taking away the Confessions and Canons, is but to secure them from
punishment, but leaves them free to all other causes of dissension, or rather
fortifies and animates them to pursue their differences with more violence.
Impunity and Authority will not cool their zeal of advancing the Interest of
their Sect; for it is not Toleration but Mastery they aim at. In the mean time
our Sowing will be turned into Fighting, our Plough-shares into Swords; the
field of the Spirit into a field of War, and thus we shall live in a perpetual
storm. This is all the hope we have of Peace by it.

Charity, we shall find it has as little to do here. It will be neither want
of Charity to leave them out, nor a work of Charity to take them in.

1. It will be no want of Charity to leave them out, if by that we condemn them
not. And condemn them we do not, if we keep St. Paul's rule. Schismatics are
without the Church, we judge not them; Those that are without the Church, God
judges, 1 Cor. 5.13. They must stand or fall to God. And when we do refuse
them, we do not condemn them to Hell. All we say is, if they will not go to
Heaven our way, they shall not go in our company; and in truth they cannot.

2. It is no work of Charity to take them in with all their faults. For though
Charity be a good natured Virtue, and covers a multitude of sins, but when they
are not known abroad, but cherishes none that are. I could never think it a
breach of Charity to condemn Heresy or Schism, which are known sins, though it
be against Charity to condemn any person of either, of whose guilt there may be
doubt. Charity may sometimes absolve the Offender, but never the Offense. When
the Offense is known to us, and the Fact avowed by them, they cannot be taken
in for Charity sake, if we love our own quiet, and Charity begins at home.

Now if neither Peace nor Charity have any share in framing this New Church, I
may for a Conclusion ask the question our Savior did the Jews concerning
John's Baptism, Is it from Heaven, or of men? or which is all one, is it from
the Flesh or from the Spirit? If they shall say from the Flesh, all men will
adjudge it to Corruption; If they shall say from Heaven, or from the Spirit, I
will ask them another question, Whether a Church without Walls can be of Gods
making? His Church is a garden enclosed, Cant. 4.12. And when he planted a
Vineyard, Esaias 5.2. and that was his Church, he fenced it in. But when he saw
it brought forth wild Grapes, then he threatens them with this Judgment, I will
take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; and break down the Wall
thereof, and it shall be trodden down. Can it be wisdom to draw that upon our
selves, which God would not inflict but in vengeance? To make the Field of the
Spirit no better then the Field of the Sluggard? Prove. 24.31. I went by it, and
lo it was all grown over with thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof,
and the stone wall thereof was broken down. Nothing can be liker then Schisms
to Thorns, and Liberty from Laws to a broken Wall.

If I had kept my self to the proper work of the Preacher this day, which is
Palm Sunday, I should have carried a Palm to the triumph of our Savior entering
into Jerusalem. But finding some so busy in strewing our way with THORNS, in
stead of PALMS, I thought it fitter first to clear the way of them, to prepare
it this day for a greater Triumph at Easter, over Sin, Death, and Hell.

I have no more to say, but to end as I began, Be not deceived, God is not
mocked. That which is dearest to us, our own Credit, that we be not men
deceived; and that which ought to be Gods honor, that he be not mocked, are
both engaged in the Truth of this Doctrine, that we do not rashly adventure to
sow what we would be loath to reap; and unwisely prefer that which will
certainly and suddenly fade away, before that which will last for ever. He that
sows to the flesh, etc.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books, printed for, and sold by H. Brom, since the
dreadful Fire of London, to 1675.
A Guide to Eternity, by John Bona, octavo, 2 s. Dean W. Lloyd's Sermon before
the King about Miracles. 6 d. -- His Sermon at the Funeral of John Lord Bishop
of Chester. 6 d. -- His Sermon before the King in Lent, 1673. 6 d. The
Seasonable Discourse against Popery, in quarto. 6 d. -- The Defense of it,
quarto. 6 d. -- The Difference betwixt the Church and Court of Rome, in quarto.
6 d. The Papists Apology to the Parliament answered. 6 d. Mr. Naylor's
Commemoration Sermon for Col. Cavendish. 6 d. Mr. Sayers Sermon at the Assizes
at Reading. 6 d. Mr. Tho. Tanner's Sermon to the scattered Members of the
Church. 6 d. Mr. Stanhopp's four Sermons on several occasions, octavo bound, 1
s. 6 d. Papal Tyranny, as it was exercised over England for some Ages, with two
Sermons on the fifth of Nov. by Dr. Du Moulin, in quarto, 1 s. 6 d. -- His
Sermon at the Funeral of Dr. Turner Dean of Canterbury. 6 d.

