A SERMON Preached before HIS MAJESTY at Whitehall, March 12. 1664/5.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, B. Lord Bishop of Lincoln.

Published by His Majesty's special Command.

London, Printed for Timothy Garthwait, 1665.

1 THESSALONIANS. 4.11. And that ye study to be quiet.


AND] is a word that takes hold of something that went before, without which
the sense of that which follows is not full. That which went next before is, We
beseech you to increase more and more. We beseech you, is that we are to take
into the Text, and then it runs thus, We beseech you to study to be quiet.

But all the use I shall make of it, now we have it here, is but to give you a
taste beforehand of the nature and quality of this duty, That it is no trivial
thing little to be regarded, but that which obliged S. Paul, Sylvanus, and
Timotheus, for they all joined in it, to be so earnest, as to beseech them to
study to be quiet. 2. And that which commends this duty the more is, (as we use
to say, Men are best known by the company they keep) And] brings in this Duty
in the company of the best of Virtues, Charity, for that place S. Paul gives it
above all; Col. 3.14.
Above all things put on Charity, which is the bond of perfection. To study to
be quiet, and to increase in brotherly love and charity, for that led the way
before, are two duties bound together in the same Exhortation. 3. Quiet is not
only a fit companion for Charity, but an Allie to it, and grows out of it, as
the branch out of the stock; for where brotherly love is, there will be always
quiet too. 4. To make all suit the better with Charity, the Exhortation is
advanced by a Dialect of Love, We beseech you. Paul, Sylvanus, and Timotheus,
were all Apostolical men, and might command, as S. Paul of himself in another
case to Philemon, Though I might be bold to enjoin thee, yet for loves sake I
rather beseech you. And lastly, that which might very well set this edge upon
their affections, was, that which happened to the Thessalonians at their first
conversion; for this Epistle was written immediately after. The story we have
in the 17 chap. of the Acts: When S. Paul had preached the Gospel to them, and
with good success; for v. 4. Some of them believed, and consorted with Paul and
Silas, and of the devout Greeks a great multitude, and of the chief women not a
few. But v. 5. The Jews who believed not, moved with envy, took unto them
certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and set all the
City in an uproar, and assaulted the house of Jason, and sought to bring them
out to the people; mad enough of themselves; but the more to ferment and enrage
them, they charge the Apostles with the fault that they themselves were acting;
These are they that turn the world upside-down. S. Paul having escaped this
fury by going to Athens, and there considering in what a case he left his new
Converts, both them and their Doctrine; them in a furious tumult, and their
Doctrine under the reproach of troubling the world; out of a zeal, no doubt,
and desire to remove that scandal from the Faith, of all things begs and
beseeches them to study to be quiet.

But how will this concern us? I wish we never had, and had not still the same
occasion. It is not so long since, that we should forget how our late troubles
first brake in upon our quiet: We had unbelieving Jews then amongst us too,
and some, as was thought, in the literal sense; who moved with envy of the
times, took unto them likewise a company of lewd fellows of the baser sort, set
the City in an uproar; and we may remember whose houses they beset (as the Jews
did Jasons) none of the meanest, and cried out for that justice which
themselves deserved. And there were Religions in the world then too many, to
the scandal of the true, who led on, and blew up those tumults: And even now,
though (God be thanked) they dare not be so bold to assault us in the streets,
and beset our houses as they did then; yet still keep their quarters and
leaguers within doors, with more secrecy, but no less danger.

It will not therefore be unseasonable for us now, who have the same cause the
Thessalonians had, with the same affection the Apostle did, to beseech you to
study to be quiet. We have all need of quiet, and quiet it seems has need of
study, and study has need of Gods blessing, and therefore before we proceed
further, Let us pray, etc.

THe parts of the Text are two; What we are to study, And that we are to
study. First, What? That ye study to be quiet. Quiet is here commended under
the notion and quality of an Art or Science; for we are enjoined to study it.
And in them we are to look, first, to the object, the nature and quality of it;
and then to the Principles and Theorems whereon the Art is grounded.

1. For the nature and kind of this Quiet first: For there be many things lay
claim to this word, which are either unfit for our study, or improper to this
place. As first, there is a quiet from all motion or action that is good or
useful; to do nothing but eat and drink and sleep, or worse: Away with that
quiet; it neither deserves our study, nor needs it. This is Negotiosa quies; we
are commanded in the words following to be busy as well as quiet; we are both
to study to be quiet, and to do our own business.

2. There is a Quiet, not simply from all, but public business; when men
retire themselves for private study or devotion. This may be allowed, and
commended too, when the necessities of their Countries requires them not. But
because public employments are seldom forced upon any, nor need to be; for no
man's parts or abilities are so great, which may not truly, and certainly will
be thought such as can very well be spared: They therefore who affect that
privacy, may be secure from that necessity; they who have a will to be quiet
for devotion or study, need not study to be quiet, the access to that is easy
enough.

3. There is another Quiet, more commendable in its self, and needs our study
too; To compose our unruly and disordered passions and affections, which raise
tumults and commotions within us, that will not suffer us to be at rest or
quiet day or night. In the midst therefore of all the temptations of good, or
storms of ill fortune to rest securely and contentedly, whatsoever happens to
our private, is certainly an admirable temper, and well worthy our best care
and study; and was that which S. Paul himself it seems studied, for he said he
learned it; I have learned in what estate soever I am, Phil. 4.11.
therewith to be content.

But the quiet we are here to study is not properly within us, but without us;
it is not simply a quiet from motion, but commotion, a troubling of others.

4. And that I may contract my argument and bring it into as narrow a compass
as may be, I shall not take in every of the disturbances of the quiet of
others: No not that which is the greatest of all, and most contrary to peace
and quiet, Civil Wars and broils. The mischiefs of that we have learned so
lately to our cost, and so perfectly, that I hope we need not be set to study
that now: when every good man was put to his study how to live, and when vile
and contemptible wretches ranted in plenty and power.

The horrid fruits and consequences of that great disturber of quiet, War, have
induced some learned men, as well as others, to think all wars unlawful; I
should have been much inclined to that opinion upon the strictest rules of
Christianity, if War were not sometimes necessary to Peace. A foreign War for
that reason may be lawful, but a civil and domestic never. And the reason of
this difference is, because for the composing of all quarrels that may arise
between subjects, God has by his Ordinance provided a remedy in Princes and
Magistrates, from whom alone we are to seek for revenge or defense. But for
such differences as arise between free Princes and States, because there is no
Judge on earth, to whom they may have recourse for their relief, being destitute
of the common remedy, they may, without question, make use of that sword which
God has put into their hands to defend their subjects from the injuries as
well of strangers as their own. Nor are they in this Judges in their own cause,
which has some appearance of injustice; for a foreign War, for defect of a
competent Judge on Earth, is but an appeal to the supreme Judge of Heaven and
Earth. And when they go into the Field, it is but to plead their cause before
God, with whom are the issues of War. Only they had need be careful, that the
cause they bring before him be good; For shall not the Judge of all the world do
right? But the must leave this to Princes and their Ministers, who are the
only proper students of that quiet, which is disturbed by War, and come to
that which may and must be the study of us all: That is, a quiet from troubles
that arise from different judgments and persuasions in matters of Religion,
which cause sects and divisions in it, though they break not out into an open
War. Not that War be quite left out of the sectaries reckoning. For though
Civil Wars and rebellions have their beginning for the most part from the
ambition or discontent of a few, yet because the people, who are the necessary
instruments of that mischief, be not apt to serve the ambition of others, if it
comes barefaced to them, the mask of Religion is always put on, wherein all
people are concerned, which makes it a common and popular interest. And
therefore you shall scarce hear of a Rebellion of late times, in which Religion
did not carry the Colors at least, if not command in chief.

But I shall nevertheless at this time forbear to make that any part of the
Schismatics charge, but treat them upon their own terms, that they are as
great enemies to War as any that object it to them: Yet I must charge them all
to be guilty of the breach of peace and quiet in the Church, and that not
accidentally, which may sometimes bear excuse, but necessarily; it is
connatural and incident to the very nature of schism, which is a rent or
division, so the word signifies. It is the worst disturbance that can be to any
body, to be torn in pieces. It dissolves the bonds by which the parts are
joined together, especially that which unites them to the Head; for schism in
the Churches notion is properly a separation from the Head and authority, and
is the same in the Church that Rebellion or Treason is in the State. Now as
every disobedience to the King and the Laws is not Treason, though against the
King, but the disclaiming the right and power the King has to govern, and the
practice of such things, by which his Regalia and rights are usurpt by others,
as to make War, to make Laws, to thrust Officers upon him, to order the Coin,
these and of the like kind are only Treason. So every error or disobedience in
Religion makes not a schism, but the disclaiming the right and power the
Church has to govern them, and a usurpation of a right to themselves, to order
and frame points of Belief, and Forms how to serve and worship God, apart from
the Church, for so went the style of the ancient Church for Schism, altar
contra altar, which in our modern dialect is a Conventicle against the Church.
For though Schism be formally a separation from the Head, yet consequently it
works upon the members; for that which was at first but difference of opinion,
soon begets a disaffection, and from that grows to hatred and contempt, and so
falls into the practice of such things as destroy the very being and power of
Religion, which consists in the mutual offices of Charity; and though this
mischief breaks not out into an actual War, yet is always accompanied with most
unnatural and unchristian practices, as S. James long since observed, Jam.
3.16. Where envy and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work. Now to
avoid all this, it will highly concern us to study to be quiet.

Having cleared the first Point, the Object of our study, Quiet, and wherein
the sormalis ratio of it consists, and how it comes to be disturbed by Schism:
The next Point is, to enquire into the Principles whereon we are to ground our
study; for if there should be an error or mistake in them, all our labor and
study is lost, or worse; for an inveterate, grounded, studied error is so much
the harder to be reclaimed. It was no unreasonable demand therefore of the
Philosopher, who asked a double reward for those Scholars that had been already
entered into the study of Philosophy, because his pains would be double with
them, to undo first, and cast out those false prejudices which they had
already learned.

Now if it should happen, that they which are otherwise studious and desirous
of peace, should not do the things that make for peace, as the Apostle
requires, Romans 14.10.
our study will grow upon us, first to unlearn those false deceitful
principles of peace, before we enquire into the true: Of some of the chief of
these therefore I shall give you an account in the first place. It will conduce
much to the peace of the Church, they say, First,

1. If Religion were free, and all compulsory means forborne, 2. If mere
Errors in Judgment howsoever were not punished as crimes, which is not in the
power of any to help. 3. Or if that, yet (Thirdly) That omission of Forms and
Ceremonies were not more severely and frequently punished, then notoriouus and
scandalous crimes. 4. If fewer Articles and Points of Religion were defined, it
would make more room in the Church for those that dissent. 5. Another is, If
men of moderate Opinions were only employed in the Church. 6. The last, and
most importunate pretender to peace, is, Liberty of Conscience.
But that none of all these are things that make for peace, I shall show with
as much brevity as the matter is capable of; as first,

1. Not the forbearance of all compulsory means by punishments, which, they
say, is repugnant to that freeness with which Religion should be entertained,
and only forces men to an hypocritical obedience to that which in their
judgments they detest.

Religion, I grant, should be free; it is no Religion which is not so: But it
is as true, that every other act of virtue, and obedience to the Laws should be
free likewise; but therefore not to punish them that transgress, were to
proclaim a perpetual Jubilee, and set open all prison doors: God would never
have enjoined the Magistrate to punish temporally, nor himself threatened to
punish eternally, if the fear of that did corrupt our obedience: For our
Savior in the Parable, when the guests came not to the banquet at his
invitation, Luke 14.23.
commanded his servants to compel them to come in. And where they say, the
fruit of that is but hypocrisy; Hypocrites they are like enough to be, but
from a worse cause, not from the punishment, but their own frailties, because
they prefer their temporal safety before the eternal blessing which Christ has
promised to all that suffer for his sake and the truth. Secondly, It is true,
that punishments reach not directly the inward man, nor do they teach or inform
the Judgment, that is, they do not perfect the work; but are nevertheless a
good beginning to it: For, Fear is the beginning of Wisdom, which Love must
perfect. Though the Needle stays not in the Garment, yet it must lead the
Thread that makes it up. The Rod indeed does not teach the child, yet scares him
to his book where he may learn: So though punishments do not perfect and
accomplish our duty, yet they set us to our studies, to consider that we do not
rashly cast our selves upon danger, which otherwise possibly we would never
think off, but run on whither our wild vain fancies and groundless persuasions
led us: For Spes impunitatis est illecebra peccandi. Punishments therefore are
both justified for the good they do, and are absolved from the evil they are
pretended to do; and therefore wholly to forbear them in matters of Religion is
no good principle whereon to ground the Churches peace

That howsoever it be in other matters of Religion, it would make much for the
quiet of the Church, if Errors in Judgment were not punished as crimes,
because no man can be abler and wiser then God has made him.

It is true, that an Error, so long as it stays in the Understanding, and goes
no further, is not properly a sin; for the Understanding is not agens liberum,
but passive. In that the eye of the mind is as the eye of the body; if that be
naturally short-sighted, it is no fault that it sees not so far as another: But
if the weakness of the Understanding participate with the Will, which is agens
liberum, and so the Error comes within our power, then it may be properly a
sin. This is the case of all that dissent in Sects; for though in speculation
the Understanding is distinct from the Will, yet in practice they are seldom
severed. For it is morally impossible, that after a man has conceived an
opinion, he should not be well pleased with it, and have a will as occasion is
to defend and propagate it too. And when it is Voluntarium, no doubt but it is
Peccatum, and when error grows to be a sin, I know no reason why it may not be
punished; for interest reipublicae peccata puniri. But for all that it is, they
say, a great disturbance of quiet to be tied to assent to that we cannot know
nor comprehend. That Is a great mistake. I know there is much exception taken to
the too punctual definitions of some mysteries of the faith, and particularly
in the Creed commonly called by Athanasius, where there are many particulars
which they cannot know nor comprehend. Whereas in truth it is not required of
them, they are not bound to know them, but to believe them; for it is the mercy
of God, that the defect of our knowledge may be supplied by the knowledge of
others; for to believe is to see with other men's eyes, as knowledge is with our
own.

But may we safely trust others in that which so nearly concerns as a Creed?
Yes sure, and it is as well the mercy, as the command of God, that we should
trust those that watch over our souls; yet still that must be to supply the
defect of our knowledge, not otherwise; for the Church is not Lord of our Faith,
but helper of our Ignorance. It supplies the defect of our sight, it does not
put it out: for if a man knows the contrary, he is not bound to believe others;
for if he can see with his own eyes, why shall he be tied to see with other
men's?

But then we must distinguish betwixt not knowing the negative, and a positive
knowing the contrary: for if we refuse to believe merely because we do not know
or understand, we leave no place for Faith at all, which is the benefit to see
by others. And for that positive knowledge which discharges us of believing
others, that we be not mistaken, it is not every conjectural or probable
persuasion will do it, but certain knowledge: and when that is, we may safely
learn from the Schools; Ubi non est formido contrarii, after diligent search
and enquiry, when there remains no scruple, doubt, or fear of the contrary,
when the understanding is fixed, we are said to be certain.

If this knowledge will serve to discharge us of believing others, every one
that dissents will say he knows the contrary, yea, and if need be will swear to
it too; for that is an expedient lately found out to obtain that liberty, That
they may be admitted to swear they know the contrary to that which is
commanded. Truly, if they will say it, and think so too, whether they swear it
or no, I think we may safely absolve them from the guilt of disobdience: but
that must be in foro Conscientiae only, and let them make the best use they
can of that; yet in foro externo we can not; for there the Judge must give
sentence according to his knowledge, and not according to the knowledge of the
party, if he will do justice. And that course can be no good friend to Peace,
which is an enemy to Justice.

the omission of Forms and Ceremonies is more severely punished then some foul
and scandalous crimes.

To this I answer, First, That they who object this, are not to be trusted with
the balance of sins, for we know how the Market went for them when they held
the Scale: Obedience to the King and the Laws, and serving God according to
them, were the great scandalous crimes.

2. Allowing it to be true as they say, That omission of Forms and Ceremonies
is by the Church more frequently and severely punished then greater faults. But
how greater? It may be in their proper and natural guilt and obliquity,
according to which sentence shall be given at the day of Judgment, and to death
eternal. But our earthly Tribunals are not erected to anticipate the day of
Judgment, to bring all sinners to trial for whatsoever they have committed in
the flesh; and according to the proper measure of their guilt; but for a
particular end and use; that people, while they live here in the world, and in
society, may be kept in good order and quiet, from doing or receiving injuries.
And to this end is the degree of their punishments commensurate: Treason and
Rebellion are more severely punished in the State then many other heinous
crimes, because they destroy the very foundation of government and Society. And
for the same reason, a schismatical disobedience, though but in matters of Form
and Ceremony, is pursued with more care and strictness, because it destroys the
very end for which the power is given the Church to punish, which is, the
preservation of peace and unity.

For though the Pastors of the Church may and must by way of Instruction, the
better to prepare us for our account at the great and general Judgment, give
every sin the proper weight and measure of guilt, that is by way of
Instruction: But by way of Correction the Church is bound up to certain causes,
and if they keep not their bounds, they shall be sure to hear of a prohibition;
and those Causes are especially such, for which the power is only given, That
the peaceable orderly Worship and service of God be not disturbed.

For though they are ever telling us, it is for trifles, ceremonies, or
indifferent things, it is but the same quarrel the Atheists have against God
himself, for being so much offended for an Apple, a trifle which scarce any man
that has an Orchard would have been troubled with; and one Answer will serve
both in effect. In that forbidden fruit, Gods authority in commanding, and
Adams duty in obeying, were symbolically engaged for him and his, and there was
venom enough in that to infect both. The Rites and Ceremonies of the Church,
in like manner, though not in like degree, though in their opinion as
inconsiderable as the paring of Adams apple, yet when discord and disobedience
is found with them, there is poison enough in that for the strongest antidote
the Church does at any time make use of. Let not that therefore mis-lead or
disturb our Student of Quiet.

If fewer Points and Articles of Religion were defined, that so the Church-door
may be wider open to let in those whose dissent now troubles the peace of the
Church.

It is fit, I grant, the Church-door should stand always open, but for such as
shall be fit to enter; for it would be a dangerous thing to set any door so
wide open to let in an enemy upon us. But to what purpose would we have the
Church-door so wide, when the Gate of Heaven is strait? why should they be
taken in here, if they shall be turned back there? The Church is a City, as
Jerusalem, a City that is at unity in it self; so it is a City too that has
gates and walls to shut our others.

He that came to a little City, where there was a great Gate, merrily warned
the Citizens to take heed lest their City went not out at the Gate, may soberly
be said to those that would have the Church door so wide to let in all Sects,
to take heed lest the Church gets not out at the door: For where so many
Religions are, it may be feared, that soon there will be none at all. If we be
not, as the Apostle commands, built up in the same Faith, it will avail us
little to be found within the same walls.

It is therefore a perverse remedy for peace, to abate or diminish the Articles
and definitions of the Church, which were made of purpose to take away
controversies; it would be a strange course to end controversies, to take away
the definitions. Our Student must read his Books back ward, if he seek for
peace from hence. We might as well say, all the world would be quiet, if there
were no Judges nor Laws to determine differences.

If men of moderate opinions were only taken into employment in the Church.

Moderation, I confess, is an excellent virtue, and much to be desired; Let
your moderation be known unto all men, Phil. 4 5. But then it must be in a
subject capable of it, wherein there are extremes and excesses to be moderated,
as there is certainly in our passions, there it is proper. S. Paul gives it for
a Lesson to all Students in Religion, Ephesians. 4.3^. Let all bitterness, and
wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking, be put away from you, with
all malice; and be ye kind one to another, and tenderhearted, forgiving one
another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. This no doubt is a
very fit temper for quiet, and none more unfit, then angry, waspish, and
domineering spirits.

Only this caution is to be observed in lenity, That it be such as may win men
into the Church, not such as may secure and encourage them to stay without. Yet
lenity and gentleness is so good a Virtue, that I am loath to dast water upon
it, or seem to temper it.

But for men of moderate opinions, I am at a loss to know what they should be;
for moderation there cannot be, but between extremes: Now what extremes are
there of opinions in a settled Church, unless the Church be one extreme, and the
Schismatic another? and then the man of moderate opinions is he that is part
Churchman, and part Schismatic. I hope none are so unkind to their Mother the
Church, to charge extremities upon her Doctrine or Laws. If there be any such,
they are but Hybrides in Religion, and make a new sect in the Church, as
pernicious to the peace of it as any of the rest. The truth is* moderate
opinions are a Chimaeta, a fancy; either nothing, or somewhat worse then
nothing: for possibly they may bestow that good word (Moderation) upon such as
care little either to observe the Law themselves, or to require it of others.
If these be the men of moderate opinions, I wonder how they will be able to
give account of their justice and fidelity to the trust committed to them. Yes,
they say, very well; It is rather prudence then injustice, to mitigate and
sweeten the sharpness and rigor of the Law. But if the Law it self be too
rigorous, in God's name let it be amended, and not left to the arbitrary power
of others to do it, for that is known to be a remedy ten times worse then the
disease. It is said in Physic, I know not how truly, that an error in the
first concoction, is not mended in the second: It is certainly true here, an
error or excess in the Law, which is the first concoction of justice, will be
ill cured afterward by an arbitrary partiality in the execution. I hope
therefore no wise Student of quiet, will take such Moderators for the best
Ministers of peace. But I leave them, and come to the most popular, and
therefore most dangerous principle in the study of quiet; that is, Liberty of
Conscience.



First, That there is a great deal of reason to restrain the Conscience, and
Secondly, That there is no reason to give it liberty.

1. There is reason enough to restrain the Conscience, for the mischief it does
to Quiet when it is at liberty; for all the discord and divisions of the Church
grow from hence, and that is a mischief we have reason to avoid. Romans 16.17.
Mark them (says S. Paul) which cause divisions among you, and avoid them.
There is reason then to mark that which causes them to make divisions, and
that is the Conscience. It is no quietter in the Commonwealth, where it
destroys the very Foundation of Government, and frustrates the Ordinance of God
for it in Princes and Magistrates; for what is left for them to do, if every
one must follow the dictate of his own Conscience, that is, in plain terms, be
bound only to obey himself.

This is no slander to the pretenders of conscience; they will say as much
themselves, if ye ask them. Ask the Schismatic why he joins not with the
congregation of Gods people? and he will tell you, His conscience will not
suffer him. Ask the Rebel in the State, why he takes up Arms to the ruin of
his King and Country? and his Conscience will answer for him, That it is Gods
cause, and it is to do him service. Ask him again, why he does not repent of
the mischief done by it? (for that they seldom do) and the Conscience will
serve that turn too, It is Gods cause, and the conscience will not suffer them
to repent of that. Thus we see, the Conscience, as it is used, does not only
open a door to sin, but shuts the very door to mercy, that is Repentance.

If S. John said true, as no doubt he did, That there were many Antichrists,
then possibly the Conscience thus improved may be one of them For, it sets it
self in the Church above all that is called God, yea, and God himself too, in a
sense; for his Laws are not to be obeyed, unless the Conscience first allows
them to be his: and thus all is resolved into the Conscience, as the dernier
resort and last appeal.

While the King and the Pope are contending for Supremacy, the Conscience
without scruple puts in for it against both, and takes it for her right to be
supreme in all causes as well Ecclesiastical as Civil. There is great complaint
in the world of domineering over the Conscience; but have we not rather cause
to complain of the domineering of the Conscience? And if any list to see the
Conscience acting all this, we need go no further then our late times, when the
Conscience was loose for a while; one would think Hell had broke loose, so
filled was on a sudden the Church with sects, and the Commonwealth with
confusion. There is reason enough therefore to restrain the Conscience that
acts all this, if we knew how.

The next thing I undertook to show, is, That there is no reason why it should
have liberty; and particularly, not that which gives the fairest color to it:
Neither the duty we owe to Truth, which seems to have some right to liberty;
nor that we owe to the Will of God, that nothing be done against the
Conscience. For the first.

Truth is that (I confess) which no consideration of peace may warrant us to
desert; for I could never be of that opinion, That Truth in smaller matters may
for Peace sake be either denied or prejudiced. Magna est veritas etiam in
minimis; in Gods name let it prevail over all. But then it must be Veritas in
rebus, not Veritas in intellectu. For though Truth be defined to be a
conformity of the understanding to the thing as it is indeed, yet takes the
name from both; from the thing where Truth is originally, and from the
understanding where it is only represented. Truth in that first reference to
the thing, admits no qualification; things must be taken as they are, be they
never so small: but as the things come to be represented to, and entertained by
the Understanding, by reason of the mistakes and errors that may happen in
that, though Truth it self, or Truth in the thing cannot, yet my apprehension
of it may both yield to better, and may sometimes be waved for peace sake. To
argue from Truth in the thing, to Truth in the appehension only, is a fallacy
against the Rules of Reasoning, we call it Petitio principii, or a begging of
the question. If a Sectary should beg an alms, I wish he may have it; but he
shall beg long ere it be granted him, that he has the truth. How then can he
presume upon that truth, to which he has no other title but his own
persuasion, which can be no better then any man's else, who is as strongly
persuaded to the contrary? And this is all the service that Truth can do the
Conscience for liberty.

2. The second thing whereupon the Conscience especially bears it self so high,
is the Will of God that nothing be done against the Conscience. That no doubt
is a great offense, and made so by the greatest Authority: Yet the same God
that requires our obedience to the Conscience, commands us likewise to obey our
Parents, our Princes and Governors, and all these stand upon as good authority
as the Conscience. If we cannot reconcile our obedience to that with our
obedience to these, we may sin against God, when we do not sin against the
Conscience. For though God has erected a Tribunal in every man's breast, and
there set the Conscience to be a Judge of all our actions, there be other
Tribunals of Justice besides, of Gods erection too, and to which he has
subjected the very Conscience. Ye must needs be subject (Romans 13.) not only
for wrath, but also for conscience. And after both these, there is another
Tribunal in Heaven, to which all Judges, Conscience and all must give an
account one day. For the Conscience is no Court of Record; the Decrees and Acts
passed there, will be no good evidence at that Bar; there all must be
re-examined, and tried over again. Though I know nothing by my self, (says S.
Paul) yet am I not thereby justified. Though he could not charge his Conscience
with any offense, he knew a further trial must pass upon him before he could be
absolved. My Conscience indeed may be pleaded there in evidence against me as a
Witness to condemn me, but not as a Judge to absolve me. It is a great mistake
in the power and operation of the Conscience: That it will condemn us, if we do
any thing against it, the Text is clear for that; but that it will absolve us
for that we do according to it, there is no Text, I am sure, for that We must
then be tried by the Law, and not by the Conscience: For how the proceedings
will be at that Bar, we have a record, Matthew. 25.31. When the Son of Man shall
come in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him; Then shall be sit upon the
throne of his glory, and before him shall be gathered all nations. When the
Court was set, the Charge was given to those on the left hand; I was an
hungered, and ye gave me no meat; I was athirst, and ye gave me no drink; I was
a stranger, and ye took me not in; naked, and ye clothed me not; sick and in
prison, and ye visited me not.

To this Charge the Conscience (no doubt confidently enough) pleaded Not
guilty; Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked,
or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee? Their Conscience could
accuse them of none of these things; for all that, the Sentence went against
them upon a point of Law and Equity; In that ye did it not to these (says the
Judge) ye did it not to me. And for this they were condemned to eternal
punishment.

If they that stand so much upon their consciences did seriously consider this,
they would find as little cause to desire that liberty, as there is to grant
it, seeing it stands them in so little stead when they have most need of it;
for when they think their conscience shall answer for them, they must then
answer for their conscience, and upon trial, the conscience may prove the great
offender. Thus have I hitherto given you an account of some of the vulgar
mistaken principles of Quiet, which our Student is first to unlearn; which are
all but the patching up of a false deceitful peace, condemned in the Politics
under the name of a Syncretismus, when all the Factions in Crete joined
together in a common danger, which lasted no longer then the cause of it: like
the bonds of a hard. Frost, that binds Earth and Water, Sticks and Stones all
together, till the Sun comes to shine upon them, and then they all presently
return to their proper place and nature again.

But I fear I have run out all my time almost in these mistaken ways of peace:
I presume it will be a greater offense to leave you here now, then to beg a
little more time to set you in the right way, though I shall not go beyond the
office of a Mercury, to point the hand where it lies.

There is the Kings highway to peace, and the Students private way, and both
good in their kind. With the Kings way I shall not meddle, as being fitter
matter for our thankfulness then instruction, who has already paved the way
for us by wholesome Laws for that purpose. But because often times Vitia sunt
remediis fortiora, the compulsory way by Law, though always necessary, is not
always effectual; to the Kings way we must add the Students also: That every
one in his particular makes it his care and business to contribute to it, that
it be an artificial studied peace, to which not Fear only, but Conscience of
Duty and Religion obliges us.

Now every good Student of any Science searches into the true and proper cause
of things; for, Scire est per causas cognoscere. If the cause of all division
in the Church, be differing in judgment, nothing can cure that but a consent.
S. Paul therefore prescribes that for the remedy, 1 Cor. 5.10. That there be no
divisions among you; how may that be helped? it follows, But that ye be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. This is
the true Apostolical Principle, whereon we are to ground our Study of Quiet:
For all the fine things and sentences that are spoken for peace and quiet, will
little move those that are, and may very well be confident, they ought not
howsoever have peace with Sin, or Error. Unless therefore we can be first
persuaded that we ought not to charge the Church with either, we do nothing for
Peace. This I confess is the great difficulty, yet if this be not done, there
can be no hope of Peace.

And to do this, I shall not send our Student to the Polemick School, to
convince him out of speculative Principles of Reason and Divinity; for to that
study, some have not capacity, others not leisure: I shall only commend to him
some practical Principles of Religion, obvious to all, and denied by none, that
out of them he may learn not to dissent from, or condemn the Church of Error.

To prevent the passing that sentence, let the Student 1. Study himself, his
own condition. 2. Let him study the Church against which he passes sentence.
3. Let him study the nature and quality of the things whereupon judgment is
given. 4. Let him consider well the manner of proceeding in judgment.
In all which we shall find some known Principle of Religion to direct us.

1. First, In the study of our selves, and our own condition: Religion teaches
us to have an humble, lowly, mean opinion of our selves; and not without cause,
whether we respect our Understandings, or our Affections: Our Understandings
are naturally weak, imperfect, short-sighted, we know but in part, the best of
us; and our Affections too are disloyal to our Understandings, The heart of
man, says the Prophet, is deceitful above all things. We have little reason
then to trust our selves much in either. He that is truly conscious of his own
weakness or lameness, will be content to be supported by others. If we study
this point well, our own infirmities, we should learn more willingly to assent
to, and take support from the Church.

Especially, if in the second place, we study that too whose Governors Religion
likewise teaches us to obey, For they watch over our souls, Heb. 13.17. If it
be a good point of Religion, in lowliness of mind to esteem others better then
our selves, Phil. 2.3. it is Religion and Reason both, to think our Governors
wiser too; for there is a presumption always in favor of them. S. Paul gives
it for a rule to Timothy, Not to receive an accusation against an Elder, 1 Timothy
5.19.
but before two or three witnesses, because it is to be presumed on the part of
Age and Authority, to know more, and offend less. But when it comes to be the
whole Eldership, all our Governors jointly, the presumption is so much the
stronger. If we add this study to the former, how little reason we have to
trust our selves, and how much we have to trust our Governors, we will not
rashly pass sentence against them, if we have either Reason or Religion in us.

3. And yet we have more work for our Student; Let him, in the third place,
consider the nature and quality of the things whereupon judgment is given, how
apt they are to deceive us. Truth is many times so like an Error, and Error
comes so near to Truth, that he had need be careful and circumspect that shall
distinguish them in some cases. And in others again, Truth lies hid under many
folds, especially ambiguity of words, the common cheat of all Students, who are
more often deceived into opinions then convinced. It is not strange to see so
many go astray from the Church, to whom the things of it are represented under
the covert of false names, when they hear the Government of it called Tyranny;
obedience, slavery; contempt, courage; license, liberty; frenzy, zeal; order,
superstition. How easily thus may simple people mistake their way, and fall
into the pit that is covered over with shadows and false names of things? When
he has studied this point well,

4. Let him, in the fourth place, be well advised in what manner he proceeds in
judgment, and upon what evidence: For, allowing the Conscience to be a Judge,
it must not trespass upon the Rules of good Judicature, as, both sides must be
heard impartially, which is seldom done; the Conscience must not be misled no
more then other Judges, by prejudice, passion, or favor; for what can that
judgment be worth which is perverted by any of these. Now if we examine how
most men come to pass sentence against the Church, we shall find it to be upon
very slight evidence: It may be their Education, they have been always brought
up that way; for Sects commonly run in a blood, in a family: Or they have been
so taught, they say, by good men; that indeed is the sum and upshot of the
Faith of most that dissent, the credit given to some weak, private, ignorant
Instructor, whose person they have in admitation, without any great cause, God
knows; whereas their private judgments, because they are parties, ought always
to be supected, if we be wise; and because against their Governors, to be
contemned, if we be obedient.

All these well studied, may make for peace, when possibly Arguments, and
Disputes, and Punishments too will not do it. And yet if still none of these
will make our Student quiet,

Let him, in the last place, make trial of a common remedy that prevails in all
cases of difficulty: Let him but study his own security, the safest course, and
he shall find that better provided for in the Churches judgment, then in his
own; for, if he should err in following the Church, or his Governors, for that
is possible, the greatest part of that guilt, some say all, I say only the
greatest part, must lie at their door that command that which is unlawful: But
if they should err in following their own judgment, or a Judge of their own
choosing, for that makes it their own too, and that is more then possible, all
the blame and guilt then must of necessity and inexcusably fall upon
themselves. Upon these principles, setting aside all those that may convince
our judgments in particulars, from these alone, I say, we see how safe, how
prudent, how religious a thing it is to submit our private judgments to the
public, for the peace of the Church.

It remains only now, that we employ our best endeavor and study for it,
which is the second part of the Text, and the last thing to be considered,

That ye study.

STudy is an earnest intention of the mind, by diligent search and enquiry.
Wishing well to Quiet, or speaking well of it, will not serve; the greatest
disturbers of Peace will do that many times, give it a good word, when they
will not part with a fancy for it. And yet Quiet is a thing that requires
care and pains somewhat more then ordinary: For when S. Peter likewise speaks
of peace, it is in words of the same import, Seek peace, and ensue it. If it be
hidden, 1 Pet. 3.11
seek it out; if it flies from you, pursue after it. It is a busy thing to be
quiet. The word here translated, Study, is in the Original (...) Be ambitious
of it; that is, pursue and study it as you would do Honor and Preferment: And
that, I think, is as much as can be desired; and yet no more then Quiet both
deserves and needs.

First, It deserves it. For though quiet be rather Status vitae, then Virtus;
it is no Virtue it self, yet the best soil to plant Virtue in The fruits of
righteousness are sown in peace, Jam. 3.18. So are all the fruits of Industry;
Learning, Arts, Sciences, Traffic, Commerce, flourish most in the calm
temperate clime; but in troubles and dissentions every good thing goes
backward, only mischief thrives It fares with troubled times, as in troubled
waters; all the filth, dirt and mire in the bottom gets then up to the top. We
saw as much when our waters were lately troubled; what a deal of filth, dirt
and mire, what sordid stuff was then got up to the top and highest place of
rule and command? So much are we the more obliged to study that peace and
quiet, which has sunk them to their proper place again, the bottom: And there
let them lie, if you would be quiet.

2. As it deserves therefore our study, so it needs it too; for it is a
difficult thing to be quiet, the way to it lies through so many parts and
duties of Religion, and not the easiest of them neither: To deny our selves,
(...) humility and lowliness of mind to acknowledge our own weakness and
frailty, to submit our judgments to others, as better and wiser then our
selves; to subdue our passions and lusts, from whence the Apostle observes Wars
and Contentions to come, from our Lusts; and to all these the Flesh has
naturally a reluctance. Our Student therefore has need to contend with himself
to be at peace with others.

S. Paul was at Athens when he wrote this Epistle, a famous University for the
study of all liberal Arts and Sciences. I cannot say he had these in his
thought, when he commended this study to the Thessalonians, as an Art of more
use then any he found at Athens: Yet when I see him so passionately earnest for
it, to beseech them to study, we have reason to value it as an Art well worthy
of Schools, and Professors, and Students. And they would make a Royal Society,
whereof the King himself is Master, who is our Peacemaker by office, and by a
care equal to that, has by Law provided, 1 Timothy 2.2.
that under Him we may live a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness and
honesty. He has little sense of Honor, that will not enter himself a Student
under that conduct. The very word for Study, (...), carries Honor in it.

And yet I can tell them of a higher School for it then this, and wherein Kings
themselves are content to be Students. Our Lord Christ, the great Mediator of
our eternal peace with Heaven, would not be brought into the world without a
Song of Peace on Earth, by Angels: And when he left the World, bequeathed it as
a Legacy after him, My peace I leave with you. S. Joh. 14.27.
And when he comes again to judge the world, we have reason to look that he
will call us to a reckoning how we use his Legacy. And so he will too; for he
is that Lord, Matthew. 24. that when he came and found some smiting their
fellow servants, commanded them to be cut asunder, and have their portion with
hypocrites: A punishment well fitted to the offense; there was a schism in the
fault, and there shall be another schism in the punishment; they who sundred
and divided from their Brethren, should themselves be cut asunder, and have
their portion with hypocrites. But for the Peacemakers, when he comes, he will
provide better company, for they shall be called the Children of God. Matthew.
5.9.
Blessed are they then whom the Lord when he comes shall find at their studies
of that Quiet which gives them so fair a Title to Eternal Rest and Peace in
Heaven with Christ, and all the Children of God.

FINIS.

