THE INTEREST OF THE SPIRIT IN Prayer.

By H. Lukin.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Brabazon Aylmer, at the three Pigeons in Cornhil,
1674.

READER,
THe following Discourse was a Sermon preached some years since, and one that
heard it, desiring a Copy of it, I did at length yield to his importunity, and
sent it him, as now you see it, with the addition of these few Latin
Quotations, which I do not use to interrupt the attention of ordinary hearers
with in popular Discourses; and this I did, not purposing to make it thus
public, but having once transcribed it, I consented further to the desire of
some to have it printed, but never had opportunity to review what I had written
from the first time that I sent it till I saw it from the Press. This I thought
meet to advertise you of, that you may not expect much accurateness (though you
knew not the Author before) nor a clear and full discussion of such things, as
a discourse of this nature would allow, only some brief touches of it. I hope
none will complain of a bold pressing of Scripture to serve an Hypothesis, of
propension to any party, of a slavish subjection to the Authority of great
Names, of a Skeptical or Magisterial censuring of other Men of their Opinions;
I have endeavored to show that candor, freedom, impartiality, moderation,
that I may not be afraid of, or ashamed to own it as a Man, a Scholar, a
Christian, a Minister, either when it is exposed to the censure of others, or
at that day when every man's work shall be made manifest. I have, for the
finding out of the truth herein, attended to two things, Scripture and
Experience; both of which we should have a due regard to in our search after
Truth. As in Physic, through practice and Experience be a great advantage to
Men, and make things more clear, as Examples do Rules: yet if Men trust wholly
thereto, the Emperical Physician may be deceived as soon as the Rational or
Methodical: because there being so many things that effects depend upon, or may
proceed from, it is very easy to mistake that for the cause of a thing, which
is not the cause of it; and though they see the effects, they know not what
concurs thereto, or what has the chief influx into them: and I have often
observed and lemented Men's being imposed upon by this fallacy of non causa pro
causa, or taking that for the cause of a thing which is not, especially in
matters of Religion. Besides, Men are apt to infer general conclusions from
particular experiments, and so either measure themselves by others, or make
their own experience a standard for the trial of others. So on the other hand,
many times Men attain not the true sense of Scripture, while they consider
things only in the Idea or notion, without examining how things are really in
particular Subjects. I know we must not make Man the measure of all things as
Protagoras in another sense. Men must be tried by Scripture, not the Scripture
by Men. Yet we must acknowledge the Scripture speaks sometimes according to
what really is: or, it speaks as things are sometimes found to be, not
according to what is constantly or universally true. Wherefore I have
endeavored to find out what the Scripture, according to its ordinary style and
manner of speaking may intend in such places as I have had occasion to inquire
into: and have likewise observed and examined what is the ordinary experience
of sober serious Christians, who dare not boast of such things as they have not
really found in themselves, but have that experience of God's Gracious working
in them which they would not want for the whole world; and which does establish
them more firmly in the belief of Spiritual things than to be shaken by such
(...), or vain-spirited persons, as are not likely to be acquainted with such
matters, or to be competent Judges of them. There are some Erratas in the
Printing, for those who are in the few words of Hebrew, Greek and Latin, as the
Learned only can take notice of them, so they know how to correct them. There
are some small faults in pointing, and omissions of a letter in some places
which any ordinary Reader may know how to rectify.

The more considerable you may correct thus:

ERRATA.
Page 35. l. 13, r. as he knows. P. 39 l. 3. r. riches of his Mercy. P. 48. l.
19 r. desultorians. P. 55. marg. r. Genesis 45.26. P. 59. l. 17. r. do
confidently. P. 61. l. 4. r. the Philosopher speaks. P. 73. l. 17. r.
ingenuously. P. 75. l. 4. r. desired. P. 83 l. 12. r. to assist. P. 100. l. 6
r. in Prayer.

The Interest of the Spirit in Prayer.
Romans 8.26. Likewise the Spirit also helps our Infirmities: For we know not
what we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes Intercession
for us with Groanings which cannot be uttered.


THere are two Things which are the chief Trouble of Christians in this world;
inward Corruptions, or the Remainders of Sin; and outward Afflictions, or
Tribulations. Against both these does the Apostle comfort and encourage them in
this Chapter, and in these words especially, wherein he shows how the
Holy Ghost, whom our blessed Savior had promised as a Comforter to his People,
does perform this Office, particularly, by assisting us in our Prayers.

For the better understanding of the Words, we may observe, that by
Infirmities, in Scripture, are understood either Afflictions, which we call
natural Infirmities, or sinful Defects, or Imperfections, which we call Moral
or Spiritual Infirmities. It is likely the Apostle understands the former,
where he says, 2 Cor. 12.10.
he takes Pleasure in Infirmities. It can hardly be conceived how he should
take pleasure in moral Infirmities, and without question he understands outward
Afflictions, where he says Christ was compassed about with Infirmities, Heb.
5.2.
for he was free from all sinful Defects; 1 Pet. ^2* 22.
He did no sin, neither was Guile found in his Mouth. Now if the Apostle should
here speak of these natural Infirmities, it is certain the Spirit helps us
against them, by assisting us in our Prayers; Prayer being an excellent Remedy
against afflictions. Wherefore David, when he was in a great Strait, Psalm.
109.4.
resolves to give himself to Prayer: Which Words have much exercised Critics.
But I think our English Translation has fully expressed the Sense of them; and
Prayer is a Remedy against Affliction.

1. As thereby we ease our Minds by pouring out our Hearts to God. Psalm. 62.8.
So the Psalmist expresses the Nature of Prayer. It is an Ease to us in Trouble
to pour out our Complaints into the Bosom of a Friend, Job. 32.20.
and we refresh our selves by giving vent to our passion, if it be a Friend
that will consider our Condition, and pity us in it: so by Prayer we open our
Cause to God, or reveal our Cause to him; Jer. 11 20. Cap. 20.12.
as Jeremiah expresses it: Isa. 63.9.
He is afflicted in all our Afflictions, and pities us therein, Psalm. 103.13.
as a Father pities his Children.

2. Prayer is a Remedy against Afflictions, Psalm. 138.3.
as thereby we obtain support and Comfort under them, or Deliverance from them.
And I may say as much of Prayer, Heb. 11.3. etc.
as the Apostle does of Faith, Jam. 5.16.
the effectual fervent Prayer of a righteous Man avails much: It turned the
Heart of Esau; Genesis 32.11.
it put to Flight the Amalekites; Ex. 17.11.
Numb. 14.17.
It held God's Hand; Exodus 23.11.
It turned away his wrath; Joshua 10.12.13.
It stayed the Sun in the Firmament; It opened Heaven, Jam. 5.17.18.
and shut it again; Yea time would fail me to tell of David, Asa, Jehoshaphat,
Hezehiah, Esther; The Prayer made by the Church for Peter, which opened the
Prison-doors; The thundering Legion in the Time of Aurelius, which were so
prevalent for the Emperor against his Enemies, when he was in a great Strait,
that he thereupon wrote to the Senate to forbear the Persecution of them, of
which, amongst others, we may read Tertullians Apology, Cap. 5. and Eusebius,
Lib. 5. Cap. 5. And the Reason of this Efficacy of Prayer is, because they are
his Children that pray to him, their Prayers are indicted by the Holy Ghost, and
presented by Jesus Christ.

3. Though God do not always answer the Desires of his People in Prayer, yet
he many Times quiets their Hearts so as they go away satisfied, as one that
has left the Management of his Affairs in the hands of a Friend, who he knows
is both faithful and able to look after them: As Hannah when she had poured
forth her Soul before the Lord, 1 Samuel 1.15.18.
went away, and her Countenance was no more sad. And we find that often
verified which Bernard says of himself, Sermon. 32. In Cant. Quoties me Oration
quem pene desperantem suscepit reddidit exultantem et de Venia presumentem? he
went to Prayer oftentimes even despairing, and returned rejoicing and confident
of Pardon. Thus we shall find David beginning his Psalms many times, with
mournful complaints, which he ends with Thanksgiving and Triumph; as
particularly Psalm. 6. Psalm. 13. Psalm. 22. Psalm. 28. Psalm. 69. Psalm. 142.

But Secondly; hereby sometimes are meant moral or Spiritual Infirmities; Psalm.
10.
as the Psalmist accounts it his Infirmity when he was ready to give up his
Hopes; and to complain of God as if he had forgot to be gracious. And these are
the Infirmities which the Apostle requires the strong to bear with in the weak.
Romans 15.1.
Now here it seems to signify those spiritual Infirmities which we are subject
to in our prayers, by what follows in the Text, and I shall make it more fully
appear in mine ensuing discourse. Rom 8.35.
It is said he makes Intercession for us; Which is not to be understood as if
he did mediate or intercede for us, as Christ does, who does also make
Intercession for us. Neither does he intercede in us, using us only as
Instruments to express his Mind, as evil Spirits speak by those who are
possessed by them; but what he does is by way of Assistance, lifting over
against us, as the Greek word is by many interpreted, as he that lifts over
against another to help him, when he is lifting at something that is too heavy
for him: And he is said to intercede, because he helps us therein, or causes
us to intercede: As in one Place it is said the Spirit of Adoption cries Abba
Father; Gal. 4.6.
in another Place that We thereby cry, Abba, Romans 8.15.
Father. 1 King. 8.13.
As Solomon is said to build the Temple at Jerusalem, because he directed,
encouraged, and furnished Materials for the Building of it. Both Christ, and
the Holy Ghost are concerned in our Prayers. Ephs. 2.18.
It is by Jesus Christ through one Spirit that we have Access to the Father. 1
Jo. 2.1. Jo. 14.16.26.
And the same Word translated Advocate, when applied to Jesus Christ, is
likeways frequently applied to the Holy Ghost. And as Advocates do not only
plead for their Clients, but many times dictate to them what they should say;
So both Christ and the Spirit are as Advocates to us. And as Nathan did first
suggest to Bathsheba what she should say, 1 King 1.12. etc.
and then came in himself to confirm her Words, to second them, further to urge
them: So the Spirit does first assist us in drawing up our Petitions, for which
Cause we are said to pray in or by the Spirit or Holy Ghost. Ephesians. 6.18. Jude
20.
And in this respect, as is generally supposed, he is called the Spirit of
Supplication. Zech. 12.10.
And when we have presented our Petitions, then Christ does by his Intercession
further confirm them, and plead with the Father on our Behalf. Now I shall show
particularly what are those Infirmities which we are subject to in Prayer, and
how the Spirit helps them: And the first Infirmity I shall speak of, is that
which the Apostle here mentions in the Text, that is, Ignorance; we know not
what we should pray for as we ought. He says not (...), which might be
understood of an Inability in General, as that they know not to do right, which
is according to the ordinary manner of Expression in several Languages,
particularly the French, and Italian; and our English Bibles do well express
that of the Evangelist, which has puzzled many Critics, make it as sure as ye
can: Matt. 27.65.
But it is here, (...), we know not what we should pray for as we ought. And
this may be understood two ways, either of the Matter of our Prayers, that we
know not, as we should indeed know, what to pray for: or of the manner of them,
we know not what to pray for as we should pray. It is certainly true of both;
As will appear by what I have here to say.

First; we know not what we should pray for: we know not first what we stand in
need of; such is the Latitude of the Commands of God, Psalm. 119.96.
and consequently the extent of our Duty, that although we may know how to
express our Desires in some -- Comprehensive Petitions, which according to a
large Interpretation of them may reach to our several necessities; Yet we
cannot pray explicitly for those several Mercies which we need. And again, so
various are the Occurrences of our Lives, that we know not what particular
temporal Blessings to pray for. As God caused a Gourd to grow up for Jonah,
which he labored not for: So, he prevents us with many Favors, which we
cannot by our foresight or forecast contribute any thing to. Now as it is in
Learning, those who have some Infight into it, may possibly, if they have
Opportunity to furnish themselves with Books, provide such as may serve to
inform them in some general and common Learning; But such is the vast compass
of Learning, as that a young Scholar would not know how to furnish a Library,
so as to have Books of all sorts to serve himself of upon all Occasions. Or, as
in the Accommodations of Life, an ordinary Person may easily know how to
furnish himself with necessaries, or what may serve him to live in a mean or
sordid Manner: But there are many more things required to live neatly and
handsomely, if a man be exact and curious, which an ordinary Man would not think
of. Now thus it is in Matters of Christianity, if a man can satisfy himself to
live at all Adventures with God Lev. 26.21.
(as the Expression is in the margent of our Bibles) a little will serve his
turn; But if a Man will walk circumspectly, Ephesians. 5.15.
or accuratly as a Christian ought to walk, taking heed to his Ways, pondering
the Paths of his Feet, taking heed to his Spirit, keeping his Mouth as with a
Bridle, filling up every Relation with the Duties belonging thereto, filling up
every Duty with the Graces required therein, exercising the Graces requisite to
every Condition; loving Enemies, praying for those that persecute him and
despitefully use him, denying himself, crucifying the flesh with the Affections
and Lusts, watching against Temptations, there is much required to such Manner
of Life, and we shall have many particular Mercies to beg of God in Order
thereto.

Secondly; We know not what is meet and convenient for us to ask; and so
sometimes, as the Sons of Zebedee, Matt. 20.22.
ask we know not what. No man knows what is good for him in this Life. Eccles.
6.12.
And so we pray many Times for that which would be a Cross or a Curse to us,
rather than a Comfort or Blessing. What we pray for as Bread, would, if God
should grant it, prove as a Stone to us, Matt. 7.9
rather break our teeth then refresh or nourish us. Probably our Savior might
in these Words refer to some proverbial Speeches among the Jews: For there were
Proverbs of like Import, or to the same Purpose, in other Nations, as the
Learned know: As in these things there was a near Resemblance or Similitude, as
to outward Show: But the greatest Difference as to their use and effect; So as
a Child seeing some kind of Stone, as a Pumicestone or some such like, might
desire it, as Bread, to satisfy his Hunger; yet his Father, knowing what it
is, would not give it him, as knowing how unfit it would be to answer the
Child's End. And the like may be said of some Fishes, and Serpents; Yea of an
Egg, and a Scorpion, if that be true which Naturalists report of them. The
drift of our Saviors Discourse is, that though Children are so ignorant as to
desire many things as good for them, which their Parents see not good to grant,
as knowing them to be improper means for the attainment of that end which the
Children aim at, or propound to themselves; So we do many times in our Prayers
fix on such things as God sees would not reach the end which we think to attain
thereby: So that God does sometimes deny us in mercy, as well as answer us in
mercy: For Riches, Honor, Wisdom, Learning, Beauty, Wives, Children are great
Blessings, where God is pleased to make them so; But if we peremtorily and
absolutely insist upon them in our Prayers, as Abraham for a Child, Genesis 15.2.
as if all that God could do for him were nothing, if he went childless; God
can give us them alone without that comfort which we expect with them, and so
we receive them, as he did a Ring (which he had lost) with great Joy rewarding
him that brought it, without taking much notice of it; but upon further
Observation, saw, that there was his Ring without the Diamond, so that it was
not worth the reward which he gave for finding of it: Outward good things,
without that Blessing which should make them comforts to us, are not worth
asking. Now the Spirit helps this Infirmity by giving us more Wisdom and
spiritual Understanding. And here I shall do these two Things.

First, show you that this Wisdom and Understanding is from the the Spirit of
God.

Secondly, show you how much this conduces to help us in our Prayers. For the
former it is evident from the Testimony of the Scripture. The Apostle prays
for the Ephesians, Ephesians. 1.17
that God would give them the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the Knowledge
of him. For the Philippians, Phil. 1.9
that their Love might abound more and more in Knowledge, and in all Judgment.
For the Colossians, Col. 1.9.
that they might be filled with the Knowledge of God's Will in all Wisdom and
spiritual Understanding. All which does imply that it is God that gives these;
and that he does it by his Spirit, is without question, 1 Cor. 2.12.
it being thereby that we know the things freely given to us of God. It is he
that takes of the things of Christ and shows them unto us, Joh. 16.14.
and so is a Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, making Christians in their
Measure quick of Understanding in the Fear of the Lord. Isa. 11.2.3.
Now if we could not conceive of the manner of this Work of the Spirit, yet we
should rest in this Evidence, that there is such an effect of it: And we may
further suppose that he gives us an experimental Knowledge of Christian Graces
or Virtues, by Working them in us, that he brings the Heart unto Wisdom, or
causes us to apply our Hearts thereto, by awakening us to a serious sense of
the great importance of heavenly things; and that he does open our eyes, or
elevate our Understandings to understand the mavelous things of God's Law,
Psalm. 119.18.
Rev. 3.18.
and so is as eyesalve to anoint our Eyes, that we may see. And if any shall
yet expect a more satisfactory account of this work of the Spirit, let them
consider how little it is that we understand of the nature of Light, Ephesians. 5.13.
though it be that which makes all other Things manifest; And though we all by
experience know the Benefit thereof, and serve our felves of it.

Now in the next place I shall show how this helps our Ignorance in Prayer:
and, first, we hereby come to understand more of the Compass and Latitude of
our Christian Calling, and how far our Duty extends. Wherefore the Apostle, in
the forementioned places, prays for this Knowledge, Judgment, Wisdom, and
spiritual Understanding, Phil 1.1.
that they might be filled with the fruits of Righteousness; and that they
might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, Col. 1.10.
being fruitful in every good Work. Hence it is that serious Christians are so
enlarged many times in their Prayers. Some men go to Markets or Fairs only for
company or out of Curiosity, to see and be seen, and such are soon weary of
being there, and may come home as soon as they please: But those that are men
of much Business, and great Dealing, have many Occasions to take up their time,
which cause them many times to stay late. Formal Christians have little to do
with God when they come to him only for Company, or Custom; but a serious
Christian, that understands the Business of Christianity, has so much to do
when he comes to the Throne of Grace, and the Favor of God, to desire toward
him in so many particular Cases, and on so many Occasions, that he hardly knows
how to get away; He has such Duties to perform, which he wants Help in, to
perform them as he knows he ought; such Graces to be strengthened, which are
ready to dye; such difficulties to be directed in, such Temptations to be
strengthened against.

Secondly; by this Wisdom and Understanding, we come to approve the things that
are more excellent, Phil. 1.10.
to value things according to their real worth, and so not to insist too
peremptorily on temporal Mercies; As Christ submitted his natural Desires to
the Will and Design of his Father. Matt. 26.39.
So that we do not too much urge Petitions for outward Blessings, but (as
David) Jo. 12.27.
look upon it as an Answer to our Prayers in Trouble or Affliction, if God
strengthen us with strength in our Souls, and account a sanctified use of
Affliction, so, Psalm. 138.3. Heb. 12.11.
as thereby to be made Partakers of Gods Holiness, as better than Deliverance
from it. It is true, these acts of the Spirit upon the Soul, do but habitually
qualify it for Prayer; and many suppose there is yet a further actual
Assistance of the Spirit in Prayer whereby he does suggest our very Words to
us. 1 Cor. 2.13.
Now to look a little more narrowly into this matter, we may observe, that God,
who works all things according to the Counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1.11.
is pleased to work variously, as the nature of things does require, or as may
best serve his own wise and holy Ends. Our Salvation depends chiefly upon his
effectual heart-turning Grace; But yet he makes his Providence many times
subservient to this Grace: For we see he does hereby usually cast men under
such means, and into such Circumstances, as may best serve his Grace: though
when he would make manifest the power of his Grace, and the rights of his
Mercy, he will turn a man in his full Career to Hell, as he did Paul. So he
usually makes Nature and other Means subservient to his Power, and to the
operations of his Spirit: Yet when he would give clearer Proof of his divine
Power, and when such subservient means fail, he shows that he has no need of
them. Of old he fed his people with Bread from Heaven, while they were in a
Wilderness, and could not be supplied with Bread in an ordinary Way: But when
they came into the Land of Canaan, and had Opportunity to eat of the Corn
thereof, Josh. 5.12.
the Manna ceased. So, when God gave a new Law by Moses; for gaining the
greater Credit thereto, he endued him with extraordinary Gifts, and inspired
him immediately by his Spirit; And so he did other Prophets, when he would
recover his Church from some notorious Defection: But ordinarily, we know, he
served himself of such as had an Education, which fitted them for that work,
which he employed them them in; as will appear to any that shall consider that
there were places of Education, which were called Schools of the Prophets: For
it is evident from Scripture that there were certain Companies of them which
did abide together in some considerable Number, because they were forced to go
and build them another Place: and they were called Sons of the Prophets, 2
Kings 2.3. Cap. 4.38. Cap. 6.1, etc.
because they were instructed by some famous or eminent person whom they called
Father: For there were Fathers by Instruction as well as by Generation. Mat^.
23.9.
It is further evident that it was looked upon as an unusual thing for the
Spirit of God to come upon any but such as were thus trained up; because it was
looked upon as such a strange thing that Saul should prophecy; 1 Samuel 10.11.
Cap. 19.24.
and by the Apology of Amos, Amos 7.11. Zech. 13.5.
and the Confession of the false Prophet. Now to bring this nearer to our
Purpose: At the first preaching of the Gospel God was pleased to confirm it by
signs and Wonders, Heb. 2.4.
and diverse Miracles and Gifts of the Holy Ghost, for the gaining of more
Credit thereto. And then there were Persons to be sent forth into several
Nations of the World, which could not speak their Languages, nor were
instructed in many things which might be useful to them in such an Employment;
So God did supply that Defect by the extraordinary work of his own Spirit: But
when the Gospel was confirmed by these Gifts and Miracles, and was planted in
the several Nations of the World, It has pleased the Lord to make use of
ordinary Means as he did of Old, to be subservient to his Spirit in such
Ministrations as are for the Good of his Church; so that there is not such a
distinct evident Assistance of the Spirit now in preaching and praying, 1 Cor.
14.15.
as was in the Primitive Church: Yet we may observe whom it has pleased God to
make use of, for the work of the Ministry, Ephesians. 4.12.
for the perfecting of the Saints, for the edifying of the Body of Christ.

If any shall to what I have said, object, That of old when any were acted by
the Spirit of God (though there were Societies of Prophets) it came evidently
upon them and there was such a divine Power upon them, as it did plainly appear
they were not acted by their own Spirit, but by the Spirit of God.

I answer; the Spirit of God did then act them according to that dispensation
which they were then under, and agreeable to his manner of working upon the
Prophets of old. And we may observe a manifest Difference betwixt the Work of
the Spirit upon the Prophets under the Old Testament, and such as were
extraordinarily gifted under the New: Those had the Spirit coming upon them
only at certain times; as it is frequently said, the Word of the Lord came to
them at such a time, 2 Kings 4.27.
or at such a time they had such a thing revealed to them; and it came upon
them in such a manner, that they were as men in a Rapture or extacy out of
themselves, so that they used strange Gestures sometimes; 1 Samuel 19.24.
and in their style they speak not after the manner of men, but pass from one
thing to another, not observing any Method or Connection of things of the same
Nature or Argument. But under the New Testament they had a more constant
habitual Assistance of the Spirit, whereby they were moved more agreably to
their Natures, in a more sober rational way; So that their style is more even,
composed, and one thing depending more methodically upon another; and they are
not so disultorious as the Prophets, making frequent and sudden Transitions
from one Subject to another, of a quite different Nature; and agreeable hereto
is the ordinary Assistance which we now have from the Spirit of God, which
being in such a calm connatural Way or Manner, is not so easily observed as
the Transports, or more violent Motions of Prophets and prophetical men of Old.

And as in Preaching, when men have, by giving attendance to Reading 1 Timothy
4.13.
and Study, both got a stock of habitual Knowledge, and made actual Preparation
for delivering a Sermon, it pleases God sometimes to suggest things to them
that may serve his own wise and holy End, which they never thought of in their
Preparation; as in the case of Austin, who converted Firmas a Manichee, by
something which he did, besides his Intention, fall upon in his preaching. And
the experience of many can witness that they have had many things brought to
mind in Preaching which they had never prepared. So in Prayer; though the
Spirit of God do not ordinarily assist either Ministers or private Christians,
so as he did those that had the Gift of Prayer in the primitive Church; but
they do ordinarily consider what Errand they are going to God on beforehand;
yet, as is said in another Case, there is many times given them in that hour
what they Mat. 10.19.
should speak; And diverse things suggested to them by the Spirit of God, who
does doubtless put into them many Good things; as the evil Spirit steals away
Good things from us. And though I would not impute the difference that is in
the Prayers of Christians always to the unequal Assistance of the Spirit; yet,
on the other Hand, we should not impute it wholly to the uneven working of men's
Fancies, or the different motion of the natural Spirits.

Another Infirmity which we are subject to in our prayers, is, Unbelief. That
this is a sinful Infirmity, is evident from the displeasure of God against the
Nobleman that would not believe the plenty that should be in Samaria; 2 King.
7.19.
and against the good man Zacharia, that did not believe the things promised,
which were to be fulfilled in their season. Luke. 1.20.
And we are subject to this Infirmity in three cases especially: First, when we
are under great and clear convictions of Sin; when we have our sin set in order
before us, and reprefented by the Spirit of God in all the Circumstances which
may aggravate it. For first, the pardon of it seems to be no light matter, but
an act of Divine Power. As Moses prays that the Power of the Lord may be great
therein. Number. 14.17.
I know it may be interpreted of his power in bringing them into the Land of
Canaan, upon the pardon of their sin: But yet it is an act of Divine power to
pardon sin, in that God does so far prevail with himself therein, we should not
be able to overcome our own passion, so far as to pardon such as had so far
offended us, and were so much in our power. But further; those who are under
such convictions have such an esteem of Gods pardoning grace, that they are
afraid to believe it, or please themselves with the hopes of it, lest their
hopes should fail them, and such a disappointment aggravate their trouble. Genesis
47.26.
Thus Jacob was backward to believe the advancement of his Son Joseph, looking
upon it as too good news to be true. So when Christ was risen, they believed
not for joy. Luke 24.41.
Quod nimis volumus haud facile credimus and tarda solet magnis rebus inesse
fides. Whereas unhumbled sinners that were never made sensible of the evil of
sin, are so ready to believe the pardon of it, that they can hardly believe
that God will punish it, but think it would be rigor and severity in him so to
do.

A second case, is, when we are in great straits and difficulties; as the
Israelites, Psalm. 78 19.
Can God furnish a table in the Wilderness? Ezekiel. 37.11.
Can these dry bones live? Our hope is lost, we are cut off for our part. It is
made an argument of strong faith in Abraham, Romans 4.18, 19.
to believe in hope against hope.

A third case, is, when the answer of our prayers is deferred or denied.
Sometimes God seems to be angry against the prayers of his people; Psalm. 80.4.
and when they pray, things go worse and worse. And it was an argument of
strong faith in the woman of Canaan, that she did not east away her confidence
when first Christ seemed not to regaad her prayers: He answered her not a word,
and when he did answer, did in effect deny her, telling them that He was sent
to the lost sheep of the house of Israel; Man 15.22 etc.
and when she perfisted in her suit, upbraids her as one unfit for mercy; this
would be to take the childrens bread and cast it unte dogs. It is hard to hold
on, when God thus beats us off. Now the Spirit helps this Infirmity, First, by
strengthening the habit of Faith in us. Heb. 12.2^
Jesus indeed is the Author and Finisher of our Faith; Ioh. 16.14
yet it is by the Spirit that he does it; Phil. 1.19.
the work of Faith is fulfilled as well as begun with power; These. 1.11.
He does so fully convince us of the infinite Wisdom, Power, Goodness and Truth
or Veracity of God, Ephesians. 1.19.
that we do not confidently rely upon his Promises, or Attributes, Psalm. 60.
so far as the Scripture gices us encouragement to do it. Secondly; he does
this by witnessing to us our Adoption, so as we can come to God with a filial
boldness, crying to him, Rom 8.15.16.
Abba, Father. Many suppose this testimony of the Spirit to be an internal
immediate evidence of the Spirit of God to the Soul of a Believer, saying (as
David prays) I am thy Salvation; Psalm. 35.3.
or, as Christ to him that was sick of the Palsy, Matt. 9 2.
thy sins are forgiven thee. Now to affirm there is no such testimony of the
Spirit, because we find no such thing in our selves, is as the Philosophers
speak, to measure virtue by our selves, and to think nothing can be done which
we cannot do our selves. Seneca Epist. 71. And for what is objected against
this, from the countenance that it gives to Enthusiasmes, and pretenses to
secret inspiration, and the tendency that it has to make men deceive
themselves by Satanical suggestions and delusions. It is answered, that though
this Testimony be not mediately by the Word, it is always according to the
Word: so that men do in vain pretend to such a Testimony, while they have not
these characters of the Children of God; which the Scripture makes an Evidence
of Adoption; and that the Spirit does witness so plainly and clearly, as to set
a man above all suspicion of Delusion; as it did the Apostles and Prophets,
when they were inspired thereby. Though it is not denied that men may verily
think that the illusions of Satan are the Testimony of the Spirit; as he that
is awake may certainly know that he is so, though he that dreams may verily
believe he is awake. Yet to affirm that this is the Testimony of the Spirit,
which Believers may ordinarily expect, would rather create Scruples in the
minds of many, who not daring to speak by guess, or hearsay, or boast of what
Christ has not wrought in them, cannot say that they ever had any such
Testimony. Neither will these places of Scripture which are alleged in this
case prove any such thing: for not only things are said to witness in
Scripture, which can do it only objectively; as the heap of stones cast up by
Jacob; Genesis 31.48. Job. 16.8.
Job's Wrinkles and Leanness, our sins: But persons, according to Scripture,
Isai. 59.12.
do witness objectively by their actions, in respect of which those mentioned
by the Apostle, Heb. 11. are called Witnesses. Heb. 12.1.
And if it be further urged that the Apostle says, the Spirit himself
witnesses, not his Graces. I answer; Acts 5.32.
God himself is said to witness, when he does it only by the Effects or
Operations of the Holy Ghost. Heb. 2.4.
So that the Spirit himself may be said to witness to our Spirits, or with our
Spirits, when he acts us and leads us. Yet I will not deny that the Spirit does
more toward assuring us of our adoption, as a Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation,
Ephesians. 1.17.
in the knowledge knowledge of Christ. He may assist or enlighten our
understandings, both to discern those Characters of Divinity which are in the
Scripture, evidencing the Authority of it, and likewise to know the things that
are freely given to us of God; or to discern or make a right Judgment of the
Work of Grace in our own Souls, 1 Cor. 2.12.
some way answering to the gift of discerning of Spirits in the Primitive
Church: And this is one effect of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.10.
to enlighten our Understandings, to know the exceeding greatness of his Power
toward those that believe. Ephesians. 1.^2
But what ever we determine concerning the manner, yet for the thing it self
the Scripture plainly affirms that the Spirit witnesses that we are the
Children of God.

Thirdly: the Spirit helps our Unbelief, by bringing things to our Remembrance.
Mat. 16.9.
Forgetfulness is many times a cause of Unbelief; Deuteronomy. 7.17
and the Remembrance of what God has done both for our selves and others,
Psalm. 77.11
a great support to our Faith. Now Christ promised that the Spirit should bring
to Remembrance whatsoever he had said to his Disciples. Ps. 78.35.
Joh. 14.26
I know this might be verified in his effecting or accomplishing what Christ
had foretold: As when the Disciples saw the Zeal of Christ in purging the
Temple, John 2.17
it put them in Mind of that which was written in the Psalms, the Zeal of thine
House has eaten me up. But yet this may have a further meaning: and, as he
does assist our other faculties, so he may the memory also; not only by
habitual Grace, disposing our hearts to the love of heavenly things, Psalm.
119.97.
which makes us more frequently think of them; but by suggesting things to us,
as occasion requires, which is not improbable. Luke 8.12.
If we consider that the Divil steals things out of our hearts, whereby we
become forgetful hearers, and not doers of the Word; so that the holy Spirit,
to counter-work him, does often keep things in the Imagination of the thoughts
of our Hearts, 1 Chronicles. 29.18.
and bring back what the Devil has stolen away. And further, we know by
experience that it has been with many Christians, as with Hagar that sat and
wept as if there was no way but her Son must perish for want of water; Gone.
21.16.19.
till God opened her Eyes to see a well of Water: So many have refused to be
comforted, forgetting the exhortation or consolation which speaks to them as
to Children, Heb. 12.5.
till some Promise or other passage of Scripture has been suggested to them;
from which, as from Wells of Salvation, Isa. 12.3.
they have drawn Water with Joy and Comfort.

I might add, that the Spirit of God may make some extraordinary Impression of
confidence upon the Hearts of Christians in their Prayers for some temporal
Mercies; as in Luther, when he prayed for his Friend Myconius; and Edward the
sixth, when he prayed for his Tutor Sir John Cheek. But these are extraordinary
cases; Matt. 21.22.
neither is want of Faith herein an Infirmity: That Faith of Miracles, Mark
11.24.
which some had in Prayer in Christ's time, James 5.15.
and the times of the Apostles, not being now repuired of us.

Another Infirmity which we are liable to in our Prayers, is, Hypocrisy; when
we flatter God with our mouth, Psalm. 78.36.
and lie to him with our Tongue. And this happens happens in two cases, first,
when we pray according as we are convinced in our consciences we ought to pray;
or, as we have been taught by Forms, or otherwise, to pray: and so the matter
of our prayers is such as it ought to be; but we cannot bring our hearts freely
to consent thereto, or our corrupt lusts put in exceptions, and plead for an
indulgence; as Austin Ingeniously confesses of himself: Confess. l. 8. c. 7.
At ego adolescens miser valde, miser in exordio ipsius adolescentiae; etiam
petieram a te castitatem, and dixeram: da mihi Castitatem and Continentiam, sed
noli modo. Timebam enim ne me cito exaudires, and cito sanares a Morbo
Concupiscentiae, quam malebam expleri quam extingui: That is, I a wretched
young man, unhappy in the very beginning of my youth, had even then desired
Chastity of thee, and said, give me Chastity and Continency: But do not give it
me yet, for I was afraid lest thou should hear me too soon, and should too
soon cure me of my Disease of Incontinency, which I desire rather to have
satisfied than extinguished. Thus many take up the words of David, (as it is
too ordinary for men to make use of expressions borrowed from Scripture to fill
up their prayers, without that spirit wherewith they were there spoken) Set a
Watch, O Lord, Ps. 141.3.
before my Mouth; keep the door of my Lips: When they would be loath to be taken
at their words, and be kept from speaking many things, which God would keep
them from should he set a watch before them. Again, many pray that God would
not lead them into temptation, when they would be loath to be kept from many
things which are a temptation to them.

The second case wherein this happens is, when we pray for such things as we
would indeed have done, but yet would not have it done by such means as God
usually makes use of for the effecting of such things: As when we pray that God
would humble our proud Hearts, we could be content to have it done as Naaman
would have had his Leprosy cured, 2 King. 5.11.
by some miraculous means which may put us to no trouble; but would not have it
done by any humbling Providence. We would have our Hearts weaned from the
World, but not by hedging up our way with Thorns, Hos. 2.6.
or crossing or disappointing us in our worldly Designs. We pray with David
that God would search us and try us, Psalm. 139.23.
but would not have it done by any searching Affliction, or trying Providence.
This indeed is not so gross Hypocrisy as the former; yet he that does sincerely
will the End, does also will the Means that are ordinarily necessary thereto:
Else we deal with God as with a Physician whom we have sent for to cure our
disease, but when he comes, begin to propose terms to him; that he shall not
let us blood, nor give us any thing that will make us sick, nor confine us to
our chamber or our bed, nor restrain us from any thing which we have a mind to.
Who would bear with such a Patient, or undertake his Cure on such Terms? Now
the Spirit helps this Infirmity by mortifying those Lusts which are so loath to
yield: Romans 8.13.
To remedy which he does, by making us Partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet.
1.4.
Romans 12.2.
and renewing our Minds, and settling in our Hearts such Principles as are
contrary to those prejudices which we have taken up against the Ways of God,
by renewing our Wills sincerely to desire the things which we are convinced in
our judgment that we ought to pray for; Phil. 2.13.
he working in us both to will and to do of his Good Pleasure; and by
quickening our Affections to heavenly things, so as to make us hunger and
thirst after Righteousness; Mat. 5.6.
that is, sincerely and earnestly to desire it.

The fourth Infirmity wherewith our Prayers are attended, is, the the Wandering
of our Minds therein, or not carefully attending thereto; Matt. 15.9.
drawing nigh to God with our Lips, and honoring him with our Mouths, when our
Hearts are far from him: Prove. 17.24.
Like the Eool's Eyes in the corners of the Earth. Now our Savior tells us,
this is to worship God in vain: And Jeremiah, Jer. 29.13.
that we shall seek him and find him, when we search for him with all our Heart.

But that I may clear up this matter so as not to leave any unnecessary
Scruples in the Mind of any, I shall premise, First, that there is a Wandering
or Trifling in Prayer, which is altogether voluntary; when men do not at all
strive against it, nor make any Conscience of it: such Prayer is but
Lip-labor; or, (...) as the Rabbis call it, which God regards not. Secondly;
there is a wandering of our minds in prayer, which is not properly voluntary,
proceeding partly from the Business of our Fancies, and the malicious
Injections of the Devil. This the Spirit does not free us from by any
Assistance which we have from him: He does not so subdue our spiritual Enemies,
as wholly to discharge us from our spiritual Warfare; but to assist us, as we
may be able to maintain our conflict with our Spiritual Adversaries: So that
though such unstediness of our Minds may be matter of Humiliation to us, we
cannot hope that the Spirit should so far help us, as wholly to free us from
it. Thirdly; there is a Distraction or wandering in Prayer, proceeding from our
own neglect: which though we do not, as the first sort that I speak of, wholly
give way to, but are convinced that it is sinful; yet we do not, as we ought,
watch and strive against it. This is that which many of the Ancients complain
of, whose words I shall take liberty to transcribe, that we may see if we are
troubled with such wanderings, our case is not singular: yet, what a sense good
men have had of this infirmity, hear how Austin complains, in Psalmum 85, Ipsae
plerunque orationes impediuntur vanis cogitationibus, ita ut vix stet cor ad
Deum suum, and vult se tenere ut stet and quodammodo fugit a se, nec inveniet
cancellos quibus se includat, aut obices quosdam quibus retine at avolationes
suas and vagos quosdam motus, etc. Our Prayers are distracted with vain
thoughts, so that our hearts cannot keep close to God, or stand still with him;
it does, as it were, flee from it self, and there are no bounds to be set to
the extravagant motions of it: and he should have thought his own case singular
if he had not found David saying in a certain place, 2 Samuel 7.17.
Thy servant has found his heart to pray to thee; For so he reads that place,
Quoniam inveni Domine cor meum ut orarem ad te: Whereon he observes, that David
says, that he found his heart, as though his heart were wont to slay away from
him, and he forced to run after this fugitive, and not being able to overtake
it himself, to cry to the Lord, My heart has left me. So Cyprian in Orat.
Dominic. Having made many complaints on like occasions, adds, Quomodo te audiri
a Deo postulas, cum te ipse non audias? Vis esse Deum memorem tui cum rogas,
cum tu ipse memor tui non sis? We would have God to mind and hearken to our
Prayers, when we do not regard them our selves. So Jerome complains how he was
frequently in his Prayers walking in the Galleries, or casting up his Accounts,
or drawn away by some filthy thoughts; and adds, Do we think Jonah prayed
thus? Or the three Children? or Daniel among the Lions? Or the Theife upon the
Cross? So Salvian also; Aliud quippe ora hominum, aliud Corda agunt: Et dum
verbis praeterita mala plangunt, sensu futur a meditantur; Men do one thing
with their Mouths, another thing with their Hearts; with the one they bewail
their sins past, with the other study how they may sin for the future. See more
of like Nature in Bernard de interiori Domo Cap. 29.33. And Bellarmine himself,
however he may write in heat of Controversy about free will and the Grace of
God, yet in that Book which he says himself he had read three or four times,
and purposed to exercise himself frequently in the reading of, having found it
so useful to him (whereas he read his other Books only when he was forced
thereto) I mean his Book de Ascensione mentis in Deum, complains that he could
not do the good which he would, but did the evil which he would not; and
particularly when he would set himself to Prayer, his Mind wandered from him,
and drew him to other things, and before he was aware his Prayer was
interrupted and he was deceived by his Imagination; and a little after he adds,
Quare Anima mea si sapis noli de viribus liberi arbitrii gloriari donec
pervenias ad libertatem gloriae filiorum Dei: that is, Wherefore, O my soul, if
thou be wise, do not boast of the Power of Freewill till thou come to the
glorious Liberty of the Sons of God. Grad. 8. page 176, 177. and Grad. 16. page
321. speaking of those words of the Apostle, Jam. 3.2.
in many things we offend all, he adds, What must we say that fall so far short
of the perfection of the Apostles? We pray to God, and presently our
Imaginations carry us away to think of other things; and we turn the back as it
were on God. Now thus to trifle with God in Prayer is very unsuitable to the
Majesty and Greatness of that God whom we should serve with Reverence and godly
Fear; Heb. 12.28.
very unbecoming those that have or should have such a sense of the Worth of
those things we pray for, and the need which we stand in of them; and such
Prayers are no way answerable to those expressions of Scripture, whereby the
Nature of Prayer is set forth; Genesis 32.24.
as wrestling with God; striving with him; Romans 15.30. Esa. 26.16. Psalm. 102.1.
pouring out a Prayer to him; out our heart before him; crying to him; Psalm.
62.8.
searching for him with all our heart; Jona. 2.2. Jer. 29.13. Esa. 64.7.
stirring up our selves to take hold on him; lifting up our Soul to him: So
that we lose much of the Comfort and Benefit of our Prayers, and finding little
Sweetness therein and rare returns thereto, another evil follows hereupon, and
that is Tediousness or Weariness of Spirit therein. It is with us, as with
Servants that go with their Masters when they visit their Friends: The Master
who is taken into some inner Room, and has the delightful Converse of his
Friend, and some Collation or Banquet to entertain him, thinks time hastens too
fast away; while the Servant that stays without, and has no Company to
converse with, nor any thing to refresh him, thinks time long and tedious. Or,
it is with men in Duties of Religion, as in reading Books: A School boy to
perform his task toyls about words, without regard to the Matter thereby
expressed, and burdens his Memory with what he understands not: But when he
comes to be a man, and capable of Understanding the Matter of the Book, and to
suck out the Marrow and Sweetness of it; what was a burden to him before, is
now a Delight. So, while we are Christians only by Profession, we tire our
selves with the mere outside or shell of Duties; But when we come to be
Christians in truth, we come to the marrow and kirnel thereof, and so they are
sweet and delightful to us. Now the Spirit helps the distraction and wandering
of our minds, and consequently the tediousness and weariness that follows
thereupon, by making intercession for us with groanings which cannot be
uttered; inspiring us with those earnest and fervent desires which our tongues
(that ordinarily outrun our desires) are not able to express. And it is the
first direction that a learned Man, in his exercises of holy living, gives
against Wandering Thoughts in Prayer, that, besides the moral Industry that we
should add, to be steady in our Thoughts, we should pray for the Spirit of
Supplication, and use Prayer to be assisted in Prayer: Psalm 86.11.
And as God can unite our Hearts to fear his Name, so he can unite them, or
keep them close unto himself in Prayer. For, not to insist upon that immediate
or Physical Influx that he may have upon our Minds to determine them to any
particular Object, we may conceive how this may be done in a moral way, as a
Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation assisting our Understandings in the knowledge
of Spiritual things, that having a due Sense of the Majesty and Greatness of
God with whom we have to do, and the Necessity and Excellency of the things we
pray for, our Minds may be more intent and fixed on the Object and Matter of
our Prayrs: Acts. 3.5.
as the lame man gave heed to Peter and John, expecting to receive something
from them.

Further; the Spirit of God does both encourage our moral Industry, and
likewise assist us therein. And as I before explained the Greek Word, here used
in the Text, helps or takes over against us, by giving us some sweet tastes of
Spiritual Comforts in Prayer. As the learned man last mentioned, observes in
the beginning of Religion most frequently, and at other times irregularly, God
complies with our Infirmities, and encourages our Duty, with little
overflowings of spiritual Joy, and sensible Pleasure and Delicacies and Prayer,
so as we seem to feel some little beam of Heaven, and great refreshments from
the Spirit of consolation; though he adds, that it is not safe for us always
to expect them, for when we do so, it is apt to make us cool in our enquiries
and waitings upon Christ when we want them. This seems to be that which the
Church means by being brought into the chambers of her beloved, Cant. 1.4.
which are places of most intimate and familiar converse; and into the
Banqueting House, Cant. 2.4.
or Winecellar, to taste those spiritual Comforts which are as the best Wine,
Cant. 7.9.
that causes the Lips of those that are asleep to speak; and though we taste
not these Comforts always in Prayer, nor frequently; though this be, as
Bernard says, rara Hora, a time that seldom happens; yet, Psalm. 63.1.
as David's Soul longed to see Gods Power and Glory as he had seen it in his
Sanctuary; so this will make us long and hope to taste the like refreshments in
prayer: as a good man when he had lost a Son, and was very much afflicted
thereby, he was observed on a sudden to be very cheerful; and being asked what
was the reason of so sudden a change? he answered, that to enjoy those comforts
which he had found with God in prayer, he could be content to lose a Son every
day in the year.

The Fifth and last infirmity which I shall speak of, is Sorrow or Grief, which
many times makes the soul as a Vessel without vent. Cura livis loquuntur,
ingentis stupent; Esa. 26.16.
light afflictions do many times makes us pour out our prayers to God, but
great afflictions amaze and stupifie. So the Psalmist was so troubled, Psalm.
77.4.
that he could not speak. Yet this is an infirmity; for we should pour out our
complaint before the Lord even when we are overwhelmed. Psa. 102.1.
Now, according as this sorrow or trouble is different, so is the means whereby
the Spirit does help or ease us. Sometimes our affliction may be very great,
and we may be pressed out of measure above strength, 2 Cor. 1.8.
as Paul was in Asia; and then God pities us, Psalm. 103.13.
as a Father pities his Children: and, as when the Spirits are exceedingly
oppressed, we apply Cordials which may relieve them, and enable the sick person
to breath; so God does by his Spirit shed abroad his love into our hearts,
which does relieve and revive the Soul by a more immediate virtue, Romans 5.5.
then those comforts, which by degrees we relieve our selves with, by communing
with our own hearts, or meditating on the Scriptures: as Cordials do not
require time or natural strength to concoct them, and turn them to Nourishment,
as meat does; but immediately diffuseth its virtue to the sudden cheering or
revival of the Patient. Sometimes Christians are (as I may say) sullen, like
Ahab when he could not have Naboth's Vinyard, 1 Kin. 21 4
being exceedingly discontented at some worldly cross or disappointment; as
Jonah at the withering of his Gourd, Jon. 4.1, 8.
and at Gods sparing of Ninive; or they do too much give way to grief, and
indulge themselves therein; as the Psalmist refused to be comforted. Psalm. 77.2.
Now the way to deal with such, is to awaken their Consciences to a due sense
of the evil of sin, that they may more earnestly pray for the pardon of it, or
more prize the pardon of it; and think with themselves they have greatter
matters to exercise their minds, then those that they trouble themselves so
much with; or that God has done so much for them in the pardon of their sins,
that they should not take outward troubles so grieviously at the hands of God,
Job 2.10.
but be content to receive some evil from him, having received so much good: 2 Samuel 19.5.
as when David was so exceedingly troubled at the death of Absalom, Joab roused
him out of his dumps, by representing to him his unkindness to his faithful
Subjects, and how this act of his might be justly interpreted; and likewise the
great danger which might ensue thereon, by his people leaving him while he did
so discourage them: and this made him shake himself from his sorrow.

I shall in a few words apply what I have said on this Subject; and this may,

First, instruct us how exceeding impotent we are to that which is good; there
is nothing does more fully convince us of our weakness, then our inability to
pray. We might think, if we considered things only in the Idea, as they speak,
without consulting experience, that if we could do any thing we might pray; it
being that which our necessity does so far enforce us to, that it might seem
enough to us to have liberty to pray: but we see, that as we cannot call Christ
Lord without the Spirit; so we cannot call God Father without the assistance
thereof; nor pray either for matter or manner, as we ought, without it.
Wherefore it seems strange to me that any wise considering man should reduce
the whole interest of the Spirit in the Prayers of Christians, to that
extraordinary gift in the primitive times, whereby, as they say, those that
were to pray for others, were enabled to ask those things which were useful for
them, and to teach others how to form their prays; and so, that to pray in the
holy Ghost, Jude 20.
enjoined by the Apostle, was to keep to the public Assembly, and join with
him that was then assisted in his Prayers by the holy Ghost. And that this gift
when it ceased, was supplied by set prepared forms for daily and constant uses,
provided by such as had benefited under those that had such gifts, and
remembered some of their Forms, or at least the method and manner used by them;
and that Liturgies in the Church had their rise from hence. About the use of
Liturgies in the Primitive Church, or the authority of those recommended to us
for their venerable antiquity, it is not for me now to speak any thing, but by
what I have already said, it appears, that the Spirit of God is further
concerned in the Prayers of Christians, and I cannot see how the Spirit should
this way make intercession for us with Groanings which cannot be uttered.

Secondly; This may teach us when ever we go to God by Prayer, Ephesians. 2.18.
not only to come to him by Jesus Christ for acceptance, but to look to the
Spirit for his assistance. We do not expect, nor teach others to expect
Enthusiasmes, or immediate Inspirations ordinarily in Prayer, neither do we
suppose that men should attend so for the assistance of the Spirit, as to
forbear their Prayers till they find themselves (like holy men of old who were
the pen men of the Scripture) moved by the holy Ghost, much less do we think
that all Extempore Prayer, as it is called, or conceived Prayer, is by the holy
Ghost; neither do we suppose that those that join with others in Prayer do not
pray by the Holy Ghost; for he assists, as to the manner, as well as the matter
of our Prayers; neither do we believe that the Spirit assists us to the utmost
of his power, so that those Prayers wherein we have his assistance should be in
every respect perfect: but he does, as a Spirit of Grace and Supplication, not
only qualify us habitually for Prayer, Zach. 12.10.
but assist us actually in Prayer, yet in such measure as seems good to him:
and as of old God would not accept of Sacrifices offered by strange fire, Lev.
10.1.
so neither will he accept of our Spiritual Sacrifices, unless they be offered
by the fire of Zeal, kindled from Heaven, and blown up by the holy Ghost: but
as he may hear Sinners, 1 King. 21.29.
as he did Ahab, for some outward Mercies, which are from the exuperance or
overflowings of his bounty. And though I doubt not but many do vainly pretend
to, or falsely boast of the assistance of the Spirit in Prayer, not
understanding what they speak, or whereof they affirm; yet to scoff at praying
by the Spirit, as if it were not a thing for any to expect, or in any sense to
pretend to, is such a piece of boldness and profaneness, and at least borders so
near upon Blasphemy, that no sober serious Christian will adventure upon it.

FINIS.
Books printed for, and to be sold by B. Aylmer, at the three Pigeons in
Cornhil.
THe Harmony of the Divine Attributes, in the Contrivance of Man's Redemption.
By W. Bates, D.D. in Quarto.

The Duty and Reward of Bounty to the Poor: in a Sermon (enlarged) Preached at
the Spittle on Wednesday in Easter-week, Anno 1671. Price 1 s. 6 d. bound.

The Best-Match: or, the Soul's Espousal to Christ: Opened and improved, by
Edw. Pearse. Pr. 2 s. bouud.

A Beam of Divine Glory: or, The unchangeableness of God, asserted, opened,
vindicated and improved, By Edw. Pearse; being the last that will be printed of
the said Author's.

A Persuasive to Peace and Unity among Christians, notwithstanding their
different Aprehensions in lesser things. Pr. 1 s. bound.

The Advice of a Father: or, Counsel to a Child, directing him how to demean
himself in the most important passages of his Life.

Quinti Curtii Rufi de Rebus gestis Alexandri Magni. Pr. bound 1 s. 6 d.


