LVDVS SCACCHIAE: A SATYR AGAINST UNJUST WARS: Representing the intemperate
lust of a Wanton and never satisfied Ambition.

Dum Vacat. --

LONDON: Printed for Robert Clavel at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1676.

To the Reader.
PApers of this nature, having no coherence with each other, but passing
abroad, loose, and nameless, are oftentimes (as Children straying from their
Parents) seized on, and possessed by Wanderers; who do not yet think them stolen
sure enough, till by distorting their Limbs, and newfashioning, and moulding
them into unknown shapes (as the same Tribe deal with stolen Garments) they have
altered the Property of the child; thus doubly lost, to its Parents first, and
to it self after. Such having been the luck of some of these Papers, the Author
thought himself concerned, by suffering them to appear as when he first parted
with them, to repair the Injury done to them, Himself, and the Reader.

Ludus Scacchiae.
BEtwixt two Potent Shecks an endless Fewd
Begun, decided, and again renewed,
Where Equal Powers Equal Powers invade,
By turns who Triumphed, and were Triumphs made;
Where Virtue never did on Fortune wait,
But drew at home the Lot of its own Fate;
Death, both alike, or Victory pursue,
'Cause other men had nothing else to do,
We sing. But first, according to the Law^
Of story, though some thus ^^ightly speak oth' cause,
We must not so passed o'r, le^t it be thought
We knew as little on it, as they ^h^t fought.
The common Soldier, by Pro^idence
Called forth to Fight for Conscience, or for pence,
(Both which he wanted* and returned hom, fraught
With full as much of either, as he brought)
Made that his cause, obliged to kill and slay
By (...) Religions, or more sacr^d pay.
Some talked of Fame* and Honor; gained by spoil,
Rapine, destruction, and the Virtuous Toil
Of shedding Blood; in which crimes alone
They placed All Honor, and without them, none.
But these were private ends, which might be gained
Whether their party Right, or Wrong maintained;
But the Grand cause it self, is still a Mystery,
Mentioned by no Authentic Rhyme, or History;
Only one Nameless Author, (who shall still
Be so for us since 'twas his own good will)
Says, that they quarreled not 'bout Wrong, or Right;
But cause the one was Black and the other white:
So that although in shape, both sides were one,
In substance, Power, Value, Motion;
And for the same, did as the friend appear,
The fewds, through deadly Colors, mortal were*
So for like cause to death, the Veneti
Pursued and were pursued by the Prassini;
Though both were Greeks, though one were as much Christian
As the other; both subjects of the same Justinian:
Had took no Covenant, framed no Cross-Religion
By serpents Innocence, and wit oth' Pidgeon;
Fought for no good nor hurt, Honor nor Riches;
But 'cause the O^e wore Blew, The Other Green Breeches:
Yet, which with wonder must be told again,
These Veneti and Prassini were men,
Though to all wise Men's Judgment, and the Trial
Of Reason, their madness seemed a Self-denial.
And so when minds from minds divided are,
Th^se Colors, often give causeless, endless War;
For Minds take Colors too, and the deep taint
Blots him a Devil, and guilds him a Saint:
For, As Light simple, uncompounded Ray,
Strikes all eyes with the same, One sense of Day:
But that same Light, if through a mist it stream,
Is Color, in the Clouds, was Light, in the Beam;
And is as various, and Fantastical,
As is its various Passage, or its Fall:
So the first pure Descents of Truth, and Right,
Shed in all hearts, express One Native Light;
A Simple, primitive* untainted Flame,
One; as is One, that Glory whence it came.
But this same Truth, beheld through Interest,
Adherence, Folly, Pride, or other mist;
Is then discolored: And her own Chaste Ray
Is varied by the tincted Term, or Way;
And she, whose simple, naked Candour's still
The same, false Colors takes of Good and Ill,
And through those Mists stains all she shines upon,
With differing Color, and Opinion;
Who, for Truth's self, embracing the Disguise,
(The false Clowde's Beauty for the Goddesse's)
Do, for that Colors sake, hate those, who be
Vested in any Other Livery;
And make it Capital, for all who Stray
By differing Rules, and Err, Another way.
Some say they fought, as Indians, by Tradition;
And from the States Below, took their Commission.
Some, to enlarge their Empire; Not to ease
The wretched, as the glorious Hercules,
(Who, for the Oppressed, broke the Oppressour's yoke,
When he lop'd Hydra, and made Cacus smoke:
No preys from the Helpless ravished, brand his Story;
He left the Spoils, and only ^ook (the Glory;)
But, to detain the Captived Liberty
Still ^aptive, and Translate the Tyranny;
Grasp^ng f^lse Glories and di^honour'd Power,
Judged (...), when most it can devour;
Th^^ they themselves may spoil Alone, whilst they
The Oppres^ed, and the Oppres^our, make One prey;
Like Thieves an^ Murderers, as the bold Pirate
Talk^ng to A^^xander at a High rate,
Told that Great Conqueror, he had to all
The Ships he ^ook by Sea, as good a Call,
As he and's Ma^edonians had, to seize
The Eastern World, and make Persia Prize;
That therefore he, the vanquished World's chief,
Was but a Great, himself, a Lesser Thief;
And those were Vulgar, and unjust decrees
Which Crown the greater Crimes, but D^mn the less;
For the same guilty Facts, advancing him
To the due Scaffold; him, toth' Diadem.
Some say they Fought only for their Own Qui^t,
For Body politic, keeping ill diet,
Full of diseases grows, Rebellious Tumors,
Caus^d, as the Natural, by peccant Humors;
Which to discharge, the cleanlyest way is found
To purge: But let it work on Neighbors Ground.
What ever the Cause was, they resolved to fight,
Success would make One of 'em in the Right;
For few pursue their Right, but their Advantage,
And having Power once, They never want-adg-Ust
cause, for Power can make Powerful Laws:
Laws, make what is just, what is just, makes a good Cause;
So that whater'e the Cause seem at First sight,
All victours, first or last, are in the Right.
Wherefore, no Field yet fought, we shall forbear
To say the Righteous cause was Here, or There;
Despairing to be able to determine
More knowingly what 'twas, than the poor vermin,
Who Covenanted to Fight for it with their Lives,
Their Goods, Their Fortunes, and their pregnant Wives:
But the Success alone shall here demonstrate,
To which, with greatest speed we shall go on straight;
Not staying to rehearse the General's speeches,
Counting the Wealth stowed in Foes Camp, or Breeches;
What ble^^ed Change of Fortune, Quarters, Linen,
( Gol^ they had long been out of, Shirts had bin-in;)
The Victory would yield 'em, Victory,
That would indulg a houndless Liberty;
Such, as in Peaceful times, were dangerous,
Where men of Valor often are caught in the Noose,
When for their Private ends, They practice ought
Which for the Public good they had been taught;
Committin^ in the Highways, or oth' Borders,
Some Honorable Action without Ord^rs;
Whereas* for the same deeds, performed here,
The Noble Hero straight would Laurel wear;
For the happy swo^d, All Rights, All Bonds dissolves,
All Actions sacred, with profane involves;
And the freed Victour, from those Bonds released,
places above a God, beneath a Beast:
For even from Nature's Laws, (which Gods decree,
And themselves keep,) Conquest shall set him free;
His licensed Rage and Lust, no Bounds regard,
Those Crimes, are his bold Trophies, and Reward;
Midst which Atchievments, triumphing, he can
Insult o'r the vanquished, and forget the Man;
When torn by his wild Rage, defaced shall lie
The Others, and His own Humanity;
All Laws forgot, born, or delivered; All,
But the Good Orders of the General.
Prepared thus with powerful speech, and pay,
And grant of every thing came in their way;
Both sides advance: But ever we farther tell
What in this memorable fight befell,
We should, the motions of each piece, and worth,
And the Reasons for it, briefly first set forth:
For here, the Art of War, as sure is told,
As Chemists, taught by Orpheus Hymns, make Gold;
Yet Dark and subject to Interpretation,
As in revealing Mysteries is the Fashion
For prime and leading Authors: For they make sure
Of Fame who darkly render things Obscure;
(For objects which in Mists are shown, and Night,
Their Terms being broken, and indefinite;
Are floating, doubtful, loose; and manifold,
Which now as stated, can, and one, behold:
This, their presenters render Safe and Great,
The veil, at once honors, and hides the Cheat)
Keep in the Learned, Ignorant, and Lord,
Themselves confounding, and the amazed crowd^;
For whom they understand, and for whose sake,
They Errors often expound, and oft-times make;
Yet, by a wide Interpretation,
Can the Authors fame, bring safe off, and their Own;
That Fame, which the Author gained, and the world allots
For profound Gravity, and Knitting knots;
Who, had he spoke his Words out, plain and clear,
Men had been quiet, 'cause they had spied Nothing there.
Which we espying here, (for any One
May day at small hole see, and Night at none)
We shall not much, Our selves, or Others, trouble
Why some piece singly moves, and some moves double;
Nor of the place, or shape, what is the Moral,
Shall Reason any give, for some, or for All;
But leave it to the sage Mythologist,
Who may be free to wander as he list;
To hide, what-ere he please, and he please, what tell.
We must go forward to describe the Battle,
Which thus began: Betwixt each Camp, there lay
An equal space, fit to begin the Fray,
From that side, which by lot, Fate did decree
In this sad war should the Agressours be
A bold Pawn sallies out, and having run
Double the Race of his slow motion,
He halted in the middle of that space,
Lest if he should pursue his violent Race,
Breathless, and spent, he might presented be,
A Tired, and not an Equal enemy.
But The Other side, whose Resolution
Was great as theirs, scorning to be fallen on
Within their Trenches, with like speed, send forth
A valiant Pawn, of Equal strength, and worth;
These sight with Rage unheard of, for how could
They any Otherwise, since both were Wood?
Yet both stood firm; For with an easy ward
Against downright Blows, their Station was their Guard*
Whilst int' each Others Heads, they lay about
To beat their Own Cause, in, or Foes Brains, Out,
Intentive only to each Others Blows,
(How great they were, none but who felt them knows)
One of the Black-side's Pawnes of the next Rank
Obliquely strikes the white Pawn through the Flank,
He fell, and his fall had been sung aloud,
But Common Names are lost among a Crowde.
The Pawn who guarded him revenged his Blood,
And o'r the late proud Victour, Victour stood;
But without guard, which spied by adverse Bi^hop,
He shoots an Arrow at him, which by mishap;
Pierced his Habergeon, though of toughest Leather,
Armor of proof (alas) against cold weather,
But not cold Iron; That went quite through, and ^etter,
He fell to Earth, but rose in Fame much greater;
And to his wretched Heirs bequeathed it, who
To live upon it, had more than they could do;
Fame may be good to the Dead, who eat not: But
When in the Scale against Living-hunger put,
It proves too light: For though Fame, e'vry-where
Sound wondrous loud, The Belly has no ea^^;
But to provide for them, he cared not,
As long as he himself was gone to Pot.
An Adverse Knight espied this, and leaping here
And there about the Field, and everywhere
Over Neighbors Shoulders, at the last falls on
The King and Bishop with his The Pythagorean Y, and the Logician's Dilemma,
are both of them Horned; Because they present two Objects of Choice, both
dangerous, and one of them ^^evitable; rendering the mind anxious and perplexed,
being enforced to a Necessity of Election, yet not knowing which peril to
choose. Chawcer, in his Troilus and Cresseid, when Cresseid was in a like
Extremity, maks her say?
Dulcarnon.
I am till God me better mind send
At Dulcarnon right at my wits end. Meaning, she was reduced to the same
Condition as is affected by the Powers of the Y, or the Dilemma, for either of
which Expressions, Chawcer substitutes, this new One of his Own, of the very
same import, taking it from the Era Dhilcarnain, which was Alexander's Era:
Who, to establish that Opinion of his being the Son of Jupiter Hammon (who was
Corniger) caused a coin to be stamped, having his Own Image or it with Two
Horns as well as his Father Hammon; whose Image also was on the Reverse, (a
Coin of which I have by me) And the Greeks, in memory of Him, substituted
Another Era in place of their Olimpiad, and called it (Era Alexandrea)
Alexanders Era. This Era, the Arabians called Era Dhilcarnair, viz. Era
habentis duo Cornua: which our Excellent Poet, though in those dull times, saw
as clearly as Scaliger did after; and accordingly made use of.

Whoever observes the Knight's Cheque, That it equally threatens Two Opposites,
and unavoidably destroys One, will allow the Expression; and not take
Dulcarnon for the name of the Knights Sword.



No passage open against the Knight there lay,
For Numerous Pawnes obstructed all the way;
Wherefore, the King first from the danger freed,
Himself, the Bishop off'red in his steed;
The Knight incontinent in his place did stand,
And having cast him down, Possessed his Land.
Fortune now doubtful stood; here, victory
Crowns the succesful; Others bleed and dye;
In differing Fates, their Glories Equal be,
This boasts his Conquest; He, his Destiny.
Time, and succeeding Charges, buries All,
And levels To Others Triumph, with his Fall.
But to describe Each Private Fate, or Glory
Or the different Wounds and Deaths to lay before ye,
As Grave Historians well-seen in Poetry,
Do, when plain Narratives they beautify,
Telling, how many ways wild Man had found
To ruin Man; Here, One dye without wound,
Trod under Foot; There, (which might be thought Fiction)
Knight, all-berai'd in Blood, Or his Own miction,
Lies drowned in Open Fields; or midst the Host,
Here closing lips beneath, breaths, out the Ghost:
We, who to Truth and Brevity pretend,
Shall here omit, and hasten to an end.
Nor shall we tell what Salvid Aben Patrick
Deposes, how One oth' Shecks designed by a-trick,
To ruin The Other, making the War cease,
And during pleasure, an Eternal Peace;
That* in the mean time, watching the Others water,
Whilst he lay still, and dreamt of no such matter,
This, who was Watchful, did embrace the Occasion,
And following the present Dispensation;
Which Providence held forth, (and he had Grace
To take, being a Saint of Mahomet's Own Race)
Quitting that Honor, by which Men draw nigh
The Gods; those Garlands, which veracity
Plants on their Glorious, their still-flourishing Brow,
Who truth revere, and to its Altars bow,
For the fading Glories, successful perjury
Does yield, fell on, and gained the victory:
But what Ben Patrick says, is naught to us,
We follow better Authors, who write thus.
Each Sheck had by his side a bold virago,
Penthesilea such was long time ago;
And she, who did of late so stoutly pull-a-Crow
with Sr. Hudibras, Our modern Trulla;
One of these Dames, whose Valou^, and bold worth
Safely forgot, when Honor called Her forth
Oppres^'d with Number, fell; and drew upon
The Foe, a Numerous Ruin, with Her One:
The Victours, by her Death grown confident,
Against the frighted Sheck, their whole Force bent;
Who, with his small strength guarded, sometimes flies,
Then stands, charges, retires, and all ways tryes;
Till at the last he gained, a Pass, where, free
From Check, he breaths, and faces the Enemy.
Whilst thus they stand at gaze, designing how
These may overcome; This, shun Overthrow,
A valiant Pawn oth' distressed Parties side,
Who, Fortune, Follower took; and Virtue, Guide;
To the Foes last, and greatest strength, made on,
Which he possessed, maintained, and reached a Crown;
The spoils of that late glorious Amazon,
Who had before been Partner of the Throne;
He, since in him Her virtues are enshrined,
Is now the Queen; No sex in the mind;
Virtue, whom it adornes, it equals; All
With her bright Laurel bound, are Laureats All;
And with this wrath, Each circles his Own Brow;
The virtuous, to Themselves their Garland owe;
Which, men ( aloof) beholding, deck with Praise,
These, do but Honor; Theirselves Plant their Bays.
Amazed, with this so generous, self-rais'd supply,
The Sheck, with joy, with dread, the Enemy;
She takes the Advantage of that Fear, and Charges,
And their thin, opening Troops, urging, enlarges;
Down falls a Rook, and Bishop, Knight withdrawes
To place of safety; Fear has no shame, nor Laws;
To the abandoned Sheck, she then gives Mate,
The Hand that gave it forth, Honored the Fate.
Thus was this scene of Blood once acted, when
These which are puppets now, at first were Men,
As is recorded by a Bard oth' Chinois,
From whom, Great Naso, so called from his high-nose,
Borrowed much matter in's Metamorphosis;
But, none knows why has wholly left out this;
Which truth, out of that Bards own words, we here
Hold forth, as by comparing 'twill appear.
Fate (quoth he) which in its deeds is dark and ample,
Decreed to make these Miscreants an Example;
And though she some, for causes like, does dignifie,
Enraged now, she did these Arabs lignifie;
Their close designs and Frauds, a Pattern made
To all, who drive of War the guilty Trade,
And in this wanton Field, since 'twas unknown
Which party did the Iuster Arms put on;
Whose cause for Current went, and whose did lag;
She shuffled Both of 'em into One Bag;
From whence drawn forth, as if they still were then,
Upon the like Good cause, They'th to it again.
To the Memory of my Dear Friend and Tutor, Mr. John Gregory of Christ-Church.
I Will not accuse thy fall; that well-plac'd Fate
Made thee the Desire of the Age, no more the Fate,
It Is just, it wants, what it contemns; that they
Wander unpittied, who despise the way;
Fools their Own sentence, still, and Judgment are,
They beg their ill; and suffer that false Prayer.
Nor will we pity thee; since, what thy mind,
In its Restraint, and Prison, could not find,
Pressed with its Body, and the time, it now,
Freed from the ungrateful Loads, does clearly know;
Truth's thy possession; And what ever began,
Of Knowledge here, ends now in vision;
Error, and wonder cease, and that pure Fire,
Which, when it covered lay, and shaded here,
Thou could not fully, by its languishing,
Faint Ray, discover the true Face of Things,
(As Colors are not judged in the twilight, where,
Wants Darkness, to be hid, and Light, to appear:)
Shines out unclouded now; and does enjoy
All its high Essence dares, a Bright, full day,
Of knowledge, where, the Light, pure, and unmixed do* stream
No false Refraction, nor Errour's in the Beam:
No doubtful Color (that veil of shade and Light)
Disguises things, no distance breaks the sight:
But that unbounded Glory, that certain light,
Commands all Objects; sure and Infinite.
Let it not wrong thy Memory, that we
Admiring what thou Now art, do pass by
Thy knowledge H^re, as if 'twere wanting, No;
What Man could find. Thou needst not Die, to know,
Language was thine, and what that language frames,
Thou were not seen only in empty Names;
Those, the Materials of thy knowledge were,
^ut not the Work: Thou only enterd'st there
Where Other rest; and fraught with their rich prey,
Thou brought home thence, Arts, numerous as they.
'Twere idle to recount them* By thine Own
Remains the have left us, They are greater known
Than by Our faint Report, the are they, must raise
Trophies, that will outlive all Lesser praise.
For to the same Duration, sacred be,
The Aged Reliq^^, and the Memory.
To the Memory of Mr. William Cartwright of Chr. Chapter
Crowned with thine Own choice Bay, we do not bring
Hither Our cheap, and humble Offering,
As by it we could raise up Ought to thee;
There Is no Access comes to the Deity
By the sacrifices that to the Altar fall;
(The God is worthy of his Honor) All
Those wealthy vows, not Make him, but Confess,
They Testi^^^ the Worth, not it increase;
That scorns to Owe to the poor Votary,
Worth were thence less, whence it could Greater be.
And such was thine, not born from Others Fame,
Parent, and Honor the art, of thine Own Name;
'Twere wrong to attest it; when the Sun to his Midway
Has dimb'd, who needs Bear witness to the day?
'Twere to Sus^ect his Luster, and betray
The Truth and Evidence of his Own Ray.
C^ as that Fire, and high as is that Fire,
Which did, as that, break fo^th, as that, aspire;
Thine was, 't took wing, disdained, and left the Ground,
Great, and unusual, and with wonder Crowned:
Reached at, and gained the H^ight; touched the bold Thirse,
Made known the Power and the high Rage of verse.
All, but the Short Lif^ oth' Ray, (like the Lightning Ray
Which Shines, and dies, glances, and dar^s away,)
Thine lasting was; As that continual Fire
Which to after Ages wakes in the Sephulcher;
Wild wit, like Wild-fir^s, Once alone we see,
They shoot, and Blare, but in the presentment dye.
Nor was there Light, and H^at alone, but thence
(That Act of Both) a quick strong Influence;
Through All the parts divided, made them One,
Gave to each Part, to it self proportion,
And to the Whole; And in that Union
Made Life, and Order, strength, and Beauty join.
Nor did this Active mind, and influence
Reflect upon it Self alone: ^ut thence,
(As the Sun's quickening Operation, can
Perfect the Mass begun, and finish Man)
Inform the Hearers; Raise, and inspire them, with
Those Numbers only, that high and greater Breath:
(As did the happy Thracian's Powerful Song,
Which forced the Lion, and his Den along,
And placed a Soul there:) As if Each had been
The Is^ue, and the Creature of thy Pen.
That Life which thou on Others could confer,
Assume thy self; And know no Sepulcher,
It Is to thee, both thy Crown, and Recompense,
The Glory, and Reward of Eloquence.
Live then Great Shade' and spite of Time and Death,
Take of thine Own, Another; farther Breath*
Upon Ben. Johnson's Picture.
THus looked, the Guide, and Raiser of the stage,
Whom. first the Age saw Great, then he the Age;
Johnson: in whom, those distant Parts (never great
But when divided Judgment and Fancy met.
All was not Rapture; Nor (to shun that) Supine,
(Like their dull works who put their Prose in Rhyme)
But a just, Equal Heal, Each part informed
Which, both at once, Beauty and strength adornd.
Thy plays were not only in the Action seen,
As when St. George, and Dragon Both, came in;
And good Sr. Lancelot with his trenchard Blade,
Broke the Giants Head in earnest, and made
The Boys, and (wiser than the Boys) the Me^,
Laugh, and cry out, Let Us have that Jest again!
No; by it self, we could approve thy play,
Though Bevis and the Champions were away.
No General Muster came upon thy stage,
No Piques, nor Errant Prentijes did rage;
No Batteries were made, nor did the Drum
With direful Noise, Summon the Tyring Room,
'Twas Peace in thy time Ben! Some Messenger
Brought in the Event, but carried off the War.
Thou never such Tragique words, or sense, did choose
Which did the People, and thy self amuse;
No Caytiff vile was plunged in speckling Troubles
Of Sinking Grief, rowld up in sevenfold Doubles
Of plagues unvanquishable: Though thy Muse flew high
And lessened to the City, some might descry,
Thou, did not alter Nature; Things came in
Such as the are Born* no Outrage wronged the scene:
No Ship was cast away in Open Field;
Nor fort, in Perjon, did come in, and yield;
Nor was it all One to thee, which crossed the Seas,
The sad Ambassador, or Tripolis;
Things had their just proportion, Color, Light,
Nature never fell, nor Reason, both kept their ^ight.
The Poets Fictions, though did resign
To Boys, and Pedants; Thou did not vex Each line
With Harpyes, Gorgons, Hydra's, Bears, and Goddesses,
Beyond Tim Corgats works; or Homer's Odysses;
Such Antique draughts never Issued from thy Pen,
Thou turnd'st the Centaurs Out, and brough^'st in Men.
But he was slow, and heavy, a year scarce brings
One play forth! Fools! The wary growth of things
Precludes to their Continuance; delays
Crown Poems, the price, and emblem of the Bays:
Plants that live Ages, creep slowly from the Earth;
They came forth late, and Aged in the Birth;
So steady, careful, and ( So) slow, grew thine,
Perfect, Full-tim'd, and truly Masculine;
Born to Posterity, and the long stay.
Of Ages; such, as shall never decay
Till time fall with them, till the Muses grace
Prin's Poems, Or nice Ladies court thy Face.
To the Lady B. Upon the first coming to E. after her Marriage.
MAke ready the Libation! Bring the wine
Hither, and the choycest Flowers, as when
We invoke the Genius of the Pla^e, to bless
It, with a solemn, farther Happiness.
Such be the Rites, while to this happy seat
(Fit for so fair Receipt) we call as Great,
But a diviner Presence; which, to the place
New Beauties shall divide, and its Own Grace.
So when a Temple, or an Altar's raised,
Not yet devo^ed, though the Building's praised,
The Height, firm Beauty, and silent Awe's admired,
It Is still Imperfe^t yet, while the Go^'s desired,
Whose Presence must po^^ess, and fill that space,
And Own the common Beauty of the place.
Such here, both the want, and Luster was, where All,
For which, or Greatness, or delight could call,
Was met together like the dwellings Fancy reares,
When parti^g from Obscure and humble Lares,
It raises palaces, advances Towers,
Plants those continual Shades, and living Bowers
Where Lovers o^ the Blessed dwell; and bring
Flow^^s which ^ver Breath, and stay the spring;
To whos^ quick stains, All Colors f^de, and set,
But (...), to whom even those seem Counterset.
It Is not the Rose's Blush, nor the first Day
Oth' Lillies new-disclos'd, Own whiteness, may
Express that Beauty, which Triumphs, like that staind,
Which, through a crimson veil, the Sun's Rays strained.
Shed on ^n Ivory Table, where the Light streams
More Glorious from the Clo^d* than from the Beam.
Fair Copy to the Endeavors of these Flowers,
Whose ^olours, shadow only are to yours,
But Life, and pattern The Other Beauties give
That wonder hither! and with it relieve
The Shade, and Faintness, of their Luster; where
May it still flouri^h! Nor Age nor sickness bear
Spoils from that Face: But like that Beauty, which
This Outward Form encloses (your, far more rich
And lovely virtue) Or those Chaste equal Fires
Kindled in either Breast, which still aspire;
And know no want, no failing, or decay,
But ever climb, their steadfast, earnest way;
May that endure! From this blessed Union
Where all those Beauties, and Perfections join
In their full Height, and Bounty, which Others own
Les^en'd and maimed, in their Descent alone;
Where we, (your Bloud's or Fortune's Eminence
Being spared,) might place, and count you from the Cense
Of virtue only, and from thence begin
Your long Descent, may a like Issue spring!
On whom, amongst those Other that attend
Their Birth, may that Best Part, Virtue descend.
Upon One Vaulting.
THE Pindar he leaped full thirty Foot back,
'Twas a good jump in those da^s, but short yet of Jack;
Nay though 'thad forty been, John yet were safe,
You know the Pindar had a Quarter-staff;
Which, (as when the fellows careless Head it broke
Which stood int's way, so here) Strikes a good stroke:
But he needs no such help; He, by his Own
Mere motion, gets up, and by the same gets down,
Not so old Sinon. the Treacherous Posti^ion,
Who rod the Great-horse charged with Greeks to Ilion,
And those walls, o'r which, not ten years prevailed,
In one short night, he and his Ambush scaled;
They came not off so well, for why? They slid
Down by a Rope, says Vi^gil, (And so they did)
But he at Once can, fetching a compass quite
About his Courser, both get up, and alight:
Hence then persidious Greeks, who did not faulter
By Ladder to get up, and down by Halter;
Thou do defy such Ominous Motions O John
Oth' Traytrous Greeks, and mount'st like a true T^oj^r.
The best oth' Greeks thou put'st down, even no Worse-man
Then Chiron, who his Own self, was a Horseman;
Which greater Worth than his, if some require
That it should plainly here be made appear,
With this one Argument let John be rited,
John can dismount, No centaure ever lighted:
As Ancient Authors write, Sages and Poets,
Profound Mythologists, and the small No-wits,
Therefore John, is both in the History
Greater than Chiron, and eke in the Mystery;
Since he alone oth' twain, must needs be best,
Whose Region of the Man, can quit the Beast.
O Pacolet! who with a wooden pin
Did guide thy nimble steed through the Air so thin.
To teach us virtue; Boast not thy wondrous course,
Nor vaunt O Knight, who on thy steady Horse
Brave Clavileno, for Trifalds fair,
Did Malambruno seek, pacing the Air;
And ( all at length) did leap, some say, fall down,
This was thy Horse^ Prowess, not thine Own;
Nor any henceforth boast, their Horses force
Leaps hedge, Or ditch, John shall leap o'r their Horse.
A Pastoral Ode by T. Randolph.
(SHEPHERD.) COy Caelia, do Thou see
Yon' hollow Mountain tottering o'r the plain,
O'r which, a fatal Tree
With Treacherous Shade, betrayed the sleepy Swain?
Beneath it is a Cell,
As full of Horror, as my Breast of Care:
Ruin therein might dwell;
As a fit Room for Guilt, and black Despair:
Thence will I headlong throw
This wretched weight, this heap of Misery;
And in the dust below
Bury my Carcass, and the Thought of thee:
Which when I finished have,
O hate the dead, as thou have done Alive!
But come not near my Grave,
Last I take Heat from thee, and so revive.

The Answer.

CAELIA: STay hapless swain, Return!
Love's Altar knows no Bloody Sacrifice;
No Guilty Fires there burn,
He only Wounds, not kills his Votaries.
Stay Sheepherd! pity Me,
Since to thy self, thou bear such stubborn Hate,
Is thy tried Constancy
Faithful to Plagues? That Is though thy wonted Fate:
Death with all thy Griefs end,
They Will lie forgotten in the same dust with thee;
My sorrows enter then,
And the long mischief still will torture Me.
Why would thou perish Now?
It Was the Coy CAELIA made thee hate thy Breath,
She Will be no more so now:
O Turn fond Friend, and do not loose thy Death.

Chorus. Let the Tree flourish! And
Forget his F^tal Name; but adorned thus
Cast a New Sh^de; and stand
For ever Sacred unto Love, and us.
Crown the dry and withered Hill
With fresher Roses, then h' has yet had on,
And may he now be still!
Or if he totter, Let him fall Alone.

Horat. Ode 7. Lib. Car. 4. Ad Manlium torquatum.
THe Snow's dissolved, and the Chased Flowers, return
Back to their Field: By the Trees, Leaves are worn,
Earth Shifts her Habit; The Bank (but now despised,)
Checks the Whole River; and it self does Rise,
The Graces, with the Nymphs, now naked, may
Visit the Field; smiling, and Fair, as they,
The year tells us we are mortal, and the gliding stay
Of the prone Hours, hurrying the Light away;
The Gentle, easy Blasts awake the Spring,
The Hot remove it hence and Summer bring:
That Is fled when the Trees bow down their Loads, and then,
The dull, cold Winter binds up all again.
But the Swift Moons r^turn the year, But we!
When once we fall, shall with Aeneas lie,
Tullus and Ancus; And ( born no more) shall fade
Into our Urns, Dust and forgotten Shade.
Who Is sure the next Sun shall Shine on Him? and raise
The small spent Sum, and moment of his Days?
That which thou leave, thy heaps of Wealth and Care,
Shall perish too, and slide from thy glad Heir,
When once the have left the Day, and the just Judge, shall
Fix thy Eternal Doom, (thy truest fall)
It Is not thy Birth, nor Eloquence, can free
And quit thee from't, nor thy late Piety.
Boet. de Consol. Phil. lib. 2. Metr. 4.
WHol'd fix a Sure Retreat,
A lasting, wary seat;
Safe, when the wild storms blow,
And the Seas overflow;
Let him the Hills proud Height,
And the Sands false Bottom slight:
That, the loud Tempests shake,
These, the vain Pile forsake.
Shunning the envious Fate,
Does pleasant seats await?
Let thy low, humble cell
In a Rock's Bosom dwell:
Though Seas and Tempests join
In One Confusion,
Hid in that quiet space,
Thy steadfast Rock's Embrace,
Thou shall complete thine Age,
And scorn the Cloud's vain Rage.
SONG.
^ WIthdraw my Caelia! Cloud thine eye,
Smile on an Enemy;
Those Glances M^rther where they fly,
Retire that piercing* earnest Light!
And my faint wounded sight,
Bless rather with a Sh^^^, and night:
The bliss, which in a boundless* wantou Flood,
Showers on the narrow Soul, a vaster Good,
With Excessive joys,
The or'whelmed Power destroys.
2. Those lovely Aires be far away!
Which, of the Syren's Lay
The sweetness, and the Death conveigh:
In these, more Fate, more Magique lie,
(...), must the Siren flee,
Or hearing, charmed, must follow thee:
But since those Deaths, where Souls fly ravished hence,
Have more of j^y, than Life can ever dispense,
Smile and sing, Caelia, Life's an Ill,
Where Smi^es, and Soft Aires kill.
3. Thus, Souls with Raptures charmed lie,
When from their Cells they fly,
Called, not by Death, but Exstacy:
Thus the Divine Nepenthe, gives
Life, which in Slumbers lives,
When Fate it urges and retrieves.
And thus, whilst by that voice and eye, betrayed,
My Soul, (as motions like, their like obey)
Does to Elysium stray,
Elysium is the way.
The Cyprian Virgin.
When Cyprus fatal Hour drew nigh,
And only One year was untold
Decreed by impartial Destiny
That Venice should that Island hold,
The Turkish General Mustap^^
Sat down before Nicosiae.
To the Venetian Seignory
Cyprus a hundred years did bow;
But to a greater Tyranny
Its vanquished Head it must yield now;
Dominions cease, and scepters dye,
And low, as their fallen Princes lie.
Nicosia long had peace enjoyed,
Seated in the midst oth' fertile Isle;
And by no Enemy annoyed,
Had all the thoughts of War exiled;
War follows peace; And that War may
Prevail, Peace does it Self betray.
Waked with the Rumor of this War,
With a new strong defensive Wall,
With Bulwarks firm and Regular
Their City they encompassed All:
Who knows whe'r Fates are fixed? Or we
May Fate retrieve by Industry?
But all this Guard unequal was
To the Opposers violence;
The Cannons Thunderbolts took place,
And rent in sunder All Defense.
Man's strength, far weaker than Man's Rage,
Does borrowed Powers, and Furies wage.
The For prevails; and, as a Flood
Whose weight all Banks, and Dams bear down,
Swells high, and loud, by naught withstood;
So the proud Foe o'rewhelms the Town.
But Floods are calm to him, what can
Equal the Boundless Rage of Man?
Who thirst for Blood may glutted be,
Who lusts, may gratify that vice;
For, the Reward of Victory,
Of Cities stormed the glorious price,
Is, That the Soldier is left free
To put off his Humanity.
But what is forbid by Heaven's Decrees,
Can Generals to their Soldiers give?
Laws against Lusts, and Cruelties
In Heaven signed, Dare they retrieve?
The happy sword may give new Law
To the vanquished, must not Heaven awe.
Forbidden Lusts whilst they permit,
And Fury raging beyond Death,
They, that themselves are Men, forget,
And with the vanquished draw One Breath:
Swords licensed thus, against Heaven are drawn,
They gain the Day, but lose the Man.
By the Sword 'bove fifteen thousand fall,
And twenty thousand Captives led:
These, do the slain more happy call;
And closely chained, envy the Dead.
The slain, no Victour can enslave,
Eternal Freedom dwells in the Grave.
Who ere has Beauty, strength, or Art,
Now yi^lds it up, as Sp^y^s to the Foe,
Captives have in themselves no part,
But to the Victour All forgo^:
They breath for Him; who, as their Fate
Dispences Life, or gives it Date.
Three Ships, with Dead and living Spoils,
(Treasure and Captives) laden were;
The ^arve^ of that Summers toyls
To S^^i^^ sent by the Conqueror:
The Blood and Guilt of Th^^sands, must
Serve O^^ Ma^s Luxury, and Lust.
The Mothers, spread along the Shore,
Follow the Ships with big-swoln eyes,
To see those, they should see no more,
And to the Heavens send their Cries;
Uncertain what from thence to seek,
A happy Voyage, or a wreck.
For to what end should their vain Prayer
Beg Prosperous Gales, and Happy winds,
That wafred by a gentler Air,
They might at length Safe Bondage find?
Let rather Rocks in sunder rend
Their Limbs, and their swift thraldom end.
But what soft Mother, ever could
To hardened Rocks for Pity call?
'Twere too too fearful to behold
Their mangled Limbs in pieces fall;
Wherefore, of Heaven, they beg Heaven's will,
Ready to suffer't, or fulfill.
A Virgin amongst the Captives was,
Who seated by that Cy^ri^n Queen,
Which Poets in this Island place,
That Venus had less Venus been;
For this, more Goddess, held enshrined
In her Fair shape, a fairer mind.
She, with some Others, destined was
To the Grand Seignor's lustful Bed,
To suffer an enforced embrace,
As victims are to altars led,
Who die for Others Crimes; As these
To Others Lusts are sacrificed.
But She above Captivity
A Freedom held in her great mind,
Which soared beyond their Victory
And their dull Triumphs left behind:
Virtue born up oth' Soul's great wing.
No sword can into Bondage bring.
To that loathed Fate I am reserved,
I scarce dare think upon, Said she;
Ye Powers who the helpless still preserve,
Mine Honor guard, and Chastity!
Which e're i will yield to violate,
I Will be my self mine Own bold Fate.
Full of Great thoughts, She moves about
Slowly, not minding of her way,
And follows One amidst the Rout
Who at the Magazine did stay;
A Torch he bore in's hand, which gave
Light to the Horror of the Cave.
The sudden Change of Objects, made
Her retired Spirits sally out,
To view, what in that dismal Shade
Had interrupted her fixed Thought;
The Object pleased, fit to wait on
Her glorious Resolution.
Snatching the Torch out of his hand
Who held it, not regarding Her,
She straightway hurled the flaming Brand
Into the Powder that lay there
And as into the Heap it fell,
I Am Free (said She) Tyrant Far^well
As swift as thought, a dreadful Cloud,
(Where ribs of Ships, and Men's Limbs rent
Floated, in One confused Flood)
With Horror to the Heavens went:
What the same moment saw, the same
Saw vanquished and without a Name.
Where Is the insulting Victour now?
Where does the Captived wretch remain?
One Blast, the Laurel from his Brow,
Has struck, and from his Neck, the Chain:
Victour and vanquished both are lost
And equaled in One Common Dust.
Nothing escaped but each fled Mind
With its Deeds virtuous, or unjust;
Which both went with it and staid behind
To punish or Reward its Dust.
Good Deeds, from Men, Fame and Renown
Receive; And from just Heaven a Crown.
Learn Justice then yet livi^g Souls!
And an unblemished purity;
Which both the Earth, and Heaven enrolls,
And will S^^vive, when Bodies dye.
The Glories of the Chaste, and Just
Renew and spring out of their dust.
Amongst these Records of Earth and Heaven,
Blessed Virgin be thy Nam^ enrolled!
Who by thy great Example given
To aged Time and Flame, have told
The following world, It Is less to dye
Than to dishonor Chastity.
Live! great Example of it then!
And with it twine thy Honored Name,
By the succeeding Race of Men
Placed high in the Record of Fame.
Where the Cha^^ C^pria^ Vi^gi^ Shines
Amongst the A^ci^^t H^^oins.
EPITAPH. On two Young Children, M. and A. R. Who were killed in their Beds by
the fall of a Chimney.
SLeep boldy on! No careless Ruine's nigh,
No second heap to bid you Wake and Dye:
This Earth will press you gently, This weight, must
Securely yield up, and reveal its Dust.
Since then This, Rest; That, Death and Ruin gave;
Call this your Bed! 'Twas 'Tother was your Grave.
When sleep betrays, and Our Breath Slumbers seize;
O Let all Sleep as Innocent as these!
EPITAPH, On Mrs. E. G.
BEauty, youth, and what e're we
Lovely call, Here Buried lie:
Dust has them; And their choice Forms, they
Have lost in the undistinguished Clay.
But the Beauties of her mind
No Grave seals up, No Earth can bind,
They, with her Soul; And they alone,
Live Beauteous still, and still her Own:
The spoils due to the Grave value no more!
Call all those Pageants (Reader) Dust, Before.
EPITAPH, On Mrs. V. H. Aged 62 Years.
LIke the Shock of Corn, which its full Age has seen,
She came to the Grave, not snatched, but gather'd'm;
Whose Life, not only from the years she told
We Aged call, But from her virtues, Old:
These gave her years; and Crowned those years they gave,
Her Life erst lasting made; and now, her Grave:
For these enshrine our Dust; These, from Change free
Make few years, Age; and Age, Eternity.
EPITAPH. On Mrs. M. M.
REader! In vain, you search for memory
Of Ought, in the Land when All forgotten lie
Silence, and Night, here their dark Mansions have;
These make, and Seal the Sto^y of the Grave*
Here lies Dust: Unfashion^d now,
Molded Once, and formed, as Thou,
Beauty sat there, and youth, Life's fairest Flowers;
Pleasant, but swift, and passing as its Hours:
Those Garlands, with the Brow that wore them, wither;
Life, and its vainer Blossoms fell together.
But within her Soul enshrined,
Virtue waits on the fled mind,
Whose leaves fade not, measured by
Time, or by Eternity:
Whence the Soul divided never,
Wear^s a Crown, and Triumphs ever.
Reader! No more, declining Shadows trust,
Call Virtue, Beauty; Other Beauty, dust.
A Reflection upon that Discourse of, Lipsius de Constantia, the discourse
having been rendered into English by the Author in our troublesome Times, and
printed with it.
ANd what is it that can harm thee now? I Am Free,
Yet by no monstrous, tainted Liberty;
Above All Human Power; serene and high,
I quietly attend All Misery.
For judgment, nor the Act of Chance, is found,
Nor Man; (Affliction springs not from the Ground)
No; from the Eternal, Wakeful, Providence;
(That most Confessed, most unknown Influence)
All things, as they their Life and Being have,
Their Act and Motion; so their e^st and Grave.
All struggling's then in vain: Proud, Feeble clay,
Look whence the stroke proceeds, and Learn to Obey.
But Cheerfully Obey! as thou were Free,
And could resist; It Is Imbecility,
And not Obedience, that suffers, cause
N^cessity enjoynes, and the hard Laws
Of Fate: Choose what befalls thee then! And lay
Thy bold repinings, and vain strengths away;
Obedience is thy surest Guard, To will
What must befall, shuns and deceives the Ill;
But he is twice harmed; who, when there is no Defense,
Endures both the ill, and's Own Impatience.
And what should fright thy will? What from Above
Descends, where naught but Goodness dwells, and Love,
Is Good and Loving too; No plague comes nigh,
Nor from that Dwelling; those Emissions, high,
And Healthful are; Divine Beatitude
Is not from henc^ alone, 'cause 't does exclude
All evil from it self; and comprehend
All Good; But, 'cause that Good descend,
Joys in that Bliss it does to Others bring,
Spread a full Shad^, an universal Wing;
Under whose cool Defense, All Creatures rest;
A Power still Blessing, and for ever Blessed.
Say not, from thence, that each Affliction,
Each unkind mixture, Each distress comes down,
And these are evils; No! We falsely guess
That Love, by Outward pain or Happiness;
Those smiles do neither Cure, nor those Griefs kill;
For neither joy is Good, nor pain is ill.
Not the poor joys of Earth: nor its false pain,
Which while the affect us, do withdraw again,
(As when a storm, gives, or a Sun, to the Flower,
The Beauty, or the sickness of an Hou'r)
And when the are fled, (As Flowers their drooping Head
Never to rise, let fall;) The are Ever fled;
Fled like a pleasing, or unquiet Dream,
Or like the smooth, or the complaining stream,
Which Yesterday (never to return) passed by:
Their Torment, and their joy, Then, Equal be;
And in One Even State, together lie
The Glorious, and the Wretched, Memory
Is All that does divide 'em; For what is past,
Time has sealed up, and the dark Grave holds fast;
Their Present Sense of what is fled, is One:
The wretched, Suffers not His pain that is gone;
Nor the happy, feels his joy: But One deep Night
Has drawn it is heavy Wing, and closed Each Light;
No pleasing, or ungrateful Sense remains,
But the faint Story of the Joys or Pains.
Such shadows are the Affections Good or Ill,
Fleet as their Objects: But the Soul's great will
Pursues no dying Good; but those, that be
Companions of its Own Eternity;
For the Good that is Chosen, must proportioned be
To the Power that Chose, that it may satisfy
Its utmost Cravings, when reposing there
It shall enjoy and lose its Vast desire:
But amongst the Mines of Earth, there is none can fill
The Embraces of the Soul, nor bound its will:
False to their Love, they do but Cheat the mind;
For parting, those dull Goods will stay Behind.
It therefore Courts a lasting Happiness,
And hates that Evil, which no Change can bless;
Enjoys the Peace of Truth and Virtue; flies
The pain of Error, and Impieties.
Rectitude measures what it Loves, and Shu^s;
Guide of its knowledge, and its Actions.
Such is the Soul's delight! Such its high Love!
A Pure, Immortal Beauty, lodged Above,
Which outlives Change; and unconcerned, looks on
The Torreent of a Desolation;
When All the Things, which here we Glorious call,
Stoop to their First Earth; And together fall
Low as their Foundations: When naught withstand
The Fury of the Glo^ious, Guilty Hand,
But One heap made, show, what Confusion
Deforms the World, when Strength and Madness join.
There, (like a steep, bold Rock, which midst the flood
Has thousand storms, and thousand Thunders stood;
Whose Safe Foundations laid Beneath the Deep,
Quiet, and low, in the Earth's firm Bosom sleep,
Free from the War oth' Tempest, whilst his proud
Advanced head, raised 'bove both Sea, and Cloud,
Views Either storm Beneath; and safe does lie
Though midst the Rage, yet 'bove the Injury)
Thy Great Mind stand Secure; High, and Alone,
It Self entire, and its Possession:
For who can wound, Or lead thy Mind away
Captive? Or take thy Virtue amongst the Prey?
It Conquers Time and Death: And does abide
When the sense of suffering, Or enjoyings fled;
For when the pleasure, or the pain is gone,
The Conscience of a Virtuous Action
Liv^s, and Rewards the doer: These joys Alone
Know not the Grave, Nor see Corruption;
But with the Soul, whose Good they are, ascend;
Pure, Immaterial, Aged as the mind.
Never to be parted, For the Good desired,
Though severed in the pursuit, yet when acquired,
Is with the Power desiring it, made One;
For All Desire tends to Perfection,
(The high Reward of Love) which then is attained,
When the Imp^rfect Power, to its Fair Hope chained;
Weds the Beloved Object to its Own
Being; From which entire Perfection
Crowning its Being, and with it made One
Who shall divide it, makes the Being None.
If then the Soul's Enjoyments are Above;
If it is high, well-aim'd wishes thither move,
If Truth, and Goodness only, are its end;
All things befall us, as they thither tend
Are Good, or Bad; Since things subservient
To Other ends, are named from the Event.
What then unwings the Soul, and stops its Flight,
Which or depresses, or suspends its height,
Wrongs the End; which, if unskilful Happiness
Shall do, is from its weight this Motion cease,
That flattring Bliss will to thy sorrows add;
It Is but a Death sent Smiling; ill, Well-clad.
Or, If Affliction shall Promote its way,
If by it, (freed from the Hindrance, and delay
Of Outward Things,) The Soul, now left Alone
(Preluding to its Separation)
Shall view these perishing Objects, with those Eyes
Which both their Presence, and their Want despise;
And with a pure and rectified desire
To Goodness only shall, and Truth aspire:
The Afflicted shall lament no more: But bless
The Mercy of the wound; The Happiness,
To which, (as when dark storms or Clouds conceal
A God descending,) Sorrow was the veil.
Aim then aright, thy ill-plac'd Hope and Fear!
For since the Glorious, and the Scorned Things Here
Wait for One Change; (as when the last great Flame
Shall mingle Stars and Dust:) And since No Name
Shall know them any more when parted hence,
Nor their Effects, return, and strike the sense;
(For who enjoys the fallen Flower? Who can tell
Where the Rose has hid its Color? l^ft 'its smell?
Whither, its fair, its untaught Blast did str^y?
Or what rude wind stole its last Breath away?
That can new-dress the scattered Flower, can tie
The Leaves into their knot again, which fly
The vain winds scorn?) Leave the delights of Earth!
(Those Flowers oth' Field.) And whence thy Soul its Birth
Derives, Ascend! kindle a new Desire
Within thy Breast; A genuine Native Fire;
Which to that Beauty climbs that dwells Above,
That Glorious Endless Form! Be this thy Love!
'Tother, Embrace, or Shun, as They Serve this;
Call 'em the Attendants On it, not the Bliss;
Follow the End! It Is that alone can stay
The Soul, No Rest's to them who dwell in the way.
ETERNAL POWER! Cause of our joy and Grief,
From whom, All Sorrow comes and All Relief,
Guide us in Either! If Thou Wilt have us tried
With Outward Blessings, Teach us to abide
The strong Temptations of Happiness:
But if (Our Frailty known) Thou Wilt rather Bless
Us with Affliction (since Prosperity
Of Fools destroys 'em) Let Us not repine, that we
Are freed from the Curious Danger; Nor be cast down,
And murmur at thy mercy, 'cause thy Frown
Saves us; But cheerfully submit to Thee;
Since Our Distresses, and Our Sufferings, be
The Care of Heaven; Since the Power directs
And which commands the Plague, That Power protects.
Thus when we have devolved Our selves on thee,
Whate'r befalls us, joy, or Misery,
We shall be Safe in Either; placed on High
(As our Defense is) when the storms pass by,
The wild impatient storms, Beneath us, we
(As the safe Laurel, when each blasted Tree
Oth' Grove the last Mark stand oth' Lightnings way)
Shall still be Green, and Flourish like that Bay:
That of Ovid Met. 12. Iam timor ille Phrygum, Deus et tutela pelasgi
Nominis Aeacides, etc.
Transferred to Our CHARLES I
AND now the Erittains Crown and Gu^rd, the Dread
Of jealous -- whose unconquered Head
Nor Tongues nor Arms subdued, oth' low Block laid,
By the votes which Glory promised, is betrayed.
He Is Dust now; And of that Great Prince, we have
Only what scarce fills up a Nameless Grave;
But his vast Fame, spread o'r the world, still lives
And fills it; and his Endless Name retrives:
This to his worth's Commensurate, and this
Equ^ls Thee, CHARLES! And shall contemn the Abiss.
PANEGYRIC, To His Excellency the thrice-noble General, General MONK.
WHat Honor, the Ancients to their Virtue gave
Who Monsters quelled and the Oppressed saved,
Though clad in Fable, (and thence, bolder drawn,
As not by the Life, but heightened Fancy taken)
Is due to you, Who, a more ravenous Crew,
Of Hidra's, Harpi^s, (Monsters of prey) subdue,
Than they or knew, or feigned: whilst thus, to you,
Both All True Story yield, and Fable too,
Those vanquished Acts, which they, as Wond^rs tell,
Gain our B^lief, but lose their Miracle;
And your Deeds, make, whilst They thus stand alone,
Their ravished Garlands, and Their Wreaths, your Own.
After a Twenty years restless Expense
Of Treasure, Prudence, Blood, and Innocence:
The Great Work in Our hands still prospering, we
At length achieved Bondage and Inf^my;
A Bondage, where we did unpitied lie,
Since 'twas Our Crime, not Infelicity;
Gained, to the d^er, unvalued losses, of Th^se
Who to successful Guilt, vain Arms opposed:
Brave Souls! Who, when the Torrent ^igh^st stood,
Cast your ^el^es in, to stein the Impatient blood;
But swallowed by the Gulf, to the greedy wave
All, but your Conscience and your Honor, gave:
They, their Own Heaven attaining whence they came,
Left us your Great Example, and long Name;
For though Our Crimes must in Oblivion lie,
(The Stress oth' Times) your Virtues never shall die.
Thus, deep in Guilt, which its Own vengeance drew,
Suffering true ills, whilst we false Fears eschew;
Reaping the Guilt of Our ill-guided prayer,
Which against sacred things we durst prefer,
We lay, The Conquest of those vows, and Tears,
Which Heaven in Wrath alone, and judgment hears.
Caught thus in the snare which Our Own Folly laid,
All Civil, and Religious Rites betrayed,
As of passed streams, or a fled Life stolen by,
Only the Fable of Our Liberty
Remained; whose Worth its Loss made greater known;
As heightened Glories, by deep'st, Shades are shown.
This, after freedom Our vain Wishes led,
But not Our Hopes; they, with Our freedom, fled.
Souls in Eternal Night, may Wish for Day,
Not hope it, Hope leaves that End which has No way.
So wholly shut up, so deplored seemed Ours;
Stopped, and forbidden by devoted Powr's:
Whom the great Gain of Guilt, and greater Fear,
Heightened by Art or Conscience to Despair,
Made Sure to the Black Cause; Thus misled, They
Fell to their Chi^fs; We unto B^th, a prey.
And now Confusion poured in; All Our world
By vi^lence, and Fanatique Fury hurld:
The Victours quarrel, Not to make us free,
But whose Inheritance the Slaves shall be;
How to cut out, and Share the Bleeding prey,
And keep the Saints in Everlasting pay;
Whose Fever highest beats, and does present
The Closest, Heaviest yoke of Government;
His, who, of Helots dreamt, and Gibeonites,
Placing o'r Each, the Spartan Israelites
In the select Senate; Or his, who saw
The longer vision of Oceana.
These, and what-e'r some New-Trance might reveal*
One Heat enact, and the next Fit repeal,
From their Prodigious Lights what raised could be
To the scorn of Reason and Humanity,
More horrid yet, we feared; more without Name,
Or Bottomless, than the pit from whence it came.
But he, whom Seas, and the deaf winds obey,
And the people, more enraged, more deaf than they,
Whose presence, the swift Checks of ill declare,
And o'r the Helpless, a Surprising Care;
(That Dread, to Guilty Powers may still be nigh;
And Hope to the wretched's low Calamity:)
Looked down; And (by your Hand!) parting each wave
To Peace, and Liberty a passage gave;
Our King, to Us did; Us, unto Our King,
The Sum, and Measure of Our Blessing) bring*
What Statue shall preserve you? Or, to your Fame
Equal, what loud Inscription bear Monke's Name?
Who, not misled b' Ambition's vain Desires,
(Those erring, and those swiftly-falling Fires)
But guided by those Laws firm Virtue gives,
And that Fair Honor, which by Her still lives,
Did a blessed Order from Confusion bring,
Faithful to God, your Country, and your King.
On the City of S. purchase of the Cap of Maintenance.
THis Relic cost us 'bove three hundred pound,
Badg of Our Honor, and Discretion:
But, what did make it a saving Bargain, was,
We got the Close in, and St. Nicholas:
Now we may throw Our Cap at 'em; All Is gone!
Our wit, Our money, and Dominion:
Should They requite us, 'twere much Cheaper done;
We bought the Close, but they might beg Our Town.
Strada's Nightingale In Imitation of Claudian's style.
NOw the prone Sun stooped to his Western way,
From his bright hairs darting a softer Ray,
When, by cool Tibur's streams, a Lutanist
On his full mellow Lute his Cares released;
From the Heat's power defended by the Shade,
Which, as an Arbor formed, the dark Holme made.
Him, in the adjoining woods, close arms embraced;
A Nightingale o'rehears, the muse oth' place,
Its Siren, (harmless Siren) Who, stolen near,
Stood listening midst the thicker Branches; Where
The sounds he strikes, She takes; and from her Breast,
Those, his swift fingers gave, her voice expressed.
The Lutanist, the emulous Notes o'reheard;
And meaning to entertain the lovely Bird,
With swiftest touch he does each Nerve explore,
Strains, those were lax, looses the o'restretch'd before;
Nor slower She, Coins into thousand Notes
The melted Air through her dividing Throat.
The Artists skilled hand then drawn o'r the trembling Nerves,
Sometimes his Nail the careless plecter serves;
Which, in a bold, contemning motion thrown,
With One, smooth, Equal duct, all Chords kembs down;
Then Beats, and with his trembling fingers tops,
Breaks the Whole Sound into Swist parts, then stops.
She, with as many modes, his Art repaies
With Art; Now, as She had forgot her lays,
She, a plain, Single Tone, unvaried, strikes;
Then trilling, with a Second, that Note breaks;
Over Both which hovering, but assured to None,
She 'twixt two Notes, divides the floating Tone.
The Artist wonders, so exile a Throat
Should yield so various, and so sweet a Note,
Wherefore, with bolder strokes, the differing strings
By turns he moves, whilst with a quicker Spring
The smaller Nerves do vibrate: But the Base
Their Wide excursions make, with slower pace;
Whose hoarser Notes, which with those loud Tones jar
He joins, as when the Trumpet sounds in War.
This too the sweet Bird Sings; whose liquid Breast
Having a smart and trembling Note expressed,
She on the sudden from that Height falls down
To the low murmur of a hollow Tone,
Purling within Her Breast; Then does excite
By turns, both tones, as sounding to a Fight.
The Lutanist, with Shame and Anger filled,
That the untaught voice, Notes 'bove his Art should yield,
Or this (says he) Thou woods wild Chorister
Shall never return, Or I will break my Li^e!
This said, He with inimitable Strains
Urges his Lute; mounts, and descends again
Through all the Chord; beats, stings, divides, and trills,
And in the dying Close all Numbers fills:
Then stays, expecting what the Bird would do.
But she, although her weari'd Throat grew rough
With her late toil, yet touched with the disdain
Of being vanquished, She unites (in vain!)
All her spent powers; For whilst the Numerous Tone
Of differing Strings, She strives to match with One,
Unequal to the attempt, but more, to Grief,
Faints; And in a Soft Tone, breathing forth Life,
Falls on the Victours Lute; A decent Grave!
Such Aims at Virtue, All, even least Souls, have.
FINIS.

