PART OF LUCIAN MADE ENGLISH FROM THE ORIGINAL.

In the Year 1638.

By JASPER MAIN then Master of Arts, and one of the Students of Christ Church.

To which are adjoined those other Dialogues of Lucian as they were formerly
translated by Mr Francis Hicks.

OXFORD, Printed by H. Hall. for R. Davis. 1663.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY, WILLIAM MARQVESSE OF NEWCASTLE, Knight of the most
Illustrious Order of the Garter, and one of the Lords of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council.
May it please Your Excellency,
THese Pieces of LUCIAN, which (as your Excellency can bear me witness) were
Translated for your private Entertainment above five and twenty years since,
like Fugitive servants broken forth out of your Closet, do now return to you
in a more Public way. And truly, My Lord, whether it were Malice or Mistake I
know not, but they were here in this place taken for Wanderers; And when they
went to the Press, met the Whipping-post in their way, by the over severe
persecution of some needlessly morose.

I need not tell your Excellency, that Translations compared with their
Originals are commonly pictures of very differing shapes; Or that the
Conversion of the meanest Author from one Tongue into another is so hard a
Task, that the undertaker may as well contrive a Marriage between two
disagreeing Elements; or beget a friendship between Fire and Snow, as reconcile
the several proprieties in which the several. Tongues speak.

For as the Painter who would draw a man of a bald head, rumpled forehead,
copper nose, pigge eyes, and ugly face, draws him not to Life, nor does the
business of his Art, if he draw him less deformed, or ugly then he is; Or as
he who would draw a fair, amiable Lady, limbs with an erring pencill, and
draws a Libell, not a Face, if he give her not her just features, and
perfections: So in the Translation of Books, He who makes a dull Author,
Elegant and quick; or a sharp, elegant Author flat, rustic, rude and dull, by
contrary ways commits the same sin, and cannot be said to translate, but to
transform. Now of all Authors, I know none more hard to be rendered like
Himself then Lucian: whose Greek is not of one uniforme Web, like Plato,
Thucidides, Polibius, or Eunapius; but of such a new, and particular Style, and
Composition, that his best Interpreters into Latin, Erasmus, Sr Thomas Moore,
Melancthon, and some others, after all their learned diligence have but made
him speak like a raw Traveller from one Country to another, and to express
his mind imperfectly in the broken language of the place. The sharpness of his
wit, the salt of his Expressions, the humor of his style, and the Air of His
conceptions, which in all his Writings have a secret, charming mixture, will
require a pen dipped often in the standish, and the very Soul and Genius of the
Author transmigrated into the Quill and Fancy of the Translatour.

How great a Rhetoritian, and Orator he was, appears by his Orations. Some of
which for the weight of his Arguments, the Distribution, and close pursuit of
the parts, the Roundnesse of his periods: the rare Art in the choice of his
words, and Transitions, naturally sliding into one another, and musically tied
together, in a full flood, and torrent of persuasion: and yet like an even,
un-interrupted stream, every where like himself, without Inaequalities, or
swellings, may, without disparagement to such great Princes in that Art, stand
in competition with the best Orations in Demosthenes, or Isocrates; And do
far exceed any thing spoken by Gorgius, Leontinus, or Aeschines, who in their
Times were called the Eloquence of Greece.

It Is true, His Subject, like Quintilian's in his Declamations, is sometimes
Poetical, and Feigned. But so free from Impossibilities, both for the matter,
and the Dress, the same skill which made him plead for the Dis-inherited
Son, in any real Court of Justice would have sent him victorious from the
Bar, and have made the Judges side with his defended Truth.

Perhaps some, who (without Rivals) do think themselves great Orators, may
differ from me in Opinion. But surely more out of Pride, and Kindness to their
own Meteor-compositions, then justice to Lucian: who, had he seen a
self-conceited Preacher go up buskind into the Pulpit, and there in a
Tragical style, and voice as Cothurnall, entertain his Hearers with a
Romantic shower of words, which promised Demonstration, the great Mountain of
Discourse, but brought forth an abortive, poor, topicall Mouse; If he should
hear a Text of Scripture transformed into a Chaos, pursued without just order,
and stuffed with Bombast, and confusion; sometimes flying aloft into a thin
cloud of Nonsense, as if the Preacher aimed at some high preferment in the
Moon; or else had stolen his Sermon from Lucian's true History, which speaks of
Ants and Gnats as big as Elephants, and Whales; and describes Battles fought by
two Armies in the Sun; sometimes puffed up into such bubbles of Expression, as
sound big to the ear, but are but bubbles to the eye, he would doubtless send
such Garagantua, tumid Orators to the Doctor who cured his Lexiphanes of his
Fustian disease, who upon the taking of a purge was delivered of a Tympany, and
made to vomit all his tuffe, affected words, his Anodynes, Efforts, and
Exertions up again.

But I do not wonder that such Opiniators should be sick of this Disease: who
having succeeded a canting Generation of men, whose Rhetoric was as rude, and
mechanic as their persons, do defile the English Tongue with their Republic
words, which are most immusicall to the Ear, and scarce significant to a
Monarchical understanding. Words which are the mere Excrements of Language;
which proceeded from the late Body politic of this Vncivilized Nation, and
were not allowed their legitimate concoxion, but broke forth into the World
with Brutishness, and Rebellion Coined, and minted by those Seditious, Rump
Grammarians, who did put their own impressions to the Kings Silver, and so
committed Treason against their Prince, and their own rude stamp and sense to
their Goth and Vandall words; and so committed Treason against His good people.
Quem penes Arbitrium est and Ius and Normaloquendi.

Indeed it would make a man, who has a true Taste in Rhetoric, and knows
from what fountains the waters are to be drawn, what ancient Examples in that
Art are to be followed, and what just measure of Oil is to be powered into his
Lamp, who will speak with success, fall into a fit of Indignation, when he
hears a rumbling fellow, to whom a Trope or Figure is unknown, much more the
Laws which give power and strength to a Discourse, start up a Rhetorician with
no other furniture but Face, Impudence, and Noise. And affront the ears of his
hearers with a lump and heap of such indigested stuff, as has no other excuse
but that he spewed it unpraemeditated. Such fellows are only eloquent by
faction; and nothing can preserve them from being like the tumultuary Orator,
who bespoke a set of friends still to vote his speeches good.

How exactly skiled in all sorts of Philosophy he was, and how fit to sit down
in the chair, and be the Judge of Controversies, your Excellency may perceive
by his curious, and Logical examination of all Sects, In his Hermotemus. From
whence I know not whether Lactantius did not borrow his Christian Arguments to
prove, that as they all grossly erred in their Notion of true Happiness,
(concerning which there were as many Opinions, as there were several Schools
and Sects) so they were all no less mistaken in their Notion of Truth. Both,
like the Oracle, concluding Socrates to be the VVisest man for saying, That he
only knew this one Truth, that he truly knew nothing.

As for his Wit (a thing never yet perfectly defined) He has had this
previledge beyond most other Writers, That as it never wanted a solid Ground
and Foundation in Matter, so after so many Ages it is still Fresh and current.
Aristophanes, in a Comicall way, was doubtless one of the greatest wits of his
Time. And the like might be said of Menander, if Time, which devours its
children, had left us more the^ his Fragments, to judge him by: yet their wit
being only fitted to the Humors and Persons of their own present Times, for
the most part entered with the Prologue, and expired with the Epilogue of their
Comoedies. And is now wit to none but those, who have taken the pains to be
acquainted with the Manners of that Age; And can raise Laughter to themselves
from the help of a Scholiast, to tell them, why Socrates was made ridiculous
for being a grave man, or Cleon for being a Knight, and Senator of Athens.

The truth is, some kinds of wit are like some kinds of Garments, which hold
fashion for a while, but grow old in the wearing, and are left off in
compliance to a newer mode. Or as it is with small wines, which taste quick upon
the place where they grow, but pawle, and dye, by the way, if they be
transported by Sea into another Country.

Men of vulgar Judgments, and sanguine aary co^prehensions, think all wit
co^sists in the sudden breaking of a Jest, or the quickness of an Epigram, or
the Tooth of a Satyr, or the Newness of a Saying, which was not heard before:
but these are but the lighter Ingredients of wit, which like Squibs, flash, and
blaze, and perish in the kindling. To make wit lasting, and long lived, a well
weighed mixture of Reason is required; A working Invention to contrive, and
design, a quick fancy to give the Edge, and a sharp Judgment to apply, and to
shape, and square all this to present Subject, and Occasion. In all which this
Author was so great a Master, that his Compositions will be as lasting as the
World. And his Images have already outlived the Statues of Phidias, and
Lysippus, though to give them Immortality, they were carved, and wrought in
Marble, and Corinthian Brass.

Notwithstanding all these Excellencies, set off with as great a variety of wit
and matter, as can possibly match profit with delight; some Vinegar men, at
whose Births sure Saturn reigned, and conveyed his leaden Influence into their
Morosity and Manners, are not content in their dull, pedantick way to persecute
all wit, as vicious, and profane, but seem wholly to incline to Sr John
Sucklin's opinion, who made a rich Alderman of London to have the greatest wit,
for being perfectly well gifted in the Art of getting Money.

And these are they, My Lord, who have most wretchedly endeavored to change
the fabulous Tradition, which goes of Lucian's Death into true story; That
returning from a Feast he was torn in pieces by Dogs. For first, among their
other Ignorant aspersions, they have not stuck to call him Atheist: But is it
not strange they should accuse Him of Atheism, who so ingeniously drove
Idolatry out of the World? Before whose wit the Heathen Images fell to the
Ground, as Dagon did before the Ark of God in the Scripture? Who did the
business of S. Paul, and the rest of the Apostles, by taking their Divinity
from God's of wood and stone? Who stopped the mouths of Oracles, quenched the
fires upon their Altars, turned their Temples into Deserts, undisguised their
Delusions, and taught the cosen'd World that they paid dear for Lies and
Cheats? Was he an Atheist who would not allow their Jupiter to be the Thunderer
in Heaven, whose Sepulcher and Cradle were to be seen in Creet? Who thought no
Religion was due to a Venus made of Ivory; or to an Aesculapius which was the
Creature of a Smith? Who laughed at Gods made of the same Materials with their
Altars; And thought an Apollo hewn out of a Tree not fit to be Worshiped, but
to Kindle an Oblation. If for this they call him Atheist, they cannot acquit
themselves from being Infidels, and Heathens. They might as well affirm that
Clemens of Alexandria, Arnobius, Justin Martyr, St Austin, and as many Fathers
of the Church, as armed their Pens against the Superstitions of those Times,
were bred in Lucian's School: and like Him, were Atheists too. Since they
only in a sober way proved such Gods to be no Gods: He exposed them to the
scorn and contempt of those who did adore them. So that for my part, I know
not to whose writings we more owe our Christianity, where the true God has
succeeded such a multitude of false, whether to their grave confutations, or to
his facetious wit.

Next, they object That he is too Satyricall, and puts too much Gall into his
Ink. It Is much to be suspected That They who thus object, are guilty of the
Follies, Hypocrisies, and Crimes, which he with so much pleasant wit labors to
reform. For if they were innocent, why should they read his Works with such
trembling apprehensions, as if he were risen from the dead to pluck off their
Disguises, and say, Ye are the men I mean? Why should any man who is not like
the Fantastic Gentleman, who thought the bare having of a great Library,
which he understood not, nor ever meant to study, would make him a great
Scholar, quarrel with a dead Author, and speak hardly of his Ashes, for
telling a story of one sick of this Disease, who bought Epictetus Candlesticks
in hope it would make him a Philosopher? Or of one who at an excessive price
bought Orpheus Harp, thinking it would enable him to draw Beasts and Trees
like Him, and without learning of the Art, would make him a rare Musician? Why
should they be troubled with his Description of a Feast, where a company of
Wrangling Philosophers met; who began the meal with a grave Discourse of
Virtue; then drank themselves drunk in praise of Sobriety and Fasting; Then,
as their wine inspired them, proceeded to hard Notions; Then by virtue of a
bigger Glass to a comparison of Sects; From a comparison of Sects to most
rude, un-manlike Raylings; which concluded in a Civil War, where Platters
were made weapons, and were changed to pewter Syllogismes, thrown at one
another Heads? Was he too much a Satyrist, who called such a meal as this, by
the name of the Battle fought between the Lapithae's and Centaures? Or was his
Character too Keen of such Hypocritical pretenders, for saying, that they
were mere aequivocall Good men, whose Philosophy and Virtue lay in their sour
looks, their artificial Gravity, their long beards, and formal Gowns? Did
he bait his Hook with too much Gall, who baited it with Gold, by which he
makes whole Sholes of such grave dissembling men, place Happiness in Wealth,
and swim Captives to his Angle? If such Truths as these deserve the name of
Satyr, I must confess he was the best Satyrist in the World.

But can they who thus reproach him with the sharpness of his wit, say he was
an Enemy to any thing but Vice? Was there ever a fairer Picture drawn of a
truly Learned, Virtuous man then his Demonax? Or could Demosthenes himself
speak more in praise of his Own Eloquence, then Lucian has done for him? Or
was there ever such a Picture of Beauty mixed with Virtue, as he drew of the
Lady, which gave the Title to his Images? Yet some sour formalists, who only
want the long beards of his two faced Philosophers, to be as Pedantick, and
perhaps as learned as They, have not only without wit disparaged Lucian's wit,
which has been the Delight and Admiration of all Ages, but have grinned at
Me for being his Translatour. It Is not a work proper for a Divine, say they.
It Is well St Chrysostom lives not in our Days. For if I be thus censured for
turning a few pieces of him into English, what punishment did he deserve, who,
being a Father of the Church, with a very pious Theft, converted several parts
of him into Homilies and Sermons? But to assure their Wisdoms that they have
barkt in the dark, without the help of Moonshine to direct them in their
Snarling, your Excellency knows, I was no Divine, but a young Student of this
College, when these Sheets past through my Pen. But Lucian wrote against the
Christians. It Is more tolerably spoken, and with less Ignorance then his, who
said, Lucian was an Aerian, and wrote against Bishops. He might as well have
said, that he wrote in Defense of Antichrist; Or that by the same Figure of
wild Anticipation, He was an Arminian, because, In his Jupiter confuted, he
wrote against Stoicisme, in the point of Fate, and Absolute Decree. The truth
is, these men have taken popular error for their Guide. For if they will give
credit to the Judgment of Philander, Micyllus, Opsopaeus, Cognatus, and some
others, who by the difference of Wit and Style, could discover a Spurious
Author from a true: the Dialogues in which the Christians are reproacht, were
none of his. Or if they were, How am I to be accused, who have not made them
English, but have left them locked up in their own untranslated Greek? But he
Wrote an Obscoene Lucius, and Meretricious Dilaogues, not fit for the Eyes or
Ears of a Chaste, or Christian Reader. These too I have left with their own
Curtain drawn before them, and have not held a Candle to the Mysterious
doings of a Stews.

The truth is, My Lord, in this Translation I am guilty but of one great
Offense, which these sharpe-sighted Men have most grossly overseene. And that
is, not an Offense against them, but against your Excellency, for not
Translating more. Which I had done, if the late barbarous Times had not broke
into my Study. And by raising a Rebellion against Learning, and their Prince,
had not called You away to lead an Army in the Field. Where I reasonably
supposed, that in the Head of a Camp, you could not find leisure for such
Divertisements as these. But when a Powerful Enemy was in view, and ready to
join Battle, would have thought it a very incongruous Recreation to read such
Books as these with your Sword and Helmet on; or to Issue forth your Orders
with a Lucian in your hand. For the clearing, therefore, of the many
Obligations, which beyond all requital you have often laid upon me, I beseech
you to accept of my Will for the Deed; Nor to despise this Sacrifice, because
the Sheep is taken from another man's Fold, or because the Sheafe grew in
another man's Field. But to put the greater value upon this mean Address,
which to show me grateful, has put me into the Number of those very poor
people, who are feign to borrow the Money with which they pay their Debts.

Your Excellencie's real Honourer, and much obliged Servant JASPER MAIN.
Christ Church. Aug: 10, 1663.
An Answer to one that said, You are PROMETHEUS in your Speeches.
PROMETHEUS am I then? If good Sir, you say so, because my works have Earth in
them, I allow the Comparison, and confess my self like him; nor refuse to be
called a potter; though my Clay be much baser, and almost as barbarous and
course, as that which lies in the street. But if over praising my speeches for
curious, and artificial, you entitle them to the wisest of the Titans, take
heed lest some body say, you speak Ironie; and that you attire an Attick flout
in a Commendation. But where, I pray, am I so curious? Or in which of my
writings perceive you this overpolisht Promethean Wisdom? It Is enough for me
that they are not wholly composed of Earth; or fit to be rewarded with Caucasus.
But with how much more Justice may you be compared to Prometheus, who are so
famed for your pleadings, and for making Wars against the Truth? Yours are
living, breathing works, and carry a heat with them, which has flame in it;
wherein you truly imitate Prometheus, only here is the difference; most of you
work not in Clay, but raise golden pieces. I, who address my self to the
Multitude, and glory in their Attention show forth only some certain dead
Images; And, as I said before, like puppet-makers, and potters, busy my self
in clay; having neither life nor motion in my doings, but making my Recreation
and Play my business. I cannot then, but consider, whether you called me not
Prometheus, as the Comoedian called Cleon, when he said Cleon was an after game
Prometheus. Or as the Athenians called all those who made pots and pans, and
wrought in clay, Prometheus; alluding, I suppose, to their materials, and the
baking of their vessels in the fire. If this be the meaning of your Prometheus,
you have aimed your dart aright, and have tipped it with an Attick sharpness,
and point. Since my works are as frail, and brittle as their pots, and are
ready to shiver and break upon the least dash of a stone. But some man, for my
encouragement, will say, in comparing my doings to Prometheus, you have praised
their Novelty, as following no Copy, or Example. As he when there were yet
none, first invented, and framed Men; shaping and trimming his new Creatures
so, as to be quick of Motion, and graceful in Aspect. Wherein though he were
the Artificer, yet Minerva assisted; who inspired the Clay, and breathed a
Soul, and life into the Workmanship. Thus may some man say, and give a fair
construction to your Words. And perhaps this was your meaning. But this
satisfies me not, if I be thought a Broacher of Novelties; since nothing can be
named more ancient then that Original by which my works are drawn. Yet if they
wanted Gracefulness, or Beauty, I should both blush for them, and, would have
you know, should tread them under foot. Who am not so taken with Noveltie, as
not to despise it, if it come misshapen. Since, should I think otherwise, I
were worthy to be torn by sixteen Vultures; Not understanding how much the
Deformity of things is increased by their strangeness. Ptolomy, therefore the
son of Lagus, having brought two strange things into Egypt, a Bactrian Camel
all over black; And a man equally divided into two Colors, one half exactly
black, the other exceeding white; and having assembled the Egyptians in the
Theater, and entertained them with many other shows; at last presented the
Camel, and party colored man, thinking to raise their wonder by the sight. But
they much frighted at the Camel, were ready to run away in Tumult: Though he
were decked all over with gold, had trappings of purple, and a bridle inlaid
with Jewels; The wealth or Treasure perhaps of some Darius, or Cambyses, or
Cyrus. But at sight of the man many laughed: Others turned away their faces, as
from some Prodigy. Whereupon Ptolomy perceiving, that they took not as he
intended, and that the Egyptians were not at all amazed with their
strangeness, bu^ rather preferred things comely and well featured, caused them
to be removed, not having the man afterward in such value as before: And
suffering the Camel to die neglected, he gave the two-colour'd man to one
Thespis a Minstrell for playing well at a drinking. So I may well fear lest my
works show like a Camel before the Egyptians: However some men may admire
their bridle, and purple. For that they are compounded of two excellent things,
Dialogue, and Comedy, is not enough to give them Elegancy, and form, unless
there be agreement, and measure, and harmony in the Mixture. For from two
Excellencies may arise a disfigured composition, as is ordinarily reported of
Centaures; which you will not call an amiable creature, but rather a Creature
of Contempt: If we may believe painters, who always limb them amidst their
drunkenness, and slaughters. What then? may there not spring a well favored
Compound, from two beauties mixed? As when Wine is mingled with honey, may I not
say both are sweetly tempered? I will not earnestly affirm my writings to be
such; But fear lest their Composition have corrupted their beauty. For Dialogue
and Comedy, have not always been friends, and matched together, Since that kept
at home, and delighted in solitary walks, and maintained discourse but with
some few; whereas this wholly giving over it self to Bacchus, lived in the
Theater, and ther^ raised sport, and laughter, darted jests, and danced to the
pipe in numbers: Sometimes speaking in Anapaests; it scoft at those who studied
Dialogue, calling them men of anxious Contemplations, and Romancers of high
matters, and the like; observing only one way of presentment, which was to jeer
them, and with a Dyonisian Liberty to bring them in, sometimes walking in the
Air, and conversing with Clouds; sometimes measuring the jumps, and skippings
of Fleas; as men who disputed light, Aerie matters too subtly. On the other side
Dialogue held reverend disputes of the nature of things, and of virtues of
Philosophers; so that, according to the Proverb of the Musicians, there was
twice the distance of all Gamut, from the highest note to the lowest and
basest, between them; And yet have I dared to unite things of this distance,
and to raise agreement from things disagreeing, and not well enduring
fellowship: And from hence have reason to fear, lest I seem to have attempted
something like to your Prometheus, in mingling a woman with a man, and do
therefore undergo your Arraignment. Nay, lest I have enterprized something
worse, and conzened my Hearers by inviting them to bones covered with fat, and
dressed a Comic Laughter in the Gravitie of a Philosopher. As for Thee very; of
all things you can never charge that upon my writings. From whom should I
steal? unless there be some one, not yet come to my knowledge, who has
written of Chimaera's, and Giants. Besides, what would would you have me do?
It Is good to pursue an Enterprise once begun; since to change purposes belongs;
to Epimetheus, not Prometheus.

An Epistle to Nigrinus.
Lucian to Nigrinus wishes prosperity. OVVles to Athens, says the Proverb; as
if 'twere ridiculous to carry Owls thither, where is such plenty. So for me
to write, and send my book to Nigrinus accompanied with power and force of
words, were to fall under the ridiculous Proverb, and to send Ovvles indeed.
My purpose being only to acquaint thee, how I am, and how thy Speeches have
left such deep Impressions in me, I dissent from Thucydides saying, that
Ignorance makes men bold, and consideration fearful: Since it is manifest that
not Ignorance alone, but the desire and love of Conversation and Speech is the
cause of this my boldness. Farevvell.

Nigrinus, or the Manners of Philosophers.
The Speakers. Lucian and a Philosopher. LUcian. How venerable, and exalted
you are returned? neither vouchsafing to look on us any more, or to afford us
your Company, or to mingle discourses with us, but are of a sudden
transformed into One who contemnes all men. I would gladly know of you, how
you arrived to this Insolence, and upon what reasons?


Philos. What Reasons can there be, my friend, but felicity?


Luci: How say you?


Philos: Marry, that beyond my Expectations I am returned prosperous and happy,
and to borrow an Expression from the Stage, thrice happy.


Luci: O Hercules! in so short a Time?


Philosoph: It Is even so.


Lucian. But what else is there which makes you so proud, as not to allow us to
rejoice at your good fortune, or to hear the truth of your whole Story?


Philosoph: Is It not a thing to be admired, think you, for a slave to return
free, a beggar rich, a fool wise, and a madman recovered?


Lucian. Yes surely: Yet I understand not clearly what you drive at.


Philosoph: I went into the City, then, to find a Surgeon for my Eyes; whose
pain very much increased, and grew upon me.


Lucian. All this I know; and wished you might light upon a skillful one.


Philos: Having purposed also, of a long time to bestow a visit upon Nigrinus,
the Platonic Philosopher, rising early, I went to Salute him, and knocking at
his door, a boy carried in the Message, and I was sent for in. At my first
Entrance, I found him with a book in his hand, beset round with the Images of
the ancient Wisemen. In the midst of the room stood a table bestrewed with
Geometrical Diagrammes, and figures; and a Sphere resembling the Universe.
Saluting me very friendly, he asked me how I did; I having made him an account,
for return, asked him how he did, and whether his resolution held for another
voyage into Greece. He no sooner began to speak, and to open his mind, but his
words fell upon me in such a shower of Ambrosia, that me-thought (if ever there
were any) I was among Homers ancient Sirens, and Nightingales. So Divinely he
uttered himself, when falling into the praise of Philosophy, and the Child
thereof, Liberty, he laughed at those things which the vulgar esteem good;
Riches, Glory, Kingdoms, and Honor, Gold also, and Purple; and those other
things prized commonly by the most, and till then by me. Which I received with
an attentive and open mind, saw not for the present, the thing to which I might
compare my self: but was cast into a Distraction; sometimes greiving to hear
those things most precious to me, Riches, Gold and Glory disproved; almost
weeping at their Confutation; now again accounting them bale and contemptible.
Much joyed, though, that I now began to look through the clouds, and
Gloominesse of my former life: wherefore wholly forgetting the cure of my eyes,
as a vanity, my mind by little and little began to be very sharp sighted, which
till then I carried about with me blind; till passing on, I became the thing
whereof you accuse me; a Man advanced, and carried aloft by his discourse, and
unable ever since to submit to small contemplations. For that happened to me
concerning Philosophy, which is reported to have happened to the Indians
concerning Wine; who being naturally hot, upon their first taste of a liquor so
enflaming, presently grew mad, and were twice as much enraged as other men.
Just so do I appear to you, drunk and reeling with all discourses; though this
is not to be drunk, but discreet and sober.


Lucian. I would feign, (if it may be without your trouble) hear his discourses
reported, securing them from my disdain, being such a hearer as is both a
friend to your self, and one who has heretofore spent time in such lofty
studies.


Philosoph: I obey your desires Sir, since according to that half verse in
Homer, you petition One already willing; who, if you had not prevented me, had
voluntarily craved your attention. For I desire to make you a witness to
others, that I am not mad without reason; it being my delight to exercise, and
make repetitions to my self, though no body be present; and twice or thrice a
day solitarily to revolve what I heard. And as lovers supply the absence of
those they love with the remembrance of their Words or Actions, and fixing
their thoughts upon them, cousen their Longings with their memory, as if those
they loved were present; framing to themselves imaginary Dialogues, and
taking pleasure in those things which they then seem to hear, as when they
were at first spoken; and applying their minds to the remembrance of things
past, busy themselves as if they lay before them: so I take no small
satisfaction in recollecting those absent discourses of Philosophy which I once
heard; and like Seamen, or Travelers in the dark, do steer my Course by this
Candle, always imagining that man to be present to my Actions, and as it were
still hearing his discourse; sometimes raising my Contemplation, methinks I
have his face in my eyes, and his words in my ears; so truly did he verify
that of the Comedian, and left a sting in his Hearers.


Lucian. Spare further Prefaces, admired Sir, and begin your story; for you
do not a little torment and tire my expectation.


Philosoph: You say true, my friend, and what is fit; But first I pray have you
seen an ill Tragic or Comic Actor; those I mean who are hist, who spoiling
good Poems with bad Actions, are at last plucked off the stage, though the play,
perchance, deserve Bays and Clappes?


Lucian. I know many such; But why ask you?


Philosoph: Because I fear lest I seem to you to imitate them; whilst giveing
no right order to my rehearsal, I corrupt his meaning by my weakness, and
wrong the Play by repetition. As for my self your disallowance will not much
trouble me; But I should be sorry a good argument should suffer in my delivery,
or grow disfigured under my performance. Remember then, that through my whole
Narration the Actors faults be not laid upon the Poet, but remove him far from
the stage, as not concerned by that which is done in the Theater. I, in the
mean time, will give you a taste what a player I am for my memory; otherwise
not at all differing from a messenger in a Tragedy. Wherefore if I report any
thing imperfectly, think that which was left out, best; and that the Poet would
have told it with more advantage: and then if you hiss me, I shall not much
care.


Lucian. An excellent exordium, by Mercury, and continued like a Rhetorician.
You would add now, that you stayed not long with him, and that you come
unprovided to speak, and that 'twere better hear him make his own report; and
that you brought not away all, but as much as was possible for you at that time
to bind up in your memory. Were you not about to say thus? I shall therefore
hold you excused, and desire you to think you have Spun a sufficient preface to
your Story: Since I, for my part, am ready to give you my applause; whereas if
you tire me longer, I shall remember my vexation by the way, and hiss aloud.


Philosoph: Surely 'twas in my purpose to say as much as you have past over;
and to have added, besides, that to deliver things in this order, and to draw
them into the like continued web, is to me impossible; since striving to make
him speak with my voice, I should once more be like those players, who
sustaining the person of Agamemnon, or Creon, or Hercules, and being richly
dressed, and looking majestickly, and straining to speak big, come off in a
slender, treble, womanish voice, much smaller then that of Hecuba, or her
daughter Polyxena: least therefore their Accusations become mine, by acting a
part too great for me, and thereby disgraceing my properties, I will speak in
my own naked person; least where I slip, that Divine personage, whom I
represent, should fall with me.


Lucian. This fellow will never leave vexing me with similitudes taken from
Tragedies, and the stage.


Philosoph. I have done, and now come to the matter. The entrance to this
discourse, then, was a Commendation of Greece, and of the students at Athens,
who were equally bred to Philosophy, and want; neither vainly delighted with
the sight of the Citizens; nor so taken with strangers as by their new fashions
to corrupt their education; But if any came among them so disposed, they by
little and little transformed him, and untaught him his former manners; and
wrought him into a purer kind of behavior and carriage. I remember he told a
story of one of those spanglers, and glittering men, who came to Athens very
brave, and gallant, numerously attended, and variously apparelled; who supposed
himself to be much aemulated by all the Athenians, and thought a Demigod* but
appeared to those a man much to be pitied; who presently began to instruct
him, not harshly, or openly dissuading him to live in a free City, as he
pleased. But after he began to be troublesome to their Schools, and Bathes,
thronging all Passengers with his Crowd of followers, one in a concealed low
voice, scarce able to reach him, would say, I was afraid least this gallant
would have been smoother'd at washing: Another, the Bathes have enjoyed a long
peace, what need of such an Army then? He in the mean time overheard things as
they were, and took in Instruction. Again when he took off his Imbroideries,
and purple, pleasantly jeering his Flowers, and colors, some would say, The
spring is come: others, From whence flew this peacock? others, Perhaps these
feathers were his mothers, and the like. And so passing their scoffs on other
things, sometimes they would flout the multitude of his Rings: sometimes the
superfluous curling of his hair: sometimes the Luxury of his Diet, till
insensibly he grevv discreet, and being thus publicly reformed, departed much
better then he came. How little they are ashamed to profess poverty, appears
by a passage which he recounted to me, which happened publicly at the
celebration of the Athenian Games; where one of the Town was apprehended and
brought before the Judge of the sports, for coming to the shovv in a died suit;
which when the rest savv, they pitied the man, and besought his pardon; and
when the crier proclaimed, he had broke the Law, which allowed no spectators
so apparelled, as if they had before consulted, they all cried out with one
voice, that liberty should be granted to one so arrayed, seeing he had no more
clothes. Such passages as these he much extolled; as also the freedom of the
place, the frugality of their Diet, the Calmes, and tranquillity of the people
which they possess un-envied. Assuring me withal, that their life was
agreeable to their Philosophy; and was able to preserve manners in their
purity; and that to a virtuous man, and one who had learned to despise Riches,
and had resolved to order his life by these things which were naturally honest,
no place afforded such suiteable Conversation. But to a man that loved wealth,
and took delight in Gold, and measured happiness by his power, and purple; who
never tasted liberty, or made trial of freedom, or beheld Truth, but was bred
up in flatteries, and servitude, who sacrificed his soul in obedience to
pleasure, and loved luxurious feasts, or excess of wine, or use of women,
filling himself with Impostures, Cousenage, and lies: As also to him who took
pleasure in light Music, or in loose lascivious songs, the conversation of
this place was most proper. For here every street, and market place is stored
with the things which they most affect; and men are free to take in pleasure at
all their gates and senses, their eyes, their ears, their smell, their palate,
their Imbracements, and Touch; which running in one eternal, muddy, troubled
stream, drownes and overflowes all passages; Adultery, and covetousness, and
perjury, and such a tribe of pleasures, meeting there together in one channel:
whence the soul being overwhelmed by a deluge, modesty, virtue, and justice
become utterly unjoynted, and lost; leaving the place void and empty, and in
their stead a thirst, and spring of vices of several kinds and forms. This
character he gave me of this City, the nurse and mistress of such virtues. I
therefore, said he, no sooner set sail from Greece, and arrived near my own
shore, when recollecting my thoughts I asked my self the reason of my return;
Applying that verse of Homer to my self, O most unhappy Wight, why leaving
Phoebus light, ( Greece you must suppose, and the happiness, and the liberty
of those parts) art thou come back? that thou may behold the disorder of
this place, Sycophants, proud salutes, prolonged suppers, flatterers, murders,
expectation of dead men's wills, and dissembled friendship? or what will thou
do, who can neither reform, nor yet practice the bad Customs of the place?
Reasoning thus with my self? as Jupiter did Hector, so I withdrew my self
from the pikes, and slaughters, and skirmishes of the World; resolving ever
after to keep at home, and proposing to my self this womanish, or (as some may
call it) dastardly course of life. I hold discourses with Philosophy, Plato,
and truth: And placeing my self as if I were in some populous Theater, I look
down from aloft upon the Carriage of affairs abroad; partly as they are able
to stir recreation, and provoke laughter, partly as they are able to prove
the Constancy of a resolute man. For if it be seemly to speak in praise of
vice, you cannot imagine where the exercise of virtue is greater, or where
minds undergo stronger trials, then amid'st the manners of this City. For
it is no small victory to resist so many temptations, so many charming
spectacles, and attracting allurements: But like Ulysses to sail by them, not
with hands bound, (which were cowardly) nor with ears stopped with wax, but with
attention, and loose, requires a mind sublimated, and raised above them. You
will admire Philosophy, if you set it in comparison with such madness; and
contemn the Goods of fortune, beholding, as it were in a Scene, or varying
Comedy, a servant sometimes to come forth a master, a rich man to become poor;
And on the contrary, a beggar to become a Lord, or Prince; one man to be a
friend, another an enemy, a third an exile. But the thing most deplorable is,
that though fortune plainly testify that the businesses of mortals are her
pastime; and though men daiely see that nothing is stable, and fixed, yet they
still itch after riches, and great place, and still walk on in the pursuit of
succeslesse hopes. Now whereas I told you 'twas fit to laugh and raise mirth
from ordinary Occurrences, so I will give you some examples. Is It not good
Comedy to see rich men display their purple, brandish their rings, and bewray
so much folly? But the great vanity of all is, that they salute those they meet
by others mouths, and account it a great favor to vouchsafe them a look.
Others more venerable, and expecting Adoration, are not to be saluted a far
off, nor after the Persian manner, but are to be approach't with a low
obeisance; And in fashioning your address before you come near, you are to
signify the humility of your mind, by the posture of your body; and then are
permitted to kiss their breast or hand: which in those who were never so
favored, stirs a matter of emulation, and regard, whilst you, all the
while, deliver your self over to be cousen'd. Where I cannot but praise their
inhumanity, for not saluting us with their mouth. Much more ridiculous are
those their retainers, and clients, who rising at midnight, fetch a Compass,
and walk about the City; and after all are excluded by the servants; and
suffer themselves to be called dogs, flatterers, and the like. The reward of
their tedious Circuit, is a troublesome supper, and the cause of many
mischiefs; where eating much, and drinking more then is fit, and speaking many
things not to be named, at last finding fault and discontent they depart,
either blaming their entertainment, or disrespect, or the baseness of the
invitation: Bespewing the Lanes also, and Allies, as they pass; or quarrelling
in vile baudy-houses; whereby most of them the next day are fain to keep their
beds, and to send for Surgeons; others, most absurdly, scarce refrain making
visits in their sickness. I, in the mean time, hold these who thus flatter,
much more miserable and lost, then those who are flattered: as being the
principal authors of the others pride. For when they admire their plenty, and
extol their wealth, and every morning beset their doors, and in their ordinary
accostments salute them as their Masters, what must the others think of
themselves? Whereas, if by common agreement they would forbear, though it were
but a while, this voluntary servitude, do you not think the rich would come a
begging to poor men's doors, and make suit to them not to let their Felicity lie
without spectators, and witnesses? or the bravery of their tables, and
magnificence of their Buildings, to stand useless and unregarded? For none are
so enamoured of their treasures, as to think themselves therefore happy because
they have them; since possession would give little value to stately palaces,
Chests of Gold, and boards of Ivorie, were there not some body to admire them.
'Twere fit therefore, for the Abatement of their estimation and power, to
encounter rich men with contempt; since humouring of them increases their
folly. But for men unlettered, and openly professing ignorance, to do thus,
may perhaps be thought tolerable. That which most deserves a Satyr, is, that
those who make profession of Philosophy, do things yet more ridiculous. How
think you, am I troubled in my soul, when I see a man of reverend years mingle
himself with a troop of flatterers, and give his attendance to some great
officer, and at supper to mix discourse with other retainers, yet the more
taken notice of for his habits sake? Though I stomach most that they change not
their garb, as well as act all the other parts in the Play. For as for those
things which pass at such invitations, to which of the flatterers are they to
be compared? Do they not eat with much less moderation? Are they not much
more apparently drunk? They always rise last, and strive to carry away more
then others: And if there be any one of them of a finer education, many times
he will offer to sing. These things he observed as ridiculous, particularly
also taxing those who taught Philosophy for reward, and sold virtue, as it
were, in the market; calling their Schools shops, and shambles; and thinking it
most reasonable, that he who taught others to despise wealth, should first
render himself above gain: since it was his own ordinary course, not only to
instruct those who would learn gratis, but if need were to supply their wants
out of his generous contempt of riches; being so far from coveting things
which did not concern him, as not to bend his cares to the preservation of
those things which were his own; for many years not once vouchsafeing to visit
a farm which he had near the City. For first, he made question whether he
might call it his own: proceeding I suppose by this distinction, that by
nature we are not Lords of any thing; but that by law, and succession, we
obtain an uncertain possession, and use of things; and are for a little time
called owners; and when our set term is expired, that then they pass on to
another, who bares that name. Many other exemplary things he had in him worthy
of imitation; the plainness of his diet, the moderation of his exercise, the
gravity of his person, the decency of his apparel, but above all the equal
temper, and sweetness of his behavior. His manner was to admonish such as
resorted to him, not to defer their amendment, (as many do; who set
themselves certain feasts, and solemn times, from whence to begin to leave
off lying, and to do things which are honest) maintaining that the imbracements
of virtue ought to be without delay. He also condemned those Philosophers very
much, who placed the exercise of virtue in accustoming their young Scholars to
the labors, and hardnesses which they were to resist; commanding them
sometimes to be bound, and whipped; others, somewhat more elegant, used to cut
prints in their flesh with a rasour: whereas, said he, 'twere much better to
beget an hardiness and courage in their souls first; that way of education
being still to be preferred, which partly regards the mind, partly the body,
partly the learners age, and former course of breeding; it being a great fault
in Tutors to task their Scholars beyond their abilities; since many too hard
set have died under their impositions. One I knew, said he, who having tasted
their cruel discipline, at the first hearing of more rational discourses (as
if he had then come to himself) irrecoverably forsook them, and lived ever
after very contentedly. Here he past on, and speaking of other professions, at
last fell upon the disturbances, and Justlings of the City; not omitting the
Theater, the horse-race, Horsemens statues, names of great horses, and the
Crackes made of them in by-Corners. For, said he, there is not a more usual
madness then that of Horse-race; wherewith also many who wear the countenance
of virtue are infected. After this entering, as it were, upon another Act of the
play, he touched upon those passages which fall out at funerals, and making of
wills: Adding, moreover, that the Romans in all their life time uttered but one
true word, meaning in their wills; so that the Testator never enjoyes the
benefit of his own truth. I could not refrain laughter, when he proceeded,
and said, the Romans desired to have their ignorance buried with them, and yet
proclaimed their stupidity by their wills; whilst some command those clothes
of best value worn by them in their life time to be burnt with them; Others
leave so many servants to attend their graves; Others give order for the
crowning of their pillars with chaplets; prolonging their folly beyond their
funerals; and leaving it to conjecture what they did alive, when they provide
for such monuments after their death. For these are they, said he, who buy only
that meat which costs most, who at their entertainments drink wine with music,
and Odours; who in the midst of winter crown themselves with roses, which they
prize from their unseasonablenesse, and scarcity; disdayning those as
worthless which are of a timely and natural growth. These are they who drink
perfumes: where, by the way, he carp't at those who knevv not how to order,
and use their pleasures; but sinned by the preposterous shuffling, and
confusion of them; suffering them utterly to trample upon and waste the soul;
being, according to that saying of the Tragedy, themselves hurried beyond the
mark. This he said, was a mere soloecisme in pleasure; Imitating Momus, I
believe, in his reprehension. For as he found fault with God for making a
Bull, and not placeing his horns before his eyes; so he blamed those who
wore Garlands, and knevv not their right place; For, said he, if they delight
in the Air, or sent of violets, and roses, they should wear them just under
their noses, and near the place of breathing as may be, that the smell may
strike their sense the stronglier. He laughed also at those who spent their
studies in the contrivance of curious entertainments; affecting unknown
sauces, and variety of dishes, and putting themselves to so much charge and
trouble for the love of a short transitory pleasure. For he made it a clear
case, that all their pains were laid out upon the breadth of four fingers,
which, said he, is the measure of the longest throat; For they cannot enjoy
the pleasures of their dainties before they eat them; nor differ they in taste,
though never so costly, from courser fare after they have eaten them. It
remains, then, that after their great sums, they bought merely that short
pleasure which they took in the passage and going down. And they are justly
punished, said he, for their ignorance, who understand not those true pleasures
which Philosophy bestows on the industrious. He discourst to me, also, many
things concerning Bathes: How vainly they are frequented; what affronts are
there offered; how some are carried thither upon their servants shoulders, as
it were to their funeral. One thing ordinarily practiced in the City, but most
usual in Bathes, he much inveighed against: That is, to have some servants go
before to warn them to look to their footing, as they are to pass over some
hole, or by some place which jets out; most absurdly instructing them how they
are to tread. A thing in his judgment much to be complained of: that since they
did not dine or suppe with others mouths or hands, nor hear with others ears,
yet being in perfect sense they should employ others eyes to see for them, and
be guided by directions scarce fit to be given to men blind or lame; and this
at midday, in the open street, when as they themselves have the managing of
the state. This and much more he briefly past over, and so ended his discourse.
I all the while listening to him like one entranced, and still fearing he
should give over. For he was no sooner silent, but that befell me which
happened to the people of Corcyra. Long fixed I mine eyes upon him like one
enchanted; Then suffering in my self a great confusion, and Tumult, first I
fell into a cold sweat, next laboring to speak, I sunk down, and was unable: my
voice failed, and my tongue denied its office; and to conclude, for want of
other expression, I fell a crying. For his discourse did not lightly raze my
skin, or leave in me a casual impression; but the stroke was deep, and home,
and his speech so rightly aimed, that, as I may so say, it entered, and cleft my
very soul. For if, under correction, I may now pass my judgment of
Philosophical discourses, this is my opinion of them: The mind of every
ingenious man is like a loft delicate Butt; many Archers there are in the
world, who carry quivers filled with discourses of all sorts; yet all do not
hit the mark: But some drawing their Bow too hard, give too much force to
their Shaft, which flies home, indeed, but sticks not; but through too much
strength passes through the Butt, leaving a great gappe and wound in the Soul.
Others again on the contrary through the weakness of their Arms, and
slacknesse of their Bow, shoot not home; but their Arrows languishing in their
flight, fall down many times in the midway: Or if they chance to reach the
mark, they do but superficially touch it, and leave no impression; as not
being discharged with might enough. But a good Archer indeed, and like him I
spoke of, will exactly consider whether the Butt be not too soft, or too hard
for his Arrow: (for there are some Marks not to be pierced) and as he makes
his discovery, dipping his Shaft (not in poison, like the Scythians, nor in
harmfull juyces, like the Cretans, but) in poignant, and sovereign Medicines,
he discharges; allowing such just aim to his shot, as to pierce and not pass
through, but to remain and stick, till the virtue of the dart, diffusing it
self, overspread and season the whole mind. And this is that which at once
stirs the delight, and tears of the hearers. As it then befell me, when I
felt his Balsam gently creep over my Soul. I applied therefore unto him that
verse: Still shoot, if unto men thy darts prove rays.
For as those who hear a Phrygian Cornet winded, do not all run mad; but those
only who are possessed with their Goddess, upon the sound of the charm, fall
into their former distractions: so all who hear Philosophers do not depart
astonished and wounded, but those only between whose Souls and Philosophy,
there is some sympathy and alliance.


Lucian. What reverend, admirable, Divine things, my good friend, have you
delivered! who are (now I confess) returned full of Ambrosia, and Myrtle:
wherefore all the time of your discourse my Soul felt commotions too, and I
now grieve you have done so soon; and can use your words and say, I am wounded.
Nor let it stir your wonder: for those, you know, who are bitten by mad
Dogs, run not only mad themselves, but if they in their fury bite others,
they whom they bite run mad too. For the rage conveying it self with the
wound, one infection begets another, and spreads at last into a stream, and
large succession of madness.


Philosoph: You confess your self touched then?


Lucian. I do, and request you to find out some common remedy for us both.


Philosoph: We must do then as Telephus did.


Lucian. How Is that?


Philosoph: Ask our cure of him, who gave us our wound.


The Kings Fisher, or a Discourse of TRANSFORMATIONS.
The Speakers, Chaerephon and Socrates. CHAEREPHON. What sound is this,
Socrates, which strikes our ears from yonder promontory, and Cliffe? hark how
sweet it is: what musical creature may this be?


Socrates. A sea-Fovvle, Chaerephon, called the Kings-fisher, wholly made up of
Complaints, and woes; of whom there goes an ancient Fable. For it is reported,
that being once a Woman, Aeolus the Graecians daughter, and that loosing her
Husband Ceyx the Trachinian, descended of Hesperus the Evening-starre, a
beatifull son of a bright Father, when she was yet a Girl, out of extreme
love, she much lamented his death; And thereupon, by the power of some God, was
put into feathers; and has ever since in the shape of a Bird flown about the
Sea in search of him.


Chaerephon. A Kings-Fisher call you her? I never heard her before; and
therefore to me she seemed some outlandish foul. Truly she sings in a very
mournful tune; pray, Socrates, what manner of Bird is it?


Socrates. Not great, Chaerephon, unless it be for the great honor she has
received from the Gods for her love to her husband. For all the while she sits,
though in the midst of winter, the world enjoyes Halcyon days, of a
different calmness from other times; whereof this day is one. See you not how
clear the Heavens are? and how the Sea without wave or billow, resembles for
smoothness a mirror, or Glass.


Chaerephon. True. This is, indeed, a Halcyon day; and yesterday was such
another. But for Gods sake tell me, Socrates, may I give credit to what you
said, in the beginning, that women have been raised out of Birds; or that Birds
have been transformed into women? It sounds to me altogether impossible.


Socrates. O my friend, Chaerephon, we are but purblind Judges of what is
possible, and impossible. For we pronounce according to the ignorant,
faithless, dull abilities of men; And therefore, many things in themselves
easy, seem to us difficult; and many things in themselves attainable, seem to
us not to be attained: And this befalls us sometimes through unexperience,
sometimes through the infancy of our minds. For compared to the first cause
every man, though never so old, is but a child; And compared to Aeternity our
whole life is but a childhood, and spanne. How then can they who know not the
power of the Gods discourse of them, or precisely tell what is possible, and
what is not? you saw the storm, Chaerephon, about three days since, what
lightnings, and Thunders, and tempestuous winds were there? some man would
tremble at the thought of them, fearing least the whole world would have fallen
to ruin: yet you see it ended in a wonderful Calm, which lasts yet. Which,
then, think you is the harder, and more unlikely, to raise a stillnesse out of
a blustering tempest, and to cast fair weather over the world, or to change the
shape of a Woman into the form of a Bird? we see children every day raise
several figures, and shapes, from wax or clay. Then certainly to God, who is
too great and excellent to be brought into Comparison with our performances,
all these things are most familiar, and easy. How much bigger is the Heaven
then you, can you tell?


Chaerephon. No, Socrates, nor any man else: such comparisons are not to be
known, or taken measure of.


Socrates. Well then! do we not see the vast disproportions of some men
compared with others, and how they differ in their impotencies, or strength?
what wondrous difference is there between a man of mature age, and a child five
or ten days old, both for their infirmity, and might; as also for all the
Actions of life, whither they be the defense of those our walls so often
assaulted, or any other performances either of body or mind? which things
cannot possibly enter into the apprehension of a child? Then, for greatness of
strength, a grown man carries no proportion, or measure, to a child; who with
one hand can easily overcome millions of them. For naturally men are born of an
age at first altogether unexpert, and unfit for action. If, then, one man so
much excel another; how much the Gods excel us, they may consider who have
abilities for such contemplations. It will, therefore, I doubt not, seem
credible to most, that as much as the whole world exceeds Socrates, and
Chaerephon in magnitude and space, so much do they exceed us in power and
providence, and wisdom. Many things, therefore, to you and me, and such as we
are, seem impossible, which to others are easy. For to wind a Cornet well to
those who cannot play, and to read or write to those who are ignorant of
Grammar, shows more impossible then to make women of Birds, or Birds of women.
Nature, we see, finding in a Comb of Wax a shapelesse worm, without Legs or
Feathers, gives it Wings, and feet, and enamelling it with great diversity of
fair colors, produces a Be, the wise Architect of Divine honey: out of dumb
senseless eggs she forms several sorts of flying, walking, swimming
Creatures, assisted (as it is thought) by the Sacred influence of the sky. We
therefore, poor mortals and infants, who can neither comprehend great matters,
nor understand small, but doubt of most things, even of those which concern our
selves, can say little concerning the power of the immortal Gods, or of their
transformations of Kings-Fishers, or nightingales. Only as the Glory of the
Fable has bin Conveyed to me from my Ancestors, so will I, to the praise of
thy songs, O thou bird of mourning, convey it to posterity; and will often
repeat thy virtuous love of thy Husband to my Wives Xantippe, and Mirto; not
forgetting the honor bestowed upon thee by the Gods: and do you Chaerephon,
do the like.


Chaerephon. It Is fit I should Socrates, since all your words carry double
persuasions, and are able to instruct both sexes.


Socrates. Now then, it is time we bid the Kings-fisher farewell, and return
into the City.


Chaerephon. It Is so, and therefore let us go.


Prometheus or Caucasus.
The speakers. Mercury, Vulcan, Prometheus. Mercury. LOok Vulcan, yonder is
Caucasus, to which we are to nail this wretched Titan: let us find out some
eminent place, uncovered with Snow, where we may the firmelier chain him, and
where he may hang most open to passengers.


Vulcan. You say well Mercury: For if we chain him to some low place, near the
earth, his creatures, men, will come in to his succor; and if we fasten him to
the Hilltoppe he will not be seen below: wherefore, if you think fit, let us
crucifi^ him here in the middle of the hill, which hangs over this valley, and
let him stretch one Arm that way, and the other this.


Mercury. It Is well contrived, for here the Rock is craggie, and inaccessible,
and inclining to a precipice; and the ascent so narrow, that you can hardly
stand tiptoe; and every way fittest for his Cross: make no delays therefore
Prometheus, but mount and suffer your self to be fastened.


Prometheus. Vulcan, Mercury, pity me, who without desert am thus unfortunate.


Mercury. Pity thee Prometheus? why is it not enough for thee to be bound to
Caucasus, unless Jupiter doom both us to the same punishment, for disobeying
his Decree? Stretch forth thy right hand: unmanacle him Vulcan, and nail him,
and be sure to give strength to your Hammer. Now reach out thy other hand, that
he may fasten that too: well done. An Eagle will fly hither presently, and will
prey upon thy Liver, and then thou will be fully rewarded for thy rare and most
ingenious piece of work-manship.


Prometheus. O Iapetus, Saturn, and mother Earth, what tortures do I feel,
who never offended or committed fault.


Mercury. Dids't thou never offend, Prometheus? Who at a division of
sacrifices, dids't deal so unequally and deceitfully, and stealing the best
for thy self, left'st nothing for Jupiter but Bones covered with fat; As I
remember Hesiod tells the story so: Next thou made men, a most sly and
fallacious creature; but especially women: But above all thou stolest Fire, the
most precious treasure of the Gods, and bestowed'st it upon men. And after all
these offenses, can thou say thou art causelessly fastened?


Prometheus. Methinks, Mercury, you as well as the Poet do accuse the
innocent; when you charge me with things, for which if I had Justice done me, I
should be allowed a pension. If therefore, your leisure serve you, I will
gladly wipe off your accusations, by showing how unjustly Jupiter has given
sentence upon me. Do you, in the mean time, being both eloquent of speech, and
skillful in the laws, make his defense as if he held equal Scales, in dooming
me to be here crucified near the Caspian streights, upon this Caucasus; where I
am a miserable spectacle to all the Scythians.


Mercury. Thou spendest words in vain, Prometheus, and to no purpose; yet say
on. For since I am otherwise enjoined to tarry till the Eagle alight, and feed
upon thy Liver, 'twill not be amiss to fill up the time with listening to thy
Sophistry, wherein thou art most expert.


Prometheus. First, then, Mercury, do you aggravate your charge as much as you
can; and as well as you can defend your fathers justice. In the mean time,
Vulcan, be you Judge between us.


Vulcan. So help me, Jupiter, I will rather be thy accuser. Do you remember
how you stole my Fire, and left my Forge cold?


Prometheus. Divide the accusation between you then, and do you say all you
can against my Theft, let Mercury plead against my Creation of men, and
division of the sacrifice: you seem to be both your Arts-masters, and very able
to speak.


Vulcan. Mercury shall speak for me; who am not for your pleadings, and Law
Cases, but employ my self about the Anvill, and Forge. For he is an Orator,
and has studied Rhetoric.


Prometheus. I believe Mercury has little to say against Theevery, and will
not charge me with a thing, whereof himself is the Author. If you have,
Mercury, it is time you produce your Accusation.


Mercury. It would ask a long speech, Prometheus, and much preparation to
repeat all your offenses: It shall suffice me to recount only their heads.
First, being permitted to cast Lots for a Sacrifice, you kept the best for your
self, and cheated the King; next, you made men, which was not fit; lastly you
stole Fire from us, and bore it to them: wherein, in my opinion, you did very
indiscreetly, to provoke Jupiter, who is such a friend to men. Now if you deny
this, for your greater convincement, 'twill be fit I enlarge my self, and try
to make the truth of things yet plainer. If you confess that you made a false
Division of the Sacrifice, and that you formed men, and stole Fire, my
Accusation will be full, and I should but trifle to say more.


Prometheus. Whither you have not spoken trifles all this while, we shall see
anon; I, since you think you have made such a full accusation, will strive, as
well as I can, to dissolve it: First, then, lend me your attention concerning
the Sacrifice. I call Heaven to witness whether in making my defense, I blush
not for Jupiter, to think he should be so poor spirited, and whining, as for
one small Bone, which came to his share, to send hither so ancient a God, as I
am, to be crucified; not remembering of what assistance I have been to him, nor
weighing how childish the ground of his displeasure is, to be angry, and fret,
because he had not the greater piece. Nor do I think, Mercury, that cheats of
Entertainment are to be remembered, but that all faults committed at feasts are
to be reckoned sport; and that he was to leave his anger behind him at the
Table. But to bury his hate till the next day, and to lay up a past injury, and
keep it in fresh memory, is neither Kingly, nor like a God. For take away from
Banquets wit, breaking of Jests, putting of Tricks, Jeeres, Comicall abuses,
and laughter, and nothing will remain but drunkenness, surfets and silence;
Things dull and unpleasant, and misbecoming a Feast. I, therefore, could not
imagine Jupiter could have remembered things the next day; much less have
proved so Choleric, or taken matters so haynously, if in the division of a
little flesh, one should make sport with him, and make trial whither he knew
how to choose the better part. But put the worst, Mercury, that I gave him not
the lesser piece, but deceived him of all; must he therefore (according to the
proverb) bring heaven and earth together, and project fetters, Crosses, whole
mountains, and Eagles to devour my liver? Look if such proceedings as these
do not betray great weakness, and poorness of Spirit, and inclination to
revenge. If he do thus for a little beef, what would he have done for the
loss of a whole Ox? Mortal men deal much discreetlier in the like cases,
then so; who should be proner to, wrath then the Gods. For never any yet
crucified his Cook, for dipping his finger in the sauce, and licking it; or for
cutting a slice of beef from the spit, and eating it: but rather pardoned him;
or if he were very angry, gave him only a cuffe on the ear, or a blow on the
cheek. But never any was crucified for things of this light nature. And thus
much be spoken concerning the flesh; a matter unworthy of my defense, but much
unworthier of his complaint. I proceed to speak next of my workmanship, and
Creation of men: which falling under a twofold charge, I know not, Mercury, of
which you acuse me most; whither because it was not fit for men to be made at
all, but to have lain unformed, and the Earth to have remained unoccupied; or
because they should have been made otherwise, and of another shape, and Figure.
I shall easily reply to both; and will first endeavor to prove that the
production of men is no hurt or damage to the Gods; next that it is of much
more convenience and advantage to them, then that the earth should lie
desolate, and unpeopled, whereby it will plainly appear, whither I have
offended in my graceful formation of men, the only creature of a divine and
heavenly race. For the earth was a rude, shapelesse thing, grown over with
thickets, and dark woods: the Gods had neither Altars, nor Temples, nor Images,
nor statues; who are now every where adored with much reverence. I therefore
(for 'twas ever my care to provide for the common, and to advance the honor of
the Gods, and to project things of ornament and beauty) did cast with my self,
whither I could do better then take a piece of clay, and form Creatures like
us Gods, in visage and figure. For this, methought, was wanting to our
Divinity; that there was not a contrary, or foil, which set in Comparison
with us; might set off our felicity: which nevertheless was to be some mortal
thing, though otherwise most ingenious, understanding, and sensible of the best
things. At length, according to that saying of the Poet, mixing earth with
water, and working it into a soft mortar, I framed men; requesting Pallas to
assist me in my work. This is my great offense against the Gods: and how great
my punishment is you see, only because, forsooth, I raised creatures out of
Clay, and gave motion to a thing which before moved not. And as if the Gods
were the less Gods, because there are mortals on earth, therefore Jupiter is
thus displeased, thinking the number of the Gods diminish't by the production
of men: unless he be afraid least they should attempt a rebellion, and make
war upon the Gods, as the Giants did. It Is plain then, Mercury, that there is
no fault either in me, or my workmanship. If you can show any though never so
small, I will be silent, and will think I suffer deservedly. But that the Gods
are hereby much benefitted, you may easily learn, if you be hold the Earth no
longer untilled or unmanured, but adorned with Cities, Agricultures, and
generous plantations; the Sea navigated; Islands inhabited; Altars every where
erected, sacrifices offered, Temples and solemnities frequented; streets filled
with Jupiter, and markets with men. Had I made this Creature for my self only,
I had bin the wealthiest of all the Gods. But I wrought for the public, and
for the rest; especially for Jupiter, Apollo, and you Mercury; whose Temples
are every where to be seen, but not one for Prometheus. Can you, then, at all
perceive, that I have considered my self, and have diminisht or taken from the
Common? Tell me, Mercury, can you think possessions desirable without a
spectatour; or any piece of workmanship pleasant, or delightful to the owner,
if not seen and praised? which I therefore say, because if men had not been
made, the beauty of the Universe had lackt a witness, and we should have
possessed riches neither admired by others, nor valued by our selves: Nor should
we have wherevvithall to comfort our selves, or understand how happy we are,
did we not see others void of our condition. Thus great things seem great by
their comparison with less. But you, who ought to have honored me for this
public service, have revva^ded my endeavors and studies with a Cross. But,
say you, there are great malefactors among them, Adulterers, Rebels, men that
marry their sisters, and plot against their parents. As if there were not the
like among us, and that heaven might not be accused as well as the Earth, for
producing us. But, you will say, there is a burden cast upon us to take care of
their affairs. For the same reason a shepherd may count it a Burden that he
has a flock, because he is troubled to look after it. Though, indeed, this
very trouble be seasoned with pleasure, and this care be delightful in the
exercise. Besides, how should we spend our time, if there were none to busy
our providence? Sit idle, and do nothing but drink Nectar, and stuff our
selves with Ambrosia? But that which vexes me most is, that you inveigh most
against me for making women, and yet love them, and are still descending to
them, sometimes like Bulls, sometimes like Satyrs, sometimes like swannes, and
are content to make them Goddesses. But, say you, 'twas fit men should be made,
but after another manner, and not like us. What other pattern should I propose
to my self, then that which I knew to be most excellent? unless I should have
made a witless, beastly, rustic creature. Besides, had they not been as they
are, how should they sacrifice to us, or give us due honors? You, when you are
invited to Hecatombes, can sail sometimes the whole length of the Ocean, to
the faultlesse Aethiopians. But you crucify the Author of your honors, and
sacrifices. And let this suffice to be spoken concerning men. I now pass on to
the heinous stealth of fire. Answer me without delay in the behalf of the
Gods, have we lost any fire since it came among men? you cannot say we have;
since it is the nature of this Element not to decrease by communication, nor is
one flame extinguish't by the kindling of another. It Is plain envy, then, to
forbid the necessary use of those things which take nothing from us; whereas it
becomes the Gods to be gracious, givers of good things, and free from all
envy. But suppose I had stolen all your fire, and conveyed it to the Earth, I
had not vvrong'd you much; for you need it not, being neither cold, nor
accustomed to boil your Ambrosia, nor used to the supply of an Artificial
light; but to men fire is necessary, as for other uses, so especially for their
sacrifices; not able else to perfume your temples, or to send you up clouds of
incense, or burn their oblations on your Altars. Besides, I observe you are
much delighted with their smoke, and much pleased with the smell, when a cloud
of perfume ascends to heaven; you condemn then what you desire. Lastly I
wonder you forbid not the Sun to shine, whose fire is much diviner, and hotter
then mine; or that you blame him not for spending your treasure. I have said.
If I have spoken amiss, I would have you, Mercury, and Vulcan, correct or
disprove me, and I will make a second reply.


Mercury. It Is hard, Prometheus, to contend with so generous a Sophister. But
you may be glad Jupiter heard you not; who doubtless had sent sixteen Vultures
to devour your entrails, so grievously have you accused him in your own
defense. I marvel, being a prophet, you did not foresee your punishment.


Prometheus. I did, Mercury; and do also presage that ere long a friend of
yours shall come from Thebes, and shall shoot the eagle, which you say is to
light upon me.


Mercury. I wish to see it, Prometheus; and that you were releast, and making
merry with us again, but not dividing a sacrifice.


Prometheus. Be confident I shall once more feast with You, and Jupiter for his
no small happiness shall release me.


Mercury. What mean you? speak clearly.


Prometheus. You know Thetis, Mercury. But I forbear to say more; it is better
to keep thee secret, till it bring me a reward for my punishment.


Mercury. Do as you think best Prometheus: let us depart, Vulcan; the Eagle is
coming: expect you a while, Prometheus, for the Theban Archer, you spoke of, to
come and ease you of the Fowls tortures.


A Dialogue between Prometheus and Jupiter.
Promet. RElease me now, Jupiter, for I have been miserably tortured.


Jupiter. Release thee, say thou, who deservest more shackles, and that all
Caucasus should be laid upon thy head, and that thy liver should not only be
gnawn by sixteen Vultures, but that thine eyes should be dug out, for making
such Creatures as men, and women, and for stealing fire? I forbear to mention
the cheat you put upon me, at the division of flesh, allotting me bones covered
with fat, and keeping the best for your self.


Prometheus. But I have felt sufficient punishment, having thus long been
chained to Caucasus, and fed an eagle, the cruellest, and worst of fowls, with
my liver.


Jupiter. This is the least part of what you ought to suffer.


Prometheus. But you shall not release me gratis, Jupiter. I will reveal a
secret which much concerns you.


Jupiter. You play the sophister with me, Prometheus.


Prometheus. What shall I get by it? if I deceive you, you know where Caucasus
stands, and want no fetters.


Jupiter. First tell me what ransom you will give me?


Prometheus. If I tell you where you are now going, will you believe my other
Divinations?


Jupiter. How can I choose?


Prometheus. You are going then to lie with Thetis.


Jupiter. Well; and what more? hitherto you have guest right.


Prometheus. Have nothing to do Jupiter, with that sea Goddess; For if she
conceive by thee, the child will just deal with thee, as thou dealst with
Saturn.


Jupiter. Not expel me my Kingdom, I hope?


Prometheus. I wish he may not, Jupiter But your copulation with her threatens
as much.


Jupiter. Farewell Thetis, then. Vulcan, Prometheus, shall strike off thy
shackles.


A Dialogue between Jupiter and Cupid.
Cupid. IF I have offended pardon me, Jupiter, who am yet a child and lack wit.


Jupiter. Art thou a child, Cupid, who art much older then Iapetus? or being so
aged and cunning as thou art, would thou be thought a child because thou have
not a beard, or gray hayres?


Cupid. As old as thou say I am, wherein have I wronged thee, that thou go
about to bind me?


Jupiter. Consider, thou Varlet, if it be a small matter to make me thy
pastime, since there is nothing into which thou have not transformed me, a
Satyr, a Bull, a Shower of gold, a Swanne, an Eagle: and yet never made any
woman love me again; no not my own wife. But I was still feign to Court them
in borrowed shapes, and to disguise my self. And those who were enamoured of a
Bull, or Swanne, if they saw me in my likeness, died for fear.


Cupid. And justly. Forthy presence, Jupiter, is too glorious for mortals.


Jupiter. How come Branchus, and Hyacinthus, then to love Apollo?


Cupid. But Daphne fled from him, for all his bright hair and smooth chinne.
If, therefore, thou would be loved, shake not thy target, and carry no
lightning; But make thy self amiable, by letting thy locks on both sides hang
curled and encircled with a mitre; wear purple robes, golden shoes, and dance
gracefully to the pipe, or flute, and thou shall see more will follow thee,
then frantic women Bacchus.


Jupiter. No more, Boy. I would not thus effeminate my self to be beloved.


Cupid. Then you must leave off wenching, Jupiter. It Is no hard matter.


Jupiter. I will not; and yet I will enjoy with less trouble; and so for this
time do let thee go.


A Dialogue between Apollo and Vulcan.
Vulcan. APollo, have you seen Maia's new born child, what a pretty infant
it is, and smiles upon every body, and promises much to expectation?


Apollo. Call you him an Infant, Vulcan, or imagine he will prove good, who for
his Juggling is elder then Iapetus?


Vulcan. Whom could he cheat, being but newly born?


Apollo. Ask Neptune, whose Trident he stole; or Mars who lost his sword out
of his scabbard; I could tell you too, how he robbed me of my bow and arrows.


Vulcan. One new born to do this, scarce able to go, and in his swaddling
clouts?


Apollo. Observe him, if ever he come to your shop Vulcan.


Vulcan. He has been here already.


Apollo. And have you all your Tools? none lost?


Vulcan. Not one, Apollo.


Apollo. But search diligently.


Vulcan. By Jove, I miss my tongs.


Apollo. But you shall find them among his clouts.


Vulcan. Are his fingers so quick, as if he studied the every in the womb?


Apollo. Do you not mark how talkative and voluble he is? He will needs be our
messenger. Yesterday he called Cupid to him, and in wrestling, I know not how,
trip'd up his heels. And while Venus praised him, and would have hugged him
for his victory, he stole her girdle; whereat Jupiter laughing he filch't his
scepter. And had it not been too heavy and fiery, had stolen his lightning also.


Vulcan. This is a nimble youth, indeed.


Apollo. He is a Musician too.


Vulcan. How d' you know?


Apollo. He found a dead Tortoise some where, and made a Lute of it; so
ordering and disposing the pins, laying bars and covering them with a belly,
then applying strings, that he plays most harmoniously; even to my envy, who
have always exercised my harp. His mother says he stays not in heaven by
night, but that he may be nimming, goes down to hell, and pilfers thereto. He
was borne with wings, and has made himself a rod, of strange force,
wherewith he musters souls, and leads the dead.


Vulcan. I gave it him in stead of a Rattle.


Apollo. And for recompense he stole your tongues.


Vulcan. It Is well remembered. I Will fetch them again; and see if I can find
them, as you say, among his Clouts.


A Dialogue between Jupiter, and Vulcan.
Vulcan. WHat am I to do now, Jupiter? here I am come at your command, and have
brought an Axe sharp enough to cleave a stone at a blow.


Jupiter. It Is well done, Vulcan; prithee strike hard, and cleave my head
asunder.


Vulcan. D' you think I am mad? speak truly, therefore, what you will have me
do.


Jupiter. Divide my scull, I say. If thou refuse, thou shall perceive this is
not the first time I have been angry: strike with all thy might, therefore, and
make no dela^es; For I am ready to die with the torments which whirle my head
about.


Vulcan. Take heed Jupiter, I hurt you not, For my Axe is sharp, and will not;
like Lucina, be your midwife without blood.


Jupiter. Strike boldly, Vulcan, I know what is fit.


Vulcan. Against my will, then, since you are not to be disobeyed, have at your
scull. What Is this? An armed wench? I blame you not Jupiter, for storming,
being molested with such a head Ache, and lodging in your brain a Girl alive,
and armed; your head was not a head, but a Camp. Look she capers, and dances
the Matachine; clashes her buckler, and shakes her spear, as if she were
divinely possessed; nay, which is more she is grown handsome, and full statured
of a sudden; blew eyed, but her helmet turns that to beauty: wherefore
Jupiter, as the reward of my midwiferie, let her be my wife.


Jupiter. Thou do ask impossibilities, Vulcan; she resolves to live a Virgin:
how ever I will not be thy hinderance.


Vulcan. It Is all I desire, leave the rest to me. I will ravish her away with
me.


Jupiter. Do if thou can; but I know thou love an Impossible.


A Dialogue between Jupiter, Aesculapius, and Hercules.
Jupiter. CEase Aesculapius, and Hercules, to quarrel like mortals; such
discords misbecome the meetings of the Gods.


Hercules. Shall this quacksalver then, Jupiter, sit down before me?


Aesculapius. Yes, Sir, being your better.


Hercules. Wherein, good Thunderstruck? Because Jupiter for your knavery once
slew you with lightning, and afterward out of pity restored you your
immortality?


Aesculap. Have you forgot, Hercules, how you your self were burnt in Oeta,
that you lay fire in my dish?


Hercules. Lets compare the Actions of our lives; I am Jupiters Son, have
undergone famous labors, vanquished monsters, and subdued barbarous men: thou
root-scraper, and Mountebank, able perchance to administer Physic to sick
folk, art not famous for any manly performance.


Aesculap. It Is true, Sir, I have only cured your scalds, when you came up to
us half burnt, and your body almost turned to oinders by your Coat, and
woodpile. Yet it is something that I never was a serving-man, like you; and that
I never spunne at a distaffe, as you did in Lydia, when you wore a scarlet
petticoate, and suffered your mistress Omphale to correct you with her golden
slipper; and that in a fit of madness I slew not my wife, and children.


Hercules. Stop your foul language, Sir, or your immortality shall not
secure you, for I will cast you down headlong from heaven, and dash out your
brains so as Phoebus shall not cure them.


Jupiter. Give over, I say, and disturb not the feast; or I will banish you
both from the Table. It Is fit, Hercules, Aesculapius should sit before you, who
died before you.


A Dialogue between Juno and Jupiter.
Juno. I should blush, Jupiter, to have such a Son, so effeminate and lost in
wine: who wears a Miter, lies with mad women, more womanish then they; dances
after Timbrels, Pipes, and Cimbales; and resembles every body more then you his
Father.


Jupiter. This Miter-wearer, and wencher, Juno, not only subdued Lydia, and the
Inhabitants of Tmolus; as also the Thracians; but went against the Indians,
with his female Army, took their Elephants, possessed their Country, and brought
away their King, who made resistance, captive. And all this he did revelling
and dancing, and carrying rods twined with Ivye, and drunk, as you say, and
beside himself. But those who reviled him, or blasphemed his rites, either he
punished with shackles of Vines, or caused to be dismembered, by their mothers,
like Fawnes. Are not those valiant Acts, and worthy of me his Father? Nor let
it be any disparagement that he mingled Maskes, and Revellings with his
Conquests; But rather consider what he would do sober, who can do thus drunk.


Juno. Me thinks, Husband, you should have made a panegyric of his invention
of Grapes, and wine. Though you see how men reele when they are drunk, and
incline to quarrels, and forget themselves in their drink* and how that
Icarius, to whom he first taught the use of Vines, was killed by his
Companions, and slain with pitch-forkes.


Jupiter. This is nothing to the purpose: For it is not Wine, or Bacchus which
do this, but the excess of wine, and drink taken in beyond fit measure. But
whosoever drinks moderately is cheered, and made the merrier. And as for
Icarius it wrought not so upon any of his Company. But you show your jealousy,
Juno, and spleen to Semele, when you accuse Bacchus of those things which are
most commendable.


A Dialogue between Venus and Cupid.
Venus. Why, Love, do thou Conquer all the other Gods, Jove, Neptune,
Apollo, Juno, and me thy mother, and spare Minerva; toward whom thy Torch is
flamelesse, thy quiver empty, thou without a Bow, and unable to shoot?


Cupid. I am afraid of her, mother; she is so terrible, of such a stern
countenance, and of such a manly grimnesse; so that when I draw my bow, and
aim at her, she shakes her plume, and so astonishes me, that I begin to
tremble, and my arrow drops out of my hand.


Venus. Is not Mars more terrible? and yet thou have disarmed and conquered him.


Cupid. He willingly meets my shafts, and invites them, Mother; but Minerva
perpetually frowns. I once unawares brought my Torch near her. If you approach
me, quoth she, by my Father, i will thrust you through with my javelin, or take
you by the leg, and hurl you down to hell, or peece-meale you. Many such
threats came from her. Besides she looks fiery, and wears on her Breast a
Gorgons head, hair'd with snakes, which much affrights me, and makes me run
away at the sight.


Venus. Thou say thou fear Minerva, and her Gorgon, But fear not Jove's
lightning. But how come the Muses impenetrable, and beyond your shafts? Do they
shake their Crests too, and wear their Gorgons.


Cupid. These I reverence, mother, for they are venerable, and are allwaies
busied in contemplations, or songs; so that many times I frequent their
company, taken with their Music.


Venus. You spare these, then, because of their Gravity; but why wound you not
Diana?


Cupid. To satisfy you in a word, I can never find her but always wandering in
mountains. Besides, she loves a Cupid of her own already.


Venus. What Cupid? my Boy.


Cupid. Marry, to hunt, and shoot wild beasts, stagges and Fawnes; which is her
whole study. But as for her brother, though he be an Archer, and shoot well.


Venus. Yet thou, my Boy, have shot him often.


A Dialogue between Mars, and Mercury.
Mars. DId you hear, Mercury, what proud, absurd threats fell from Jupiter? I,
said He, if it please me, will let down a chain from Heaven, at which, pull you
never so hard, you shall never draw me down: But if I list to pluck, I will not
only draw you, but the Earth, and Sea aloft; with many the like brags, which
you heard as well as I. For my part I should not deny him to be superior, and
stronger then any one: But that singly he should excel so many, as that we
should not be able to weigh against him, though we took the Earth and Sea into
our scale, is past my belief.


Mercury. Good words, Mars, it is not safe to speak thus; least your petulancy
procure your punishment.


Mars. Do You think, I would speak thus to any but your self, whom I know to be
no teltale. 'Twas not in my power to conceal from thee, how ridiculous,
me-thought, his threatening was. For I remembered, how not long since, when
Neptune, Juno, and Pallas, being but three, conspired to imprison, and cast him
into chains, how fearfully he varied himself through all shapes: And if
Thetis out of pity, had not called that hundred handed Briareus to his aid,
they had bound him for all his Thunder and Lightning.


Mercury. No more, Mars: it is neither safe for you to talk thus, nor me to
hear.


A Dialogue between Jupiter and the Sun.
Jupiter. WHat have thou done, thou most wicked of all the Titans? who have
utterly ruined the world by trusting thy Chariot to a witless boy, who has
burnt some things by falling too near the Earth, and starved others with cold,
by withdrawing their Fire from them; And in a word has left nothing
undisturbed, and undisorder'd. So that had not I, beholding his Carreers,
Thunderstruck him, not a man had bin left. And this skillful Coachman and
Driver, was of your sending forth.


Sun. I was to blame, Jupiter; yet pray be not angry, since I was over-borne by
my Sons importunity. Alas how could I foresee the mischief which followed.


Jupiter. Did you not know what skill your place requires? And that upon the
least aberration of your Wheels all perishes? You knew not neither the
fierceness of your Horses, and that they are to be hard reyned. For give them
Bridle, they presently alter course; just as they hurried him sometimes to the
left hand, sometimes to the right, sometimes quite contrary, now up, now down,
as they list themselves, he not knowing how to manage them.


Sun. I knew all this, and withstood him a good while, and denied him my Teem.
But when he joined tears to his petition, and Clymene his Mother with him, I
set him fast in the Box, and taught him how to drive; telling him how high he
was to mount, and how low he was to fall; as also how to reyne his horses, and
curb their furies* I told him also the danger should he drive wrong: But he,
child as he was, having mounted so much fire, and beholding such a vast dungeon
beneath him, could not choose but be amazed; whilst the horses missing their
usual driver despised the Boy, and fell a wandering, and wrought all this
mischief. He letting go the reins, and fearful, I believe, to fall, took
hold of the Chariot: but he has suffered already, and my sorrow Jupiter is
punishment enough for me.


Jupiter. Enough for such an attempt? Well, I pardon you for once; But offend
so again, and send forth such another Deputy, and you shall feel how much
hotter my lightning is than your fire. Let his sisters also bury him near the
Po, where he fell, and let them be turned into Poplars, and weep Amber over
him. Be it your business to mend your Chariot, (for the Axle is broken, and
one of the wheels is cracked) and having coupled your horses again drive your
self: and remember this Accident.


A Dialogue between a Cyclops and Neptune.
Cyclops. O Father, how am I served by my wicked Guest, who first made me
drunk, then assaulting me in my sleep put out my eye!


Neptune. Who was it that dared this Polyphemus?


Cyclops. First he said his name was Nobody; but after his escape, when he was
out of shot, he called himself Ulysses.


Neptune. I know who you mean; he lives at Ithaca, and sailed now from Troy.
But how could he attempt this, being such a Coward?


Cyclops. Coming home from my stock, I found a great Troop in my Cave, in all
likelihood lurking to steal my sheep: whereupon I bolted my door, made of a
huge rock, and kindled a fire. No sooner began the wood, which I brought from
the mountain, to cast a flame, but they prepared to hide themselves. But I
apprehending some of them, devoured them as thieves. In the mean time that
subtle Companion, Nobody, or Ulysses, which you will, gave me a venomous
potion to drink, very sweet and fragrant, but most treacherous, and turbulent
in operation. For I had no sooner drunk, but me-thought my Cave went round, and
I was no longer my self; and at last fell into a deep sleep: he sharpening a
Bar and stirring the fire, put out my eye, and ever since, Neptune, I have
been blind.


Neptune. You slep't soundly, my son, that the loss of your sight could not
rowse you. But how escaped Ulysses? Me-thinkes he should not be able to roll
away the rock from the door.


Cyclops. I removed it, that I might the easier catch him going out. And
planting my self at the hole, I grop't with my hands, letting only my sheep
pass, remitting my business to my Ram.


Neptune. Now I know his Device: he past under thee among them unperceived. But
me-thinkes you might have called in other Cyclops.


Cyclops. I did, and they came, and ask't me the traitors name. And when I told
them, Nobody, they thought me mad and departed: and so the Caitiffe cosen'd
me with a false name. But that which grieves me most is, that upbraiding me
with my hurt, he told me my Father Neptune should not cure me.


Neptune. Take courage, son, I will revenge thee. And and he shall know, that
though I cannot heal eyes bored out, yet it is in my power to save or drown
those that sail. He is yet at Sea.


A Dialogue between Alpheus and Neptune.
Neptune. What Is the reason, Alpheus, that of all the rivers which fall into
the Sea, you only, contrary to the courses of the rest, grow not salt, nor
mingle waters, or diffuse your self; but gliding through the Ocean preserve
your stream fresh, untainted, and pure; in some places, I know not how, diving
like a sea pie, or Heron, and rising again in other places, and showing your
self?


Alpheus. These are love tricks, Neptune; Therefore blame me not, you have
loved in your time.


Neptune. Is It a woman you love, Alpheus, or a Nymph, or some sea Goddess?


Alpheus. None of these Neptune, but a Fountain.


Neptune. Where springs it?


Alpheus. In the Island of Sicily; they call it Arethusa.


Neptune. I know it: believe me, Alpheus, you have not made an unlovely
choice. It Is a clear spring, and flows in a pure Crystal; and receives thus
much ornament from the pibbles among which it rises, that it shows like a
poole of silver over them.


Alpheus. I see you know it, Neptune; To it am I now going.


Neptune. Go; and be happy in your love: but first tell me one thing, where
did you see Arethusa, you being an Arcadian, and she rising near Syracuse?


Alpheus. You hinder my journey, Neptune, by your impertinent questions.


Neptune. You say well; pass on to your beloved; and when you rise again from
the Sea, mingle with your fountain in one Channel, and become one Stream.


A Dialogue between Menelaus and Proteus.
Menelaus. THat you should be converted into water, Proteus, is not incredible,
for you are a Sea God; or into a tree, may be borne withal; or sometimes into
a Lion, is not utterly beyond belief: But how, living in the Ocean, you can
transform your self into a flame, is a thing which I admire, but believe not.


Proteus, Marvel not, Menelaus, for all those changes I under-goe.


Menelaus. I have seen you. But, then, me-thought (as I may say to you) you
jugled only by drawing false presentiments over your tricks, and casting a mist
before your spectators eyes; not that you truly were what you appeared.


Proteus. What juggling could there be in things so plainly done? Have not you
seen with your eyes open into how many shapes I have transformed my self? If
you will not believe that sense, but will still think you saw a delusion, or
some Aerie appearance cast before you, when I next turn my self into fire,
apply, generous Sir, your sense of touch to me, and then you will perceive
whether I be true fire, or fire in show.


Menelaus. That would be no safe trial, Proteus.


Proteus. In my opinion, Menelaus, you never saw a Polypus; nor understand the
transformation of that fish.


Menelaus. A Polypus I have seen, but would gladly learn it is transformation
from you.


Proteus. To whatsoever rock it fastens, or spreads its finnes, it becomes
like; and throwing off its own, assumes the color of the stone; thereby lying
concealed from fishermen, not at all differing, or varying in appearance from
the rock.


Menelaus. So the report goes: but yours, Proteus, is a Paradoxe much
unlikelier.


Proteus. I know not, Menelaus, whom you will believe, who will not believe
your own eyes.


Menelaus. I saw what I saw; yet it is a thing to me prodigious, how you should
become fire and water.


A Dialogue between Neptune, and a Dolphin.
Neptune. It Is well done of you Dolphins, that you are such friends to men. For
heretofore you carried the son of Inus ashore the Isthmus, after he and his
mother were cast down from the Scironian Cliffe; now thou have wasted a
Musician of Methymna, over to Taenarus, keeping his Furniture, and Harp, and
have not suffered him to perish by the Sailors.


Dolphin. Wonder not, Neptune, that we succor men thus; we of Men were made
Fishes.


Neptune. It Is a thing I blame Bacchus for, that having overcome you in a Sea
fight, he transformed you; whereas it had been enough to have taken you
prisoners, and to have subdued you as he did others. But how, good Dolphin,
came Arion to be thus endangered?


Dolphin. Periander (as I imagine) delighted with his skill sent for him often.
He being enrich't by the King, desired to sail home to Methymna, to show his
riches, shipping himself with a crew of Pirates, who knew he carried much gold
and silver about him: when they came about the middle of the Arches, the
Sailors conspired against him. Well, quoth he (for I heard all swimming near
the Ship) since you intend to kill me, permit me in my bravest furniture to
play mine own funeral Elegy, and voluntarily to cast my self into the Sea.
They consented. And he taking his robe, and playing most ravishingly, cast
himself overboard, with a purpose to drown himself. But I receiving him,
and getting him on my back swam with him to the Promontory.


Neptune. I applaud your love to Music; 'Twas a fit reward for your Attention.


A Dialogue between Diogenes and Pollux.
Diogenes. I Charge you, Pollux, as soon as you are risen (for to morrow I
perceive it is your course to return to life) that if you see Menippus the
dog, (whom you shall find in the Schools at Corinth, or in the Lycaeum at
Athens, laughing at Philosophers wrangling with one another,) you tell him,
that if he have laughed enough at the passages of the upper world, I desire him
to come down into the Lower; where he shall have much more to laugh at. For
there our proceedings, which he laughs at, are doubtful to him, and he meets
with this frequent objection, Who knows what shall befall us after the end of
this Life. But here tell him, he shall never want sport* But laugh as I do, as
often I see rich men, great Officers, and Tyrants humble and unrespected, and
not to be distinguished but by their unmanly degenerous howlings, at the
remembrance of their life past. Tell him this, and bid him bring a knapsacke
with him filled with beans, and a supper (if he can find one) made for Hecate
in some cross way; or an egg, left after a lustration; or the like.


Pollux. I Will deliver your Message, Diogenes; But for my better knowledge of
him, what kind of man is it?


Diogenes. A little, crabbed, old man, enclining to baldness; wearing a torn
Gown, pervious to all winds, and varied with patches of several colors. He
always laughs, especially at self-conceited Philosophers.


Pollux. 'Twill be easy to find one of this Character.


Diogenes. Will you carry a Message from me to those arrogant Philosophers too?


Pollux. Speak your Errand, it shall not be any trouble to serve you.


Diogenes. In short, then, Counsel them to trifle no longer, nor to dispute of
wholes, nor cast one another into Dilemma's or horned syllogismes, nor give
form and mood to Crocodiles; nor breed their minds to such dry barren studies.


Pollux. But they will say I am ignorant and unbred thus to condemn their
wisdom.


Diogenes. Bid 'em, then, from me Live scornd.


Pollux. So much I shall tell them.


Diogenes. Say to Rich men in my name, Why ye fools do you treasure up your
gold? and why do you torment your selves, by counting your use money, and
laying talent to talent, who are shortly to come hither but with a penny fare
in your mouth?


Pollux. I shall tell them this also.


Diogenes. Tell the spruce Gallants, and Hectors, Megillus the Corinthian, I
mean, and Damoxenus the Wrastler, that here is no use of golden hair, black
eyes, or red cheeks; or of big sinews, or strong shoulders.


Pollux. It shall not be burdensome to deliver this also.


Diogenes. Bid the poor who are many, driven from their estates, and groaning
under their wants, that they neither weep nor howl, but that they consider the
equality of this place, and that they shall see the richest here as poor as
they. And if you think fit tell the Lacedaemonians, that they are grown loose
and effeminate.


Pollux. Pray excuse me for the carriage of your message to my Countrymen,
Diogenes; your errands to the rest I will deliver.


Diogenes. Leave them out, then, it you think good; and convey my speeches to
the rest.


Pluto, or a Complaint against Menippus.
The Speakers, Croesus, Pluto, Menippus, Midas, Sardanapalus. Croesus. It Is not
possible for us to endure, Pluto, this insufferable Barker Menippus to be of
our company. Therefore remove him hence, or we will depart some where else.


Pluto. What hurt can he do to you, being dead as you are?


Croesus. When we howl, and sigh at the memory of our pleasures in the other
world, Midas of his gold, Sardanapalus of his Luxury, I of my treasures; he
laughs and upbraides us, calling us slaves, and base villains: sometimes he
drowns our howlings with singing, and in a word he is very troublesome.


Pluto. What say you to this, Menippus?


Menippus. It Is all true. These men I hate as degenerous and lost; who think it
not enough to have lived wickedly, but remember and dwell upon the thought of
those things above. Therefore I delight to plague them with themselves.


Pluto. But you do ill; for they lament no small losses.


Menippus. Are you mad too, Pluto, that you approve their whinings?


Pluto. No, Sir. But I would not have you divide your selves.


Menippus. Know this, O ye worst of Lydians, Phrygians and Assyrians, that I
will never leave you; but wheresoever you go I will follow, vexing you, and
singing, and laughing.


Croesus. Is not this plain Contumely?


Menippus. No. That was contumely which you usually practiced, suffering your
selves to be adored, and abusing free people; not at all remembering your
mortality: wherefore hovvle, now you have lost all.


Croesus. Where are my rich and Numerous possessions?


Midas. How much gold do I miss?


Sardanapalus. And I how much pleasure?


Menippus. So, this I like: vveep on; I Will join with you, and sing the old
sentence, Know thy self. A fit dittie to be mingled with your mournings.


A Dialogue between Pluto and Mercury.
Pluto. DO you know old Eucrates the usurer, who has not one child, but five
thousand Gapers after his estate?


Mercury. The Sicyonian you mean; what of him?


Pluto. Let him live, Mercury, ninety years more to the ninety he has lived
already, and longer if it be possible. But fetch hither his flatterers, young
Charinus, and Damon, and the rest.


Mercury. That would show very preposterous.


Pluto. Rather very just. For why do they pray so earnestly for his death, but
that they may enjoy his estate? But that which is yet most base, is that at
that very time when they wish his Death, they grossly observe, and Court him;
And when he is sick, all men know what they desire, yet they vow sacrifices for
his recovery. In a word, they have several ways of flattery. Wherefore let
him be immortal, and let them die first, and loose their gapings.


Mercury. Well, being such knaves their punishment shall be ridiculous: But
methinks he lures them on pretty handsomely, and feeds them with hopes; allwaies
dissembling, as if he were about to die, when he is much lustier then his
Flatterers. They in the mean time dividing the inheritance among them, are fed
with the Image of a Fantastic happiness:


Pluto. Let him therefore, like Iolaus, cast off his old age, and grow young
again. But let them in the amidst of their hopes, be snatch away as it were
in a golden dream, and like evil men die evil deaths.


Mercury. Enough Pluto. I will send them to you one after another. I think
they are seven.


Pluto. Call forth their souls, Mercury; and let him send them every one hither
before him: but let him of an old man become a youth.


A Dialogue between Terpsion, and Pluto.
Terpsion. IS this Justice, Pluto, that I should die, who am but thirty years
old, and that Thucritus, who is almost an hundred, should live?


Pluto. Great Justice, Terpsion; For though he lives, yet he wishes none of his
friends dead; whereas you all the time you lived, laid nets for his estate.


Terpsion. Was It not fit, being an old man, and no longer able to use his
riches, he should die, and leave them to those that are younger?


Pluto. You make new laws, Terpsion, that when a man can no longer use his
riches with pleasure, he ought to die. Fate and Nature decree otherwise.


Terpsion. I accuse them, therefore, of disorder. For the business ought to
run in this succession: The most aged to die first, then those who are next in
years; And not to be inverted, or he to live who is decrepit, has but three
teeth left, scarce sees, is supported by four servants, distills at nose, has
eyes filled with rheum, has lost all sense of pleasure, and is laughed at by
boys as a living sepulcher; and the most beautiful, and lustiest young men to
die. This is to make rivers run backwards. At least 'twere fit we knew the date
of old men's lives, that they might not cosen us as they do. But now the old
Proverb is brought to pass, the Cart leads the Ox.


Pluto. These things are wiselier carried, Terpsion, then you are aware of. For
what ailes you, that you yawne after other men's fortunes, and enslave your
selves to childlesse old men? you do, therefore, but make your selves
ridiculous, and they bury you first; which to many is metter of great pleasure;
for just as you prayed for their deaths, so much delight is it to others to
have you die first. For you have introduced a new Art, to make love to old
women, and old men, especially to those who have no children neglecting those
that have; whilst many of those who are courted by you, well acquainted with
your aims, if they chance to have children, pretend to hate them, that they
may have observers. At length those who had for a long time wasted themselves
in gifts, are shut out of the will, and the son, as there is good reason,
enjoyes all: the rest cheated of their hopes gnash their teeth.


Terpsion. You speak truth. Thucritus has almost quite eaten my estate; still
making me believe he would die. And as often as I came to visit him, he would
groan, and sob inwardly, and counterfeit a noise like an abortive chick in the
shell; wherefore by how much the nearer I thought him to his grave, so many
gifts the more did I send him; least his other flatterers should exceed me in
presents: many nights have my cares taken my sleep from me, numbering and
disposing my fortunes. And indeed care, and watching were the causes of my
death: whilst he having swallowed my bait, assisted at my funeral, and went
before my beer laughing.


Pluto. May thou live eternally, Thucritus, to grow rich, and laugh at such
men. And may thou not die, till thou have sent hither all thy flatterers
before thee.


Terpsion. It would be a pleasure to me too, Pluto, if Chariades should die
before Thucritus.


Pluto. Take comfort, Terpsion; Phido, Melantus, and all the rest shall die
before him of their Cares.


Terpsion. This I like. Live eternally Thucritus.


A Dialogue between Zenophantes, and Callidemides.
Zenoph. BUt how died you, Callidemides? you know I, being Dinias parasite, did
over-eat my self, and was choked with a surfeit: you stood by when I died.


Callid. I did, Zenophantes. I died unexpectedly: you know old Ptaeodorus.


Zenoph. You mean the rich Usurer, who has no child, whose house you always
frequented.


Callid. I always observed him, and flattered my self with his death: but
when I saw my expectation prolonged, and that he began to be older then Tython,
I contrived a compendious way to gain his estate. For having bought poison, I
dealt with his Butler, that when Ptaeodorus next called for drink (and he
usually drinks deeply) he should steal it into the bowl, having it ready, and
give it him; which if he did, I swore to make him a freeman.


Zenoph. And what happened? For me thinks you are about to tell a strange story.


Callid. We went to bath our selves, where his Boy held two cups; one for
Ptaeodorus, which held the poison, the other for me. But mistaking, I know not
how, he gave the poison to me, and the sound cup to Ptaeodorus: who presently
drunk it off; when at the instant I fell down dead, and excused his funeral
with my own. Why do you smile Zenophantes? you do not well to laugh at your
friend.


Zenoph. You have suffered things to he laughed at, Callidemides. But how looked
the old man at your fall?


Callid. First he was frighted with the Accident. But being informed, I
believe, how things were, he laughed at what the Butler had done.


Zenoph. You did ill to make such short contrivances, for a thing which would
in ordinary course much safelier have happened, had you made less have.


A Dialogue between Cnemon and Damnippus.
Cnemon. Why this is the old Proverb right, the Fawn beats the Lion.


Damnip. At what do you chafe, Cnemon?


Cnemon. At what do I chafe, do you ask? I have left an heir against my will,
and am cousen'd, wretch that I am, and have undone my children.


Damnip. How I pray?


Cnemon. A little before my death, I applied my self much to the rich,
childlesse Hermolaus; who took my Addresses not distastfully: and to show my
self a wise fellow, I made my will, and published it, and left all my estate to
him; expecting that out of imitation he should do the like to me.


Damnip. And what was your success?


Cnemon. What he wrote in his will, I know not; but I died suddenly by the fall
of a house: since which time Hermolaus possesses my estate, like a Pike which
carries away the hook with the bair.


Damnip. Nay, you the Angler and all: wherefore you made a ginne for your self.


Cnemon. It seems so, and therefore I now mourn.


A Dialogue between Charon, Mercury, a company of dead men, Menippus,
Charmoleus, Lampichus, Damasias, a Philosoper, and a Rhetorician.
Charon. Hear how the case stands with you: My Boat, as you see, is small, and
rotten, and leakes in many places; And therefore if it be not equally trimmed,
'twill overturne. And yet so many of you together are come hither, every one
with a great burden; which if you bring in with you, you will repent it,
especially those who cannot swim.


The Dead. How shall we do then for safe waftage?


Charon. I Will tell you, you must enter naked, and leave your carriages upon the
shore. And it is well if the Boat receive you all so. Be it your charge,
Mercury, to admit none but such as are slender, and cast away their Luggage:
stand therefore at the ladder, and receive them with choice, and compel them
to enter stripped.


Mercury. I will obey your Directions. Who is the first?


Menippus. I am Menippus. Look Mercury I have cast my wallet and staff into
the lake: as for gown, 'twas well I brought none.


Mercury. Enter Menippus, thou best of men, and take the first and highest
place in the Boat; from whence thou may see the rest. But what spruce youth
is this?


Charmoleus. I am Charmoleus, the lovely Megarian, who took two talents for a
kiss.


Mercury. Cast off your beauty, and lips with their kisses, your long hair
too, red cheeks, and whole skin? It Is well; you are now fit, enter* But what
grimme Sir is that, arrayed in Purple, and a Crown on his head?


Lampichus. I am Lampichus, Tyrant of Gela.


Mercury. Why thus laden? Lampichus.


Lampichus. Should a Prince come naked? Mercury.


Mercury. A prince should not, but a dead man should. Therefore put off your
ornaments.


Lampichus. There lie my riches.


Mercury. But you must cast off your pride; and stateliness too, Lampichus.
For if these enter with you, they will overcharge the Boat.


Lampichus. Let me keep but my crown and robe.


Mercury. By no means, you must forsake them.


Lampichus. There then: what more? you see I have cast away all.


Mercury. You must cast off your cruelty too, and folly, and insolence, and
fury, and the like.


Lampichus. See, I am naked.


Mercury. Now enter. What gross fleshy fellow are you?


Damasias. I am Damasias the wrastler.


Mercury. So methought, I have seen you often at wrestling.


Damasias. True, Mercury; receive me therefore naked.


Mercury. You are not naked, my friend, who are clothed with all this flesh;
put it off therefore: for if you put but one foot into the boat, you sink it.
Cast away your Crowns, and praises too.


Damas. See, I am naked, and slender, like other Ghosts.


Mercury. You are now of a fit lightness; therefore enter. Do you Crato throw
away your wealth, as also your effeminatenesse, and pleasures; and bring not
with you your Epitaphes, and titles of your Ancestors: leave behind you too
your pedigree, and reputation, and panegyricks bestowed upon you by the City,
to which you have been a benefactour; the inscriptions of your statues also.
And speak not of the great tomb they have raised for you, for these things
gather weight from their remembrance.


Crato. Well, I will put them off, because I cannot help it.


Mercury. Bless me! what armed? why do you carry that Trophie?


Crato. Because I conquered and achieved it, Mercury, and was therefore
honored by the City.


Mercury. Leave your arms to the Earth; there is only peace in Hell, and no
need of Trophies there. But what venerable shade is that, of a grave presence,
who knits his brows out of contemplation, and wears such a long beard?


Menippus. A Philosopher, Mercury; or rather a jugler, and cheater: pray
strippe him, and you will see many things very ridiculous hid under his gown.


Mercury. Lay aside your gown, Sir, and all things else. O Jupiter! what
arrogance, ignorance, contention, vainglory* endless questions, thornie
disputes, intricate notions, fruitless labors, whimseyes, trifles, and
curious follies, he carried about him? Besides gold, and pleasures, and
impudence, and choler, and wantonness, and luxury. These things escape not my
knowledge, Sir, though you should strive to conceal them. Cast off your lying,
also, and your pride, and your conceit that you are better then others. For if
you enter thus burdened, a pinnace will scarce carry you.


Philosoph. I cast then all off, since it is your pleasure.


Menippus. Let him put off his beard too, Mercury; which you see is both long,
and slovenly, and weighs at least five pound.


Philosopher. But who shall cut it?


Mercury. Menippus shall shave you with the axe that mends the boat, laying
your beard upon the sides of the ladder.


Menippus. Not so, Mercury, 'twill be more ridiculous if you lend me a saw.


Mercury. An Axe will serve.


Menippus. So, you now look more like a man, having cast off your stink; shall
I clip your eyebrows too?


Mercury. Yes, for these he used to raise to the top of his forehead, when he
strained himself. What, do thou cry? varlet, and art afraid of death? enter
then.


Menippus. He still has one thing strong about him.


Mercury. What, Menippus.


Menippus. Flattery, Mercury, which when he lived, stood him in much stead.


Philosoph. Do you then, Menippus, cast off your liberty, and boldness of
speech; your jollity also, and jeering.


Mercury. By no means: keep them still; for they are light, and of easy
portage, and will advance our passage. Do you, Pleader, cast away your tedious
speeches, and your Retortions; your similitudes also, and periods, and
barbarismes, and other burdens of language.


Rhetor. It Is done.


Mercury. It Is well. Now set from the shore, and lets pull up the ladder, weigh
anchor, and spread the sail. Do you, Ferry-man, guide the stern; and let us be
merry. Why howl you ye vain people? especially, you Philosopher? because you
lost your beard?


Philosoph. No. But because I thought the soul had bin immortal.


Menippus. He lies: he weeps for something else.


Mercury. For what?


Menippus. Marry, because he can be no more invited to costly suppers; and
cannot steal forth by night unespied, and muffling himself in his gown, go
over his circle of whore-houses, and in the morning cheat his pupils, with his
lecture of wisdom, and take their money. These are the things that grieve him.


Philosopher. Art not thou troubled, Menippus, because thou art dead?


Menippus. How can I, who hastened to meet death before I was called? But hark,
do you not hear a great noise from the earth.


Mercury. Yes, Menippus, in more then one place. It Is a company met together,
who make themselves merry at Lampichus death; The women also surround, and
follow his wife, and the boys throw stones at his children. Others in Sicyonia
clappe Diophantus the Orator, for making a funeral Oration upon Crato.
Damasias mother also with other women make a lamentation for him: No body
bewailes thee, Menippus; thou lie unmolested.


Menippus. Not so, you shall presently hear the dogs dolefully barking, and
the Crows beating their wings when they come to bury me.


Mercury. Thou art a valiant fellow, Menippus. So, we are arrived at the shore:
go all you straight forward to the Court of Justice. I and the Ferry-man will
fetch others.


Menippus. Farewell, Mercury, we will pass on. What will become of you my
friends? you must all be arraigned; and they say there are grievous punishments
here; Wheels, and Vultures, and restless stones: every man's life shall be
opened and ripped up.


A Dialogue between Crates, and Diogenes.
Crates. DId you know rich Moerichus, Diogenes? he that was so wondrous rich,
and came from Corinth; who had whole fleets laden with Merchandise; whose
cosen Aristeas being also very wealthy, used to repeat that piece of Homer, Do
you kill me, or let me kill you.


Diogenes. The two that always courted one another, Crates?


Crates. Yes, for their estates: being both alike aged, they published their
wills. In which Moerichus, if he died first, left Aristeas heir to all he had,
and Aristeas did the like if he died before Moerichus. This was recorded. They
continued their Courtship, and strived, who should excel in flattery. The
presagers, whether they took their conjectures from the stars, or from their
dreams, as the Chaldaeans do, nay Apollo himself also sometimes gave the
victory to Aristeas, sometimes to Moerichus: so that the Balance sometimes
inclined to one, sometimes to the other.


Diogenes. What was the event, Crates? it is a thing worthy my hearing.


Crates. They both died upon one day, and their estates descended to Eunomius,
and Thrasycles their two Kinsmen, not at all presaging so great a fortune. For
sailing from Sicyonia to Cyrrha, a contrary wind and tempest took them in the
middle of their Course, and sunk them.


Diogenes. They were rightly served. But we in our life time did no such things
to one another; neither did I ever pray for the death of Antisthenes, that I
might inherit his staff, though twere a strong one, and made of a Crabtree.
Nor do I think, Crates, that you wished me dead, that you might inherit my
Tubbe, or Scrip, or two quarts of Lupines.


Crates. I had no need of those things, Diogenes, neither had you. As much of
Antistenes descended to you, as you had use of; and as much from you to me, as
I had use of: which was much more, and more precious then the Persian Monarchy?


Diogenes. What do you mean.


Crates. Wisdom, Contentment, truth, liberty, and freedom.


Diogenes. I remember I succeeded Antisthenes in those wealthy virtues; and
left them amplified to you.


Crates. Others neglected such possessions, and never courted us for our
estates; but had their eyes fastened upon Gold.


Diogenes. And good reason. For they could receive no such things from us; but
being torn with pleasure, like old rotten purses, what ever wisdom, or
liberty, or truth, is put into them, presently drops out and runs through,
the bottom being not able to hold it. Resembling Danaus Daughters, who power
water into a vessel full of holes. But gold they retain with tooth and nail,
and all the strength they have.


Crates. We, therefore, even here enjoy our Treasures: they bring but one
single penny with them, and leave that too with the Ferryman.


A Dialogue between Alexander, Hannibal, Minos, Scipio.
Alexander. It Is fit I be preferred before you, Lybian, being the better man.


Hannibal. No, Sir, It Is fit I should be preferred.


Alexander. Let Minos judge.


Minos. Who are you?


Alexander. This is Hannibal, the Carthaginian; I am Alexander the Son of
Philippe.


Minos. Before Jove, both famous men. But about what is your contention?


Alexander. About taking place. He says he was a greater Commander then I. I,
as all the world knows, not only excelled this fellow, but all men else in
Wars.


Minos. Both therefore speak for your selves as well as you can: and do you
begin, Lybian.


Hannibal. I am glad Minos, that I have here learnt the Greek Tongue, that
herein also Alexander may not excel me. I say, then, that those men are most
worthy of renown, who from small Originals, have arrived to great
Achievements, and by their own power have made themselves worthy of Empire.
With a small Troop I made an inrode into Spain at first, as Lieutenant under
my brother; where I was held fit for the greatest employments and counted the
best soldier. For there I conquered the Iberians, and overcame the Gauls, and
Hesperians; and having marched over great mountains near the Po, I over ran
and demolish't diverse cities, wasted all the Champion Country of Italy, and
led my army to the suburbs of Rome; and slew so many Romans in one day, that
we measured their Rings by Bushels, and made Bridges over rivers with dead
bodies: And all this I did, neither called the son of Ammon, nor faining my
self a God, nor telling my mothers dreams. But confessing my self to be a
man, I fought against tried, experienced Captains, and joined battle with
stout and warlike soldiers; not with Medes, or Armenians, who fly before they
are pursued, and yield the victory to any man of a bold spirit. Whereas
Alexander, succeding his Father in his Kingdom, enlarged it, indeed, but by
the current of Fortune; who when he had overcome, and taken the miserable
Darius in the plains of Arbela, contrary to the custom of his Ancestors,
would have been adored: And corrupting himself with the Persian Luxury, he
slew his friends at Banquets, and assisted at their murders. I had the rule of
my Country too; yet when they called me home, because a great fleet of enemies
sailed toward Lybia, I speedily obeyed, and rendered my self a private man:
and when I was afterward condemned, bore the sentence contentedly. And this I
did, being but a Barbarian, and not bred to the Greek Discipline: who never
read Homer, like him, nor was instructed by Aristotle; but was led by my own
excellent Genius. And these are the things wherein I pronounce my self better
then Alexander. But if he think himself my superior, because he has
encircled his head with a Crown: perchance such ornaments may seem venerable
to his Macedonians; but it follows not that therefore he should be preferred
before a valiant and Warlike Captain, who still went more by Counsel then
Fortune.


Minos. He has made a generous speech for himself, and not to be expected
from a Lybian. What say you to this, Alexander?


Alexander. It Is fit, Minos, I should make no reply to such a bold fellow:
since fame can sufficiently instruct thee how great a Prince I was, and how
great a Thief he: Yet consider how far I excel him, who began my
Achievements, with my youth; when succeeding in a troubled and distracted
State, I took revenge of my Fathers Murderers. Afterward, striking a terror
into all Greece by my conquest of Thebes, they chose me their General: nor was
I content to straighten my self within the Kingdom of Macedonia left me by my
Father, but projected the victory of all the world. Thinking it poor not to
reign over the Universe, with a small Army I entered into Asia, and in a great
battle won Lydia, Ionia, and Phrygia. And conquering all as I marched, I came
to Issus, where Darius with an Army consisting of Myriads expected me. After
this, Minos, you may remember how many thousand shades I sent you in one day:
The Ferry-man says his Boat was not sufficient, but that he was feign to join
boards together, and waft them over upon planks. And this I did, still exposing
my self first to danger, and offering my self to wounds. And that I may not
recount to you, what I did at Tire, and in the fields of Arbela, I went as
far as India, and made the Ocean the period of my empire; took their
Elephants; and brought away Porus Captive. Passing over Tanais, in a great
horse fight I vanquished the Scythians, a people not to be contemned: Rewarded
my followers, and revenged my self of my foes. If men thought me a God, they
are to be pardoned, being persuaded from the greatness of my Actions. After
all, I died a King. Whereas Hanniball died Banished in the Court of Prusias the
Bythinian; A fit death for so deceitful, and perjured a fellow. For I forbear
to tell how he overcame the Italians, not by valor, but by cousenage,
perfidiousnesse, and stratagems. There being nothing just, or clear in all
that enterprise. But whereas he objects to me my Luxury, he forgets what he did
at Capua; where he had his Mistresses, and like an admired soldier
voluptuously squandered away the opportunities of war. Had not I, out of my
contempt of the Western parts, turned my march to the east, what great matter
had I achieved? Have taken Italy, perchance without blood, or have subdued
Lybia, to the utmost coasts of Africa. These were Countries below my Conquests,
being already terrified by my fame, and acknowledging me for their Lord. I have
said: give sentence, Minos. And let these few Achievements picked out of many
suffice.


Scipio. Stay, Minos, till you have heard me too.


Minos. What are you, Brave Sir? or from whence come you?


Scipio. I am the Roman Scipio, who overthrew Carthage, and in many great
Battles subdued Lybia.


Minos. What would you say more?


Scipio. Marry, that I am inferior to Alexander, but greater then Hanniball,
who conquered, and pursued him, and compelled him to a dishonorable flight. He
is therefore very impudent to compare himself with Alexander, with whom I, who
vanquished him, presume not to rank my self in comparison.


Minos. Before Jove thou speak rightly, Scipio: wherefore I pronounce
Alexander to be first, next to him you Scipio; and, if you please, let
Hanniball be third, since he is not utterly to be despised.


A Dialogue between Diogenes and Alexander.
Diogenes. HOw now, Alexander, are you dead too like all us?


Alexander. You see I am, Diogenes: nor is it strange, being a mortal man, I
should die.


Diogenes. Did Jupiter Ammon lie then, when he said you were his Son; or were
you in earnest the Son of Phillip?


Alexander. Of Philip it seems: had I been descended of Jupiter, I had been
Immortal.


Diogenes. But there went a report of your Mother Olympia, that a Dragon should
couple with her, and be seen in her Chamber; and that from thence she should
conceive, and bring forth you; and that Philip was deceived to think himself
your Father.


Alexander. I have heard such a Report; but now I see that neither my Mother,
nor the Priests of Jupiter are to be credited.


Diogenes. Yet their lie stood you, Alexander, in good stead in your
Enterprises: for many were struck with an opinion of your Divinity. But tell
me, pray, to whom have you left your great Empire?


Alexander. I know not, Diogenes. I had no more leisure to dispose it, then
just at my Death to give my Ring to Perdiccas. But why laugh you, Diogenes?


Diogenes. How can I choose? Have you forgot what the Grecians did, when at
your entrance into your Kingdom, they flattered and chose you their Prince,
and General against the Barbarians: and how some placed you among the twelve
Gods, built Temples, and Sacrificed to you, as the Son of the Dragon? But tell
me, where have the Macedonians buried you?


Alexander. I have lain these three days at Babylon. But Ptolemy, my Armor
bearer, has promised, as soon as the Tumults now on foot will give him
leisure, to carry me into Egypt, and bury me there; that I may become one of
the Egyptian Gods.


Diogenes. Shall I not laugh, Alexander, when I see you play the fool in Hell,
and hope to be made some Anubis, or Osiris? Throw off your Ambition, Divine
Sir, for it is not possible for any, who have once past over the Infernal Lake,
and entered the mouth of the Cave, to return; neither is Aeacus invigilant, or
Cerberus to be contemned. I would therefore gladly learn of you, how you bear
the remembrance of the felicity you left above; your Guards, and Squires, and
Peers, your Treasures and Countries which adored you: Babylon also, and
Bactria; besides your Elephants, Honor, and Glory, when you were carried in
Triumphs, your head bound about with a white Coronet, and your self clothed
with Purple: do you not relent at the memory of these things? why weepest
thou, Fool? did not your wise Master Aristotle teach you, not to account any of
the gifts of Fortune stable?


Alexander. Call you him Wise, who was the basest of Flatterers? there is none
knows so much of Aristotle, as ^; what suits he made, and what letters he wrote
to me, and how he abused my Ambition to Learning, soothing and extolling me,
sometimes for my Beauty, as if it been a piece of the highest Good; sometimes
for my Actions and Treasure; maintaining that Riches were Good, that he might,
I believe, with the less shame refuse them. He was a Jugler, Diogenes, and
Cheater. All that I gained by his wisdom is to grieve for those things you
mentioned, as for the greatest goods.


Diogenes. He teach you a cure for your sorrovv. Since there grovvs no
Hellebore here, drink as great a draught of Lethe, as you can, and you will
never after be troubled for Aristotle's goods. But look, yonder comes Clitus,
and Callisthenes, and many others to dismember you, and revenge themselves for
what they suffered: wherefore vvade over to the other Bank, and drink soundly
as I bid you.


A Discourse of Followers, and such as are employed for Reward.
HOw shall I, my Friend, describe to you the First and the Last, as they say,
of those miseries, which they are fain to suffer and undergo, who are in pay,
and retain to the Friendship of Rich men? if I may call Servitude, Friendship.
For I know many, and almost all the evils which befall them. Not from my own
experience, (for I was never forced to make trial, nor may I ever, O ye Gods)
but many who have been cast upon that course of life, have made descriptions to
me: some, whilst they yet felt the thraldom, deploring the many and great
indignities they endured: others, as if they had broke prison, recounting with
some pleasure what they had suffered, much rejoicing to repeat the mischiefs
they had escaped. These are the more to be credited, having been admitted into
the secrets and mysteries of the Course, and seen all from the beginning to the
end. I hear them therefore not carelessly, or without attention, but as men who
report an unlookt for deliverance from some Shipwreck; like those Sailors, whom
we see in our Temples with shorn heads, who will tell you of waves, and
billows, and steep swellings of the Sea, and tossings, and broken Masts, and
torn Tackling; but above all of the Twinne Brothers, Castor and Pollux, (two
necessary persons in the Tragedy,) or some other God unexpectedly sitting on
their Sails, or standing at the Stern, who guided their Ship to some
peaceable Shore, where it no sooner arrived, but by easy and gentle degrees
sunk, whilst they by the favor and protection of their God, safely landed
themselves. Many such Tragical passages will they report to raise your Charity,
presuming to receive the more, if they appear not only distressed, but affected
by the Gods. But they who speak of their Domestic tempest, and waves, and, as
I may say, of their third, fifth, and tenth Billows: and how they first launcht
into a calm Sea, and what they suffered in their voyage; Thirsty, Sea-sick,
and overcome with the salt water: lastly, how their unhappy Ship dashed against
an hidden Rock, or some sharp Promontory; and how they, wretches, were
miserably fain to swim to land naked, with the loss of all they had. When I
hear such complaints as these, they seem to me to conceal many things for
shame, as men willing to have them forgotten. But I, framing my conjectures
from such and the like discourses, have found out the discommodities of such
Attendances, which it shall be no trouble to me, my Friend Timocles, to
decipher to you. For, me thinks, I have perceived you of a long time bending to
that course of life. For when not long since we fell upon this Argument, one of
the company praised this Mercenary course, calling them thrice happy who had
dependence on great persons at Rome, where they might feast shot-free, lodge
magnificently, travail with all accommodation and pleasure, and lie along if
they please in an Ivory Sedan. Moreover, to be paid for their friendship and
well-being, is no small felicity; so that without Sowing or Tillage, all things
spring to them voluntarily. At this, or the like Discourse, I saw how you
gap't, and presently held open your mouth for the Bait to drop in. Least
therefore you should hereafter blame me, or should say, that when I saw you
about to swallow the Hook with the Bait, I saved you not, or plucked not out the
hook before it was fastend in your throat; or did not forewarne you, but staid,
till it stuck and were fixed in you; and when I saw you entangled and caught
without any redress, stood by only and wept: least, I say, you should make
these objections, not by me to be answered, should I not give you some
premonitions, take with you this brief Character, and consider at your leisure,
before you be wrapped and infolded in it, into what a mouthlesse Net you are to
enter. Feel the tongue and point of the hook with your fingers, and apply for
trial the sharp Trident to your cheek; which if you find not sharp, and not to
be escaped without wounds, but forceably attracting and irresistably holding
what they catch, reckon me among Cowards and Beggars: and take you the
boldness to be caught, and like a Sea-cob swallow the whole bait. Now though
this discourse be intended for you, yet 'twill concern not only Philosophers,
and as many as propose to themselves a life of Virtue, but Grammarians also,
and Orators, and Musicians, and as many as live by their Learning, and teach
for reward. Since all are of condition alike, then, and the same things happen
to all, it is plain that Philosophers are not exempted, but are of worse
condition, if they endure the same things which others do; and if these who
have them in pay, hold them but in equal reverence. But what discoveries
soever my discourse make by the way, they are first in fault who offer such
indignities, next they who endure them. But I am blameless, unless Liberty
and Freedom of narration be a fault. As for those of vulgar quality, as
unskilful Flatterers, men of poor and abject spirits, it is below me to dehort
them from such courses; or if I should, 'tvvere to no purpose. Nor is it fit I
should condemn them for not forsaking their Hire, though much affronted by
them; being made and cut out, and formed for such Employments. Besides they
have no other course to turn themselves to; so that if any man should take it
from them, they would presently be void of business, turn slothful, needy,
and unprofitable. To such no Employment seems base or disgraceful, though it
be, as they say, to hold a Chamber Pot. For they are at first entertained to
bear contempts, and it is their art to dissemble, and wink at what they suffer.
But I cannot but distaste such submissions in men of Learning and parts, and am
to endeavor their conversion and restitution to Liberty: which I shall be the
better able to effect, if I examine the reasons why some enslave themselves to
that kind of life, and show their weakness and infirmity; whereby they will be
disarmed of their Defense, and of the ground on which they build their
voluntary Bondage. Most men then, if they can pretend poverty, and the want of
things necessary, think they have got a sufficient color and veil for their
entrance into that life; and think it excuse enough to say they do nothing
which deserves not pardon, if they seek to free themselves from poverty, a
thing to the life of man most intolerable* pressing upon all occasions that
piece of Theognis, Want kills all men; and such other affrightments from
poverty, as the most obscure and abject Poets have delivered. And truly if by
such dependances I should see them released from their necessities, I would not
so earnestly dispute with them about Liberty. But as the Orator said, being of
Sick men's diet, how can they possibly clear themselves from having given
themselves ill counsel, the reason of their course still remaining? For they
still suffer want and need supplies, unable to lay up, or keep any thing over:
but when they are paid their wages, (if yet they be paid) it is spent presently,
and hardly defrayes their ordinary charges. 'Twere good therefore not to invent
such refuges, as cherish and assist poverty, but such as take it away: which
perchance was the meaning of Theognis, when he said, Poverty was to be cast
headlong from a steep Cliff into the Sea. But if any man who serves for wages,
and is still needy and poor, think this the way to avoid Poverty, he deceives
himself. Others, say they, would not at all fear Poverty, if like other men
they could sustain themselves by their labors; but having bodies weakened
either by age or sickness, they are fain to betake themselves to the easy
life of Serving-men. Let us see then whither they say truth; and whither their
wages come to them easily, and not through harder tasks then other laborers.
'Twere indeed to be wished, that without toil or sweat Silver would flow upon
them. But this is so far from Truth, that no employments are fuller of labor,
and sweat, and require more vigor and strength of body; which is every day
wasted by a thousand businesses, and tired to the utmost. But of this I will
treat in due place, when I come to speak of other grievances. For the present
it shall be enough to have shown, that their pretenses, are false. I come next
to speak of the true cause (but unacknowledged) which makes men enter
themselves into great families, that is, that they may enjoy pleasure, cherish
large and ample Hopes, admire the abundance of Gold and Silver, fare
deliciously; and partake the other happinesses of life, and without control
drink Gold. These are the things which entice men, and make them of freemen
slaves; not the want of necessaries, as they pretend, but the thirst of
superfluities, and itch of abundance: much like sly, and cheating mistresses,
who entertain their wretched, and unfortunate lovers and inflame them with a
pretty disdain, to Court, and observe them, and yet after their long service
scarce allow them a short kiss, well knowing that Love is dissolved by
fruition; which they therefore keep locked up, and impart sparingly, cherishing
in their lovers some faint hopes, least despair should lessen their flame, or
unedge their desires; They therefore are always affable, make fair promises,
that they will perform, and be thankful and acknowledge their costly
presents. 'Till at length both grow old, ere they be aware, and become unfit;
the one to Court, the other to be Courted; so that their whole life has
vapoured away in hopes. But to undergo any course for the love of pleasure is
not altogether blameworthy, but someway pardonable in him who is inclined to
it, and pursues all ways to compass it; Though I must needs say, it is both
base and unmanly to give himself for it: For the pleasure which arises from
liberty, is much greater. Yet as I say before, They deserve pardon, if they
attain the pleasure they aim at; But for the bare expectation of pleasure to
undergo so many encumbrances, is, in my judgment, ridiculous: especially
seeing how certain, manifest, and unavoydable, their pains are; and how the
thing they expect, which is pleasure, after a long attendance flies from them;
And, if they shut not their eyes to truth, is never likely to approach them.
Ulysses companions having tasted of the enchanted bowl, neglected all things
else, and preferred their present delight before virtue; having some little reason
to forget what was decent, their souls being possessed by pleasure. But should
some thirsty man stand by when another drinks of such a bowl, out of mere
hope to get a taste, and yet get none, and fo forget what is fit and decent, He
were most ridiculous and worthy Homers whipping-post. These, or the like, are
the Causes which carry men into dependances, and suffer rich men to put them to
what employment they list. To which we may add, that some think it a glory to
retain to illustrious persons, and persons of Honor; as being thereby
advanced above the condition of the Vulgar. For my part I would not belong to
the greatest prince, or be seen in his retinue, if no other preferment
accompanied my neernesse to him. This, then, being the foundation of servitude,
let us consider next, what they feel, and endure, before they compass their
ends; and what are the calamities of their life; and lastly, what is the
Catastrophe of their Tragedy. First they cannot say that though their
employments be burdensome, they are made easy by custom, and require no great
trouble; or that to a willing mind business does it self: many wearisome
walks are to be made, their doors every morning to be visited, you the saluter
to attend, though you are locked out, or thrust from the door sometimes, if
you grow bold, or pressing, by the Porter, who speaks broken Syriack, and are
feign to bribe a Lybian Nomenclator to remember your name. Then you must wear
Clothes above your Ability, for the credit of him you serve, and make choice
of such colors as he delights in; and which differ not in Lyverie from his.
Lastly, you must always follow, or go before, thrust and justled by the other
servants, and as it were make one in a show, or Triumph; Whilst your Patron
for many days not once looks upon you: or if it be your good fortune to be
seen or called by him, and that he by chance speak to you, then you begin to
sweat, your eyes dazell, your joints shake, the standers by laugh at your
confusion; especially when he shall ask you who was king of Achaia, and you
make answer he had a Thousand ships: which good natures will call modesty;
bold men, cowardlinesse; unbred men, ignorance; whereupon you, having made a
dangerous encounter of his Familiarity, depart much accusing your bashfulnesse.
And when you have lost many nights sleep, and past over many bloody days, not
to recover a Helen, or to Conquer a Priamus, or Troy, but for the hopes of
five groats; if by chance you light upon some assistant God in a Tragedy, you
are examined whither you be skilled in the Mathematics, a question frequent in
the mouths of rich men, who are, therefore, much praised, and celebrated:
whilst you out of astonishment think he gives sentence upon you, and calls
your life in question. This thought coming cross your mind, that no man will
receive you, if you be disallowed or rejected by him, you must needs be cast
into a thousand distractions, out of envy to those who are examined with you,
and who stand in competition with you for your place: imagining you have
answered imperfectly, and tossed between your Hopes, and fears, you watch his
countenance, and if he show any dislike of your Replies, you are undone; If he
hear you with approbation, you take heart, and revive your hopes. Besides, it
cannot be but that many should withstand your desires, and should strive to
remove you, and place others in your Room, and should dart at you underhand.
Consider too what a sight it is to see a man with a long beard, and a white head
examined what a Scholar he is; and to some to appear to have profitted, to
others not. In the mean time your former life and age past is curiously searched
into. And if any acquaintance, or neighbor, upon some light provocation, shall
accuse you of adultery, or the like, he is heard as a witness produced from
Jupiter's Table Book. If all report well of you, they will be suspected,
thought vain, and hired by you: you must therefore have great luck, and meet
with no rubs, or you will never compass your aims. But put the case that
fortune be your friend, and that your Lord approve of your parts, and that his
best friends, upon whose authority in such trials he most relies, strive not to
divert him: suppose too you have his wives allowance, be not thwarted by the
Steward, and that no man blemish your former Behavior, but that, as they say,
all things concur to make a grateful Sacrifice; you have conquer^d, happy
Sir, and have won the Garland; you have taken Babylon as soon, or the Castle of
Sardis, and may as well possess Amalthaeas Horn, or milk the Fowls. For
suppose the time now come, that you receive recompense answerable to your
Service; and that your Garland prove not a Garland of frail Oken leaves, nor
your wages contemptible, but that it be seasonably paid you without much suit,
and that you be preferred before your fellow attendants: moreover, that you be
released from your troublesome visits, attendances in the dirt, and watchings,
and, according to the common Proverb, be allowed to sleep with your feet
stretched out, and for the future be employed only in those easy businesses,
for which you were at first hired, and taken in; which is but reasonable,
Timocles; nor would a man grudge to bear an easy yoke, which were portable,
and guilt; yet will you fail much, if not altogether, of your expectation. For
there are a thousand things in such dependances, which mis-become an ingenious
man: which, as you hear from me in order, judge whither they be to be born by
any man who has but tasted of Learning. I will begin from your first
entertainment, from whence you may make a judgment of your future usage. First,
a neat Serving-man is sent to invite you to Supper; whom you are to fee, and,
least you be thought uncivil, are to clap into his hand at least a Crown:
which he refuses with, Pray excuse me, I cannot take it, Hercules forbid; but
is at length persuaded, and being gone laughs at you. You presently put on your
best clothes, trim, and wash your self; and fear to be the first commer: for
that is clownish, as to come last is troublesome. Having watched therefore for
fit opportunity, you enter; and you are honorably bid welcome. Then comes one
to you, and bids you sit down above the rich man that invited you, between his
two old friends: but you, as though you were newly entered into Jupiter's
Temple, admire all things, and are astonished at every thing you see done, which
appears strange, and unusual to you. In the mean time the eyes of all the
Servants are upon you, and the other Guests observe how you carry your self.
Nor are you unwatcht by the rich man, who before hand charged the waiters to
mark what by-glances or looks you cast upon his Wife, or Boys: whilst the rest
that are invited seeing you for want of experience amazed at what passes, smile
at you, and conjecture that you were never invited before; and that you were
never till then used to a Napkin. Whereupon you out of distraction fall a
sweating, and though you be thirsty dare not call for Drink, lest you be
thought a Tipler: and of all the variety of dishes which stand in order before
you, know not to which you are first or last to move your hand; but are fain to
observe him that sits next to you, and to learn in what order you are to cut;
and so pass over your meat distracted in your mind, and struck at all that is
done. Sometimes you admire the rich man for his Plate, and Ivory, and
pleasures; then again you deplore your own unhappiness, in that you possess
nothing, and yet live: another thought presently flatters you, what a desirable
life you shall lead to have the fruition of all those pleasures, and equally to
enjoy them; and how all your Suppers will be Bacchanals. Besides, the wayters
laughing at you in private, will make pleasant descriptions to you of the
sweetness of your future conversation, and tell you that you will be always
singing those verses in Homer: No marvel if the Trojans and Greeks strong
Did their laborious war and siege prolong
For so much happiness. --
At length you are invited to drink a Health: and one taking a great Bowl
begins to you, by the name of Tutor, or some such like compellation; you
receive the cup of him, and know not what answer to return, and so for want of
experience are thought rustic, and unbred. Besides, that drinking to you stirs
the envy of all the inviters old retainers, who are galled at your sitting down
before them too; that being but a new commer, you should be preferred before
men who served a prentiship: presently therefore they begin thus to mutter
among themselves. This only was wanting to other Indignities, that we should be
placed after those who are newly entered into the family. None but Grecians are
respected at Rome; and what is there in them why they should take place of me?
Is their Service more then ours, because they can prate? Did you not mark,
says another, how much he drank? how he devoured all the meat that stood
before him? an unbred, famisht fellow, who never dreamt of white bread, or
Pheasants, or Partridges, and yet he left us nothing but the bones. Peace,
Fools, says a third, within this week you shall see him esteemed no more then
one of us. He is now prized and valued like a pair of new Sho^s; but when he is
worn a while, and has been in the dirt, he will be neglected and cast aside,
like us, and make a dinner for the Rats. These and the like speeches are tossed
among them, who from that time project complaints and accusations against you,
and all the Discourse of the meal is of you: who not used to such meetings,
having overdrunk your self in sweet, loosning wine, find your belly work, and
are not well. Neither can you in good manners depart before the company, nor
can you with safety stay. In the mean time, while the drinking is continued,
and one discourse falls into another, and one show is presented after another,
(for you must stay to see all) you are not a little tormented, and neither
mark what is done, nor hear what is sung, or played by one of his Ingles. But
are to praise all out of necessity, though you wish the house would fall with
an Earthquake, or that some body would proclaim it to be on fire, that the
feast might be dissolved. You have the Character, my friend, of your first and
most pleasant entertainment: which to me is not so pleasant as Onyons, and bay
salt, of which I may eat freely, and as much, or little as I please. I omit to
tell you of the rawnesse, and crudities of your stomach, and of your vomits in
the night. Next morning you are to bargain what wages you are to have by the
year, and Covenants are agreed upon in the presence of two or three of your
masters friends. Before whom he first bids you sit down, and then thus begins.
You see what my estate is, how free from pomp, which I enjoy without any
ostentation, in a moderate and vulgar way; I would have you, therefore, believe
that all things shall be common between us. For 'twere ridiculous that I should
trust you with the best part of my possessions, my life, or children, (if he
have any) and not in an equal measure make you master of my Fortunes. But
because we are to come to certainties, I shall complie with your moderation,
and frugalitie. For I understand no desire of gain drew you to my house, but
other considerations, as your affection to me, and the honor of your Relation,
yet something I will allow you; and I should be glad your self would set the
proportion: but consider first the gifts I shall bestow upon you at good times,
which shall not be omitted, though they fall not within our bargain; and you
know there are many revolutions in the year; These therefore considered, set to
your self some reasonable price, or hire; For I know you men of learning
despise money. By this Prologue he besieges you with Hopes, and renders you
pliant, and flexible to his ends. You, who before fancied to your self
Talents, and Millions, and whole Farms, and palaces, secretly perceive his
sordidnesse: yet believe and think his promises, that all things shall be
common, are unfayling Oracles; not discerning that they proceeded merely from
his lips, and not from his heart. At last out of Modesty you refer the
sum to him, which he refuses to name; But desires one of his friends, there
present, to deal between you, and to design a price, neither too great for him
to spare, out of his other necessary disbursments, nor yet too small for you to
receive. Here his old friend, bred up with him in flatttery, asks you, if you
think not your self the most happy man in the City, that you have lighted
upon the good fortune, so much coveted by others, to be admitted into
dependence by such a person? To have the use of one of the greatest Families in
Rome? which, if you have your modesty, is more then Croesus wedges, or Midas
wealth. I know some, says he, of good quality, who would give money, only for
the credit of the Relation, to belong to him and to be seen about him, as his
followers or Friends. I cannot, therefore, sufficiently extol your happiness,
who are to have pay to your good fortune. In my Judgment, therefore, unless
you be a spendthrift, so much is enough; And then sets some small price, far
below your expectation; which nevertheless you must accept contentedly, since
there is no escape for you now out of the Net. Grudgingly, therefore, you
thrust your head into the bridle; yet carry your self gentle, not being much
troubled, or galled, till you be a little accustomed to him. They abroad, in
the mean while, emulate you, seeing you within the pale, and making your
entrance without control, and made one of the Family; whilst you know no
reason why you should appear so happy in their eyes, but only that you flatter
and rejoice your self with the hopes and amendment of your fortune, which
every day lessens and goes backward. At length as it were in a doubt, full
light, you begin to perceive that all your wealthy hopes were but golden
bubbles; but that your Toils are real, unavoidable, and perpetual. But you
will ask me what those toils are? and tell me, that you discern no such
troubles in such dependances, or such intolerable employments as I speak of.
Hear, therefore, Gallant Sir, and weigh not only the trouble, but the
baseness, dishonor, and servilitie of such employments. For first from the
time you are entertained, you are to forget your liberty, and parentage; and
are to resolve, when you enter into such relations, to leave your descent,
freedom, and Ancestors at the door. For Liberty cannot have admission with
you, who are received into such low and ungenerous employments. A servant,
therefore, however you are troubled at the name, a servant you are necessarily
to be, not of one, but many; and are to wait uncovered from morning to night
for contemptible wages. Besides, not being bred of a child to service, but
coming to the trade late, and well stricken in years, you will hardly please,
or be much valued by your Master. For the remembrance of your former Liberty
will corrupt you, and prompt you to a relapse sometimes, and make your
Thraldom much the heavier: Unless you think you are at liberty because you
had not Pyrrhias, or Zopyrio for your Father; or were not sold, like a
Bithynian, by some big voiced Crier. But, good Sir, to stand every new Moon
with Pyrrhias, and Zopyrio, and hold out your hand like other servants, to
receive what shall be given, is sale. For he needs no Crier who is his own
Crier, and of himself makes long suit for a Master. If therefore, you base
fellow, (for I cannot but say so to one who professes Philosophy) a Pyrate
should take you at Sea, or if some Robber should enslave you, you would deplore
your self* as one who became unfortunate beside your merit. Or if one should
apprehend you, and say you are his Servant, you would invoke the Laws, use all
endeavors to free your self, express great disdain, and in a loud voice call
the Earth and Gods to your assistance. And yet for all you are of an age, in
which had you been born a Slave, 'twere time for you to look toward Liberty;
and though you have been bred to virtue, and wisdom, for a few farthings you
sell your self; never regarding the excellent Discourses uttered by Plato,
Chrysippus, and Aristotle, in the praise of Liberty, and dispraise of
Servitude: nor are you ashamed to be reckoned with Flat^erers, Hirelings, and
Buffoones; or among so many Romans to go attired like a stranger, or to speak
Latin barbarously, or to go to tumultuous, promiscuous Suppers, where the
company is mixed and troublesome; and there to pass ridiculous praises, to
drink immoderately, and next morning at the sound of a Bell to rise, break your
sweet sleep, and trudg up and down with yesterdaies dirt yet about your heels.
Do you feel such a penury of Beans, or Herbs, or have fountains left off to
run, that despair should drive you to this course? No such matter, neither want
of beans or water, but your desire of Juncats, and delicate fare, and
odoriferous wines drew you, and like a Pike your greediness justly fastened a
hook in your Gills: and so you suffer the reward of your licorousnesse; and
like a Monkey chained to a post by the neck, make sport to the Beholders;
whilst you are much pleased to have Figs and Comfits thrown to you. But Liberty
and Freedom, Stock or Pedigree, are vain, empty names, and of which you keep no
remembrance. Yet the course were to be liked, if it had only this inconveniency
of baseness, to make a Freeman a Slave, and brought not other servile
Employments with it. But consider whither your taskes be more tolerable then
those which are enjoined to Dromo, or Tibius. As for your Learning, for which
you say he took you in, he little regards it: for according to the Proverb,
what agreement can there be between an Ass and an Harp? Do you not observe how
they are possessed with the desire of Homer's Wisdom, Demosthenes Eloquence, and
Plato's high Discourses? and yet should a man take out of their minds their
thoughts and cares of Gold, and Silver, nothing would remain but Pride,
Effeminatenesse, Luxury, Lasciviousness, Cruelty, and Ignorance; to all which
you are useless. But because you have a large Beard, and are of a venerable
aspect, and wear a decent Greek Mantle, and all men know you to be a
Grammarian, or Orator, or Philosopher; he thinks it is for his reputation to
mingle such a one with those who go before him, to grace and set out his
train: And from hence gains the opinion of a Patron of the Grecian Arts, and
of a Friend to Learning, so that you are not hired for excellency of parts, or
Discourse, but for your Beard and Gown. And therefore are always to be seen in
his company, and never to be from him, but are to rise early every morning to
present your self, and appear in your attendance, and not break your rank. He
sometimes laying his hand upon you, prates any thing by chance, and makes show
to those he meets, that in passage through the streets he forgets not the
Muses, but imployes the small leisure of his walk in honest conferences:
whilst you most wretchedly sometimes going apace, sometimes softly, sometimes
up, sometimes down, (for such you know are the passages of the City) sweat, and
put your self out of breath. At length he strikes into a house, to talk with
some friend, whom he went to visit; where, for want of a place to sit down, you
are fain to read a Book, to pass away the time. After this, having neither
eaten nor drunk that day, discommodiously washed, and at an unseasonable hour,
about midnight perhaps, you go to supper; and are no longer reverenced, or
regarded by the rest. But if there be a new comer, you are set below him, and
thrust into some obscure Corner, where you sit as a Spectator only of what is
brought to Table; and like a dog gnaw the bones which descend to you, or out of
hunger suck some withered Sallet, refused by those who sit above you. Nor is
this all your disgrace; you are not allowed a whole Egg to your self, nor is
it thought fit that you should be attended still like the other Guests, and
Strangers, (for that was your fond conceit) nor is the same Fowl set before you
and others. But before your Lord stands a crammed, juicy one; before you, a
young starved, tastlesse one: which is indeed no fowl, but an affront and
reproach. Many times, if another want meat, one of the wayters takes away that
which was set before you, and looking upon you, tells you, you are one of the
house. If at any time a Pigge be cut up, or a Venison pasty, you had need have
the Carver your friend, or you will divide with Prometheus, and nothing but
bones will come to your share. For that a dish should stand before him who sits
above you, till he be cloyed, and should pass by you in an instant, it is not
to be endured by one that has any ingenuity, or but so much Gall as an Heart. I
have not told you, that when the rest drink the oldest and best, you are to
drink the fulsome, palled Wine: and therefore are careful to drink in a
Silver, or guilt Bowl, lest the color should betray what a contemptible Guest
you are. Yet this were also to be endured, might you drink your full: but if
you call often, the wayter will not hear you. There are many other things which
will vex you; but especially to see an ^ngle or Dancing Master, or an
Alexandrian Jester, who writes Farces, preferred before you. For how can you
expect to take equal place with them whose qualities are more delightful, and
who carry love letters in their bosoms. You, therefore, sit in some hole at
supper, and hiding your self for shame, secretly sigh, as it is fit, and bewail
your self, and accuse your fortune, for not allowing you a sprinkling of their
favors; and could gladly wish your self a Poet to write amourous Ditties, or
had the gift to sing those which were made by others; seeing for what qualities
others are prized and esteemed before you: nor would you refuse for a need to
act a Magician, or Fortune^teller, and presage, like them, great Fortunes,
Empires, and mighty Riches. When therefore you see men of such condition
esteemed, and much made of, you could even find in your heart to be one of
them, to preserve your self from disesteem, and contempt. But because you are
not so happy as to be framed for such Arts, you must of necessity give way, and
silently mutter your grievances, and neglects to your self. For if some
whispering Tell-tale Servant complain of you, that you praised not your
Mistresses Page for dancing, or singing well, you are in no small danger. You
are therefore like a thirsty Land-frog, to cry aloud, that you may appear the
most forward, and remarkable in your commendations. And sometimes when the rest
are silent, you are to have in a readiness some fained Panegyric, well
powdered with Flattery. Next, it is a thing most ridiculous, that hungry, and
thirsty, as many times you are, you should anoint your self, and wear a
Chaplet: for then me thinks you look like a Pillar erected over some ancient
Carcass, adorned with Offerings to the Dead; who though they be anointed and
crowned, yet neither eat nor drink the viands set before them. Besides, if you
light upon a Master who is jealous, and who keeps handsome Boys, or has a
young Wife, and that he find you no stranger to Venus, or the Graces, it is
matter for a Quarrel, and your danger is not contemptible. For Kings have many
ears and eyes, and do not only see Truths, but always add something over,
least they be thought to connive. You are therefore to sit as if you were at a
Persian Supper, with a downcast look, and to beware, lest some Eunuch catch you
darting glances upon one of your Master's Concubines; or lest another Eunuch
holding a bent Bow shoot an arrow through your Cheeks, whilst you are drinking,
for casting your eyes aside. After you are risen from Supper, you are no sooner
asleep, but at the first Cock-crowing you awake, and say to your self, O me
most unfortunate wretch, what conversation have I left, what friends, what a
quiet life, what untroubled sleeps, and free Walks, to cast my self headlong
into a Dungeon! And wherefore, O ye Gods, have I entered into this course? or
what splendid reward does it bring me? It Is not possible the commodities of
this life should countervaile those I forsook, when I enjoyed my liberty, and
had all things in my own power. Now, as they say, I am led like a tame Lion up
and down in a string, neither knowing (which makes my case most miserable) how
to give content, or able to make my self gracious; being ignorant, and
unskilful, compared to those men who make the Arts of pleasure their
business. Besides, I am distasteful, and not fit for great Feasts, being
unable to raise laughter; which makes my Master look discontentedly upon me
because when he would be very merry, I carry my self tetricall, and grave; in a
word, I shall never be able to piece with him. For if I endeavor to preserve
my reverence, I am thought severe, and to be avoided: If I laugh, or strive to
show a cheerful countenance, he presently grows disdainful, and spawles at
me; so that, me thinks, I act a Comicall part in a Tragical dress. Lastly,
what kind of life shall I leave for my self, after I have spent my present age
in the service of another? In the midst of this Soliloquie, the Bell rings, and
you are to return to your former task of walking and waiting, Having first
anointed your thighs, and knees, to enable you for your race. Then you have
the same supper, and at the same hour; Till at length your unaccustomed diet,
watchings, and tirings by degrees undermine you, and introduce a Consumption,
or Ptissick, or pain of the Bowels, or some excellent Gowt: which you
valiantly resist, and many times when you are to keep your bed, cannot be
allowed; but your sickness is thought a pretense to avoid business. Hence it
comes to pass, that you are always paler then others, and look like one ready
to die. And thus much be spoken of your sufferings, in the City. When you are
to Travel any where, among other things, which I omit, you are by your place,
and lot, to tarry for the wagon, and to come wet, and last into the Inn;
where for want of Room you are lodged with the Cook, or your Mistresses barber
upon the straw. I Will tell you a passage which Thesmopolis the Stoic told me of
himself, very ridiculous, but not incredible, or such as may not happen to any
other. He lived with a wealthy delicate, proud Lady, in the City, who had
occasion to take a journey; where he said the first contemptible accident, he
ever suffered, was, being a Philosopher, to sit next in the Coach to her page,
whom she kept shaven both chinne and thighs, and carried with her (it seems)
for her Credit. He told me his name was Chelidonius, or swallow. Now judge you
what a sight it was for a severe, grave, ancient man, with a white beard (which
you know Thesmopolis wore at full length) to be placed next to an effeminate
Boy, whose eyes were painted, and lasciviously rolled in his head, and his neck
wantonly bent to one side; who more deserved to be called Vulture for his naked
chinne then swallow; and who, had he not been at his entreaty dissuaded, would
have worn his head in a bag. Innumerable he said were the disturbances which
he suffered from the page, who all the way sung, and prattled, and, if he had
not restrained him, would have danced in the Coach. He told me, also, of a
certain charge, laid upon him by the Lady; who calling to him, Thesmopolis,
quoth she, if you love me, you must not deny me a favor, which I shall ask of
you, nor expect I shall ever request a greater. He, as 'twas fit, promised to
obey her request. Then, quoth she, I pray, because I take you to be an honest,
careful, good natured man, take my little bitch Myrrhina into the Coach, and
keep her for me, and see she lacks nothing; For she is very big with puppies,
and is even ready to whelp, and my other servants are such Knaves, that upon
the way they have neither care of her, nor indeed of me: you shall therefore
not a little obliege me, if you will take care of a dog so dear and precious
to me. Thesmopolis, at her earnest entreaty being almost ready to cry,
received the Bitch. Here, then, was a spectacle most ridiculous, to see a
little dog peeping under his gown, just below his Beard, and bepissing him
sometimes (Though Thesmopolis dissembled it) and barking in a small voice (for
such dogs are most in fashion) and licking the yesterdaies fat which stuck
upon the Philosophers chinne. The Page, who sat next him, having not unwittily
at supper played upon others of the company, at last broke a jest upon
Thesmopolis; All I can say, quoth he, of Thesmopolis is only this, that of a
Stoic he is become a Cynick. For I hear when the little Bitch pupp't in his
Gown. These are the Mockeries, or rather the affronts, which they fasten upon
those who live with them, rendering them by little and little tame and patient
of contempts. I knew a Carcharian Orator, who being commanded at a supper to
make an Oration, declaimed not by an hour glass, but by a Rundler of wine,
very eloquently, gravely, and roundly, and with the acclamation of those who in
the mean time drank, and received two hundred Drachmes for his performance. Now
such impositions are some way tolerable; But if he to whom you belong, be
either given to Poetry, or History, and be accustomed to repeat his own works
at supper, how are you troubled to praise and flatter, and invent new ways of
commendation? There are some, who will be admired for their Beauty; whom you
must call Adonis, and Hyacinthus, though they have a nose a Cubit long. For if
you commend them not, presently you are committed to Dionysius Dungeon, as one
who wish them ill, and carry plots against them. You must call them Sages, and
Orators too; who though they utter solecismes, yet they will be thought to make
speeches full of Attick flowers, and Hymettian Honey, which ought to become
patterns afterward for men to speak by. But perhaps the carriage of the men
is to be born with; but then the women affect too to have learned men in pay,
who shall retain to them, attending upon their Sedans; And think nothing
conduces so much to their other bravery; and pomp, as to be called Learned
Philosophers, and better makers of verses then Sappho. And for the raising of
such an opinion, they are still accompanied by pensionary Rhetoricians,
Grammarians, and Philosophers, who most ridiculously read to them, either while
they are dressing themselves, or curling their hair, or at meal time; for at
other times they are not at leisure. Sometimes, whilst the Philosopher is in
the midst of his Discourse, the Chambermayde enters, and delivers a letter to
her Lady from her Lechour-servant; whereupon the learned discourse of chastity
breaks off, till she have wrote an answer, and return to her Lecture. After a
long time, at the Feast of Saturn, perchance, or Minerva, if some threadbare
Cloak, or motheaten garment, be sent you, you must recieve it as a great
present; And the servant first privy to his masters intention, who runs and
acquaints you with his bounty, is not to be sent away without a reward for his
news. The next morning, at least thirteen more bring you the same message;
every one reporting what he said to his Master, how he put him in mind of it,
and that being entrusted with the business he chose the most advantageous; who
though they all return fed, yet grumble that you gave them no more. Next, your
whole pension comes not to above six Crowns, which if you demand you are
thought impudent, and troublesome, and, therefore, before you can receive it,
you must insinuate and flatter, and court the steward; which is one step of
servitude more; nor is he to be neglected who is your patrons friend, and of
his Counsels. And when you have rereceived your salary, you are presently to
pay it again to your Tailor, or Physician, or Shoemaker; so that your rewards
not only come late, unseasonable, and to no purpose, but great envy is kindled
upon you, and by degrees the servants begin to hatch complaints against you;
especially finding their masters ears open to entertain them: who by this
time, perhapps, sees you worn out with business, and unfit for employment,
and troubled with the Gowt; And having gotten the most flowery and vigorous part
of your age, and wasted your bodily strength, and worn you out like a torn
garment, he looks about for some dunghill where to cast you, and entertaines
another more able to drudg; accusing you with the enticements of his page, or
alleging that being an old man, you defloured his maid, or laying some such
crime to your charge; for which in the night time you are thrust out of doors
by the neck, forsaken of all, poor, and carry nothing away with your age but
an incomparable Gowt; And having by length of time forgotten your first course
of life and made your belly as large as a sack, it becomes an insatiate and
never to be contented mischief. Your stomach will expect it is usual
repletions, and grow enraged at denials. Besides no body will afterward
entertain you, being of a spent age, and become like an ancient decayed horse,
whose very skin is of no use. The pretense, also, for which you were put
away, carrying some possibility, will brand you for an adulterer, or a
poysoner, or the like: So that your accuser, though he say nothing, will be
believed against you, who are a Greek, of a light behavior, and prepared for
any mischief. For such they account us all, and not without good cause. For if
I be not deceived, the reason why they hold such an Opinion of us is, because
most of us who are taken into Families, for want of better knowledge, profess
Magic, and Charms, and the Art to provoke Love, and to reconcile Enemies;
which we call Learning, and set it off with a grave Gown, and a venerable
Beard. Hence it comes to pass, that they have the like esteem of all, as they
have of those whom they judge to be the best; especially when they observe our
Flattery, both at Feasts, and in our Carriage at other times, and our extreme
baseness, to submit our selves to ways of gain. And therefore, not without
cause, when they have turned them off, they mortally hate them, and seek all
the ways they can to destroy them: as men who are able to divulge all the
secrets of their life, having inwardly known them, and seen them naked; a point
which pricks them to the quick: For as you have seen some fair Books, whose
Covers are enameled, and guilt without, but contain within Thyestes eating his
children at a Banquet, or Oedipus lying with his mother, or Tereus deflowring
two Sisters: so these men are very glorious, and sightly without, but within
hide many a Tragedy under their purple; whom if you rip open, and unwrap, you
will find them lined with much Tragical stuff, not unlike that of Euripides,
or Sophocles. However without, they show guilt and enameled. Their
Consciousnesse therefore breeds their hatred, and makes them seek the ruin of
those who fall from them; as men who are able to represent them on the Stage,
and give their true description. For a Conclusion then, like Cebes, I will draw
you the picture of this kind of life in a small Table; that by looking toward
it, you may know whither it be to be entered into or no. I could wish some
Apelles, or Parrhasius, or A^tion, or Euphranor, would limme it: but because
such excellent and exact Painters are not now to be found, I will, as well as I
can, give you a slender Image and Draught of it. Let there, then, be drawn a
high gilded house, not situated on any low place, but aloft on a hill; and let
the ascent to it be so steep, inaccessible, and slippery, that those who many
times hope to aspire to the top, tumble down, and break their necks. Within,
let Riches dwell, of a bright and amiable aspect. Let their Lover, having with
much ado climbed up, and attained the door, at first sight grow amazed. And
let Hope (whom you may also imagine to be well favored, and diversely dressed)
take him in this astonishment by the hand, and lead him in, and from his first
entrance go before him: then let other women receive him, namely, Deceit, and
Servitude, and deliver him over to labor. And let Labor after long exercise
deliver the Wretch over to Old age, diseased, and wittherd in his face, and
color. Lastly, let Contempt hurry him to Despair; and from that time let Hope
vanish, and forsake him, and fly away. Then let him be cast out, not at the
Golden Porch, at which he entered, but at some Backdoor, or dark Outlet,
naked, hungry, pale, aged, with one hand covering his shame, with the other
choking himself. At his ejection let helpless Weeping and Repentance meet him,
and double his misery. And let the Picture here end. Now do you, Timocles,
having well weighed my discourse, consider, whither you be content to enter at
the Golden Door, and be dishonourably thrust out at the Postern. And what
course soever you undertake, remember the saying of a Wise man; God is not to
be blamed, but your own Choice.

A Defense of those who are employed for Reward.
I Have long considered with my self, Excellent Sabinus, what you thought or
said, when you read my Book, concerning those who are employed for reward. For
I am verily persuaded you could not forbear laughing in the perusal. Though
you made some objections by the way, which I will now answer agreeably to my
writings. If my Divination fail me not, me thinks I hear you say; Is this he
who wrote those things, and inveighed so bitterly against this course of life,
and yet unmindfull of his own Satyr, upon the turning of the shell, as they
say, has voluntarily put himself into an eminent and illustrious Service? What
Midas, or Croesus, or streams of Gold, could once tempt him to forsake his dear
Liberty, bred up with him of a child? Yet though he be not far from Aeacus, and
have one foot in Charons boat, now submits he himself to be tossed, and drawn, as
if he were fastened by the neck with a golden Collar, or some great man's chain
of Corral? Surely there is a wide difference between this new course and his
writings. Rivers me thinks do now run backwards, and the order of things is
inverted. Recantations are made for the worse; and all this change is not for
the fruition of a Helen, or the conquest of a Troy, but merely that a good
discourse may be subverted by an ill choice. Thus, in all likelihood, do you
say to your self; and are, it may be, ready to give more seasonable and
friendly counsel, and such as becomes an honest man, and a Philosopher. If
therefore I personate you right, I shall think my self happy, and will
sacrifice to Eloquence: if not, do you supply my defects. It Is time then we
shift the Scene, and that I be a Mute, and patiently for my cure submit my
self to be lanced, or if you think fit, feared by you; and that you apply your
medicines, and have your knife, and burning Iron in readiness. Taking your Cue,
then, to speak, thus you accost me: Heretofore, my friend, your Book (as it
well deserved) was much valued, and, as the report goes, was well received both
by the multitude, and by as many of the learned as read it, or took it into
their hands. For your composition is faultlesse, your narration various, and
such as both shows your experience in business, and your perspicuity in the
delivery. But above all, as your writings are generally useful, so especially
to Scholars, who from hence are taught not to enter themselves rashly into
Services. But when you shall alter your opinion, and prefer the contrary
course, and bid a long farewell to Liberty, and practice that ignoble Iambick,
That where gain may be had, you are to serve against nature, take heed no man
over hear you reading your own works, or meeting with them compare your present
life with your writings. Pray also to Infernal Mercury, to besprinkle those
who have heretofore heard of them, with the water of Oblivion: lest, like
Bellerophon in the Corinthian Tragedy, you prove to have written a Book against
your self. For my part, I cannot see with what face you can defend your self
against your Accusers; especially if they should merrily praise your writings,
and the liberty of them, and see you the Author waiting, and voluntarily
submitting your neck to the yoke: since they might probably enough entitle some
more generous person to your Book, and say you are but the Iay, who triumph in
borrowed feathers; or if it be yours, that you have done like Salaethus, who
imposing a sharp Law upon the Crotonians against Adulterers, for which he was
much reverenced, was not long after caught in the Act of incest, with his
brothers wife. So some man may not unfitly compare you to Salaethus; But that
he was more excusable, who (as he urged for himself) was drawn by his
affection, and did voluntarily cast himself into the fire: upon which reason
the Crotonians out of pity gave him his choice of Banishment. Whereas you much
more absurdly, having written an exact description, and inveighed against the
servile condition of those, who retain to great persons, and cast themselves
into fetters, where they act and suffer a thousand Calamities, in your extreme
age, when you are almost beyond the threshold, have made choice of an ignoble
servitude, and are ready to triumph in it. By how much, therefore, the more
eminent, and advanced you show, by so much the more are you laughed at, as one
whose life contradicts your writings. Nor shall I need to urge any other
complaint against you, then that of the excellent Tragedian; I hate that wise
man who is not wise for himself. Your Accusers, perhaps, will not lack other
examples to compare you to. Some will liken you to Actors in a Tragedy, who are
Agamemnon or Creon, or Hercules upon the Stage; but in the Tiring house when
they have put off their properties, are Polus, or Aristodemus, fellows hired
to act, and many times hist, whip't and plucked off the stage at the mercy of
the Theater. Others will resemble you to an Ape, which they say Cleopatra had;
which being taught to dance, a great while footed it very comely, and
gracefully, and maintained her postures with great admiration, and kept time
and measure with them who sung, and played a Hymenaeall galliard: Till at length
perceiving a Fig, or an Almond a far off, she tore of her vizard, and leaping
to the Fig bid ^arewell to the fiddles, and dances, and fell to eating. So you,
may some man say, who are no player, but a learned Author, and excellent
Lawgiver, at the sight of a Fig have shown your self an Ape, and a Philosopher
but from the teeth outward; who conceal some things, and speak other; and
leave it to men's suspicion to conjecture, that what you say or are praised for,
has but only touched your lips, and never wet your Palate. Your punishment
has followed you therefore; who, when you had audaciously insulted over other
men's wants, not long after as good as sold your own Liberty by a Crier. And
Adrastia was at your back, laughing at your Brags, and contempts of those
indignities which you despised in other men: Because she foresaw, being a
Goddess, that you would in time fall upon their course; and because you did
not first spit in your own bosom, before you blamed those who through the many
changes of fortune have been cast upon that condition. Suppose Eschines, after
his accusation of Timarchus should have offended and have been questioned for
the same fault: would it not have stird the Laughter of the Spectators to see
him inveigh against Timarchus, for a crime of youth, and being an old man
commit the same himself? Lastly, you are like the Apothecary, who boasted much
of his medicine against the Cough, and promised to cure men at one taking, and
was all the while shaken with a Cough himself. This and much more, may such an
Accuser, as you, say, in an Argument so spacious, and replenish't with
objections. It Is time then, I now turn my self to my Apology, and Defense,
wherein my best way (who suffer voluntarily, and have submitted my back to the
whippe, nor deny it to be a disparagement) will be, perhaps, to fly to the
common excuse, and pretend Fortune and Fate, and with their pardon to desire my
reprehenders to consider that we are not our own Lords, but are swayed against
our inclinations by some superior power, or one of the destinies, and are
therefore excusable in all things which we either do or speak. But this way of
defense is too Vulgar for you, my friend, to allow of; Though I have Homer for
my Advocate, and those Verses from him, No man could ever yet his fate eschew:
As Soon as we are borne fate rules our clue.
Laying aside, therefore, an Apology so unreasonable, if I say, that I was
neither enticed by gain or any such like expectation, to undertake my present
attendance, but that merely out of my admiration of the wisdom, valor, and
nobleness of the person to whom I belong, desired to be employed in his
affairs; I fear least to your former accusation you will think I flatter, and
catch me, as they say, driving one nail with another, or a lesser fault with a
greater^ since flattery of all vices is the most servile, and therefore the
worst. What remains, then, if neither of these Defenses be allowable, but that
I confess my self unable to make any sound defense at all? One Anchor more,
perhaps, I have never yet cast, or wet, which is to pretend old age,
sickness, and beyond both these poverty, which persvvades men for it is
avoydance, to do or suffer all things. And here I might seasonably call in
Medea in Euripides to my assistance, and with a little detorsion make her
speak for me in lambicks, and say, The things I am about to do are ill,
But that my poverty withstands my will.


As for that piece of Theognis, it is known without my quotation; who says,
They are not to be blamed, who, to avoid poverty, cast themselves into the deep
sea, or fall headlong from a steep rock. These are the colors which another
in my case would bring into his Apology; of which not one, I confess, is
specious, or well favored. But be confident of me, my friend, that I will not
make use of one of them. For Argos was never so oppressed with famine, as to
consult about the ploughing of the sands of Arabia; Nor am I so utterly
unprovided of an answer, as to flee to such poor starting holes, for my
defense. Consider, therefore, I pray, the great difference between one hired
into a Rich man's family, to serve, and undergo the drudgeries, set down in my
book, and one who receives pension from his Prince to look after public
affairs, and imploies his parts in the service of the state. Consider this, I
pray, and weigh these two conditions apart, and you will find that they differ,
as the Musicians say, the whole Gamut: And that there is as much resemblance
between these two courses of life, as between lead and silver, brass and Gold,
wild poppy and a rose, a man and an ape. It Is true both receive pay, and are
under another; But then there is a vast disproportion in their employments. The
one undergoes a downright servitude, and is no better then a Mercenary household
Drudg: whereas the other who handles public matters, and bestows his Labor
upon Cities, and whole nations, is not to be blamed, or to be drawn into
resemblance or made sha^er with the other in accusation, because both receive
pay. For then all great officers are to be deposed, nor should the Governors of
Provinces, Rulers of Cities, and Captains, or Generals, of Troops, and
Armies, be honorably thought of, because there is a reward set to their
employment. One exception, therefore, ought not to have the force of a general
disgrace; nor are we to place all those who take reward in equal rank.
Briefly, I said not in my book, that all that took payment were of a miserable
condition, but only pitied those who under the pretense of their Learning were
entertained, and enslaved by great Families. My employment, my friend, is
utterly different. For though we be equal in our Domestic dependances, yet
abroad I share in Government with the Emperor, and cooperate my part. For, if
you mark well, no small portion of the Kingdom of Egypt is under my
government: who ordain their forms of Judicature, and impose orders upon the
people; and take records of whatever is done, or spoken, and judge of the
pleadings of their Lawyers: and not only keep the Decrees of my Prince with all
fidelity, after the safest and exactest manner, but deliver them to the people
to be a perpetual rule to their obedience. Nor is my reward private, but from
the Prince; nor contemptible, but paid by talents. And hereafter if matters hit
right, I cherish no vain empty hopes to be made Ruler of some Province, or to
have some Princely Employment cast upon me. I will yet take the liberty to
clear my self from the Accusations thrown upon me by a more ample Defense; And
dare tell you that No man does business unrewarded, no not those of highest
employment: I will not except Princes themselves. I speak not now of their
Customs, and Tributes, which are yearly paid by their Subjects; but of their
greater rewards, their Praises, public Reverence, and veneration for their
good Deeds. As also Statues, Temples, and Altars, erected to them by their
Subjects: all which are payments for the providence and care, which they
sustain in looking after the Public, and studying the common good. So that if
you will compare small things with great, and beginning at the top of the Heap,
descend by all the Grains whereof it is composed, you will see, that we below
differ from those aloft, but as the less from the greater, being all
Mercenaries alike. If therefore I had enacted a Law that none should suffer
themselves to be Employed at all, I might very well seem my self a
Transgressor. But if there be no one such passage in my whole Book, and that it
becomes every virtuous man to be employed, how can he better busy himself, then
in assisting his friends in the best Employments, and in giving some clear
public trial of himself, with what fidelity, care, and sweetness, he can
discharge those affairs which are put into his hands, lest he fulfill the
saying of Homer, and be an unprofitable load to the Earth? Besides, I would
have my Reprehenders remember, that when they blame me, they accuse not a wise
man, (if yet there be any wise man to be found) but one from among the people,
who has applied himself to learning, and therein attained some laudable
proficiency, but never was practiced to those sublime virtues, approachable
only to great Scholars. Nor am I sorry for it, since I never yet met with the
person, who in all things answered the Character of a Wise man. In the mean
time I cannot but marvel, if you should dislike my present course of life;
who long since know what great gains came in to me, when I was a pleader; at
that time when you went to see France, and the Western Ocean, and met with me,
who was then reckoned among the most high priced Orators. This Apology, my
Friend, have I, amid'st a thousand Employments, made to you, as one who shall
not slightly value your favorable and full acceptance. For as for others,
though they all should conspire in their Accusations, my protection shall be
the old Proverb; Hippoclides cares not.

The Tyrant-Slayer.
The Argument.
One got into a Fortress, where a Tyrant lived, with a purpose to kill him.
But, not finding him, killed his Son, and left the sword in his body. The
Tyrant coming in, and seeing his Son dead, with the same sword kills himself.
He that slew the Son demands the reward of a Tyrant-slayer*

THough, O ye Judges, I have in one day slain two Tyrants; one aged and feeble,
the other young and vigorous, and so the more apt to succeed in his Fathers
oppressions; yet I stand here to demand but one recompense for both. Of all
those that ever killed Tyrants, I am the first who have freed you from two with
one wound, and have slain the Son with my Sword, the Father with his Affection
to his Son: who has made us ample satisfaction for those things he has done,
in living to see his Son first murdered, and then (a thing till now strange)
forced to be the Tyrant-slayer to himself. His Son dyed by my hand, and being
dead, became my Engine to a second Murder: who in his life time partaked with
his father in his Injustice, and at his death, as well as he could, became his
Parricide. It Is I then, who have put an end to his Tyranny; and it is my Sword
which has wrought your deliverance. However I inverted the order of my
slaughter, and achieved their murders an unusual way; killing him who was
the stronger, and ablest to defend himself with my own hand, and leaving my
bare sword to dispatch the other. I expected therefore from you something
extraordinary, and that my rewards should in number equal those I have
destroyed: seeing I have not only freed you from your present calamities, but
from all fears of future, and have established you in a firm liberty; there
being no heir left of your mischiefs. But on the contrary, after such glorious
achievements, I am not only in danger to be dismissed by you unrewarded, but
am the only man who am denied the recompense designed me by those Laws I have
preserved. He, therefore, that withstands my demand, in my judgment does it not
with reflection upon the public, but out of sorrow to those who are slain, and
revenge to him who was the author of their death. Afford me therefore your
attention, Judges, whilst I decipher to you (though you know them already) the
miseries of a Tyranny: for thereby you will both discern the greatness of my
benefit, and increase your joies from the apprehension of those calamities from
whence you are releast. First then, we felt not a single Tyranny (as it many
times befalls others) nor were enslaved in a single bondage, nor subjected to
the desires of one Master; but of all others, who ever suffered the like, in
stead of one Tyrant had two over us, and were miserably distracted by several
oppressions. The Father indeed was the more moderate, and hardlier to be
enraged, slacker in his punishments, and slower in his lusts; his age having at
length mitigated his violence, and cast a bridle on his desires. Nay at the
very first, as it was said, he was contrary to his own inclination put upon his
unlawful practices by his Son; being not himself Tyrannical, but only in
compliance with him: for how extreme dear his Son was to him, appeared by his
death. His Son was to him all things; him he obeyed, oppressed whom he
commanded, punished as he appointed, and observed him in all things. In a word,
the Son was Tyrant over the Father, and the Father was but an Officer to his
Sons lusts. And though the young man, by reason of his age, let the old enjoy
the Honor, and esteemed not the name of the Kingdom; yet he, in truth, was
the head*Tyrant. And though the Father fortified and secured his power by him,
yet the Son alone enjoyed the fruits of the others Injustice. He it was who
ordered the Guard, appointed Garrisons, cut off those who affected the Crown,
and feared Conspirators. He it was, who made Eunuchs, violated Wedlocks, and
deflowred Virgins. All Slaughters, Banishments, Exactions, Torturs, and
Injuries, were his bold Contrivances: whilst the old man only obeyed, and
countenanced, and applauded the wicked enterprises of his Son. This made our
calamities insupportable. For when the desires of the mind are backed by supreme
power, they admit no limits of Irregularity. But that which grieved us most,
was, that we foresaw a perpetual Slavery growing upon us, and the common
wealth likely to descend in a succession, from one Master to another, and the
people in a direct way to be made the Inheritance of a wicked Tyrant. Whereas
it has been no small comfort to men in our case, to be able to discourse, and
say among themselves, This Tyrant will not always live, he will dye in time,
and we shall ere long be free: which fell not under our hopes. For we had in
our eyes a Successor in the Tyranny, which made none of our Citizens dare to
put in practice my adventure, though they were valiant, and had my attempt in
their design, and wishes: But Liberty was despaired of by all, and the Tyranny
seemed inexpugnable, though many had inclinations to the enterprise. This
daunted me not, nor was I disheartened by the difficulty of the Action, nor
frighted with the danger. But unassisted, and single, I went against a strong
and numerous Tyranny; or rather not single, but assisted by my sword, which
shared in my slaughter of the Tyrant. Having death before my eyes, and the
public Liberty purchased by my death before my apprehension. First then
encountering the outer Guard, and not easily putting the keepers to flight, and
killing him that came next, and offered to make resistance, I reached at length
the top of my adventure, the only strength of the Tyranny, and the spring
head of all our miseries. And rushing into the keeper of the Castle, after a
valiant defense, and resistance of many thrusts, and wounds I slew him. At
which instant the Tyranny ceast, and my enterprise had an end. And from that
time we recovered our Liberty. No impediment remained but an old, solitary man,
unarmed, deprived of his Guard, especially of his great Protector, and unworthy
to fall by a valiant hand. I, therefore, most equal Judges, made this
discourse to my self; All things are fallen out succesfully, I have achieved
my enterprise, and accomplished my designs. But how shall he that survives be
slain? He is unworthy of me, or my hand, and if after my other glorious,
valiant, and generous exploit, I should kill him, he would shame my victory: we
must, therefore, find out some public executioner for him. But let him be
first tortured, least he gain by his punishment; let him see, and be rackt at
the sight of my sword, to which I leave the farther accomplishment of my
design. Having thus consulted with my self, I left the place. He, just as I
presage, killed himself, and put an end to the Tragedy. Hither, then, am I
come, and have brought a Democracy with me, and do bid you take courage, and
proclaim a general Liberty to all. From henceforth enjoy the benefit of my
performances. The Fort you see is dispeopled of Tyrants; There is none left to
bare sway. It Is in your power now to prefer, sentence, or contradict,
according to the Laws. All which you are to ascribe to me, and my valor, and
that one slaughter which the Father could not possibly survive: I cannot,
therefore, but in Justice require a reward, answerable to my attempt: not that
I am covetous of gain, or sordid in my desires, or one who would obliege my
country to pay, but because I am willing to confirm by my reward, and not
suffer my enterprise to die and pass away ingloriously, as imperfect and
unworthy of recompense. But here my adversary may reply, and say, it is not
reasonable I should be honored, or rewarded, who have not slain a Tyrant, nor
accomplished the Law, since something is imperfect in my achievement, which
should make me capable of recompense. Let me ask him, what more he can require
of me? Was it not my plot? Entered I not the Fort? Did I not kill? procured I
not your Liberty? Does any man rule or domineer over you? are you threatened by
any Master? has any one of your oppressors escaped me? You cannot gainsay me,
but must confess, that you now enjoy a full peace; your laws are restored;
your liberty is apparent; a Democracy is settled; your marriages are unviolated;
your sons unprostituted; your Virgins safe; and the City free to celebrate
the public felicity. And who is the cause, and contriver of all this? who
removed your Calamities, and procured your welfare? If there be any who
deserves to be honored before me, I will decline my satisfaction, and resign
to him my reward. But if I alone did all, attempted, put my self in hazard,
scaled the Castle, slew, tormented, and made one the engine to kill the other;
why should he detract from my achievement? or stir the disaffection of the
people against me? But I slew not the Tyrant, and therefore have no right to
the reward provided by the law. Tell me, what difference is there between
killing him, and being the occasion of his death? Certainly, none at all. Nor
was the intention of the Lawmakers any other, then merely to aim at Liberty,
popular government, and the removal of Usurpers; And thereunto to propose
honors, and rewards: which you cannot deny to have been by me achieved. For I
slew him, without whom the other could not live; the slaughter was mine. I gave
the wound, he only lent the hand. Question not then overcuriously the manner of
his death, nor examine how he died, but whither he be dead, and whither dead by
my means. Otherwise by your inquiries you may detract from one who deserves
well of the state, because he slew not the Tyrant with a sword, but with a
stone, or a logge, or some other way. What if I had besiedged the Tyrant, and
starved him to Death? Had it not been a legal murder, because I slew him not
with my own hand? or would you say I had not satisfied the Law, though I slew
him a more cruel way? The only thing, therefore, you are now to make
inquiry of is this, what usurper is left? What seeds of fear? What impression
of Thraldom? If all be clear, and calm, it is a piece of envy and detraction
in any man, for want of one slight circumstance in an Action, to deny virtue,
and valor its revvard. I remember the Laws distinguish (if I have not forgot
their words through a long bondage) of a double cause of Death; if one man
kill another with his own hand; or if he kill him not himself or with his
own hand, but be the contriver, or occasion of his Death. And has equally
provided a punishment alike for both. Decreeing very justly that in such cases
the attempt shall be equal to the Fact; and passing by the manner of the
Murder as superfluous. You think fit, then, that he who shall thus kill
another, shall be punished as a manslayer, and not have his pardon: and will you
not allow me, who have in like manner saved my country, the rewards agreeable
to one of such deserts? You cannot say I slew him unwittingly, and that my
success was fortunate beyond my expectation. For what could daunt me having
slain the stronger? Why did I leave my sword in the wound, but because I
presaged what would afterward come to pass? Unless you will say that he who
is dead was no Tyrant, nor carried the name of one; and that you would not have
awarded me any great recompense for the exploit, if I had killed him. But you
cannot say so. A Tyrant, then, being slain will you not reward the Author, and
occasion of his Death? O subtlety! Do you possess your Liberty, and yet
question how he was slain? Or do you yet require more of him, who has
restored your popular government? But the Law, say you, enquires precisely
what is done, and considers not curiously the manner and means of the Action.
But what? shall not he that but expells a Tyrant be revvarded? He ought in
Justice, having introduced Freedom instead of Bondage. But my fact is not a
bare expulsion, or banishment, nor have I left them any hopes of future
recovery, or restitution; But an utter taking away, and destruction of the
whole Lineage; and an eternal extirpation of all our miseries. Examine then,
if you please, my whole enterprise from the beginning to the end, and see
whither any thing required by the Law have been omitted, and wherein I have
come short of being the killer of a Tyrant. First, to such an attempt is
required boldness of courage, and such an affection to ones Country, as
refuses not to encounter dangers for the common good, or to purchase the
public safety with the loss of a private life. Have I failed hitherto? was I
daunted, or did I sluggishly break through the perils, with which I foresaw I
was to skirmish? You cannot say I did. Here, then, stay a little and consider,
whither barely to intend, and project such an exploit were not glorious; and
whither for my mere design, I may not justly claim the recompense of a good
Patriot; or if I had failed of my will, and another coming after me had killd
the Tyrant, tell me, had it been unreasonable for you to reward me? or if I
should say, My dear Countrymen I purposed, intended, attempted, showed my good
will, and am only worthy to be rewarded; what would you answer? But this is not
all I can say; I scaled the Fort, Countrymen, and encircled my self with a
thousand dangers, before I slew the Prince. For I would not have you think it
an easy, or slight adventure, for one man singly to break through a Troop, to
vanquish a guard, and to put such a multitude to flight: But to account it the
Top, and pinnacle of the exploit. For a Tyrant is no hard thing to be
encountered, and overcome, but those who guard, and defend the Tyranny; which
who so conquers has finished his enterprise, and left little else to be
achieved. I, then, had never approacht the Tyrants, had I not first vanquished
and overcome their Guards, and attendants. Upon which part of my adventure,
before I go farther, let me dwell a little. I vanquished their guards, I say,
and overcame their attendants, and left the Tyrant naked, disarmed, and
undefended. Am I yet, think you worthy of Honor, or do you require his
slaughter too? if you do, I can satisfy your expectation. Behold the Blood
with which I am yet sprinkled, since the valiant, and stout murder of a youth
of flourishing age, feared by all, by whom the Tyrant was secured from
Treasons, and who was his confidence, and a greater protection to him then his
Guards. And am I not yet, think you, worthy of reward, but shall I after all my
great Actions, be sent away dishonourably? what if I had slain but one of his
Guard, or an attendant on his person, or some favorite servant? Had it not
been a glorious Act to ascend a Fort, and in the midst of a Garrison to kill a
near friend of the Tyrants? Consider next him who was slain. 'Twas the son
of the Tyrant; or rather the crueller Tyrant of the two; A master more
insufferable, to revenge proner, in his injuries more furious; and above all
the only heir of his father, and like to prolong our Calamities by his
succession. Suppose I had only slain him, and that the Tyrant had saved
himself by flight. I demand a reward for that Action. What say you? will you
deny me? was it not he you dreaded? was not he your cruel, intolerable master?
If I have not yet done enough, consider the heart and utmost of my exploit;
that which my Gainsayer requires of me, I have gloriously achieved, and
through another vvound have slain the Tyrant; not at one single blovv (which
perhaps after so much injustice he could have wished) but by a slow, and
lingering grief, prostrating before his eyes the thing most dear to him, his
son, I mean, vicious, but in the spring of his age, and flourishing, and,
like his father, wallowing in his own blood, and Gore. These are the right
wounds of parents, these the swords of him who would truly kill a Tyrant; And
this is the death which cruel Tyrants are to suffer; and this is a revenge fit
for so many oppressions. To die presently, as it were in a short swoone, and
behold no tormenting spectacle, is a punishment too unworthy of a Tyrant. I was
not ignorant, Judges, I was not ignorant, nor any man else, how passionately he
was affected toward his son, and how he resolved not to survive him a
minute. All parents are affectionate to their children; But he had a stronger
and juster reason, having but him only to uphold, and preserve the Tyranny; To
ward, and shield him from conspiracies, and fix the scepter in his hand. 'Twas
in my foresight, therefore, that if his affection did not, his despair would
presently kill him; as soon as he considered, that having lost his safety with
his son, he had no encouragement to live longer. In one Troop I presented to
his apprehension his natural affection, grief, despair, fear, and terrors
for the future. These were the forces I raised against him, and drove him to
that fatal execution of himself. In revenge to you he died childlesse,
tortured, lamenting, and shedding tears. His sorrow indeed was not long* but
enough for a father. But that which is yet most cruel, he fell by his own
hand: A death much more miserable, and bitter, then if another had been the
author. Here is my sword, who claims it? whose weapon ever was it but mine?
who carried it into the fort? who ever used it before the Tyrant? or who sent
it to him? O Blade? thou partner, and successor, in my great exploits, after so
many perils, and so many slaughters, are we neglected, and held unworthy of
reward? should I demand a recompense for my sword only, and should say,
Countrymen, when the Tyrant had a mind to kill himself, and for the time
wanted a weapon, my sword supplied him, and became the instrument of all your
Liberties; you would certainly decide some honor, or reward to the Blade. Nay
would you not have been thankful to the master of so public an instrument,
and have enrolled him among those who have been benefactors to their Country?
would you not have laid up my sword in your Temples, and have sacrificed to it
as to the Gods? Consider, with me, I pray, what in likelihood the Tyrant did,
or said before he killed himself. After I had stabbed his son, and thrust
him through with many wounds, in the most open, and remarkable places of his
body, the more to torment his father, with the spectacle, and rack him with the
sight, he pitifully cried out and invok't his father, unable to assist, or
rescue him, being both old and feeble, and having but just sight enough left to
behold the Calamities of his house. I, in the mean time, the contriver of the
whole Tragedy, conveyed my self away, and left him a wounded body, stage,
sword, and all things else for the finishing of my part. He entering, and seeing
his only son gasping, and welring in his blood, struggling with death, having
received wounds all over, and many of them mortal, fell into this exclamation:
O my dear son! we are destroyed, butcherd, and slain as Tyrants. Where is
the Murderer? For whom reserves he me? or what intends he to do with me, who
am already slain in Thee? does he despise to kill me by reason of my age? or
is it to prolong my punishment, and lengthen my death, and spinne out my
slaughter? Thus saying, he looks about for a weapon, (being himself unarmed,
as still having his son for his defense) which was there ready for him,
prepared before, and left by me for the ensuing Tragedy. Having drawn forth the
sword out of the wound, Thou have half slain me already, said he, now kill me
outright. Be thou the relief and succor of a forlorn father; assist my
decrepit hand with thy-edge, and stabbe me, whilst I am yet a Prince, and
deliver me from my sorrows. Would I had received thy first stroke, and had
died first: Though I had died as a Tyrant, yet I had left a revenger; whereas
now I die not only without a son, but without one to kill me. Having thus
said, he stabbed himself, trembling and unable to thrust home; having a desire,
but not strength enough for the attempt. How many punishments were here? how
many wounds? how many deaths? how many slaughters? how many Garlands due? To
Conclude, then, you have all seen the son prostrated, and slain; no small,
or easy achievement. You have seen the father fallen on his son, and
mingling bloods together. Both the triumph of my sword, and made one sacrifice
to your Liberty, and my Conquest. You have seen my sword lying betwixt them,
and approving it self worthy of me its master, and witnessing how faithfully
it dispatched my business: which had been less from my hand, and increast its
glory from the strangeness. Lastly, I am he who have removed the Tyranny,
though the carriage and progress of the achievement, like so many parts in a
Tragedy, were divided among many. The chiefest part ^ acted; the next, the Son;
the third, the Father: my Sword was Engine and Servant to us all.

The Dis-inherited Son.
The Argument.
A Dis-inherited Son learnt Physic, and caring his Father of a Phrenzy, after
he was given over by other Physicians, was restored to favor. Afterward being
commanded to cure his Stepmother of the like Phrenzy, and refusing, he is
dis-inherited the second time. He defends himself.

THat which my Father has now done, O ye Judges, is neither new nor strange;
nor is this the first time he has been carried away by his displeasure; but
has heretofore made use of this Law, and is practiced in his proceedings
against me at this Tribunal. All that is new in my present Misfortune is, that
having committed noe offense, fit to be brought into Accusation, I am in danger
to be punished for my Art; because it cannot in all things obey his impossible
commands. Then which what can be more unreasonable? For he requires that my
Skill should be as great as his Injunctions, and that I should work Cures, not
as my Profession is able, but as he is pleased to impose. I could, therefore,
wish there were not only Receipts in Physic to recover people distracted, but
those also who are without cause inclined to passion: that so I might cure my
Father of one disease more; who being perfectly freed from one Distraction, is
carried by his anger into another. And to make my c^se the more deplorable, he
is recovered to every body else; only against me, who recovered him, he still
retains his fury. You see how I am rewarded for my Cure, who am cast off by
him, and made a Stranger to his Family the second time. As if he had only
restored me for a while, that to my greater infamy he might often banish me his
house. To those cures which fall within the compass of my skill, I expect not
to be commanded; who voluntarily, and unsent for, wrought his recovery: but
where the Malady carries despair with it, I would not willingly be an
undertaker. Of all others I have good reason not to attempt the cure of this
woman: considering what I am likely to suffer from my Father, if I miscarry;
who, for not daring to adventure upon her, am dis-inherited. I cannot
therefore, O ye Judges, but bewail my Stepmother in the case she is in; for
she was a virtuous woman: next my Father, who suffers in her Madness; but
especially my self, who am thought disobedient, because I cannot effect what I
am required, both for the greatness of the disease, and the smallness of my
skill. To be dis-inherited, then, for not undertaking a cure, which I am not
able to effect, I hold most unjust: and desire you to judge from these present
proceedings, upon what grounds I was cast off heretofore. Though I doubt not
but for the clearing of them, my Behavior and life have long since been my
Defense. To those things whereof I am now accused, I will answer as well as I
can; having first briefly acquainted you with the state of my case. At that
time, when my Father ceased not to proclaim me for a stubborn, rebellious,
disobedient Son, the disgrace of my Parents, and infamy of my house, I thought
it best, not to make only a short Defense, but leaving his house, thought my
best remedy and appeal would be to my future carriage, and life; when it should
appear how free I was form his aspersions, and in what honest studies I
employed my self, and what virtuous company I kept. For I then foresaw, and had
it in my suspicion, that my Father being of no very sound mind, would at some
time or other without my desert grow furious, and hatch false accusations
against me. And some there were who construed those proceedings, as the
beginning of his Distraction; and judged his causeless hatred of me, his
froward carriage, his meditated railings, hard censures, clamorous fits of
anger, and extreme inclination to Choler, as so many threats, and forerunning
darts of an approaching Phrenzy. Wherefore I thought it would concern me to
learn Physic with all speed: and thereupon went to Travel, and acquainting my
self with the most approved Physicians of other Countries, with much labor and
diligent study I learned the Art. At my return I find my Father plainly
distracted, and given over by other Physicians, who do not sound, or make any
exact judgment of diseases. I, therefore, as it became a pious Son, neither
remembered my Abdication, nor staid to be sent for; having, indeed, nothing
personal to lay to his charge, since his ill dealings with me, were not his
own, but the faults of his disease. Offering, therefore, my self, as I said,
unsent for, I proceeded not presently to his cure; which had been to depart
form my usual practice, and from the laws of our Profession, by which we are
taught first to examine whither the disease be cureable, or incureable, and
exceed the limits of our Art. And then if it be undertakeable, we apply
remedies, and employ our whole studies about the recovery of the Patient. But
if we find the Malady too strong, and not to be conquered, we forbear to
prescribe at all; but observe their ancient Rule, who were the Inventors and
Fathers of the Art, who forbid us to meddle with overgrowne diseases. Finding,
therefore, my Father nor past hope, nor his distemper past cure, having first
weighed all circumstances, I undertook him, and confidently gave him Physic.
Many of the standers by suspecting my prescription, spoke in disparagement of
the cure, and were ready to call me into question: my Stepmother also was
present, fearful, and distrustful, not of hate to me, but care to him; whom
she perfectly knew so ill disposed, having long converst, and been a witness
to his Distemper: yet I not at all discouraged (knowing his Symptoms did not
lie, and that my Art could not deceive me) at fit times stole a cure into him.
Though some, who were my friends, dissuaded me from undertaking; lest
miscarrying in my attempt, I should draw a fresh accusation upon my self, and
be thought to have poisoned my Father, in remembrance of my Injuries. In a
word, in a short time he recovered, and grew sober again, and had the perfect
use of his understanding. His neighbors and friends marvelled, my Stepmother
applauded me, and publicly congratulated, me, for my good success; him, for
his recovery. He also (for so much I can witness for him) without any delay,
or consultation with any body, no sooner understood things from those who were
present, but cancelled his Abdication, made me his Son again, calling me his
Preserver and Benefactor? confessing he had now received an exact T^yall of me,
and excusing himself for what had formerly past. This much rejoiced many of the
company, those especially who were honest. Though it grieved others, for whom
the rejection of a Son made more then the Reconcilement: so that all were not a
like affected. But I could see some change color, and appear troubled in their
looks, and angry in their countenance, the sure marks of Envy, and discon^tent.
We in the mean time, as 'twas fit, enterchanged joys and embraces, being now
reconciled to one another. Not long after, O ye Judges, my Mother in law fell
sick of a cruel and desperate Distemper. For, as I observed from her first
surprise, it was not a slight, or superficial kind of Madness, but an ancient
and inveterate, which had long lodged in her soul; and having got the victory,
then broke forth, and discovered it self. We have many other signs to know
who are incurably mad, but the common one I observed in her, which is this;
that to all others she is quiet, and calm, and as long as they are present
falls into no ragings: But if she see a Physician, or but hear his voice, she
presently falls a raving at him, which is an infallible sign that she is
irrecoverably distempered. All I could do, was to bemone and pity her, as it
well became me, who without her merit became thus distracted. Yet my father out
of his want of skill (for he neither knows the spring nor cause, nor growth of
the distemper) commands me to cure her, and to prescribe her his potion:
supposing it to be the same kind of madness, and the like disease to his, and
a distraction of the same nature, and the same way cureable. And when I tell
him, that which is most true, that it is not possible to restore her, and
confess my self overmaster'd by the disease; he fumes, and chides, and says
I refuse of purpose, and deny her my help, and so makes the weakness of my Art
a Crime. Agreeing herein with all others oppressed with sorrow, that they grow
angry to hear truth plainly and freely told them. I, then, as well as I can,
will make my defense, and answer both for my self, and profession: and will
take my beginning from the Law, by which he would disinherit me; where it
shall appear, that his power is not the same as 'tvvas before. For the
Lavvgiver, my good father, has not given this power to all, nor intended that
all sons should be disinherited, as often as the father list, or upon what
discontents he lift. But as he has allowed parents in some cases to be
displeased, so he has provided that children without their Desert shall not be
rejected. And for this reason, he permits not punishments to be Arbitrary, or
without judicial Trials; but has appointed a Tribunal, and Judges, to
determine things without prejudice, or passion. For he saw that many men were
many times moved to anger upon unjust grounds: one out of his belief to a
false report, another upon the misinformation of a servant, or a malicious
wife: He thought it not fit, therefore, that matters should pass without
Legal examination, or that children without any defense should presently be
condemned; But the houreglasse is set up, reasons are shown, and nothing is
left undiscussed. All the power, therefore, which a father has, is to appeal
to you, O ye Judges: The power to Judge whither his complaint be reasonable
belonges to you: Consider not then, yet a while, what my crime is, for which my
Father is displeased; but consider, first, whither he have authority to
disinherit me again, having once cast me off; used the power of the Law;
accomplished the Dominion of a parent; and after all this received me into his
family, and cancelled his Abdication. For my part, I cannot but think it most
unreasonable, that the punishments of children should be numberless, or that
their Doomes should be infinite, and their fears perpetual: Or that the Law
should permit parents, sometimes to Cashiere, afterward to recall their Act,
then again put it in force; and so shuffle and toss the Law up and down as
they see occasion. 'Twas fit, indeed, the Law for the first time, should make
the parent Lord of his childs punishment, and should give authority to his
displeasure. But when the parent has once spent his authority, and
sufficiently used the law for satisfaction of his anger, and has once again
restored his son, out of his persuasion of his amendment; he ought to be
constant to his pacification, and not fall back, or alter his resolutions, or
make void his Act. At Nativities, whither he that is born will prove well or
ill, I suppose cannot fall under any certain knowledge. And for that reason
it is permitted to parents, to cast off those who degenerate from their descent.
But when a Father, not constrained, but out of his own authority and choice,
shall approve, and restore his son, what device can he have for his
inconstancy, or what farther use is there of Laws? For thus will the Lawmaker
say; If your son were vicious, and worthy of rejection, why did you restore
him? why did you receive him again into your house? why did you frustrate the
Law? You were free, and Lord of your own Actions. You are not to play with the
Laws, as you list, nor are statutes to vary with your Changes; nor Acts of
state to be sometimes of force, sometimes invalid, or Magistrates to sit as
witnesses only, nay as officers of your pleasure, to punish or absolve at your
Discretion. You begat your son once, and gave him education once; and,
therefore, it is once permitted you to reject him, provided you do it upon just
reasons. But to assume an endless, perpetual, frequent, and arbitrary power
to your self, is above the Commission of a father. Wherefore, O ye Judges, be
it far from you to grant, that having made a voluntary reconciliation, and
dissolved his first sentence, and made void his displeasure, he should have
Liberty to revive his past punishment, or have recourse to the Dominion of a
Father, which is long since expired, unpriviledged, forcelesse, and spent.
Consider, also, the practices of other Courts, where Judges sentence by Lot,
which if any man think unjust, the Law allows him to appeal to another Court.
But if any voluntarily assign their own Judges, and refer their cause to
Umpires, it is otherwise. For their Decisions, which at first might have been
refused, after they are once chosen Arbitrators, are in Justice to be stood to.
So you, my father, (in whose choice it was whither you would have restored me,
till I had been thought worthy of my Ancestors) out of your belief of my
reformation, having once restored me, cannot again disinherit me. For by your
own Testimony I have been judged unworthy of the like rejection, and
acknowledged worthy of your favor. You are not, therefore, to repent of your
restitution, but to confirm your reconcilement, after your several judgments
and two sentences: one when you ejected me, the other when you revok't your
purpose, and took me again into your Family; Cancelling your former Decrees,
and establishing future. Be constant then to your own Acts, and make good your
own Ordinances. Since your purposed, professed, and obliged your self to be
one, be still a Father. Were I not a natural, but an adopted son, I should
think 'twere not lawful for you again to disinherit me. For what was once in
your power to do or not do, being once done, is not in your power to be
recalled. How can it, then, be reasonable to expel often, or to deprive a
natural son of his relation, having by a voluntary election and decree called
him back from expulsion? Suppose I were your servant, and you upon your
suspicion of some misdemeanors should cast me into ^etters, and afterward out
of your persuasion of my innocence should make me a free man. Do you think
'twere Lawful the next time you are displeased to make me again your servant?
It Is not in your power. The Laws decree that such Acts shall be firm, and for
ever inviolable. Though, then, I have many reasons to prove that a father
having once cast off his son, and afterward recalled his rejection, cannot
again cast him off, yet what I have said is sufficient. Next, consider, I pray,
what kind of son he disinherits. I forbear to tell you, that he did cast of
one unlettered before, but a Physician now, (for I seek not refuge from my
Art;) or that I was then a youth, but am now a grown man, and have given proof
that I have done nothing unbeseeming my age. For these would seem slight pleas.
For heretofore when I was cast off, as I had committed no offense, so I had
deserved no great favor. Now I am expelled a preserver and benefactor. And what
greater piece of ingratitude can there be, then for one newly saved by my
skill, and delivered from a dangerous distemper, to reward his cure with such
dealings; and without any reckoning at all to forget his recovery, and to
banish him who dutifully obeyed, when he was unjustly cast off; and not only
forgot his expulsion, but cured the expeller, and settled him in his right mind
again? For it is no small or vulgar benefit, O ye Judges, I conferred upon him,
yet am thus ill rewarded. And though he were senseless of his distraction, yet
you all know what he did, and suffered, and how ill he was affected when I
undertook him; and when other Physicians gave him over, and his own Servants
fled from, nor durst come near him, I recovered him as you see, and enabled him
to accuse me, and discourse of the Laws. Or if you require an Example, My
Father, when, not long since, you were just crazed, as your wife is now, I
reduced you to your Wits again. It Is not equal then, that my Duty should be
thus recompensed* or that your Recovery should be my Ruin. The greatness of
my Benefits will clearly appear from those things whereof you accuse me. For if
you hate me, because I do not cure your Wi^e extremely crazed, and at the point
of Expiration, why do you not much rather love me for releasing you of the like
Distemper, and confess your self obliged for your delivery from such
Distractions? But you, against all equity, no sooner come to your self, but
presently question me; and are no sooner recovered, but you fall to your old
punishments, return to your former hatred, and proceed by the same law. Is this
your fair Requital of my Skill, or meritorious Recompense of my
Administrations, to recover only for the undoing of your Physician? Will you
permit him, O ye Judges, to punish his Preserver? to expel the Author of his
safety? to hate him, who gave him his understanding? and to take Revenge of his
Recoverer? you will not, if you be Friends to Justice. Had I at this present
committed some heinous Offense, yet my former obligations upon him were such,
that the memory and apprehension of them ought to have excused me, and have
gained his pardon: especially where the benefit is so great, as to be put in
Balance with all after Accidents: as mine was to him whom I saved, and who
owes his whole life to me; whose gift it is that he is, is sober, and
understands; especially, when all other Physicians despaired of him, and
confessed themselves too weak for his Cure. And to raise the merit of my benefit
yet one story higher, at that time when I was not his Son, and had no necessary
tie upon me, but was free, and a stranger, and discharged of my natural
obligation, yet I neglected him not, but came voluntarily, unsent for, and of
my own accord; succored, relieved, cured, restored, observed him as my own
Father; purged my self from my Abdication, allayed his displeasure by my
application; abrogated the Law by my piety, purchased my readmission into his
family by the greatness of my Benefit; declared my Fidelity toward my Father
in a time of peril; insinuated my self into him by my Art, and showed my self
a natural Son in the midst of his calamities. What travailes, and toiles,
think you, did I undergo, who continually visited, attended, watched my
opportunities; sometimes giving way to my Fathers ragings, sometimes applying
my skill according to the pawses, and intermissions of the disease? It Is the
hardest and most dangerous part in Physic, to cure, or be near men so
affected, who many times as they are enraged by their Fit, discharge their Fury
upon the standers by. Yet I, not at all daunted, or affrighted, attended him;
and after a long and various conflict with his disease, at last I vanquished it
by Physic. Nor let any man who hears me, presently say, What a great piece of
work it is to administer a Purge? Many things are first to be done: way is to be
made for the Potion, the Body to be prepared for the Reception, and to be
carefully ordered; sometimes taken down and macerated, sometimes raised by fit
diet; sometimes to be put into gentle motion and exercise; sometimes to be cast
into a reposednesse, sleep, and left solitary: to which courses in other
diseases the Patient in many times obedient. But men distracted by reason of
the liberty of their minds, are unruly, and intractable, dangerous to their
Physician, and obstinate against his prescriptions: whereby, many times, when
the Cure is almost finished, and we are almost Master of our Hopes, some small
error gives new force to the distemper, perverts all our former proceedings,
sets back the Cure, and defeats our Art. After all these undertakings then,
after my wrestling with an enragement so dangerous, and my conquest of the most
invincible disease of all other, will you yet give him power to disinherit me,
and permit him to interpret the Laws, as he pleases, against his Preserver,
and suffer him to make war with Nature? I, out of obedience to Nature, O ye
Judges, have cured and saved my Father, when his Injuries were upon me. If he,
therefore, taking the advantage of the Law, as he says, ruin a Son so
deserving, and cut him off from his Family, he is a Child-hater, I a Lover of
my Parent: I fulfill and embrace the laws of Nature, he breaks and violates
them. O Father unjustly displeased! O Son more unjustly observant! for I cannot
but, compelled by my Father, blame my self, that being in his hatred, I love
him undeservedly, and beyond his merit. Nature commands Parents to love their
Children, more then Children to love their Parents: yet this man wilfully shuts
his eyes against the Laws, which forbid the expulsion of faultlesse children;
and contemns Nature, which has planted in Parents such strong affection to
those whom they beget. For notwithstanding I have the greater Title to his
affection toward me, yet he neither makes the greater return, nor yet (which
is less) takes example by me, or imitates the expression of mine to him: but
rather (which is the height of calamity) hates me for my affection, expells me
for my piety, injures me for my Merits, disinherits me by those Laws which
were made for my relief. O war, where the Laws are made to combat Nature!
Things are not as you suppose, my Father, you misinterpret just Laws, which are
not to fight with natural affection. They conspire, and are of mutual
assistance in their protection from Injuries. In wronging one that deserves
well, therefore, you commit an offense, both against Nature, and the Laws,
which of themselves are equal, just, and favorable; but that you draw them
from their institution, and arm them against one Son as against a multitude of
Offenders, and press fresh punishments from them, which are willing to exact
no more then the obedience of Children to their Parents; nor were at all made
against the Innocent. But, certainly, they allow men to sue others, who are not
thankful to their Benefactors. In stead of thanks, then, to punish for
benefits received, is worth your consideration, whether there can be a greater
piece of Injustice. By this time, then, I hope it is clear, that it is not in his
power to disinherit the second time, who has once exercised that power, and
taken the full advantage of the Law; nor is it reasonable to cast off one, to
whom he is so much engaged for courtesies; or to deprive him of his family. Let
me now proceed to the cause of my expulsion, and examine the quality of my
Offense: where 'twill be fit I once more have recourse to the Intention and
mind of the Lawmakers. Here, should I a while grant it to be in your power to
disinherit as often as you please; nay should I grant you this authority over
me, from whom you have received great Benefits: you cannot simply, and for
every light cause proceed to Expulsion. For the Lawmakers does not say upon
whatsoever complaint of the Father let the Son be expelled; as if his bare
will, or accusation were enough. For then what need were there of your
Tribunal? but it bids you, O ye Judges, enquire whether the Fathers
displeasure have any weighty, or just ground, or no. And this for the present I
desire you to consider. I will begin from what happened upon his recovery. He no
sooner, then, came to himself, but his first act was to cancel his Abdication;
acknowledging me for his Preserver, Restorer, and what not? There was no
Offense, I suppose, in all this. Afterward, what can he complain of? what
respect, or observance of a Son did I omit? when did I ever lie abroad? what
unseasonable meetings, or drinkings can you object? who ever complained of my
Intemperance, or quarrel with a Pimp? No body. Now these are the chief
disorders for which the Law permits Expulsion. But my Stepmother fell sick.
Was that my fault? or am I to be punished for her Phrenzy? No, say you. Why
then? Because being commanded to cure her, you refused; and therefore deserve
to be cast off for your disobedience to your Father. Give me leave a while,
Judges, to open to you those things wherein I could not obey him, and for which
I am undutifull. First, then, let me in short tell you, that the Law allows
him not to enjoyne what he list, nor am I bound in necessity to obey all his
Impositions whatsoever. For some Commands may be refused, though others are
allowed their punishments. As if my Father should be sick, and I should forsake
him; or should commit the business of his house to me, and I should neglect
it; or enjoin me to look to his country affairs, and I should refuse* These,
and the like, were just colors and pretenses for the complaints of a Father.
Other things, concerning their Arts, or the exercise of them, are left to the
liberty of the Children, especially where the Parent is not endammaged. If a
Father should say to his Son, who is a Painter, Limne this piece, and not that;
or being a Musician, should bid him play one Lesson, and not another; or should
say to him being a Carver, Work me this Statue, and not that; would any man
think it fit he should dis-inherit his Son for denying to submit his Art to his
Directions? I believe not. By how much then Physic is more honorable, and
useful for the life of men, by so much ought the Professors to be the more
free. Since it is but Justice, that an Art for its Exercise and use, should be
privileged, and not enforced, or commanded, being a thing sacred, professed by
the Gods, and studied by wise men; and therefore not to be prostituted to the
Law, and made liable to the fear and punishment of the Magistrate, much less
to the pleasure, threats, or anger of an illiterate Parent. If then I had
boldly, and openly said to you, I will not cure her, though I can; I have
learnt my skill only for my self, and you my Father, to all others I will be
unexpert: what Tyrant is so cruel as to force me against my will to use my
Art? Offices of skill, if I be not deceived, are to be obtained by Courtship,
and entreaties, not by Laws, Quarrellings, and Courts of Justice. A Physician
is to be persuaded, not compelled; to come voluntarily, not to be drawn by
terror; nor to be forced to a Cure, but willingly to undertake it. An Art,
then, is free from the Authority of a Father, or the payment of Tribute; Common
wealths having decreed Honors, Precedencies, Immunity from Taxes, and
privileges to Physicians. Thus might I say in defense of my Art, though you
had taught me, or had spent much care, and cost in my study of it; and though
this cure were possible, and yet I should refuse it. Consider, then, the
Injustice of your dealing, who deny me the liberty, and use of that, which is
purely my own. I learnt this Art when I was not your Son, nor subject to your
laws; yet I learnt it for your cure. You were the first, who reaped benefit by
it, though you contributed nothing to the Acquisition. What Tutor had you in
pay? what laid you out in Receipts? nothing at all: but poor, and distressed as
I was, only by the pity of my Teachers, I attained my skill. All the allowance
I had from you toward my studies, was Sorrow, Solitude, Poverty, Hatred of my
Acquaintance, and avoidance of my Kindred. For these good deeds you would have
me employ my skill, and would be Master of that Knowledge which I got when you
were not my Master. Let it suffice, that heretofore I have voluntarily and no
way obliged, bestead you; when I could not, after I had done, demand so much as
Thanks for my pains. It Is not fit my Benefit should ever after prove my
necessity: or because I once befriended you with my Will, you should from
thence take occasion to enjoin me tasks against it; or that it should be drawn
into a custom, that when a Physician has wrought one Cure, he should for ever
be bound to cure as many as the party cured should enjoin. For then we should
make our Patients our Lords, and enslave our selves, and our reward should be
to serve and obey them in all their Commands. Then which, what can be more
unequal? Because I recovered you from a dangerous distraction, do you
therefore think you have authority of my Skill? Thus might I plead for my
self, had my Father commanded me something possible, and I had not precisely,
and necessarily obeyed him. But now, I pray, consider the nature of his
Imposition. Because says he you cured me of my Lunacy, and my Wife is taken
with the same Distemper, (for so he thinks,) and is given over by other
Physicians, as I was; and because you have given a clear Trial, that you can
heal all Infirmities, cure her also, and ease her of her distraction: which
being barely so spoken, especially before a man unlearned, or unskilld in the
profession, would sound very reasonable. But if you will give me leave to speak
for my Art, I shall desire you to consider that we are not omnipotent, nor are
the natures of all Diseases alike, nor their cure the same; nor have our
Prescriptions in all the like powerful success. And then the difference will
appear between an unwillingnesse to cure, and a disability. Wherefore lend me a
while your attentions, whilst I play the Philospher, and present you with a
discourse of things, neither unpleasant, fruitless, or impertinent to my
profession. First then, the Natures and tempers of all Bodies are not the same,
though plainly arising from the same elements. But some partake more one
element, ^ome less: which I speak with application to the Bodies of men, which
are not alike, or the same in all, either in Temper, or Constitution; but
differ both in magnitude, and form. Whence it necessarily falls out, that the
diseases bred in them sometimes are slight, and meet their Cures, sometimes are
desperate, especially in those bodies which easily take in Infection, and are
afterward as strongly distempered by it. He, therefore, who thinks all
Fevers, or Consumptions, or Ptifficks, or Distractions to be alike in all
bodies, is neither of those who are wise, nor discursive, nor experienced in
these matters. That which is easily cureable in one, is not so in another. For
example, the same Corn sown in several grounds; in a champion, deep, moist,
sunny, windlesse, and well manured field, springs up in a full ear, and yields
a glad and abundant harvest. But it is otherwise in a mountanous, rocky,
sunless, h^lly country, according to the diversity of Soyles. So diseases,
according to the soyles where they are received, prove either fruitful, and
grow; or wither, and pine. Yet my Father passing all this over without
consideration, thinks all distractions in all bodies alike, and their cure the
same. But for an addition to all, I have yet said, that a woman's body differs
much from a man's, both for diversity of distemper, and hope or despair of Cure
is not hard to be known. For the bodies of men are well knit, and sinewy,
accustomed to labors, motion, and exercises abroad: but the bodies of women
are washy, loose, bred in the shade, pale for want of blood, scarcity of heat,
and superfluity of cold humors; and are therefore more liable to diseases then
men, more impatient of Physic, and more disposed to phrenzies. For having in
them much choleric, light, provocative matter, and small strength of body,
they eas^ly slide into distempers. 'Twere unreasonable, therefore, to require
of a Physician the same Medicine for both, seeing how much they differ from
their very births, both in their whole manner of life, all their actions,
exercises, and studies. When you speak of madness, thefore, add withal, that
it is a woman's madness. And confound not several distractions under one and
the same name; But distinguish them, as nature has: and then consider how
far they severally admit cures. We Physicians, as I said before, have first
regard to the complexion, and temper of the patient, and do examine what humor
he most partakes of; whither he be cold or hot; young, and vigorous, or decayed
and acient; of great, or little stature; gross or slender; and the like: which
he that shall exactly consider, is worthy to be credited, either when he
despaires of a cure, or undertakes it. For there are numberless kinds of
phrenzies, springing from numberless causes, of diverse compellations. To
dote, and to be beside ones self, is not the same; And it is one thing to rave,
it is another thing to be crazed. Though all these names be but higher or lower
degrees of the same distemper. Besides, men have one cause of their
distraction, women another. Again, among men, the cause in young men is
different from that in old: their ragings spring most commonly from su^fers;
the others from their importunate spleen, and frowardness, which they many
times discharge upon their family; and which first makes them disquiet, then by
degrees converts into distraction. But infinite are the distempers in women,
which makes them so easily run mad; Though the chief be their extreme
hatred, or envy at the success of their enemy; sometimes grief, and for the
time anger: Any of which, after a long growth, and nourishment, end in
madness. This, my father, is your wives case; who in likelihood has
contracted her phrenzye, from a long sadness. For she shows no signs of
envy, no not in her fits. And, therefore, is not to be cured by the skill of
any Physician. If any will undertake, and recover her, my disobedience will
deserve your hatred. Though thus much I must tell you, that though her
distraction were not quite so desperate, but that there were some hope of
recovery, yet would I not willingly meddle with her, nor venture to give her
Physic; for fear of my success, and the ill reports of people. You see it is
the general opinion, that all children are odious to their stepmothers, though
never so good natured; who are thought peculiarly to inherit the distemper
common to all women kind: which might breed a suspicion in some, if the disease
should prove incurable, and my prescriptions fail, that I jugled, and dealt
treacherously in my Administrations. But with your wife, my father, thus stands
the case, and I speak from my experience, she will not be better, should she
take a thousand purges. 'Twere, therefore, folly to undertake her: unless you
be earnest with me to loose my labor, and have a mind to pull disgrace upon
me. Let me still be the envy of those of my profession. And if you will again
expel me, though I be forsaken of all, yet shall there be duty in my wishes.
But suppose, (which the Gods forbid) your distraction should return, (for
distempers of that nature upon the least provocation grow again,) what am I to
do then? You know well I would cure you then also; nor will I ever neglect the
obligation imposed upon me by nature, nor forget my Original, and descent. But
whither after you are again recovered, I may believe your reconciliation, Judge
you. In the mean time doing as you do, you invite your disease, and refresh
your madness. You were but yesterday, or the day before recovered from your
distemper, and you now rage again, raise clamor, and, which is worst, fall
into choler, give way to your Hatred, and recall the Laws. O, my Father,
these were the entrances to your former madness.

Alexander, Or the false Prophet.
PErhaps, my dear Celsus, you think you have set me a light, and easy task,
when you enjoin me to send you Alexander of Abonwall, the impostor's life,
Tricks, Adventures, and cousenages, written in a book. But he, who shall
exactly describe them all, shall find it an enterprise as hard as to write the
deeds of Alexander the son of Philippe: the one being as eminent for his
villainy, as the other for his valor. Yet upon condition you will read me with
pardon, and supply the defects of my narration with your own Additions, I will
undertake the work: and will endeavor to purge, if not all, yet as much of
Augea's Oxstall, as I can, by carrying forth some few Baskets full of filth;
that from thence you may guess how great and unmeasurable the Dung was, which
three thousand Oxen were able to make in so many years. Though I cannot, in the
mean time, but blush both for you and my self. For you, who think fit a person
so wicked should be committed to memory, and writing: For my self, for
employing my labor in the History and Actions of a fellow not worthy to be
read by Scholars, but to be seen in some populous and ample Theater dismembered
by Apes, and Foxes. Yet if any shall accuse us, we can defend our selves by
example. For Arrianus, Epictetus Scholar, a man much reverenced at Rome, who
spent his whole life in study, shall in like case be our Apology. For he
refused not to write the life of Tilliborus the Thief. But I am to speak of a
Thief much more famous, and cruel: who robbed not in woods, or mountains, but
in Cities; nor made Mynia only, or Ida his walk, or beset some few wild places
of Asia, but (as I may so say) overspread the whole Roman Empire with his
Robberies. First, then, I will give you a draught of his person, and dravv his
picture to you as well as I can; though I be no very skillful Painter. For his
Bodily character, he was tall of stature, well set, of a goodly aspect, and,
to say truth, of a Divine presence: white of Complexion, his Beard not thick:
his Hair partly native, partly artificial, but so resembling the natural,
that many took it for his own. His eyes sparkling, and expressing a Divine
possession, or rapture: his voice svveet, and clear. In a word, for his
Lineaments, Shape, and Figure, he was every way faultlesse: but for his Soul
and Mind, Let me, O Hercules, thou expeller of mischiefs, and thou, O Jupiter,
preventer of sad Accidents, and Castor and Pollux, ye Tvvin-Protectors from
Shipvvrack, rather fall into the hands of Enemies, then have to do with him.
For in wit, projects, and sharpness, he exceeded all others: he had
curiosity, quickness of apprehensio^, memory, and aptness to all the Sciences
in excess. All which he employed to the vvorst; and furnished with those
natural helps, quickly became the Top of all the famous Rogues that ever
were, and excell^d the Cercopians, Euribatus, Phrynondas, Aristodemus, and
So^stratus. For vvriting upon a time to his Son in law Rutilianus, his
modestest expression was the comparing of himself with Pythagoras. Nay with
Pythagoras, pardon, though he were a wise man, and of a Divine understanding,
had he lived till now, he had (I believe) been thought but a Child to him:
which I desire you not to take as spoken in disparagement of Pythagoras, as if
I compared them together for the resemblance of their Actions. But let any man
sum, and compute the vvorst, and most reproachful things which pass in
slander of Pythagoras (to which I cannot give any credit as Truths) they will
not make the least part of Alexander's Impostures. For you are to present him
to your Imagination as one; the temper of whose Soul was various, compounded
of Lies, Deceits, Perjuries, and Juglings; active, daring, flexible,
industrious to pursue projects, persvvasive, apt to gain belief, and to act
virtue, and to profess that which he had least in design. No man, therefore,
but at first acquaintance departed with this opinion of him, that he was of all
men the most excellent, just, severe, and farthest from Tricks. Then his aims
were always high, not petty, or poor, and his mind always bent to great
enterprises. When he was yet a Boy, being, as I have heard, and as far as I can
judge of the Spring by the Stubble, of very beautiful lineaments, he
prostituted, and let himself out to as many as would hire him. Among others, he
was entertained by one of those Impostors, who profess Magic, and
Enchantments, the Art to provoke Love, bewitch Enemies, find Treasures, and
obtein Inheritances, who, perceiving him Toward, and apt to act a part in his
Employments, and as much enamoured of his devices, as he was of his Feature,
taught him his Art; and from that time used him as his Officer, Prentice, and
Servant. His profession in public was Physic, having learnt of Thoon the
Egyptian's Wife, many Receipts to cure, many to kill, all which he afterward
bequeathed to the other as his Heir. This enamoured Doctor was by birth a
Cappadocian, and one of those who accompanied, and converst with Apollonius
Tyaneus, through all the passages of his Tragedy. You see, then, what man I
describe to you, for his School, and Company. After his Masters death,
Alexander, whose Beard was now grown, being reduced to great poverty, and
unable by his handsome shape, which now began to wither, to maintain himself,
betook himself to no small designs: but joining acquaintance with a certain
Byzantine Chronographer, (naturally the greatest Impostor that ever yet entered
upon the course) whose name, if I be not deceived, was Cocconas, went about
with him, practicing Cheats, and fleecing Gross men; for so do these Juglers
in their Canting language call the Vulgar. Among the rest, lighting upon one
Macetis a rich woman, well stricken in years, yet desirous to be thought
lovely, they picked a maintenance from her, and attended her from Bithynia into
Macedonia. For she dwelt at Pella, a flourishing Country under the Macedonian
Kings, now inhabited only by a few obscure Villagers. Here beholding Dragons of
a wonderful greatness, and yet so gentle, and tame, that they were fed by
women, lay with Children, sufferd themselves to be trod, and crushed without
reluctance, and like Infants sucked milk from the Breast, (for many such there
are in that country, from whence in likelihood sprung the fable, that when
Olympias conceived Alexander, she had copulation with a Dragon) they for a
small sum bought one of the fairest; And, in the expression of Thucidides,
From hence began the war. For these two most wicked, adventrous men, and
prepared for any mischievous attempt, entering into Conspiracy, easily perceived
that the two great Tyrants over the life of man were Hope, and Fear. And that
he that could employ them to advantage, might suddenly grow rich. For they
savv, that both to him who was troubled with Fear, and him who nourisht
Hopes, Prophecy, and Presage, was most necessary, and desirable. Thus
Delphos anciently increased its riches with its fame. Thus Delos also, and
Claros, and the Priests of Apollo grevv vvealthy; men being drawn to their
Temples by the forementioned Tyrants, Hope, and Fear, with desires to
foreknovv future events; for which they sacrificed Hecatombes, and offered
golden plates. Having well discoursed, and tossed the Plot, they resolved to
erect an Oracle; confident, that if their design prospered, they should in
short time enrich, and make themselves happy: whose success was afterward
far greater then they at first expected, and indeed beyond their hope. Their
next consultation, therefore, was, where they should lay their Scene, and
how they should begin their enterprise. Cocconas thought Chalcedon to be the
fittest place; being a country of Merchants, and bordering upon Thrace, and
Bithynia, and not far from Asia, and Galatia, and other neighboring people.
But Alexander rather preferred his own country: affirming (as the truth was)
that the first broaching of such an Adventure required dull, simple men, and
easy of entertainment: such as are the Paphlagonians, who dwell at Abonwall,
who for the most part are superstitious, and gross, that if but a Sive-prophet
appear among them, with a Fiddler, Trumpetter, or one that plays on a Cymball
in his company, they presently flock together, and gape at him, and admire him,
like some Divine person dropped from Heaven. After some controversy, at last
Alexander overcame: yet to Chalcedon they went (a City, as they thought,
conducible to such a design) where, in Apollo's old Temple they buried some
brazen Meddals, which prophesied, that ere long Aesculapius, and his Father
Apollo should come into Pontus, and dwell at Abonwall. These Meddals thus
purposely found, presently cast a rumor throughout all Bythinia, and Pontus,
but especially among the people of Abonwall; who presently decreed to build a
Temple, and began to lay the foundation. Cocconas was left at Chalcedon, where
he wrote ambiguous, doubtful, cross Oracles: and shortly after dyed of the
sting of a Serpent. Whereupon Alexander was sent for, who came in curled hair,
clad in a changeable Cassock of Purple, and white; over which was cast a white
Ephod, holding a Sickle, like Perseus, from whom he derived himself by the
Mothers side. The stupid Paphlagonians in the mean time, though they knew both
his Parents to be of obscure and base quality, yet gave credit to an Oracle
which said, Phoebus friend, Podalirius blood you see,
One who from Perseus draws his Pedigree.
This Podalirius was naturally so lecherous, and given to women, that he was
enticed by Alexander's mother from Tricca into Paphlagonia. There was another
Oracle, as if written by some Sybill, foretelling, That near Sinope, on the
Euxine sand,
Not far from Tyrsis should a Prophet land,
Whose medicinal name should these four numbers hold,
One, thrice ten, five, and twenty three times told.


A while after Alexander, with his puppet-play, in great bravery, and pomp,
arrived in his own Country; where he sometimes counterfeited him self
possessed, and foamed at mouth; which was easy for him to do, having first
chewed soap weed root, with which wool is scoured. His foaming showed to the
spectators both divine, and terrible. Before his arrival he made a linen head
to his Dragon, visaged like a Man, and painted like one, which opened, and shut
the mouth, with horse hair: having also, like other Dragons, a black forked
tongue, which was also stirred, and moved by hair. This Dragon he had in
readiness, and fed secretly, with a purpose, when he saw occasion, to produce
him; and to assign him his part in the play; or rather to make him the chief
Actor. When 'twas almost time to begin, he contrived this plot: coming by
night to the foundation of the Temple newly dug, where stood water, either
risen from some spring, or fallen in some shower, and bringing with him a
hollow goose egg, which held a little serpent, newly hatched, he sanke and
buried it in the mudde, and so departed. Next morning running naked into the
marketplace, with only a golden towell about his soynes, carrying also his
sickle in his hand, and shaking his loose bayre, like one possessed by the mother
of the Gods, he got upon an Altar, and proclaimed the happiness of the City,
which was presently to discover the foretold Deity. The spectators, which were
all the men, women, and children of the City drawn together, were amazed,
fell to their prayers, and adored him, whilst he uttering some unsignificant
words, in Hebrew perhaps, or the Phoenician Language, much more astonished them
who understood nothing he said, but only that he often named Apollo, and
Aesculapius. From hence he distractedly ran to the newly begun Temple, and to
the pit, and spring, dug there to lay the foundation; and descending into
the water, in a loud voice, sung the praises of Apollo, and Aesculapius, and
invited the God to enter with good fortune into the City. Demanding also a
shovell, which was reached him, he no sooner dipped it in the water, but brought
up wrapped in water, and mud together, the egg, which enclosed the God;
indiscernably stopped, and cemented with white wax, and chalk, which taking in
his hand,, now, quoth he; I will show you Aesculapius. They stupidly wondered,
what would be the event, and much admired the egg found in the water. Till he
breaking it in the hollow of his hand, took out the young snake. Which when
they saw stir, and ros^ it self about his fingers, they presently gave a
great shout, and saluted it as a God, and congratulated the good fortune of the
City: every one also conceiving a petition, and prayed to him for wealth,
riches, health, and the like. He speedily ran home again, carrying w^^h him
his new hatched Aesculapius, borne now the second time, whereas men are borne
but once. Hatched, I say, not by some Coronis, or Daw (which was his mothers
name) but by some Goose. All the people followed, divinely inspired, and
distracted with their hopes. He for some days kept at home, hoping as indeed
it came to pass) the same would draw great confluence of Paphlagonians. When
the City began to be filled with people, void both of understanding, and
brains, and no way resembling men who lived by bread, nor differing at all
from beasts, but only in shape; he, sitting in a little room, upon a Couch,
attired like a Priest, held his Pellaean Aesculapius in his bosom; which was,
as I said before, of a fair, and goodly magnitude. For winding him sometimes
about his neck (which he patiently suffered) and letting only his tail hang
down, and hiding his head under his arm, he trayled upon the ground:
sometimes from under another part of his Cassock, he would let the linen head
peep out, which was verily thought to be the Serpent's. For you are to fancy
the house where he made his presentiments, neither stately, nor over lightsome:
then the press of people, which thronged to see him, squeezing and crowding
one another, and anticipating the show with their astonishment. For coming
with raised expectations, it must needs seem a miracle to them, to see a
little, small serpent, in a few days become a great Dragon; faced like a man,
and withal so gentle. No spectators stayed long, but before they had an exact
view, were thrust out by new comers, who continually resorted. Just against
the door, where they entered, stood open another door, to let them out. In
imitation of the course practiced by the Macedonians, when Alexander lay sick,
and ready to dye, and great troops pressed into the Palace to see him, and take
their last farewell. It Is reported of this Cheater, that he many times made
these presentiments, especially to strangers which were rich. And to say truth,
my dear Celsus, you are to pardon those dull unlettered Paphlagonians, if they
were cousen'd when they touched the Dragon, (which Alexander permitted to as
many as would) and saw a head by a false doubtful light, so artificially
opening and shutting the mouth, that *twould require a Democritus or Epicurus,
or Metrodorus, or some other of a hard, flinty faith toward such things, not
to believe, or to make a true conjecture of what he saw. And if he could not
find out the mystery, yet to come with a persuasion that the ways, and secrets
of the Imposture, were above his discovery, though all he saw were a Delusion,
and Impossible to be done. In short time, Bithynia, Galatia, and Thrace were
drawn to the spectacle, upon the report of those who confidently affirmed,
they saw the God newly hatched, and touched him after he was in few days
grown very great, and that he had the face of a man: Pictures also, and
Images, and Statues were taken of him, some carved in Silver, others in Brass.
At last they gave him a name, and called him Glycon, warned in a verse by a
divine Oracle, thus uttered by Alexander, I Glycon am from Jove Third, Mortals
light.


It now began to be time (which was the great hinge of the Plott) that he was
to give Oraculous answers, and to Prophecy. Alexander, therefore, taking his
pattern from Antilochus in Cilicia, who after the death of his father
Amphiaraus at Thebes, being banished his Country, went into Cilicia, where he
lost not by his change, but prophesied to the Cilicians, and took monyes for
his predictions. Taking I say, his copy from him, he told all comers that his
God would shortly give Oracles, and assigned a day, bidding every one write,
what they had a desire to learn, or know in a little book, and to wind it
about with thread, and seal it with wax, clay, or the like: And that he taking
the books, and presenting them before the Tripod, (for by this time an Oracle
was built, and a Curtain hung up) would call them in order by a Crier, or
Priest, and as he was instructed by his Deity, would restore to every man his
scrowle, sealed, as it was, with an exact answer subscribed by his God, to
every pet^tion. Which Device, to such a man as you, or (without ostentation) as
I am, were palpable, and easy to be found out, but appeared to blunt men, and
as they say, to such as blew not their noses, a very prodigy, and wonder. For
having invented several ways to open the Seals, he read the contents, and
framing agreeable answers, bound up the papers again, and returned them
sealed, to the great admiration of the receivers: who thus reasoned with
themselves. How could he know what I gave him, locked under seals so impossible
to be counterfeited, if he were not a God, who knows all things? You will ask
me now what art he used. It Is worth your hearing, that you may be instructed
against such juglings. His first way, my dear Celsus, was to heat a needle,
with which melting the wax under it he took off the seal; and having read
the inside, with the same needle melted the wax which was upon the outside of
the thread, and clapped on the seal again entire. His next way was by Collyrium,
a thing Compounded of Berytian pitch, lime, specular stone pounded, wax, and
masticke; which he warming at the fire, and applying to the seal, first
anointed with tallow, brought away the impression; and as soon as it was cold
and hard, having nearly opened the paper, and read it, applying his stamp to
fresh wax, gave it a print, as it were, with a stone seal, exactly resembling
the Original. His third device was, to mingle chalk, with the ordinary glue,
with which letters are sealed; which he wrought into a wax, and applying it
soft to the print, presently took it off; which afterward growing as hard
as horn or Iron, he used for a seal. Many other contrivances he had, which I
cannot stand to report, lest I seem tedious; especially since you in your
Commentaries concerning Magicians, which are excellent useful, and able to
make their Readers wife, have delivered many more passages of this nature.
Oracles, then, he gave and Divinations; which with great Art, and Subtlety he
still dressed in probable colors. Giving to some Questions Oblique, and
intricate answers. To others, answers dark and unintelligible. A course, as
he thought, most suitable to an Oracle: some he frighted, and encouraged
others, as he found it made for his profit. To some he prescribed Medecines,
and dyets, being (as I said before) variously skilled in receipts. Among which
he chiefly extold Cytmides, which is the fayn'd name of a plaster made of
Bears grease. The answer to hopes, successes, and successions in
Inheritances, he still put off to another time; Adding though, that they should
accomplish their expectations, when he thought fit, and when his Priest
Alexander should pray or petition for them. The rate set upon every Oracle was
a Drachme and two pence: which you are not, my friend, to call a small gain,
rising yearly to 70. or 80. thousand Drachmes. Some men out of their
greediness, and thirst of satisfaction, paying for ten, some for fifteen
Answers. What he received he kept not wholly to himself, or treasured up, but
maintained many associates, and servants, some were emissaries, some projected
Oracles; some subscribed Answers; some made and applied the Seals; some
interpreted; all were more or less sharers according to their place, or
employment. His Emissaries he sent into far Countries, who did spread the
fame of the Oracle among the Nations; and reported that he foretold future
events, recalled fugitive servants, discovered Thieves, and Robbers, revealed
where treasures were to be digg^d, cured all diseases; and raised some from the
dead. Whereupon followed great resort, and confluence from all parts;
Sacrifices were offered, and double presents made to the Priest, and Disciple
of the God. For now an Oracle to this purpose was divulged: Honor my Priest
and Servant, I you charge;
Gain I despise, yet let his gaynes be large.


At length, when many recovering their wits from a deep intoxication, conspired
against him, especially those who were of Epicurus sect, and the whole cheat
and pageant by little and little began to be opened, he threatened them with
terrible misfortunes; and said, that Pontus was now overspread with Atheists,
and Christians, who were not afraid to speak blasphemies of him, charging
those, who came to consult him, as they expected the favor of the God, to
drive them away with stones. Upon Epicurus himself he past this Oracle,
when one enquired what he did in Hell; He sits in mire (said he) in leaden
fetters chained. Can you yet vvonder at the spreading of the Oracle, when you
hear what sage and learned enquiries were put up? His quarrel to Epicurus
was irreconcilable, and not without cause. For with whom in reason should
a Jugler, Friend to Monsters, and enemy to truth, make war, but with
Epicurus, a man perfectly studied in the nature of things, and alone able to
distinguish what was truth in them? The followers of Plato, Chrysippus, and
Pythagoras, he counted his friends, and was in deep, peace with them. Only
intractable Epicurus (as he called him) was perfectly in his hatred: and good
reason; For he would have converted those things into laughter, and sport. Of
all the Cities of Pontus, therefore, he most hated Amastris, because he heard
those who came with Lepidus, and many others of the like-breeding lived
ther^: which was the reason why he never gave Oracle to any that came from
thence. But endeavoring upon a time to give an Oracle to the Proconsul's
brother, he was ridiculously disappointed, neither able to invent a fit one
himself, nor any for the present to compose one for him. For intending to bid
him, for the cure of a pain in his stomach, eat a hogs foot dressed with
Mallovves, he thus uttered the prescription;

Take Malwickes in (...) di^ine hog Syrrupe steept. Many times (as I said
before) he shovv'd his Dragon to those who desired the sight; not all, but his
tail, and some more of his body: still keeping his head in his bosom
invisible. And that he might the more astonish the multitude, he promised they
shoud hear his God speak, and give Oraales without an Interpreter. For that
purpose without much difficulty, he so ordered the vvind-pipe of a Crane, that
being drawn through the Artificial head, another stood behind the curtain,
and speaking through the Artery, gave answers to the Questions; conveying the
voice through the linen Aesculapius. These were called Selfe-Oracles, and
were not spoken to all promiscuously, but only to those who were rich,
bravely clad, and offered well. The answer which Severianus received concerning
his expedition into Armenia was a selfe-Oracle, who was encouraged to make an
Invasion after this manner, Thou Medes, and Parthians, with quick war shall
waste,
Then back to Rome, and Tybers streams shall haste,
Wearing a Chaplet, which bright beams shall cast.
Upon which persuasion, after the studpid Gaul had made an incursion, and was
with his army slain by Othryades, that Oracle was dashed out of the Catalogue,
and this other insetted; Make no war with Armenians, It Is best,
Lest a man, in a woman's garments dressed,
Thee with his bow, of life and light divest.
His plot herein was by after Oracles craftily to heal the former which
miscarryed. For many times a little before their death he promised recovery to
sick persons; After whose deaths he had this recanting Oracle in readiness;
Henceforth ask no cure for thy helpless pain,
Death is at hand, to think to escape is vain.


Learning by intelligence that some at Claros, Didymae, and Male, were famous
for such divinations, he made friendship with them, and sent many thither,
saying; To Claros go, and hear my Fathers voice.


Again, At Male Amphilochus shall you resolve.


Thus much of the Scene lay within his own Coasts, though in it Ionia,
Cilicia, Paphlagonia, and Galatia had parts. But when the fame of the Oracle
once pierced Italy, and arrived at Rome, every one strived to be first. Some
presently went in person, others sent; especially Senators, and such as bore
great offices in the State. The first of note, and reputation, was Rutilianus,
a man otherwise honest, and prudent, and approved in many Roman battles for
his valor: but indiscreetly superstitious toward the Gods; of whom he had
taken in such improbable persuasions, that wheresoever he saw a stone anointed,
or crowned, he fell down, and worshipped, and made long prayers to it, and
petitioned for good fortune. He, therefore, hearing what was reported of this
Oracle, almost resolved to leave his Army, and make a voyage to Abonwall. But
however sent thither messengers after messengers. They who were sent, being
servants of small capacity, and easily deceived, at their return reported what
they had seen; and some things which they feyned to have seen, and heard;
much enlarging their relation, the more to endear themselves to their Master.
Much was the unfortunate old man enflamed, and cast into a violent phrenzy, who
going about to all his friends (of which he had store, and powerful) told what
he heard from his messengers, besides some additions of his own. The report
presently filled, and astonished the City; especially many of the Court, who
presently sent to be instructed in their affairs Alexander received the
messengers very affably; and returned them with presents, and gifts of great
value: who not only reported their answers, but sung the praises of the God;
telling prodigious lies, both of him and his Oracles. One plot he had in
ordinary practice, too ingenious, and subtle for a vulgar Cheater: which was to
open the Tickets which were sent, and if, in the reading, he found any thing
unsafe, or dangerous, he kept, and never restored them, with a purpose to keep
the Inquirers obnoxious, and to awe them with their own fears, when they
reflected upon their enquiries. Foreseeing that men of great riches, and
quality, would ask the most dangerous questions. From these, therefore, he
exacted great rewards, knowing themselves caught in his net. I will repeat to
you some of the Oracles he gave to Rutilianus, who consulting the Oracle what
Tutor he should choose for the education of his son by his first wife, who
was now grown ripe for the Arts, was thus answered; Pythagoras, and he who
Battles sings.


A few days after the child dyed; and he was much troubled to defend himself
to those who accused him of an Oracle so apparently confuted. But Rutilianus
being a religious man, prevented him, and excused the Oracle; Interpreting the
meaning of the God to be, that no living Tutor should be chosen, but Homer, and
Pythagoras, long since dead, with whom his son in hell probably held
conversation: and who now can blame Alexander for cheating such men? Inquiring
another time whose soul he possessed; 'Twas replied: First thou Achilles, then
Menander wast,
Next thy self; shall a Sun-beame be at last;
An hundred fourscore summers once being past.
But he died of Melancholy at threescore and ten, and tarryed not for the
promise of the God; though this were a self Oracle. Another time enquiring
about his marriage, he received this answer: Wed Alexanders daughter borne
of the Moon.
For there went a stale report, that the daughter he had was begotten of the
Moon, who grew enamoured of him, as he lay asleep. A thing usual with her to
love beautiful men in their slumbers. Rutilianus, like a wise man, presently
sent to the wench, and proceeded to a wedding, though he was a Sexagenary
Bridegroom, bedded her, and sacrificed whole Hecatombes to the Moon his
Mother-in-Law. Reckoning himself now among the Gods. Alexander, in the mean
time, having intelligence how the report took in Italy, applied his mind to
greater matters: and dispersed Emissaries through all the Roman Empire; who
scatterd Oracles; forewarning Cities to take heed of Plagues, Combustions, and
Earthquakes: For the eversion whereof he promised infallible remedies. In the
time of Pestilence, the Oracle he sent to all Nations, which was a selfe-one,
was comprehended in this one verse; Phoebus the unshorne infectious clouds
expells.
Which was every where written upon doors, as a charm against the Plague. But
the success was contrary. For it happened that those houses which had the
Inscription were most depopulated: which I bring not into observation, as if
the verse increased the Infection, but so it fell out by chance; and many, it
may be, relying on the Charm, were careless and negligent of their diet,
using no remedies against the Plague, but the Oracle; but thought the Syllables
would protect them, and unshorne Apollo with his dart would dispell the
Contagion. At Rome he had many Spies, who were of the conspiracy, who certified
him of every man's purposes, what doubts, and enquiries they would propose, and
what resolutions they desired: which, before they came, gave him time to
provide Answers. And these were his plots upon the Italians. Lastly, he
instituted certain ceremonies and rites, especially the carriage of Tapers in
solemn procession for three days successively. The first day, in Imitation of
the Athenians, was made this proclamation; If any Atheist, or Christian or
Epicurean, become as a Spy to these solemnities, let him depart: But let such
as reverence the Gods be initiated in our mysteries: whereupon division was
presently made; And Alexander in front cried out, away with the Christians, and
the whole multitude in a loud Acclamation ecchoing him, cried, Away with the
Epicureans. Then was Acted Latona's Delivery, and Apollo's Birth; then his
marriage with Coronis, and the birth of Aesculapius. The second day was Acted
Glycons Epiphany, and Birth. The third day Podalirius marriage with Alexander's
mother; whose name was Dadis; and the Tapers were then lighted; the whole
Solemnity ended with the Moone's and Alexander's love, and the nativity of
Rutilianus Bride. In which Alexander's part was to hold a Torch, and, like
another Endymion, to personate himself asleep; Then from the roof, as from
her orb, descended to him one Rutilia, representing the Moon; A beautiful
woman, and wife to a great Officer about Caesar, who courted Alexander, and was
courted by him again; openly, and before her besotted husband's eyes
exchanging kisses, and embraces; and had the Tapers been away had perchance
acted out the whole part. After this, putting on his properties of a Priest, in
deep silence he entered, and then sang in a loud voice, lo Glycon. To which
many Paphlagonians, well throated, who followed him, in high shoes, and stunk
of Garlic, replied, lo Alexander. Many times, as he danced in Procession, his
Cassock of purple flew open, and revealed a golden thigh; covered, I believe,
with some gilt skin, which glittered against the Torches: which raised a
great dispute between two foolishly wise, whether he were informed by
Pythagoras soul, since he had a golden thigh, or by a soul like his. The
doubt was brought to Alexander, and was thus decided by Prince Glycon;
Pythagoras soul felt often Transmigration;
But my Priests soul had sacred generation,
Dropped by my father for men's preservation.


Again: Souls, from Jove's lightning cast, return to Jove.


He used to forbid the unnatural use of Boys as a heinous sin; though his
prohibition were attended with this plot. He commanded the Cities of Pontus,
and Paphlagonia, every third year to dedicate so many of their sons to his
God, to sing his praises; and those to be approved and selected by him, of
noble birth, delicate age, and beautiful feature. Which he keeping in a kind
of Seraglio, like so many bought Captives, variously abused, and prostituted to
his lust. He made a Law, also, that none above the age of eighteen, should
touch his mouth, or salute him with a kiss. To such, therefore, he only
vouchsafed his hand, reserving his lips only for those who were handsome: who
from thence were called the admitted within the kiss. In this manner he
cousen'd simple people, corrupted their wives, and prostituted their children:
who accounted it a great matter, and much to be wished, if he would cast a
glance upon their wives. But if he would vouchsafe them a kiss, they thought
deluges of good fortune would flow into their houses. Some there were who
bragged they had conceived by him, which was confirmed by the testimony of
their husbands. I will report to you a Dialogue which past between Glycon, and
a Tyanean Priest, whose wisdom you may perceive by his Questions. I read it in
golden letters in the Priests house at Tion. Tell me, said he, Prince Glycon,
who art thou? I am, answered he, the lesser Aesculapius. Distinguished from the
former? Speak It Is not lawful for thee to know. How many years will thou
stay among us, and give Oracles? A thousand and three. Whither will thou go
then? To Bactra, and the Regions about it. For it is fit the Barbarians should
should enjoy my presence. Have the Divinations at Didymae, Clare and Delphos,
Apollo for their Author, or are they false, counterfeit Oracles? It Is not
lawful for thee to know. What shall I be after this life? First a Camel, then
a Horse, then a wise man, and a Prophet equal to Alexander. This was the
Dialogue between Glycon and the Priest: whom at last, knowing him to be a
friend to Lepidus, he sent away with this Oracle wrapped up in this verse,
Believe not Lepidus, his fates are dire.
For (as I said before) he much feared Epicurus, as an Anti-plotter, and
Anti-juggler to his cheats. A certain Epicurean, therefore, not a little
endangered himself for confuting him in a public Assembly: where setting
upon him in a loud voice, he said, Thou Alexander did persuade a Paphlagonian
to accuse his servants before the Prefect of Galatia, for the suspected murder
of his son, who went to school at Alexandria; yet the young man lives, and is
safely come home, but the servants are executed, and by this means have bin
cast to wild beasts. The occasion was this. The youth, sailing a good way up
into Egypt against stream, was persuaded from thence to sail on to India.
After a long stay, his unfortunate servants supposing him either drowned in the
Nile, or slain by thieves, (of which there was then store) returned home, and
reported he was lost; whereupon the Oracle was consulted, and they condemned:
presently after returned the youth, and reported his voyage. He had scarce done
speaking, but Alexander, much provoked by his confutation, and unable to hear
truth longer, commanded the multitude to stone him, as they meant to avoid the
wicked name of Atheists, and Epicureans: which they presently attempted. But
one Demostratus, who sojourned in Pontus, interposed himself, and rescued him
from Lapidation; who had else bin deservedly slain: for why would he offer to
be the only discreet man among so many distracted, and expose himself to the
madness of the Paphlagonians? you see what he got by it. Alexanders custom
was, the day before he gave Oracles, to call in order those who had given in
their Inquiries, and a crier standing without the curtain, ask't him if he
were pleased to answer them. And if he gave this reply from within to any man's
name, To the crows with him, none afterward received such a one into their
house, or admitted him, as they say, either to their fire or water. But he was
forced to wander up and down foreign Countries, as an Atheist, a man hated of
the Gods, and an Epicurean, which was the height of infamy. He did one thing
very ridiculous. Having got Epicurus select Sentences, which, you know, is his
best Book, and the Abridgement of his whole Philosophy, he carried them into
the midst of the Market place, and burning them, in stead of the Author, cast
the ashes into the Sea, with this Oracle, The purblind old man's works I doom
to the flame. Not considering of what use, and instruction that book was to
the Readers; and how it quieted, settled, and freed their minds from vain
fears, phantasmes, prodigious apprehensions, empty hopes, and swelling
desires, and planted virtue in their stead; truly clearing, and purging the
soul, not with a Taper, or Brush, or such other trifles, but with right
reason, liberty, and truth. Among his other Pranks, you shall hear now one of
the greatest the Rascal ever played. Having, by Rutilianus procurement, gained
no small reputation in Caesar's Court, in the heat of the German war, when
Marcus was to join battle with the Bohemians, he divulged an Oracle, which
commanded two Lions to be cast alive in Danubius, with many odours, and
perfumes, and magnificent sacrifices. But it is best to repeat the Oracle as
'twas delivered; Into Danubius, when most swollen, and vast,
Let two of Cybel's wood bred Teeme be cast,
With fragrant flowers crowned, which in India grew,
Then Conquest, Peace, and Triumph shall ensue.


All things being performed as the Oracle directed, the Lions swamme over to
the enemies shore; which the barbarous people took for foreign dogs or
wolves, and chased them away with clubbes. But a great defeat, and slaughter
befell us, to the loss of twenty thousand men: presently after, the like
befell us at Aquileia; where we had almost lost the City. He coldly wrested
the Delphicke Oracle, which was delivered to Croesus, to this Accident, and
said, the God did indeed foretell a great victory, but explained not himself
whether it should befall the Romans, or the enemy. When the City of Abonwall
began at length to be so surcharged with the great confluence, and resort of
people, which came to consult the Oracle; that it was not able to supply them
with victuals, he invented a new kind of Oracles; which were called night
Oracles. For taking their Tickets, and sleeping with them, he gave such answers
as he said his God revealed to him in his dream; which, for the most part,
were dark, ambiguous, and confused; especially if the Ticket were exactly
sealed. For then, without the danger of opening, he subscribed any thing by
chance, which was obscure, and agreeable to an Oracle. To these kind of Answers
belonged certain Interpreters; who received no small rewards, from those who
asked their expositions, and farmed their places of Alexander; to whom they
every one paid yearly an Attick Talent. Sometimes, when none came, or were sent
to enquire, he gave voluntary Oracles, to astonish the simple people, of which
this was one; The page, to thee most dear, at home unspyed,
Commits adultery with thy fair cheekt Bride.
It Is but a just revenge of sin with sin,
He Cuckolds thee, who has thy pathick bin.
Drowsy Charms, also, they in secret places,
To make thee stupid to their loose Embraces,
Under thy bed, near to the wall have laid,
Assisted by Calypto, thy wives maid.


What Democritus would not be troubled to have names, and places thus
punctually discribed? And yet would not smile as soon as he knew the plot?

He many times gave answers to barbarous people, though they enquired in their
own language; in Syriack, perchance, or French. But his manner was, when he
could not easily find one of that Country, to take the Ticket, and to keep it,
till he met with an Interpretter; which made a long space sometimes betvveene
the Inquiry, and Answer; A Scythian once received this Oracle; Morphi
Ebargulis, into the shade,
Chnenchichranc, his light shall fade.
Another time, when no body appeared, or was present, he gave this answer in
Prose; Return, he that sent thee is this day slain by his neighbor Diocles,
assisted by three thieves, Mangus, Celer, and Bubulus, who are caught, and
fettered. Now hear some of the Oracles which were given to me. One of my
questions was, (which I sealed openly and exactly) whether Alexander were
bald. To which this night answer was subscribed; Sabar, Dalachi, Malach, he
was another Attis. Another of my Questions was, (which I vvrote in several
Tickets) and sent under several names, where Homer was borne. In one paper,
deceived by my Boy, who, being asked for what he came, told him, he came for a
cure of the pain in his side, he vvrote; Take Bears grease, mingled with
Latona's Dew.
In another paper, being told by the Messenger, he came to enquire whether I
were best go into Italy by land or sea; He gave this answer, nothing at all
to Homer, Return borne by thy feet, not by thy sails.
Many such tricks I put upon him, enclosing sometimes the same enquiry in eight
several notes; to which I feined as many names, and sent them by eight
several messengers, with as many groates, and what more was to be paid: he
persuaded by his gain, and the Inscription of the notes, to this one Question,
in which I ask't when Alexander the Impostor should be discovered, gave eight
several answers, as far distant as heaven and earth, senseless withal, and
hard to be understood: which coming afterward to his knowledge, and because I
formerly dissuaded Rutilianus from marriage, and from giving any credit to his
Oracles, he hated me, as he had reason, and accounted me his mortal enemy.
Upon a time, therefore, Rutilianus enquired of the Oracle something concerning
me, and was thus answered; He spends his night with whores, in obscure stews.


And, to say truth, he deservedly hated me. Afterward, having intelligence of
my coming to the City, and that I was Lucian (now I brought two Soldiers in
my company, one armed with a Lance, the other with a Halberd, lent me by the
Governor of Cappadocia, my especial friend, for my sa^e conduct to the Sea)
He with much civility, sent for me: when I came, I found many with him, and by
good fortune brought my Soldiers with me. He, as his manner was, reached me
out his hand to kiss; which I respectfully taking, and offering to kiss, gave
it such a bite, as almost maimed him. The standers by presently attempted to
beat, and choke me, as an irreligious person; having before taken it very ill
that I did salute him by the name of Alexander, not of a Prophet. But he very
generously interposing himself, appeased them, and promised by the help and
power of his God to heal my distraction, who, said he, is able to assuage, and
win those who are most tempestuous against him. Then putting them all out of
the room, he began to expostulate with me, telling me he knew what counsel
I had given to Rutilianus; and asking me how he had deserved such carriages
from me, seeing it was in his power to contrive great matters for me? I was
much overcome with his friendly behavior; considering in what danger I was;
And after some small stay went out with him reconciled. The sudden alteration
struck deep astonishment into the beholders. Not long after, I resolved to
take ship; and being alone with Zenophon, and having sent my father, and my
other company before to Amastris, he sent me great gifts, and presents, and
offered to provide me a ship, and mariners to row me, which I accepted as
proceeding from a clear, and honest intention. But when we came into the
middle of the Sea, I saw the Pilot weep, and earnestly contest with the
Sailors; which were no very good presages of my safety. The truth is, they were
hired by Alexander to throw us over board: which had they done, he had amply
revenged himself upon me. But he that wept prevailed with them not to execute
their design; who in these words addressed himself to me, I have lived, as you
see, to the age of threescore years, a religious, innocent life; and will not
now at this great age, having wife and children, defile my hands with murder.
Intimating for what purpose he took us into the ship, and what plot Alexander
had laid. Having set us ashore at Aegiali, made so famous by Homer, he sailed
back again. Not long after sailed by the Bosphoran Ambassadors, sent by
their King Eupater with the Tribute money which was yearly paid into Bithynia;
To whom after I had told our danger, and escape, they courteously took us into
their ship, and transported us safe to Amastris. So near my death was I. From
that time I took Arms against him, and raised all my forces to revenge my
self; who before this Treachery hated him, and accounted him my enemy for the
wickedness of his life, and manners. Nor had I failed to question him, and
joined with others in his accusation, especially with the Scholars of
Timocrates the Her^clean Philosopher, had not the Governor of Bithynia, and
Pontus, with much intercession, and entreaty dissvvaded us, who out of his
respect to Rutilianus professed he could not punish him, though his Impostures
were never so plainly prooved: vvhereupon I suppressed, and suffered my revenge
to cool, dispairing of my success before a Judge so partial. Of whom, to
his other bold attempts, Alexander adventured to ask leave, that Abonwall
might change its name, and be called Ionople; and obtained power also to coin
money, stamped with the Image of Glycon, on the one side, and of Alexander on
the other, holding the Badge of his Grandfather Aesculapius, and Perseus
sickle, from whom he derived himself by the mother. At last he published this
Oracle concerning himself; That 'twas decreed by the Fates that he should live
an hundred and fifty years, and that then he should dye miserably struck with
lightning. But he dyed under seventy of a Gangrene, (as it became Podalirius
son) which did eat from his foot to his thigh; and almost devoured by
worms. At which time he was discovered to be bald, by permitting his head
to be bathed by Physicians, for the headache: which they could not do, and
not pluck off his Perivvigge. Thus ended the Tragedy of Alexander, and this
was the Catastrophe of the whole play. Through which there seemed to run a
Thread of Providence, but all was casualty, and chance. That which follovved
was an Epitaph upon him, expressing the worthiness of his Actions, and Life,
and a contention among his principal Camerades, and fellovv Cheaters, who
referred themselves to Rutilianus which should be preferred, and chosen to
succeed in the Oracle, and wear the Propheticke Crown, and Robe. In which
number was one Paetus of that City, by profession a Physician; who by such a
competition disgraced both his profession and white hairs. But Rutilianus,
the Master of the Game, dismissed them all without Gyrlands, and reserved the
Propheticke place for himself, after his departure thence. These few things,
of many, my Celsus, have I written both to give you a taste of the man, and to
gratify you, who are my acquaintance, and friend, and whom I hold in special
regard, for your Wisdom, Love to Truth, Sweetness, and moderation of
Carriage, serenity of Behavior, and Affability toward those with whom you
Converse. As also (a thing much in your wishes) to vindicate Epicurus; a man of
a divine and inspired wit, who alone knew truth, and honesty, and delivered it,
and infused liberty into all those who tasted his Conversation. Lastly, I doubt
not but this piece of my writings will be of this use to the Readers, that
'twill confute, and clear false opinions, and confirm those who are already
rightly informed in true.

Toxaris,

Toxaris, or a Discourse of Friendship.
The Speakers Mnesippus a Greek, Toxaris a Scythian. Mnesipp. WHat say you,
Toxaris? do you Scythians Sacrifice to Orestes, and Pylades, and take them for
Gods?


Toxaris. We Sacrifice to them, Mnesippus, but hold them not Gods, but good men.


Mnesipp. Have you a Custom, then, to Sacrifice to good men departed as to
Gods?


Toxaris. That Is not all; we honor them with Festivals, and solemn assemblies
too.


Mnesipp. Upon what design? your oblations cannot draw good influences from
them being dead.


Toxaris. 'Twere not amiss, if the dead were propitious to us. But we think
we much advantage the living by our Commemoration of excellent men; and do
therefore honor them dead; out of our persuasion that many of us will thereby
be wrought into their example.


Mnesipp. You do well. But why do you so much admire Pylades and Orestes, and
equal them to the Gods, being but strangers to you, or, which is more,
enemies? For being cast ashore by shipwreck, and apprehended by the Scythians
of those times, to be Sacrificed to Diana, they assailed their Keepers, forced
the prison, slew the King, surprised the Priest, ravished away your Goddess,
and sailed away with her, to the contempt and scorn of your public Scythian
Laws. If for this you adore them, 'twill be easy for you to draw many into
their Imitation. With reflection, therefore, upon this ancient passage,
consider whether it would be safe for you that more Orestes's and Pylades's
should land in Scythia. For methinkes you would thereby in short time become
irreligious, and Atheists; should your Gods, which remain, in like manner be
transported from your Country: and should you in their stead Deifie those who
came to transport them; and reward their sacrilege with oblations. Or, if for
this you worship not Pylades and Orestes, but for some other good conferred upon
you, why, holding them not anciently for Gods, do you now give them divine
honors, as if they were? and why do you sacrifice to them, who themselves had
like to have been made sacrifices? This to me seems ridiculous, and contrary
to your former practice.


Toxaris. These, which you have repeated, were their generous exployts,
Mnesippus. Who being but two durst put themselves upon such a bold attempt, as
being so far distant from home, to sail the Pontus, a sea not tried before
by any Graecians, but those who made the expedition into Colchos in the Argo;
neither daunted, nor affrighted with the fables which go of it, or with those
names which call it Inhospitable, from the savagenesse, I believe, of those
rude nations which inhabit the Coasts. And when they were apprehended, to take
courage from their misfortune, and not to think a bare escape enough, but to
revenge their wrongs upon the King, and to sail away with our Diana, how can
such valiant Achievements but raise Admiration, and deserve divine honor from
all men who have any taste of virtue? Though we hold not Orestes and Pylades
for Demigods, and worthyes from those reflections.


Mnesipp. Say, then, what other brave or divine enterprise was wrought by them.
For as for their navigation and travels, I can show you many Merchants much
diviner then they. For instance, the Phoeincians, who sail not only into
Pontus, Maeotis, and the Bosphorus, but measure all seas, both Grecian, and
Barbarous, and making, as I may so say, and yearly search after all Coasts, and
shoares, return home late in Autumn. Whom for the same reason you may style
Gods, though perhaps they be but Hucksters and Fish-mongers.


Toxaris. Hear, then, admired Sir, and consider how much our opinion of good
men, who are Barbarians, is nobler then yours. For no famous monument of
Orestes and Pylades is to be seen at Argos, or Mycenae. But we can show a
Temple equally, as 'twas fit, built to both, as they were friends; where
sacrifices are offered, and other rites of honor are performed. Nor do we
think them good men the less, because they were forrainers, and not
Scythians; nor do we examine, so they be virtuous, and honest, from whence
they are, nor repine at great Actions, though wrought by men not our friends:
But rather applauding their adventures, entitled them to our selves by their
deeds. But that which in those men we do with most admiration extol is,
that they appeared to us a pair of unequalled friends; and made their example
a Law to others, How, with their friendship, to partake in all fortunes too,
and thereby gain the veneration of the best Scythians. Whatsoever, therefore,
they mutually suffered for, or with one another, our Ancestors engraven in a
pillar of Brass, which they erected in Oreste's Temple, and made a Law that
their childrens first lesson and piece of education should be to remember what
was there carved. So that it is easier for them to forget the name of their
father, then be ignorant of the deeds of Orestes and Pylades. In the porch of
the Temple, also, is to be seen shadowed in Antique Imagery all that is
written on the pillar. Orestes sailing with his friend, then their ship broken,
and wrack't against steep rocks; then he apprehended, and dressed for
Immolation, and both consecrated by Iphigenia. On the opposite wall he is
drawn freed from his shackles, slaying Thoas, and many other Scythians; Then
hoysing sails, and conveying away Iphigenia, and our Goddess. Then the
Scythians vainly striving to stop the floating Bark, by laying hold on the
Stern, and laboring to get aboard. Lastly, Failing in their attempt, some
wounded, others for fear returning to the shore. But the most remarkable
passage is the mutual friendship they showed in their Skirmish with the
Scythians. For the Painter has limbed them both severally careless of his
own assaylers, and solicitous only to encounter those who beset the other, and
to divert his darts; not at all weighing his own slaughter, so he might save
his friend; and interposing his own body to receive those strokes which were
directed to the others. This their mutual assistance, and communion in
misfortunes, Their fidelity in friendship, ruth and constancy of affections,
appeared to us no mortal virtues, but endowments of a mind advanced above the
vulgar: who in prosperous times will take resentment at their friends, if they
share not in their successes; But let the wind blow a little adversly, they fly
away and leave them solitary in their dangers. For you must know, that the
Scythians prize nothing so much as friendship, nor will a true Scythian think
any thing so glorious as to succor his friend, and partake in his distresses:
And therefore among us no infamy is so great, as to be held a Traitor in
Friendship. The reason, then, why we honor Orestes, and Pylades, is, because
they excelled in Scythian virtues, and were approved in friendship, a thing
most in our admiration. From these proceedings of theirs we have given them a
name, and called them Coraci; which in our Language is as much as to say, the
Gods of friendship.


Mnesipp. Believe me, Toxaris, you Scythians are not only good Archers, and
better warriers then others, but the best perswaders, and Orators too. For
though I once thought otherwise, yet now, methinkes, it is but justice that you
have placed Orestes and Pylades among the Gods. This only I knew not, that you
were a good painter too. Trust me, you have most livingly described the pieces
in Orestes Temple, as also their Encounters, and wounds received for one
another. But I thought friendship had not been so sacred among the Scythians;
but that being a people barbarous and wild, they had nourisht mutual strifes,
quarrels, and disagreements, and had not held friendship with their nearest
Alliances and Domestics; Being led to this opinion by that report, which among
others I have heard, that they eat their departed Ancestors.


Toxaris. Whether, as in other things, so in the reverence of our Ancestors we
be more religious, and pious then you Greeks, for the present I dispute not.
But that Scythian friends are much faithfuller, then Grecians, and that
friendship is more regarded among us then you, I shall easily make appear. By
the Gods of Greece, therefore, I desire you not to hear me impatiently,
whilst I recount what I observed during the large time of my conversation here.
You, indeed, seem abler then others to talk of friendship; but, contrary to
your high discourses, do so neglect the works of it, that you hold it
sufficient to praise it, and to show what an ample virtue it is. But when you
should come to use it, you fall from your words, and taking wing, I know not
how, shift your selves from the practice. And when you see such rare
friendships presented on the stage in a Tragedy, you applaud, and clap hands;
and when you see them mutually engaged in one another dangers, many of you
shed tears: yet you your selves attempt nothing praise worthy for your friend.
But if he chance to be distressed, presently, like dreams, all the Tragedy you
saw flies away and vanishes; and leaves you like those hollow, and dumb
vizards, which broadly distend their mouth, and gape widely, but speak not the
least word: whereas we, by how much we come short in our discourses of
Friendship, by so much we excel you in the practice. If you like the motion,
therefore, let us pass over those ancient friends which lived heretofore, and
which either you, or we are able to muster up: because herein you overcome us,
being fortified by many authenticke authorities, especially Poets, who have
sung the friendship of Achilles, and Patroclus, Theseus and Perithous, and
others in most excellent Poem and verse. And let us select, and produce some
few among our selves, and report the deeds, I of Scythians, you of Greeks. And
let him that overcomes, and produces the best examples in friendship, be
Conqueror, and divulge his conquest, as having vanquished in a most glorious
combat. For my part, if I be worsted in the Duel, I had much rather have my
right hand cut off (the punishment among us of the vanquished) then be thought
inferior to any Grecian in Friendship, being my self a Scythian.


Mnesipp. It Is no small enterprise, Toxaris, to enter the Lists with such a
Warrior as you are, so well appointed with darts and arrows of Language, yet
will I not ingloriously upon the first encounter betray my Country* and yield
to you. For 'twere most absurd that two should overcome such Troops of
Scythians, as the Histories and ancient pictures which you just now so exactly
described, testify; and that so many Greek Nations, and Cities, should
without defense be vanquished by you single; which should I permit, 'twere fit,
that not only my right hand, as your custom is, but my tongue should be cut
out. But by what account shall we proceed; by the number of adventures in
Friendship, or shall he that can give most instances of Friends be held the
Conqueror.


Toxaris. By no means: victory ought not to be reckoned here by multitude. But
if your examples appear more excellent, and piercing then mine, though their
number be equal, they will with more advantage wound me, and I shall
willingly mee^e your strokes.


Mnesipp. You say well: let us agree then upon the number.


Toxaris, I think five for each sufficient.


Mnesipp. So do I. Begin then; but swear first to speak nothing but Truths.
Otherwise, 'twill not be hard for you to coin such examples as are not capable
of disproofe, but being sworn 'twere irreligious to distrust you.


Toxaris. Let us both take an oath, then, if you think fit.


Mnesipp. By which of our Gods shall I swear? do you like Jupiter Philius?


Toxaris. I do: and will swear in my language by another of my Country Gods.


Mnesipp. Be Jupiter, the Protector of Friends witness, then, that what I
shall now report to you, either I have my self seen, or, upon the most exact
information to me possible, I have received from others, and that I will feign
nothing of my self. First, I will relate the Friendship of Agathocles, and
Dinias, famous among the Ionians. This Agathocles, by birth a Samian, lived not
long since. A man unequalled in friendship, as he gave good Testimony, though
in other things, as Pedigree, and greatness of fortune, he nothing differed
from the other vulgar Samians. He was from his childhood friend to Dinias, the
Ephesian, the son of Lysio. This Dinias was left exceeding rich. And as it
falls out with men newly come to greatestates, had many acquaintances about him
fit to associate him in Potations and Drinkings, and conversations of Pleasure;
but were mere strangers to Friendship. Among those was Agathocles, who converst
and drunk with them, not pleased with the course. Nor did Dinias value him
more then his other flatterers. But at length became offended with his frequent
reprehensions, and held him troublesome, for remembering him of his Ancestors,
and counselling to keep what his father, with much industry possessed, and left
him. So that he no longer admitted him to their Revellings, but continued his
disorders privately with them; though with some concealment from Agathocles. It
happened that the unfortunate man was perswad^d by his flatterers that he was
beloved of Chariclea, the wife of Demonax, a man of great Quality and Office,
among the Ephesians; letters, also, were brought to him from the woman, and
chaplets half withered, and apples just tasted, and whatsoever Bawdes usually
project for the enticement of young men, when they would insinuate affection
into them, and inflame them with an opinion that they are first beloved. For
such Arts prevail much* especially with such as think themselves handsome,
till unawares they fall into the net. This Chariclea was a Courtly woman, but
extraordinarily a whore; always his, who approach't her upon the least suite.
If any man but glanced at her, she presently returned a consent; so little
fear was there of her denyals. But withal, she was more artificially cunning
then all other whores, to allure her servant^, and to keep him doubtful, till
she had wholly vanquished him. And when he was once caught, to whet him on, and
inflame him sometimes with quarrels, sometimes with enticements, soon after
with disdain, and jealousy, of her inclination to another. In a word, she was
every way expert, and practiced in the arts how to deal with her Lovers. Her,
then, Dinias flatterers projected for the youth, and laid many trains to
kindle his love toward Chariclea. She, who had already been the ruin of many
such* and had acted innumerable affections, and like a changeable, and
exercised mischief, had subverted many families, having got into her hands a
youth, simple, and unexperienced in such stratagems, suffered him not to escape
her clutches, but inclining, and ensnaring him on all sides, when she had
wholly caught him, she herself seemed taken in the snare, and became to
miserable Dinias the original of numberless mischiefs. For, first, she sent
him letters, which were frequently seconded by her maid, who told him how her
Mistress wept, and broke her sleeps; Lastly, how she, wretched woman, meant to
strangle her self for Love. Till he became persuaded that he was most happy,
amiable, and beyond measure affected by the Ephesian wives. At length, with
much entreaty, he gave her a meeting, and from that time you may guess how
easily he was to be caught by a woman beautiful, of a pleasant behavior,
skilled to weep when she list, and to mingle compassionate sighs with
discourses, to twine about him at his departures, and to meet his approaches;
to adorn herself in Dresses of most enticement, and sometimes to sing, and
play on her Lute; All which arts she employed upon Dinias. But when she
perceived him once perplexed, and sufficiently steept, and melted in Love, that
she might utterly ruin the wretch, she contrived this plot: she fained her
self with child by him, (a sure device the more to inflame a besotted Lover)
and forbore farther visits, out of a pretense that she was observed by her
husband* who had some Jealousies of their Love. He unable to bear the
separation, and impatient when he savv her not, wept, and assembled his
flatterers, and dolefully invok't Charcilea's name, and embracing her statue
made of Alablaster, made pitiful lamentation. At last, he cast himself
down, and rould himself upon the floor, and fell into a perfect distraction.
Hereupon gifts were sent to her, not in value like her Apples, or Chaplets,
but entire houses, farms, servants, embroidered garments, and gold as much as
she desired. What shall I say more? In short time Lysios family, the most
renowned among the Ionians, was waste and spent. She having thus drawn
him dry, forsook him, and laid her engines for a certain rich Cretan young
Gentleman, to whom she revolted and made Love, which he believed. Dinias thus
neglected not only of Chariclea, but of his flatterers, who also applied
themselves to the Cretan Lover, addressed himself to Agathocles; who all the
while was a spectator of the miscarriage of his affairs. After some
expressions of shame, he told him the passages of his Love, wants, the woman's
disdain, and his Cretan Rival; and in brief, how he could not live without
Chariclea's conversation. He, holding it at that time unseasonable to
expostulate with Dinias, why of all his friends he excluded him, and preferred
his flatterers before him, ^old the only house he had, left him in Samos by
his father, for three Talents, and brought him the price: which he no sooner
received, but he left off to be obscure to Chariclea, and became once more
amiable. The maid was again sent with letters, and a complaint for his
strangeness. His flatterers also resorted to him, with much insinuation,
seeing he had yet something to give. Dinias promised to come to her, and came
about the time of the first sleep. But, whither by his voluntary foreknowledge,
or by design with his wife, for both are reported, Demonax, Chariclea's
husband was within: who rising, as it were, from an Ambush, commanded to shut
the doors, and to take Dinias; threatening fire, and whips, and drawing his
sword as against an Adulterer. He seeing in what danger he was, snatched up a
bar which lay near, and slew Demonax with a blow on the head, and next
Chariclea; but not with one blow, but iterated strokes which he gave her,
partly with the bar, lastly with her husbands sword. The servants in the
mean time stood speechless, and astonished at the novelty of the enterprise.
But endeavoring at length to apprehend him, he no sooner made resistance with
the sword but they all fled. Dinias, after his great achievement, conveyed
himself privately away, and lodged till morning with Agathocles, where they
discoursed what had happened; and considered what might be the issue. 'Twas no
sooner day but soldiers beset the house, (for the fact was by this time
divulged) and took Dinias; whom, not at all denying the murders, they brought
before the then Governor of Asia; who sent him to the great King, who not long
after doomed him to Gyarus, one of the Cyclad Islands, there to remain banished
during his life. Agathocles, who had assisted at his other misfortunes, sailed
with him also into Italy, and was the only friend that stuck to him at his
arraignment, and failed him in no good office. Nay after Dinias was banished,
he was not forsaken of his friend; who voluntarily sentenced himself,
associated him in the Isle, and shared in his banishment. At length wanting all
necessary sustenance, and supplies, he hired himself to certain purple dyers,
to dive for them, and nourisht Dinias with his gains; and attended him also in
a lingering sickness; and after his death he refused to return into his own
Country, but tarried still in the Isle; holding it a reproach to forsake his
friend though dead. These were the Acts of a Grecian friend, not of any
ancient performance; For I know not well whether it be more then five years
since Agathocles dyed in the Island.


Toxaris. I could wish Mnesippus, you had told this story unsworne, that I
might not have believed it. For in Agathocles you have deciphered a Scythian
friend, I fear you have not such another example.


Mnesipp. Hear, therefore, another, Toxaris; And it shall be Euthydicus of
Chalcis; whose story was told me by Simylus, a Pilot of Megara, who swore he
was witness to the whole passage. He said, he sailed from Italy toward
Athens, about the setting of the Pleiades, and transported a mixed Company of
Passengers. Among whom was Euthydicus, and with him Damon of Chalcis, who was
his friend, of equal years; only Euthydicus was the lustier and stronger,
Damon was pale, and feeble, and appeared like one lately recovered from a long
sickness. They sailed, said Simylus as far as Sicily with prosperous winds;
But upon their passage from that Sea into the Ionian, they were surprised with
a great tempest; And not to spin out the Story with the descriptions of the
vast risings, and Billovves, and the other calamities of the storm; when they
were near Zacynthus, sailing with a naked yard, and holding by the Tackling,
the better to receive the fury of the waves, about midnight Damon, distempered
with the tossing, stoopt down to vomit into the sea, and the ship, as I
guess, at that time shelving much on that side where he stood, and driven by
the storm, he fell headlong into the sea, not naked, which might have
advantaged the unfortunate man in svvimming. Being almost stifled, he cried
out, and with much labor raised himself above the flood: which Euthydocus no
sooner heard, who by good fortune was then naked on the deck, but he cast
himself into the Sea, and laying hold on Damon then gasping, (for by the
moone-shine we beheld the whole adventure) he svvamme by him, and held him
up. They in the Ship strived to succor them, out of pity to their mutual
distress; but could not, being ravished away by the violence of the wind. All
they could do, was to throw many Corkes, and poles to them, on which if they
could lay hold, they might support themselves; and after all they let down a
Ladder of no small length. Consider, now I pray, what stronger testimony of
affection could any man show to his friend, then by night to cast himself into
a Tempestuous sea, and to partake in his death. Lay, I say, before your
imagination, the swelling of the waves, the horrid murmr of the Billows
rolling together, the foame boiling round about, the night, and despair; then
the one beginning to be choakt, and hardly able to bear himself above water,
or to reach out his hand to his friend, the other presently leaping overboard,
and swimming by him, and fearing lest Damon should perish before him; and you
will perceive that this Euthydicus whom I have reported to you was no
degenerous friend.


Toxaris. Were they both drowned, Mnesippus, or did some unexpected deliverance
befall them? for I have all this while assisted them with my fears.


Mnesipp. Take courage Toxaris, they were both saved, and do now study
Philosophy at Athens. All that Simylus* could report was, what he saw by night,
the one tumbling overboard, the other leaping after him, and both swimming
together, which was all the spectacle he could have of them in the dark. The
rest of the escape is told by Euthydicus himself; As first, that having
lighted on some Corkes, they supported themselves by them, and with much
difficulty kept themselves floating; At last, toward morning, when they saw a
Ladder let down, they swam to it, and ascending the vessel, they safely
sailed on to Zacynthus. Next to these examples, not vulgar, as I suppose, lend
me your Attention to a third, not at all inferior to the other two. Eudamidas,
the Corinthian, held straight friendship with Aretaeus of Corinth, and
Charixenus the Sicyonian: being himself as poor as they were wealthy* At his
death he left a will, in the judgment of others, perhaps, ridiculous, though I
know not whether it will appear so to you, who are a good man, and value
friendship, and therein deserve to be rankt with the foremost. The purpose of
it was this. I bequeath to Aretaeus my mother, to be maintained, and cherisht
in her old age. And to Charixenus my daughter, to be bestowed with as great a
dovvry as he can possibly give with her. Now he had a mother very aged; and a
daughter ripe for marriage. And if, said he, either of them shall die in the
mean time, let the other take his burden. When his will was read, they who
knevv only his poverty, and knevv not what friendship was betvveene
Eudamidas and these two men, made it matter of sport: and there was no man
who departed not smiling at the Legacies bequeathed to rich Aretaeus, and
Charixenus; and saying, that they were to pay Legacies to Eudamidas, and that
the survivers were to give inheritances to the deceast. But the heirs, who
were thus left, came as soon as they heard of the will, and ratified it in
all the particulars. Only Charixenus survived him five days, and dyed.
Whereupon Aretaeus, the generous successor of both, took upon him both his
own, and the others charge: and maintains Eudamidas's Mother, and not long
since matched his daughter; and of the five talents which he was vvorth, he
gave two with his own daughter, and two with his friend's, and caused
their marriages to be celebrated upon the same day. And now Toxaris what
think you of this Aretaeus? Has he not given a noble instance of friendship,
to inherit such Legacies, and not to frustrate his friends will? Is he, think
you, In just account to be reckond among the five?


Toxaris. He is a rare example. Yet I much more admire the confidence of
Eudamidas in his friends: whereby he gave proof that he would have done the
like for them, though charged by no will, and had prevented others, though he
had not been written heir to such Legacyes.


Mnesipp. You say well. The fourth, then, of whom I shall speak is Zenothemis,
the son of Charmoleus, borne at Marcelleis. He was shown to me in Italy,
when I was there Ambassador for my Country. He seemed to be a man of goodly
presence, big, and wealthy. By him in Coach as he traveled sat his wife,
every way deformed, especially lame of her right side, blind of one eye, a
Hagge perfectly loathsome, and not to be approacht. I wondering that one so
proper, and beautiful, should have the patience to wedde a woman so misshapen,
he who showed him to me told me the occasion of his marriage; exactly
knowing all passages, being himself of Marcelleis. Zenothemis, said he, was
friend to Menecrates; this ill-featured woman's father, whom he equaled in
wealth and honor; though he abounded in both. It came to pass that Menecrates
was ruined in his fortune, and made incapable of honor by the sentence of the
six hundred, as one that had given Judgment contrary to Law. For so, said he,
do we of Marcelleis punish those who pronounce corruptly. Menecrates was much
grieved, both for his doom, and that in an instant of a rich man he was made
poor, and of a great man dishonorable. But above all his daughter troubled
him most, now marriageable, being eighteen years old, whom not with all
fortunes which her father before his sentence possessed, any, either rich, or
poor, would vouchsafe to marry, of such affrighting lineaments: was she. She
was said too, to have the fits of the falling evil, at every increase of the
Moon. When Menecrates laid all this open to Zenothemis in one complaint: he
bid him take heart, and told him that he should neither want accommodations,
nor his daughter a husband worthy her descent. And so saying he took him by
the hand, brought him to his house, divided his estate, which was very great,
with him, and made a feast, where he entertained his friends, and among them
Menecrates, as if he had prevailed with one of them to accept the wench in
marriage. The meal being ended, and grace said, delivering to him a full
bowl, Take, said he, Menecrates from thy son in law a pledge of Alliance;
for to day I will marry Cydimache thy daughter: I have formerly received five
and twenty Talents as her dowry. The other replied, the Gods forbid, It must
not be Zenothemis, nor must I be so mad to suffer you, a young man, and
amiable, to be joined to a deformed, opprobrious girl. Thus saying, the other
took his bride, led her into his chamber, and a while after brought her forth
unvirgin'd, and from that time lives most affectionately with her, and carries
her every where, as you see, about with him; And is so far from taking shame
at his match, that he makes it his glory to shovv how much he contemnes the
beauties, or deformities of the body; Riches also, and opinion, and reflects
only on Menecrates, his friend: whom he thinks not the less capable of his
friendship for being sentenced by the six hundred. Though fortune have for
this requited him. For a very fair son has been borne to him of a very
foul mother. It Is not long since his father took him, and carried him into
the Court crowned with a green chaplet, and clad in mourning, the better to
win pity to his Grandfather. The Infant smiled upon the Judges, and clapped
it is hands: whereupon the Court was so taken with him, that they forgave his
Fine, and restored him to his honors, overcome by such an advocate. Thus much
the Marcilean affirmed Zenothemis to have done for his friend: wherein you find
nothing ordinary, or done like you Scythians; who are said to choose only the
most beautiful your Mistresses. I pass on to the fifth. Nor think I it fit to
speak of any other and to omit Demetrius the Sunian. This Demetrius sailed in
company into Egypt with Antiphilus of Alopece; who was his friend of a child;
and with whom he grew up, and was bred to the study of Cynicke Philosophy under
Rhodius the Sophister; Antiphilus to Physic. But at this time Demetrius went
into Egypt to see the Pyramides, and Memnon's Statue. For he had heard that
from their great height they did cast no shadow; and that Memnon at every Sun
rising was vocal. Drawn, therefore, with the desire of those spectacles, in
August he sailed up the Nile, and left Antiphilus tired with travel and heat;
who, in the mean time, fell into a misfortune, which required the assistance of
a generous friend. For one Syrus his servant, so styled from his Country, by
conspiracy with certain sacrilegious thieves, broke into Anubis Temple, and
stole the God, two golden Chalices, a guilt Cad^ceus, diverse dogs heads of
silver, with other things. All which they left to be kept by Syrus. Soon after
being apprehended selling some things, they confessed all upon their first
torture upon the wheel. And being carried to Antiphilus lodging, they produced
the things stolen, secretly under a Couch. Syrus was presently bound, and his
master Antiphilus ravished from his Tutor as he was then at Lecture. No man
assisted him, but they who were but till then his friends, shunned him as a
robber of Anubis Temple, and thought it Impiety either to drink or to eat
with him. His other servants, who were two, rifling all that was in the house
betook themselves to flight. Long time lay miserable Antiphilus in shackles,
of all the malefactors there imprisoned held the greatest. The Jailer, also, an
Egyptian, a man superstitious, thought he pleasured and revenged his God by
being harsh to Antiphilus. If at any time he defended himself, and denied the
Fact, he was held impudent, and became so much the more odious. This drew on a
sickness, and cast him into a disease. And no marvel, lying nightly on the
ground, and not able to extend his legs locked up in the stocks. For by day he
was enclosed in a cage, and but one of his hands manacled, but by night he lay
wholly in fetters. Add to this the stink, and ill air of the house, arising
from so many close prisoners, thrust into a narrow room, and scarce able to
breath; Then the sound of Irons, and broken sleeps, all which were grievous,
and intolerable to one unpractised, and unaccustomed to so hard a kind of
usage. As he thus languisht, and refused to eat any meat, Demetrius returned,
ignorant of what had happened. But as soon as he knew how things stood, he
presently ran to the prison, but was not permitted entrance. It being then
night, and the Jailer having long before locked the door, and gone to sleep,
and commanded his under keepers to watch. In the morning, after much entreaty,
he was let in; and coming near, 'twas long before he could find Antiphilus,
so much disguised was he with his misfortunes. In search of him, therefore,
he viewed every prisoner, like those who seek the withered bodies of their
dead friends after a slaughter. So that had he not aloud revealed himself to
be Antiphilus, the son of Denomenes, he had been long unknown who he was;
so transformed was he by his calamities. But as soon as he answered to his
Friends voice, and, as he came near, strokt aside his hair, which hung foul,
and knotted over his face, and discovered who he was, both fell down amazed at
the strangeness of the spectacle. After a while, both coming to themselves,
Demetrius enquired of him exactly how he fell into that mishap. And bid him
take courage, divided his mantle, and wore one half himself, the other he
gave to him; and stripped him of his own tottered rags. And from that time
giving him his best assistances, he took care of him, and attended him. For
hiring himself out from morning till noone to certain Merchants, who then lay
in the Haven, his gains were not sma^l which he earned by carrying burdens;
and still when he returned from his labor, part of his gains he gave to the
Jailer to mollify and make him gentle, the rest plentifully served to supply
his friend. By day, therefore, he kept Antiphilus company, and comforted him;
and when night came, he reposed himself not far from the prison gate upon a
bed made of grass and boughs. Thus a while they lived; Demetrius had free
accesses, which much mitigated the afflictions of Antiphilus: Till at length,
upon the death of a certain thief in the prison, it seems, poisoned, the
gates were strictlier kept, and no man was any more permitted to enter into the
house, whereat Demetrius much perplexed, and troubled, and having no other way
to relieve his friend, went to the Magistrate, and accused himself for one of
those who broke into Anubis Temple. Upon which confession he was presently
carried to the prison, and brought to Antiphilus; and with much petition
obtained of the Keeper that he might be chained next to him in the same ^ives.
Here, then, was a rare expression of friendship, to despise his own miseries,
and though he were himself sick, yet he took care that the other might sleep
quietly, and undisturbed. Thus lessened they their misfortunes by communion;
Till not long after an Accident happened which did almost put a period to their
sufferings. For one of the prisoners, having, I know not from whence, got a
file, and made most of the other prisoners of the conspiracy, filed asunder a
chain to which they were fastened by a row of shackles, and let them all loose.
They having easily slain their Keepers, being but few, issued forth in
Tumults, and presently dispersed themselves several ways as they safeliest
might, though many of them were afterward taken. Demetrius and Antiphilus
remained, and stayed Syrus, ready to follow the rest. Next morning, the Prefect
of Egypt, knowing what had happened, sent pursuers after them; and sending for
those who were with Demetrius releast them of their shackles; much praising
them that they only refused to make an escape. They were not at all pleased
with their manner of dismission Demetrius, therefore, proclaimed both himself
and friend much injured, if being taken for malefactors, they should be thought
worthy of pity, or praise, or releasement, because they did not break prison.
To conclude, therefore, they compelld the Judge more exactly to reexamini the
business; who finding them innocent, with great praises of both, and admiration
of Demetrius acquitted them. And as a recompense for the punishment, and
shackles, which they unjustly suffered, he gave them large gifts; ten thousand
drachmes to Antiphilus, and twice so many to Demetrius. Antiphilus is now in
Egypt. But Demetrius bestowing his twenty thousand Drachmes on his friend,
went into India to the Brachmans; saying only thus much to Antiphilus at his
departure, that he hoped he was excusable if he then left him; and that he
needed not money as long as he was of a composition to be content with a little;
nor that he any farther wanted a friend, whose affairs were so well
accomplished. These were Grecian Friends, Toxaris. And here, had you not in
the beginning noted us for high talkers, I could repeat to you the many
excellent Orations spoken by Demetrius at his Arraignment, where he made no
defense for himself; but spent tears and supplications for Antiphilus; and
took the whole offense upon himself, till Syrus urged by scourging acquitted
both. These few examples of many famous, and constant friends, as they first
offered themselves to my remembrance, have I reported to you. It Is now time
that finishing my Narration, you should begin yours, whom it will concern to
produce Scythians not of inferior, but of much more eminent example, if you
intend your right hand shall not be cut off. Be constant to your self
therefore; For 'twill show most ridiculous in you, having, so like a Sophister,
extolled Orestes and Pylades, to show your self a bad Orator for your Country.


Toxaris. You do well, Mnesippus, to invite me to speak, and not to show your
self afraid, that vanquished by my narrations, your tongue shall be cut out. I
begin, then, not like you, with Trappings of speech, (a thing unusual to
Scythians) since the realities of my stories shall be more eloquent then the
Historian. Nor are you to expect from me stories like yours, who have magnified
a man for wedding a deformed woman, without a portion; Another for giving two
Talents in Marriage with his friends daughter; a third for casting himself
voluntarily into shackles; knowing he was shortly after to be releast. All
which are slight passages, and have nothing high, or manly in them. I will
recount to you slaughters, wars, and deaths undergone for Friends; whereby
you shall perceive how childish your undertakings are compared to ours. Yet it
is not without cause that you admire your own small adventures, since living in
a firm, established peace, you want those Heroic opportunities, by which
friendships are to be tried. As you cannot judge in a calm of the Abilities of
a Pilot, which are best discovered in a storm. Whereas we have continual
wars, and do either invade others, or are invaded our selves; or joining
battle do fight for pastures, or prey. Hence stand we most in need of good
friends, whose Arms become unconquered, and impregnable from the strictness
of our friendships. First, then, let me tell you, that the Ceremonies by which
we initiate friends, are not, like yours, performed in Bowls, and Potations;
or with our equals, or neighbors: but when we see a man valiant, and able for
great Actions, we all presently affect him; and the same course which you take
to win your wives, do we take to beget friends. We court them much, and omit no
application, which may defeat us of their friendship, or render us despised.
And when choice is made of a friend, articles are next entered into, and a
solemn oath taken, that they shall mutually live, and, if need be, die, for
one another. Next, having opened a vein in our hand, we receive the blood in a
cup, in which we dippe the points of our swords; then both drink, nor can any
thing afterward divide us. These leagues at most consist of three: we account
of him who is a friend to more, as we do of common adulterate wives, and never
think his a firm lasting friendship, which is divided among many. I will
begin, then, with the late Deeds of Dandamis. This Dandamis seeing his friend
Amizocas taken prisoner in a skirmish with the Sarmatians -- But first I will
take my oath as we agreed in the beginning. By this Air, and Sagar, I will
report no untruths, Mnesippus, of our Scythian friendships.


Mnesipp: I might very well spare your oath, Toxaris, if you swear by none of
the Gods.


Toxaris, Why? Do not you take the Wind, and Sagar for Gods? or know you not
that to Mortals nothing is greater then life and death? we swear by those
two as often as we swear by the Wind the cause of Life, and a Sagar the cause
of Death.


Mnesipp: If this be a good reason, you may have many such Gods as your Sagar;
as a Dart, Spear, and Poison, and a Rope; for death is a various and numerous
Deity; and is by endless ways attained.


Toxaris. See what a caviller, and wrangler you are, thus to trouble, and
divert my discourse, who all the while you spoke kept silence.


Mnesipp: You deservedly chide me, Toxaris. Hereafter, therefore, I will not
interrupt you. Proceed, therefore, in your story; you shall have me as silent,
as if I were absent, to your Relations.


Toxaris. The fourth day, then, after Dandamis, and Amizocas had joined
friendship, and confirmed it with a mutual draught of blood, the Sarmatians
entered our Country with ten thousand Horse, and thirty thousand foot. We,
surprised with their invasion, were put into a distraction: some, who made
resistance they slew; some they led away alive; none escaped, but such as
svvam cross the River, where lay half our Army, and a great part of our
wagon. For our Commanders, I know not for what design had at that time
lodged their Troops on both sides of Tanais. They, therefore, easily made
their prey, led away captive, ransackt our Tents, took our Chariots with the
men, and ravished our wives, and concubines before our eyes. The accident much
troubled us. But Amizocas, as he was led captive, and manacled, loudly invok't
his friend, and remembered him of the cup, and blood. Which Dandamis no sooner
heard, but without delay in the sight of all he svvumme over to the enemies,
who cast shovvres of darts at him; and had with one assault thrust him
through had he not cried out Zizis: At the pronuntiation of which word they
slay no man, but receive him, as yielding himself to be ransomed. Being
brought to their General, he demanded his friend, and he demanded his ransom,
and refused to give him liberty but at an excessive price. Then said Dandamis,
all my possessions and fortunes you have taken from me. If naked, as I am, I
can make you satisfaction, I am ready. Make your demands. Take me, if you
please in exchange, and abuse me as you list. 'Twere needless, replied the
Sarmatian, to keep thee who did voluntarily yield thy self. Give something
which thou now possessest in ransom of thy friend, and take him. Dandamis bid
him ask what he would. He required his eyes; which the other presently
submitted to be plucked out. Which being done, and the Sarmatians allowing it
for a ransom, he returned, leaning on his friend, and swimming with him back
again safely arrived at us. This Action struck spirit into the Scythians, who
now thought themselves not vanquished, since the thing by us most valued was not
conquered by the enemy; but that our courage, and Constancy to our friends, was
still unsubdued. The Sarmatians, on the contrary, were much terrified, when
they considered what men they were to encounter upon preparation; though they
then overcame them by surprise. 'Twas therefore, no sooner night, but leaving
most of their spoils behind them, and burning our Chariots, they betook
themselves to flight. Amizocas in the mean time, disdaining the use of his
eyes, after his friend had lost his, made himself blind. And now sightlesse,
as they are, they are observed, and kept with all honor at the public charge
of the Scythians. I doubt, Mnesippus, whether you could equal this example,
though I should allow you to join ten more to your five; or if unsworne you
should have liberty to use what fictions you list. I have delivered nothing but
naked story, which in your narration had, I know right well, been painted with
all variety of circumstances; How affectionate Dandamis entreaties were; how
gladly he lost his eyes; what he said, how he returned, and with what
acclamations he was received; with other passages, wherewith you artificially
work on your hearers. Hear, next* the story of Belitta, Cousin German to
Amizocas, equal to the former. He beholding Basthes his friend, at a hunting,
plucked from his horse by a Lion, who enfolding him in his paws, began to
tear his throat, alighting from his horse leapt upon the Lions back, forcibly
rayned back his head upon himself, spurred, and provoked him, thrust his
fingers into his mouth; and labored with all his strength to free Basthes from
his Jaws, till the Lion leaving him half dead turned upon Belitta; and
griping him in his paws killed him, who dying, had only the power to thrust
his sword into the Lions paunch, and so all three expired. Whom we have buried,
and erected two neighboring monuments, one to the two friends, the other just
opposite to the Lion. My third relation shall be of the friendship of Macentes,
Lonchatas, and Arsacomas. This Arsacomas became enamoured of Mazaea, daughter
of Leucanor, who reigned in Bosphorus, at that time when he was sent
Ambassador thither to demand the Tribute, which the Bosphorans are obliged to
pay us; but were then behind three months beyond their accustomed day. For
having sight of Mazaea at a feast, a goodly, and amiable Lady, he was enflamed,
and much struck with her. The business of the tribute was now transacted, and
the King having given him his answer, and entertained him at a banquet, was
ready to give him his dispatch. It Is the custom in Bosphorus that suitors woo
openly at Table, where they declare their Quality, and to what fortunes they
can bring those they desire to marry. It happened that there were many suitors
then present, both Kings, and Kings sons; Among whom were Tigrapates, Prince
of Themiscyra, and Adyrmachus, Duke of Maclyna, hand many others; every wooer
having revealed himself, and shown upon what confidence he came thither a
suitor, is to feast with the rest, and to sit silent. The Feast ended, he is to
take a cup, and to power wine on the Table, then to address himself to the
Bride, and to enlarge his own praises, by declaring his Pedigree, wealth, and
power. Many having performed the Ceremony, and extolled their Dominions, and
estates, at last Arsacomas requesting the cup, spilt no wine (for we hold it
reproachful to the God to spill him) but taking it off at a draught, give me
thy, daughter Mazaea, O King, said he, to wife, who for my riches, and
possessions am much to be preferred before these; whereat Leucanor wondering,
and knowing Arsacomas to be but a poor vulgar Scythian, ask't him, How many
head of Cattle, and wagons have you, Arsacomas? for herein you Scythians are
only rich. I have, said he, neither wagons nor flocks; but I have two rare,
and excellent friends, such as no Scythian has besides, which raised their
general laughter, who contemned and thought him drunk. In the morning
Adyrmachus was preferred before the rest, who shortly after purposed to carry
his Bride into Maeotis to his Machlyans. At his return Arsacomas reported to
his two friends how dishonourably he was refused by the King, and laughed at in
the banquet for his poverty. Though, said he, I told him what great Treasures I
had in you Lonchates, and Macentas, and in your friendship, which is much more
precious, and powerful then all the Bosphoran forces, whereat he laughed, and
despised us Scythians, and gave his daughter in marryage to Adyrmachus the
Machlyan, for boasting himself to have ten golden Cups, eighty fourseated
Chariots, besides sheep and oxen in abundance; preferring before valiant men
herds of Cattle, wrought bowls, and massy Chariots. Two things, then, my
best friends, torment me, my love of Mazaea, and affront in so public an
assembly, where, I suppose, you also equally injured; since every one severally
is interested in the third par of the dishonor, if we live as we begun at our
first conjunction, three made one, and do resent and rejoice at the same
things. More then so, said Lonchates, in your sufferings the whole injury was
offered to every one of us in particular. How, then, replied Macentas, shall
we order our revenge? let us divide, ansvvered Lonchates, the business among
us. I dare undertake to bring Leucanors head to Arsacomas, be it your task to
bring him his daughter. I accept the division, ansvvered Lonchates; and do you,
said he, Arsacomas in the mean time (for the enterprise must in likelihood
engage us in a war) stay here, and raise what Arms, Horses, and Forces you
can: which will be no hard matter, being your self a stout man, and our Allies
being not few, but especially if you sit upon the ox hide. The design
pleased; and Lonchates presently took the next way into Bosphorus, Macentes to
the Machlyans, both well horst. But Arsacomas stayed at home; and imparted the
adventure to his equal ^^quaintances, and put some Companies of his familiars
into arms; and lastly sat down upon the ox hide. Now our custom of the
hide is this; when any man is injured by another, and would redress himself,
and is unable to wage war, he sacrifices an ox, whose flesh he divides into
parcels, and roasts it; then spreading the hide upon the ground, sits on it,
holding his hands behind him, like those who are pinioned. And this with us is
the most passionate way of petitioning. Then the flesh of the ox roasted being
set to the public access, his near acquaintances, and whosoever else will,
assemble to him, and taking every one a piece, and treading on the hide with
their right foot, promise aid according to their abilities; one to find five
horse at his own charge, another ten, another more, another as many Armed
foot soldiers, as he can; and he that is poorest, himself: so that sometimes
great troops are gathered to the hide, and an Army thus raised is of firmest
combination, and as inviolable to the enemy, as if they were knit by Sacrament;
for to tread upon the hide is with us an oath. Thus did Arsacomas order
matters; to whom repaired about five thousand horsemen, and promiscuously armed
twenty thousand foot. Lonchates, in the mean time, passing unknown into
Bosphorus got access to the King then busy in affairs of State; and told him
that he came publicly sent by the Scythians, but that the greatness of his
message required to be delivered in private. The King bidding him speak his
embassy. As for their common, daily grievances, said he, the Scythians forbid
that your shepherds any more pass beyond your own plains, but feed their
flocks within Tracho. Next, they deny those thieves, whereof you accuse them
for overrunning your Country, to have any public warrant; but say, they rob
for their own private gain, and that if any of them be taken, it is in your
power to punish them. And this I have commission to tell you from them. But
from my own private Intelligence I do inform you, that Arsacomas, the son
of Mariantas, who was lately ambassador here, will shortly make a great
invasion upon you, the cause, I guess to be your refusal of him when he
desired your daughter, which he takes as a dishonor, and has already sat
seven days upon the hide; and contracted an Army not contemptible. I have
heard, said Leucanor, that forces were assembled to the hide, but knew not that
they were raised against us; or that Arsacomas ruled the expedition. Against
thee, said Lonchates, is the preparation made. But Arsacomas is my enemy, and
takes resentment that our Elders should prefer me before him; or that I
should in all things eclipse his reputation; If therefore, Thou will contract
thy other daughter Barcetis to me, who am not unworthy of the Alliance, ere
long I will return and bring thee his head. I do here promise said the King,
exceedingly frighted, knowing the cause of Arsacomas quarrel to be the denial
of his marriage. Besides, the Scythians had ever been dreadful to him. Swear,
said Lonchates, to keep covenants, and never to deny them, which the King
preparing to do, and being ready to swear with his hands lift up to heaven,
forbear thus openly, Sir, said the other, lest some of the beholders make
interpretations of your Oath. But let us enter into this Temple of Mars, and
shut the doors, that none may overheare you: for if the least revelation be
made to Arsacomas, I fear, he will begin the war with my sacrifice, being
already fortified with no small Regiments. Let us enter, said the King; and
keep you distance, nor let any approach the Temple whom I shall not call.
Being entered, and the guard far removed, Lonchates drew his Sagar, and
stopping his mouth with the other hand to suppress cries, stabbed him in the
breast. Then cutting off his head, and carrying it under his cloacke, he went
forth, making as if he spoke to him all the while, and saying he would
presently come again, as if he had been sent by the King upon business. And
so returning to the place where he left his horse tied, mounting he rode back
into Scythia. But no pursuit was made after him, because 'twas long before the
Bosphorans knew what was done; and when they knew they grew factious for the
Kingdom. Thus accomplished Lonchates his atchievment, and fulfilled his
undertaking by the delivery of Leucanors head to Arfacomas. Macentes having
intell^gence by the way of the Bosphoran affairs, past on to the Machlyans,
and was the first reporter of the Kings death. But the people, said he, call
on you, Adyrmachus, being his son in Law, to accept the Crown; By way of
Anticipation, therefore, things favoring you by their distraction, shovv your
self unexpectedly, and assume the Empire. Let your wife by Coach follovv
after: whose presence, being Leucanors daughter, will give you a quick
interest in the vulgar Bosphorans. As for me, I am both an Aliance, and of
affinity to your wife by the mother. For Leucanor married Mastera from my
Country: from whose brothers at Alania I am now sent with commission to
exhort you to make all hasty dispatch into Bosphorus; and not to suffer the
Crown to fall on Eubiatus, Leucanors base brother, a long friend to the
Scythians, and disaffected to the Alanes. Thus said Macentes, resembling that
people both in his habit, and speech. for there is only this difference
betvveene them, that the Alanes wear not their hair so long as the
Scythians; which Macentes having newly cut, past easily undistinguish't, and
gained credit to his disguise, under which he was taken for Mastera's, and
Mazaea's kinsman. And now, said he, I am ready, Adyrmachus, as you please to
command me; either to accompany you into Bosphorus, or to stay, and as
occasion serves to conduct your wife. I had much rather, replied Adyrmachus,
that being of her alliance you would convey my wife. For by accompanying me
into Bosphorus you shall but add one horseman more to the Troop: but in
conducting my wife you will serve in stead of many. Things thus resolved, he
presently began his journey, and left Mazaea yet a virgin, to be brought after
by Macentes; who by day carried her in a coach. But when night came, by design
with one of his servants, who followed him with horses, he set her on
horseback, and mounting himself, kept not any longer the way toward Moeotis,
but turning aside to the Mediterranean, and leaving the Mitraean mountains on
his right hand, appeasing the young Lady the best he could, in three days
passage through the Machlyans, he arrived in Scythia: where his horse no sooner
finished his course, but after a short stand expired. But Mecentes delivering
Mazaea to Arsacomas, Receive, said he, from me my promise; and when the other
much astonished at the unhop't for spectacle prepared to thank him: Forbear,
said Macentes, to make me any other then your self, For to acknowledge your
self obliged to me for what I have done, is as if my left hand should give
thanks to the right, for curing it wounded, and affording it friendly
attendance. Twere, then, most ridiculous in us, if after a long conjunction,
we, who as far as it is possible became one, should put great values upon any
thing adventurously achieved by a part for the whole. Since being but a part,
the good wrought for the whole, was wrought for the part too. Thus said
Macentes to Arsacomas, preparing to give him thanks. But when Adyrmachus heard
of the plot, he broke off his journey intended for Bosphorus; for there
Eubiotus was Crowned, called home from Sarmatia, where he sojourned, and
returning to his Country rais^d a great Army, and through the mountains made
an invasion upon Scythia. Shortly after he was seconded by Eubiotus, who led a
promiscuous Army of Greeks, Alanes, and choice Sarmatians, consisting of 20000
of each, which joined to Adyrmachus Troops, made an Army of ninety Thousand;
whereof the third part were Horse Archers: we on the contrary, (I bearing a
share in the expedition, to which I with others assembled to the hide
contributed an hundred well appointed horsemen) having gathered a body, little
less then thirty thousand, with our Cavalry attended their assault, having
Arsacomas for our General. As they made their approach, we marched Counter,
placeing our forces of Horse in front. After a long uncertain battle, we were
put to the worst, and our Squadrons routed; And at last the Scythians being
divided into two bodies, one part fled, as if apparently vanquished, but in a
kind of retreat, so as the Alanes durst not pursue them far, but incircling
the other part which was the weaker, with help of the Machlyans, made great
slaughter with their showers of Darts, and Arrows: so that our men thus
besieged were very much distressed, and many of them threw away their Arms; in
which number by chance were Lonchates, and Macentes; who more forward then
others to put themselves upon dangers, were both wounded, Lonchates with a
poisoned dart which burnt his thigh, Macentes with a stroke of a Battle axe on
the head, and a halberd on the shoulder, which when Arsacomas understood, who
was then with us in the other part of the Army, holding it dishonorable not to
relieve his friends, putting spurs to his horse, with loud cries and his
sword drawn he broke through the enemy, nor could the Machlyans resist his
fury, but gave him passage. He having brought off his friends, and given new
courage to the rest, rusht upon Adyrmachus, and striking him on the neck with
his whineyard, cleft him down to the girdle, upon whose fall the whole Army
of the Machlyans were disordered, and soon after the Alanes, and after all
the Grecians. So that by an after Battle we conquered, and pursued them with a
great slaughter, to which only the night gave a period: next day came
Ambassadors from the enemy with petitions of League. The Bosphorans covenanted
to pay double Tribute, the Machlyans promised to give Hostages; the Alanes in
discharge of that invasion undertook to subdue the Syndians ancient enemies to
our State. To these Articles we agreed, led chiefly by the consents of
Arsacomas, and Lonchates, who swayed the rest, and a peace was concluded.
These, Mnesippus, are the exployts of Scythians for their friends.


Mnesipp. They are very Tragical, Toxaris, and sound like Romances; your
Sagar, therefore, and wind by which you swore must grant easy pardons, and not
blame him much that shall not believe you.


Toxaris. Take heed, generous Sir, your envy cause not your infidelity: yet
shall not your hardness of faith divert me from reporting the like
enterprises performed by other Scythians of my knowledge.


Mnesipp. Be not tedious, then, I beseech you, excellent Sir, nor let your
discourse be Errantry, or sometimes wander up and down Scythia, and Machlyna,
then pass over into Bosphorus, at last return home to the vexation of my
silence.


Toxaris. You shall be obeyed in your impositions and I will be brief, lest
your attention should tire in following my Digressions. Hear then what a
friend of mine called Sisinnes did for me. When I took my voyage for Athens,
out of my desire to the Greek education, I stroke in at Amastris, a Town of
Pontus, lying just in passage to those who sail from Scythia, and not far
distant from Carambe. Sisinnes bore me company, my friend of a child. Here we
saw certain Merchandises brought into the Haven, which carrying ashore we
bought, not suspecting any mischance. In the mean time, some thieves broke open
our trunkes, and stole all we had, and left us not enough to supply us for that
day. At our return from our Lodging, understanding what had happened, we
thought it not fit to question the neighbors being many, or our Host, out of
our fear to be taken for Braggarts, if we should have complained that four
hundred Daricks, diverse suits of rich apparel, and hangings, and whatsoever
else we had, had been stolen from us. We consulted, therefore, what men thus
impoverisht were to do in a strange place my resolution was to kill my self,
by falling on my sword, before I was cast upon base ways of relief, either by
thirst or famine. But Sisinnes by his better counsels diverted me from such a
fact: And said he had found a way to sustain us. That day his gains for
carrying wood from the wharfe supplied us with victuals. Next morning, as he
walked in the market place, he saw (as he tells the story) a gallant show of
stout young Gentlemen, who man by man were chosen for a prize set, to enter
combat the third day following. Having well instructed himself in the
conditions, he came to me, and said, Toxaris, hereafter call not your self
poor, for three days hence I will enrich you. We passing the time in
miserable reliefes, at the day of the show came thither as spectators. Inviting
me abroad he carried me to the Theater, as to some delightful spectacle of
the Graecians. Having seated our selves, we saw first some wild beasts peirced
with javelins, and hunted with dogs; others let loose upon certain men
bound, whom we guessed to be malefactors. When the combatants entered, the
crier produced a young man of vast size, saying, if any man will enter duel
with this Champion, let him stand forth, and as the reward of the fight he
shall receive ten thousand Drachmes. Sisinnes presently rising up, leapt our,
undertook the combat, and required arms; and receiving the money delivered it
into my hands; saying, If I overcome, Toxaris, when we depart this shall be our
viaticum. If I be slain, bury me, and return to Scythia. The words drew
sighs from we, whilst he taking the Armor, put it all on but the helmet, and
fought bare headed. In the first encounter he was wounded with a reverst blow
in the hamme; at which much blood issued, which half slew me with fear; but
he stoutly observing his adversaries assaults, ran him through the breast,
whereupon he fell presently at his feet. And he faint with his wound was
forced to sit down upon his conquest; so near was he expiration. I running to
him, raised him, and gave him heart. And after he was declared victor, took
him upon my back, and carried him home: where he lay a while under cure, but
is now recovered, and lives in Scythia, married to my sister, only he is still
lame of his wound. This, Mnesippus, was not done among the Machlyans, or in
Alania, which might give you colors for your distrust. But the Amastrians have
yet in fresh memory Sisinnes combat. I will conclude my first narration with
the story of Abauchas. This Abauchas arrived at the City of the Borysthenians,
and brought with him his wife, whom he exceedingly loved, and two children,
one a sucking boy, the other a girl, of the age of seven years. He had
besides in his company a friend, one Gyndanes, who lay sick of a wound received
by the way from certain thieves which as^aulted them. By whom in the skirmish
he was hurt in the thigh, and disabled from standing by the pain. One night as
they lodged in an upper chamber, and were all asleep, a great fire happened,
which shut them in, and surrounded the house. At which Abauchas awaking, left
his children crying, and thrusting away his wife, who cleaved to him, and
bidding her save her self, taking his friend upon his shoulders, he carried
him down, and broke with him through the flame untoucht. His wife bearing the
little infant follovved, and bid her daughter follovv her, but half burnt she
was constrained to cast the child from her arms, and yet hardly so escaped
the flame; her daughter also which closely followed was almost smothered.
Afterward, when one objected to Abauchas, that he betrayed his wife, and
children, and saved Gyndanes, 'Twill not be hard for me, said he, to beget
more children; besides it is doubtful how they will prove: but it must be a
long time before I can find such another friend as Gyndanes; of whose affection
I had so many trials. I have said, Mnesippus, and have reported five examples
of many. It Is now time to pronounce whether I be to loose my right hand, or you
your tongue; who shall be Judge?


Mnesipp. That we did not agree upon. But I Will tell you what we will do; since
we have all this while shot without a mark; let us upon a new agreement choose
a Moderator, and report before him other examples of friendship. and as the
conquest is decided, let either my tongue, or your hand be cut off; or if such
decision be too savage, since you seem to be an admirer of friendship; and
since I hold nothing more excellent, or desirable to men, why should not we
two combind between our selves, hereafter become friends, and for ever
enterchange affections, being both conquerours, and both receiving the highest
reward, instead of one tongue and one hand, two apiece; four eyes also, and
four feet, and in a word, all things double? For two or three friends joined
become the Geryon described by writers to be a man with six hands, and three
heads. But I suppose them three men who did all things in common as it becomes
friends.


Toxaras. You say well, be it so then.


Mnesippus. To confirm our friendship, then, we need not use a svvord,
Toxaris, or blood. Our present discourse, and sympathy is much more powerful
then your Cup: since such friendships require affection not necessity for
their ground.


Toxaris. It Is true. Be we then mutually friends, and hosts, you to me here
in Greece, I to you whensoever you come into Scythia.


Mnesipp: Assure your self, I would take a much longer voyage to gain such a
friend, as you, Toxaris, by your discourse have shown your self.


Anacharsis, or a Discourse of Exercises.
The Speakers Anacharsis and Solon. Anarcharsis. What Custom is this among
you, Solon? some of your young men mutually closing, trip up one another
heels; others take their companion by the Throat, and toss him; others
tumble, and roll themselves in the mire like swine. But first I observed that
unclothing themselves they shave and anoint one another very peaceably; and
presently, I know not upon what quarrel, they fall to pushing, and to dash
foreheads like rams. Look, yonder one having lift his fellow up by the
thighs, hurles him to the ground, and falling on him, suffers him not to rise,
but draws him into a puddle, and screwing his legs up to his belly, and
enfolding his neck with his arm almost stifles him; another beats him on the
back; requesting him, I suppose, not to be chok't; nor care they to loose
their oil, or to be fullied; but bemiring, bedaubing, and putting themselves
into a great sweat, make me sport, like so many Eeles slipping away between
the holders fingers. In like manner, others here in the Court yard, roll not
themselves in puddle, but in the deep sand, and tumble together into a pit,
where like so many cocks they bedust one another, to hinder dis-imbracements, I
suppose, and to avoid slipperynesse; and by drying his body, to strengthen his
hold on his adversary. Others, keeping posture, and dusted all over, beat and
kick one another. See how yonder poor wretch sprinkled with sand bleeds with a
blow on the face, and is ready to spit out his teeth; nor does their Captain
(for so I guess him by his purple) offer to part them, or compose the
quarrel, but rather provokes them, and praises the striker: others, far off,
with much speed seem to run races, yet keep the same place, and kick up
their heels into the air. I would, therefore, know to what end they do thus.
For to me these agitations seem plain madness; nor shall any man easily
persuade me that they, who do thus, are not distracted.


Solon. It Is like enough, Anacharsis, that these exercises carry such
appearances to you, being strange, and different from your Scythian customs,
and forms of exercises; which to a Grecian spectator, would seem as
foreign, and strange. But censure fairly, I pray, These are not exercises of
distraction; nor do they beat, or roll in the mire, or besprinkle one another
with dust out of quarrel, but out of a delightful necessity, to increase the
strength, and vigor of their bodies: nor doubt I but, when you have stayed a
while in Greece, you will be one of those who tumble in the mire, and sand, and
will take both pleasure and profit in the exercise.


Anacharsis. The Gods forbid, Solon, I bequeath such Recreations of profit to
you. Should one of you offer me such affronts, he should feel I wore not a
sword in vain. But pray tell me, what do you call these kind of
Horse-playes? what name may we give to these pastimes?


Solon. That space yonder, Anarcharsis, is called the School of Exercise, and
dedicated to Apollo Lycius: whose statue you see leaning to a pillar, holding a
bow in the left hand, and sustaining his head with the right, as taking his
rest after a long weariness. These exercises, which you see performed in the
mire, we call wrestling, as also those in the sand. Those that you see thrust,
and beat one another are called Hurlers: we have many other kinds of exercise,
as Cuffing, Quoites, and Jumping; wherein we propose games. In any of which
the conqueror is held the most Generous, and carries away the prize.


Anacharsis. And what are your prizes?


Solon. In the Olympicke games, we give a Crown of wild Olive; in the
Isthmian of Pine; in the Nemean of Parsely; in the Pytihan, the Priests of the
God give Apples; we Athenians give Oil of Olive. Why do you smile Anacharsis,
are these Trifles think you?


Anacharsis. Noe, you have reckoned up rewards, Solon, very honorable, and
worthy both of their proposers for their magnificence, and of the contenders,
who so earnestly strive for them. For Apples, then, and Parslye, they toil,
and endanger themselves, thrusting and beating one another: nor, though they
should long, may they without much contention eat Apples, or be crowned with
Parslye, or Pine; unless they bedaube their faces with mire, or receive kicks
in the belly from their Antagonists.


Solon. But we, good Sir, do not barely look upon the meannesse of the
rewards, which are but signs of victory, and marks, whereby to know the
Conquerours; who prefer the glory which accompanies them above all things
else. And, therefore, they who seek Reputation from their dangers, think it
honorable to be kicked. For fame is not purchased without labor; But it
behooves him that courts it, to undergo many difficulties at first, and to
pursue, and sweeten his end with sufferances, and toils.


Anachar: Call you their end, Solon, sweet, and gainful, who are crowned in
public Assembly, and extolled for their victory, who just before were pitied
for their patience? or can they be happy, who for so much danger, are paid with
Apples, and Parsley?


Solon. You are still unexperienced in our Customs: ere long you will change
your opinion, when you have been once at our Games, and there see a
numberless multitude gathered, to the spectacle, the Theater filled with
thousands, the exercisers shouted, and the Conqueror equaled to the Gods.


Anachar: This makes their case the more deplorable, Solon, not to suffer such
indignities before a few, but before so many spectatours, and witnesses of
their affronts, who pronounce them not happy till they see them stream with
blood, or throttled by their Antagonists. And this you call the felicity of
their conquest. But among us Scythians, if any strike a Citizen, or justle him
out of the way, or tare his garment, the Elders fine him very deeply, though
the injury were offered but in the presence of few, and not in such public
Theaters as Isthmus, and Olympia. Nor do I only pity your exercisers for
their sufferings, but your spectators; who, you say, being of great quality,
resort from all places to the show. For I cannot but wonder that they should
neglect their serious affairs, and find leisure for vanities. Nor can I
understand how it can be a spectacle of pleasure to them, to see men struck,
and beaten, and thrown down, and trampled by one another.


Solon. Were this the time, Anacharsis, of our Olympic, or Istmian, or
Athenian Games, the things there done would teach you that our studies of them
are not vain. For no man by my descriptions can so instill the pleasure of
those sights, as when you your self making one of the spectators, behold men's
valor, the goodlinesse of their persons, their admirable dexterity, prodigious
skill, invincible strength, courage, emulation, unavoidable sleights, and
indefatigable desire of victory, which I know you would incessantly praise,
shout, and clap.


Anarchar: By Jupiter, Solon, I should incessantly flout, and laugh, to see
your whole Catalogue of virtues, bodily force, shape, and courage mis^imploy'd,
and spent to no end: when neither your Country is endangered, nor your Coasts
invaded, nor your friends injured. For, to me, those whom you call valiant,
appear the more ridiculous for their vain sufferings, afflictions, and
defacement of their lineaments, and personage with dust; and tramplings, that
their victories may be rewarded with Apples, and Pine-leaves. I cannot,
therefore, think of such prizes but they are my sport. But tell me, have all
excercisers the same reward?


Solon. Noe; He only that conquers.


Anachar: Do the rest, then, toil for a doubtful, uncertain victory, knowing
there can be but one Conqueror; And that the conquered, who are many, endure
all those beatings, and wounds to no purpose?


Solon. You seem, Anacharsis, to know nothing of a well ordered Commonwealth;
otherwise you would not so slightly value the best customs. But whenever you
give your mind to know how the best State is to be governed, and how the best
Citizens are to be made, you will then praise those exercises, and emulations
so much practiced by us, and will discern the commodities mingled with those
sweats, though they now seem labors in vain.


Anachars. I had no other purpose, Solon, to my journey from Scythia hither, in
which I measured much Land, beside the tempestuous Euxine Sea, but to learn
the Grecian Laws, and to instruct my self in your customs, and study the
best form of Government. Of all the Athenians, therefore, and forreiners, I
chose you by your fame for my acquaintance, after I heard you were a giver of
Laws, and an inventer of excellent customs, and an introducer of useful
institutions, and fashioner of a commonwealth. You cannot therefore, more
desire to teach, and to make me your Scholar, then I shall be ready, without
eating or drinking, to sit as long as you are able to speak, and greedily
attend your Lecture of Laws and States.


Solon. To give you a just account in a brief narration were not easy. You
shall, therefore, by degrees and steps, know what opinions we hold of the
Gods, of our parents, of marryage, and other things; As also what we decree of
our young men, and how we breed them, when they they once begin to know what
is best; and arrive at such a strength of body as to endure labors. All which
I will unfold to you, that you may be instructed, why we set them those Games,
and compel them to exercise their bodies; not merely for the Games fake, or
the glory of the prize (for few attain to it) but for a far more excellent
good, which hereby grows to the whole Commonwealth, and to themselves in
particular. For there is a more public prize, and crown proposed to all good
Citizens, not made of Pine, or wild Olive, or Parsley, but which comprehends
the common happiness of men; namely, the private liberty of every one, and
public of the State; besides riches, glory, fruition of solemn Assemblies,
security of friends, and whatsoever Blessings else men would ask in their
prayers of the Gods. All which are woven into the Garland, I spoke of, and
accompany that prize, to which those exercis^s, and labors lead.


Anachar: Why then, most venerable Solon, having rewards of such value, did you
tell me of Apples, and Parsley, and boughs of wild Olive, and Pine?


Solon. Even these, Anacharsis, will not be of slight consideration to you
after you understand what I am about to say. For these have the same purpose,
and end, and are but lesser portions of that ample and happy reward, and
Garland I mentioned. But my discourse, has, I know not how, broke order, to
begin with things done in the Isthmian, Olympic, and Nemean Games, I,
therefore, since my leisure and your patience meet; will dravv things from
their first principles, and lay for my original that public reward to which
all these exercises aspire.


Anachar. You shall do well, Solon, if you use no more digressions by the way;
And thereby I shall the easier be persuaded not to laugh any more when I see
one stalk Majestically crowned with wild Olive, or Parsley. If you please,
therefore, let us withdraw into yonder shade, where we may sit undisturbed
with the noise of the exercisers. For (not to dissemble) I am impatient of the
scorching Sunbeams striking on my bare head, and left my cap at home, that I
might not be the only man seen among you in a foreign Habit. Besides, now is
the time of the year that the scorching star, which you call the Dog,
reigns, and burns all things, and renders the Air sultry and enflamed; The
Sun also now at noone, being vertical, casts an insupportable raye on our
bodies. So that I wonder, you being an old man, do not, like me swet, nor
appear molested with the heat, nor look about for some cool place to retire
to, but patiently brook the season.


Solon. Those foolish exercises, Anacharsis, and frequent tumblings in the
mire, and open contentions in the Sands do harden, and fortify us against the
Sun; nor need we cappes to protect our heads from his beams. But let us
withdraw. I expect not you should consent or bind your whole faith to every
thing I speak as Law, but when you think I speak amiss presently to
contradict, and rectify my discourse. For in one of those two I will not
fail, either to make you of my opinion, if you meet with nothing to be
contradicted, or learn from you how erroneously I have been the author of
those customs; For which the whole City of Athens will give you ample
thanks. Nor can you more oblige them then by disciplining, and instilling
righter opinions into me. which I will not conceal, but will presently make
them public, and standing in open Assembly thus bespeake the City. I, O ye
Athenians, have heretofore written Laws, which I thought most necessary for
the State, But this stranger (pointing at you, Anacharsis,) being by Country a
Scythian, yet a wise man, has otherwise instructed me, and taught me better
principles, and institutions. Let him, therefore, be registered your Benefactor,
and erect his brazen statue among the persons most of honor in the City,
near Minerva. Hereupon assure your self, Anacharsis, the Athenians will not
be ashamed to be taught better rules by a Barbarian, and a stranger.


Anachars. I heard as much before of you Athenians, that you were great
scoffers: For how should I, being a rude, wandering man, living in a wagon, and
travailing from one Country to another, who never inhabited, or till now saw a
City, discourse of policy, or teach men borne and bred in an ancient State;
where for so many successions they have lived under the best form of
government? especially you, Solon, whose study, they say, it has always been
to lay the best foundations of a Commonwealth; and to know under what Laws it
would most flourish? It Is fit, therefore, your Authority, being a Lawgiver,
should sway me. And, therefore, if I oppose you, where you seem not to speak
reason, it shall be that I may be the firmlier instructed. See we are now
sheltred in this Arbor from the Sun; this cool marble also offers us a
pleasant, and seasonable seat. Begin your discourse then, and say, why you
breed your children to those hard labors; or how puddles, and exercise can
make them gallant men; or how dust, and tumblings in the mire can advance their
virtues. This I first desire to know: you shall inform me of other
particulars in their place and order. Remember I pray withal in the structure
of your narration that you speak to a Barbarian; which I tell you, that you
may neither involve, nor prolong your discourse. For I shall be apt to forget
the beginning, if your narration be too much lengthened.


Solon. Your admonition will be timelier, Anacharsis, when you find me dark
in my expressions, or digressing from the purpose. It shall, therefore, be in
your power to ask what questions by the way, and to cut off what
superfluities, you please. But where I am pertinent, and rove not from the
mark, you must give me leave to be copious; and to observe the practice of my
Country, allowed of even by the Areopagus, where matters of the highest nature
are decided. For in that Court the Judges being entered, and placed, to
determine of murders, intended wounds, and conflagrations, Liberty is given
both for the accuser, and the accused to speak by turns, either themselves,
or by their Advocates, retained to plead for them: who, as long as they speak
to the business, are heard with silence of the Senate. But if any shall offer
by a preface to render the Judges favorable, or to draw pity, or
powerfulness to his cause, (which are the ordinary arts of young Orators)
presently a Crier stands forth, and enjoynes him silence, and suffers him not
to trifle before the Senate, or to color the business with eloquence, but to
present it naked to them. So I do constitute you, Anacharsis, the Areopagite
of my present discourse; and give you power to hear me according to the Laws
of my Court; and where you find me over Rhetorical to silence me; but where
I speak agreeable to the business to suffer me to enlarge my self. For we
hold not Dialogue now in the heat of the Sun; And therefore let me not seem
tedious, if I prolong my narration, since we are now in the thick shade, and
are both vacant.


Anachar: You speak reason, Solon, and I give you no small thanks, that by
this Digression you have taught me the the passages of the Senate; which,
truly, are admirable, and such as befit wise men, who order their suffrages by
Justice. Proceed, then; and since you have made me one of your Areopagite
Judges, I will hear you like one.


Solon. First, then, you are briefly to mark how we define a City, and
Citizens. We take not a City for the buildings, such as are the Walls,
Temples, and houses: For these are but, as it were, a constant immovable body
for the receipt, and safety of the Inhabitants. All Authority is seated in the
Citizens; who fill, order, perfect, and preserve the other, as the soul does
every one of us. Upon these considerations we extend our cares, as you may
observe to the Body of the City, which we adorn to the utmost show of
magnificence, with elegant structures within, and secured with the strongest
Rampires, and Fortifications without. But the chiefest part of our providence
is, that the Citizens may have virtuous minds, and strong bodies: whereby
being enabled for government, they may be mutually useful to themselves in
peace, and defend the City, and preserve it free, and happy, in war. Their
first education, therefore, we assign to their Mothers, Nurses, and
Schoolmasters, to breed them to the Liberal Arts. But when they are grown up
to understand what virtue is, and when modesty, bashfulnesse, reverence, and
desire of the best things is implanted in them, and when their bodies, by
patient exercises, are confirmed, and strengthened, and brought to a manly
consistency, then we teach, and propose to them other knowledges of the mind,
and exercises of the body: which we accustom and inure to other labors. For
we think it not enough to be borne, as we are, with bodies, and souls; but
are to perfect both with Discipline and sciences: by which natural endovvments
being reduced to order, are much advanced, and defects are beautified, and
corrected. We take our patterns from husbandmen, who when their plants are
lovv and tender, cover, and dig about them, to protect them from the vvinde;
But when they are well grown, they cut off the supersfluous boughs, and
exposing them to be tossed, and shaken by the vvindes, render them the more
fruitful. The first elements of our childrens education are, music,
Arithmeticke, how to form letters, and exactly to pronounce them. Afterward,
we repeat to them the sayings of wise men, ancient exployts, and useful
discourses made illustrious by verse, that they may the better be remembered.
They hearing the deeds, and memorable Achievements of famous men, are
insensibly inflamed, and provoked to an imitation, that they may be celebrated,
and admired by posterity. Of which nature are many things delivered by our
Hesiod, and Homer. When they are ripe for government, and are ready to be
called to the handling of public Affairs -- but this is besides the purpose.
For I intended not at first to show how we manured their minds, but why we
thus employed, and exercised their bodies. I do, therefore, enjoyne my self
silence, without the reprehension of a crier, or such an Areopagite as you, who
out of modesty, I believe, have all this while heard me trifle beside the
purpose.


Anachars: Tell me, Solon, why your Areopagus does not punish those who omit
things material, and pass them by in silence?


Solon. Pray make me understand why you ask this Question.


Anachars: Because you pass over the best things, and which I most desire to
hear, Namely the exercises of the soul, and proceed to the less necessary
labors and exercises of the body.


Solon. Herein I am constant to my first purpose; For should I suffer my
discourse to wander from the scope, I should confound your memory by my
digressions: yet I will give you as brief a draught as I can of those also.
For an exact description of them, would require a particular discourse. First,
then, we lay in our childrens minds excellent sentences; Afterward we teach
them the Common Laws, which in capital Letters are openly hung up to be read;
commanding what is to be done, and what to be avoided; That the company of good
men is to be used, from whom they may learn to speak what is fit; to observe
justice in an equality of Conversation; not to covet things dishonest, but to
desire honest; and not to offer injuries. Now these men are with us styled
Sophists, and Philosophers: we bring them, also, into the Theater, where we
publicly teach them by the virtues and vices of former ages presented in
Comoedies, and Tragoedies, which they are to shun, which to embrace; we give
liberty, also, to our Comic Poets to personate, and inveigh against those
Citizens, whose lives are infamous, and disgraceful to the Commonwealth;
whereupon some grow reformed by Libells, and forsake their faults which would
hereby fall under the reprehension of the vulgar.


Anachars: I understand you, Solon; your Tragoedians, and Comoedians were those
who wore Socks, and Buskins, and were changeably apparelled, and adorned with
golden fillets, having on their faces ridiculous, wide gaping vizards; under
which they spea^ big, and stalk, I know not how, unknown in their ^^skins. At
which time, if I err not, you celebrated your feasts of Bacchus Your
Comoedians were not so exalted, were lower shod, and spoke in a lesser tone,
and more like men; only their vizards were more ridiculous, and raised the
general Laughter of the Theater. But those Buskined Actors were heard with a
general sadness, out of pity, I suppose, to the weights, and Cloggs of
their feet.


Solon. 'Twas not pity to them, Sir; but the Poet, perhaps, represented some
ancient, calamitous story, which cast into Tragical language, and action,
moved the Tears of the spectators, and hearers. It Is likely, also, you saw
Fiddlers, and Singers placed together in a Ring; neither are their voices, and
cornets, void of profitable use; but by such and the like incitements, we whet,
and sharpen, and better our souls. As for our bodies, which you next desire to
hear, we thus discipline them, when they are once compact, and past their
tenderness; First, by going naked sometimes we expose them to the Air, and so
acquaint them with all seasons, as neither to dissolve with heat, or shrink
with cold. Next, we annoint and supple them with oil, to make them the more
active and pliant. For 'twere unreasonable that dead hides, and Leather softened
by Oil, and tanned, should be less capable of ruptures, and last longer, and
that we should think such Ointments lost upon animated bodies. Next, we invent
exercises of several kinds, to which we assign several Teachers; one for
Fencing, another for Wrestling. That, being accustomed to such exercises, we
may both know how to defend our selves from blows, and not shun wounds
through Cowardlinesse. Two great advantages do hence arise; our young men, by
not sparing their bodies are made valiant against dangers; and possess a firm
consistency of health, and strength. For those that wrestle, do thereby learn
to fall safely, and to rise nimbly, to cast off, embrace, toss, strangle, and
lift their adversary aloft. These, then, are not exercises to be neglected,
whose chief and great end, which they infallibly attain, is, that bodies thus
exercised gain higher patiences, and vigor. Their next end, not inferior to
the other, is, that hereby our young men may be experienced against the
necessities, and Accidents of War. For it is clear, that a soldier by his
skill in wrestling* will more easily overthrow his enemy, or being overthrown
rise again himself. All these personated combats, then, we refer to that
greater of the War; out of our opinion, that men thus practiced are fittest
for Arms, whose naked bodies we have first by Ointments, and labors,
confirmed, and fortified, and thereby made agile, and dextrous, and offensive
to their encounterers. For you may easily imagine what those men would do in
Armor, who can naked strike a terror into the enemy; when they see bodies
neither overburden'd with white unsupportable flesh; nor pine'd with leanesse,
and palenesse; like the bodies of Women, which withering in the shade, tremble,
and flow with sweat, and pant under a helmet; especially if the Sun, as now
it does, shine hot at Noone. For what service can they be fit, who are
impatient of thirst, and dust, and faint at the sight of blood, and expire
before they come within shot, or encounter of the enemy? Whereas our men, dying
their natural redness by the Sun into a brown, show manly countenances,
great Heights of spirit, and flames of valor. Being by the goodness of their
composition, neither too gross, nor too thin, nor overclogged with weight,
but wrought into a measure by their sweats, by which they evaporate the
useless superfluities of their flesh, and retain only that which gives
strength and vigor, without mixture of defects. For the like effects which
winnowers have upon Corn, have those exercises on our bodies; they blow away
the Chafe, and husks, from which they separate the pure grains, and gather
them into heaps. Hence comes it, that we are so sound, and so able to endure
long Labors; Or that one thus bred, is so hardly provoked to sweat, and so
rarely cast into a Distemper: As if one should set fire to Wheat, Straw, and
Stubble, (for I return to my former comparison) I suppose the Stubble would
presently be consumed, but the Corn would by degrees, without any great
pyramids of flame, not at one blaze, but by insensible clouds of smoke after
sometime be it self burnt; so neither diseases, nor weariness invading a body
thus exercised will easily infeeble, or overcome it; Being so well prepared
within, and so impregnably fortifyed against them without, as, to withstand
their entrance and to encounter heats and colds without damage of the person.
For by those Laborious exercises, much heat being taken in, and of a long time
provided, and laid up, as it were, for necessary use, it administers sudden
supplies, and renders the body indefatigable. For these praelabours, and
Toils, do not destroy the courage, but increase, and enlarge it by
provocation; we breed our young men to races also, and enable them by custom
to hold out in long courses, and by their speed, and activity in short. Nor do
we allow them to run on firm, equal ground, but in deep sand, where they
can neither fix, nor fasten their feet, but are ready to slip at every
stride. We teach them, also, if need be, to leap Trenches, and other places of
hinderance; which they practice to do with leaden weights in their hands.
Sometimes, also, they strive who shall hurl a Spear farthest. You have seen,
also, another brazen weight in the place of exercise, round, and made in the
figure of a little shield, having neither handle, nor string; which you poysed
as it lay in the midst, and it felt massy, and hardly to be taken hold of by
reason of the smoothness. This they sometimes fling aloft into the Air;
sometimes straight forward, striving who shall hurl farthest, and outthrow the
rest* which kind of exercise does much strengthen their shoulders, and beget a
vigorous spring in their Arms. Hear now, venerable Sir, why they exercise in
the mire, and sand, which to you, at first, seemed ridiculous. The first reason
is, that they may not be thrown on the hard pavement, but may fall softly
without hurt; The next reason is, because their slipperinesse by their sweating
in the mire is much increased, which you compared to Eeles; but it is no matter
of contempt, or laughter: For hereby their strength and vigor is not a little
perfected, when thus besmeared they are forced to take stronger hold of one
another to hinder escapes: For you must not think it easy to hold fast one
bemired, sweating, sleekt with oil, and struggling to slip from your fingers.
All which slights do much conduce to war; whither a wounded friend be without
impediment to be fetched off, or an enemy taken prisoner to be borne away. Upon
these considerations, we exceedingly exercise them, to the most difficult
labors, that they may the more dexterously undergo the easier. We practice
them in the dust for a contrary reason, that they may not slip from their
entwinings. For being inured in the puddle to grasp their adversary, for all
his sleekness, they learn to slip out of his hands themselves when they seem
caught: Now dust sprinkled on distilling bodies, drinks up the sweat, and much
enables them not to tire. It Is a kind of crust to them too, and protects them
from the wind striking on their tender, and naked flesh. Besides, it scoures
off the filth, and makes the man much cleanlier. Should I, then, bring in
presence together one of the delicate pale men, who always live in the shade,
and one of those, whomsoever you shall choose, exercised in the Lyceum, and
washed from his Dust, and mire, I would ask to which you would choose to be
like. I know you would presently at first sight, though unacquainted with the
education of either, choose to be strong, and solid, then to be of a broken,
and melting constitution, and pale with the poverty, and retirement of your
blood to the inward parts. These are the exercises, Anacharsis, to which we
breed our young men; whereby, we think, we enable them to defend their
country, to secure us in our liberty, and vanquish our invaders, and make us
terrible to our neighbors; who for the most part are subject to us, and pay us
tribute. In times of peace our use of them is no less excellent, between whom
spring no base aemulations. Nor have they leisure to be injurious, but spend
their whole time, and employment in these exercises. Now (as I said before) The
common good, and highest felicity of a state consists in the best preparation
of youth, both for Peace, and War, which is only to be effected by Studies of
this excellent Nature.


Anacharsis. So then Solon, when you are invaded, you meet your enemies in your
Ointments, and dust, and encounter their Armor with your hands, and fists; who
in the mean time struck with terror fly from you, fearing, least if they
should gape, you should cast sand into their mouth; or coming behind them
should trippe up their heels, or twine their legs about their middle, and
your Arm about their neck and stifle them? And though they shoot Arrows and
hurl Darts at you, yet you, like so many Statues are impenetrable; being
tainn'd in the sun, and stored with so much blood. For you are not men of
straw, or stubble, to yield at the first onset; but are hardly brought to loose
blood, though pierrced with deep and mortal wounds. For so you said, if I
mistake not your resemblance. Or, perhaps, when you go out to battle, you Arm
your selves like Comedians, and Tragedians, and put on gaping vizards, that you
may appear terrible, and like so many Goblins to your enemies; and wear high
buskins, which, if you have occasion to fly, are light; And if you pursue your
foes, are unavoidable, bringing you so fast upon them. But consider, I pray,
whither these fine slights, and devices, be not frivolous, and childish, and
the exercises only of young men, void of better employment, and given to sloth.
For if your aim be to be free, and happy, you should prescribe true, and real
exercises, and such as are practiced in War. Where the Combat is not in jest
between Companions, but against enemies; with whom they are to fight, with
danger exercising their valor. Laying aside your dust, and your oil,
therefore, teach your young men the use of their Bow, and Pike; nor accustom
them to slight darts, which are carried away by the wind; but to massy spears,
which sing and whistle in their discharge; To stones also which fill their
hands. Let them wear also a Sagar on their side, a shield in their left hand, a
Breast Plate also, and Helmet. For as you now are, you appear to me saved by the
favor of some God, who have not all this while perished by the incursion of any
slight invaders. For put the case, I unsheathing this short Sword, which I wear
at my girdle, should singly set upon all your young men; doubtless I should
raise a general shriek, and take the School, or put them to flight, none
daring to look back upon my weapon, but standing behind statues, and hiding
themselves behind pillars, they would by their tears, and affrigh^ments be the
Argument of my laughter. Then should you see their bodies no longer red, as now
they are, but they would presently wax pale, and discolored with fear; For a
long peace has so softened you, that you cannot resolutely endure the sight of
one plume in an enemies Crest.


Solon. The Thracians, Anacharsis, Who under the conduct of Eumolphus took
Arms against us, spoke not thus, nor your Amazones, who having Hippolyta for
their General, made an expedition against our City. Nor others, who have had
trials of us in War. For we do not so make our young men exercise naked, as
to expose them to dangers unarmed; But when they grow perfect, they afterward
practice in Armor, which by these preparations, they much more easily manage.


Anachars. And where is your School where you thus exercise in Armor* I have
surveyed your whole City and cannot discover it.


Solon. When you have converst longer among us, Anacharsis, you will see every
house furnished with Armor, which in times of necessity we use; Crests also,
and Caparisons, and Horses, and Horsemen, to the fourth part of the Citizens.
To bare Arms, or wear a Sword in time of peace, we hold superfluous; and
punish those who needlessly carry a Weapon, or appear armed in public: which
in you is pardonable, who spend your whole lives in arms. For dwelling in
places unfortified, you cannot but lie open to incursions, and create many
Wars; nor are you certain, but that some neighbors may slay you, as you
sleep in your Wagons. Besides, your mutual Distrusts, and association
together without any common bonds of Law, or Government, makes it necessary for
you always, to have your Sword in readiness to prevent injuries.


Anachars. Without cause, then, Solon, to wear a Sword, you hold it
superfluous; and do favor your Arms, least with frequent use, they should be
worn out: you lay them up, therefore, in your Armories, and bring them forth
only upon occasion. But in the mean time, without any imminent danger you
commit the bodies of your young men to mutual beatings; who weaken themselves
by sweat, not forced by necessity, but vainly spend their courage in the mire
and dust.


Solon. You seem, Anacharsis, to have the same opinion of courage, as you have
of wine, or water, or some such liquid thing, which makes you imagine, that by
frequent exercises, it will insensibly leak away, as through some broken
vessel, and leave the body empty, and dry, having no spring within to
replenish it. But herein you are mistaken. For the more courage is drawn forth
by Labors, the more it overflowes. Like the fable which you have heard of
Hydra: who having one head cut off, was presently supplied with two. It Is true,
a body originally unpracticed, and feeble, and wanting sufficient natural
matter, is presently tired, and consumed by exercise, as we see in fire, and
Tapers; with the same breath you kindle the one, and in an instant blow it into
a greater flame; but extinguish the other, not having competent strength of
matter to encounter your blast, or a strong root to sustain it self.


Anacharsis. I do not well understand you, Solon; your Similitude is too subtle
for me, and requires an exact consideration, and a sharp sighted mind to
conceive you. But pray tell me, why in your Olympic, Isthmian, Pythian, and
other Games, where, you say, there is such confluence of Spectators to behold
your young exercisers, do you not make them contend in Armor; but producing
them naked, expose them to kickes, and beatings, and then reward the Conquerors
with Apples, and Olive boughs? I would feign know the reason of your Custom.


Solon. We think, Anacharsis, we hereby more inflame, and animate them to such
exercises, when they see the vanquishers honored, and shouted in a Ring of
Graecians; And therefore, they who thus contend naked, are provident of their
bodily habit, and blush not to strip themselves; but every one strives to make
himself most worthy of victory. Nor are they, as I said before, small rewards
to be cried up by the Spectators, and held the most honorable, to be pointed
at by passengers, and voiced the most valiant among equals. Many of the
beholders, therefore, whose age is not past exercise, depart not a little
enamored with their virtue, and Labors. Should any man, then, banish the
thirst of Glory from common life, what mark should we have to our desires, or
who would covet to perform any high Action? From hence you may conjecture
how they would behave themelves in War, armed for the defense of their
Country, Children, Wives, and Temples, who naked for a wreath of wild Olive,
or Apples, are enflamed with such a serious desire of victory. How would you be
affected, should you see our Quayle, and Cockfightings, and our solemn studies
of them? perhaps, you would laugh; especially if you knew that our Custom were
built upon a Law, which commands all of docile Age to be present; and to behold
the Fowls contend to their utmost rigor. But it is no argument for Laughter.
For hereby an insensible contempt of Dangers steals into their souls, who
mean not to appear more degenerous, or cowardly, then Cocks. And are hence
taught, not to yield to wounds, weariness, or other difficulties whatsoever.
Now to make the like trialls of them in Arms, and to behold their mutual
slaughters, were savage, and inhumane. 'Twere great improvidence also to
destroy those valiant men, whose courages would be better employed against an
enemy. Because, then, you resolve, Anacharsis, to see other parts of Greece,
pray remember when you arrive at Lacedaemon, that you laugh not at them also;
nor think them vainly busied, when met together in the Theater at Ball you see
them strike one another: or assembled in a place surrounded with water, and
divided into Battalions, naked, as they are, they make a formal War upon one
another, till one side, namely the Lycurgians, drive the other, namely the
Herculeans out of the Island, or force them backward into the mote, whereupon
follows peace, and no man is afterward struck; especially when you see them
whipped at an Altar, and streaming with blood, their Fathers and Mothers standing
by, not at all moved with the Spectacle, but threatening them if they shrink
under their stripes, and entreating them to hold out to their utmost patience,
and to take courage from their sufferings. Hence many die under the scourge,
disdaining to faint in the presence of their familiars, as long as they have
life, or to favor their bodies. To whose honors you shall see statues
publicly erected by the Spartans. When, therefore, you see this done; think
them not mad, or that they thus discipline their Children without just cause,
because no Tyrant is feared, or enemy near. For Lycurgus their founder will
give you very good reasons, why he instituted such cruel customs, being
neither enemy, nor carried by his hatred, to the unprofitable destruction of
the youth of the state, but desirous to render these, who were to defend their
Country, stout, and of courage above their sufferings. Or suppose Lycurgus
should say nothing, yet you your self know well, that none such taken in
war, did amidst the tortures of the enemy, ever discover any secret of the
Spartanes; But smiled when they were rackt, and strived with their Tormentors
who should be first tired.


Anacharsis. Was Lycurgus himself, Solon, in his young days bred to the
Whippe? Or without trialls of his own was he only the author of the Discipline?


Solon. He was very old before he wrote his Laws, and came thither from Creet:
where he had so journed a while, because he heard they had the best Laws,
having Minus the Son of Jupiter for their Lawgiver.


Anachars. Why, then, Solon, do not you imitate Lycurgus, and whippe your
Children? An education wise, and worthy of you.


Solon. Because we hold our own native exercises sufficient; and think foreign
imitation below us.


Anachars. Or rather because you understand, I suppose, how ridiculous it is to
be whipped naked, and to supplicate with erected hands; without profit either to
him that is whipped, or to the state. If I come to Sparta, therefore, at a time
when they discipline, they cannot but forthwith publicly stone me; for I
shall laugh to see them scourged like Thieves, Pilferers, or such like
malefactors. For clearly a City accustomed to such ridiculous sufferings, in
my Judgment should be purged with Hellebore.


Solon. Think not, generous Sir, being alone Orator, and solitary, and no
repliers present, you have vanquished* you will meet those at Sparta who will
give probable satisfaction. Since, then, I have made you a just report of our
Customs, which you have entertained with no great approbation; Let me not seem
unreasonable if I request a brief report from you, how you Scythians do breed
your children, and by what exercises you make them stout and valiant.


Anacharsis. It Is but Justice, Solon. I will, therefore make you a narration of
our Scythian Customs; not so glorious perhaps, or grateful to you as your
own: for we are not so valiant as to strike one another on the cheek; yet such
as they are you shall hear. Till to morrow, then, if you think fit, let us
break off our Discourse; that in private I may the better recollect what you
have said, and furnish my memory with what I am to say. Here, then, put we a
period to this conference, and depart; For the evening comes on.


A Discourse of sorrowing for the Dead.
It Is worthy the Observation, what many, in their sorrow do, and say; and what
is said by those that comfort them; how they account some accidents
intolerable, both to those that mourn, and to those that are mourned. When (by
Pluto and Proserpina) they not at all understand, whither they be evil, and
deplorable, or grateful, and desirable to the sufferers; but make fashion and
custom, the rule of their grief. For when any body dies, this is their manner.
But first, I will tell you what opinions they hold of Death. Whereby it shall
appear upon what grounds they are thus superfluous. The greater part of people,
whom the wise call Idiots, building their faith upon Homer, Hesiod, and other
Fablers, and making their Poetry their Law, imagine a certain deep place, or
hell under ground, large, spacious, dark, and sunlesse; yet so lightsome in
appearance, as to represent to them every thing there. In this vault (as one of
them told me the story) reigns Jupiters brother, called Pluto; honored with
that style from the store of Ghosts wherewith he is enricht; whose form of
Commonwealth, and the life of souls infernal is thus ordered. It fell to him
by Division, and Lot, to rule over the Dead* which, as he receives, he binds in
unavoidable Chains; and permits none to return, but some few once in an Age,
upon weighty reasons. Through his Country run Rivers, great, and terrible from
their very Names, called Cocytus, and Phlegeton, and the like. And what is yet
worse, the entrance to it is the Lake of Acheron: which first receives all
Comers, and is not to be past, or sailed over without a Ferryman; being for
depth not to be waded, and for breadth not to be swumme over. In a word, the
Ghosts of Fowls departed cannot fly over it. In the Descent, seated in a Gate
of Adamant, sits Aeacus, the Kings Cousin German, who commands the passage.
Near him lies a dog with three heads, of great fierceness; who on Arrivers
casts a gentle, and peaceful eye; but barks at those who endeavor to escape,
and frights them back into their Dungeon. Those that are wafted over the Lake
are received into a spacious meddow, set with Daffodills; through which glides
a stream enemy to remembrance, and for that reason called Lethe. For these are
the relations of them, who have anciently returned from thence; Alcestis, and
Protesilaus, two Thessalonians; Theseus also, the Son of Aegeus* and Homers
Ulysses; very reverend and credible witnesses: who surely drunk not of the
forgetful Spring, for then they had not remembered such descriptions. Pluto,
then, and Proserpina, as they report, reign there, and have the whole Dominion
of the place. Though they have many Attendants, and Ministers of state, as
Furies, Punishments, Horrors, and Mercury, (who is not constantly resident)
under-rulers also, and Peers, and two Judges, Minos, and Rhadamanthus, both of
Creet, and Sons of Jupiter. Who when a Competent number of good men, and
just, who have lived a life of virtue, are arrived, send them like a Colony
into the Elysian fields, there to live a life of felicity. But wicked men they
deliver to the Furies, to be conveyed to the region of Malefactors, there to
be punished according to their offenses. In which place what miseries do they
not suffer? tortured and burnt, and gnawne by Vultures, and tossed upon wheels,
and forced to roll relapsing stones against steep hills. Tantalus stands in a
Lake, yet is wretchedly in danger to dye with thirst. Others of a middle kind
of life (of which there are store) wander in a meddow without bodies, being
mere shades, which touched vanish like smoke. These are nourisht by our
sacrifices, and oblations powered on their graves. So that he who has no
friend, or Allye left on earth, wanders among them famisht, and starved. These
dreams have made such strong impressions in some, that when one of their
friends dies, first they put a fare in his mouth, which he is to give the
Ferry-man for his wafrage. And do not first consider whether the money be
current, and will pass below; or whether with Ghosts, an Attick, or
Macedonian, or Aegina coin bear most value; or whether it were not much
better to have no fare at all to give. For so being refused by the Ferry-man,
he may be sent back, and return to life again. After this, they wash him, (as
if the Infernal marrish were not B^th enough for those that come thither) and
embalme his body with rich ointments, for the expulsion of ill smells; then
crowning him with Orient flowers, they lay him out gloriously apparrelled;
lest, perhaps he should take cold by the way, or be seen naked of Cerberus;
Then follow the howlings of women, tears of acquaintance, percussion of
breasts, tearing of hair, cheeks bloudyed, garments rent, and heads sprinkled
with dust. So that the living are more to be pitied then the dead. For they
many times roll themselves on the floor, and dash their heads against the
ground, whilst the other, adorned and trimmed, and gloriously crowned, lies
aloft, and sublimed, like one dressed for a triumph. Lastly, his mother, and
father, surrounded with their kindred, go before him, to whom turning
sometimes (you must imagine him to be some gallant young man, for the greater
solemnity of the play) they utter abortive, senseless sounds, to which the dead
party would make answer, were he able to speak. For his father, drawing out
every word with interruptions, and sighs, thus bespeaks him. My dear son,
thou art lost, dead, and before thy time snatched from me; leaving me alone,
solitary wretch: Thou vvast neither married, nor had children, not practiced
to the Camp, or plough, or arrived to thy old age; never more, my child, shall
thou feast, be amorous, or drunk again with thy companions. Such and the
like complaints he povvres forth, out of an opinion that his son after death
needs, and desires such things, but is denied the fruition. But why mention I
such trifles? How many are there, who at such funerals do sacrifice his
horses, concubines, and butlers, and burn, and bury his robes, and clothes of
ornament, with the deceased party, as if he were to use, or enjoy them
below? Now the old man, who thus laments, speaks not this, and much more,
nor is thus tragical with reflection on his son, (For he knovves he cannot
hear him, though he should cry as loud as Stentor) or on himself, for then
his bare inward thought, and contemplation, were sufficient without a voice.
For no man needs to be clamorous to himself. It remains, then, that he acts
this distemper for the spectators sakes, since he neither knovves what has
befalne his son, nor where he is, nor well examined the course and state of
his life. For, then, he could not reckon his departure hence among calamities.
Well, therefore, might his son, having obtained leave of Aeacus, and hell, to
raise his head a while out from his dungeon, for the quieting of his distracted
father, say thus to him, Forlorn man, what mean thy clamours? Why do thou
trouble me? cease to tear thy hair, and to rent thy face. Why art thou so
injurious to call me miserable, and unfortunate, who am much better, and
happier then thou? Is it, think thou, any calamity to me, that I am not
arrived at thy decrepit age, or have not a bald head, wrinkled face, crumpt
back, and slack knees, or am not withered, and decayed by so many Triacades,
and Olympiades of time, or betray not my follies before so many witnesses? Fond
man, What can thou call desirable in life, which we shall not afterward
enjoy? perchance thou will say delicious potations, feasts, rich garments, and
the pleasures of Venus; whose denials thou fear are my misfortunes. Do
thou not understand how much better it is not to thirst, then to drink? or not
to be hungry, then to eat? or not to be cold, then richly clothed? Since,
then, I perceive thee ignorant, I will truly teach thee how to grieve. Begin
thy Lamentations again, and say, My wretched child, never more shall thou
thirst, never more shall thou hunger, never more shall thou freeze. Thou art
lost, unhappy boy, and have escaped diseases, need not hereafter fear
fevers, enemies, or Tyrants: Love shall no more torment, nor venery tempt
thee; nor shall thou twice or thrice a day consume thy self. O calamity! Thou
shall not be scorned, when thou art old, nor thy sight be thought troublesome
to young men. Should thou, O my father, say thus, would not these complaints
seem much truer, and more ridiculous then the other? Be not, therefore,
troubled at the consideration of our night, and great darkness; nor imagine
me stifled when I am shut up in my tomb. But think rather, that my eyes
being perished, and burnt (if yet you have burnt me) need neither darkness,
nor light to see by. But suppose your own private complaints reasonable, how
am I bettered by your howlings, or by so many breasts, as it were musically
struck, or by the immoderate Lamentations of so many women? why do you lay a
stone strowed with Garlands on my grave? or to what end do you power wine upon
me? Do you think 'twill distill to us, and soke through to Hell? As for your
funeral sacrifices, you your selves, I suppose, plainly see that the most
precious part, which is intended for us, is carried up in smoke to heaven, and
profits not us below. Nothing remains but dust altogether unusefull, unless
you think we can eat Ashes. Pluto's Kingdom is not so barren, or
unfruitful, nor are we so void of Daffodils, as to translate your meals
hither. I swear, therefore, by Tisiphone, I have had a longing desire to
exclaim against your Actions, and speeches, but was hindered by the winding
sheet, and wool wherewith you stopped my utterance: He made an end, and then
death closed his eyes. But for Jove's sake tell me* should one departed
return, and leaning on his elbow speak thus, would you not think he spoke
reason? yet these senseless people do both howl themselves, and hire some
Sophister, whose trade is lamentation; who mustering up many old calamities, is
employed as the leader, and captain of the frantic solemnity; and where he
begins, they follow, and make up the ridiculous consort. Their lamentations
have all one manner of folly; But several Nations have several manners of
funeral. The Greeks burn their dead; the Persians bury them; the Indians
anoint them with Lard; the Scythians eat them; the Egyptians salt and powder
them: where I have seen a dead body well dried, and seasoned set at meal, and
made a guest. Nor is it unusual with an Egyptian, when he lacks money to
supply his wants, to pawn his father, or brother for a time. For as for
tombs, Pyramides, Pillars, and fading Epitaphs, are they not superfluous, and
childish? Others ordain funeral Games, and make Orations at Sepulchers. As if
they pleaded, or gave testimonials of their dead friends to the infernal
Judges. After all comes in the funeral supper; to which are invited the
deceased persons friends, who comfort his parents, and persuade them to eat.
To which they are not unwillingly compelled, having felt the famine of three
days before. How long, say they, will you bewail your dear loss? Trouble
not his happy Ghost any longer with your complaints. Or if you be obstinately
resolved to mourn, you are therefore not to starve your self, that you may be
able to hold out with the greatness of your sorrow. Then for a Conclusion,
they all repeat these two verses of Homer; For bright hayr'd Niobe remembered
meat:


And, The Hungry Greeks banished their cares with meat.


Whereupon they fall to; but bashfully at first, out of their fear, after the
death of their dearest friends, to betray any humane disturbance. Many things
more ridiculous then these may he observe, who marks what is done at
mournings, since most people think death the greatest of evils.

Hercules of Gaul, or a Discourse of Eloquence.
THe Gauls in their Language call Hercules Ogmius, and paint the God in a
strange figure; extremely old, and decrepit, bald before, his hair, which
remains, white, his skin wrinkled, and burnt into a deep tawnie, like aged
sailors: you would take him for Charon, or some Infernal Iapetus; and would
guess him to be any thing sooner then Hercules. Yet in this unlikely shape he
wears the ensigns of Hercules; a Lions skin about his shoulders, A massy
clubbe in his right hand; a quiver at his back, and a bent bow in his left
hand, like an outright Hercules. I thought at first they had drawn him thus
preposterous out of contempt of the Grecian Gods; and by this uncouth picture
meant to take revenge of him, for his ancient entrance into their Country, and
the prey's he took, when in search of Geryons herds, he overran many
western Nations. But I have not yet told you the greatest paradoxe of the
picture. This aged Hercules draws a vast multitude of people tied by the ears
with chains, which are slender wires, made of gold, and amber, like to our
most orient bracelets. Yet though they be captived by such feeble threads, they
neither labor to escape, though they easily might, nor offer to make
resistance, nor hang back, or struggle with their leader, but follow him with
pleased, cheerful, and applauding countenances; all striving to make haste,
and slacking the cords out of their desire of prevention, and expressing some
unwillingnesse to be releast. It shall not be troublesome to me to describe to
you what to me seemed most absurd. The painter, wanting a place where to
fasten the ends of his wires, having filled his right hand with a clubbe, his
left with a bow, bored a hole through the tip of his tongue, at which he drew
them linkt* the God turning himself, and smiling on them. Lord stood I fixed in
the contemplation, wonder, doubt, and indignation of the piece. till a certain
Gaul, who stood near me, not ignorant of our learning, as he well showed by
his exact pronuntiation of Greek, whereby I took him to be some Philosopher
of that Country, said, Stranger, I will unriddle the picture to you; for it
seems to have cast you into a deep astonishment. We Gauls do not, like you
Grecians, ascribe eloquence to Mercury, but to Hercules; who was much the
stronger. Nor let it be your wonder that you see him painted old, since
eloquence of all things else shows its power most in age. If your Poets say
true: that, In younger minds do mists and clouds arise,
But the discourses of old age are wise.
Thus honey was said to drop from your Nestor's tongue; and the Trojan Orators
to utter fragrant flowers; that is, if I mistake not, to speak in a musical
voice. Nor are you to marvel that this old Hercules, the emblem of
eloquence, draws men tied by the ears to his tongue, knowing the near
Alliance between them. Nor ought it to be his reproach, that you see his
tongue bored; for I have learned, said he, from your Comedies, which I yet
remember; That men, in speaking verst,
Have tongues bore'd through, and pierced.


Briefly, we hold that Hercules performed all his labors by Rhetoric; and
being a wise man, subdued Countries merely by his persuasions: whose darts were
sharp, well aimed, quick speeches, which pierced the hea^ers souls, such
speeches as you call winged. Thus said the Gaul. Whereupon I walking off,
considerd with my self, whether it would become a man of my years, who had
long since abandoned the profession, again to submit my self to the judgment
of so many censurers: when opportunely the remembrance of the picture gave me
encouragement. For till then I was jealous, lest you should think my course of
life childish, and too youthful for my Age; or lest some Schoole-boy should
apply that piece of Homer to me, and say, Thy strength is vanished, Age ^ath
made thee snow,
Thy servants spent, thy horses are grown slow,
Alluding by that scoff to my feet. But as often as I remember the old
Hercules, I am prepared for any employment; nor blush at my profession, though
I be as antique as the picture. Fare well, then, my strength, activity, shape,
and all other goods of the body. And let Cupid, if he please, seeing me with
this white chinne, fly by me with his glittering wings, more swift then
Eagles. It shall not trouble Hippoclides. For now is the time for me to grow
young, and vigorous again, and to flourish in elocution, and to draw as many
by the ears, and aim as many darts as it is possible; since I am fearlesse
that thereby my quiver will be exhausted. You see the refreshments of my old
age; who thus adventure to launch forth my ship which has layne long in the
Docke; and to commit her once more rigged to the mercy of the sea. Swell my
sails prosperously, O ye Gods, who have so much need of friendly and
auspicious winds. Which if you vouchafe me, let another apply that other
piece of Homer to me, See what strong nerves look through his aged rags.


The Ship, or, a Discourse of Wishes.
The Speakers, Lycinus, Timolaus, Samippus, and Adimantus. Lycinus. DId I not
say a corrupted carcass cast out would sooner escape Vultures, then a strange
sight Timolaus, though he were to run himself breathless to Corinth? How
came you to be such a lover of shows, and so indefatigably inflamed with them?


Timolaus. How should I employ my leisure, Lycinus, when I heard of a great
ship, beyond the ordinary burden, landed in our port; especially one of those
Carickes which transporters Corn from Egypt into Italy? I believe you and
Samippus had no other motive for your coming hither, but the spectacle.


Lycinus. Adimantus the Myrrhinusian came with us too, but is lost in the
Crowde of spectators, I know not how. He accompanied us to the ship, and
ascended with us. for if I mistake not, you Samippus went before, Adimantus
followed you, and him, holding him with both my hands, Till he barefoote
guided me shodde up the ladder, and then I saw him no more either in the ship,
or below after our descent.


Samippus. Do you not remember, Lycinus, that he left us when the handsome boy
arrayd in pure white, whose hair equally divided on his forehead was tied
behind, came forth of the Cabin? If I know Adimantus well, at sight of the
fair spectacle he bid farewell to the Egyptian Ship-wright, who showed us
the Rooms, and after his old fashion stood still, and wept: for his amorous
nature makes him very prone to tears.


Lycinus. Methought, Samippus, the boy was not so ravishingly handsome, as to
cast Adimantus into an astonishment; who is courted at Athens by so many young
men, beautiful, nobly borne, fluent of speech, practiced in Games, and to whom
tears are no disparagement. For besides the swarthinesse of his complexion, he
had prominent lips, small legs, a loose, continued, running speech, which
was Greek, indeed, but pronounced after the manner of his Country, in an ill
sound, and Tone. His hair, and locks woven behind, showed him to be a slave.


Timolaus. Their hair, Lycinus, is a sign of nobility among the Aegyptian^,
which all men's children of Quality wear brayded, till their age of maturity.
So our Ancestors of Pallene, when old, cherish't long hair, which they wound
up in a caul, stuck with golden Grasshoppers.


Samippus. You do well, Timolaus, to bring to our remembrance the writings of
Thucidides, who in his Preface to his Ionians, when with others they were
transplanted into Colonyes, speaks of our ancient luxury.


Timolaus. I now remember, Samippus, Adimantus left us when we stood so long
by the mast, numbering the hides laid in heaps, and admiring the sailors
running up the Tackling, and down again, safely holding by the sail yard.


Samippus. You say true, what then shall we do, stay here, and expect him?
or shall I go back again to the ship?


Timolaus Rather let us go on. For it is likely he is past by, and returned
into the City after he could not find us. If he be not, he knows the way;
nor if we leave him behind is there danger of his loss.


Lycinus. But consider whether we may with civility depart and leave our
friend; yet if you like the motion, Samippus, let us go on.


Samippus. You have my consent, if the School of exercise be yet open. But
among other Discourses, do you remember what large Descriptions the wright
made of his ship? which he said was an hundred and twenty Cubits in length,
the fourth part of that in breadth; from the Deck to the lowest Bottom, where
the pumpe stands, twenty nine cubitts. He told us also the length of the mast,
the greatness of the yard it bore, and the vastness of the cable whereto
'twas fastened. How the Stern rising in an insensible bent had a golden goose
for an ensign, and the forcastle equally promiment, and standing out at the
other end bore on each side the Goddess Isis; who gave name to the Carricke.
The other trimmings, pictures, flame colored sails, Anchors, Capstalls,
Rudders, and Cabbins next the Stern, much provoked my admiration. Then the
multitude of sailors, which might be compared to an Army. Then 'twas said to
carry as much corn as would serve all the Inhabitants of Attica a year for
food. And all this prodigious bulk is ruled by a little dwarfish old man, who
steeres and wields it with a slender pole. One showed him to me, a bald curled
fellow, his name is Heron.


Timolaus. A rare man in his Art, as they report who sailed with him, and a
better seaman then Proteus. You have heard by what accident the ship was
driven hither, what they suffered in passage, and how they were preserved by a
star.


Lycinus. We have not, Timolaus, but would gladly hear.


Timolaus. I had the relation from the Master, a courteous man, and of civil
behavior, who told me that after they had hoysed sails from Pharos, they
were with easy gales in seven days brought in sight of Acamas, at what
time they were crossed with a west vvind, which carried them as far as Sidon.
From whence in great tempest they were driven in ten days through those
straights upon the Chelidonian Islands, where they almost suffer^d vvrack. I
know by my own experience, and presage by those Islands the roughness of
that Coast, especially made tempestuous by the South, and South west vvindes.
For there the Pamphilian Sea dividing from the Lycian, and the floods meeting
several vvayes, and breaking themselves against the Promontory, which
consists of sharp, broken rocks, made craggy by the waves, swell into
terrible billovves, which make a dismal roar, and rise sometimes above the
height of their steep rocks. Hither, he said, they were driven in a dark
night. At length the Gods, compassionate to their cries, revealed a fire to
them from Lycia, by which they knevv the place. For a star, one of the
tvvins, sat upon their top-saile, and by a left hand course directed the
vessel again into the Sea, just ready to dash against the steep cliffe. From
thence, having once strayed from their right course, sailing through the
Arches, the seventieth day after their departure from Egypt, by Easterly side
winds they were yesterday driven into the Pyraeum; and cast thus lovv: who,
had they left Creet on the right hand, and sailed above Malea, had by this time
been in Italy.


Lycinus. By Jupiter, Heron showed himself a most admirable pilot, and equal
to Nereus, to wander thus from his course. But see, is not that Adimantus?


Timolaus. It Is he. Lets call him. Adimantus, you Myrrhynusian, Strobichus
son.


Lycinus. He is one of the two, either angry with us, or deaf. It can be no
other but Adimantus. I know him by his clothes, and gate, and close notching:
lets swiften our pace, and overtake him. If we had not taken hold of your
cloak, and stopped you, Adimantus, you would never have heard us: you seem to
be in a contemplation, and dumpe, and carry some magnificent design in your
countenance.


Adimantus. It Is not dangerous, Lycinus, but a certain unusual contemplation,
which seized on me by the way, and made me not hear you, whilst my sense
was called away by my consideration.


Lycinus. What was it? fear not to acquaint us; unless it be such a secret,
as is not to be uttered. You know we are sworn friends, and have learnt to
conceal.


Adimantus. I shall blush to tell you; so childish will my thoughts appear to
you.


Lycinus. Is love their object? you may safely admit us to your mysteries, who
are initiated with the same bright Taper.


Adimantus. No such matter, Sir, But I was shaping to my self great fortunes,
which others, perhaps, style empty happiness; and when I was in the height of
my wealth, and pleasures you awoke me.


Lycinus. According to the common proverb, then, we are to cry half Mercury,
or Booty, and you are to produce your riches: For it is but Justice that we who
are your friends should share in your felicity.


Adimantus. As Soon then, as we were ascended the ship, and I had safely got you
up, Lycinus, you all forsook me, and left me measuring the greatness of the
Anchor; I nevertheless took a survey of all things, and asked one of the
Mariners, what revenue the ship might one year with another bring the
master of it: who said in the least computation twelve Atticke Talents. At my
return, therefore, I thus discourst with my self. Would some God make this
ship mine, how happy should I be? being enabled to obliege my friends, to
sail sometimes my self, sometimes to send forth my servants? with the twelve
Talents would I build a Palace of the best situation, a little beyond the
painted palace by Ilissus, and forsake my fathers house; I would buy servants
also, rich apparel, coaches, and horses. In this speculation meethought I
sailed, was proclaimed happy by those in the ship, reverenced by the sailors,
and almost thought a Prince; when as I was setting things in order in the ship,
and beholding the port a far off, you, Lycinus, Wrackt my whole treasure, and
overwhelmed my Burke, carried by the prosperous gales of my Imagination and
wishes.


Lycinus. You were best carry me, therefore, before the Admiral, for a
pyrate, or Drowne^, or one that has committed a Land wrack in the way
between the Haven and the City. In the mean time see how I will comfort you
for your losses. Feign to your self the possession, if you please, of five
ships, fairer and greater then the Egyptian, and, which is yet more,
impossible to be wrackt; Let them yearly make five returns, and voyages from
Egypt with wheat, you plainly show fortunate, Sir, how insolent your behavior
would be. Who being but the Master of one Imaginary ship you refused to hear
us, when we cried after you; if you had five such weather proof, you would
not, I believe, vouchsafe to look upon your friends. Proceed you then, wealthy
Sir, in your navigation: we will sit in the port, and ask those who sail
from Egypt, or Italy, if they saw the Isis, Adimantus great ship.


Adimantus. See now whether my fear to reveal my thoughts were not
reasonable; knowing you would convert my wishes to derision, and Satyr:
whilst you go back* therefore, I will stay here in my ship, and proceed in
my navigation; for it is much better to converse with sailors, then to endure
your flouts.


Lycinus. It must not be; we will ship our selves with you.


Adimantus. I Will ascend first, and draw up the ladder.


Lycinus. We will swim after. For you must not think to enjoy great
carrickes, which you neither bought, nor built, and that we cannot also
petition the Gods to enable us to swim many leagues untired. When not long
since we rowed over to Aegina in a small boat, and gave groats a piece for our
fare, you disdained not our company in the passage; yet now you scorn to admit
us, and threaten to draw up the ladder: you are grown haughty, Adimantus, and
have forgot your self; nor know what Master of a ship you are, but are
exalted with your palace built in the most eminent place of the City, and
with the multitude of your followers. For Isis sake, therefore, at your next
return from Egypt, remember to bring us some fine Nile pickles, or perfumes
from Canopus, or an Ibis from Memphis, or, if your ship be able, one of the
Pyramids.


Timolaus. Enough, Lycinus, you have made Adimantus blush, and have overwhelmed
his ship with laughter, which begins to leake, and can no longer hold out
water. Since then there is a good space to the City, let us divide the way
into four parts, and assigning every man his reach, let us severally put up
our vvishes to the Gods. So shall we not perceive the tediousness of the
walk, but recreate our selves like men fallen into a pleasant dream, which
shall make us as happy as we please. For it shall be in every man's power to
put measure to his vvish; since the Gods are able to accomplish things in their
own nature incredible. The thing most considerable herein will be the
discovery how every man will employ his riches, and vvish, and how he will
alter with his fortunes.


Samippus. I obey your fair proposal, Timolaus, and will in my turn vvish
as I think fit. Adimantus consent, I believe, is not to be asked, who has one
foot in his ship already, and Lycinus cannot refuse.


Lycinus. Make we, then, our vvishes, if you please. I will not hinder the
common fortune.


Adimantus. Who shall begin?


Lycinus. You Adimantus, and next to you Samippus, then Timolaus. I will begin
my vvish a little before we arrive at Dipylum, at our entrance upon the last
half furlong, which I will briefly run over.


Adimantus. I, then, will not forsake my ship; but, if you please, will
amplify my vvish, and be Mercury the God of Gain, propitious to us all. I
would have the ship, then, and all things in it, the Merchandise, Merchants,
women, sailors, and whatsoever else is of desirable possession, mine.


Samippus. You forget one thing in the ship.


Adimantus. You mean the long hayr'd boy, Samippus; I would have him mine too.
Next, I desire that all the Graynes of Corn there might be minted into gold
coin, and made so many Darickes.


Lycinus. 'Twould sink your ship, Adimantus. For Wheat, and Gold are not of
equal weight.


Adimantus. Be not envious, Lycinus. But when it is your turn to wish,
transform, if you please, the mountain Parnes into gold, I Will not repine.


Lycinus. I only spoke with reflection on your safety; lest you should all
perish with your gold; which were no great loss. But your handsome boy,
unable to swim, would be shipvvrackt too.


Timolaus. Fear not Lycinus, some Dolphin would convey him on his back to
shore. For can you imagine a musician so preserved, in recompense of his
harmony, or a dead youth transported by a Dolphin to Isthmus, and yet Adimantus
new servant to want an amorous fish?


Adimantus. You have learned from Lycinus, Timolaus, to mock me; though you
be the Author of the proposal.


Timolaus. Wish more reasonably, then. As to find treasure under your bed,
whose conveyance from the ship to the City might put you to no trouble.


Adimantus. You say well. I would have dug up from under the stone Mercury
in my hall as much wealth as should arise to a thousand baskets of minted gold.
Then (as Hesiod prescribes) would I presently have variety of magnificent
Palaces, and buy all the Countries about the City, Isthmus also, Delphos, and
Eleusine, all the Sea coast, and regions bordering upon Isthmus; which should
be for my places of game, when I made my progress into those parts, and to the
plains of Sicyonia. Briefly, all the well wooded, watered, and fruitful places
of Greece should in short time be mine. The dishes wherein I eat should be of
massy gold; my bowls not slight, like those of Echechrates, but should
severally weigh two talents.


Lycinus. How then should your Cup Bearer deliver to you such heavy Bowls
filled? or how could you receive from him, not a Cup, but a weight equal to
that of Sisyphus?


Adimantus. Good Sir, disturb not my wish. I will have Tables, Beds, and, if
you talk, wayters of gold.


Lycinus. Take heed, lest, like Midas, your bread and wine become Gold, and
lest you miserably perish by your Treasure, and dye of a wealthy hunger.


Adimantus. Order your wishes better, Lycinus, when when it comes to your
course to ask. I would to all this, have purple Robes, most delicate fare,
sleeps of pleasure; be saluted, and petitioned by my friends, reverenced and
adored of all: some should every morning early walk up and down before my
door, among which I would especially have Cleaenetus, and Democrates. At whose
approches, and offers to enter, seven barbarous, biggboned porters should
clappe the Gate in their face, as they do now to others. When I pleased to
submit my self, like the Sun to be seen, upon some I would not vouchafe to
dart a look. But to a poor man, or such a one as I was before, be affable,
bid him wash, and come to supper. Rich men should hang themselves when they saw
my Chariotts, Horses, beautiful Pages, to the number of two thousand,
fairliest chosen out of all ages. Then my meals served in gold plate, (for
Silver is base and below me) my sawces, and oils from Spain, my wines from
Italy; my honey native, and untryed; my provision, as pigges, hares, and variety
of fowls, from all places; my Pheasants from Colchis, Peacocks from India,
Turkies from Numidia. Then, my purveyours of all those should be Sophisters,
well studied in Luxury and Sauces. When I take the bowl to drink to any body,
He who pledged me should bear away the Cup. They who are now rich, compared
to me should be so many Irus's, and beggars. Dionicus should no more in
ostentation show his silver Dishes, and Goblets, seeing my Grooms employ as
much silver in daily use. My expenses upon the City should be these. Upon a
Citizen I would monthly bestow an hundred Drachmes; upon a Sojourner fifty:
for the public ornament I would build Theaters, and Bathes; and bring the Sea
as far as Dipylum, where I would make a Haven, and to which I would cut a
passage large enough for my ship to sail in, and to be seen from the
Keramicke. As for you, my friends, I would command My Steward to measure to
Samippus twenty bushels of stamped gold. To Timolaus five pecks. To Lycinus one,
and that strik't, because he is a talker, and flouts my wishes. And this is the
life I would lead; I would be above measure rich, live delicately, and enjoy
pleasures of all sorts. I have said: Mercury accomplish my desires.


Lycinus. Do you know, Adimantus, by what a slender web your God of riches
hangs; which if once broken all your great fortunes will vanish, and your
treasures will be transformed into coals?


Adimantus. How mean you, Lycinus?


Lycinus. That it is doubtful how long you shall enjoy your wealth. For who
knows when you sit down at your golden table; but that while you stretch out
your hand to taste your Numidian Peacocke, or Turkey, you may breath out your
wretched soul, and leave all your ri^hes to Vultures, and Ravens? Shall I
reckon to you some dead before they could possess their wealth? others
impoverish't alive by some God that envyed their estate? Have you not heard how
Croesus, and Polycrates, who were much richer then you, fell in an instant from
their great wealth? But to omit those, can you think your self of a constant
and an eternal health? See you not how many rich men are miserably tortured
with diseases, and pains? some not able to go; others blind, or vexed with
secret stitches within? Should you be silent, yet I know you would not
accept your vvish doubled, and feel rich Phanomachus cramps, or be so
vvomanish as he. I forbear to reckon the Ambushes, and treasons laid for your
wealth, besides the danger of thieves, and slaughters, and hatred of the
multitude. Do you yet perceive of what mischiefs your Treasure is the cause?


Adimantus. Still you are my opposer, Lycinus. I will, therefore recall my
peck of gold, since you thus thvvart my vvishes.


Lycinus. You do like most rich men, to revoke your promise. Propose you your
wish, Samippus.


Samippus. I being an Arcadian, In land man of Mantinea, as you know, desire
not a ship, which to show to my Countrymen were impossible. Nor will I draw
down the Gods to such poor petitions, as to ask a certain measure of
Treasure, or Gold, since all things, even those which seem most difficult, are
possible to them, and since the Law made by Timolaus gives power to ask all
things of them, who will deny nothing; my wish is to be a King. Not such a one
as was Alexander, the son of Philippe, or Ptolemy, or Mithridates, or one
that reigns in a kingdom left him by his father. But I would begin my Empire
from robbery; in which course I would have some thirty faithful, resolute
companions, and associates. Shortly after should come in to us successively
three hundred, then a thousand, not long after ten thousand, till at last we
made up an Army of fif^y thousand foot, beside five thousand horse. Then would
I by common suffrage be preferred, and chosen General, as fittest to lead men,
and manage affairs. That it might be my excellency above other Kings to be
preferred for my virtue, to rule an army; and conquer, not succeed in an
hereditary Kingdom. For that were a felicity like Adimantus Treasure; and
would carry much less satisfaction, then to be the author, and contriver of my
own greatness.


Lycinus. You have ask't no trifle, Samippus, but the height of felicity, in
vvishing to govern such an Army, and to be held the worthiest of fifty
thousand. I thought Mantinea could not have bred such an admirable Prince, and
Captain. But proceed in your Empire, and lead on your Soldiers, and set your
Horse and Foot Troops in Array. I would feign know whether such numerous
Regiments march out of Arcadia, or against what miserable people you intend
your first expedition.


Samippus. I would tell you, Lycinus, did I not rather desire you would march
with us. I will make you Colonel of five thousand Horse.


Lycinus. I thank you for the honor, most mighty Prince, and, after the
Persian manner, do prostrately adore you with my hands behind me, and do
reverence your erected Tiara, and Crown. But desire you to cast the Employment
on some man more valiant. For I am utterly unskil'd in riding, and 'till this
day never backed horse. Nor can I but fear, lest at sound of the Trumpetter,
falling off, I should be trampled in the tumult; or left, if my cour^er be
fiery, taking the bridle between his teeth, he should carry me into the midst
of the enemy: so that to sit him, and rain him in, 'twill be necessary I be
locked to the saddle.


Adimantus. Let me, then, Samippus, lead your horse Troops, and let Lycinus
command your right wing of Foot. For I deserve the highest employment from you,
to whom I gave so many bushels of gold coined.


Samippus. Let us first ask the Horsemen, Adimantus, whether they will accept
you for their Commander. Fellow Soldiers, let them who approve Adimantus for
their Colonel hold up their hand. You have their general consent, Adimantus.
Be you, then, over the Horse, Lycinus over the right wing, Timolaus shall
command the left. I will keep in the midst, after the manner of the Persian
Kings, when they intend to assemble their Counselors. Make we, then, our
first march over the mountains to Corinth, and King Jupiter assist us. After
we have subdued all the parts of Greece (for none will dare to oppose their
Arms against such numerous forces, but we shall conquer without toil) let us
ship our Men and Horse, (Store of victuals, and shipping, and all things else
lie prepared at Cenchrea) and let us sail through the Arches into Ionia. And
having there Sacrificed to Diana, and taken their undefended Cities, and
placed Governors in them, let us march into Syria, through Caria, Lyci^^
Pamphylia, the Pisidians, and the Maritime and mountainous parts of Cilicia,
till we come to Euphrates.


Lycinus. If please you, Invincible Prince, leave me Prefect of Greece. For I
am timorous, and would not willingly go far from home, for I perceive you
mean to invade the Armenians, and Parthians too, Nations warlike, and skillful
Archers. Bestow your right wing, therefore, on some other, and make me some
Antipater of Greece, lest leading your regiment to Susa and Bactra, I be slain
with a Dart, or run through in some place where I am disarmed.


Samippus. You put your self out of the roll, like a Coward, Lycinus, and by
the Law are to loose your head for breaking order. Since, then, we are now at
Euphrates, and the river has a bridge; and the Countries behind us, which we
have past through, are secured, and have accepted Governors of my Imposition
upon them severally; since also some of our Troops are dispatched to the
conquest of Phoenicia, Palaestine, and Egypt, pass you over first, Lycinus,
with your wing, I Will follow, next after me Timolaus, do you Adimantus in the
rear convey over your horse forces. You see through our whole march through
Mesopotamia, we have met with no enemy, but the Inhabitants have voluntarily
surrendered both themselves and their forts We no sooner approach Babylon, but
are unexpectedly received within the walls, and put in possession of the City;
the King making his Rendesvous at Cresiphon has heard of our Incursion;
passing on from thence unto Seleucia, he enlarges his preparations, and
presses more Horsemen, Archers, and Slingers. Our Spies compute him about an
hundred thousand strong, of which twenty thousand hurl darts on horseback:
nor is the Armenian yet come in, nor the borderers upon the Caspian sea, nor
the Bactrians, but the neighboring Troops only, and Suburbs of the Kingdom.
So ^^sily has he levied a vast Army. It Is time, therefore, to consider what
we have to do.


Adimantus. My counsel is to dispatch our Foot Companies to Ctesiphon; and our
Horse Troops to stay hereto guard Babylon.


Samippus. The neerenesse of the danger makes you a coward Adimantus, what is
your opinion Timolaus.


Timolaus. To march against the enemy with our whole Army, and not to give them
leisure to increase their strength, by the new Forces which from all places are
coming in, but to give them an onset by the way.


Samippus. It Is well advised: What think you Lycinus?


Lycinus. My counsel is, that tired with walking this morning down to the
Pyraeum, and now thirty furlongs back again, the Sun also now at noone
being hottest, we repose our selves among those olive trees, and sit down upon
this engraven pillar. Afterward that we rise up and walk on to the City.


Samippus. Do you take your self to be at Athens, Lycinus, when you are
sitting in a Council of war, in the plains before the walls of Babylon?


Lycinus. Your pardon, Sir, I thought you in your wits, But I see you are
beside them.


Samippus. March we on, then, and show your selves undaunted with perils, nor
betray the courage of your Ancestors. You see your enemy in present Array. Let
the word be Enyalius. At the sound of the Trumpet, rush on with a shout, clash
Spears with shields, and join battle with the enemy; Get within their Darts,
that we may avoid their strokes, taking from them their just space and aim:
and since we now fight hand to hand, Timolaus, and his left wing has put the
Medes their Encounterers to flight. The battle about me is yet equal, for it
consists of Persians, and the King is among them. The whole Force of the
Barbarian Horse is turned upon the right wing. Behave you, therefore, your
self stoutly, Lycinus, and encourage those about you to withstand the
Impression.


Lucinus. O dire misfortune! All the Horsemen make their assault upon me, and
I am left alone to encounter them. My best course is, since they enforce me,
to run away to the fencing school, and leave you here in the Skirmish.


Samippus. By no means. You have in part vanquished them. I, as you see, am to
enter combat with the King, who challenges me, and to refuse him were
dishonorable.


Lycinus. By Jupiter, you will presently be wounded by him; For it is very
Princely to receive wounds in a Duel for a Kingdom.


Samippus. You say true. I have received a slight wound; but in no open place
of my body, which shall hereafter betray any deformed scarre. But do you see
how upon reencounter I have with one thrust of my spear pierced both him and
his horse? Next cutting off his head, and taking off his Crown, how I am
saluted King, and publicly adored? From the Barbarians I expect adoration,
over whom I will rule by the Grecian Laws; and be styled one Emperor of
both. Afterward, imagine how many Cities I will build to my name; how many I
will demolish, and take by force, if they contemn my Government. But my chief
persecution shall fall on rich Cydias; who being my neighbor, dispossessed me
of my field, and by degrees encroacht upon my borders.


Lycinus. Finish your wars, Samippus, it is now time after such great
Conquests to celebrate your victories at Babylon with a feast, (For your
Empire, I believe, has extended beyond your furlong) and that Timolaus take
his turn, and wish what he please.


Samippus. But how like you my wishes Lycinus?


Lycinus. As much more laborious, (most admired Prince) and troublesome then
Adimantus wishes* since he desired only a life of pleasure, and to entertain
his friends with two Talent Gobletts. But you were hurt in a Duel, and were
cast into fears, and anxietyes night and day; And were not only surrounded
with Affrightments from your enemies, but with a thousand Domesticke Treasons:
Besides the envy, hatred, and flatteryes of those with whom you convers't.
Among whom you had not a true friend, but all their affections were dissembled,
and acted; out of hope, or fear. The fruition of your very dreams was not
pleasant. Only you had Glory, purple garments, embroidered with Gold, a white
fillett about your head, and a guard to go before you. The rest is toil
insupportable, joined with much anguish. For you are to entertain Ambassadors
from the enemy, or to sit in judicature, or to publish Edicts to your Subjects.
Then some Nation rebels; or some Forrayne invasions are made upon your Empire.
So that your fears, and suspicions are perpetual. And you appear happier to
all men then to your self. Can that condition be noble, wherein you feel the
same sickness as peasants do? nor does a fever distinguish you as a King;
nor death fear your Guards; but making what accesses to you, it pleases,
carries you away lamenting, without any reverence to your Crown? Whilst you
falling from your height, and snatched from your Throne, and going the common
way of men, and made equal to the vulgar, by being lost among the heard of the
departed, leave behind you upon earth only a high Tomb, or exalted Pillar, or
Pyramide rising in equal angles, as so many late, and insensible honors. The
Statues, and Temples, which flattering Cities raise to you, your great name
also perish all by degrees, and dye neglected. Or if they be of any long
continuance, what fruition can they afford to one senseless of them? You see,
then, what fears, perplexities, and toils befall you alive; and what shall
befall you after death. It Is now your turn to wish, Timolaus, see you ask
discreetlyer then these two; as it becomes a prudent man, and one acquainted
with affairs.


Timolaus. Judge you, then, Lycinus, what is faulty in my wish, and what to be
corrected. I desire not gold, or Treasure, or sacks of Coin, or Kingdoms, and
Wars, and Affrights of Empire, which you deservedly rejected. For all these
things are unstable, and fraught with Treasons, and carry with them more
trouble then delight. But I would ask of Mercury certain Rings of those
several virtues. The first should keep me in a firm consistency, and health
of body; invulnerable, also, and free from distempers. The next should make the
wearer invisible, like that of Gyges. I would have another, which should
instill into me the strength of ten thousand men, and enable me single to
carry a weight scarce to be lifted by an Army. I would have another Ring, which
should enable me to fly aloft from the ground. I would also charm as many as
I pleased asleep. Doors also at my approach should voluntarily open, the
locks fly back, and the bolts fall off; and this to be performed with one
Ring. But above all I would have one more powerful then the rest, which worn,
should make me amiable to handsome Boys, Women, and whole Nations, and should
so enamour, and inflame them, and make me so desirable, as to be their
discourse. Women impatient of their desires should hang themselves, and boys
grow mad, and account him happy, on whom I vouchsafe to look: And they whom
I neglected should pine away with grief. Briefly, It should render me more
beautiful then Hyacinthus, or Hylas, or the Chian Phaon. And thus would I be
not for a short time, or according to the measure of the life of man, but a
thousand years, renewing my youth after youth, and still returning to the age
of seventeene; and casting off my decays like serpents. In this state I will
lack nothing. Whatsoever others possess shall be mine, by my power to open
doors, lay the Keepers asleep, and enter invisible. If there be any thing in
the Eastern, or Northern parts of the World, of strange, and unusual
spectacle, or if there be any thing precious, or pleasant to be eaten, or
drunk, I would, without sending for them, my self fly thither, and enjoy them
to a satiety. And because a Griffin is a winged beast, and the Phoenix a foul
to be seen in India, and no where else, I would behold them there. I would
also discover the head of Nilus, and the uninhabited parts of the earth, and
the Antipodes, if there be any such, who inhabit the adverse Hemisphaere of the
world. Next, I would know the nature of the Stars, of the Moon, and Sun
himself, being praesecur'd from their fires. But my greatest delight should be
in the same day to report at Babylon who vanquished at Olympia. And if, perhaps,
I dine in Syria, to suppe in Italy. Then if I had an enemy, to take an
invisible revenge of him, and dash out his brains with a stone. On the
contrary, to bestow secret courtesies on my friends, and shower gold on them in
their sleeps. If there were a proud man, or a rich disdainful Tyrant, I would
take him up some twenty furlongs, and then precipitate him. Then, without
control might I converse with fair boys, and make invisible approaches, by
laying all asleep but they only. What a spectacle we it to hoyer aloft in
the Air, above all shafts, and there look down upon two Armies fighting? And
if I listed to join my self to the weaker side, and by charming the
Conquerours to bestow victory on the flyers, and recall them from their flight.
In a word, the whole life of men should be my recreation; All things should be
mine, and others should take me for a God. And this is the height of felicity,
which can neither fade, nor be betrayed, especially being accompanied with
health, and long life. What can you blame, Lycinus, in my wish?


Lycinus. Nothing, Timolaus, nor were it safe to oppose a man winged, and
stronger then thousands. But yet let me ask you, Have you among all the
Nations you have flowne over, seen such another old man, so beside his right
mind, as to think himself by the power of a small Ring enabled to remove
mountains with the top of his finger? or made amiable to all eyes, though he
were bald, and saddle nosed? Again, tell me, why one Ring may not suffice
you, but that you must wear so many, and burden every finger of your left
hand, nay with the over number charge the right hand too? Besides, you omit the
most necessary ring of all, which you ought to wear for the cure of your
folly, and allay of your excessive insolence. Unless Hellebore simply taken
purge better


Timolaus. It Is at length come to your turn, Lycinus, to wish. We shall now
see how innocent, and unblameable your demandes will be, who thus accuse others.


Lycinus. 'Twere needless for me to wish. We are now come to Dipylum; and
Heroicke Samippus by his Siege of Babylon, and you Timolaus by dining in Syria,
and supping in Italy, have worn out my remaining furlong; for which I thank
you. For I should never endure to enjoy great riches for a while, and shortly
after be tormented with their loss, and be compelled to eat a thin morsel
of bread; which will ere long be your case, when your fantastique selicitye,
and aerie treasures take flight, and forsake you. And you taking leave of your
wealth, and scepters, like men awakened out of a sweet dream, find nothing at
home but dissimilitudes. Like those Tragedians, who Act Kings; who of^ the
stage are ready to starve, though on it they were Agamemnons, and Creons. You
cannot, then as it is fit, but pine, and vex at your mean spectacles at home.
Especially, you, Timolaus, when Icarus misfortune lights on you, and when upon
the melting of your wings, you fall from heaven, and walk again on earth and
loose all your enchanted ringes which voluntarily drop from your fingers. It
shall suffice me instead of Treasures, and Babylon, sweetly to laugh at your
wishes, especially being so learned, and made by the praysers of Philosophy.


The Council of the Gods.
The Speakers, Jupiter, Mercury, and Momus. Jupiter. LAy aside your future
murmurs, ye Gods, and vent not your mutual whispers, and discontents in
corners, that so many unwothy mortals are admitted to your meetings. But when
the counsel is assembled about it, let every one openly speak his grievance,
and make his complaynt. And do you Mercury, according to Law, make
Proclamation.


Mercury. Hear, and be silent. If any perfect God have ought to say to this
Senate, he is permitted to speak. The inquiry is concerning the native Gods
and forraigners.


Momus. With your leave, and pardon, Jupiter, I Momus am ready.


Jupiter. That Is granted you already by the proclamation; I need not confirm
it.


Momus. First, then, I Pronounce some of us blameworthy; who are not themselves
content of men to be made Gods, but, unless they advance their followers, and
servants to the same equal honors, think they have done nothing great, or
sprightfull. I desire, therefore, Jupiter, that Liberty of speech may be given
me; otherwise my complayntes will be imperfect. You all know of what a
liberal tongue I am, and how ill a dissembler of faults. For I bring all
things into reprehension, and utter my mind freely, not disguising my opinion
for fear, or reverence of any: which makes me seem troublesome to some, and
naturally a Sycophant to others, and am styled the public Informer. Since,
then, the Law, Proclamation, and you your self, Jupiter, allow me freedom of
Language, I will speak nothing reservedly. Many there are, (as I said before)
who not content to be admitted into our Senate, and to enjoy equal society,
though they be half mortal, have brought their servants, and associates into
Heaven, and there enrolled them: where they now share with us, and partake
sacrifices, and pay us not our due tributes.


Jupiter, speak not in riddles, Momus, but express your self clearly, and
without clouds, and assign names. For hitherto you have thrown your speeches
amongst us, and drawn many into suspicion, and raised our jealousies on
diverse. Utter your self boldly, therefore, and fear not to reveal your
self.


Momus. Since you allow me, Jupiter, freedom of utterance, (wherein you do
magnificently, and like a Prince) I will come to particulars, and instances.
First, then, the most generous, halfe-mortall Bacchus, not so much as a
Grecian by the mothers side, but borne of Cadmus a Syrophoenician Merchants
daughter, was no sooner installed in his Immortality, but I blush to tell you
of his behavior, miter, drunkenness, and reeling. I believe, you all see how
naturally effeminate, and womanish he is, half mad, and intemperate from
morning to night. He, I say, has introduced his whole Lineage upon us, and is
the Leader of a Morris, and has declared Pan, and Silenus, and certain wild,
savage Satyrs, and Goat like men, given to dancing, and of monstrous shapes,
for Gods. Of which one has horns, and in half his body downward resembles a
Goat, and wears just such a long beard. Another is a bald old man, wryenosed,
riding for the most part upon an Ass, by birth a Lydian. The Satyrs are
prick-eared, bald, horned, much like new calved Fawnes, by original Phrygians.
They have all tails; and these are Gods of the sober Gentleman's creation. Nor
are we to wonder if mortal men despise us, when they behold such ridiculous
misshapen Gods. I forbear to tell you, how he has brought up two women, one
his Mistress called Ariadne, whose Crown he has placed among the Stars;
the other ^carus the plough-mans daughter* Besides, what is yet most
ridiculous, O ye Gods, he has made Erigones dog a Constellation also, least
she should grieve to be without her companion, and whelpe she loved, in
Heaven. Are not these so many scandals to us, and arguments of our folly, and
others laughter? I proceed to others.


Jupiter. Take heed, Momus, you speak not of Aesculapius, and Hercules. For I
see whither your speech tendes. One of them you know is a Physician, and cures
diseases, and therefore is to be preferred before others. Then, my son
Hercules has purchased his imortality by no small labors. Take heed,
therefore, how you accuse them.


Momus. For your sake, Jupiter, I spare them, though I have much to say; among
other things, that they yet retain their marks of fire. But had I liberty to
speak of you your self, I could say much more.


Jupiter. You have full license. But how can you question me, who am a native
God?


Momus. I cannot hear so in Creet, where they speak otherwise of you, and
show your sepulcher. But I neither believe them, nor those Greeks of Aegina,
who say you have but a forged, supposititious Deity. The things which I think
most worthy of reproof, are these. The original of these disorders, and the
cause how our celestial senate becomes thus adulterated springes, Jupiter,
from you. Who mingle with mortal women, and descend to them in varied shapes.
Which makes us fear least, mistaken for a Bull, you should some time or other
be sacrificed. Or when you are transformed into Gold, least some smith should
work you into one change more, and make a chain, or bracelet, or eare-ring of
a Jupiter. Besides, you have filled heaven with Demigods; for so I must call
them. And 'twould be mere Argument of laughter, should any man of a sudden
be told, that Hercules is made a God, and that Eurystheus, who enjoined him his
labors, is dead and perished; and that nearly adjoined are to be seen Hercules
the servants Temple, and Eurystheus the Masters Tomb. Again, Among the
Thebans, Bacchus is made a God; yet his cousins Pentheus, Actaeon, and Learchus
were of all men the most unfortunate From the time, then, that you, Jupiter,
opened the Gate, and accompanied with mortal women, all have followed your
example; not only the male Gods, but what is yet worse, the female too. Who
knows not Anchises, and Tithon, and Endymion, and Jason, and others? All
which, to avoid tediousness, I pass over.


Jupiter. Take heed Momus, you say nothing of Ganymed. I shall take it ill, if
you displease the boy by the disparagement of his Pedigree?


Momus. If, then, I must not speak of the Eagle which you have also placed in
heaven, and which sits upon your imperial Scepter, and almost builds her nest
on your head, but must for Ganymed^ sake be sparing; pray tell me, Jupiter,
how Attis, and Corybas, and Sabazius were advanced hither, or Mithres, the
Mede, who wears a Cassock, and Tiara, and has not Greek enough to pledge him
that drinks to him. The Scythians, therefore, and Getes upon these
apprehensions have quite cast us off; bestow Divinity of their own, and make
what Gods they please. So that, without our allowance, Zamolxis a slave is
registered a Deity. But all these are tolerable, O ye Gods: you Egyptian
Barker, who are clad in linen, what are you Divine Doggs-face? or how come you
to be a God? Besides, what means this spotted Bull of Memphis, which is
adored, and gives Oracles, and has his Priests? I blush to speaks of the
Storke, Apes, Goats, and other ridiculous Deities, which, I know not how, have
ascended from Egypt up to Heaven: which how, O ye Gods, can you behold
equally, or more honored then your selves? Or how can you endure, Jupiter,
that they should give you the horns of a Ram?


Jupiter. Surely, the things whereof you accuse the Egyptians, Momus, are very
foul: yet most of them are mysteries, which the profane are not to deride.


Momus. Indeed, we have need of mysteries, Jupiter, by which we may know Gods
to be Gods, and Dogs to be Dogs.


Jupiter. Speak no more of the Egyptians; of whom we will consult at leisure;
proceed to the rest.


Momus. Trophonius, Jupiter, and what most stirs me, Amphilochus, the son of
a wicked Matricide, gives Oracles in Cilicia, false for the most part; with
which, for two Drachmes, he deceives the Inquirers: so that you, Apollo, are
no longer famous; but every stone, and altar which has now Oil povvred on
it, and is Crovvn'd with roses, and frequented by Impostors, of which there
are many, gives answer. The Statue of Polydamas cures fevers at Olympia; and
of Theagenes at Thasus. They sacrifice to Hector in Troy; and in the opposite
Chersonesus to Protesilaus. Since our number, then, was increased, perjury,
and sacrilege have been more familiarly practiced; and the virtuous have
learned to contemn us. And thus much be spoken of bastard, supposititious
Gods. Next, I cannot but laugh, Jupiter, when I hear certain strange names of
things, which are not found among us, nor, indeed, can be. Where are the
so-much spoken of Virtue, Nature, Fate, and Fortune to be seen? are they not
mere senseless empty names of things invented by vain Philosophers? which
though they have no higher offspring then their fiction, yet they make such
impressions upon simple people, that none will now sacrifice to us, out of
their persuasion, that though they should offer to us a thousand Hecatombes,
yet things would fall out according to Destiny, and Chance, and according to
the thread of every man's nativity. I would now gladly know, Jupiter, where you
ever saw Virtue, or Nature, or Fate. For that you your self hear such words
in the disputations of Philosophers, I doubt not, unless you be deaf, and
cannot hear their wranglings. I have much more to say, but will here set my
Period. For I see some troubled at my discourse, others hiss; Especially those
who have been touched by my freedom. For a conclusion, therefore, if you
please, Jupiter, I will read the Decree, lately made for redress of those
grievances.


Jupiter. Rehearse it; since thy complaints have not been altogether
unreasonable; but that many things are to be reformed, and kept from a farther
growth.


The Decree.
The Speakers Momus, and Jupiter, Momus. AT a council, lawfully assembled, the
seventh day of this present month, Jupiter was chief, Neptune President,
Apollo Assistant, Momus scribe by Night, and sleep pronounced this sentence.
Whereas many Forraigners, not Greeks only, but also Barbarians, altogether
unworthy of this State, and Society, have registered themselves, I know not how,
and taken upon them to be Gods, and filled Heaven, so that our meetings are
crowded with the tumultuous confluence of a diverse languaged rout, and our
Ambrosia, and Nectar spent, and raised to a Mina the quart by reason of the
multitude of drinkers: and whereas most immodestly they displace the Ancient,
and true Gods, and contrary to the Laws of this Country, claim the highest
seats here, and precedence of Adoration on Earth: It seems good to the
Council, and present assembly, that the next winter Solstice, a Parliament be
called in Olympus; and there seven Gods be joined in a Committee for the
examination of usurpations, of which three to be of the old house under
Saturn, and four or the twelve; of which Jupiter to be one. Next, they who
sit in Commission to be Legally sworn by Styx; and Herald Mercury, to summon
all those who are to appear in the Synod; and they to bring sworn witnesses,
and proofs of their descent, and to come forth one by one. And the
Commissioners, upon examination, either to pronounce them Gods, or to return
them to their Sepulchers, and the Monuments of their Ancestors. He, who once
disallowed, and sentenced by the Commissioners, shall afterward attempt to
enter Heaven, to be cast down to Hell. Next, every one to attend his own
profession. Minerva not to practice Physic, nor Aesculapius to give Oracles,
nor Apollo so variously to employ himself, but to make his choice whether he
will be an Oracle, or a Musician, or a Physician. Philosophers to be admonisht
that they feign not new names, nor trifle about things they know not. They who
have been falsely honored with Temples and Sacrifices, to have their images
demolisht, and the Statue of Jupiter, or Juno, or Apollo, or some other
Legitimate Gods to be erected. Cities to build Tumbes to the rest, and in
stead of Altars to set up Pillars. Whosoever disobeyes this decree, and
refuses to make appearance to be sentenced unheard.


Jupiter. The Act, Momus, is most just; you who approve it, hold up your hands;
or rather be it ratified. For I know many will deny their suffrages. And so
dissolve the Court; with this charge that at Mercury's summons you all appear,
and bring every one clear proof, and certain evidence of his father, and
mothers name; how he came to be made a God, and also of what stock, and family
he is descended. If any appear not, the Commissioners shall not consider what
magnificent Temples he has on Earth, or how men esteem him for a God.


The Images.
The Speakers, Lycinus, and Polystratus. Lycinus. Just so as they who were
confounded at the sight of the Gorgons head, was I lately astonished at the
sight of a beautiful woman; and almost accomplished the fable, by being changed
from a man into a stone, and congealed by the wonder.


Polystratus. By Hercules 'twas a supernatural, and very powerful spectacle,
if a woman did stupifie Lycinus. You frequently suffer such Trances at the
sight of handsome Boys; and it is much easier to remove Sipylus, then to draw
you from their contemplation: so gazingly fixed are you, and many times ready to
dissolve in tears like Tantalus daughter. But pray tell me, what petrifying
Medusa is this, and from whence, that I may also see her? I cannot think you
will envy me her sight, or grow jealous, if I cannot avoid Congealment at the
spectacle.


Lycinus Know, then, that if you but see her through a Casement, she will
presently strike you dumb, and render you more immovable then a statue. But
perchance your wound, if you only see her, will be more gentle and slight. Let
her but see you, and what power will you have to depart? she will draw you
captived whither she list, as the Lodestone draws Iron.


Polystratus. Faigne not, Lycinus a beauty so prodigious. But tell me who she
is.


Lycinus. I am so far from speaking Hyperbolies, that I fear when you see
her, she will so excel, that I shall appear faint in my praises. But who
she is I cannot tell you; she was numerously accompanied, and with great
pomp attended by a multitude of Eunuchs, and waiting Women. In a word her
retinue was much above a private fortune.


Polystratus. Did you not learn her name, nor how she was called?


Lycinus. My Intelligence of her is only that she is of Ionia: for one of the
spectators, turning to him that stood next, said, Such are the Smyrnaean
beautyes. Nor is it a miracle that the fairest City should produce the most
beautiful Women. By which Boast of her, I conceived the speaker also to be of
Smyrna.


Polystratus And you, in the mean time, had this property of a stone, neither
to follow her, nor to ask him who she was. Describe her, therefore, to me, in
the best language you can perchance I may that way be brought to her Knowledge.


Lycinus. Do you know what you ask? It Is beyond the power of speech,
especially mine, to decipher so admirable a piece; for which Apelles, Zeuxis,
or Parrhasius, though we should join to them Phidias, and Alcamenes, are
insufficient. I shall but deforme the Original by my want of skill.


Polystratus. However, describe her face, Lycinus, 'twill be no dangerous
attempt, to represent her picture to your friend in its own lineaments.


Lycinus. I hold it much safer, for the accomplishment of the work, and fairer
draught of the woman, to call into my assistance some of the ancient Artificers.


Polystratus. How mean you? Or how, after so many years, can you recall them
from the dead?


Lycinus. Easily if you will vouchsafe to answer to my Questions.


Polystratus. Ask what you please.


Lycinus. You have been at Cnidos, Polystratus?


Polystratus. Yes.


Lycinus. And you have seen their Venus?


Polystratus. It Is the best piece Praxitiles ere made.


Lycinus. You have heard the story, also, which the people report of her; how
one enamored of the Image, and secretly left in the Temple, to his power
committed with the Statue? but more of this some other time. Since, then, you
have seen her (as you say) answer me to this question. Have you observed
Alcamenes Statue in the Garden at Athens?


Polystratus. I were the dullest, and most careless of all men, Lycinus, not
to mark Alcamenes fairest piece.


Lycinus. I will not ask you, Polystratus, how often you have ascended the
Fort, and there seen Sosandra carved by Calamis.


Polystratus. I have frequently seen her too.


Lycinus. It Is sufficient. Which piece of Phidias's do you praise most?


Polystratus. Which should I, but that at Lemnos? on which he doubted not to
engrave his name? and next his Amazon leaning on a Spear?


Lycinus. These, indeed, are his best. Nor shall I need more Artificers: take
now several parts from all these, and proportion them as well as you can, and
I will show you all their excellencies collected in one feature.


Polystratus. How may that be?


Lycinus. Without difficulty, Polystratus, If allowing the ability of drawing
pictures to language, we allow it the power also to trim, compose, and fit,
and with the best proportion it can, to observe mixture and variety too.


Polystratus. You say true. Pray show me these several excellencies joined. I
would feign see how you can dispose them; or how, from such disagreeing parts,
you can raise one harmonio^s piece.


Lycinus. The picture, then, which I will present to to your view, shall be of
this composition. Give it the head of Venus at Cnidos, and 'twill require no
other parts of the naked Goddess Next, you shall allow it the hair forehead,
and well drawn eye brows of the Goddess, as they are carved by
Praxiteles; as also the sparkle of her eye, joined with such a cheerfulness,
and grace of countenance, as Praxiteles has fancyed them. Then the breasts,
and fore parts shall be taken from Alcamenes, and his Venus in the garden; as
also the extremities of her hands, the Arithmeticall junctures of her wrists,
and the decent slenderness of her fingers, ending in a beautiful sharp; the
Air of the whole face, the delicacy of the cheeks, and measure of the nose
shall be borrowed from Lemnia and Phidias, who shall also bestow the composure
of the mouth and his Amazons neck. Sosandra, and Calamis shall adorn it with
modesty; with which shall be mingled a soft, unperceiveable simper inclining to
a smile. The bravery of Attire shall be taken from Sosandra, all but of the
head, which shall be bare; the size and dimensions of her stature shall carry
just proportion to that of the Cnidian Venus, as Praxiteles has happily
measured her. What think you Polystratus, will it be a fair piece when it is
exactly finished?


Polystratus. Can there be yet any addition of beauty made to your picture,
after such an amiable accumulation of parts?


Lycinus. Hitherto my description has been rude; and to all this, my friend,
you are to join color, and decorum; that those parts which are black be
exactly black, and those which are white, be execllently white; and those which
are read do out-blush the role. So that the danger is, since the greatest
perfection is yet wanting, from what paternes we shall derive it. Shall we
call into our assistance the rarest paynters, to help us to mingle colors, and
teach us how to give them fit order, and disposition? Be it so; let us recall
Polygnotus, Euphranor, Apelles, and Aetion; and let them divide the work. Let
Euphranor paynt the hair, as he has drawn Juno's. Let Polygnotus limb two
decent eyebrows, and such flowery cheeks, as he has given to Cassandra in
the Quire at Delphos; let him also shape the garments so subtlely, that part
may sit close, the rest may hang loose, and appear blown by the wind. Let
Apelles draw the rest of the body by Pacata, on which let him not lay over much
white, but make it temperately sanguine. Let Aetion draw such lips, as he
has given to Roxana; but above all, Let Homer, the best of Painters, be joined
in assistance with Apelles, and let the whole body wear that color which he
has laid upon Menelaus thighs, Ivory dipped in Scarlet. Let him also frame the
eyes, and make them Oxelike; to which let the Thebane Poet join his Pencill,
and draw the liddes. Then let Homer add a sweet cheerfulness, shoulders of
snow, rosy fingers, and make her fitter to be compared to his golden Venus,
then Briseus daughter. And so much be taken from the most learned Statuaries,
Painters, and Poets. But the Grace, or rather all the Graces, and Cupids,
collected in one Circle of beauty, arising from this composition what Language
can express?


Polystratus. Trust me you have deciphered as divine a piece, Lycinus, as if
dropped from Jupiter, or made by some Celestial Artificer. How was she busied
when you saw her?


Lycinus. She held a Book in her hands, rolled into two parts; one of which
she seemed to have read, and then to read the other. Only between pawses
she discoursed some thing to one of her women, which came not to my knowledge,
because her voice came not to my hearing. But when she smiled, Polystratus,
she betrayed two rovves of teeth, so white, so even, and so proportioned to
one another, that if you have seen a rope of Orient, and equally sized pearl,
just in such order they grew. Only they took a fresh luster from the Crimson
of her lips, through which they shined like Homer's polisht Ivory. None were
broader, or higher, or more prominent then others, as you see in most women,
but were of one equal rank, color, and bigness, and equally ordered in
their rows. Briefly she was a great wonder, beyond all mortal beauty.


Polystratus. Despair not. I know what woman you mean, by her description and
Country; and by the Eunuchs, and soldiers, which you said attended her. Your
remarkable piece is a Kings wife.


Lycinus. What is her name?


Polystratus. It Is a most sweet, and amiable one, Lycinus; The same with that
of Abradatas fair wife. Have you not often heard Xenophon praise a discreet,
beautiful woman?


Lycinus. Yes; and am so affected, that methinkes I see her, as often as I read
that passage in him; and do almost hear her discoursing of battles; and how
she armed her husband, and behaved her self when she sent him to the War.


Polystratus. You then, seeing this Lady but once in passage, like a flash of
lightning, have hitherto praised only her vulgar perfections, I mean, her
body, and outward feature. The perfections of her soul are invisible, nor
could you know how much more excellent, and divine, her inward beauties are
then her corporeal. But I do, who am of her acquaintance, and have often
mingled discourses with her, and am of the same Country. For I have (as you
well know) ever praised sweetness of carriage, and affability, and height of
spirit, and wisdom, and education, before beauty, as endowments much worthier
to be preferred before those of the body. For 'twere most unreasonable, and
ridiculous to admire the garment above the wearer. The most perfect beauty,
then, (if I may judge) is, when the virtue of the mind concurres with the
amiable shape of the body. I can show you some of indifferent features, who are
staynes to their creation; In whom the only thing praiseworthy dies, and
withers, blemished, and disgraced by its desertlesse conjunction, to so foul a
Mistress as their soul. Such women to me resemble Egyptian Temples, where
the outward structure is glorious, magnificent, and adorned with precious
stones, gold, and carvings* but if you shall search for the Deity within, you
shall find an Ape, or Storke, or Goat, or Cat. 'Twere easy to give you many
such examples. Form, and shape, therefore, are not enough, where the true, and
just dressings are wanting. I do not mean rich garments, and jewels, but those
better dressings before mentioned, of virtue, discretion, equal behavior,
affability, and the rest comprehended under these.


Lycinus. Being so able, Polystratus, to return tale for tale, as they say, in
the like measure, and over, you may do well to draw the portrayture of a soul,
that we may no longer fix our admiration on the worse half.


Polystratus. You enjoyne me* my friend, no small enterprise: nor is it all
one difficulty to praise things apparent to all, and to make obscure things
visible. I shall need assistance too to my Draught, not of Statuaries, or
Painters, but of Philosophers, to whose receipts my figure is to be conformed,
and fashioned, according to the ancient Imagery. Thus, then, I begin. First,
her speech is vocal, and clear, and flows sweet^er then honey from her
tongue; so that Homer is herein to give her the precedence of his Pylian old
man. Every word is pronounced with most delicate Accent, neither too base, or
manly, nor yet too treble, effeminate, or loose; but like the utterance of an
unripe boy, pleasant, tunefull, and gently stealing into the sense: so that
when she cea^es to speak, a certain melody, and relic of her voice
remains, and plays about the ear; like a soft echo, which prolongs the
hearing, and leaves certain delicious footsteps of language, full of
persuasion in the Soul. When she sings her best, especially to the Lute, then
it is time for Halcyons, and Swannes to be silent. For all things are
unmusicall, compared to her; Pandions daughter harsh, and artlesse, with all
the variety of her voice. Had Orpheus, and Amphion, who lead their hearers, and
drew things void of sense to their harmony, hear her, they had, I believe,
forsaken their harpes and stood her silent Listners. For whence should that
Thracian, or the other, who fed a heard on Cytheron, have the skill so to touch
a harp, as to observe the exact proportions of Harmony, not to transgress
number, but by seasonable risings, and falls, to give measure to the lessons,
then the harp to bear consort with the voice, and the quill to keep time with
the tongue, to which are to be added the right stroke of the fingers, and
flexibility of the joints? It, therefore, Lycinus, you ever hear her sing, you
will no more undergo the transformations of a Gorgon, and pass from man to
stone; but will feel raptures like those of the Sirens, whilst a sweet charm
creeping over your sense, takes from you the remembrance of your Country and
acquaintance. And though you seal your ears, yet the sound will insinuate
through the wax. Such is the music of a Terpsichore, or a Calliope, and such
is the skill of a Melpomene, ^raught with a thousand enchantments of all sorts.
In a word, methought I heard such Harmony, as was fit to pass through such
lips and tenth: since, then, you have seen her, imagine you hear her too.
Though this excellency of her voice, being purely Ionicke, with which in her
familiar discourses she mingles much of the Atticke elegancy, be the least
thing to be admired in her; since it is hereditary, and descended to her from
her Ancestors; nor could she well do otherwise, having in her travels
converst with the Athenians. Nor do I wonder that she delights in Poetry, and
is well studied in that way, springing from Homer's City. Suffice it, Lycinus,
that you have seen the picture of her excellent voice, though rudely drawn:
Consider we now her other parts* which I purpose not, like you, to decipher by
a Collection taken from many, and wrought into one piece, (for 'twere poor and
like vulgar paynters, to join so many various, disagreeing beautyes in one
draught) but all the virtues of the soul severally taken shall be cast into
one exact coppye of the original.


Lycinus. You promise me a feast, Polystratus, and a variously furnished
banquet, and seem to repay me with overflowing measure: proceed then; for
there is nothing with which you can more obliege me.


Polystratus. Since, then, the knowledge of all good arts is necessary,
especially those of Contemplation, I shall present her to you various, and in
diverse shapes, and shall approve my self not outdone by you in Mimature.
Imagine her, then, possessed of all the rare endowments which flow from H^licon;
not like Clio, and Polyhymnia, and Calliope, and the other Muses, who are
severally learned but in one thing, but possessed of all, even those of Mercury,
and Apollo too: whatsoever Poets have written in ravishing numbers, or
Historians have published, or Philosophers extolled, are but the several
trimminges, and ornaments of my picture; which are not to be superficially
colored, but to be thoroughly steept in colors of Grain, iterated, and to
satiety repeated. You are to pardon me, If I cannot show an Archetype to this
portrayture; Since in all the Monuments of the Ancient Literature, none such is
recorded. If you think fit, therefore, let this piece of her be laid up as
sacred; being, in my judgment, spotless, and without blemish.


Lycinus. You have described her, Polystratus, most exactly, and with all her
numbers.


Polystratus. I am, next, to decipher the Image of her wisdom, and
understanding. For which I must borrow aid from many examples, most of them
ancient, and one Ionicke. My painters, and coadjutors shall be Aeschines,
friend to Socrates, and Socrates himself; the best resemblers of all those
Artificers, who ever drew with a Venus, and life. Their Aspasia, with whom the
admired Olympius familiarly converst, as she is by them proposed for no mean
example of wisdom, both for her experience in business, sharpness in
affairs politic, and for the edge, and piercingnesse of her judgment, will
I in the most exact resemblance transfer from Miletum to my picture: only
here will be the difference, she is drawn in a narrow Tablet, this Image will
take up the Dimensions of a Colossus.


Lycinus. How mean you?


Polystratus. That though both portraitures be equal in resemblance, yet they
are not in magnitude. Nor did the Athenian Commonwealth then carry any near
proportion to the Roman Greatness now. Though, then, they agree in
similitude, yet this excells in largeness, as being drawn in a more spacious
Table. To these add we, for a second, and a third example, Theano, and the
Lesbian Poetresse, and Diotima. Theano shall confer height of mind; Sappho
Courtlinesse of Behavior; she shall resemble Diotima not only for those
virtues extold by Socrates, but for her other discreet endowments too: and so
Lycinus, you have one part more of her picture.


Lycinus. By Jupiter, Polystratus, most admirably limbd. Pray describe her
other perfections, namely, her sweetness of Nature, and affability, the manner
how she expresses her pity, and relieves the distressed.


Polystratus. Once more, then, I must resemble her to Theano, Antenors wife; as
also to Arete, and her daughter Nausicaa, and all others who have observed an
equal temper in an abundant fortune. Next, fancy to your self the Idea of
modesty, and discretion in Behavior, and in both she answers Homer's Character
of Icarius daughter. For just such a description has he made of Penelope, as I
have, for the agreement of their names, made of Abradatas wife before mentioned.


Lycinus. Your piece, Polystratus, is every way complete, nor can you easily
find more patterns, having past through all parts of the soul, and
commendation.


Polystratus. Not all. Her greatest praises are yet behind. I mean, that in
the eminent height of honor in which she is, she is not blown up by her
prosperity, nor puffed beyond humane measure by her confidence in fortune; but
observes a moderation of carriage which is neither haughty nor burdensome;
receives those who make their Adresse with a popular, and equal sweetness,
affording both her hand, and familiarity. For persons of Quality by so much the
more win upon their Approachers, by how much being advanced above them, they
are not tragical, or unkind in their deportment. And, therefore, they only
who show their power not in pride, but benefits, are most worthy of the goods
of fortune, and most easily avoid envy. For none will repine at his happiness,
whom they see temperate amidst his felicities, and not like Homers Ate,
stalking on the heads of men, and trampling inferiors. A carriage not unusual
in men of base spirits, though the mis-apprehension of their fortune. By which,
beyond their hopes, being suddenly advanced, and placed in a sublime, and
winged chariot, they keep not within their measure, or look down, but
strain to fly aloft, till at length, like Icarus, their wax melts, and
feathers drop off, and they, to the laughter of the beholders, fall headlong
into the sea, and flood. But they who, like Daedalus, employ not their wings to
too lofty flights, remembering they are joined with wax, but observe a humane
course, and love to carry themselves not too high from the water, rather
choosing to wet their feathers, then betray them to the Sun, fly in a safe, and
secure Region. As this Lady, who cannot be sufficiently praised, did: who
receives this reward of her virtues, to have all men wish that she may always
be upon this height of the wing, and that all good things may stream to her.


Lycinus. So be it, Polystratus; since her merits arise not only from her
bodily gifts, which are equal to Helen, but she is much more fair, and lovely
in the qualities of her mind. It becomes also so great a King, and withal so
serene, and gentle, among his other felicities to have the happiness to have
so brave a woman borne in his Empire, joined to him in marriage, and to love
him. For that woman can be no vulgar blessing, of whom the speech of Homer may
properly be pronounced, that she may contend with Venus for beauty, and with
Minerva for parts. For the woman cannot be assigned, with whom she may be
compared, for shape, for wit, for mind, for artifice, as Homer has it.


Polystratus. It Is true, Lycinus, If you think fit, therefore, let us mingle
Characters, and unite your picture of her body, with mine of her soul: which
compiled in a book, let us exhibit to the general admiration of the present
age, and succeeding. A monument much more lasting then if drawn by Ap^lles, or
Par^hasius, or Polygnotus; and she her self will show much more illustrious
limbed by the industry of the Muses, then represented in wood, wax, or
colors: since that is the best picture which, with the beauties of the body,
expresses the virtues of the soul.


A Defense of the former Discourse.
The speakers Polystratus, Lycinus. Polystratus. I Am sensible, Lycinus, says
the Lady, of your great respects, and the honor you design me in your
writings. For no man would have so over praised me, but one who wrote with
affection. But the thing which I would have you know is this. In my disposition
I am not taken with Flatterers, but such men seem to me Impostors, and slaves
by nature. So that when any man heaps Panegyricks on me, and swells my praises
into troublesome, immoderate Hyperboles, I presently blush, and am ready to
stop my ears, and take his commendations rather for mockeries, then just
Encomiums. For praises are no farther tolerable, then the person praised knows
them to be due. All excess is improper, and fawning. I know many, says she,
who delight to hear themselves commended, and to have their defects supplied
by flatteries. As, if they be old, to have one extol their vigor; if they be
deformed, to be preferred for beauty before Nireus, and Phaon. Supposing they
alter shape from their praises, and wax young again, as Pelias believed. But
they are deceived. For nothing were so precious as Panegyricke, if Hyperboles
could bestow whatsoever they commend. Methinkes, therefore, said she, their
case is much like his, who being naturally ill-favored should wear a
beautiful vizard: and then grow proud of his borrowed looks, though they be
ready to drop off, and be disordered upon every encounter; and thereupon to
expose him to the more laughter, when he returns to his own face, and
appears without his veyle. Or, as if a dvvarfe vvearing buskins should
contend in stature with one a cubit higher. Hereto she joined an example.
There was, said she, a great Lady, of competent feature, and handsomeness,
but low, and very short of just stature, praised by a Poet, in song, among
other perfections for her beauty, and tallnesse, who compared her for length
and straightness to a poplar tree; she was much tickled, and clapped her hands,
as if she had received new stature from the verses: which the Poet, seeing her
so joy'd with false praises) often repeated to her. Till a stander by
whispering him in the ear, said, forbear, Sir, lest you persuade the Lady she
is grown taller. A story like this, but much more ridiculous, she reported of
Stratonice the wife of Seleucus, who proposed a talent for the reward of that
Poet who most elegantly praised her hair; though she were bald, and had but
few hairs left: yet bald as she was, and publicly known to have been so of a
long time, by reason of a disease; she found some wretched Poets, who called
her her hayres Hyacinthine, and wove them into curled tresses, and compared the
thinner spaces to Lovedge. She, therefore, laughs at all such who thus expose
themselves to flatterers. She added moreover, that many love to be thus
flattered, and deceived, not only in language, but in pictures too: and,
therefore, choose those painters, who will draw them best featured. For there
are some, says she, who charge the painter to dis^semble their nose, to add
blackness to their eyes, and whatever else they desire; Hence they are not
drawn, but do honor to other pictures nothing like them. These and the like
were her expressions. Many things in your description she likes, but resents
one passage where you resemble her to Juno, and Venus. Such comparisons, she
says, are much too high for her, or any mortal creature. Nor will she allow
you to take Idea from such Heroicke women as Penelope, Arete, and Theano, much
less from the most excel^ent Goddesses. For she says, she bears a sacred
horror, and a superstitious reverence to all things concerning the Gods. And
fears she should be like Cassiopeia, should she admit such praises; though she
stood only in comparison with sea Nymphs, and adored Juno and Venus. She,
therefore, bids you, Lycinus, either alter such expressions, or she will call
the Goddesses to witness you wrote without her allowance. She would have you,
also, know, that she is much troubled your book should be made so public,
comprehending (as now it is) so much irreligion, and blasphemy against the
Gods. She thinks, also, she cannot excuse her self from impiety, and
sacrilege, should she suffer her self to be equaled to Venus at Cnidos, or
in the Gardens. She desires you, also, to remember what you said of her
toward the end of your book, where you style her moderate, not haughty, nor
soaring above humane reach, but observing humble flights; and yet forgetting
your self, you advance her above the heavens, and place her among the
Goddesses. She would not have you think her more indiscreet, then Alexander,
who when an Architect promised to transform Athos, and so to figure it like
him, that the whole mount should be his statue, holding two Cities in his
hands; gave no countenance to such a prodigious undertaking, but holding the
Attempt to be above his performance, dismissed the man not probably able to
contrive so vast a Colossus, and bad him let Athos stand as it was, and not
shrink so great a hill to the similitude of so small a body. She, therefore,
much extols Alexanders Magnanimity, and says, by this refusal he has erected
a statue bigger then Athos in the minds of those who will be his perpetual
remembrancers. It being no Act of mean spirit to contemn such a Paradox of
honor. She praises, also, your Imagery, and admires the contrivance of your
draught, but acknowledges it not to be like her, being unworthy of such
resemblances, nor any way near them; nor, indeed, any woman else. She,
therefore, returns your honors with veneration of your Archetypes, and
patterns: and desires you would praise her a more humane way, and not make her
shoe too large for her foot; lest when she meets you, you silence her. She
bid me, also, tell you, that she hears many say (how truly you know) that
conquerours in the Olympicke Games, are not licenced to have Images erected to
them bigger then their bodies; and that the Judges take care that none exceed
the truth; but exactly size their Statues to the measure of the wrastlers: she
would therefore have you consider, whether if she should allow your false
dimensions, the Judges would not demolish her picture. Think, therefore,
Lycinus, upon some fair alteration of your book, and blot out your offenses
against the Gods; which she took with so much resentment, and read with
such horror, that she besought the Goddesses to be propitious to her. Nor was
she to be blamed for expressing the passions of her sex. For, to tell you
true, I was minded to have said some such thing my self; who at first hearing
perceived nothing amiss, having my contemplation fixed on her descriptions: but
since she made her objections, I begin to be of her opinion; having before
suffered in my self a deceit of the sight; which beholding things in too
near an approach, and close to the eye, cannot perfectly distinguish; But at a
just distance, and space, all things cast true appearances, and are seen as
they are. To resemble a mortal woman, then, to Venus, and Juno, what is it but
to detract from the Goddesses? For by such comparisons the less is not
advanced to the greater, but the greater is diminisht, and drawn down to the
less. As if two should walk together, one of very tall, the other of dwarfish
statute, and you should desire to match them in equality, not one to exceed the
other; the shorter by stretching himself would never reach the others height,
though he stood Tiptoe. But if they will appear alike statured, the taller is
to stoop, and depresse himself. So it is in Imagery; where a man compared to
a God is not so much made greater, as the God called down to an inferior is
made less. Yet had your want of earthly instances sent you to heaven for
Coppyes, you had had some excuse for your impiety: but you having for example
the beauties of so many women, had no need to liken her to Venus, or Juno. You
are, therefore, to your utmost to deliver your self from envy, Lycinus: who
are not accustomed, nor otherwise prone, or easy to over-praise; yet now, I
know not how, you are suddenly changed, and fallen to excesses, and show your
self as prodigal of your commendations, as hitherto you have been sparing.
Nor let it beget your shame, to correct your work, though published; since they
report Phidias to have done so, when he drew Jupiter for the Eleans: who when
he first opened his workmanship to the view of Passengers, stood behind a
curteine, and heard what they blamed or praised. One accused the nose, as too
big, another the face as too long; others censured other parts; and when the
spectators were gone, Phidias shutting himself up corrected, and reformed his
picture by the public Judgment. Holding the opinion of so many not to be
contemned, but that many must necessarily see more then one, though that one
were Phidias. Thus much she gave me in Commission to say, which I cannot but
approve being your friend, and so well affected to you.


Lycinus. Till now, Polystratus, I took you not for such an Orator, who by
your lengthened speech, and accusation of my work, have left me no hope of an
Apology: yet of one piece of Injustice, I must complain, especially in you,
who have sentenced my book undefended, and no advocate assigned to it. It Is
easy, I suppose, according to the Proverb, for him to win the race who runs
alone; nor do I marvel at your conquest, where no glass is set up, nor
liberty given to plead: but that which is yet more unreasonable, is, that you
have made your s^lves the Accusers, and Judges too. Which, therefore, will
you, that I patiently submit to your Decree, and like the Himeraean Poet,
write a Recantation? or will you give me leave to make an Appeal?


Polystratus. Take your choice, so you come prepared with a just defense, which
you shall not make before your Adversaries, as you call us, but before your
friends. I am prepared to undergo the like Trial.


Lycinus I am something troubled, Polystratus, that I shall not plead for my
self in her presence (which would have been much to my advantage) but make my
defense only at her command, yet upon condition you will be as faithful a
reporter to her, as you have been from her to me, I will put my cause on the
Dice.


Polystratus. Secure your self Lycinus, you shall find me no partial
conveyer of your answers, so you contract them into such a brief, as I may
well remember them.


Lycinus. I should rather prolonge my defense to such copious Accusations; but
for your sake I will abridge it. Tell her then from me.


Polystratus. By no means, Lycinus, but express your self as if she were
present: under which personation, I will represent you to her.


Lycinus. Since you will have it so Polystratus, I do suppose her present, and
to have spoken to me whatsoever you have reported from her; though it put me
to the expense of a second preparation. For (not to conceal my perturbations
from you) you have (I know not how) made the Attempt much more terrible to me.
who (as you may perceive) do sweat, and tremble at the apprehension of her
presence, which begetts a kind of astonishment in me. Thus, then, I begin,
since there is now no way left for evasion in her presence.


Polystratus. Let not so serene a countinance affright you: you see she is
cheerful, and mercifully disposed; speak boldly, therefore*


Lycinus. I, most excellent of Ladies, whom you charge for having praised you
above just measure, cannot see how I have bestowed more Panegyricke on you,
then you have heapt upon your self by your religious esteem, and reverence of
the Gods, which is more to your commendation, then all I have said of you.
Pardon me, therefore, that I omitted this part of your description, which had
it fallen within the compass of my knowledge, had stood in the first place:
not with a purpose to excel your other praises, but because, I have said much
less then you deserve. Judge, therefore, what excellencies I have left out,
and what available proofs of your religious carriage and straight intentions.
Since they who thus reverence the Gods, are to be supposed virtuous in all
their Actions toward men. Should you, then, enjoyne me to alter my writings,
and to correct my portrayture, I should be so far from substraction, that I
should insert this passage as the top and crown of the whole work. Next, I
confess my self obliged to thank you, that when I praised the moderation of
your behavior, as not corrupted, or swollen, or puffed up with your present
greatness, and fortune, you by your dislike of my expressions, have confirmed,
and verified them. For not greedily to catch at such commendations, but to
blush at them, and to think them above you, is a sure sign of a discreet, and
affable temper. You, therefore, by your averseness to praise show your self
so much the more worthy to be praised; and do almost fulfill the saying of
Diogenes, who being asked which was the readiest way to glory, said, the
contempt of it. So should one ask me who most deserved praise, I would say,
they who most avoid it. But this is Digression, and from the purpose. That
whereto I am to make my defense, is, that in drawing your picture, I have
resembled you to Venus at Cnidos, and in the Gardens, to Juno, also, and
Minerva. Comparisons too high and beyond your last. To this I might reply, that
the old saying is, Poets and Painters are not accountable; much less
Panegyrists; though their language be Iower, and not fettered in numbers. For
praise is a free thing, and not to be measured by the laws of brevity, or
excess; but makes this its principal aim, to commend the person praised to
the public emulation and wonder. But I will not take that way of defense,
lest I should seem to you so to do for want of other matter. You know that
the laws of Panegyricall Orations consist in the Panegyrists right use of
similitudes, and resemblances; and the height of the Art is to apply well:
which is achieved not when like is compared to like, or to a worse, but when
the thing praised is advanced by something as transcendent as it is possible.
For example, If one in commendations of a Dog should say he were bigger then
a Fox, or Catt, would you think such a one skilled in the Art of praising?
you would not; nay though he should say, he were equal a Wolf, he had not
praised him much. But the perfection of praise were to compare a Dog to a
Lion for size and strength. As when the Poet praises Orions Dog, calls him
Lyon-tamer, which is the perfection of a Dogs commendations. Again, should
any man, desirous to praise Milo the Crotonian, or Glaucus the Carystian, or
Polydamas, say, they were stronger then a woman, would you not think him
worthy to be laughed at for his silly comparison? or if he should say they
exceeded other men, 'twere not praise enough. But how does the excellent Homer
magnify Glaucus? He says, Pollux had not might enough to encounter him hand
to hand, nor Al^mena's warlike son. Do you mark to what Gods he compares him,
or rather preferres him before them? yet Glaucus took not resentments to be
extolled above the stoutest Gods; nor did they take revenge either of him or
the Poet. as irreligious in his prelations; But both were famous, and had in
honor of the Greeks, Glaucus for his valor, the Poet for his numbers,
especially for that passage in them. Wonder not, therefore, that I, intending
to bring you into comparison, (which is essential to a Panegyrist) went by the
highest patterns, led by the reasons of the work. But since you in veigh
against flattery, and profess your hatred of flatterers, I am obliged to make
that one degree more of your praise but by the way I will define and
distinguish the business of a praiser, from the excesses of a flatterer. A
flatterer, making his profit the end of his commendation, without any regard to
truth, thinks he cannot be hyperbolicall in his praises, with which he
mingles many untruths and falsehoods of his own, not blushing to style
Thersites com^lier then Achill^s; or to call Nestor the youngest of all the
Captains that came to Troy; and so he may gain by his lying, he will swear
that Croesus son is of quicker hearing then Melampus, and that Iphneus is
quicker sighted then Lynceus. Whereas the other in praising, lies not, nor
inserts descriptions utterly disagreeing; but taking their natural perfections
though not great, amplifyes them, and makes them larger: not fearing when he
would decipher a horse naturally swift, and fleet, to say, He could fly over
the tops of unprest corn;
Again he would not doubt to say, The course of horses swift as wind.
And if he were to praise a fair house magnificently furnished, he would say,
Such is the Inside of the Olympicke Hall.
Which verse a flatterer for hope of reward, would apply to a swine-heardes
Cottage: like Cynaethus, flatterer to Demetrius P^liorcetes; who when he had
spent all other ways of flattery, praised him for his ptissicke; and said, he
cought very musically. Nor is it the only mark of difference between them,
that flatterers strive to purchase favor with those they praise by lies, and
that the others praise truths with advancement: but that wherein they most
differ, is that the one without choice heap together what Hyperboles they can;
the others use them, but selected, and confined to moderation. These few
distinctions of many have I shown you between flattery and just praise; that
you may not confound, but divide them, and asigne them their several limits,
and measure. Now, then, if you please, apply both these rules to my
descriptions of you, and see to which side they belong. Had the person, which I
compared to the statue of Venus at Cnidus, been foul, and deformed, I might
deservedly have been thought a deceiver, and more impudent then Cyn^ethus: but
being such a one as we all know you to be, my boldness is not altogether
unpardonable. But, perhaps, you will say, or rather have already said, that you
allow me to praise your beauty, but then it ought to have been without envy,
or comparison of a frail woman with Goddesses. I, most excellent Lady (for now
truth compels me to speak) have not compared you to the original Goddesses,
but to their Coppies wrought by the best Artificers in stone, brass, and
Ivory. Nor can I think it irreligion for men to draw resemblances from the
workmanship of men; unless you take her Statue made by Phidias for the true
Pallas; or the Venus carved not long since at Cnidus by Praxiteles for the
heavenly: which apprehensions of them were dishonorable, since I hold their
true portraytures unexpressible by any humane imitation. But suppose I had
compared you to them, I am not singular, or the first broacher of such
similitudes; but have for my examples excellent Poets, especially your
Co-cittizen Homer, whom I will now raise from the dead in my defense, confident
of your allowance of a name so Classick. Let me ask him, then, or rather you,
(who among your other praises, are skilled in all the best descriptions of his
Poems) What think you of that passage, where speaking of the captived Briseis,
he says, Bright as Golden Venus she bewayl'd Patroclus? and a little after, as
if his comparison of her to Venus were not enough, he says: So spoke the woman
Goddess-like and wept.
As often as you meet with such expressions, do you hate him, or throw away
his Iliads, or do you allow the licentiousness of his resemblances? If you do
not, so many past ages have; nor has he hitherto found an accuser, or one that
durst lash his Statue, or libell his obeliske, with the inscriptions of his
censurable verses. If he, then, were licenced to compare a barbarous, weeping
Lady to Glittering Venus, may not I (ommitting your beauty, not to be spoken of
with your patience in your hearing) compare a sprightfull, debonaire Lady, to
the Images of the Gods, for those things which we mortals partake in common
with the^? next, in his Character of Agamemnon, observe how sparing he has bin
of the Gods, whose scattered perfections he has collected, and cast into one
gallant description, where he says, For his eyes and head he was equal to
Jupiter, for his courage to Mars, for his breast to Neptune; dividing his parts
by several resemblances with the most eminent Gods. In another place he
compares him to mortall-slaughtering Mars, and compares others to other Gods;
He calls Hector the Godlike Phrygian, and Achilles frequently the God-like
Greek. But I return to examples of the other sex, you know where he says,
She is like golden Venus and Diana;


And Such is Diana hunting.
Nor does he only compare them with Gods, but likens Euphorbus hair to the
Graces, though imbrued with blood. In a word, there are so many examples in
Homer, that there is scarce any part of his Poem unadorned with similitudes
taken from the Gods. Either, therefore, let such expressions be blotted out,
or grant me liberty to make the like* Nay the use of allusions, and
similitudes, is so uncontrouleable, that Homer has not doubted to bestow
praises on Goddesses borrowed from mean and inferior things; thus he calls
Juno ox eyed, and Venus in another place Violet-sighted; who is so smally
verst in his poems as not to have read of the rosy-finger'd Aurora? It Is no
offense, then, to say, one is shaped like the Gods; but how many have assumed
their compellations, and have styled themselves, Bacchus's and, Vulcans, and
Jupiters, and Neptunes, and Mercuryes: The wife of Euagoras, King of Cyprus,
was called Latona; yet no Goddess was offended, though able to transform her,
like Niobe, into marble. I forbear to speak of the Egyptians, of all people
the most scrupulously superstitious; yet the names of the Gods are in that
plenty worn among them, that most of their compellations are fetched from
heaven. Be not you, therefore, troubled at my praises. For if there be any
offense against the Gods in my writings, you are not accountable, unless one
may prove guilty by hearing offenses read. The Gods will punish me, when they
first punish Homer, and the other Poets; but they have not yet taken revenge of
the best Philosopher, for saying man was the Image of the Gods. I have much
more to say, but for Polystratus sake do here break off, that he may the
better report what I have said.


Polystratus. I know not, Lycinus, whether I be able: for you have spoken long,
and beyond your Glass. Yet I will try the goodness of my memory. And that my
relation to her may be faithful, I do here stop my ears; least the
entrance of other things should confound your method, and I be exposed to the
hisses of the spectators.


Lycinus. 'Twill concern you, Polystratus, to act me right: and so, having
delivered you your part, I take my leave. When the Judges give up their
Decision, I will appear again, and see what will be the issue of this
controversye.


Jupiter Tragoedian, or a Discourse of Providence.
The speakers, Mercury, Minerva, Jupiter, Juno, Neptune, Venus, the Colossus,
Momus, Apollo, Hercules, Hermagoras, Timocles, Damis. Mercury. WHy thus musing,
Jupiter, and holding private Dialogue with your self? You look pale, and have
got the face of a Philosopher. Unlocke your self, and make me Counselor to
your Dumps: perhaps my trifling assistance will not prove contemptible.


Minerva. Say, Jove, thou Sire of Gods, and things below,
I blew-eyed Pallas beg, reveal, and show,
What new disturbance does thy mind surprise,
And from whence do thy sighs, and palenesse rise?

Jupiter. It Is beyond the power of language to name the thing so grievous, or
the distemper, or calamity so Tragical, with which the nature of the Gods is
not burdened.


Minerva. O Phoebus! with what Prologue he begins to speak!


Jupiter. O ye wicked earth sprung race of Mortals, and thou more wicked
Prometheus, what evils do I suffer?


Minerva. What ayle you, Sir? Pray tell this assembly of your friends.


Jupiter. O my loud thunder, what do thou profit me?


Minerva. Moderate your rage, Sir, unless you intend to put us into Buskins
too, and to answer you in lofty parts taken from Euripides.


Juno. Do you think we know not the cause of your distemper, Sir?


Jupiter. Thou can not know, scold never so loud.


Juno. Alas, Sir, the root of your commotion is love. Nor is it my custom
to scold; though I have been frequently injured in this kind. You have found
some Danae, or Semele, or Europa who has kindled this distemper in you, which
you will quench by turning your self into a Bull, or Satyr, or shower of
Gold, in which you will descend into the bosom of your Mistress. For your
sighs, and tears, and change of color, are but so many signs, and
confessions of your flames.


Jupiter. Happy thou, who think my disturbance springs from such a Toy as
Love.


Juno. What else can afflict Jupiter?


Jupiter. The state of the Gods is in extreme danger, Juno, and, according to
the Proverb, it stands upon the edge of a rasour whether we shall hereafter be
worshipped, and receive sacrifice, or be utterly neglected, and held in contempt.


Juno. Has the earth produced new Cyants? or have the old broke their chains,
and freed themselves from prison, and took fresh arms against us?


Jupiter. The Gods are safe from their invasion.


Juno. What else worthy our fears, can befall us? If your distemper arise not
from hence, I see not why you should of a Jupiter become a Polus, or
Aristodemus.


Jupiter. Yesterday, Juno, Timocles the Stoic, and Damis the Epicurean (upon
what occasion I know not) disputed of Providence, in a great Assembly of
knowing and understanding men; which much troubles me. Damis maintained there
were no Gods, who either disposed, or took care of humane Affairs; but the
religious Timocles argued for us, till a press of people rushing in, broke off
the dispute without a decision: only they agreed to meet again, and finish
the discussion. And this is the day on which the suspended heareis expect which
will conquer, and speak most probable truth. Do you see our danger, and to
what straights we are reduced, when Heaven relyes upon the proof of one
single man? one of the two must happen; either we must be despised, and held
only empty names; or be honored as before, i^ Timocles pre veil.


Juno. Believe me, these are no slight dangers, no^ were you tempestuous in
vain, Husband.


Jupiter. You thought the cause of my distemper to be some Danae, or Antiope.
What, then, shall we do? Mercury, Juno, and Pallas, contribute your advice.


Mercury. My counsel is to call a Parliament, and to refer the business to
a public consultation.


Juno. I concur with Mercury.


Minerva. I hold it not fit you should trouble heaven, or show your self
disquieted with the Accident; but privately project that Timocles may overcome,
and Damis may depart exploded from the disputation.


Mercury. Such stratagems, Jupiter, will not be concealed, the Philosophers
disputing so publicly: besides, you will be thought a tyrant, not to impart
so weighty an Affair, wherein all are interested.


Jupiter. Make proclamation, then, and summon all the Gods.


Mercury. I obey you. Hoe, O ye Gods, come to the Parliament: delay not, but
assemble your selves to consult of affairs of state.


Jupiter. Do you make such slight, simple, and faint proclamation, Mercury, for
a Parliament of this consequence?


Mercury. What should I say, Jupiter?


Jupiter. What should you say? I would have you make proclamation in verse, and
in bigge-voyced poetry, that the Assembly may be the fuller.


Mercury. It Is fit for Epicke writers, and writers of Rhapsodyes. I am not
poetically given, and shall therefore spoil the summons by over or under
feet, and my verses will be scorned as inspired by displeased Muses. Besides
I see many laugh at Apollo for his halting oracles, though his obscurity secure
him, and give not the hearers leisure to examine his numbers.


Jupiter. Join, therefore, as many of Homers verses together as he usually
summons us in. You cannot but remember them.


Mercury. Not over readily. Yet I will try.

Be then, no female absent, or male God,
No Goddess of the Sea, or Nymph oth' Flood;
But all to Jupiters Great Council come,
Who ere claim Sacrifice, or Hecatomb.
Come Namelesse too, and vulgar Deityes,
Who feed on gross clouds which from Altars rise

Jupiter. Well done, Mercury; and like a perfect Herald. They are already
assembled, assign them their places, according to their dignityes. Let the
Golden sit first, next to them the Silver, then the Ivory, then the brazen,
then the stone; and among these let those take place, who have been carved by
Phidias, or Alcamenes, or Myron, or Euphranor, or the like rare Statuaryes. As
for this ignoble, uncarved rout, let them sit crowded together afar off, and
keep silence, and serve to fill up the Assembly.


Mercury. It shall be done; and they shall sit as you decree, Jupiter. But I
understand not whether a Deity of Gold, though ill carved, and of vulgar, and
misshapen sculpture, shall take place by the talent, and weight, of Myrons, or
Polycletus brazen, of Phidias, and Alcamenes stone Gods, or whether they shall
sit by Imagery, and workemanshippe.


Jupiter. It ought to be so Mercury; but custom preferres the Gods of Gold.


Mercury. I am instructed. You would have them seated by their wealth, not by
their excellencyes, and values. Come, therefore, sit first ye Gods of Gold.
You see, Jupiter, the highest rooms are taken up only by Barbarians. All the
Grecian, polite, fair shapen, well wrought Deityes, are but of stone, or
brass; or if there be any more precious, they are but of Ivory, slightly
guilt, and colored over with Gold, wooden within, and lodging whole swarms,
and commonwealths of flies. whereas Goddess Bendis, and Anubis, and next to
him Attis, and Mithres, are entirely of solid, massye, precious Gold.


Neptune. With what Justice, Mercury, do you place that ugly, Dog faced
Egyptian before me, who am Neptune?


Mercury. Because Lysippus has formed you brazen, Neptune, and poor; The
Corinthians at that time having no Gold; But he is made of the wealthiest
met^all. You must, therefore, be a patient Spectator, and not take
indignation, if one with such a golden snout be preferred before you.


Venus. Place me, then, Mercury, in the foremost row; for I am golden.


Mercury. Surely, Venus, I am much mistaken, then, and my sight fails me, if
you be not Alabaster, hewne from the Quarry of Pentelus, which Praxiteles
thought good to work into a Venus, and then bestowed you on the Cnidians.


Venus. I have authentic Homer for my authority; who up and down his Poems
always calls me golden Venus.


Mercury. So he styles Apollo rich, and wealthy; yet you shall see him
presently sit among the last, robbed of his Rays, and Coronet by thieves; and
the strings of his harp sacrilegiously stolen. Be content, therefore, lest you
be thrust down among the servants of the Assembly.


Colossus. Who dare stand in competition with me, being the Sun, and of such
magnitude? whom though the Rhodians have not cast very ingeniously, not to
admiration, yet they have made sixteen golden Gods by my rude pattern. In
reason, therefore, I ought to be held the wealthiest. As for my workmanship,
and making, it is recompensed by my greatness.


Mercury. What shall I do, Jupiter? this is a difficult case. If I consider
his metal, it is brass; But if I consider how many talents of brass he
weighs, 'twill rise to above five hundred medimnes, and exceed a Knights estate.


Jupiter. What makes He here, thus to upbraid the others, with their smalnesse,
and disturb their sittings? Nevertheless, though, most excellent Rhodian,
thou be more honorable then the Gods of gold, yet how can thou take place,
except all the others rise, and make thee room to sit, whose each buttocke
will take up the whole wooll-sacke. 'Twill be best, therefore, for thee to
stand, and stoop down sometimes to our consultations.


Mercury. Here Is another knot hard to be untyed, Bacchus, and* Hercules, both
of Brass, of the same work, and made by Lysippus, of the same equal descent,
being both sons to Jupiter. Which therefore shall sit first? for you see they
both strive for place.


Jupiter. We loose time, Mercury, and should long since have begun the
consultation. Let them, for the present, sit promiscuously, as every one
pleases. This shall be the business of another meeting, where an Act shall
pass in what order they shall take place.


Mercury. But do you mark in what tumult the Commons are, and how they cry
out for their daily shares, and distributions? Where is our Nectar? What Is
become of our Ambrosia? Where are our Hecatombs? restore our Sacrifices.


Jupiter. Silence them, Mercury; That laying aside their trifles, they may know
wherefore they are Assembled.


Mercury. All do not understand Greek, Jupiter. Nor have I languages enough to
speak to Scythians, Persians, Thracians and Gawles. I think it best,
therefore, to enjoyne them silence by beckening with my hand.


Jupiter. Do so.


Mercury. Hark, they are all as mute as Pythagoreans. Begin your speech; All
their eyes are fixed upon you, expecting what you will say.


Jupiter. I will not conceal my distemper from thee, Mercury, being my son:
Thou know what a confident and stern voyced speaker I am.


Mercury. I do, and have trembled at your speeches, especially when you
threatened to draw up from the deep, the earth, sea, Gods, and all by letting
down your golden chain.


Jupiter. Yet partly with the Apprehension of the instant dangers, partly with
the greatness of the Assembly (which Thou see is numerous, and solemn) I am
confounded, and dashed, and my tongue is fettered and tied. Besides, what is yet
worse; I have forgot the preface, which I made to my speech, that I might gain
the more favorable entrance into their Attentions.


Mercury. You mar all, Jupiter, They will presently suspect your silence, and
expect to hear some great mischief from your delay.


Jupiter. Shall I then, speak Homers prooem to them?


Mercury. What is it?


Jupiter. Listen to me ye Gods, and Goddesses.


Mercury. Fie you have cloyd us with such prefaces already: If you will take my
counsel, perplex not your self with verse; but take one of Demosthenes
Orations against Philip, and alter it to your purpose, it is the practice of
many modern Orators.


Jupiter. Thou say well. It Is a Compendious way of Rhetoric, and lies open
and prepared for those who are unprovided: Thus then I begin. I suppose, O ye
men and Gods, it will be in stead of great fortunes to you, to hear me
declare the Cause, why I have called you together. 'Twill, therefore, become
you to lend me cheerful attention. The present occasion, does almost vocally
instruct us to make prevention of our present dangers; with which we all seem
too coldly affected. I will, therefore, borrowing no longer preface from
Demosthenes, clearly open to you the reasons, why in great perplexity I have
summond this Parliament. Yesterday, you know, Mnesitheus the Pilot offered a
Sacrifice for the preservation of his ship, almost wrackt near the Promontory
of Caphareus. And feasted as many of us in the Piraeum, as he called to the
Sacrifice. After the oblation, you all departed several ways, as your
business led you. Only I, toward evening returned to the City to walk in
the Keramick; considering with my self Mnesitheus thrift, who entertained
sixteen Gods with the sacrifice of one ancient, decayed, rheumatick Cock; and
four grains of musty, withered incense, which vanished in the kindling, and
sent not up smoke enough to touch the tip of our noses, though he vowed whole
Hecatombes, when his ship was ready to dash upon the rocks, and sink. With
these contemplations I was carried on to the painted gallery, where I saw a
vast crowde of people, some standing within the School, others without, others
very earnest and loud, sitting upon benches. I guessing them, (as indeed they
were) to be wrangling Philosophers, drew near to hear what they said: And
wrapping my self in a thick cloud, presently transformd my self into one of
them; and stroaking my long beard perfectly resembled a Philosopher. Having
made my passage with my elbow, I entered, unknown who I was, where I found
that Atheist Damis, the Epicurean, and the best of men Timocles the Stoic,
hotly disputing. Timocles had quite lost his voice with sweating and clamor.
Damis, profusely laughing, ceast not to provoke him. Their whole disputation
was concerning us, whom the wicked Damis affirmed to be void of providence,
and not to reguard the affairs of men; which is to maintain us not to be at
all. And this he proved with great strength of Argument, and the applause of
many On the contrary, Timocles, well studied in our cause, encountered,
abhoried, and repelled his proofs. Much extolling our providence, and shovving
how we rule, dispose, and give order to all things in the world. Nor did he
want some who praised him. Only he was tired, and spoke feebly, which turned
all the eyes of the multitude upon Damis. But I apprehending our danger, caused
night to close upon them, and dissolve the meeting: whereupon they divided,
upon agreement the next day to give an issue to the disquisition. At their
departure I mingled my self with the press, and heard them magnify Damis's
Arguments, and extol them above measure. Some also there were who would not
prejudge the opposite side, but kept themselves in suspense, what Timocles
would urge the next morning. These are the motives for which I called you
together; which are not slight, O ye Gods, if you consider that all our
honor, glory, and reverence, proceed from men. If they, then, be once
persuaded, either that there are no Gods, or if there be, that they fall not
under our providence, we shall no longer receive Sacrifices, gifts, or honor
from the earth; But shall here sit neglected in heaven, famisht, and deprived
of our Feasts, Holydaies, Games, Oblations, and night Solemnities. I hold it,
therefore, fit that we unanimously advise upon some remedy against those
dangers; And how Timocles may prevail, and appear to be in the truth, and
Damis may be exposed to the laughter of the Auditors. I am not confident that
Timocles of himself can conquer, unless we lend him our assistance. Make
legal proclamations therefore, Mercury, that whosoever will may stand up and
speak.


Mercury. Hearken All, with silence. If any of the perfect Gods have ought to
say, he is permitted to speak. How Is this? Not one stand up? Or are you
struck dumb with the fear of what you have heard?


Momus. Be all as speechless as the earth, and sea. If you will give me
liberty of utterance, Jupiter, I have many things to say.


Jupiter. Speak boldly, Momus, thy freedom does promise good counsel.


Momus. Afford me your Attentions, then, All ye Gods. I have long expected
that our affairs should be driven to those straights, and that many such
Sophisters should spring up who take the cause of their boldness from us. Nor
ought we in equity to be displeased with Epicurus, or his followers, and
successors in that Sect, for their opinions of us. For what apprehension of us
can they have, who see such a tumult, and disorder in things? good men
despised, and afflicted with poverty, sickness, and thraldom; corrupt, and
wicked men held in veneration, overflowing with wealth, and bearing rule over
the Virtuous? Some to escape punishment with sacrilege, others to be
crucified, and rackt for innocence? when they see such an unequal disposition
of things, they may dispute whether there be such things as Gods. Especially
when they hear such ambiguous oracles as these: Halys past; Thou an empire
shall dissolve. Not explayning whither his own Empire, or the enemies Again,
Thou Salamis shall women's sons destroy;
Which held both for Persians and Greeks, who, I believe, were women's sons.
Again, when they read those Poems, where we are said to be enamourd, and
wounded and made servants, and imprisoned, and to hold factions, and a thousand
such passages which are practiced among us, who all the while pretend to
happiness and immortality, how can they choose but laugh, and contemn us? yet
we are angry because some men are not stupid, but bring these things into
disputation, and take our providence from us: whereas we guilty of such
irregularities ought to be glad that we are sacrificed to at all. And here,
Jupiter, (since we are alone, and no man present in this Assembly, but
Hercules and Bacchus, and Ganymed, and Aesculapius who are now denizon'd
Gods) answer me truly, whether earthly affairs have at any time so entered
into your care, as to examine what men are wicked, and what virtuous? Had
not Theseus traveling from Tr^ezon to Athens casually slain the malefactors
by the way, for any hinderance from you, or your providence, Sciron, and
Pityocamptes, and Cer^yon, and others, might have lived, and glutted themselves
with the slaughter of passengers. And had not Euristheus, a just and provident
Prince, out of his love to mankind, enquired into their grievances, and redrest
them by sending abroad Hercules, then his servant, an active, stout, and hardy
man, Hydra, and the Stymphalides, the Thracian horses, and contumelious drunken
Centaures, had never entered into your consideration, Jupiter. To say truth,
our whole employment is to sit, and observe who offers sacrifice, and
perfumes our Altars. All other things are ruled by chance, and fall out by
accident: We suffer, therefore, justly for the present, and are likely to
suffer more hereafter, when men looking up to us shall find that it is but
loss to sacrifice to us, or to send us up oblations. Shortly, therefore, you
will see the Epicureans laugh at us, such Philosophers as Metrodorus, and
Damis prevail, and our defenders overcome by them. 'Twill concern us,
therefore, to finish, and heal these grievances, both present, and precedent.
As for Momus there is no fear that I shall be less honored, who was never
yet a God of respect, when you flourisht, and enjoyed your Sacrifices,


Jupiter. We must privilege this fellows humor, O ye Gods, which is always
bitter, and Satyricall. It Is easy for every body, says the excellent
Demosthenes, to find fault, complain, and rail; but to show a way how to
settle the present distemper, is the work of a wise Counselor: which I expect
from you though he be silent.


Neptune. I, as you all know, live under water, and have my kingdom to my
self, in the deep; where, as well as I can, I protect passengers, transport
ships, and allay storms: yet out of my regard to the public cause, I hold
it fit that Damis, before he enter into a second dispute, be destroyed, either
by a thunderbolt, or some other way, least he overcome; (for you say,
Jupiter, he is eminently persvvasive) whereby others may perceive, that we
are able to punish those who urge impious Arguments against us.


Jupiter. Are you in jest, Neptune, or have you forgot, that such revenges are
not in our power, but that the destinies decree who shall dye by lightning, who
by the sword, who by a fever, who by a consumption. Did I hold the scales, do
you think I would have suffered those sacrilegious thieves to have escaped from
Olympia unthunderstruck, who cut off two of my locks weighing six pound a
piece. Or would you have connived at the fisherman of Oreus, who stole your
Trident at Geraestus? Besides, 'twill argue our passion, melancholy, and fear
of Damis Syllogismes; as if we slew him out of our distrust that he would
vanquish Timocles: which were to get the better, only in an undefended cause.


Neptune. I thought I had contrived a compendious way to victory.


Jupiter. Your contrivance, Neptune, is as gross as a Tunyes, to slay an
adversary before his time, and to destroy him unconvinced, leaving the question
controvertible, and undecided.


Neptune. Do you project better, since my counsel is contemptible.


Apollo. Did the Law permit young, unbearded Gods, to give advice, perhaps I
might say something useful to the present business.


Momus. In deliberations of this weight, we are not to speak by age, but by
the common Interest. For 'twere ridiculous if in extreme perils we should
stand upon niceties of Law. Besides, you Apollo, are a legitimate speaker, and
have long since past your nonage, and been enrolled of the twelve, and should
have been of the board in Saturnes time. Let not your youth, therefore, be
your excuse, but speak your mind freely, nor be abasht that you are a
beardlesse speaker; your son Aesculapius having so long a one. Besides,
'twill now become you to give some proof of your wisdom, least you appear to
have sat all this while idle at Helicon, and to have Philosophized with the
Muses.


Apollo. You are not to grant licenses, Momus, but Jupiter. At whose command I
may, perhaps, say something worthy the Muses, and my retirement at Helicon.


Jupiter. Speak my son, you have liberty.


Apollo. Doubtless Timocles is a virtuous man, a lover of the Gods, and
exactly studied in the Stoic Learning; which makes him so stored with pupils,
by whom he receives a large revenew; so persuasive is he to his scholars in
private. But in public he is so timorous and of such a silly, and harsh
delivery, that he still raises the derision of the auditory by his
disconnections, and tautologies, and Nonplusses. And thus he is when he most
labors to be eloquent; Though otherwise he be of a sharp judgment, and
subtle apprehension, as they report, who are ve^st in the Stoic Arguments:
which he through imbecility spoils, and confoundes in the exposition, and
urging, not clearly expressing his drift, but proposing his meaning
enigmatically, and giving dark answers to the opposite questions. Hence his
hearers laugh at as much as they do not understand. For nothing more advances
a disputation, then to urge clearly; and to the capacity of the Auditors.


Momus. You do well, Apollo, to praise perspicuity, though you little practice
it in your Oracles; where you are dark, and knotty, and securely cast forth
many things so ambiguous to your hearers, that they need another Apollo to
expound them. But give your advice, how may we cure the Imperfection of
Timocles speech?


Apollo. By joining a Coadjutor to him, Momus, who shall take his Arguments,
and press them with a better grace.


Momus. Counsel worthy your beard, and a schoolmasters; To place a
Co-disputant in such an assembly of Philosophers, to interpret to the Auditors
whatsoever Timocles shall urge, and Damis to dispute single. Besides, should he
use a Co-adjutor, privately to whisper his arguments into his ear, and he
speak rhetorically more then he understandes, it must needs raise the laughter
of the schools: some other course therefore, is to be thought upon. In the
mean time, you, methinkes, who take upon you to be a prophet, and have such an
ample revenew coming in by your predictions, that sometimes they have offered
sowes of gold, should in this time of danger tell us by your Art which of the
disputers will prevail. For being a Presager, you cannot but know things
future.


Apollo. How can I, Momus, having neither Tripod, nor perfume, nor presaging
fountain here, like that of Castalia?


Momus. See how you Wave my demand, and to what straights you are driven.


Jupiter. Answer him, Son, and give not the railer occasion to detract or
slander thee, as if thy skill lay in a Trivet, and Spring, and Incense, without
which thy Art fails thee.


Apollo. I should better obey, Father, at Delphos, or Colophon? amidst my
Oracles, as my custom is: yet unfurnisht as I am, I will endeavor to foretell
you whose shall be the victory. But perhaps you will take exceptions unless I
speak in verse.


Momus. No matter so you speak things which need not a Comment, or
Interpreter. No sheep, or tortoyse is now boiled in Lydia; you know about what
affair you are consulted.


Jupiter. What ghastly terrors precede Oracles? See, his color changes, his
eyes roll, his hair bristles, his gate is frantic. All things testify a
divine possession, and are full of mystery and horror.


Apollo. Unto Propheticke Phoebus lend your ears,
About a strife raised by loud Sophisters;
Who armed with fables, dart disputes; and Noise:
And fill the streets with Syllogismes, and voice.
But when the Vultur in his crooked claws
Shall graspe the locust, and shower telling dawes,
Have clackt their last, the Mules shall then prevail;
But the Ass shall his fleet colts with horns assail.

Jupiter. Why do you laugh so profusely, Momus? our present affairs are above
sport. Cease, Mischief, or thou will be choakt with laughter.


Momus. How can I choose Jupiter, at such a clear, and intelligible Oracle?


Jupiter. It seems you can interpret, then, what he said.


Momus. It Is so plain, that we need not a Themistocles. For the Oracle says
expressly that the utterer is a cheater, and that we are pack Asses, and Mules
for believing him, and have not so much wit as Grasshoppers.


Hercules. Pardon me Father, Jove, if I, an assumed God, speak my opinion;
When they are met for disputation; If Timocles have the better We will let the
arguments go on; But if it happen otherwise, I, if you please, will shake the
School, and cast it on Damis, that he shall never more impiously reproach us.


Momus. O Hercules, Hercules, how wildly, and Boeotian like have thou spoken,
to destroy so many innocents with one offendour, and demolish a school, with
Marathon, Miltiades, and Cynaegirus? After whose ruin, how shall the
Rhetoricians make their speeches, being deprived of their greatest argument,
and help? Besides, in your lifetime, perhaps you might have performed such an
exploit. But since you were made a God you have learnt, I believe, that such
accidents are reserved only for the Fates, and exempted from our power.


Hercules. When I slew the Lion, and Hydra, then was I but instrument to the
Destinies?


Jupiter. It Is so.


Hercules. If one should now affront me, or rob my Temple, or demolish my
Statue, might I not crush him; though the sisters had not anciently decreed so?


Jupiter. By no means.


Hercules. With your leave, then, Jupiter, be it spoken. (for I, as the Poet
says, am a blunt fellow, and call a spade a spade) If our case be so, I will
take farewell of my honors, smoke of incense, and blood of sacrifices here,
and go down to hell, armed wi^h my naked bow, where the shades will dread me
for the savages I have slain.


Jupiter. So, here is a home witness, as they say. You have just taught Damis
what to say. But what brazen faire-shapte, well carved, hasty messenger comes
yonder, with an antique bend about his head? It Is thy brother, Mercury, The
Rhetorician who stands in the painted gallery, see how fullyed he is with being
so often cast* what brings thee hither post, my son? Any news from the Earth?


Hermagoras. Great news, Jupiter, and well deserving of my dispatch.


Jupiter. Speak it, if it be any thing we knew not before.


Hermagoras. As I was just now under the brasiers hands, who soder'd my breast
to my back, and carved a ridiculous corselet about my body, and with like art
stamped his Copper mark upon me, I saw a tumultuous crowd of people thronging
about. Two bawling ill looked, contentious Sophisters, Damis, and --


Jupiter. No more, Hermagoras, of your tragical news: I know whom you mean.
But tell me how long have they been at skirmish?


Hermagoras. They do but yet hurl darts at a distance, and cast reproaches at
one another.


Jupiter. All we can now do, ye Gods, is to bow down our ears, and listen
to them. Let the Porter Hours therefore, remove the bolts, dispell the clouds,
and set open the doors of Heaven. Good Hercules! what a multitude of hearers
are met together? I do not like Timocles, he trembles, and is so daunted,
that he will betray our cause, and confesses himself manifestly unable to
encounter Damis. Let us, therefore, the best we can assist him with our
prayers, and wishes, silently, and to our selves, least Damis hear us.


Timocles. Dare thou maintain, thou sacrilegious Damis, that there are no
Gods, nor any providence over men?


Damis. No. But first answer me, why thou art persuaded there are.


Timocles. Nay first, answer me, Thou lewd fellow.


Damis. Not till thou answer me.


Jupiter. Thus far our man has the better, and has given the louder onset.
To him Timocles, rail at him; For therein lies thy strength; Though at
Argumentation he be able to stop thy mouth, and make thee as silent as a fish.


Timocles. By Minerva I will not give the first answer.


Damis. Well, Timocles, your oath shall prevail. Propose your question, but
without ill language, I pray.


Timocles. Tell me then, Thou Miscreant, do thou hold that the Gods have no
providence?


Damis. I do.


Timocles. That Is very fine indeed; do all things fall out, then, without
providence?


Damis. Yes.


Timocles. And is the care of the Universe not ordered by the Gods?


Damis. Noe.


Timocles. Are things, then, carried by Accident and blind chance?


Damis. They are.


Timocles. Can you, good people, hear these things with patience and not stone
this blasphemer?


Damis. Why do you provoke the people against me, Timocles? or what are you,
that you should be thus tempestuous for the Gods? when they hearing me
formerly (if yet they can hear) were not all displeased, nor made me a
wretched example.


Timocles. They do hear thee, Nay they do hear thee, Damis, and will punish
thee hereafter.


Damis. When will they have leisure to punish me, who, you say, are taken up
with such serious employments, as the disposition and ordering of the
numberless affairs of the world? so that they have not yet had time to
revenge themselves on thee for thy perjuries, and other offenses? Excuse me if
thy own provocations draw bad language from me, who cannot see what greater
proof of their providence the Gods can show* then to destroy such a sinner as
thou art. But it is plain they are traveled from home over the sea to the
devout Aethiop^ans. For they use frequently to go thither for entertainment,
and sometimes without invitation.


Timocles. What shall I say to so much impudence, Damis?


Damis. Marrye, that which I have long desired to hear, how you became
persuaded that the Gods have a providence.


Timocles. I took my first persuasion from the order of things; observing the
Sun always to move in the same Circle, as also the Moon, then the
revolution of times, the springing of the Plants, the generation of beasts, and
these so regularly disposed, as to be able to feed, move, apprehend, walk,
build, contrive defenses. All which seem to me as so many demonstrations of
providence.


Damis. You run away with the question, Timocles, nor have you yet proved
whether providence move those wheels or not. That such things are done, I
grant, but whether ruled by the hand of providence I hold not necessary to be
believed. It Is true there is an orderly rising, and course of things, but you
call this order necessity Then you grow Choleric if you be not obeyed in your
opinion, when you make an enumeration of things, and think your praises of
them are so many demonstrations that all their revolutions and changes are the
effects of providence. Hitherto, therefore, your answer has bin frivolous,
give a better.


Timocles. Methinkes they need not a higher proof; yet I will produce others:
Answer me, then, Do thou take Homer to be the best Poet?


Damis. Yes.


Timocles. I build my faith, then, on his authority: he plainly mentions a
providence of the Gods.


Damis. Most admired Sir, We all grant that Homer was an excellent Poet, but
not that he or any other Poet is of authority sufficient in this case. For
truth, I believe, was not their aim, but the delight of their hearers. And,
therefore, they sung in verse, and mixed fables with their numbers, having only
pleasure for their end. But I would feign know by what place of Homer you were
most persuaded. By that where speaking of Jupiter, he says, his daughter, and
brother, and wife, took counsel to bind him, and had not Thetis out of
compassion called in Briareus to his aid, our great Jupiter had bin fettered,
and hurryed to prison? Out of his gratitude for which rescue, at Thetis suite,
he deceived Agamemnon, and sent him a false dream, that many of the Graecians
might be destroyed. Where observe that he was not able by a bolt of thunder to
consume Agamemnon, unless he had shown himself a deceiver too. Or perhaps, you
are most swayed by the description, how Diomedes assisted by Pallas wounded
Venus, and Mars himself. And how, a little after, the Gods held a conflict,
and war among themselves, males with females, where Pallas overcomes Mars,
weakened, I suppose, by the wound he received from Diomed: And against Latona
useful Hermes stands. Or perchance your persuasion is built on that passage of
Diana, where she complains, and takes disdain, that she was not invited by
Oeneus to his feast; and in revenge sent a vast Bore of an invincible strength
to wast his country. Are these the authorities of Homer, on which you build
your belief?


Jupiter. Hark what a humme the applauding multitude give Damis, whilst our
man stands like one forsaken, dismayed, and trembling, and ready to cast away
his shield, and prying after a passage to make an escape.


Timocles. What think thou of the authority of Euripides, who brings in the
Gods upon the stage, protecting virtuous, and valiant men, and subverting the
wicked, and irreligious, such as thou?


Damis. If, Timocles, Thou most learned of Philosophers, you have drawn your
persuasion from tragedies, one of those two must necessarily follow; either you
must take Pole, or Aristodemus, or Satyr for the Gods, or for the Actours of
the Gods; when you see them clad in buskins, long robes, spangled clokes, rich
mantles, gloves, ventrals, glittering corslets, and other properties, with
which they set off their tragedies, which were most absurd: since Euripides of
himself, and unconstrained, freely delivers his opinion in his plays, where
you may hear him clearly say, See thou the Air diffused in boundless
spaces,
Encircling earth, and sea with moist embraces,
Think this is Jupiter, think this is God.


Again: What Jupiter is Jupiter I know not,
But what goes in tradition. --
and the like.


Timocles. Are all people and nations deceived then, who hold there are Gods,
and celebrate their Festivalls?


Damis. I thank you, Timocles, for quoting the Nations. From whom any man may
learn what small certainties may be had of the Gods, of whom there are so many
doubts, and diversities of opinion. For the Scythians sacrifice to a Whinyard,
the Thracians to Zamolxis a fugitive; who fled from Samos thither; the
Phrygians to the Moon; the Aethiopians to the day; the Cyllenians to Phales;
the Assyrians to a Dove; the Persians to Fire; and the Egyptians to water;
which is their Deity. More peculiarly the Memphites have an Ox for their God;
the Pelusiots an Onion; some a Storke, or Crockodile; others a Dog, or Catt,
or Ape. Again, in streets, To some the right side is the Deity, to the
opposite dwellers the left, to others half the head. Some adore an earthen
cup, others a dish. Are not these Gods to be laughed at, most holy Tomocles?


Momus. Did I not tell you, ye Gods, that all this would be divulged, and be
brought into discussion?


Jupiter. Thou did, Momus, and did deservedly chide us. It shall be,
therefore, my business, if we escape this brunt, to contrive a reformation.


Timocles. Tell me yet, thou enemy to the Gods, from whence proceed the
Oracles, and predictions of things to come? not from them and their prescience?


Damis. Speak no more of Oracles, good Sir, but let me ask you upon what
Oracle you most rely? upon that which Apollo gave to Croesus? you know 'twas
two edged, and faced like those double pictures of Mercury, which are both
sides alike, which way soever you turn them. Nor revealed it whether Croesus
passing Halis should ruin his own, or Cyrus Empire. Yet that ambiguous Oracle
cost the wretched Sardian not a few talents.


Momus. This fellow is fallen upon the very objection, ye Gods, which I most
feared. Where is our divine fiddler now? Why do you not defend your self
Apollo?


Jupiter. Thou massacrest us, Momus, with thy unseasonable reprehensions.


Timocles. Thou were best, then, thou Atheist, quite overthrow the religion,
and altars of the Gods by thy impious discourses.


Damis. I would not have altars pulled down, Timocles; since without any
great inconvenience they may still send forth svveet smells, and perfumes. Yet I
would be glad to see Diana's Altar at Taurica utterly demolisht, if she
delight in such Sacrifices on them.


Jupiter. What an uncontrollable mischief is fallen upon us? This fellovv
spares no God, but inveighs, and lets fly at all, whether guilty, or not.


Momus. You will find fevv of us innocent, Jupiter; And therefore you shall
have him presently strike at the highest.


Timocles. O thou God-opposing Damis, do thou not sometimes hear Jupiter
thunder?


Damis. I hear thunder, Timocles; but whether Jupiter be the thunderer, you
know better then I, who came lately from him. They who come from Creet say
otherwise; where his sepulcher is to be seen with a pillar erected, showing
him long since dead, not thundering.


Momus. I long since foresaw he would make that objection. Why do you loose
color, Jupiter, and gnash your teeth for fear. You are to take courage, and
contemn such fellows.


Jupiter. Contemn, say you, Momus? do you not see what a ringe of Auditors he
has? And what persuasions of us they take in from Damis, who leads them
captived by the ears?


Momus. But you, Jupiter, when you please, letting down your golden chain,
can draw them all up with the earth, and sea.


Timocles. Tell me, Infidel, were it thou ever at sea?


Damis. Often, Timocles.


Timocles. Were you not driven by the wind, falling on your tackling, and
swelling your sails, or by Rowers? and did not a pilot, standing at the helm,
preserve the ship?


Damis. I grant it.


Timocles. A ship, then, ungoverned could not sail. And can thou imagine
the whole universe should move without a governor, or pilot?


Damis. Your illustration, Timocles, is discreet, and solid. But, then, the
pilot of a ship always contrives things necessary; and before hand prescribes
their employment to the sailors, and provides that the vessels carry nothing
useless, or unfit, but be fraught with profitable burden. But your other
pilot, who, you say, rules the greater ship, and his co-governours order
nothing regularly, as becomes them. But sometimes, as it falls out, the mast is
fastened to the stern; and the tackling to the fore-decke. Sometimes the
Anchors are of gold, and the trim of lead; the bottom under water is carved,
and painted, the deck and rayles are deformed and rude. Again, you may observe
some of the sailors, sluggish and artlesse, and impotent at their business,
rewarded with double or treble shares. Others able to steer, and to order the
sails, and skilled in navigation, set to empty the sinkes. The like
observation you may make of the passengers. Many times a slave sits uppermost,
next the governor, and is looked upon with reverence* or perhaps, some
Catamite, Parricide, or Church robber, is advanced to the highest place of the
ship, and many virtuous men are thrust into an obscure, retired hole, and
trampled by them: Consider, how Socrates, Aristides, and Phoc^on, sailed; how
unsufficiently victualled, and unable to stretch their feet upon the bare
boardes beyond the sink. On the contrary, in what streams of pleasure did
Callias, and Midias, and Sardanapalus swim, and look down upon their
inferiors? This is the Government, Timocles, of your ship, under which have
happened a thousand wrackes. If there were a pilot who observed, or ordered
things, first, he would not be ignorant, what passengers are virtuous, what
wicked. Next, he would assign employments answerable to every man's desert;
and place the best men in the best place, near himself, and the worst men in
the worst below. Then, he would take into his counsel, and fellowship, the most
excellent. The industrious Sayler should rule the stern, or govern the sides,
or command in chief; The slothful and careless should five times a day be
beaten about the head with a rope. The instance, therefore, which, admired Sir,
you have given of a ship is through the badnesse of the pilot in danger to
suffer wrack.


Momus. This succeeds according to the stream of Damis, who now with full
sails is carried on to victory.


Jupiter. It Is true, Momus; Timocles has urged not one argument of weight, but
all common and vulgar, and easy to be confuted.


Timocles. Since you think the example of the ship of small force, hear now a
sacred anchor, as they say, a proof by no engine to be broken.


Jupiter. What more will he urge?


Timocles. I will now press thee with a Syllogism; see if thou be able to
overthrow it. If there be Altars, there are Gods, but there be Altars,
therefore there are Gods; Answer me to this.


Damis. I will, as soon as I have laughed my fill.


Timocles. Methinkes your laughter is very endless, prithee tell me why thou
think my argument ridiculous.


Damis. Because you discern not by what a slender thread your anchor, though
sacred, hangs. For by inferring that there are Gods because there are Altars,
you think you have woven an invincible Cable. Since, therefore, you profess
your self unable to spring a proof helper, for this time let us depart.


Timocles. Thou confessest thy self vanquished, then, by breaking off first?


Damis. I do, Timocles. For you, like malefactors led to punishment, fly to
Altars. By your sacred Anchor, therefore, I swear to sacrifice upon your
Altars against you, that we may no more dispute of them.


Timocles. Thou may flout me, thou tombe-breaker, villayn, abominable
slave, whipped rogue, scumme of men; whose uncertain father we know not, but
know thy mother was a whore; who slewest thy brother, lie with men's wives,
corruptest young boys; Thou luxurious, impudent fellow. Fly not till I beat
thee; for I will mawle thee, Pagan as thou art, with this Brick-bat.


Jupiter. Damis goes away fleering, O ye Gods, the other follows railing, and
impatient of his jeeres, and ready to break his head, with a potsheard; what
shall we do?


Mercury. Methinkes the Comic poet says well; mischiefs contemned loose
their force. What great danger can it be, then, if a few men go home thus
persuaded? there are more who hold the contrary both Graecians, of other
nations, and the Barbarians in general.


Jupiter. Yet I cannot but repeat, Mercury, that gallant saying of Darius,
spoken of Zopyrus. I had rather have such a one as Damis of my side, then
conquer a thousand Babylons.


The Cynicke.
The speakers Lycinus, and a Cynicke. Lycinus. HOw comes it, Friend, that you
have a long beard, and hair, but have no gown, but go ragged, and unshod,
making a vagrant, inhumane, savage life your choice, and against all example
abusing your body wander up and down, and lodge upon the bare ground, sullying
your coat, which is not of the finest web, nor over soft, or florid.


Cynicke. Yet I feel no want: whatsoever is of easy procurement, and possessed
with least trouble suffices me. But pray tell me, do you think luxury a
vice?


Lycinus. Yes.


Cynicke. And frugality a virtue?


Lycinus. Yes.


Cynicke. Why, then, seeing me live thriftier then others, and others live
more wastefully, do you accuse me, and not them?


Lycinus. Because you seem not to me to live thriftier then others, but more
distressed, or rather more perfectly needy, and poor; not at all differing from
beggars, who beg their daily sustinance.


Cynicke. Shall we, then, (since we are entered into this discourse) define
what want, and enough is?


Lycinus. If you please.


Cynicke. Is that sufficient for every man which satisfies his want, or do you
require more?


Lycinus. Be it so.


Cynicke. And is that poverty, when necessityes are supplied in a shorter
proportion then is fit?


Lycinus. It Is.


Cynicke. I then lack nothing, whose necessityes are sufficiently satisfied.


Lycinus. How mean you?


Cynicke. Consider the end of all our provisions against poverty. Is not a
house for shelter?


Lycinus. Yes.


Cynicke. For what use are clothes? are they not for coverings?


Lycinus. Yes.


Cynicke. And why, for Gods sake, do we need coverings? Is It not for welfare
of the thing covered?


Lycinus. I think so.


Cynicke. What think you, then? are my feet worse then other men's?


Lycinus. I know not.


Cynicke. Thus, then, you may know; what is the business of feet?


Lycinus. To go.


Cynicke. Do my feet, then, think you, carry me worse then other men's?


Lycinus. Perhaps not.


Cynicke. But if they were better, or worse, could they not perform their
office?


Lycinus. Proceed.


Cynicke. I show not worse affected in my feet, then, then other men?


Lycinus. You do not.


Cynicke. Is my body worse then other men's? If it be worse, then it is feebler;
for the virtue of the body is strength; Is it feebler then?


Lycinus. Not in appearance.


Cynicke. Neither my feet, then, nor the rest of my body need a covering. If
they did, they would be ill affected. For want is altogether ill, and where
it is, makes things worse. But my body shows not the worse fed, because I eat
what ever comes to hand.


Lycinus. It Is clear.


Cynicke. Nor would it be vigorous, if 'twere ill nourisht. For bad diet rotts,
and corrupts the body.


Lycinus. It Is right.


Cynicke. Tell me, then, my case being thus, why you blame, and disparage my
course of life, and call it miserable?


Lycinus. Because when nature, (whom you adore) and the Gods have set an earth
before us, and enabled it to bring forth such plenty of good things, as that
without envy there might be sufficient not only to supply wants, but for
pleasure too, yet you, deprived of all, or most of these, enjoy no more then
the beasts. You drink water like a beast, and eat what you find like a dog.
Then your lodging is no better then that of dogs; for you lie upon the grass
like them. Then you wear a garment too tottered for a beggar. If, then, this
contentment proceed from your wisdom, God has done ill to make far sheep,
delightsome vines, and the other wonderful varietyes of nature, as oil,
honey, and the like, that we might have food of all sorts. As, also, pleasant
drink, money, soft beds, fair houses, and all things provided for our use. The
works of art, also, are the works of the Gods. To live, then, deprived of all
these, is to be miserable, though you were deprived by another, like prisoners.
But his case is much more miserable, who deprives himself of all these good
things, for it is an evident madness.


Cynicke. It Is something you say. But, then tell me, if a rich man should
cheerfully, courteously, and friendly make a feast, and entertain guests of
all sorts, some weak, and some strong; and should set before them dishes of
all variety, and one of the invited should engrosse, and devour all the meats
both near him, and remote, which were dressed for the sickly, being himself
sound, and having but one belly satisfyable with a little, should yet out-stay
the rest, would you take this for a wel-carriaged man?


Lycinus. By no means.


Cynicke. Or a temperate?


Lycinus. Neither.


Cynicke. What if another at the same table should neglect the variety, and
choosing one dish near him, sufficient to dine him, should civilly eat of it,
and no other, without desire of the rest; would you not think this man more
virtuous, and temperate then the other?


Lycinus. Doubtless.


Cynicke. Do you know what I am about to say?


Lycinus. What?


Cynicke. God is like that liberal inviter; And has set before us
entertainments of all sorts, and agreeable to all palates; some things for the
healthy, some things for the sick, some things for the strong, others for the
weak. Not that all should enjoy all, but every one those things which are
proper for him, as his need requires. But you are like him, who through his
insatiate appetite, and intemperance snatches all, when you aim at universal
fruitions, and send your desires into all parts, nor content with the things
next you, nor thinking the earth or sea sufficient for you, fetch pleasures
from the farthest coasts, and prefer things foreign before native, and
costly before cheap; and things of difficult procurement before things of easy.
In a word, desireing rather the evils of business, and traffic, then the
calmes of life. For all these precious, and happy provisions, in which you
rejoice, are conveyed to you through many anguishes, and disquietts. Consider,
I pray, your so much desired Gold, and Silver; Consider your magnificent
houses; Consider your studied garments; Consider all things belonging to
these, with how much negotiation, toil, danger, blood, slaughter, and ruin of
men, are they purchased? who not only suffer shipwreck in sailing for them,
besides other calamityes which they undergo in their search, and pursuit, but
imbarke themselves in frequent wars, and lay mutual trappes, and ambushes,
friends against friends, children against parents, and wives against
husbands. Thus for Gold, I suppose, Eriphile betrayed her husband. And when
all is done, embroidery makes not garments warmer. Nor do houses shelter
because they are guilt. Nor does the metal of the bowl enrich the wine; nor
do beds of Gold, or Ivory yield the sweetest sleeps. But you shall many
times see rich men want sleep in a bed of Ivory, and under an embroidered
coverlet. Besides all your negotiations about meats nourish not better, but
corrupt the body, and engender diseases. I omit to speak how many
difficultyes men undergo, and suffer, for the satisfaction of their lusts:
which were easily cured, were luxury banished; For which men think the common
folly, and corruption, not sufficient, unless they pervert the natural use of
things; as when they convert their beds into coaches.


Lycinus. Who do so?


Cynicke. You; who employ men like your beasts, to carry you in your sedans,
like litters on their shoulders; whilst you sitting delicately aloft, do
reyne your Porters, like mules, and bid them turn what way you list. And they
who do thus most, are held most happy. Then, do not they who use not fishes
for food, but to extract rich colors from them, as purple dyers, unnaturally
misimploy Gods creatures?


Lycinus. No; If they can dye, as well nourish.


Cynicke. But they were not ordained for that end. As one may force a cup to
the employment of a kettle, but it was not made for that employment. Your
miseries are so many, that I cannot stand to recount them all. And yet dare you
blame me for not being a partaker? I live like the well-behaved man, I speak
of, content with the things next me, and of easiest provision. Not at all
allured, by your varities, and daynties. Yet though I need few things, and use
as few, my life to you seems brutish. By the same reason the Gods are in worse
condition then beasts; for they lack nothing. But that you may know how much
better it is to need few things then many consider that children lack more
things, then grown youths, and women more then men; and the diseased more then
the healthy. Briefly, the worse estate wants more then the better. Thus the
Gods want nothing, and therefore they nearest approach them who want least. Can
you imagine Hercules (the most valiant of men, and deservedly reckond among the
Gods) was miserable when he traveled up and down naked, clothed only with a
skin, and lackt none of those things? certainly he could not be miserable,
who delivered others from calamity; nor poor, who ruled over land and sea. For
wherever he made his assault, he vanquished; nor did he ever meet with his
equal, or ^uperiour, till he left the conversation of men. Can you think,
then that such a one, who thus traverst the world, did want a rugge, or shoes?
you cannot. But he was temperate, and stout, desired to live frugally; and to
avoid pleasure. Was not his scholar Theseus, also, King of the Athenians,
Neptunes son, and the bravest man of his time? yet he contemned shoes, and
went barefoote, and cherisht a long beard, and hair. Nor was it his only, but
the practice of all the ancients, who were your betters; and would have brookt
the present luxury no more then a Lion will suffer himself to be shorn.
Tenderness, and sleekness of flesh they thought only became women. They, as
they were, still chose to appear men; and held hair as much their ornament, as
a mane a horses, or a beard a Lions. To whom, as God has given somethinges for
ornament, and beauty, so he has given beardes to men. The ancients,
therefore, shall be my example and imitation. Nor do I envy the men of these
times for their felicity, full tables, and rich apparel; or because they
polish, and smooth all parts of their body, not content with those secret parts
as nature sent them. For my part, I wish my feet differed not from horses
hoofes, as they report of Chiron. Or that I wanted a coverlet no more then
Lions, or high fare no more then dogs. Or that any earth, or floor may
suffice me for a lodging; That I may think the world my house; That my diett
may be that which is easiest purchased; That neither I nor any friend of mine
may covet Silver, or Gold: the thirst whereof is the root of all evils,
factions, wars, treasons, and slaughters* All which have the desire of more
for their fountain, and spring. Be, therefore, the itch of abundance far
from me; And when I have not sufficient, yet may I be content. This is our
doctrine, utterly different from the common received opinions of the most. Nor
are you to marvel, that we differ from others in our manners, and course,
who differ so much from us in their elections, and choices. Mean time I wonder
at you, how you can think there is a certain habit, and behavior, proper for
a fiddler, trumpeter, and player, and do not perceive that there is a garb, and
dress proper also for a virtuous man; but think he is to habitt himself like
the most, though the most be vicious. If, then, good men are to be peculiar in
their clothes, what attire is seemlier then that which is most disgraceful to
the luxurious, and which they most eschew? It Is my bravery, therefore, to wear
a slovenly, nasty, pat^ht coat, neglected hair, and to go barefoote. whereas
you in your bravery resemble Cinaedo's, from whom you are not to be
distinguished, either in the color, or delicacy of your garments, or the
number of your suites, clokes, or shoos, or the curlings, and powdrings of your
hair. For the most cou^tly among you smell just like them. And what can he
do like a man, who is perfumed like a Pathicke? Then, you are as impatient of
labor as they, as easily melted with pleasures; you eat, sleep, and go like
them; or rather ye refuse to go and are carried, like burdens, some of you by
men; others by beasts. My own feet carry me where I list: who am patient of
cold, and heat, and repine not at the seasons which the Gods send; or because
they make me miserable. But you, through too much felicity, are content with
nothing, but always complain. You loath the things you have, and desire the
things you have not. In winter you wish summer, in summer winter; In heat cold,
and in cold heat; like displeased sick folks who are always whining; Only
they have their sickness for a cause, you your manners. Would you, then, have
us change our course, and rectify our life by yours, who so frequently err in
your counsels, and are so indiscreet in your actions, and do nothing with
judgment, or discourse, but by custom and appetite? Certainly you differ
nothing from men carried by a Torrent; For they are hurryed where ever the
flood pleases, and you where your Lusts. So that you are in his case, who (as
they say) ascended the back of a wild horse; The horse ran away with him, and
he being in full speed could not alight. And when one met him, and asked
whither he rode so fast, he said, whithersoever this horse pleases* So,
should one ask you whither you are carried, your answer will be, if you speak
truth, wheresoever your affections please. Particularly, sometimes where your
pleasure pleases; sometimes where your ambition; sometimes where your
vainglory; sometimes where your covetousness of gain; sometimes also your
rage, sometimes your fear: still some passion or other transports you. You,
then, are mounted on the back, not of one but of many wild horses by turns;
which hurry you upon steeps, and precipices; yet till you fall you perceive not
your danger. Whereas, my patcht coat, which you deride, and my hair, and rude
accoutrements, have the power to create me a quiet life; to do what I list,
and to converse with whom I list. None of the ignorant, or unlearned will
approach me for my habits sake. Then effeminate men decline me afar off,
only the best wits, modestest men, and lovers of virtue resort to me, in
whose company I take delight. Their gates, who are called Great men, I regard
not, but look upon their guilt chaplets, and purple, as arguments of their
pride, and laugh at the wearers. But that you may know how agreeable my habit
is, not only to good men, but to the Gods themselves, (and then laugh if you
can) consider their Statues; whom do they most resemble, you or me? go over
all the Temples also, both of the Greeks, and Barbarians, and consider whether
their Gods have long hair, and beards, like me, or are like you, carved, and
drawn, trimd, and shaven. You shall see most of them clothlesse, and naked
like me. How dare you, then, speak of my accoutrements, as reproachful, when
they become the Gods?


Jupiter Confuted, or, a Discourse of Destiny.
The Speakers, Cyniscus, and Jupiter. Cyniscus. FOr my part, Jupiter, I will
never trouble you with petty petitions for Riches, Gold, or Empire, which most
men pray for, but are not easy for you to grant: which makes you deaf to
their prayers. My desire is, that you would satisfy me an ordinary request.


Jupiter. What is it, Cyniscus? Thou shall not be denied, since thou say thy
petitions are modest.


Cyniscus. It Is, that you would answer me to a slight question.


Jupiter. It Is a small request, and very grantable; Ask, therefore, what thou will.


Cyniscus. I pray mark, then, Jupiter. It Is like you have read Homer's, and
Hesiod's Poems. Tell me, is all true which they have spoken of Fate, and the
Destinies, when they say, that the thread which they spinne at every man's
nativity is unavoidable?


Jupiter. It Is all very true: Nothing is free from their decrees. And
whatsoever is done is first rolled upon their spindle: where, from the
beginning, all things have their infallible events assigned them, which cannot
but come to pass.


Cyniscus. When, Homer, then in another part of his Poem says, He entered
Plutoe's Court though fates forbad:
and the like, we are to take him in jest?


Jupiter. Yes. For no such thing could be achieved against the Laws of the
destinies, or beyond their Line. All things sung by Poets inspired by the Muses
are true. But where the inspiration forsakes them, and they are left to
themselves, what ever they write is fabulous, and repugnant to their former
raptures. Yet are they to be pardoned, if they err, after their dispossession
of the God who spoke by them.


Cyniscus. Well be it so. Let me ask you one question more. Are there not
three Destinyes, Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos?


Jupiter. There are.


Cyniscus. What are the so much celebrated Fate, and Fortune then? Have they a
power equal to the Destinies, or above them? for I hear every body say
nothing is more forcible then Chance and Fate.


Jupiter. It Is not lawful for thee to know all things, Cyniscus. But why did
thou ask me concerning the Destinies?


Cyniscus. First resolve me, Jupiter, whether you be under their Empire, and
empaled within their line?


Jupiter. Most necessarily, Cyniscus. Why do thou smile?


Cyniscus. That passage of Homer is come to my mind, where, in a Parliament of
the Gods, he brings you in, uttering this threatening speech; That with your
golden chain you would draw up all things to you. For there you say, That you
would let down a chain from Heaven, with which, should all the Gods with all
their force strive to pull you down, they were not able, but if you listed you
could easily draw all them up with the earth, and sea. When I read this, I
apprehended you of an admirable strength, and trembled at the Verses. But now I
see both you, and your chain, and great threats, by your confession, hang upon
a slender Thread. Methinkes, therefore, Clotho might with more reason pronounce
your brag, who sees you hang aloft at her distaffe, like fishes at an Angle.


Jupiter. I understand not the drift of your questions.


Cyniscus. By the destinyes, and Fate, then, I desire you will hear me speak
free truths, without impatience, or choler. If the case stand so, that the
destinyes rule all, and that nothing which they have once decreed can be
altered, why do we men sacrifice to you Gods, and offer up Heccatombes with
our prayers that you would dropp benefits on us? I see no fruit of our
devotions, if by our petitions we cannot divert evils, nor receive good from
you.


Jupiter. I now know from whence you have borrowed your subtle inquiryes; from
those accursed Sophisters who say, we exercise no providence over men; and by
such impious questions as these dissuade men from their sacrifices, and
prayers, as from vanities: maintaining that we take no care of your actions,
nor indeed can do any thing in earthly affairs. But they shall not long
triumph in their discourses.


Cyniscus. I swear by Clotho's spindle, Jupiter, no persuasion taken from them
has bin the ground of my questions: But the progress of our conference has,
I know not how, driven me to think sacrifices are needless. Let me,
therefore, without your disturbance, crave your resolution to one brief
question more; and consider of your answer.


Jupiter. If thou be at leisure to trifle, propose it.


Cyniscus. Do all things happen, say you, by destinye?


Jupiter. I affirm it.


Cyniscus. And is it not in your power to change, and un-spinne their decrees?


Jupiter. By no means.


Cyniscus. May I, with your leave, from hence make inferences, and clear, or
not clear, report what you say?


Jupiter It Is clear, that we are not sacrificed to out of any necessity, but
for hope of returns: so that men adore us either, to buy benefits of us, or
out of a virtuous love to religion.


Cyniscus. And this you think sufficient, and affirm, that profit is not the
cause of oblations, but the piety of some men, who honor what is best: But if
a Sophister were present, he would ask, why you style the Gods best, since
they are but fellow servants with men, and subjects to the same mistresses, and
Destinyes. You will not say their condition is better, because they are
immortal. For it is so much the worse. Since death, if nothing else shifts men
into liberty. But your thraldom is endless, and your servitude is eternal,
and drawn out into an everlasting thredde.


Jupiter. But this endless perpetuity, Cyniscus, is our happiness, who live
in a full fruition of all good things.


Cyniscus. You are not all happy alike, Jupiter, but your felicities are
distinguished by their perturbations: you perchance are happy, being King of the
Gods, and able, by the demission of a coard, to draw up earth, and sea. But
Vulcan, mean time, is a lame, sullyed, mechanical Smith: Prometheus, also,
was once crucified. I speak not now of your father, who lies shackled in Hell.
They report of your loves, and wounds, and prentiships to men: Your brother
hired by Laomedon; and Apollo by Admetus: Employments in my judgment not very
happy. So that some of you seem happy, and of prosperous estate, others not. I
forbear to mention how you are robbed, like us, and suffer sacrilege, and the
wealthyest of you in an instant beggars. Besides, many of you who are gold, and
silver, and were decreed to it, are cast, and melted.


Jupiter. You may speak reproachfully of us, Cyniscus, and may hereafter
repent it.


Cyniscus. Spare your threats, Jupiter; you know I can suffer nothing to which
I am not predestined by the Fates. They who robbed your Temples are not yet
punished, but have most of them escapt you; being, I suppose, decreed not to be
caught.


Jupiter. Did I not say thou were one of those, who by their discourses
overthrow providence?


Cyniscus. You are over causelessly suspicious, Jupiter; and take what ever I
say for their doctrine. From whom can I learn these truths, but from you? I
would gladly, therefore, ask you, what you mean by your providence. Is it one
of the Destinies, or some Goddess superior to them as their Queen?


Jupiter. I told thee before, 'twas not fit for thee to know such things. And
thou at first did promise to ask but one Question; yet proceedest to trouble
me with frivolous doubts. I see the aim of thy discourse is to demonstrate
that our providence is not busied in humane affairs.


Cyniscus. It Is not my aim. But you said a little before, there were
Destinies, who governed all things. Unless you repent, and recant your words,
and intend to erect your providence by the expulsion of Fate.


Jupiter. No such matter, Sir. Fa^e does all things by us.


Cyniscus. I understand you: you confess your selves, then, the servants and
ministers of the Fates; They decree, and order things, and you are their
instruments, and Tools.


Jupiter. How mean you?


Cyniscus. Just as a Hatchet assists a carpenter in his trade, and an Augwer
cooperates; yet no man will say they are Artificers. Nor is a ship the work of
the Axe, or Augwer, but of the Ship-wright. So Fate is the Carpenter of all
things, you are but the Wimbles, and Axes of the Destinies. In reason,
therefore, men should sacrifice to Fate, and thence implore benefits; and not
make their addresses to you, or strive to render you propitious by veneration,
and honors. Nay, in strictness, they ought not to adore fate. For, I suppose,
it is not in the power of the Destinyes to change or alter any decree they have
once made. Nor will Atropos permit any to wrest her distaffe another way, or
unwinde what Clotho has spunne.


Jupiter. So then, you maintain, Cyniscus, that the sisters themselves are not
to be adored by men, and cast all things into a confusion. Yet we, if for
nothing else, yet for our Oracles, and pre-interpretations of these Decrees,
which the fates have made, deserve to be worshipped.


Cyniscus. The foreknowledge of future events, Jupiter, is utterly fruitless,
if by observation they be impossible to be avoided: unless you hold that one
foretold he shall be slain by the point of a spear, may defeat his death by
shutting himself up, which is impossible. For his destiny will draw him forth
to hunt, and expose him to a dart. So Adrastus spear being aimed at a bore,
shall miss, and slay Craesus son, as if directed to him by the powerful
ordinance of the fates. That forewarning, also, given to Laius was ridiculous,
which bid him not beget a son against the allowance of the Gods; if he did,
his child should slay him. For I hold such precautions no armor against
necessary events. For after the oracle he begot a son who did slay him. I see
no reason, therefore, why you should require to be paid for your predictions. I
forbear to speak of the cross, double-sensed oracles, which you have uttered
to many; Not clearly expressing whether Craesus, passing Halys, should ruin
his own, or Cyrus Empire. For the oracle carries both constructions.


Jupiter. Apollo, Cyniscus, had a just cause of quarrel against Craesus, for
mingling the flesh of a Tortoyse with that of a sheep in sacrifice to him.


Cyniscus. But it became not a God to quarrel. I therefore, rather think the
Lydian was decree*d to be deceived by the oracle; and Fate long before had so
spunne his thread, that he was not clearly to understand the prophecy. So that
your predictions are but a part of Destiny.


^upiter. Thou leavest us nothing to do then, but make us Gods in vain,
neither busied in the ordering of humane affairs, nor worthy of sacrifices,
like so many Awgers, and Axes. Then thou take a privilege to contemn us,
because, being armed with thunder, I suffer thee thus to blaspheme us.


Cyniscus. Discharge your bolt, Jupiter; If I be predestined to be struck with
thunder, I will not accuse you for the blow, but Clotho, who wounded me with
your hand: nor will I charge your thunder with my stroke. But pray let me
enquire of you, and destiny, and do you answer for both to a question, which
your threats have suggested to me: why do you spare so many sacrilegious,
theevish, blasphemous, oppressing, perjured men, and so often strike an
innocent oak, or stone, or sail of a ship with lightning? Nay, many times,
an innocent, religious travailer. Why are you silent, Jupiter? Is it not
lawful for me to know this neither?


Jupiter. It Is not Cyniscus; yet thou art still curious, and come prepared,
(I know not how set on) to perplex me with scruples.


Cyniscus. Nor is it permitted to enquire of you, and Providence, and Fate, why
the excellent Phocian, and before him, Aristides, dyed in such extreme want,
and necessity; and Callias, and Alcibiades, luxurious young men, flowed with
riches. Midias, also, the insolent, and Charops of Aeginar a Pathike, who slew
his mother with famine. Again, why Socrates was delivered up to the eleven
Judges, and not Melitus. Lastly, why effeminate Sardanaphalus was a King; and
why so many honest, and virtuous P^rsians were crucified by him, because they
distasted his Actions. I cannot now stand to go over all particulars, or
recount how wicked men prosper, and abound with wealth; and how good men are
carried, and tossed with poverty, and afflicted with diseases, and a thousand
mischiefs.


Jupiter. You know not, Cyniscus, what punishments are reserved after this life
for the wicked, or what felicityes for the Good.


Cyniscus. You mean Hell, Titius's, and Tantalus's. Things, whose clear
knowledge I expect to have in the next world. Let me be happy all the time I
live here, and let sixteen vultures feed upon my liver after I am dead. But let
me not pine with thirst here, like Tantalus, and drink with Hero's, in the
Islands of the blessed when I am placed in the Elizian meadows hereafter.


Jupiter. Do thou not believe, then, that there are such punishments, and
rewards, and a court of justice, where every man's life shall be examined?


Cyniscus. I hear one Minos, a Cretan, is judge below in such causes: pray
tell me, is there any such officer there? The report goes he is your son.


Jupiter. What would thou know of him, Cyniscus?


Cyniscus. Whom does he punish?


Jupiter. Malefactors, such as murderers, and Church robbers.


Cyniscus. Whom does he admit among the Heroes?


Jupiter. Good men, and religious, who have lived a life of virtue.


Cyniscus. Why so, Jupiter?


Jupiter. Because the one deserves honor, the other torments.


Cyniscus. But if one commit an offense against his will, is he in justice to
be punished too?


Jupiter. By no means.


Cyniscus. Nor if one do good against his will, is he to be thought worthy of
honor?


Jupiter. It Is true.


Cyniscus. It belongs not, then, to Minos either to reward any man, or punish
him.


Jupiter How not any man?


Cyniscus Because we men do nothing voluntarily, but as we are moved by an
inevitable necessity; supposing that to be true which you granted before, That
Fate is the cause of all things. If, therefore, one man kill another, fate is
the murderer. If any man commit sacrilege, he was enforced by his destiny.
If, therefore, Minos would order his sentences aright, he should punish fate
for Sisyphus; and destiny for Tantalus. Since they could not offend who were
merely obedient, and passive.


Jupiter. I hold it not fit to answer thee to such questions. For thou art a
bold fellow, and a Sophister. And so for the present I leave thee.


Cyniscus. I meant to ask you, where the destinyes dwell, and how, being but
three, they can exactly order such numberless affairs. For to me their life,
amidst such various employments, seems laborious, and unfortunate; and they
themselves, borne under no very propitious destiny. I, therefore, were I put to
my election, would not change my life for theirs; but would rather choose to
live yet poorer, then sit spinning at their distaffe, and observe the numerous
businesses with which they are surrounded. But if you cannot well reply to
these Inquiries, Jupiter, I will content my self with your other answers; and
the revelations which your conference has made of fate, and providence, shall
suffice. Perchance I am not decreed to hear the rest.


The Parasite.
The Speakers, Tychiades, and a Parasite. Tychiades What Is the reason, Simo,
since all other men, both free, and servants, are skilled in some art, by which
they are useful to themselves and others, you, (for ought I see) betake your
self to no employment, which may benefit either your self, or others?


Parasite. How mean you, Tychiades, I understand you not, speak clearlier.


Tychiades. Are you skilled in any profession, as music?


Parasite. By Jupiter, not I.


Tychiades. What then, Physic?


Parasite. Neither.


Tichiades. Nor Geometry?


Parasite. Not at all.


Tychiades. What then, Rhetoric? you are as great a stranger to Philosophy as
vice is.


Parasite. A greater, if greater may be. Think not therefore, you upbraide one
ignorant of his own ill education. I confess my self a sluggard, and am much
worse then you take me.


Tychiades. Perhaps you have learned none of these sciences by reason of their
subtlety, and hardness. But what mechanical art have you bin taught; Masonry,
or Shoomaking? methinks you are not of that quality, as to be utterly without a
trade.


Parasite. You say true, Tychiades. But I have learned no such occupation.


Tychiades. What other occupation, then?


Parasite. What? In my opinion a very generous one; which when you hear, I
believe you will praise. I express it in practice, but not in language to you.


Tychiades. What is^t?


Parasite. I have not exactly studied the descriptions of it. But that I am of
a profession you may easily perceive, and trouble me no farther, what it is you
shall know some other time.


Tychiades. I am impatient of delay.


Parasite. 'Twill seem a paradox to you.


Tychiades. I long so much the more to know it.


Parasite. Hereafter, Tychiades.


Tychiades. Tell me now, if you be not ashamed.


Parasite. It Is Parasitry.


Tychiades. Is any man so mad, Simo, to call this an art?


Parasiite. I do. If, therefore, you think me mad, because I have learned
no other art, let my madness be my excuse for this, and chide me no farther.
For they say, though madness be otherwise troublesome to the distemperd, yet
it is the advocate of their errors, and takes their faults upon it self as the
Author and cause.


Tychiades. But is Parasitry, say you, Simo, an Art then?


Parasite. A very science; And I am the first inventour.


Tychiades. So then you are a Parasite?


Parasite. You are pleased to abuse me, Tychiades.


Tychiades. You blush not to call your self so.


Parasite. No. I should blush if I did not.


Tychiades. When we would, then, tell those who know not who you are, we
shall say you are a Parasite?


Parasite. I had much rather you should call me so, then Phidias the statuary.
Nor do I joy less in my Art, then he in his Jupiter.


Tychiades. One thing will (in my apprehension) follow hereupon most ridiculous.


Parasite. What is it?


Tychiades. If in our superscriptions (as the manner is) we direct our letters
to Simo the Parasite.


Parasite. You shall more obliege me, then if you endorsed them to Dion the
Philosopher.


Tychiades. How will you relish the compellation? It Is below my care. But one
absurd thing more is to be considered.


Parasite. What is it?


Tychiades. If we should reckon this among other sciences. As if one should
ask, What Art it is, and we should answer as we do of Grammar, or Physic,
it is Parasitry.


Parasite. I will maintain this, Tychiades, to be more an Art, then any other,
if you will hear me speak as I think; Though, as I said before, I have not
studied my preparations.


Tychiades. Truth shall pass for premeditation.


Parasite. First, then, if please you, let us in general define what art is;
so shall we in particular know whether this be rightly one or no.


Tychiades. What is Art, then, do you know?


Parasite. Very well.


Tychiades. If you know, define it.


Parasite. Art (as I remember it described by a certain wise man) is a System
of precepts, got by practice, conducing to some end profitable to life.


Tyciades. You remember his definition right.


Parasite. If Parasitry, then, partake of all the parts of the definition, what
is it but an Art?


Tychiades. If it do, it is a very Art.


Parasite. Well, then. With application of Parasitry, to all the kinds of Art,
let us examine whether it consent with that definition; or whether, like faulty
pots struck it sound crazed. This, then, like all other Arts, ought to contain
a System of precepts. The first is to find out, and choose one who is fit to
feed a Parasite; and so to feed him as not to cast him off. For shall we say
that a Goldsmith by his art knows how to distinguish what coins are
adulterate, and what not; and that a Parasite without art can distinguish what
men are adulterate, and who are current; especially since men, like coins,
cannot be known but by the touch? it is a thing which the wise Euripides
complains of, saying, How we may ill men know,
No marks of body show.
So that more art is required in a Parasite, to discern and know by a kind of
divination things to abstruse, and unevident. Is it not, think you, a great
piece of precept, and institution, to know how to speak winning language, and
by insinuation of behavior to steal into the familiarity, and affection of his
patron?


Tychiades. It Is.


Parasite. Then, do you think it is not a work of great discourse, and
wisdom to depart from feasts with double shares, and preferred before those
who have not the Art?


Tychiades. It Is.


Parasite. Then, can any man unskilled know the virtues, and faults of diet,
and the curiosity of victuals? especially after that Oracle delivered by the
most excellent Plato; He that will make a feast, and is not a good Cook, has
small judgment in entertainments. Next, that Parasitry consists not in precept
only, but in practice too, you may easily from hence learn. The precepts of
other Arts lie days, and nights, and months, and years sometimes
unpracticed; yet they, whose arts they are, loose not their habits. But if the
rules of a Parasite be not kept in daliy exercise, not only the art but the
Artificer too is lost. Lastly, whether it have an end profitable to life, were
madness to doubt; since I find nothing more conducible to life than to eat and
drink, without which 'twere not possible to live.


Tychiades. It Is very true.


Parasite. Parasitry, then is not such a thing as beauty, or, strength; which
seem not to be an Art, but some such like power.


Tychiades. You say true.


Parasite. It Is not then void of Art. If it were, it would not profit the
owner. If you should commit your self in a ship to the sea, in a Tempest, and
knew not how to steer, could you be safe?


Tychiades. No, certainly.


Parasite. What Is the reason? is it not because you lack skill to preserve your
self.


Tychiades. Yes.


Parasite. So, then, a Parasite, if he lack skill, cannot preserve himself by
his parasitry.


Tychiades. It Is true.


Parasite. By Art, then, he is preserved; by want of Art, not?


Tychiades. I grant it.


Parasite. Parasitry then is an Art?


Tychiades. It seems so.


Parasite. I have often known expert Riders, and Chariotteers cast from their
box, bruised, and very much maimed; but none can tell of a wrackt Parasite. If,
therefore, Parasitry be not artlesse, nor a bare faculty, but a System of
precepts got by practice we must acknowledge it to be an Art.


Tychiades. As far as I conceive it is. But, then, you are to assign some
genuine definition of Parasitry.


Parasite. You say well. Methinkes the best definition of it is this. Parasitry
is an Art of meats, and drinks, and of the things to be done and said for
them, whose end is pleasure.


Tychiades. In my opinion you have most excellently defined your Art. But,
then, you are to consider whether a debate will not arise between you, and some
Philosophers, about your end.


Parasite. It Is enough that Felicity, and Parasitry have the same end, as they
manifestly have. For the wise Homer, admiring a Parasites, as the only happy,
and to be envyed life, says, No greater happiness can be desired,
Then when all people are with mirth inspired,
When tables swell with cheer, and Bowls are crowned,
With rich wines which go in Carowses round.
A little after, as if he had not sufficiently expressed his admiration, he
delivers his opinion more fully; saying excellently, This seems to me the top
and height of Bliss.
Intimating thereby that he thought there was no happiness comparable to that
of a Parasite. Nor is this said there by a vulgar person, but by the wisest in
the Poem. For had Ulisses meant to prefer the Stoicke end, he had
opportunity, when he fetched Phelocletes from Lemnos, and when he sacked Troy,
and when he stayed the Greeks from flight, and when he entered Troy having
whipped himself, and going ragged, and torn like a Stoic. But he then mentioned
no such end as best. Nor did he, when he lived an Epicurean with Calipso, where
he spent his time in a voluptuous Idleness, and enjoyed the loose embraces of
Atlas daughter, prefer this as the happiest life, but the life of Parasites:
who in those times were called Feasters. For what says he? The verses deserve
to be again quoted, nor can they be heard as they ought without repetition, Let
all the the Feasters sit in feast-like row,
And let the board* with cheer, and Viands flow.
Epicurus, then, impudently enough took his end from Parasitry, and made it
the same with his Felicity: which is a plain theft. For that pleasure belongs
to us, not to Epicurus, you may thus learn. First, I hold pleasure to be a
composed tranquillity of the body. Next, an even calmnesse, and want of tempest
in the mind. Both which are attained by Parasite, neither by an Epicurean: who
holding disputes of the figure of the Earth, of infinite worlds, of the
bigness of the Sun, of distances, of the first principles, of the Gods,
whether they be, or be not, and of the end it self, is in a perpetual war,
and disagreement with others; and perplexed, not only with humane, but with
mundane subtiletyes also. Whereas a Parasite, content with the state of things,
as they are, and believing they cannot be better, with all security, and
quietness, unvext with such scruples, eats, and sleeps soundly, stretched out
both hands, and feet, like Ulysses sailing homewards. The Epicurean, then, has
no title to pleasure, not only for the forementioned reasons, but for those
which follow. For what wise man soever he be, either he has something to eat,
or he has not. If he have not, his life will be so far from pleasant, that
he cannot live at all. If he have, either it is his own, or another. If he have
his diet from another, he is a Parasite, and not the man he boasts himself. If
he have it from himself, he lives not pleasantly.


Tychiades. How not pleasantly?


Parasite. If he provide his own meals, Tychiades, many things must
necessarily accompany such a life. For you are to consider, that he who intends
to live a life of pleasure, must satisfy all his desires as they rise. What say
you?


Tychiades. I think so.


Parasite. A matter, perhaps, to one of great possessions not over difficult;
but to one of small, or none at all, impossible, so that a poor man cannot be
wise, nor atchieve his end, I mean pleasure. Nay this is an end, not to be
attained by a rich man, be he never so indulgent to his desires. What Is the
reason? Because he who lives at his own charge, is liable to many disquiets.
Sometimes he is to beat his Cook for the ill dressing of his meat. If he beat
him not, he is to eat his meat ill^drest, and so miss his pleasure. Sometimes
he is to quarrel with his Steward for the ill ordering of his household
Accountes. Is not this true?


Tychiades. In all appearance to me.


Parasite. The case, then, standing thus with the Epicurean, it is not possible,
he should enjoy his end. Whereas the Parasite has no Cook to quarrel with,
nor Farm, nor Steward, nor money to vex him. Yet has all things, and is the
only man who eats and drinks, disturbed with none of the encumbrances which
trouble others. That Parasitry, then, is an Art has bin sufficiently
demonstrated by these, and former arguments. It now remains that I prove it to
be the best Art; not simply, but first, that it excells all Arts in general;
next, in particular. In general it excells them thus. The study of all other
Arts carries with it labor, fears, and stripes; Things which never any but
hated. Only the Art, which I profess, is learnt without toil. For who ever
went weeping from a feast, as we see many School-boyes? or who ever went to a
Feast with a sad look, like those who go to school? A Parasite willingly
frequents entertainments, and most coveteously pursues his Art. They who learn
other sciences, hate their own studyes, and some turn Apostates. Then you are
to consider, that in other Arts, parents reward those children, who excel,
with the same honors as they daily reward us Parasites. The boy, say they,
writes a fair hand, give him his dinner. He writes ill, let him fast. Then
the consequence of other Arts is not to bear pleasant fruits till they be
thoroughly learned; A thing of much industry, and weariness, whereas Parasitry
of all other professions reapes the harvest of its Art in the Learning; And at
once begins to be, and to be in its perfection. Again, not some, but all other
Arts were merely invented for maintenance. Only a Parasites maintenance flows
to him at first. Do you not see the husbandman plough his field, not for the
mere tillage sake? And the Architect build a house, not that he may merely
build? But a Parasite drives at nothing else; That very thing which is his
work being the end for which his work is due. Besides, none, I suppose, are
ignorant, that they who are busied in other professions, live wretchedly, and
keep only one, or at least two days in a month holy, as they are yearly, or
monthly appointed by their City; which they dedicate to refreshments. But the
whole thirty days of the month are festival to the Parasite, as so many
holidays of the Gods. Again, they, who mean to excel in other professions,
use a spare and slender diet, like sick patients; since full tables are
disadvantages to proficiency. Then all other Arts, are of no use to the
professors without instruments, and tools. No man can wind a Cornet without
a Cornet; or sing to the Harp without a Harp; or show his horsemanshippe
without a horse. But my Art is so perfect, and so cheap to the Artificer, that
without other helps it is sufficient. And whereas we pay for our learning of
other Arts, for this we are paid. Again, other Arts have their Teachers: But
Parasitry cannot be taught. But as Socrates says of Poetry, It come^ by
Destiny, and Fate. Then, consider, that other Arts loose their Employment, when
we travail, or sail, but this serves all places.


Tychiades. It Is very true.


Parasite. Then, Tychiades, all other Arts seem to borrow from this, but this
from none.


Tychiades. But tell me, is it not, think you, injustice to take another
goods?


Parasite. Who doubts it?


Tychiades. How, then, can another meat render you Parasites innocent?


Parasite. I cannot answer you. But the grounds of other Arts are mean, and
base; But the ground of mine is generous, and noble. For you shall find the
much celebrated name of friendship to be the foundation of Parasitry?


Tychiades. How do you mean?


Parasite. That no man invites an enemy, or stranger, or one of ordinary
acquaintance to his table. But he must first be an intimate friend, that
partakes of his meals, and board, and of the mysteryes of this Art. I have
often heard some say, what friend can he be, who did never eat, or drink with
us? As if they held him only a faithful friend with whom they had converst in
diet. Now that this is the Queen of Arts, you may thus easily inform your self.
Others labor, and sweat, and sit, and stand to their buisinesse, like so many
slaves of their profession. A Parasite, having his Art in subjection, sits at
table like a Prince; whose happiness 'twere needless to recount; since,
according to the wise Homer, he neither plants, nor ploughes, but without
sowing, or tillage, reapes all things. Then, it is permitted to an Orator, or
Geometrician, or Brasier to exercise his Art, though he be a Knave, or Fool.
But no man can be a Parasite who is either.


Tychiades. Trust me, you have made Parasitry such a treasure, that I could
almost change my course, and turn Parasite.


Parasite. How it excells, then, all other professions in general, I have
sufficiently shown. Let us now see how it excells them in particular. To
compare it with Mechanical Arts were foolish, and a Diminution of its
worthiness. I am to show, therefore, how it excells the greatest and best
sciences. It Is confessed by all, that Rhetoric, and Philosophy are for their
knowledge, and worth, most preferred. If, therefore, I show that parasitry
excells them, 'twill be clear that it excells all other sciences as much as
Nausicaa excell^d her handmaids. In general, then, it far surpasses both
Rhetoric, and Philosophy. First for its certainty, and Independance. For
Parasitry subsists of it self, they not. For all do not take Rhetoric to be
one and the same thing; but some hold it to be an Art; some none, but an abuse
of Art. Some maintain it to be one thing, some another. The like opinions pass
of Philosophy. That of Epicurus is diverse from that of the Gate; and that of
the Stoic from that of the Academy: Briefly, Philosophy is various, according
to the variety of Philosophers, who were never yet reconciled in opinions, or
appeared to be of one sect. From whence I plainly infer, That originally that
is not an Art which is not able to subsist. For why is Arithmetic every where
one and the same? and why do twice two make four, both with us, and Persians,
without any variation either among Greeks, or Barbarians? But we see great
differences of Philosophy, without any agreement either in their principles or
ends.


Tychiades. You say true: even they who affirm there is but one Philosophy,
have made it diverse.


Parasite. In other professions he that with pardon passes over some
repugnances, as indifferent, and some variable principles, is not altogether to
be blamed. But who will allow of Philosophy as necessary, which is as various
and disagreeing to it self, as mis-tuned instruments. Philosophy then, cannot
be one, because I see it is numberless: nor can it be many, because it is one.
The like may be said of Rhetoric, of which diverse speak diversely, and hold
a war of opinions; which is a clear proof, that if it were built on any sure
principle, 'twould fall under comprehension. For to dispute which opinion were
truest, and not acknowledge Rhetoric to be one, were to destroy its
subsistence. It Is otherwise with Parasitry, which is one among Greeks, and
Barbarians, and every where the same, and like itself. Nor can it be said that
some are one way Parasites, some another. Nor are there sects among us, as
there are Stoics and Epicureans of opposite doctrines among Philosophers; but
all are everywhere of one profession, and united in the agreement of our
business, and end. So that in my judgment, by that which has been said, there
is no true wisdom but Parasitry.


Tychiades. It Is a plain demonstration. But how will you prove that philosophy
in other things is inferior to Parasitry.


Parasite. First, it is manifest, that never any Parasite studied Philosophy;
but many Philosophers have studied Parasitry, and still do.


Tychiades. Can you name any?


Parasite. You know them well enough, Tychiades, but dissemble your knowledge,
least you should more contribute to their infamy, then reputation.


Tychiades. By Jupiter, not I, Simo; and therefore, I long much to hear some
examples.


Parasite. Now I perceive you ignorant in their writings, who have recorded
their lives, where you may fully know whom I mean.


Tychiades. By Hercules, I extremely desire to hear who they are.


Parasite. I Will tell you, then; and will select no vulgar instances but some of
the highest mark, and whom you would least suspect. Eschines the Socratick, who
wrote the long facete Dialogues, came into Sicily with a purpose to be known by
them to Dyonisius: To whom having read his Miltiades, much to his reputation,
he made his future abode in the Island, and became Parasite to the Tyrant;
renouncing the disputations of Socrates. What think you of Aristippus, the
Cyrenaean? Was he not one of the approved Philosophers?


Tychiades. Yes.


Parasite. He too, about that time, lived at Syracuse, Parasite to Dyonisius;
and was of all his other flatterers of greatest esteem with him; as being more
naturally then others framed for the profession. So that Dyonisius daily sent
his purveyours to him to be instructed, being one so able to manage, and order
the Employment. Your most generous Plato came into Sicily with the like
purpose, and was for a while Parasite to the Tyrant, but for want of a Genious
to the art was cashiered, and returned to Athens; where with much industry
enabling himself, he sailed the second time into Sicily, where after some few
days entertainments he was for his unskilfulnesse rejected. And the misfortune
which befell Plato in Sicily, is like that which befell Nicias.


Tychiades. Who, Simo, reports this?


Parasite. Many. Among others Aristoxenus the Musician; a man worthy of
belief, who was also parasite to Neleus. You cannot but know that Euripides,
during his life, was parasite to Archelaus, and Anaxarchus to Alexander.
Aristotle, also, begun a Tract of parasitry, as he has of other Sciences. That
Philosophers, then, have studied parasitry, I have sufficiently proved. But no
man can give instance of a parasite who studied Philosophy. If, therefore, it
be felicity not to feel hunger, thirst, or cold, none are happy but parasites.
For you may see many Philosophers half starved, and frozen, but not one
parasite. Otherwise, he were not a parasite, but a fellow as wretched, and
beggarly as a Philosopher.


Tychiades. It Is evident. But will you demonstrate that parasitry excells,
Philosophy, and Rhetoric in other things.


Parasite. The life of men (if I be not deceived) consists in the seasons of
peace, and war. Both which plainly discover what arts, and their professors
are. First, then, (if you please) let us consider the times of war, and see
who are likely to be of most use to themselves, and the public?


Tychiades. You commit men ordinarily disjoined: nor can I choose but laugh
when I think how a philosopher will show, brought into comparison with a
parasite.


Parasite. To abate your wonder, and let you see that it is no matter of sport, I
will draw you a case. News is brought that the enemy is unexpectedly enterd a
country; which without sudden resistance, cannot be preserved from
depopulation. The General calls all of fit age to a muster, and lets the rest
depart. Among these are mustered Philosophers, Rhetoricians, and parasites. We
all strip our selves. For they who are to be armed are first to be seen naked.
Consider us, then in particular, and take a view of our bodies, and you will
see some of them lean, pale, and shrunk with poverty, like so many maimed
Soldiers. And were it not ridiculous to say such men were able to endure a
battle, or pitched field, or an assault, or Dust, or wounds, who need diet, and
refreshment? But take a survey of a Parasite, does he not carry the appearance
of a strong body, and lusty color, neither swarthy, nor pale, neither
inclining to a woman, or a slave? Then, he is stout of courage, and terrible of
aspect; the inseparable marks of our quality 'Twere against policy to send one
of a timorous, effeminate look to the wars. One of us, then, either alive, or
dead, would be an ornament to his arms. But why make I comparisons, having
such clear examples? since to speak freely, few Rhetoricians, or Philosophers
have in times of war ventured beyond their walls. If any have, I dare say, they
forsook their ranks, and fled back again.


Tychiades Your promises are high, and not vulgar.


Parasite. Thus, then, I proceed. Isocrates the Rhetorician never went to
war, nor indeed ever pleaded in a Judicial Court; disheartened, I believe,
by his fears, and the unfitness of his elocution, and voice. Did not Demades,
and Eschines, and Philocrates, frighted with his proclamation of war betray
both their City, and themselves to Phillip, and ever after lived his agents at
Athens, where every Athenian that followed their example in war was of their
friendship? then, though Hyperides, and Demosthenes, and Lycurgus, were in
show valiant, and spkae blustering Orations, and invectives against Phillip,
what famous exploit did they perform in that expedition against him? Hyperides,
and Lycurgus went not forth, nor durst peep out of their Gates; but like
self-besiegers kept within the walls, and ordered the decrees, and counsels.
Their great champion Demosthenes, indeed, who in his Orations had wont to say
that Phillippe was the ruin of the Macedonians, and that they were not fit to
be bought for slaves, adventured to march as far as Boeotia. But before the
Armies joined, and came to battle, he threw away his shield, and fled. You
cannot but have heard this from others, being a story so well known, not only
to the Athenians, but to the Thracians, and Sythians, from whence the Coward
was descended.


Tychiades. All this I know. But these were Orators, whose profession was to
make Speeches, not to fight. what say you of Philosophers? You cannot accuse
them of cowardice too, like the others.


Parasite. They, Tychiades, though they daily dispute of fortitude, and even
wear out the name of valor, are more cowardly then Orators. For, first,
consider that no man can tell of a Philosopher slain in war. Or of any that
bore Arms, or, if they did, that did not run away. Antisthenes, and
Diogenes, and Crates, and Zeno, and Plato, and Eschines, and Aristotle, and the
whole rout of them never saw a Camp. Only their sage Socrates, adventuring
forth to a skirmish in the City, fled from Parnethe to the wrestling place of
Taureus. Holding it much the better piece of wit, there sprucely to converse
with young boys, and inveigle them with sophismes, then to enter battle with a
stout Spartan.


Tychiades. I have heard as much from others, who had no purpose to traduce or
slander them; which makes me think you belie them not in favor of your own
profession. Proceed, therefore, to your description of a parasite in war; and
show what ancient Commanders have been parasites.


Parasite. No man is so unskilled in Homer, or so unlettered, as not to know
that his bravest Hero's were parasites. Nestor, from whose tongue language
flowed like Honey, was the Kings parasite. Nor do we read that Agamemnon
praised, or admired Achilles (though of a divine presence, and strength of
Body) or Diomedes, or Ajax, like Nestor. Nor does he wish he had ten Ajax's, or
ten Achilles's. But he had long before sacked Troy, had he had ten such
Soldiers as this aged parasite was. Which, also, confirms Idomeneus, though
descended of Jupiter, to have been Agamemnons parasite.


Tychiades. This I know too. Yet I am not satisfied how these two worthies were
Agamemnons parasites.


Parasite. Remember the verses in which he bespeaks Idomeneus.


Tychiades. Which are they?


Parasite. Thy bowl stands always crowned, like mine,
Ready to drown thy thirst with sprightly wine.
Where he says, his bowl stood always crowned, not as if Idomeneus Cup
stood always filled for him, fighting, or sleeping; but because he always had
the honor to diet with the King. Whereas the other Commanders had but their
days of invitation. So Ajax, after his valiant duel with Hector was (says
Homer) brought to the Divine Agamemnon, and by him honored with a late supper.
Whereas Idomeneus, and Nestor, (as he affirms) were of the Kings daily table.
Only Nestor seems to me the more expert, and artificial parasite, who begun
not to practice his art toward Agamemnon, but long before toward Coeneus, and
Exadius, and left not off till Agamemnons death.


Tychiades. Truly, he was an Heroic Parasite. If you know any more such,
produce them.


Parasite. What was Patroclus, but Achilles Parasite? A young Lord not
inferior to any other Greek, either for soul or body? Nay, as far as I can
conjecture by his deeds, he was not inferior to Achilles himself. For when
Hector broke open their Gates, entered their works, and fought in sight of
their navy, he repelled him, quenched Protesilaus ship then burning, and
having aboard it no Cowards, but the two sons of Telamon, Ajax expert at his
spear, and Teucer at his bow. He slew also, many of the Barbarians; among which
Sarpedon, the son of Jupiter fell by the hand of Achilles Parasite: And when he
was himself slain, he dyed not like others, or as Hector did, by the single
hand of Achilles, and Achilles by the single shaft of Paris; but a God, and two
men went to his slaughter. And at his expiration, no speeches came from him,
like those of Hector, who fell down, and besought Achilles that his dead body
might be restored to his friends, but such as became a Parasite.


Tychiades. What were they.


Parasite. Come twenty more such, with Darts cloud the Air;
And be the conquest of my hand and spear.

Tychiades. Enough. Now show that Patroclus was not Achilles Friend, but
Parasite.


Parasite. I will produce Patroclus, Tychiades, saying as much of himself.


Tychiades. You speak wonders.


Parasite. Listen to his own words.

Let not, Achilles, my bones lie from thine,
As one house fed us, let one Tomb combine.
And again a little after, Pelius thy Sire,
Fed me at's hoard, and called me still thy Squire;


That is, Parasite. For had he meant to call him Friend, he would never have
called him Squire; for Patroclus was nobly descended. Those, therefore, whom he
calls Squires, were neither servants nor friends, but manifest Parasites. So he
styles Meriones Idomeneus, Squire; Which I suppose was the common name for
Parasites. Where observe, that Homer vouchsafes not to equal Idomeneus, though
Jupiters son, to Mar^, but Meriones, his Parasite. Was not Aristogiton the
popular, and poor, as Thucidides styles him, Parasite to Harmodius? Nay was he
not his favorite? For parasites are their favorites who feed them. This
parasite, when a Tyranny was growing over the City of Athens, restored it to
Liberty; and now (after his effeminacies) stands in a statue of Brass, erected
to him in the market place. Such famous examples have there been of parasites.
By this time, then, you may imagine what kind of Soldier a parasite is in war.
He never enters his files, but breaks his Fast first, like Ulisses. And though
he be to fight never so early in the morning, he will not fight empty. And the
time which other Soldiers spend fearfully in putting on their Arms, one his
Helmet, another his Breastplate, tremblingly suspicious of the misfortunes of
war, he cheerfully spends in eating, and marching with the foremost is
presently ready for encounter: whilst his patron, who feeds him, closely
follows at his back; whom, as Ajax did Teucer, he covers with his shield, and
warding off the enemies darts, bears himself naked to protect him; more
careful to preserve him, then himself. Then, no Parasite falls in war with
the shame of the General, or Soldiers. Of so goodly a carcass is he, and so
like himself, sitting at a banquet; by whom, a dead Philosopher laid shows
vvitherd, nasty, a long bearded carcass, slain before the battle, a man of no
strength: who would not despise that City which had such miserable Guards?
who seeing such vvanne long hayred fellows lying, would not think the
State, for want of better Soldiers, had let loose their prisons, and
malefactors to the war? Parasites, then, in martial expeditions excel
Orators, and Philosophers. In times of peace Parasitry, in my judgment, as
much exceeds Philosophy, as peace exceeds war. First, then, (if please you) let
us consider the places of peace.


Tychiades. I understand not your drift; but let us consider them.


Parasite. I may call Courts of Judicature, wrestling places, races, huntings,
and banquets, places of peace.


Tychiades. You may.


Parasite. A parasite frequents not Courts of Judicature; places, in my
opinion, fit only for Sycophants, where nothing is done by moderation, or rule.
But he follows, and is the only man who adornes places of exercise, race, and
entetainment. What Philosopher, or Orator, stripped for wrestling, can show a
body to be compared with a parasite? or which of them seen in a race Would not
be a reproach to the place? Not one of them in a desert can withstand a wild
boar: whose assaults a parasite expects, and easily encounters, being used to
contemn such beasts at entertainments. So that neither Stagge, nor bristled
Boar affrights him; but if he whet his teeth at him, he whets his teeth at him
again. He pursues a hare more then ^ounds do. At a feast who can enter the list
with a parasite, for mirth and eating? who more cheers the Guests? He who sings
and breaks jests, or he who sits demure, in a patcht gown, with a downcast
look, as if he were invited to a funeral, not a feast? Methinkes a
Philosopher at a feast is just like a dog in a stew. But, to omit such
expressions, let us now pass on, and consider, and compare a parasites life.
First, you may observe him to be a perfect contemner of Glory, and negligent of
the things of opinion. But you shall scarce find an Orator, or Philosopher
not given to fame, and disdain; And, which is yet worse, to money. whereas a
parasite is no more taken with Silver, then another man with the pibles on the
shore; Nor does Gold, in his account, differ at all from fire. But pleaders,
and (what is yet more unworthy) they who profess wisdom, are so wretchedly
affected with gain, that some of the most famed Philosophers, (for I forbear
to speak of Orators) sell justice for reward; others take pay for teaching
their Scholars Sophistry. Another is not ashamed to receive a pension from the
King for his attendance; Another, though of decrepit age, travells and hires
himself out like an Indian, or Scythian Captive; nor hold they gain to be a
word of reproach. Nor are these their only faults, you may perceive them liable
to the most unruly passions too; as discontents, rages, envyings, and lusts of
all sorts. Affections unknown to a parasite. Whose patience suffers him not to
be angry; nor has he an enemy to be angry with. If at any time he be provokt,
his Choler is not troublesome, or mischievous, but rather stirs mirth, and
delights the company. Of all men he is least troubled with sadness. For it is
the benefit, and privilege of his profession, to grieve at nothing. Besides,
he has neither wealth, nor house, nor servant, nor wife, nor children, whose
loss may afflict him. Then, he neither covets reputation, nor riches, nor
beauty.


Tychiades. But methinks, Simo, want of maintenance should grieve him.


Parasite. You are deceived, Tychiades, if you take him for a true parasite who
at any time wants maintenance. As he is not valiant, who wants courage, nor he
wise, who lacks wisdom; so it is with a Parasite. Of whom I now speak, as he
is a parasite in deed, not in title, and name. If, then, a valiant man be not
valiant, if he have not valor; nor a wise man, wise, if he have not
wisdoms, so a parasite is not a parasite, unless he have the Art of a
Parasite. He then, that cannot suck maintenance from any other man, falls not
under my discourse, of a parasite.


Tychiades. Will you never allow him, then, to want maintenance?


Parasite. No. Which makes him not grieve for that, or any thing else. Whereas
all Philosophers, and great Orators are surrounded with fears. So that you
may see most of them walk with staves; which they would not do, if they
feared not other men weapond. Then, they firmly bolt their doors, to prevent
any night attempt. Whilst the parasite slightly shuts the door of his
cottage, merely to keep out the wind. A night attempt no more frights him, then
if there were no such matter. If he be to pass though a desert he travells
without a sword; so secure and fearlesse is he. But I have often seen
Philosophers, upon no appearance of danger, make ready their bow, nor dare they
go to a bathe, or invitation without a staff. Then, no man can charge a
parasite with adultery, force, rapine, or any other crime. For then he were not
a parasite, but would much wrong himself: so that if he should be caught in
adultery, he should with the offense purchase the name too. For as a malefactor
leaves of to be a good man, and becomes a wicked; so an offending parasite
leaves off to be what he was, and assumes the compellation of his offense. But
we not only see many such offenses committed by the Philosophers of our times,
but have large monuments of their crimes recorded in their writings. Socrates,
Aeschines, Hyperides, Demosthenes, and most Orators and Philosophers have had
their Apologyes. But never Parasite needed a defense, because no man can give
an instance of an invective writ against him.


Tychiades. I confess a Parasites life is much better then an Orators, or
Philosophers, but his death is worse.


Parasite. It Is much happier. For we know that all, or most Philosophers have
had unfortunate ends. Some found guilty, and sentenced for heinous offenses, by
poison; others have wholly perished by fire, others by the strangury; others have
dyed banished. But none can tell of a Parasite who dyed so, or who had not the
happiness to dye eating, and drinking. Or if any have felt a violent death,
'twas a flight, not an execution.


Tychiades. You have sufficiently compared a Parasite with Philosophers. It now
remains that you show of what use he is to his nourisher, and patron. For
methinks rich men maintain you out of benevolence, and charity, not without
your infamies who are so maintained,


Parasite. I thought you not so simple, Tychiades, as not to know, that a rich
man, though he possesses Gyges wealth, dining alone is poor, and appearing in
public without his parasite is a beggar. And as a Soldier without his arms,
or apparel without its scarlet, or a horse without his trappings is
pricelesse; so a rich man without his parasite is held base, and contemptible;
so that the parasite is a credit to the rich man, but not the rich man to the
parasite. Nor is it (what ever you think) any disgrace for the worse to be
parasite to the better. It behooves, then, every rich man to keep his parasite,
both for the honor, and the safety which he receives from his attendance. For
no man will easily offer to quarrel with him so guarded. Next, no man that
keeps a parasite can well be poysond. For who will make such an attempt upon
him who has such a taster? A rich man, then not only receives fame, but
preservation from his parasite: who out of affection to his patron undergoes
all his dangers, and chooses not only to eat, but to dye with him.


Tychiades. Trust me, Simo, you have not been defective, nor came you, (as you
pretended) unprepared to the deciphering of your Art, of which you seem to be
so practiced a master. For the future, therefore, if you can deliver the name
from disgrace, I will learn to be a parasite.


Parasite. To this my answer shall be (since you think I have otherwise said
enough) a question; to which answer as well as you can. What did the Ancients
call (...)?


Tychiades. Food.


Parasite. And does not, (...) signify to be fed?


Tychiades. Yes.


Parasite. It Is plain, then, that to be a parasite (which is derived from (...)
another, and (...) meat) is nothing but to be one fed by another.


Tychiades. Therein Simo, lies the infamy, and scandal.


Parasite. Pray answer me once more: which of the two would you choose. To be
the saylor, or passenger?


Tychiades. The passenger.


Parasite. The Racer, or the Better?


Tychiades. The Better.


Parasite. The Horse, or the Rider?


Tychiades. The Rider.


Parasite. The Arrow, or the Archer?


Tychiades. The Archer.


Parasite. And would you not rather choose to be fed, then to be the feeder?


Tychiades. I confess my self convinced. Henceforth like school-boyes I will
come to you mornings, and afternoons, to learn your Art. Which, being your
first scholar, I hope you will teach me without reservation or envy* For they
say mothers love their first child best.


The Lover of Lies; or the incredulous.
The Speakers, Tychiades and Philocles. Tychiades CAn you tell me the reason,
Philocles, why most men desire to lie, and delight not only to speak fictions
themselves, but give busy attention to others who do?


Philocles. There be many reasons, Tychiades., which compel some men to speak
untruthes, because they see it is profitable.


Tychiades. This is nothing to the purpose. My question concerned not them who
lie for profit: for such deserve pardon; and some praise, who have thereby
defeated their enemies, and used it as a preservative against dangers; like
Ulysses, who by such slights secured his own life, and the return of his
companions. But I now speak of those, who prefer the very lie before truth,
and take pleasure to busy themselves in fables, without any necessary
judgment. I would fain know what motives such men have to do so.


Philocles. Have you met with any born with such a natural love to lying?


Tychiades. There are many such.


Philocles. What other motive can they have not to speak truth, but their
madness? Else certainly, they would never prefer the worst thing before the
best.


Tychiades. This is nothing; since I can show you many of great discretion, and
wisdom in other things, who yet are Captives to this delusion, and love of
lies. Nor am I a little troubled to see men of excellent judgment in other
things, take delight to deceive themselves, and others. You cannot but know
those ancients better then I, Herodotus, Ctesias the Cnidian, and the Poets
before them, Homer especially; All men of great name, whose writings are stored
with fictions. So that they not only deceived their hearers then, but have
conveyed their lies to us also in a preserved succession of excellent Poetry,
and verses. I cannot, therefore, but blush for them, as often as they speak of
a Schism in heaven, of Prometheus chains, the Giants Insurrection, and the
whole Tragedy of Hell. How Jupiter, also, for love became a Bull, or Swan; and
how a woman was transformed into a Fowl, or Bear. Besides their Pegasus's,
Chimaera's, Gorgon's, Cyclop's, and the like strange prodigious fables, fit
only to recreate the minds of children, who yet fear Goblins, and Fayries. But
these are things tolerable in Poets. How ridiculous is it that whole Cittyes,
and Nations should unanimously agree in a public lie? Thus the Cretans are
not ashamed to show Jupiters Tomb. The Athenians say that Ericthonius grew
from the earth, and that the first people of Attica sprung from thence, like
Coleworts. Yet these speak much modestlyer then the Thebans, who derive
themselves from a serpents teeth sown. Yet he who takes not such ridiculous
fictions for true, but upon discreet examination thinks it proper only for a
Coroebus, or Margites, to beleve that Triptolemus was carried through the Air by
winged Dragons; Or that Pan came asistant to the Greeks from Arcadia into
Marathon; Or that Orithyia was ravished by Boreas; is held irreligious, and
foolish, for dissenting from such clear and evident truths. So powerful is a
received lie.


Philocles. Yet both Poets, Tychiades, and Cittyes are thus excusable, that the
one mingle fictions with their writings, the better to take their readers. The
Athenians, Thebans and other countries, make their beginnings more majestic,
from such fabulous Originalls. Besides, should all fiction be banished Greece,
how many reporters would dye of famine? Since none there are patient to hear
truth spoken gratis. In my judgment, therefore, they who delight in lies, for
no other reason but because they are lies, are most deservedly to be laughed at.


Tychiades. You say true. I now came from the learned Eucrates, where I heard
many things fabulous, and incredible; or rather leaving them in the midst of
their discourses, impatient of na^rations so much beyond belief, like so many
Hobgoblins they scared me away with their prodigyes, and wonders.


Philocles. Aeucrates, Tychiades, is a man of credit, nor can I believe that
one of so deep a beard, of the age of threescore, and of such continued study
in Philosophy, should endure to hear another faign in his presence, much less
that he should offer to faign himself.


Tychiades. You know not, my friend, what lies he told, how constantly he
affirmed them, and mingled Oaths with his fictions, and produced his children
for witnesses. So that I looking upon him* thought variously; sometimes that he
was mad, and beside himself; sometimes that being a cheater he had long scape't
my discovery; and had carried about a contemptible Ape in a Lions shape: so
absurd were his discourses.


Philocles. In the name of Vesta, what were they, Tychiade^? I long to know
what cosenage he could disguise with so long a beard.


Tychiades. I usually, at other times, when I had leisure, Tychiades, visited
him. But to day having occasion to speak with Leontichus, (who as you know, is
my intimate friend) and being told by his boy that he was early in the morning
gone to visit Eucrates, who lay sick, as well to meet Leontichus, as to see
him, (of whose sickness I was till then ignorant) I went thither. Where I found
not Leontichus, (who, as they said, was newly departed) but a crowd of others;
Among whom was Cleodemus the Peripatetick, Dinomachus the Stoic, and Ion; you
know him; he that is so admired for Plato's discourses, as if he only
understood exactly his meaning, and were able to be his interpreter to others.
You see what men I name to you* All Sages, famed for virtue, heads of their
several sects; All venerable, and carrying an awful terror in their looks.
There was present, also, Antigonus the Physician, sent for, I suppose, out of
necessity of the disease. Though Eucrates seemed to be much upon the recovery,
and his sickness not dangerous. For the humor was again fallen into his
feet. As soon as Eucrates saw me, remitting his voice he feebly bad me sit down
by him on the bed: whom, as I entered, I heard loud, and shrill. I very careful
not to touch his feet, and using the accustomed complement, that I knew not of
his sickness, but upon the first intimation came post, sat near him. The
discourse of the company was concerning his disease; of which they had in part
already spoken; and were then going on, each severally to prescribe a several
medicine, and cure. Take up from the ground, said Cleodemus, with your left
hand the tooth of a weesill, so killed as I said before, bind it in a Lions
skin, newly flead, then wrap it about your legs, and your pain will
presently cease. It Is not in a Lions skin, as I have heard, said Dinomachus,
but in a Virgin Hindes skin unbuckt; And so the receipt is more probable. For
a Deer is swift, and most strong of feet. A Lion, indeed, is strong, and his
fat, and right paw, and the stiff hairs of his beard are of great virtue,
if one know how to apply them every one with his proper charm. But they promise
small cure of the gowte. I, also, once thought, said Cleodemus, that a Stagges
skin was to be used for his fleetnes^e, but since a certain wise Lybian has
me taught otherwise, and told me that Lions are swifter then Buckes; For they,
said he, catch these in hunting. The rest praised his reason, as well delivered
by the Lybian. Then, said I, do you think such diseases, as this, are cured by
charms or that an inward malady is eased by an outward spell? Whereat they
smiled, and seemed much to condemn my sillyness as not knowing a thing so
received, and not gainsaid, or disproved by any understanding man. Antigonus
the Physician seemed pleased with my question; who, it seems, was formerly
neglected in his offers to cure Eucrates by the prescriptions of his Art; which
enjoined him to abstain from wine, to eat herbs, and to study more
remissely. Cleodemus, in the mean time, smiling replied saying, do you think
it incredible, Tychiades, that such spells should be of power to cure diseases?
I do, said I. Nor am I of so gross a sense, to believe that such outward
receiptes, which have no affinity with the springs, and causes of the infirmity
within, should work, by charm, as you pretend, or by Imposture; or upon their
bare application should instill cures. A thing not to be effected, though one
should bind sixteen whole weesills in the Nemean Lions skin. I have often
seen a Lion halt, and go lame with pain in his whole skin. You are a very
punye, said Dinomachus, and have not learnt to know what power such spells have
over diseases. Nor seem to me to understand the expulsion of periodicall
fevers, the charming of serpents, and asswaging of botches, and other things
performed by every old woman. All which being frequently done, why should you
think cures of this nature impossible? You pile too much, Dinomachus, said I,
and according to the proverb; drive out one nail with another. Nor does it
appear, that the things you speak of, are by such power effected. If,
therefore, you prove not to me first by reason, that it is naturally possible
that a fever, or blayn should be frighted with a divine name, or barbarous
spell, and thereupon forsake the place swollen, you have but hitherto uttered old
wives tales. Thus saying, said Dinomachus, you seem not to believe there are
Gods; since you think it beyond the power of their names to work cures. Say
not so, Good Sir, quoth I, for there may without impediment be Gods, and yet
your prescriptions may be deceitful, and false. I adore the Gods, and behold
their cures, and recoveryes of sick people by regular medicines, and Physic.
Aesculapius, and his followers healed the diseased by wholesome prescriptions,
not by the application, of Lions and Weesills. Let him enjoy his opinion, said
Ion. I will report to you a miraculous passage. When I was a Boy, about the age
of fourteen years, one came and told my father, that Midas, his Vinedresser, a
stout industrious servant, about the time of full market lay stung of a
Serpent, which presently gangrene'd his leg. For as he was bending a vine,
and winding it about a pole, the Snake crept to him, and biting him by the
great toe, presently slipped away, and retired into a hole. Whereupon he cried
out, and was ready to expire with pain. In the close of the relation we saw
Midas himself, brought by his fellow servants in a chair, swollen all over,
discolourd, in appearance rankled, and scarce able to breath. My father being
much grieved, a certain friend of his, there present, said, Take courage, Sir,
I will presently fetch a Chaldaean, who shall cure him. Not to be tedious, the
Babylonian came, restored Midas, and drew the venom from his body by a charm,
and by the application of a stone, cut from the pillar of a deceast Virgin, to
his feet: and, which is yet more, Midas rising from the chair, in which he was
brought, went back into the field; so powerful was the charm, and the stone
taken from the tomb. Among his many other miracles, which he wrought, he went
one morning early into a field, where having pronounced seven certain sacred
names, taken out of an ancient book, and purged the place with brimstone, and
taper, and walked it thrice round: he assembled to him all the Serpents of the
country. So that drawn by force of the charm came many Snakes, Aspes, Vipers,
Efts, Darters, Lizards, and Toades: only one ancient Dragon was left behind;
who for age, I believe, and not being able to crawle disobeyed the spell.
Whereupon, All are not here, said the Magician; and presently selecting one of
the youngest Serpents, sent him Ambassador to the Dragon. Who not long after
came also. When they were all assembled, the Babylonian puffed upon them, and
presently to our astonishment they were all burnt with his breath. Then said I,
pray tell me Ion, did the young Serpent Ambassador lead the old, or did he
support himself by a staff? You are merry, said Cleodemus. I was once as great
an Infidel in these things as you are now, and saw no reason to believe them;
yet when I beheld the Barbarian stranger fly, (who as they report came from the
North) I was convinced into a belief against my inclination. For what should I
do, when I saw him carried in the Air, walking upon the water, and in a slow,
and leisurely motion pass through the fire? But did you, said I, see a
Northern man fly, or walk upon the water? Most certainly, replied he, shodde
with pumpes, after the manner of his country. I forbear to speak of his smaller
performances, his infusion of love, expulsion of devils, raising of the dead
long buried, public presentment of Hecate, and drawing down the moon from
heaven. I will only report to you what I saw him do for Glaucias, the son of
Anaxicles. Glaucias no sooner began to inherit his dead fathers estate but he
fell in love with Chrysis, Demaenetus daughter. I was Tutor to his studies.
Who, had not love diverted him, had by this time learnt all the Peripateticke
Sciences; since being but eighteen years old he had already gone over the
Analytickes, and past through Aristotle's Physickes to the end. Thus perplexed
with love, he revealed himself to me: Who being his Tutor, as it became me,
brought this Northern Magician to him, hired for four Crowns in hand (which
were to buy things for the sacrifice) and sixteen more when Glaucias enjoyed
Chrysis. He observing the moons increase, (the proper time for such
enchantments) and having dug a hole in the house yard, about midnight, first
called up to us Anaxicles, Glaucias father, dead seven months before. The old
man stormed, and raged at his sons love, but in conclusion gave license to
his affection. Next, he raised up Hecate, who brought Cerberus with her. Then
he called down the Moon, a various spectacle, by reason of her diverse
appearances, and changes. For first she resembled in countenance a woman; then
she was transformed into a beautiful Cow; then into a little dog. After this
fashioning a little Cupid of Clay, Go, said he, and fetch Chrysis hither. The
Clay presently flew away, and shortly after she came, and knocked at the door,
and at her first entrance embraced Glaucias, showed her self distractedly
enamored, and accompanied him till we heard the Cocks crow. Then the Moon
flew to heaven, Hecate sunk into the earth, the Apparitions vanished; and we
about day break let Chrysis depart. Had you seen this, Tychiades, you would
not long distrust the force of charms. You say well, said I, I would, indeed,
believe this, had I seen it. But am otherwise to be pardoned, if at such
visions I be not as quick-sighted as you. As for the Chrysis, you speak of, I
know her to be an easy amorous woman. Nor do I perceive any need why you should
employ an earthen Ambassador to her, or trouble a Magician from the North, or
the Moon, for the affection of one whom for twenty drachmes you may draw as far
as the North pole; being a woman so readily prepared to meet your Incantations:
Though she be thus unlike your apparitions. For they (as you report) at the
sound of Brass, or Iron vanish: But she no sooner hears Silver, but she runs
to the sound. Besides, I cannot but wonder at the Magician, that being able to
enforce love toward himself in the women of greatest wealth, and thereby draw
whole talents from them, he should for the inconsiderable price of four Crowns
procure affection for Glaucias. It Is folly in you, said Ion, to believe
nothing. I would feign ask you, what you think of them who have delivered
Daemoniackes from their possessions; and have evidently charmed forth their
Devils. I need not tell you how many the Syrian, who came from Palestine, a
man skilled in such Arts, has restored after they have fallen down Lunatic,
stared with their eyes, and foamed at mouth, and has sent them away, cured,
and releast them, for great sums, of their distempers. For standing by them
as they lie, he asks the evil spirit from whence he entered into the Body. The
possessed person, mean time, is speechless, and the Devil replying, in Greek,
or some barbarous language, tells from whence he is and how he entered the man;
whereupon he by adjuration, and threats, if he offer to disobey, casts him out.
I saw a Devil cast out black, and of the color of soote. No marvel Ion,
said I, that you saw such visions; Plato the father of your sect has taught
you to see Idae^s, a spectacle too refined, and subtle, for our dull sense.
Many others as well as you, Ion, said Eucrates, have met with Devils, some by
night, others by day, I have, not once, but a thousand times seen such
Spectrums; and was at first frighted with them, but custom has at length made
them not strange, or unfamiliar. Especially since an Arabian gave me a ^ing,
made of the Iron taken from a cross, and taught me an ambiguous, diverse
sensed charm; unless you refuse to give credit to me, also, Tychiades. How
can I choose, said I, but believe Eucrates, the son of Dino; especially being
so wise a man, and having the freedom to speak what you please with authority
in your own house? Hear some passages of a statue of mine, then, said
Eucrates; which nightly appears to all my family, both men, and maids; who can
witness so much to you, as well as ^. Of which of your Statues, said I? Did
you not observe at your entrance, said he, a fair Statue standing in my hall,
the work of Demetrius, the Statuarie. Do you mean the Quoiter, said I, who
stands wryed in a Gesture ready to deliver, with his quoit hand reverst, and
one knee bent, as if he meant to vary posture, and rise with his throw? Not
him, said he; the Quoiter you speak of is one of Myrons pieces. Nor do I mean
the fair Statue next to him, filletted about the head with a bend; which is a
piece of Polycletus's. You are also to pass over those which stand on the
right hand as you enter; among whom are the Tyrant-slayers, carved by Critias
Nesiota. Did you not mark the statue by the conveyance of water, with the
big belly, bald, half naked, part of the hairs of his beard plucked of, of
huge sinews, and every way resembling a man? I mean Pelichus, he who is so
like a Corinthian Captain. I saw such a one, said I, on the right hand of
Saturn; having a withered wreath, and fillet on his head, and guilt Plates on
his Breast. I, said Eucrates, caused them to be guilt, after he had in three
days cured me of a desperate fever. Was the famous Pelichus, then, a
Physician said I? He is now, and take heed how you scoff at him, said
Eucrates; least he shortly take revenge of you. I know the power of the Statue
you laugh at; do you think he cannot as well inflict a fever, as expel one*
Be so powerful a Statue, propitious, and merciful to me, said I: pray, what
else have your family seen him do? As soon as it begins to be night, said he,
descending from his Pedestall, he walks round the house; all my servants have
often met him singing: he hurts none that give him way, but passes by them
without disturbance; he washes himself much, and plays all night, as we
guess, by the noise of the water. Consider, said I, whether your Statue be
Pelichus, or Talus the Cretan, who lived with Mino^, whose brazen Statue was
Centinell, and guardian of the Country. Were he not made of Copper, but wood, I
should probably think he were not the workmanshippe of Demetrius, but one of
Daedalus motions. For you say, he frequently walks from his Basis. Beware,
Tychiades, said he, you be not hereafter sorry for your floutes I could tell
you what he suffered who stole the farthings, which we every new moon offer to
him. The punishment of such a sacriledg must needs be direful, said Ion. Pray
what was it, Eucrates? I desire to hear, how incredulous soever Tychiades be.
Many farthings, said he, lay at his feet, and some other Silver coins were
fastened with wax to his knees, besides diverse Silver Plates, offered to him
by the devotion, and gratitude of those whom he had recovered from fevers. A
servant of mine, a Lybian, one of my Grooms, perceiving the Statue one night
absent, adventured to steal his oblations. Observe how Pelichus, finding
himself, at his return, robbed, revenged himself, and bewrayed the thief. Who
all night walked up and down the Hall in a Circle, unable, like one fallen into a
Labyrinth, to get out; till next morning he was apprehended with his stealths
about him, and proportionably whipped. Nor did he live long after, but dyed
miserably beaten every night, as he said, and confirmed it with the marks seen
in his body next day. Now, if please you, Tychiades, said Eucrates, laugh at
Pelichus, and me, for a Doter of Mino's time. Certainly Eucrates, said I, as
long as Brass is Brass, and your statue but the creature of Demetrius, the
Alopecian, who carved not Gods, but men, I shall not fear the Image of your
Pelichus, nor much care for the threats of the original were he alive. Here
Antigonus, the Physician, seconding him said, I, Eucrates, have also a brazen
Hippocrates, about a cubit long, which, as soon as the Candles are put out,
walks circularly through all the house, making a noise, overturning boxes,
compounding medicines, and flinging open doors: especially if we omit to pay
him his yearly sacrifice. Does Hippocrates the Physician, then, require to be
sacrificed to, said I, and take it ill if he be not feasted with oblations at
his set times? Methinkes 'twere honor enough to power wine to him, or crown
him with Garlands. Hear another passage, said Eucrates, which I with many other
witnesses saw about five years past. One harvest time, having dispatched my
reapers about noon into the field, I solitarily retired my self into a wood, to
weigh, and consider of some things. Where, at my first entrance, I heard the
howling of dogs, which I imagined to be my son Mnason, going then abroad,
as his manner is, with his companions to sport themselves, and hunt. But 'twas
otherwise. For presently after followed an Earthquake, and a hideous bellowing
like thunder. After this I saw a woman coming toward me of horrible aspect,
and near half a furlong tall, having in her left hand a Torch, in her right a
Sword, at least twenty cubits long. She had downward feet like a Serpent,
upwards in the horror of her countenance, and visage, she resembled a Gorgon;
having Snakes for hair, which partly twind about her neck, others hung loose on
her shoulders. See, my good friends, said Eucrates, how I yet tremble to tell
the story; and withal showed us the hairs on his arms stiff, and erected
with fear. Ion, all the while and Dinomachus, and Cleodemus, ancient men, gave
him serious attention as if drawn by the nose; and expressed a silent adoration
of the incredible Colossus-half-furlong-woman, and gyant-like Hobgoblin. But I
considered with my self, that such men as they, who read wisdom to young
scholars, and were generally admired, differd only from children in their gray
hairs, and long beards, and were in all things else more easy to be deceived
then they. Here Dinomachus put in, and said; pray tell me, Eucrates, of what
size, and bigness were her hounds? Bigger then Indian Elephants, replied he,
and alike black, their skin as rough, squallide, and foul. I* when I saw
them, stood still, and withal turned the seal of the ring which the Arabian
gave me to the inside of my finger. Whereupon Hecate striking the the ground
with her serpentine feet, made a great Cleft, which reached to hell, into which
she sunk by degrees. I assuming courage, and taking hold of a neighboring
tree, least astonished with the darkness I should chance to fall in headlong,
looked in, and saw all the things of Hell; The burning lake of Phlegeton,
Cerberus, and Ghosts; some of which I knew, especially my father, whom I saw in
the very garments we buried him. Pray, Eucrates, said Ion, what did the souls
departed do? What should they do, answered he, but converse in companies, and
societies with their friends, and Allies, in the Daffodill mead? Henceforth,
then, said Ion, let the followers of Epicurus urge arguments against Plato, and
his discourses of the soul. But did you not see Socrates, and Plato, among the
dead? Socrates, replied he, I saw, but not more clearly then to guess at him
by his baldness and strutting belly. Plato I knew not, nor is it fit I speak
more then truth to my friends. After I had taken an exact and universal
survey of things, the vault closed, and some of my servants, of which my man
Pyrrhias here was one, came thither to seek me before 'twas quite shut. Speak,
Pyrrhias, do I say true? Most true, by Jupiter, Sir, said the fellow; for I my
self heard the barking of the dogs through the cave, and saw the flashes of
the Torch. Here I smiled to hear the howling; and flames put in by the
witness. You have seen nothing strange, said Cleodemus, or what has not been
seen by others* For I, in my sickness, not long since, saw the like
apparition. At which time Antigonus, here, visited me, and gave me seven days
Physic for a fever, more hot, and violent then fire. One day all left the
room, shut the door, and stayed without, by your prescription, Antigonus; if
perchance solitariness might entice me into a slumber. But I, lying awake, saw
a goodly youth approach me, clothed in white: who after he had raised me, lead
me through such another cleft down to hell; as I presently perceived, when I
beheld Tantalus, Tityus, and Sisyphus. What need I report to you the rest?
Briefly, I was brought to a Tribunal, where were present Aeacus, Charon, the
Destinies, and Furies. Where, also, one sat as King, who seemed to be Pluto,
by his reading of a Catalogue of their names who were to dye, and had already
outlived their limited time. The young man brought me, and presented me to
him. But Pluto much displeased, said to him, his thread is not yet quite ^punne,
let him, therefore, depart again. And fetch Demylus the Brasier, who has
exceeded his distaffe. Whereupon I joyfully returned, releast of my fever, and
told all my neighbors, that Demylus was shortly to dye. Who then, also, lay
sick, as 'twas reported. And shortly after we heard the Cries of them that
lamented his death. What miracle is this? Said Antigonus. I knew one, who after
he had been buried twenty days, rose again. For I gave him Physic before his
death, and after his resurrection. Methinkes, said I, in twenty days his body
should putrify, or perish with famine. Unless you administered to an
Epimenides. As we thus discourst, came in Eucrates sons from exercise. One a
grown youth, the other about the age of fifteen. Who having saluted us sat
down upon the bed by their father; and a chair was brought for me. Here
Eucrates taking fresh hint from the presence of his sons, said, so may I have
Comfort of these two, (and laid his hands on them) as that which I shall now
tell you, Tychiades, is true. It Is well known how dearly I loved my wife, the
mother of these, of happy memory: which I expressed both in my carriage to her
while she lived, and after her death. For I burnt with her her whole
wardrobe, and the garments she most delighted in when she lived. The seventh
day after her funeral, I lay in this bed, as I do now, having abated my
sorrovv. And silently reading to my self Plato's little tract of the soul,
Demaenete entered, and sat down by me, as Eucratides (pointing to his younger
son) does now. The boy childishly trembled, and vvaxt pale at the narration. I,
proceeded Eucrates, as soon as I beheld her, embraced her and sobbingly shed
tears. She permitted me not to vveep, but blamed me, that after all my other
expressions of affection to her, I had not burnt one of her guilt pantofles;
which, she said, was fallen down behind a chest: which, we not finding, cast
only the other into the funeral pile. As we thus talked, an unhappy dog,
which I loved, lying upon the bed, barkt, at which sound she vanished.
Afterward we found the slipper under the Chest, and burnt it. Can you still
doubt, Tychiades, of truths so manifest, and every day apparent? By Jove, said
I, they deserve to be clapped with a guilt Sandall, like children, who do not
believe you, or impudently question the truth. Here Arignotus, the Pythagorean,
entered, a man of long hair, and venerable aspect. You know he is famous for his
wisdom, and Surnamed the Sacred. I was something relieved with his sight,
and, according to the proverb, thought I had now got an Axe against lies. For
certainly, said I to my self, this wise man will stop their mouths from
reporting any more such prodigies. In a word, I thought fortune had
unexpectedly sent some God to my succor. He sitting down in a place which
Cleodemus resigned to him, first, enquired of Eucrates his disease, and being
informed how he did, asked us what we discourst of: for as I entered, said he,
methought I heard you busied in an excellent subject. We were persuading this
man of Adamant, said Eucrates, pointing at me, to believe there were Devils.
And that the shades, and souls of men departed, did wander up and down the
earth, and appear to whom they pleased. I could not choose but blush, and fix
my look to the ground, out of reverence to Arignotus. Perchance, Eucrates,
said he, Tychiades holds that their Souls only do walk who dyed violently,
namely such as were strangled, beheaded, crucified, or the like; and that those
who dye naturally walk not. If this be his opinion, he is not to be blamed. No
such matter, replied Dinomachus, he neither holds that there are such things,
or that they were ever seen. How say you, Sir; said Arignotus, looking
frowningly upon me, do you deny such apparitions as are visible to all? You
must pardon my Infidelity, said I, who never saw any. If I had, I should
believe, as You do. If ever you go to Corinth, said he, ask for the house of
Eubatides; and when it is shown you, by the Craneum, enter, and tell Tibius the
Porter, you desire to see the place from whence Arignotus the Pythagorean
conjured away the Devil, and rendered the house habitable. May we request the
whole story? Replied Eucrates. The house, said he, being haunted, was of a long
time undwelt in. If any did adventure to inhabit it, they were scared, and
persecuted away by a horrid, and dismal Apparition; So that it began to fall
to ruin, and the roof to drop; nor had any man the courage to enter into
it. When I heard hereof, carrying with me certain Egyptian books (of which I
have store upon such Arguments) I went to the house about the first sleep, much
dissuaded, and almost violently restrained by mine Host, after he knew vvhither
I meant to go; verily supposing I went to my destruction. Notvvithstanding, I
taking a Taper with me entered the house alone, and placing the link in the
great hall, and my self on the floor, read silently to my self. In comes the
Devil, thinking he was to deal with some vulgar fellovv, and hoping to
fright me like others. A rough, shaggy fiend, and blacker then darkness it
self. At his first appearance he tried, by making an orbicular assault, to
vanquish me, and sometimes turned himself into a Dog, then into a Bull,
lastly into a Lion. But I having a direful Spell in readiness, which I
pronounced in the Aegyptick tongue, charmed him back into a dark corner of the
house. And having well observed the place where he sunk, I left speaking. In
the morning, after every bodies despair, who thought to find me slain, like
others, I, against the expectation, came forth and went to Eubatides; And told
him the glad nevves, that he might safely inhabit his house, which was now
purged and freed from Devils. Withal taking him, and many others (who
follovved out of curiosity, along with me to the place where I saw the fiend
vanish, I commanded it to be dug with pickaxes, and spades. We had not
dug above a yard deep, but we found a dead man, consumed, and nothing left
to represent him but the Sceleton. Which we took up and buried. And from that
time the house ceased to be molested with visions. When Arignotus had finished
his narration, being a man of prodigious wisdom, and generally reverenced,
there were not any of the company who did not condemn me of stupidity for
being incredulous. Nevertheless, I, neither daunted with his beard, nor their
opinion of him, said, can such a man as you, Arignotus, from whom alone I hoped
to hear the truth, be fraught also with fumes and Phantasmes? You have verified
the proverb, I have found coals for treasure. If, said, Arignotus, you neither
believe me, nor Dinomachus, nor Cleodemus, nor Eucrates, whom can you produce
more Authentic to disprove us? A man much admired, said I, Democritus the
Abderite. Who was so smally persuaded of such fictions, that shutting himself
up in a monument without the City, he there lived, wrote, and composed nights,
and days. And when certain boys, desirous to scare, and fright him, arrayed
themselves like Ghosts in black Garments, and wearing counterfeit vizards on
their heads, surrounded him, and frequently skipt about him, he neither feared
their disguises, nor at all reguarded them, but wrote on, and bid them cease to
play the fools. So firmly did he believe, that Souls were nothing after their
departure from the body. Certainly, replied Eucrates, Democritus was the veryer
fool to think so. I will, therefore, report one story more, in which I my self
was an Actor, and took it not up upon relation. Perchance when you hear it,
Tychiades, the truth of the narration, will convince you. When I lived in
Egypt, yet a boy, sent thither by my father, to learn their Arts, I had a
desire to sail to Coptus, and from thence to hear the famous Memnon sound at
the rising of the sun. Whom I heard, not as others ordinarily do, yield an
unsignificant sound; But Memnon himself uttered Oracles to me, and opened his
mouth in seven verses. Which, but that I should digress, I would repeat to
you. As we were at Sea, there sailed in company with us a certain holy Priest
of Memphis, admired for his wisdom, and skilled in all the learning of the
Egyptians. He was said to have lived three and twenty years in a cave under
ground, and there to have learnt Magic of Isis. You mean my Tutor Pancrates,
replied Arignotus, he is a religious man, shaven, goes in linen, is very
learned, speaks Greek purely, is tall of stature, has a bow nose, full
lips, and small legs. The very same answered Eucrates. At first I knew not
who he was. But when I saw him, after our arrival in the port, among many
other miracles which he wrought, ride upon Crocodiles, approach such cruel
beasts, and they to reverence him, and wagge their tails, I guessed him to be
some sacred person. And by degrees insinuated my self into his acquaintance,
and friendship. So that at length he revealed all his secrets, and mysteryes to
me. To be short, he persuaded me to leave all my servants at Memphis, and to
accompany him alone; who promised we should not want attendants. And from that
time thus we lived. When we came into an Inn, he taking the bolt of the door,
or a broom, or bar, and clothing it, spoke a charm to it, and enabled it to go,
and in all things to resemble a man. The thing going forth, would draw water,
provide, and dress our supper, and diligently wait, and attend upon us. After
his business was done, he pronounced another charm, and turned the broom into
a broom again, and the pestle into a pestle. This was an Art which, though I
labored much, I could not learn of him. For this was a mystery which he denied
me, though in all things else he were open. One day, hiding my self in a dark
corner, I overheard his charm, which was but three syllables. He having
appointed the bolt its business, went into the market. The next day, he having
some other employment in the market, I taking the pestle, and apparelling it,
in like manner pronounced the syllables, and bid it fetch me some water. When
it had brought me a basin full, it is enough, said I, fetch no more, but be a
pestle, again. But it was so far from obeying me, that it ceast not to fetch
water till it had overflown the room. I, much troubled at the accident, and
fearing least if Pancrates should return (as he did) he would be much
displeased, took an Axe, and cut the pestle in two. Then both parts taking
several buckets fetched water. And in stead of one, I had two servants. In the
mean time Pancrates came in, and perceiving what had happened, transformed them
into wood again, as they were before I uttered the spell. Shortly after he
secretly left me, and vanishing went I know not wither. And can you now, said
Dinomachus, make a man of a bolt? I have but one half of the Art replied he,
nor am I able to return him into his former shape If, therefore, I once make
him a water bearer; we shall be driven from the house by a deluge. Will you old
men, said I, never leave to speak monstrous fictions? If for no other reason,
yet for these young boys sakes, forbear your improbable, and terrible
narrations till some other time, least they be insensibly filled with uncouth
affrightments, and fables. Accustom them not to hear things which will make
impressions, and trouble them all their life; make them start at every sound,
and fill them with diverse superstitions. You do well, said Eucrates, to put me
in mind of superstition. Pray what think you of Oracles, Tychiades, and
Predictions, and Prophecies, uttered by people inspired, and heard from
Curtains, or delivered in verse by a Virgin, which foretells things to come
Cannot these things fall under your belief neither? I forbear to tell you that
I have a sacred ring whose seal bears the image of Apollo, and that the God
himself frequently talks with me; least you should think I feign this of my
self, out of arrogance, I will only tell you what I saw and heard from
Amphilochus at Mallus, who entertained me with a long discourse, and consulted
the Oracle concerning my affairs. Next I will report to you what I saw at
Pergamus, and heard at Patara. When I sailed homeward from Egypt, being
informed that there was an open, infallible Oracle at Mallus, which verbatim
gave clear answers to every man's inquiryes, written in a note, and delivered to
his Priest, I thought I should do well, as I sailed by, to try the Oracle, and
consult the God concerning my future fortunes. I by this entrance perceiving
that Eucrates was likely to lengthen his story, and that he had begun no very
compendious discourse of Oracles, and not holding it fit to contradict them
longer, leaving him sailing from Egypt to Mallus (for I saw them discontented
with my presence, as an opposer of their fictions) I will take my leave, said
I, and go seek Leontichus. For I have urgent occasion to meet with him. You,
who think humane passages not sufficient, have the liberty to call the Gods
into your fabulous discourses. And having so said, I departed. They, glad of
their freedom, in likelihood entertained, and feasted themselves with
impostures. I, cloyed with what I heard, am come to you, Philocles, just like
those who having drunk new wine, and swollen their belly, have need to vomit: I
would give any money for a potion of oblivion to make me forget, and to wash
away the mischievous remembrance of what I heard. Who still, methinkes, see
monsters, Devils and Hecates.


Philocles. I, also, suffered in your relations, Tychiades. For they say, that
they not only grow distracted, and fear the water, who are bitten by mad
dogs, but if the man bitten bite another, it is equal to the bite of a dog,
and begets the like distemper* so you having been bitten by Eucrates fictions,
have bitten me also, and filled my fancy with Devils.


Tychiades. However let us take courage, since we have an excellent Antidote to
cure us, truth, and right reason. Which if we make our rule, we shall be
troubled with no such empty, and vain falsehoods.


A defense of dancing.
The Speakers. Lycinus, and Crato. Lycinus. Since, Crato, by the bitterness of
your invective, I guess you have long studied to disparage both dances, and
the Art of dancing, and us who delight in such shows, as if we misbusied our
selves in a vain, womanish exercise, know the greatness of your error, and
how much you have deceived your self, to blame one of the most excellent
recreations of life. Though you are to be pardoned, if having originally been
bred to a sour life, and taught to hold nothing commendable, which is not
severe, your want of experience have cast you upon such Detractions.


Crato. For you, most delicate Lycinus, being such a man as you are, well bred,
and indifferently instructed in Philosophy, to forsake the best studies, and
the conversation of the Ancients, to sit listening to fiddlers, and to see an
effeminate fellow loosly clad, charm you with bawdy songs, and act the loves
of such ancient strumpets as the lustful Phaedra, Parthenope, and Rhodope, and
all this performed with Knick-Knacks, obscene gestures, and sounds of the feet,
are, doubtless, most ridiculous pastimes, and little beseeming one of your
free education. Wherefore hearing how you employed your time in such
spectacles, I not only blushed for you, but was much grieved, that having
studied Plato, Chrysippus, and Aristotle, you should sit and suffer, like them
whose ears are ^ickled with a feather. There being otherwise numberless
entertainments, As virtuous Sights, rare Musicians, and artificial Singers to
the Harp, in grave Tragedyes, and merry Comedyes, which deserve to be styled
exercises. You had need, therefore, gentle Sir, frame a large Apology to the
learned, if you mean not to be utterly expelled, and banished from the flock of
the virtuous. Your best course, therefore, in my opinion, will be to cure all
by a denial, and not at all to confess your self guilty of such a crime. And
for the future take heed least, unknown to us, of the man you were, you be
transformed into some Lyde, or Bacche. And so not only raise an imputation on
your self, but on us also, if like Ulysses, we draw you not from the enchanted
cup, and reduce you to your former studyes, before you be insensibly ensnared
by the Sirens of the Theater. For they laid Siege only to the ear, and might be
sailed by by the help of wax: but you seem wholly captived by your eyes.


Lycinus. Trust me, Crato, you have let loose your fierce dog upon me. But
your example of the Lote-eaters, and instance of the Sirens, carry no
resemblance to my case: since they, who tasted the Lote, and heard the Sirens,
perished; as the reward of their Luxury, and Attention. Whereas I, besides the
wonderful pleasure I have conceived, have hence raised excellent advantage.
For I am neither fallen into the oblivion of my household affairs, or into an
ignorance of the things concerning my self, but to speak without
dissimulation, have returned from the Theater much wiser, and sharper sighted
in the business of life. More fitly, therefore, might you have alleged out
of Homer, that he who saw the charming spectacle sailed away delighted, and the
more amply instructed.


Crato. Good Hercules! What a loft man are you, Lycinus, Who in stead of being
ashamed, can boast of your follyes? So desperate is your case, that you afford
us not any hope of a cure, thus to praise exercises so foul, and detestable*


Lycinus. Pray tell me, Crato, have you frequently seen dancing, and the
passages of the Theater, which you thus accuse^ O^ unac^ustomed to such
spectacles, do you hold them thus detestable, and unworthy? If you have been a
Spectatour, you are as faulty as I: if you have not, take heed your
reprehension show not unreasonable, and overbold, thus to blame what you know
not.


Crato. 'Twould fairly have become, indeed, my long beard, and white head to
sit among a crowd of women, and frantic Spectatours, and there to clappe, and
hurl absurd praises, to a wretched fellow, who weeps without cause.


Lycinus. You are to be excused, Crato. Yet if you will for once obey my
persuasion, and for mere trial sake afford your presence, and submit your
eyes, I am certain you will not afterward refrain to take up the first, and
most commodious place in the Theater, from whence you may both exactly see, and
hear all.


Crato. May cleanliness forsake me, when I do so; And may my limbs be for
ever rough, and my chinne unsmooth, as I pity you perfectly gone in a
distraction.


Lycinus. Sparing your blasphemies, then, will it please you to hear me say
something of dancing, and of the commodityes which attend it? How it not only
delights, but profits the beholders? how greatly it teaches, and instructs,
and fashions the mind of the Spectatours, entertaining them with excellent
presentiments, and exercising them with the best lectures, and at once
expressing a common amiablenesse of the soul, and body? Now that all this is
performed with Music, and number, is not the disparagement but praise of
dancing.


Crato. I have not much leisure to hear a mad man speak in praise of his
distemper: yet if you will needs vent your toys, I am prepared to yield you
friendly attention, and to lend my ears, and shall be able without wax to
endure your triflings. Here, then, I become silent, speak your pleasure, as if
no man heard you.


Lycinus. 'Twas the thing I should have craved of you, Crato. For you shall
shortly perceive whether what I shall say appear to you trifling. First, then,
you plainly seem to me not to know, that dancing is no new invention, or of
yesterdayes, or the other days growth, or born among our forefathers, or
their Ancestors. But they who most truly derive dancing, say it sprung with
the first beginning of the universe; and had a birth equally as ancient as
love. Since the regular motion of the stars, and the combination of the fixed
with the planets, their musical consort, and well ordered harmony, are but so
many examples of the original of dancing. Which increasing by degrees, and
always gaining new accesses for the best, has at length arrived to its
perfection, and is become a various, harmonious, and musical virtue. The
Goddess Cybele, as they report, first delighted with the Art, enjoined the
Coribantes in Phrygia, and the Curetes in Creet, to use dancing. From whose
practice of it she received no small benefit. For they, dancing round him,
saved her son Jupiter; who cannot but ascribe his preservation to them, by
whose measures he escapt his fathers teeth. The manner of their dancing was in
Armor, with Swords clasht against Bucklers; at once expressing a divinely
inspired, and warlike measure. In time, the noblest Cretans studiously
addicting themselves to this exercise, became most excellent dancers, as well
private men, as Princes, and such as bore sway. Homer, therefore, intending not
to disparage but to commend Meriones, called him Dancer: Who was so famous and
generally renowned for this quality, that he was thereby not only known to the
Greeks, but to the Trojans his enemies too. Who observed, I suppose, a kind of
beauty in his fights, and musical Gesture, which he took in from dancing. The
verses speak thus of him; Soon had my Spear peirc't thee, Meriones,
Although a Dancer --


Though he were not, in truth* vanquished, but by his Skill in dancing, I
suppose, easily avoided the darts hurled at him. Though I might make instance
in diverse other Hero's who busied themselves in this quality, and made their
exercise an Art; Yet I will content my self with Neoptolemus, Achilles son:
Who so excelled in this Science, that he added thereto the noblest kind, from
him called the Pyrrhichian Dance. Achilles, also, himself, hearing thus much of
his son, was more joy'd, I believe, then with his excellent shape, or
strength of body. Nay the City of Troy remained unconquered, till by his
skill in dancing 'twas ruined, and laid level with the ground. The
Lacedaemonians, also, who were always held the stoutest Grecians, having learnt
from Castor, and Pollux to Caryatize (which is a kind of Dance, taught at first
by the Caryans, a people of Laconia,) performed all their Achievements
afterward in music; and made war by the sound of the pipe, and the orderly
treadings and measures of the foot, so that the fife still gave the signal to
the battle; which made them so universally victorious, music and numbers still
directing their Marches. You may observe their young men no less addicted to
dancing, then to bear Arms. For having at Arms end a while strugled, and
mutually given, and received blows, after a short respite, their encounters
end in a dance. Where a minstrell set in the midst, plays, and keeps time
with his foot; whilst they regularly following one another, and ordering their
motions by his tunes, cast themselves into figures of all sorts; sometimes
warlike; sometimes amorous; most suitable to Bacchus, and Venus. Nay the Song
which they sing in dancing wears the name of Venus, and Cupid; As if they
joined with them in their sporting and dancing. And another song they have (for
they sing too) which comprehendes how to dance; and runs thus.

Far, Boys, be hence unskillfull feet:
Let every step in numbers meet.
That is, dance better. The like custom have they who danced the Bracelet. A
kind of dance common to young men, and virgins. In which one so succeeded
another, as to resemble a Bracelet. For a young man led, and expressed all the
youthful motions which he was to practice afterward in the war; A Virgin
blushingly followed, and so expressed the motions of a woman, that from both
sprung a Bracelet, compounded of modesty, and valor. Like to these is the
dance called the Bare feet. As for the dance, which Homer, in his shield, makes
for Ariadne, and that other dance contrived by Daedalus for her, I pass over
as well known to you. As, also, the two leaders of the dance, which the Poet
there calls dancers on their heads; besides what he there says; The Youths in
Dancing rolled


As if dancing were the greatest ornament, Vulcan had inserted into the shield.
Nor is it strange that the Corcyrans should so much delight in dancing, being a
people so delicate, and so abounding with all plenty. That, therefore, which
Homer makes Ulysses most admire amongst them was the nimblenesse of their feet.
In Thessaly the exercise of dancing has so prevailed, that they style their
Princes, and Generals the Leaders of the dance. As appears by the Inscription
of their Statues, which they erect to the best deservers. The City, says one,
preferred him as the fore-dancer. The people, says, another, dedicate these
Statues to Ilation for dancing the battle well. I spare to tell you, that you
shall scarce find any ancient, religious solemnity without dancing. A custom,
doubtless, instituted by Orpheus, Musaeus, and other excellent Dancers of that
time: who, as a thing most becoming, decreed; that none should be initiated to
such rites but with measure, and dancing. And to prove this true, they, who
were initiated, were bound not to reveal their rites to those that were not.
From whence they who divulge mysteryes, as all know, are proverbially said to
undance them. At Delos no sacrifices were offered without dancing, and music.
Where a Quire of boys, entering with a flute and harp, danced, and they, who
among them were judged the most skillfull, followed. From whence the tunes
which were composed for such Quires were called dance-tunes, and were set for
the Violl. But why insist I upon the Graecians; since the Indians, every
morning when they rise, pray to the Sun, not as we do, who hold the killing
of our hand to be a complete devotion, but turning themselves toward the East,
salute the Sun with a Dance; silently ordering their postures, and motions,
in imitation of his. And this among the Indians is prayer, devotion, and
sacrifice, with which twice a day, mornings, and evenings, they keep the Sun
propitious. Then, the Aethiopians always go to war dancing. Nor will a Moore
offer to pluck an arrow from his head (which serves them in stead of quivers
stuck round with shafts like so many rays) till he have first danced, and by
such agitation threatened, and terrified his enemy. Nor were it amiss, having
past through India and Aethiopia, to draw our discourse down to their
neighboring Egypt. Where the ancient fiction which goes of Proteus,
methinkes, signifyes him to be only a certain Dancer, and Mimick; who could
transform, and change himself into all shapes, sometimes acting the fluidnesse
of water, sometimes the sharpness of fire, occasioned by the quickness of its
aspiring motion; sometimes the fierceness of a Lion, and fury of a Libbard,
and waving of an Oak; and what ever he listed. From whence the fable, wresting
his natural parts something pardoxically, sain'd him to be really changed into
the things he acted. The like abilities are found in the Dancers of our time:
whom you may in an instant see suddenly metamorphosed, and turned into a
Proteus* we may, also, conjecture that Empusa, who turned her self into a
thousand shapes, was such another woman, derived to us in a fiction. After
these examples 'twere Injustice to forget the dance practiced by the Salii (the
name of a certain Priesthood taken from dancing) in honor of Mars, the most
warlike God; in which they mingled gravity with religion. Nor is the Bithynian
fable altogether unsuitable to the Italian custom, which reports that
Priapus, a military God, one of the Titans, I believe, or Idaean Dactyls,
learnt this exercise with his Arms. For Mars receiving him from Juno yet a
boy, boisterous, and beyond measure manly, taught him not to bear Arms before
he had made him a perfect Dancer. For which the reward assigned by Juno, was,
that he should ever after have the tithe of his spoils taken in war. I presume
you expect not I should tell you of the Bacchanalls, or feasts of Bacchus;
whose celebration was nothing but dancing. Now of the noblest sort of Dances,
there are three kinds, the Cordacke or Comicall, Sicinnidde or Satyricall, and
Harmonious or Tragical, which were invented by the Satyrs, the followers of
Bacchus, from whom they take their names. And Bacchus himself using this Art
subdued the Tuscanes, Indians, and Lydians, and danced down war like Nations
with Javelines wrapped in Ivye. Wherefore take heed, admired Sir, least you prove
impious thus to accuse so Divine, and Mysterious an exercise, practiced by such
illustrious Gods, and performed in their honor and which carries with it so
much pleasure joined with so much useful discipline. I cannot but wonder, that
being so great a lover of Homer, and Hesiod, as you are (for I once more betake
my self to the Poets) you dare control them, who above all things praise
dancing. For Homer having mustered together the things most delightful, and
desirable, sleep, love, singing, and dancing, styles this last only praise
worthy; ascribing, indeed, sweetness to singing, both which are found in
dancing; namely Harmony of voice, and commendable measure, which you thus study
to carpe at. Again in another place of his poem he says; To some Jove gives of
warlike actions choice,
Dancing to some, to some a charming voice.


For, certainly, a good voice, joined with dancing, is very charming, and the
most excellent gift of the Gods. Again Homer, having divided all things into
war, and peace, opposes this as the more commendable to the passages of war.
And as for Hesiod, who went not by hearsay, but early in the morning saw the
Muses dance, in the beginning of his Poem sets this as their greatest praise,
that in soft measures they danced round about a flowrye fountain, and encircled
their fathers Altar. Yet you, Gentle Sir, almost making war with the Gods,
calumniate dancing. Though Socrates, of all men the wisest, (if we may believe
Apollo, who styled him so) not only praised dancing, but vouchsaft to learn it,
ascribing much to the Elegancy, and Grace, and Musical Treadings, and amiable
behavior of such a mover. Nor blushed he, though old, to reck on dancing among
his serious employments. In which, you may guess, he spent no small study,
who refused not to learn Arts yet meaner, nor disdayned to frequent the scooles
of the Minstrells, and to attend the Lectures of Alpasia, a known Whore. Yet he
beheld this Art only in its first rising, before 'twas grown up to such height
of perfection. Did he see those who in our time have advanced it to this great
pitch, I assure my self, forsaking all other studyes he would wholly apply his
mind to this spectacle, and would teach his Scholars nothing else. In
praising Comedy, and Tragedy, you seem to me to forget that in either a
peculiar kind of dancing is observed; the grave in Tragedy, in Comedy the
Cordack, and sometimes also the Sicinnidd. But because at first you preferred
Tragedy, and Comedy, and vagrant fiddlers, and singing to the harp, before
dancing; calling them truly exercises, and therefore commendable: let us, I
pray, compare them severally with Dancing. Where, if please you, we will passs
over the Pipe, and Harp, as parts and instruments of Dancing, and consider
Tragedy as it is, first, according to its propertyes, and dress. What a
deformed, and frightfull fight is it to see a man raised to a prodigious
length, stalking upon exalted buskins, his face disguised with a grimme vizard,
widely gaping, as if he meant to devour the Spectatours? I forbear to speak
of his stuffed Breasts, and fore-Bellyes, which make an adventitious, and
artificial corpulency, least his unnatural length should carry disproportion
to his slenderness. As, also, his clamor from within, when he breaks open,
and unlockes himself, and when he howles lambicks, and most ridiculously singes
his own sufferings, and renders himself by his very tone odious. For as for the
rest, they are inventions of ancient Poets. Yet as long as he personates only
some Andromache, and Hecuba, his singing is tolerable. But for a Hercules to
enter dolefully singing, and to forget himself, and neither to regard his Lions
skin, nor clubbe, must needs, to any judging man, appear a Solcecisme. And
whereas you dislike that in dancing men should act women, is a reprehension
which holds for Tragedyes, and Comedyes too; in which are more women's parts,
then men's. Besides, as part of the delight, Comedy challenges to it self the
most ridiculous parts; as Parasites, Fiddlers, and Cooks. But the propertyes of
a Dancer are so comely, and decent, that I need not describe them, being
visible to all but the blind. The person gracefully adorned, and agreeable to
his part; not gaping like the others, but decently closed, under which many
sing their own Tunes. For anciently the Dancers sung too, till 'twas found,
that Motion, and shortness of Breath troubled the Voice; whereupon 'twas
better contrived, that they should be sung to. The Argument of both are alike.
Nor do Dances differ from Tragedies, but that These have more variety, and are
more variously studied, and admit more several Changes. The reason why there
are no Dancing-matches I take to be, because the Judges held it to be a thing
too reverend, and solemn to be brought into Decision. Though there be a famous
City in Italy, descended of the Negroponts, where Honorary Prizes are assigned
to this Exercise. And here I desire to be excused for my omissions of many
things not touched, and that you will not impute them to my ignorance, or want
of Learning. For it is not unknown to me, that many have heretofore written of
Dancing, and have spent most of their industry, and Style, in decyphering the
several kinds of Dances; their Names, Distinctions, and who were their
Inventors: wherein they thought they made show of various learning. But I,
holding such ostentations superfluous, and unseasonable, and unsuitable to my
person, shall pass them over in silence. Withal, I shall desire you to
remember, and think, that I intend not to derive the Pedigree of Dances of all
sorts, nor make it the aim of my discourse to reckon up the names of all
Dances, but of those few of the Nobler sort, before mentioned. For the present
then, the Sum of my defense is to praise the manner of dancing now in
fashion; and to show what pleasure, and profit it comprehends, and from what an
ancient beginning it has aspired to its present Elegancy, or Veneration
rather. For those Dancings of the first Ages were, as it were, the roots, and
foundations of Dancing, whose Flower, and grown Fruit now ripened into a
perfection, is the Argument of my Defense: omitting to speak of Capring, or
Crane-dancings, or the like, as impertinent to this discourse. Nor have I, out
of oversight, past by the Phrygian manner of Dancing, which was a drunken, and
feastly kind of Revelling, performed in Wine, by a Rowt of Clowns, who danced
like Women to a Pipe, using violent and boisterous Leapings, yet in use among
Country people: but because it has no agreement with the dancing I now treat
of. Though Plato in his Laws commends some of these kinds, but rejects others;
distinguishing them by their pleasure, and profit, and banishing the more
uncomely, prefers, and admires the rest. And thus much be spoken of Dancing it
self. For to extend my discourse, to all that might be said, were troublesome.
I will now unfold to you how a Dancer ought to be qualified, how practiced,
what to learn, and by what ways to attain his Art, that you may perceive this
not to be one of the facile, and easily learned Arts, but to be attained in
perfection by the help of all the other Sciences; not Music only, but
Arithmetic, and Geometry, and especially your Philosophy, both natural, and
moral. As for Logic, it has been held vain and useless to it: but Rhetoric
it requires, and partakes, as far as it is demonstrative of manners, and
affections, which are the subjects of Orators too. Nor is it a stranger to
Painting, and Sculpture; but imitates their Graces so exactly, as not to come
short of Phidias, of Apelles himself. But above all it aims to have the two
Muses, Mnemosyne, and her daughter Polyhymnia propitious, and exactly to
remember all things: for, as Calchas in Homer, it behooves a Dancer to know
Things present, past, and future. --
and not to be ignorant of any thing, but to have a memory open, and at
command. In a word, it is an imitating and demonstrating Science; an Interpreter
of conceiptes, and clearer of Ambiguityes. And what Thucydides said in praise
of Pericles, is the thing most praise worthy in a Dancer; which is, to know
what is fit, and to express it. By expression I here mean a clearness of
behavior. So that the whole business of a Dancer consists in the knowledge of
ancient history, the ready remembrance of it, and expressing of it with
decency. Taking, therefore, his beginning from the Chaos, and birth of the
world, he must carry his knowledge as far as the age of the Egyptian
Cleopatra: within which space of times we circumscribe the various learning of
a Dancer. Especially, let him learn by the way the division of Heaven, the
original of Venus, the Titans war, Jupiters birth, Cybel's plot, and
substitution of a stone, Saturnes Imprisonment, the lottery of the three
Brothers, as also the Giants invasion, the stealth of fire, the formation of
man, Prometbeus punishment, the power of love, of each sort; Then the floating
of Delos, the traveling of Latona, Pythons Slaughter, Tityu's Treason, and the
middle of the Earth found out by the flight of Eagles. Add to this Deucalion
and the Universal wrack of that Age, and the lone Arc which received and
preserved all mankind, and how Men were repayr'd from stones. Next the
dismembring of Iachus, Juno's cheat, Semele's conflagration and Bacchus double
birth; and whatsoever is reported of Minerva, Vulcan, and Ericbthonius; The
strife about Attica, and first sentence in Areopagus; In a word, the whole
Attick fable. Let him also exactly know the Errantry of Ceres and finding of
her daughter, and hospitality of Celeus, and husbandry of Triptolemus, and
plantation of vines by I^^rus, and the disaster of Erigone; and whatsoever goes
in story of Boreas, and Orithyia, and Theseus, and Aegeus. Add to this Medea's
Entertainment, and Flight afterward to the Persians; as also Erechtheus, and
Pandion's Daughters, and what they both suffered, and did in Thrace. Then let
him know Acamas, and Phyllis, and Hellens first Rape, and the expedition of the
Twins against the City; Hippolytus mischance, and the return of the
Herculeans; all which he may read in the Attick Records, which being Athenian
passages, I have briefly, for examples sake, run over. Next, let him learn the
story of Megara, Nisus, and Scylla, and the purple Hair, and Mino's departure,
and his ingratitude toward his Assister. To which let him add the
Achievements wrought at Cytheron, and Thebes; the calamities of the people,
Cadmus Banishment, and sign taken from the lying down of a Cow; the Serpents
teeth sown, and springing up again; as also Cadmus transformation into a
Serpent; the erection of Walls by Music, the Builders madness, his wife
Niobes insolent pride, and stupefaction through Grief. As, also, the story of
Pentheus, Actaeon, Oedipus, and Hercules, together with his Labors, and
slaughter of his Children. Nor is Corinth less fraught with stories of Glauce,
and Creon; and before these Bellerophon, and Stheneboea; and the Combat
between Neptune and the Sun; as also the Madness of Athamas, and aerie flight
of Nepheles children upon a Ram; and the Receipt of Ino, and Melicerta. To
which may be added the Reports which go of the Pelopidae, and Mycenae, and more
ancient then these of Inachus and Io, and her keeper Argus; of Atreus also, and
Thyestes, and Aerope, and the Golden Fleece, and Pelops Wedding, and
Agamemnon's slaughter, and Clytemnestra's punishment: and more ancient yet then
these; the expedition of the Seven Generals, and the receipt of Adrastus
fugitive Sons in Law, and the Oracle which was delivered of them; besides, the
denial of Burial to the slain, and the destruction of Antigone, and Menoeceus
thereupon; the stories also which are recorded in Nemea of Hypsipyle, and
Archemorus, are monuments most necessarily to be known of a Dancer. Who before
that is also to know what is said of Danae's Virginity, the birth of Perseus,
and his enterprise against the Gorgons; to which he is to join the Aethiopick
Reports which go of Cassiopea, and Andromeda and Cepheus, whom the Superstition
of Antiquity have placed among the Stars. Nor ought he to be ignorant in the
ancient passages of Aegyptus, and Danaus, and the Treasons of that Wedding. Nor
will Lacedaemon afford a few such examples, of Hyacinthus, and Zephyrus Rival
to Apollo; and the slaughter of the Boy by a Quoit, and the Flower which sprung
from his blood, and the mournful Inscription written in it; as, also, the
restoring of Tyndarus from the dead, and Jupiter's displeasure therefore
against Aesculapius. Besides, the entertainment of Paris, and transportation of
Helen, after the decision of the Apple. And to this Spartan History he is to
annex the Trojan, no less copious, and full of parts; from whence, according
as every one fell, may be drawn Arguments for the Stage. All which he is upon
occasion to remember; especially what happened after Helens Transportation, 'till
the return of the Grecian Captains. Aenea's wanderings, also, and Dido's Love.
Nor will the reports which pass of Orestes be impertinent, and of his
adventures in Scythia. And before that, the stories which go of Achilles,
answerable to his Trojan; his disguise of a Girl in Scyrus; Ulysses
distraction, and desertion of Philoctetes; In a word, all Ulysses Travels, the
stories of Circe, and Telegonus, and Aeolus Empire over the Winds, and other
passages along to the revenge taken of the Suitors: And before that his
circumvention of Palamedes, Nauplius Rage, Ajax Phrenzy, and the shipwreck of
the other Ajax against Rocks. Elis also has many patterns for Dancers; as
Oenomaus, Myrtil^s, Saturn, Jupiter, and the chief Wrestlers in the Olympic
Games. Nor is Arcadia less replenisht with stories, of Daphne's flight,
Callisto's conversion into a Bear, the Centaures drunkenness, Pan's Parents,
Alpheus Love, and Hyphalus Peregrination. And if we will send our discourse
into Creet, dancing may from thence fetch numerous examples, taken from Europa,
Pasiphae, and both their Bulls; the Labyrinth, also, Ariadne, Phaedra,
Minotaure, Daedalus, Icarus, Glaucus, the Prophecy of Polyides; Talo, also, and
the Brazen wall of the City. If you look into Aetolia, many Instances may from
thence, also, be taken for dancing; from Althaea, Meleager, Atalanta, Dalus,
the Combat between the River and Hercules, the Birth of the Sirens, the
Retribution of the Echinades, and habitation of Alcmaeon after his Madness;
Nessus, also, and Deianeira's Jealousy; to which is to be added the Funeral
pile in Oeta. Thrace, also, has many examples requisite to a dancer; as
Orpheus, and his dismembring; his vocal Head swimming along with his Harp:
Haemus, also, and Rhodope, and the punishment of Lycurgus. But Thessalia is yet
more copious in instances, of Pelias, Jason, Alcestis, the Fleet of fifty
Ships, the Argo, and its speaking Keel; the passages of Lemnos, also concerning
Aeta, Medea's dream, and dilaniation of Absyrtus, and what befell her in
sailing: To which are to be added Protesilaus, and Laodameia. If you will once
more pass into Asia, you shall meet with as plentiful arguments, where Samus
will presently accost you, and the calamity of Polycrates, and his daughters
voyage into Persia; besides the more ancient passages of Tantalus Babbling, and
his Feasting of the Gods. The eating of Pelops flesh, supplied with an Ivory
shoulder. In Italy you meet with Eridanus, and Phaeton, and his sisters
bewailing themselves into Poplars, and weeping Amber. A Dancer is to know all
the story of the Hesperides, and the Dragon-keeper of the Golden fruit; of
Geryon, also, and his conveyance of the Oxen from Erythia. Nor is he to be
ignorant of all the Fabulous Transmutations which have been made of things into
Trees, or Beasts, or Fowls, or Women turned into Men; I mean Caeneus, and the
Prophet Tiresias, and the like: and in Phoenicia Myrrha, and the divided sorrow
of the Assyrians. Nor shall he only know these, but the more modern passages,
attempted by Antipater, and Seleucus, after the Macedonian Empire, for the love
of Stratonice. He shall, also, know the most secret Mysteryes of the
Egyptians; That he may the more Symbollically act them; I mean Epaphus, and
Osiris, and the transformation of the Gods into beasts; especially what ever is
reported of their loves, and of Jupiter himself, and his various shift of
disguises. He shall, also, be skilled in all the passages of Hell; in their
tortures, and their several causes, and in the undivided friendship of
Theseus, and Perithous, even in that infernal place. And to comprize all in a
word, he shall be ignorant of nothing delivered either by Homer, or Hesiod, or
the most excellent Poets, especially the Tragic. And thus have I recounted a
few examples of many, or rather infinite, and rudely hudled them up in a Mass.
The rest I leave to be sung by Poets, and to acted by Dancers, and to be
pursued by you according to these patterns and instances. All which a Dancer
must have in readiness, and prepared to be brought forth, and represented upon
occasion. Now because he is to be a Mimick, and to express by motions what is
sung in verse, it is necessary, like Orators, he should practice perspicuity,
that every part of which he acts, may carry its own light, and not require an
Interpreter. And as the Pythian Oracle said, he that sees a Dance, must
understand the Dancer though dumb, and hear him though silent. As it befell
Demetrius, the Cynick Philosopher; who, like you, spoke much in disparagement
of Dancing; stiling a Dancer, the idle employment of a pipe, and fiddle, and
noise; who added nothing to a Mask, but an absurd, vain, and senseless
motion; and that it was the part of a Jugler, not of a Dancer, to be dressed in
silk clothes, guilt vizards, and to move to a pipe, and lascivious tune, and
wanton voice. A skillfull dancer, therefore, as the story goes, in Nero's time,
and not unlearned, but well verst in history, and the Art of gesture, desired
Demetrius, with the most becoming intreatyes he could, I suppose, to see him
dance, and then to reprehend him. He promised also to act before him without
either Pipe, or Tune, and did so: For having imposed silence to the Minstrels,
and Fiddlers, and Consort, he by himself danced the Adultery of Mars and Venus,
the Sun betraying them, and Vulcan plotting and catching them in a wire Net.
Then every God, who was severally spectator; then Venus blushing, and Mars
beseeching; In a word, he acted the whole Fable so well, that Demetrius, much
pleased with the spectacle, as the greatest praise could be bestowed upon him,
cried out, and in a loud voice said, I hear, my Friend, what you act; Nor do I
only see them, but methinks you speak with your Hands. And because my Discourse
is fallen upon Nero's times, I will report to you a passage of a Stranger
concerning the same Dancer, who gave the greatest praise of his dancing that
could be. This Barbarian Prince, being come from Pontus to Rome, about some
business with Nero, among other entertainments saw this Dancer personate so
lively, that though he knew nothing of what was sung (being half a Grecian) yet
he understood all. Being to return to his Country after this entertainment of
Nero's, and bid ask what he would, and it should be granted, Give me the
Dancer, said he, and you shall much please me. Nero asking him of what use he
could be to him, My neighbor Barbarians, said he, are of a different language,
nor is it easy for me to find interpreters for them. This Fellow, therefore,
as often as I have need, shall expound to me by Gestures; such praise gained
his Imitations, and Dancing, being significant and clear. The chief business,
and aim of Dancing, then, is, as I said, Personation; which is to be performed
by the rules of Rhetoricians, especially of those who busy themselves in
Declamations. In which, the thing most praiseworthy is to resemble their
subjects, and not to let the things said disagree from the Princes, or
Tyrant-slayers, or Beggars, or Husbandmen spoken of, but to give every one his
propriety, and distinction. I will report to you the saying of another
Barbarian to this purpose: who seeing five Arguments provided, (for the
Presentment consisted of so many parts) and seeing but one Dancer, asked who
should act, and personate the rest; and being told that one would undergo the
whole performance, I was deceived in you, my Friend, said he, who have but one
Body, and many Souls. Thus the Barbarian. Nor do the Italians, without reason
built upon his performances, call a Dancer a Pantomime, or general Actor. The
Poets excellent exhortation therefore, which says, When thou in Cities Stay
do make,
The mind of a pourcontrell take,
is very necessary for a Dancer, who must vary with his Argument, and
transform himself into every part he represents. Especially Dancing undertakes
to act, and personate behaviors, and passions of all sorts; sometimes bringing
a Lover on the Stage, sometimes a choleric man, sometimes a man distracted,
sometimes one lost in sorrow, and all this gracefully. And what is most
strange, upon one and the same day, it presents at one time Athamas frantic,
at another, Ino trembling; at another Atreus, presently after Thyestes, then
Aegysthus, or Aerope, and all this by one man. In other shows, and sights,
several things are severally represented; as the Pipe, or Harp, or melody of
the voice, or action of a Tragedy, or merry performance of a Comedy. But a
Dancer does express all these; in whose presentations you may behold variously
compounded, and mixed, the Wait, and Flute, creakings of the Feet, shrilnesse
of the Cymball, tunable voice of an Actor, and consort of a Quire. Besides, in
other performances, one part of the man is only employed: where some parts
concern only the Soul, others the Body. But in Dancing both are mixed, where
what is done exhibits the mind with the exercise, and activity of the Body. But
the thing most regardfull is the discretion, and decorum there observed.
Lesbonax, therefore, the Mitylenian, an honest and virtuous man, used to call
Dancers, Handy-wisemen; and went frequently to see them, as if he returned
better from the Theater: whose Tutor Timocrates, seeing once by chance, not of
set purpose, a Dancer perform his parts, cried out, What rare sights have I
lost through a Philosophical modesty? Now if it be true, what Plato delivers
of the Soul; A Dancer most excellently represents the 3 parts of it: The
irascible, when he acts an angry man; the Concupiscible, when he presents a
Lover; and the Rational, when he puts a bridle to every affection. For Reason
is mingled, and scattered with all parts of Dancing, as Feeling is with the
other Senses. Now what does this wisdom of the mind, made visible by the
gracefulness of Dancing, but verify Aristotle's saying, who praising Beauty,
calls it the third part of Virtue. And as for the silence sometimes used by
dancers, I have heard some in a youthful Hyperbole praise it as a piece of the
Pythagorean discipline. And whereas other Studies carry with them either
pleasure only, or profit, dancing only has both, and renders profit the more
profitable coming dressed in pleasure. For how much a more delightful Spectacle
is this, then to see Young men cuff, and flow with Blood, and wrestle in the
dust, when they might much safelier, and comelier, and with more pleasure be
seen in a dance. The decent motions, therefore, of dancing, graceful postures,
turnings, treadings, and caprings, are both delightful to the spectators, and
healthful to the Actors. For I must think that the best and most
proportionable exercise, which both supples the body, and renders it flexible,
and pliant, and bending to all postures, and strengthens it too. How can
dancing then, choose, but be the most accomplished exercise, which thus whets
the soul, exercises the body, delights the beholders, and instructs them in
much antiquity, and equally by Flutes, and Cymballs, and the gracefulness of
the limbs, diffuseth its charms to the eyes, and ears? If, therefore, you
affect the harmony of the voice where can you meet a fuller, or more melodious
consort? If you delight in airs of the Cornet, or Flute, Dancing will
abundantly supply you. I spare to tell you, that by such spectacles, and by
frequen^ing the Theater, you will be bettered in your manners, by learning to
hate foul deeds presented, and to bewail those who are innocently
unfortunate; And seeing the whole behavior of the Spectators disciplined. But
that which I most extol in Dancers is their Art, both to show strength, and
softness; Nor is it to me less then a Paradox, for the same person, in the
same performance, to express the boystrousnesse of Hercules, and the delicacy
of Venus. But I will now proceed to show how a good Dancer must be qualifyed
both in his mind and body. Though I have already reckoned most of the
endowments of his soul, who must have a fast memory, piercing wit, sharp
understanding, able to distinguish times well; he must also be a Critic of
Poems, and songs, able to discern Dittyes well composed, and to reject the
ill. A draught of his body, I will give you by Polycletus rules. Which must not
be over tall, nor too low, or dwarfish, but of a moderate size; neither over
fleshy, which is prodigious, nor over lean, like a Sceleton, or a Anatomy. To
this purpose, I will report to you some showtes of dislike uttered by a people,
who are no dull observers. The Cityzens of Antioch are most ingenious, and much
addicted to dancing; and so given to mark what is said, or done, that no
passage escapes them. Seeing, upon a time, a little, short Dancer enter, and
act Hector, they cried out with one voice, This is Astyanax, but where is
Hector? Another time a fellow of an overgrown length preparing to dance
Capaneus, and to scale the walls of Thebes, they told him he might mount the
wall without a ladder. Another time, a very big, and corpulent dancer,
endeavoring to vault high, We had need, said they, to underprop the Stage. To
a very lean Dancer, they cried out, God strengthen you; as if he had been in a
Consumption. I have alleged these Examples, not to stir your laughter, but
that you may know, that whole nations have so applied their studies to dancing,
as to be able to distinguish the right performance from the absurd. A Dancer,
then, must be of an active, pliant, and compacted body; able upon occasion to
make quick Turns, and, if need be, to stop strongly. And that Dancing is no
stranger to the warlick gestures of the hands, but partakes the virtues in
combating of Mercury, Pollux, and Hercules, you may perceive by several
presentiments. Herodotus holds, that the Representations which are taken in by
the Sight, are much more authentic then those which are taken in by the Ear.
Dancing satisfies both senses, and conveies such strong impressions, that a
certain Lover passing through the Theater was cured, by seeing the ill
successes of Love; and though he came possessed with a deep melancholy,
departed cheerful, as if he had drunck some potion of Oblivion; or, according
to the Poet, Some draught of Nepenthe against Sadness. Now the sign of proper
Action, and that the Presentment is universally understood, are the tears shed
by the Spectators, as often as any calamitous, or tragical passage is brought
upon the Stage. The Bacchanall manner of dancing, exercised especially in
Ionia, and Pontus, being also Satyrick, does so inchant the people, that at
certain times appointed, they neglect all other business, and sit whole days
to see the Titans, Corybantes, Satyrs, and Clowns acted, which are danced by
the most noble, and greatest personages of every City, who think it no
dishonor, but rather value themselves more for such performances, then for
their Births, Attendances, and Dignities of their Ancestors. And thus having
deciphered the virtues of Dancers, give me leave to decipher the vices too.
Those of the Body I have shown already. Those of the Mind you may thus observe.
There are many, who out of ignorance (for it is not possible that all should be
wise) commit great Soloecismes in Dancing: such, I mean, whose actions are
irregular, and not to the Tune, as they say; when the Foot says one thing, and
the Instrument another. Others keep proportion to the Music, but their
Presentiments, as I have often seen, are disproportioned to the right time. For
you shall have one, who endeavoring to act Jupiter's Birth, and Saturn eating
his Children, danceth Thyestes sufferings, for the affinity of the Fables.
Again, another being to act Semele burnt with Lightning, likens Glauce to her,
born long after. Yet is not Dancing to be scorned, because there are such
Dancers; nor is the exercise to be hated, but such Actors to be held
unskilful; and they to be praised, who, according to the right rules of their
Art regularly make their performances. In a word, a Dancer must be every way
exact, do all things with order, decency, measure, like himself, beyond
detraction, blame, and imperfections; have thoughts of the best composition, an
Education quick, a deep Apprehension, and especially humane: whose applause
must necessarily follow his performances, when every Spectator beholds himself
acted; and sees in the Dancer, as in a Glass, whatever he uses to do, or
suffer. For then men cannot contain for pleasure, but pour themselves forth
in tumultuous praises, when every one sees the Images of his mind presented,
and owns them. For the Delphick Counsel, Know thy self, is by such spectacles
so artificially instilled into them, that they depart from the Theater taught
what to choose, and what to shun, and instructed in those things which before
they knew not. For as in speech so in Dancing, over-affectation is the fault of
many, who strive to exceed the bounds of imitation, and strain beyond Decorum.
As when some great passage is to be presented, to show it over great; or if
some soft passage, to present it too womanish; or to stretch some manly
Achievement to savagenesse, and bestiality. As I once saw a Dancer, formerly
much approved, and in his other performances discreet, and worthy to be
admired, I know not by what mischance disgrace himself by over action. For
being to dance Ajax after his vanquishment distracted, he failed so grossly,
that some thought he acted not a madness, but was himself distempered. For he
rent the garment of one of those who stamped in Iron shoes; and snatching a
Cornet from one of the Fiddlers, struck Ulysses, who stood by, insulting for his
victory, such a blow on the head, that if his Helmet had not saved him, and
borne off the violence of the stroke, the wretched party had perished, and
fallen prostrate at his feet. Though the whole Theater of Spectators, as mad as
Ajax, stamped, showted, and shook their clothes. For the Rout, and Idiots, who
knew not Decorum, nor were able to distinguish false action from right, took
this as a great expression of fury. And the better bred, and more
understanding, though they blushed at what was done, yet showed not any dislike
as much as by their silence; but colored the Dancers folly with their
commendations. Though they plainly saw not the madness of Ajax, but of the
representer acted. Not herewith content the Gentleman played a prank much more
ridiculous. For descending into the pit he sat down between two who had been
Consulls; much afraid least he should have mistaken, and beaten one of them
for a sheep: which passage some extolled, others derided; others suspected his
over Imitation had cast him into a true Madness. Others report, that after he
came to himself, he was so ashamed of his action, that upon the true
apprehension of his distemper, he fell sick for grief, and plainly professed it.
For those of his Faction requesting him to act Ajax over again to them, When I
come next upon the Stage, said he; In the mean time it is enough for me to have
once played the Madman. But his chief discontent sprung from an Antagonist, or
Anti-Actor, who represented Ajax Raging, so gracefully, and discreetly, that he
was much extolled, keeping himself within the limits of dancing, and not
breaking forth into any unproper action. These few examples, and exercises of
dancing, of many, have I, my Friend, recounted to you, that you should not too
much resent my thirst, and desire to frequent them. If, therefore, you will
vouchsafe to partake of the Spectacle, I assure my self you will be inveigled,
and become in love with Dancing. Nor shall I need to apply that saying of Circe
to you, I wonder by my Cup you are not encharm'd;
for you will be enchanted; not to have the head of an Ass, or heart of a
Swine, but your understanding will be much more confirmed, and you for pleasure
will leave little of the Potion undrunk. For what Homer says of Mercury's
Golden Rod, that he thereby charms up the Eyes of whom he lists, and rewakens
them from sleep, is truly verified of Dancing, which wakes, and unlocks the
eyes of the Beholders, and rouzes up their minds to all the passages of Life.


Crato. You have persuaded me, Lycinus, and have at once opened my ears, and
eyes. And, therefore, remember when hereafter you go to the Theater, to take me
along with you, that you only may not return from thence the wiser.


The Sale of Philosophers.
The Speakers, Jupiter, Mercury, a Merchant, Pythagoras, Diogenes, Democritus,
Heraclitus, Socrates, Chrysippus, the Philosopher. Jupiter. MAke you ready the
Scaffolds, and provide a place for the Comers; stand you behind to produce the
Lives; but first adorn them, that they may look well favored, and allure
Chapmen. Do you, Mercury, make Proclamation, and, in the name of good luck,
summon Buyers to appear here in the Market. We will that you proclaim
Philosophers of all sorts, and of all sects. If there be any who cannot pay
ready money, he shall be trusted till the next year upon security.


Mercury. See, they are already assembled, so that you need loose no time, or
delay them.


Jupiter. Proceed we, then, to Sale.


Mercury. Whom shall I first produce?


Jupiter. That Hairy Ionian, with the grave, and reverend look.


Mercury. You, Pythagorean, descend, and present your self to the Assembly.


Jupiter. Now make proclamation.


Mercury. I sell a rare, and venerable Mortal, who will buy him? who desires
to be something more then a man? Or to know the Harmony of the Universe? or to
live often?


Merchant. He has a promising countenance; Which way lies his knowledge?


Mercury. In Arithmetic, Astronomy, Interpretation of Prodigies, Geometry,
Music, Juggling; He is an excellent Soothsayer too.


Merchant. May I ask him some questions?


Mercury. A Gods name.


Merchant. What Country man are you?


Pythagoras. A Samian.


Merchant. Where bred?


Pythag. In Egypt, among the Wise men there.


Merchant. Suppose I should buy you, what will you teach me?


Pythag. Nothing but to forget.


Merchant. How?


Pythag. First by cleansing your Soul, and scouring off the dross of it.


Merchant. Suppose I be already refined, how will you instruct me then?


Pythag. First you are to undergo a long and speechless Silence; and in five
years to say nothing.


Merchant. Pray, my Friend, be Tutor to Croesus son; For I mean to speak, not
to be a Statue. And what shall I learn after this five years Dumbness?


Pythag. Music, and Geometry.


Merchant. This is pleasant Education, first to be a Fiddler, then a Wise man.


Pythag. Next, you shall learn to number.


Merchant. That I can do already.


Pythag. How?


Merchant. One, two, three, four.


Pythag. Perceive you that what you think Four is Ten, and a perfect Triangle,
and the number we swear by?


Merchant. I never heard more Divine or sacred discourses.


Pythag. Next, my Friend, you shall be taught the nature of the Earth, Air,
Water, and Fire, and what is the force of each, what the form, and how they
are transmuted.


Merchant. Have Fire, Air, and Water a Form then?


Pythagoras. A very visible one. For you see their motion is not formelesse, or
deformed. To this you shall know that God is nothing but Number, and Harmony.


Merchant. You speak Wonders.


Pythag. Nay, more then this, you who seem one thing, shall know your self
another, and another after that.


Merchant. Say you, then, that I am another, and not my self, who now talk with
you?


Pythag. Now you are, indeed, the man you are; but have heretofore appeared in
another body, and under another name, and will in time undergo other changes.


Merchant. By your saying, then, I shall be immortal, and pass through
several shapes? But enough of this. Of what Diet are you?


Pythag. I eat no Flesh, but all things else, except Beans.


Merch. Why loath you Beans?


Pythag. I loath them not, but hold them sacred and mysterious. For first they
are wholly generative: and if you blanch them green, they resemble the
procreative parts of a man. If boiled you lay them certain nights in the Moon
shine, they will turn to Blood; and what is yet more, it is the custom of the
Athenians to choose their Magistrates by Beans.


Merchant. Discreetly, and Religiously spoken. Pray strip your self, for I much
desire to see you naked. O Hercules! he has a Golden Thigh. Sure he is some
God, no Man: I Will buy him at any rate. What Is the price of him?


Mercury. Ten Drachms.


Merchant. I accept him at the price.


Jupiter. Register the Buyer's name, and country.


Mercury. He seems to be an Italian, of the Coasts about Croton, and Tarentum,
and that part of Greece. Besides, not one, but almost three hundred do buy him
among them.


Jupiter. Let them take him away, and produce another.


Mercury. That slovenly fellow of Pontus, do you mean?


Jupiter. The same.


Mercury. You Fellow, with the Scrip over your shoulder, stand forth, and walk
round the Assembly. O yes, I sell a stout, virtuous, well-bred, free mortal:
Who buys him?


Merch: Do you sell a Freeman, Crier?


Mercury. Yes.


Merchant. Are you not afraid he should accuse you of Man-stealth, and summon
you before the Areopagus?


Mercury. He cares not to be sold, but thinks himself nevertheless free.


Merchant. To what employment may a man put such a slovenly ill^lookt fellow,
unless he should make him a Delver, or Water-bearer?


Mercury. That Is not all, set him to keep your house, you will need no Dogs.
His name is Dog.


Merchant. What Is his Country, or Profession?


Mercury. You were best to ask him.


Merchant. I fear his crabbed, grimme looks, least he should bark, if I should
draw near, and bite me. Do you not see how he lifts his Staff, and bends his
Brows, and how threatningly, and Choleric he looks?


Mercury. Fear him not, he is very tame.


Merchant. Of what Country are you, my Friend?


Diogenes. Of all Countries.


Merchant. How?


Diogenes. Thou beholdest a Citizen of the World.


Merchant. Whom do you emulate?


Diogenes. Hercules.


Merchant. You are club'd, indeed, like him; but why wear you not a Lyon's skin
too?


Diogenes. This ragged Coat is my Lyon's skin; in which I make war, like him,
against pleasures, not forced but voluntarily, of which I purpose to purge
Mankind.


Merchant. An Heroic enterprise. But by what Science may we style you, or what
Art do you profess?


Diogenes. I am a maker of men free, and a Physician of their passions. Briefly
I desire to be a Professor of truth, and liberty.


Merchant. Well, Sir, if I should buy you, what will you teach me?


Diogenes. First, I will take you and strippe you of pleasure, and confine you
to poverty, and apparel you in a patcht Coat. Next, I will enjoin you to
labor, and toil, to sleep on the ground, to drink water, and to eat what
comes next. If you have any wealth, by my directions you shall cast it into the
sea. You shall take no thought for Wife, Children, or Country, but esteem them
Toys. Leaving the house you were born to, you shall inhabit either some Cave,
forsaken turret, or Tub. A Scrip you shall have filled with Lupines, and
endorsed books. Thus furnished, you shall call your self much happier then the
greatest King. If you be beaten, or rackt, you shall pretend no torment.


Merchant. Shall I not, say you, when I am whipped feel pain? I wear no Tortoyse,
or Lobster shell.


Diogenes. You shall imitate that saying of Euripides a little alterd.


Merchant. What is it?


Diogenes. Although thou feel the pain,
Thy tongue shall not complayn
But the things which you are chiefly to learn, are to be impudent, bold, to
bark without distinction at all, both Kings, and private men. A way to make
them regard and admire you, for a valiant man. Let your speech be Barbarous,
and your Elocution rude, and Artlesse, like a dog. Let your look be forced
and your Gate be agreeable to your look. In a word, let your whole behavior be
beastly and savage. Be Modestly, Gentleness, and moderation far from you, and
all blushing quite blotted out of your face. You are to frequent, also,
populous places, and there to walk alone, and unaccompanied, and neither to
salute acquaintance, or stranger; for that were to destroy your Empire. Then,
you are undauntedly to do that in public, which no man else would do in
private, and to perform the Acts of Venus after the most ridiculous manner. In
a word, out of resolution you are to eat a raw Pourcontrell, or Cuttle-fish,
and so to dye.


Merchant. These are most beastly, and unmanly Instructions.


Diogenes. But easy, Sir, and obvious to be attained to. For hereby you will
neither need Education, or Studies, or such like trifles, but will arrive at
Glory a more compendious way. Though you be an Idiot, or Tanner, or Salter, or
Mason, or Banker, yet these are no hindrances, why you should not be admired,
if you have impudence, and boldness, and can artificially rail.


Merchant. I need you not for such employments. You may, perhaps, in time, make
a Sayler, or Gardener, if the Seller here will part with you for at most two
pence.


Mercury. Take him, for we would fain be rid of him, he keeps such a noise, and
clamor, snarles at us all, and talks so scurvily.


Jupiter. Call for the next; that Cyrenian, in purple, with a Chaplet on his
head.


Mercury. O yes, draw you all near. Here I present you with a costly purchase,
and fit for the rich; a delightful, thrice^happy mortal. Who loves pleasure?
come and buy a most luxurious Philosopher.


Merchant. Stand out, you, and tell what you can do: for I will buy you, if you
be good for any thing.


Mercury. Pray, Sir, trouble him not with questions; he is drunk you see, and
cannot answer you, his tongue trips.


Merchant. What man in his right wits would buy such a debaucht, intemperate
fellow? how he smells of perfumes? and how reelingly, and unballast he moves? do
you therefore, Mercury, report his qualities, and what he can do sober.


Mercury. Briefly then, he is a Joviall companion at meals, a good Reveller,
and fit for an amorous, prodigal Master. He is well studied in Banquets, and a
very skilful Purveyor; In a word, he is a very Sophist of Luxury. He was bred
at Athens, served certain Tyrants of Sicily, by whom he was much favored; his
chief end and choice is to despise all things, to enjoy all things, and to seek
pleasures wheresover they may be found.


Merch. Pray look about for some rich, and wealthy Chapman, I am not fit to buy
such a Joviall Attendant.


Mercury. It Is to be feared, Jupiter, this fellow will not be bought.


Jupiter. Remove him, then, and produce others: the two yonder, the Abderite,
who laughs, and the Ephesian who weeps; for they will sell together.


Mercury. Stand forth in the midst. O yes, I sell a most rare pair of mortals,
and cry a couple of the wisest of all Philosophers.


Merchant. O Jupiter, how unlike they are! One always laughs, the other seems
to lament some body, and incessantly weeps. Why do you laugh so, my Friend?


Democritus. Because all your business, and selves seem to me things to be
laughed at.


Merchant. How? do you laugh at us, and flight our affairs, as things of
naught?


Democritus. Even so. They have nothing considerable in them, but all things
are vanity, an endless heap of Atoms.


Merchant. It Is not so; you are rather a vain man, and unexperienced. O
Contumely! will thou not cease to fleer? And why weep you, good Friend? For I
hold it much better to talk with you.


Heraclitus. I, stranger, hold all humane affairs wretched, and deplorable;
wholly liable to Fate, which makes me thus pity, and bewail them. The things
present do not much touch me; but the calamities which are to happen
hereafter, I mean the conflagration and ruin of the universe, are things I
thus lament; As also, to consider that nothing is certain, or fixed, but all
things are wrapped up in a confusion; the same thing pleases and offends,
knowledge and ignorance, great and small, high and low, wheel in a circle, and
shift order in the May-games of time.


Merch. What is time?


Heracl. A Boy playing at dice, throwing several chances.


Merch. What are Men?


Heracl. Mortal Gods.


Merch. What are Gods?


Heracl. Immortal men.


Merchant. You speak riddles my friend, and build Labyrinths; and, like
Apollo, speak nothing clearly.


Heracl. I am not to humor you.


Merchant. Nor will any man in his wits buy such a fellow.


Heracl. My custom is to bid all men from their infancy to weep, as well
those that buy me, as those that buy me not.


Merchant. This is an humor next to madness; I Will buy neither of these.


Mercury. These will lie upon our hands too.


Jupiter. Cry another, then.


Mercury. The smooth tongued Athenian yonder?


Jupiter. Yes.


Mercury. Come hither, you. I cry a virtuous and discreet Mortal; A most
sacred Philosopher; who buys him?


Merchant. Say, where most lies your Learning, Friend?


Socrates. I teach young Boys, and am a Philosopher of Love.


Merchant. What shall I give for thee? for I want a Schoolmaster to a handsome
Son I have.


Socrates. Who is fitter then I to converse with a fair Boy? who am not a lover
of their bodies, but hold their souls only beautiful. And though they lie with
me under the same Rugge, yet you shall not hear them complain of my misusage.


Merchant. It Is incredible, being a Buggerer, as you are, you should only
affect their soul; especially having them in your power, under the same
Coverlet.


Socrates. I swear by a Dog, and Plane-tree, it is so as I tell you.


Merchant. O Hercules! what a disparagement is this to the Gods?


Socrates. Why, is not a Dog, think you, a God? what think you of Anubis in
Egypt, and of the Dog Star in Heaven, and Cerberus in Hell?


Merchant. You say true, I mistook indeed. Pray what is your profession?


Socrates. I build to my self a City, observe a strange Policy, and prescribe
my own Laws.


Merchant. I would fain hear one of your Institutions.


Socrates. Hear, then, one of the greatest concerning Wedlock. I would have no
man have his Wife to himself, but in common with any that should desire her.


Merchant. Would you have the Laws concerning Adultery repealed, then?


Socrates. Yes, and all such petty Statutes.


Merchant. How would you dispose of amiable boys?


Socrates. They should be for rewards to the virtuous, who had achieved any
famous, and youthful Exploit.


Merchant. How bountiful you are! And pray what is the sum of your wisdom?


Socrates. Idea's, and patterns of things. For of all these things which you
see, as the Earth, things in the Earth, heaven, and Sea, there are certain
invisible Images, and idea's out of the world.


Merchant. Where do they reside?


Socrates. No where. For if they were any where, they were not.


Merchant. I see no such Idea's as you speak of.


Socrates. No marvel; the eye of your mind is blind. I plainly see the Images
of all things, you unappearing; my self elsewhere, and, in a word, all things
double.


Merchant. Well, Sir, since you are so wise, and quick-sighted, I Will buy you.
What will you take for him, Crier?


Mercury. Two Talents.


Merchant. I Will give what ere you ask. To morrow the money shall be paid in.


Mercury. What may I call your name?


Merchant. Dion of Syracuse.


Mercury. Send you a good pennyworth. Epicurus, I call you next: Who will buy
this Philosopher? He was Scholar to that Laugher, and Drunkard whom I cried
before; only he excells them in one thing, that is, he is much more an Atheist.
In all things else he is a pleasant, Joviall companion.


Merchant. What Is his price?


Mercury. Two Drachmes.


Merchant. There they are; but pray tell me first what Diet he is of?


Mercury. He loves Sweetmeats, and Preserves, especially dried Figs.


Merchant. These are of easy provision. I will buy him Figs by the Freyle.


Jupiter. Call forth another; that rough skinn'd, sour looked Stoic.


Mercury. You say well: The whole multitude expect him. O yes, I sell Virtue it
self; a most accomplished mortal. Who desires to know all things alone?


Merchant. How say you?


Mercury. Marry that this Philosopher is only wise, only beautiful, only just,
valiant, a King, Rhetorician, rich, a Lawgiver, and all things alse.


Merchant. Pray Sir, is he a Cook too?


Mercury. And a Tanner, and Mason, and what you will.


Merchant. It Is very likely. Come hither, friend, and tell me your Buyer who
you are. But first, whither it grieve you not to be sold, and made a servant.


Chrysippus. Not at all; for these are things not in our power; And whatsoever
is not in our power, is to be held indifferent.


Merchant. I understand you not.


Chrysippus. How? Do you not understand that some of these things are
proegmenicall, others not proegmenicall?


Merchant. Nor yet do I conceive you.


Chrysippus. No marvel; you are not accustomed to our Terms. Nor have you a
capable fancy. But a student, who has learned the Theory of Logic, knows not
only such words, but what accidents are, and praeter accidents, and how they
differ.


Merchant. For Philosophy sake without envy, tell me what is accident, and
praeter-accident. For I am confounded with your quaint Terms.


Chrysippus. Without reservation, then, if one be lame, and through lamenesse
stumble against a stone, and unexpectedly receive a hurt, his lamenesse was
accidental to him, his hurt praeter-accidentall.


Merchant. Miraculously acute! What else do you chiefly profess to know?


Chrysippus. Nets of speech, by which I entangle, and ensnare those I talk
with; make them hold their peace, by putting a bridle to their mouth. The name
of the power by which I do this, is celebrated Syllogism.


Merchant. By Hercules, It must be of a strong and resistlesse virtue.


Chrysippus. Pray mark. Have you a good child?


Merchant. Why ask you?


Chrysippus. Suppose a Crocodile should catch this child, finding him walking
near the river, and should afterward promise to restore him, upon condition
you tell him true what he has resolved with himself concerning his
restitution, what would you say he had resolved upon?


Merchant. You propose a question hard to be answered. For I doubt whether I
should say, that I should receive him again. But for Jove's sake answer you,
and save the child before he be devoured.


Chrysippus. Fear not. I Will teach you things yet more wonderful.


Merchant. What are they?


Chrysippus. The Concluder, the Commander, but above all the Electra, and
Cryptick question, or concealment.


Merch. What is the Cryptick or Electra, you speak of?


Chrysippus. Electra was Agamemnons Daughter; who at the same time knew a
thing, and knew it not. For Orestes standing by her unknown, she knew Orestes
to be her Brother, but knew not him to be Orestes. Next hear what the admired
Cryptick question is. For let me ask you; do you know your own father?


Merchant. Yes.


Chrysippus. Suppose, then, I should bring one veyld into your company, and
should ask whether you knew him, what would you say?


Merchant. That I knew him not.


Crysippus. But it is your father. If, therefore, you know not who it is, you
know not your father


Merchant. I, but, Sir, as soon as I undisguise him, I shall know the truth.
But what end propose you to your wisdom? And by what means will you arrive
to the height of virtue?


Chrysippus. First I busy my self about the chiefest things in nature. As
riches, health, and the like; but first much labor is necessarily to be
undergone. The sight to be accustomed to small prints, comments to be compiled,
Soloecismes, and absurd speeches to be noted. In a word, no man can be wise
till he have drunk Hellebore thrice.


Merchant. Your studies are very generous, and manly. But to be a Banker, or
Usurer (for such a one you are) must a man drink Hellebore, and be perfectly
virtuous?


Chrysip. He must. For it is fit only for a wise man to let out money, whose
property only is to make Syllogismes. For to let out money, and to compute the
usury, have near affinity with making of Syllogismes. So that as the one agrees
only to a virtuous man, so does the other, who is not to take single increase
like other men, but use upon use. For do you not know that there is a first,
and second use, and one the offspring of the other? You may perceive it in
this Syllogism; He that receives the first use is to
receive the second,
But he has received the first use, ergo
He is to receive the second.



Merchant. Holds this, I pray, for the rewards too, which you take for reading
wisdom to your Scholars? Methinkes virtuous men should aim at no reward but
virtue.


Chrysippus. You are my Scholar. I receive pay not for my own, but the givers
sake. For if he be liberal and I frugall, I by exercising my frugality
exercise his liberality.


Merchant. On the contrary, suppose the Scholar thrifty, and your self a
prodigal.


Chrysip. You flout me, Sir; but take heed lest I retort an invincible
Syllogism.


Merchant. What Peril accompanies your dart?


Chrysippus. Doubt, and silence, and overthrow of your understanding; and, what
is yet more, if I please, I will presently demonstrate you to be a stone.


Merchant. How! A Stone. You seem not, Sir, to be a Perseus.


Crysippus. Thus. Is a stone a body?


Merchant. Yes.


Chrysippus. And is an animal a body?


Merchant. Yes.


Chrysippus. And are you an animal?


Merchant. I think I am.


Chrysippus. Why, then, being a body, you are a stone?


Merch. Not so, Sir. But for Jove's sake restore me, and make me a man again.


Chrysippus. It Is not difficult. Be, therefore, a man again. For tell me, is
every body an animal?


Merchant. No.


Chrysippus. Is a stone an animal?


Merchant. No.


Chrysippus. But you are a body.


Merchant. It Is true.


Chrysippus. And as you are a body, so you are an animal too.


Merchant. I grant it.


Chrysippus. Therefore being an animal you are no stone.


Merch. Trust me, Sir, you did almost benumme me like Niobe; and I felt my
limbs growing stiff. I Will buy you. What shall I pay for him?


Mercury. Ten pound.


Merchant. There it is.


Mercury. Do you alone buy him?


Merchant. No; but all these you see.


Mercury. They are a strong shouldred number, and fit for the concluding
Science.


Jupiter. Waste not Time* but call another.


Mercury. You famous, rich Peripatetick, I summon you; stand forth, most worthy
to be sold; who alone know all things.


Merchant. Whose this


Mercury. A temperate, modest, orderly carriaged, and what is yet more, a
double Philosopher.


Merch. How double?


Mercury. He seems one thing without, and is another within. If therefore, you
buy him, remember you call him Inside, and Outside.


Merch. Which way lies his knowledge most?


Mercury. He holds there are three sorts of good, one of the soul, another of
the body, a third extrinsecall to both.


Merch. He has the learning of a man. How do you value him?


Mercury. At twenty pounds.


Merch. It Is too dear.


Mercury. Not so, Sir; he seems to have money of his own, so that you will not
repent your bargain. Besides, you will ere long learn of him how long a gnat
lives; at what depth the Sun shines into the sea; and what soul Oysters have.


Merchant. By Hercules, most exquisite knowledge.


Mercury. you shall hear far greater subtileties then these, concerning
nativities, and generations, and the forming of Embryo's in the womb, how a
man is visible, and an as^e not, nor able to build, or sail.


Merch. You report most venerable, and useful Sciences. There Is twenty pound
for him.


Mercury. Take him. Is there any yet left? O, you Sceptick, Pyrromick, stand
forth, you are next to be cried. The multitude departs apace, and the market
is reduced to a few; who will buy this Philosopher?


Merch. I will. But first tell me, what thou know?


Philosopher. Nothing.


Merchant. How so?


Philosoph. Because nothing seems to me to have a being.


Merch. Have you no being then?


Philosoph. It Is more then I know.


Merchant. And have thou no being?


Philosopher. I know this much less.


Merch. O Ignorant! But what meanest thou by these scales?


Philosoph. I weigh Arguments in them, and reduce them to an equality; and when
I see them exactly equal and of like weight, I know not which is the truer.


Merch. What can thou do else?


Philosoph. All things but pursue a fugitive servant.


Merch, Why is this impossible?


Philosoph. Because I cannot apprehend him.


Merchant. Likely enough. Being so lazy, all slowpaced as thou seem to be.
But what is the end of thy knowledge?


Philosoph. Ignorance; and neither to hear nor see.


Merch. Art thou then deaf, and blind?


Philosoph. More, I want both reason, and sense, and differ not at all from a
worm.


Merch. Well, I Will buy thee. How do you sell him?


Mercury. For an Attick pound.


Merch. There it is. What say you, friend, have I bought you?


Philosoph. It Is uncertain.


Merch. I have bought thee, and paid the money.


Philosoph. I do think; and consider of it.


Merch. Follow me, therefore, as a servant.


Philosoph. Who knows whether you say true?


Merh. The Crier here, and my money, and the standers by.


Philosoph. Are there any standers by.


Merchant. I your master putting you into bridewell, will persuade you by a
worse argument that there are.


Philosoph: I doubt that.


Merch: By Jove I Will make it appear,


Mercury. Cease your contradictions, and follow him that has bought you. To
morrow good people, if you come, I will cry Idiot, Mechanic, and vulgar
Mortals.


The Fisherman, or Philosophers revived.
Socrates. THrovv, throvv shovvres of stones at this mischievous fellovv, pelt
him with Clods, and Brick-bars, knock the detractour down with Clubs, see
he escape not. Throvv, Plato, and you, Chrysippus, and you. Let Us all take
Arms against him. Let Scrip aid Scrip, and Staff lend help to Staff,
For he is a common enemy, and there is not one of us which he has not
injured. Now, if ever, Diogenes, use thy Cudgel, and cease not. Let the rayler
feel his reward. How now? What weary, Aristippus? It ought not to be; Be wise,
and call your sharpest fury up.
Aristotle, quickly come hither; so, so the wild beast is taken. Have we caught
you, Mischief? We Will make you presently know, what kind of men you have abused.
How shall we deal with him? Lets contrive various death for him able to
satisfye us all, for he has deserved to be slain of us seven times a piece.


Plato. My doom is that we crucify him, but whippe him first, then pluck out
his eyes, and cut out his tongue. What Is yours, Empedocles?


Empedocles. That we cast him into the Cavernes of Aetna, there to learn that
his betters are not to be jeered.


Plato. 'Twere better we dismembered him like a Pentheus, or Orpheus, found
piece-meale in some rocky place, that every passenger may carry away a limb.


Lucian. Hold, and spare me, I beseech you.


Socrates. You must not escape so. You know what Homer says: 'Twixt Men and
Lions no sure league can be.



Lucian. I also can beseech you out of Homer, since it is likely you reverence
his verses, and will not scorn my collections: Save me I Am innocent, and for
your hire
Take Gold, and Silver, which you wise desire.



Plato. We want not a reply for you out of Homer, hearken, therefore.

No offer shall thus liberty persuade
Though clothed in Gold, since thou art Captive made:

Lucian. O Calamity! Homer my greatest hope fayles me. Euripides then must be
my refuge; and may perhaps preserve me.

A Supplicant to kill,
Has been unlawful still.

Plato. But does not Euripides say too, No punishment's unfit
For them who Crimes commit.



Lucian. So, then, with this sentence you mean to slay me.


Plato. By Jupiter yes, for he says in another place, He his own fate does
draw
Whose free tongue keeps no law.



Lucian. Well, since you are resolved to kill me, and since there is no way to
escape you, pray tell me who you are, and what heinous injury you have
suffered from me, so intollerably to provoke you, and thus to apprehend me
for my death?


Plato. Ask thy self, mischief, what harm thou have done us, and thy trim
works, in which thou have injuriously defamed Philosophy her self, and heapt
disgraces on us, by offering wise men, nay, which is yet more, men free borne,
as it were in public market to sale. Moved therefore with indignation, we
have risen from the dead against thee, and as many as thou see here,
Chrysippus, Epicurus, Plato My self, Aristotle there, and silent Pythagoras,
Diogenes also, and as many of us as thou have libelled have for a while left
the inferior world.


Lucianus. I am relieved. No^ will you slay me, when you know what my
conversation among you has been. Cast away your stones, therefore, or rather
keep them for deservers.


Plato. Trifler, to day thou perishest; it is decreed, thou shall expiate thy
offenses with a stone garment.


Lucian. But I am one, wise Sirs, whom of all men you ought to praise, bred
among you, well instructed, of your opinion. And (if I may speak without being
burdensome) an advancer of your studies. Consider well therefore, whom you
slay, if you slay me, who have undergone so many toils in your behalf.
Consider also whether by this course you shall not show your selves like the
Philosophers of these times, ungrateful, Choleric, and senseless toward
your benefactour.


Plato. O Impudence! are we to repay your detractions with gratitude? Do you
think you talk with bondmen indeed? or that we are to requite raylings and
intemperance of speech with favors?


Lucian. Where or when have I injured you? who have constantly admired
Philosophy; and always extolled your selves, and convert with the works you
left behind you From whence have I taken all my discourses but from you, which
like a be having gathered from your flowers, I have made public to men? Who
both praise, and acknowledge every man's flower, and perceive whence, and from
whom, and how I gathered it, and speak with emulation of my Collections; but
more truly through them admire you, and your gardens, which have brought forth
such various, and many shapt productions. Which if one know how to mingle, and
interweave, and proportion, so as one shall not disagree from another, can it
be possible thus taught he should detract from you? Or disparage those good men
of which he strives to be thought one? Unless like Thamys, or Eurytus, he be
of such an ill nature, that he dare challenge the Muses, of whom he learnt to
sing, or Apollo, who taught him to shoot?


FINIS
The TABLE.
1. AN Answer to one that said You are Prometheus in your Speeches. 1 2. An
Epistle to Nigrinus. 5 3. Nigrinus, or the Manners of Philosophers. ibid. 4.
The Kings-Fisher, or a Discourse of Transformations. 20 5. Prometheus or
Caucasus. 24 6. A Dialogue between Prometheus and Jupiter. 32 7. A Dialogue
betweem Jupiter and Cupid. 33 8. A Dialogue between Apollo and Vulcan. 34 9. A
Dialogue between Jupiter and Vulcan. 35 10. A Dialogue between Jupiter,
Aesculapius and Hercules. 37 11. A Dialogue between Juno and Jupiter. 38 12. A
Dialogue between Venus and Cupid. 39 13. A Dialogue between Mars and Mercury.
40 14. A Dialogue between Jupiter and the Sun. 41 15. A Dialogue between
Cyclops and Neptune. 42 16. A Dialogue between Alpheus and Neptune. 44 17. A
Dialogue between Menelaus and Proteus. 45 18. A Dialogue between Neptune and a
Dolphin. 46 19. A Dialogue between Diogenes and Pollux. 47 20. Pluto, or a
complaint against Menippus. 49 21. A Dialogue between Pluto and Mercury. 50 22.
A Dialogue between Terpsion and Pluto. 51 23. A Dialogue between Zenophantes,
and Callidemides. 53 24. A Dialogue between Cnemon and Damnippus. 54 25. A
Dialogue between Charon, Mercury, a company of dead men, Menippus, Chermoleus,
Lampicus, Damasius, a Philosopher, and a Rethorician. ib. 26. A Dialogue
between Crates, and Diogenes. 59 27. A Discourse between Alexander, Hannibal,
Minos, Scipio. 61 28. A Discourse between Diogenes and Alexander. 64 29. A
Discourse of Followers, and such as are employed for reward 66 30. A Defense of
those who are employed for reward. 91 31. The Tyrant-Slayer. 98 32. The
Disinherited Son. 109 33. Alexander, or the false Prophet. 127 34. Toxaris, or
a Discourse of Frindship. 153 35. Anacharsis, or a Discourse of Exercises. 187
36. A Discourse of Sorrowing for the Dead. 209 37. Hercules of Gaul, or a
Discourse of Eloquence. 215 38. The Ship, or a Discourse of Wishes. 218 39. The
Counsel of your Gods. 238 40. The Decree: 243 41. The Images: 245 42. A
Defense of your former Discourse. 256 43. Jupiter Tragoedian, or a Discourse of
Providence. 268 44. The Cynick. 293 45. Jupiter Confuted, or a Discourse of
Destiny. 302 46. The Parasite. 311 47. The Lover of Lies, or the incredulous.
334 48. A defense of Dancing. 354 49. The Sale of Philosophers. 379 50. The
Fishermen, or Philosophers revived. 395
FINIS.

