Lusts Dominion; OR, THE Lascivious Queen. A TRAGEDY.

Written by Christofer Marloe, Gent.



LONDON, Printed for F. K. and are to be sold by Robert Pollard, at the sign of
Ben. Johnsons head, on the backside of the Old-Exchange. 1657.

The Actors Names.
Eleazar the Moor, Prince of Fesse and Barbary. Philip King of Spain, Father to
Fernando, Philip, and Isabella. Fernando King of Spain Philip Prince of Spain
Sons to Philip. Alvero a Nobleman, and Father in Law to Eleazar, and Father to
Hortenzo and Maria. Mendoza the Cardinal. Christofero Roderigo two Noblemen of
Spain. Hortenzo Lover to Isabella, and son to Alvero. Zarack, Baltazar two
Moor^, attending Eleazar. Cole and Crab two Friars. Emmanuel King of Portugal.
Captain, Soldiers, cum aliis. Two pages attending the Queen. The Queen Mother
of Spain, and wife K. Philip. Isabella the Insanta of Spain. Maria wife to
Eleazar, and daughter Alvero.
The Scene, SPAI^

Lusts Dominion. OR, The Lascivious Queen. A TRAGEDY.

Written by Christopher Marloe, Gent.

LONDON: Printed for Fr. Kirkman at the John Fletchers Head over against the
Angel-Inn on the backside of St. Clements without Temple-Barre, 1661.

To my worthily honored Friend William Carpenter, Esquire.
SIR!
MY Ambition has long soared so high, as to prompt me to somewhat whereby I
might in part render to you my gratitude: and not yet finding any service I can
act for you, a sufficient or competent return of any part of those many favors
you have still honored me withal; I took on me the resolution (rather then to
be thought wholly negligent of you) to lay hold on this means of rendering you
my service. SIR! This Piece, which without your favor and command had never
past the Press, I here present to you with this confidence, that as you were
instrumental in its production to the world, so your name and favor will be
sufficient to protect it from the calumny of this censorious age In doing of
which you will multiply those obligations you have conferred upon

Your devoted Servan^ FRA. KIRKMAN. Jun^

Lusts Dominion; OR, THE Lascivious Queen.
A TRAGEDY.
Act. Imus.
Scena Ima.
Enter Zaracke, Baltazar, two Moors taking tobacco music sounding within:
enter Queen Mother of Spain with two pag^, Elea^r sitting on a chair suddenly
draws the curtain. Eleaz. ON me, does music spend this sound on me
That hate all unity: hah: Zarack Baltazar?

Que. Mo. My gracious Lord.

Eleaz. Are you there with your B^agles? hark you slaves,
Did not I bind you on your lives, to watch that none disturbed us.

Qu. Mo. Gentle Eleazar.

Eleaz. There, off: Is It you that deass me with this noise?

Exeunt 2 Moors. Queen. Why is my loves asspect so g^im and horrid?
Look smoothly on me:
Chyme out your softest strains of harmony,
And on delicious Musicks silken wings
Send ravishing delight to my loves ears,
That he may be enamored of your tunes.
Come let us kiss.

Eleaz. Away, away.

Queen. No, no, says I; and twice away says stay:
Come, come, I Will have a kiss, but if you ^rive
For one denial you shall forfeit five.

Eleaz. Nay prithee good Queen leave me,
I am now sick, heavy, and dull as lead.

Queen. I Will make thee lighter by taking something from thee.

^eaz. Do: take from me this Ague and these fits that hanging on me
S^ke me in pieces, and set all my blood
A boiling with the fire of rage: away, away
Thou believ'st I jest: and laugh'st, to see m^ wrath wear antic shapes:
Be gone, be gone.

Queen. What means my love, burst all those wyres? burn all those Instruments?
For they displease my Moor. Art thou now pleased,
Or were thou now disturbed? I Will wage all Spain
To one sweet kiss, this is some new device
To make me fond and long. Oh! you men
Have tricks to make poor women die for you.

Eleaz. What die for me; away.

Queen. Away, what way? I prithee speak more kindly;
Why do thou frown? at whom?

Eleaz. At thee.

Queen. At me? Oh why at me? for each contracted frown
A crooked wrinkle interlines my brow:
Spend but one hour in frowns, and I shall look
Like to a Beldam of one hundred years:
I prithee speak to me and chide me not,
I prithee chide if I have done amiss,
Kiss But let my punishment be this, and this.
I prithee smile on me, if but a while,
Then frown on me, I Will die: I prithee smile:
Smile on me, and these two wanton boys,
these pretty lads that do attend on me,
Shall call thee Jove, shall wait upon thy cup
And fill thee Nectar: their enticing eyes
Shall serve as crystal, wherein thou may see
To dress thy self, if thou will smile on me.
Smile on me, and with coroners of pearl,
And bells of gold, circling their pretty arms
In a round Ivorie fount these two shall swim,
And dive to make thee sport:
Bestow one smile, one little little smile,
And in a net of twisted silk and gold
In my all-naked arms, thy self shall lie.

Eleaz. Why, what to do? Lusts arms do stretch so wide.
That none can fill them? I Will lay there away.

Queen. Where have thou learned this language? that can say
No more but two rude words; away, away:
Am I grown ugly now?

Eleaz. Ugly as hell.

Queen. Thou lovd'st me once.

Eleaz. That can thy bastards tell.

Qu. What is my sin? I will amend the same.

Eleaz. Hence strumpet, use of sin makes thee past shame.

Qu. Strumpet.

Eliaz. I Strumpet.

Qu. Too true it is, woe is me;
I am a Strumpet, but made so by thee.

Eleaz. By me; no, no; by these young bauds; fetch thee a glass
And thou shall see the bals of both thine eyes
Burning in fire of lust; by me? there is here
Within this hollow ci^ern of thy breast
A spring of hot blood: have not I to cool it
Made an x^action to the quintessence
Even of my soul: melted all my spirits,
Ravished my youth, deflour'd my lovely cheeks.
And dried this, this to anatomy
Only to feed your lust, (these boys have ears):
Yet would thou murder me.

Queen. I murder thee?

Eleaz. I cannot ride through the Castilian streets
But thousand eyes through windows, and through doors
Throw killing looks at me, and every flave
At Eleazar dar^s a finger out,
And every hissing tongue cries, There Is the Moor,
That Is he that makes a Cuckold o^ our King,
there go's the Minion of the Spanish Queen;
That Is the black Prince of Devils, there go's he
That on smooth boys, on Masks and Revellings
Spends the Revenues of the King of Spain.
Who arms this many headed beast but you,
Murder and Lust are twins, and both are thine;
Being weary of me thou would worry me,
Because some new love makes thee loath thine old.

Qu. Eleazar!

Eleaz. Harlot! I Will not hear thee speak.

Queen. I Will kill my self unless thou hear'st me speak.
My husband King upon his deathbed lies,
Yet have I stolen from him to look on thee;
A Queen has made her self thy Concubine:
Yet do thou now abhor me, hear me speak!
Else shall my sons plague thy adult'rous wrongs,
And ^read upon thy heart for murdering me,
Thy tongue has murd'red me (Cry murder boys)

2 Boys Murder! the Queen's murd'red!

Eleaz. Love? slaves peace?

2 Boys Murder! the Queen's murd'red!

Eleaz. Stop your throats?
Hark Hush you Squales; Dear love look up:
Our Chamber window stares into the Court,
And every wide mouthed ear, hearing this news
Will give Alarm to the cuckold King.
I did dissemble when I chid my love,
And that dissembling was to try my love

Queen Thou call'dst me strumpe^.

Eleaz. I Will tear out my tongue
From this black temple for blaspheming thee.

Queen And when I wooed thee but to smile on me,
Thou cri'dst, away, away, and frown'dst upon me.

Eleaz. Come now I Will kiss thee, now I Will smile upon thee;
Call to thy ashy cheeks their wonted red:
Come frown not, pout not, smile, smile, but upon me
And with my poniard will I stab my flesh,
And q^affe carrowses to thee of my blood,
Whilst in moist Nectar kisses thou do pledge me.
How now, why star'st thou thus?

Knock, Enter Zarack. Zarack. The King is dead.

Eleaz. Ha! dead! you hear this, is it true, is it true, the King dead!
Who dare knock thus?

Zarack. It is the Cardinal, making inquiry if the Qeen were here.

Eleaz. See? she is here, tell him? and yet Zarack stay.

Enter Baltazar. Baltaz. Don Roderigo's come to seek the Queen.

Eleaz. Why should Roderigo seek her here?

Baltaz. The King has swounded thrice, and being recovered,
Sends up and down the Court, to seek her grace.

Eleaz. The King was dead with you; Run? and with a voice.
Erected high as mine, say thus, thus threaten
To Roderigo and the Cardinal.
Seek no Queens here, I Will broach them if they do,
Upon my falchions point. Again more knocking!

Knock again Zarack. Your father is at hand, my Gracious Lord.

Eleaz. Lock all the chambers, bar him out you apes.
Hither, a vengeance; stir Eugenia,
You know your old walk under ground, away.
So down hye to the King, quick, quick, you Squalls
Crawle with your Dam, i'ch dark, dear love farewell,
One day I hope to shutt you up in hell.

Eleazar shuts them in. Act. Imus.
Scena IIda.
Enter Alvero. Alvero. SOn Eleazar, saw you not the Queen?

Eleaz Hah!

Alvero. Was not the Queen here with you?

Eleaz. Queen with me; because my Lord I Am married to your daughter:
You (like your daughter) will grow Jealous,
The Queen with me, with me, a Moore, a Dev^ll,
A slave of Barbary, a dog; for so
Your silken Courtiers christen me, but father
Although my flesh be tawny, in my veins,
Runs blood as red, and royal as the best
And proud'st in Spain, there do'es old man: my father,
Who with his Empire, lost his life,
And left me Captive to a Spanish Tyrant, Oh!
Go tell him! Spanish Tyrant? tell him, do?
He that can loose a kingdom and not rave,
He Is a tame jade, I am not, tell old Philip
I call him Tyrant here is a sword and arm^,
A heart, a head, and so pish, it is but death:
Old fellow she is not here. But ere I dye,
Sword I Will bequeath thee a rich legacy.

Alvero Watch fitter hours to think on wrongs then now,
Deaths frozen hand hold's Royal Philip's heart,
Half of his body lies within a grave;
Then do not now by quarrels shake that state,
Which is already too much ruinate.
Come and take leave of him before he dye.

Exit. Eleaz. I Will follow you, now purple villainy;
Sit like a Roab imperial on my back,
That under thee I closelyer may contrive
My venge^nce; foul deeds hid do sweetly thrive:
Mischief erect thy throne and sit in state
Here, here upon this head; let fools fear fate.
Thus I defy my starr^, I care not I
How low I tumble down, so I mount high.
Old time I Will wait ba^e-headed at thy heel^,
and be a footboy to thy winged hours;
They shall not tell one Minute out in sands,
But I Will set down the number, I^e still wake,
And wast these bals of sight by tossing them;
In bu^e observations upon thee.
Sweet opportunity I Will bind my self
to thee in base apprentice-hood so long,
Till on thy naked scalp grow hair as thick
As mine: and all hands shall lay hold on thee,
If thou will lend me but thy rusty sith,
To cut down all that stand within my wrongs,
And my revenge. Love dance in twenty forms
Upon my beauty, that this Spanish dame
May be bewitched, and dote, her amorous flames
Shall blow up the old King. Consume his Sons,
And make all Spain a bonefire.
This Tragedy being acted hers does begin,
To shed a harlots blood can be no sin.

Exit. Act. Imus.
Scena 3ti^.
The Courtains being drawn there appears in his bed King Phillip, with his
Lords, the Princess Isabella, at the feet Mendoza, Alvero, Hortensio,
Fernando, Roderigo, and to them Enter Queen in have. ^ueen. WHose was that
Screech-Owls voic^, that like the sound
Of a hel^ tortured soul rung through mine ears
Nothing but horrid shreiks, nothing but death?
Whilst I, vailing my knees to the cold earth,
D^wning my withered cheeks in my warm tears,
And stretching out my arms to pull from heaven
Health for the Royal Majesty of Spain,
All cried, The Majesty of Spain is dead:
That last word [dead] struck through the ecchoing air,
Rebounded on my heart, and ^inote me down
^reathlesse to the cold earth, and made me leave
My prayers for Philips life, but thanks to heaven
I see him live, and lives I hope to see
Unnumbred years to guide this Empery.

K. Phil. The number of my years ends in one day,
E're this Sun's down all a King's glory sets,
For all our lives are but deaths counter^eits.
Father Mendoza and you Peers of Spain,
Dry your wet eyes, ^r sorrow wants force
T'inspire a breathing soul in a dead coarse;
Such is your King: Where Is Isabel our Daughter?

Mendo. At your beds-seet consounded in her tears.

K. Phil. She of your grief the heaviest burden bears;
You can but lose a King, but she a Father.

Queen. She bear the heaviest bur^hen; Oh say rather
I bear, and am born down, my sorrowing
Is for a husbands loss, loss of a King.

K. Phil. No more, Alvere call the Princess hi^her.

Alvero. Madam, his Majesty does call for you.

K. Ph. Come hither Isabella, reach a hand;
Yet now it shall not need, in stead of thine
Death shoving ^hee back claspe his hands in mine,
And bids me come away, I must, I must;
Though Kings be gods on earth, they turn to dust.
Is not Prince Philip come from Portugal?

Roder. The Prince as yet is not returned, my Lord.

K. Ph. Commend me to him, if I never behold him:
This tells the order of my funeral,
Do it as it is set down? Embalm my body;
Though worms do make no difference of flesh;
Yet Kings are curious here to dig their graves,
Such is man's frailty; when I am embalmed,
Apparel me in a rich Roial Robe,
According to the custom of the Land;
Then place my bones within that brazen shrine
Which death has builded for my ancestors:
I cannot name death, but he strait steps in,
And pulls me by the arm.

Fern. His Grace does faint: help me my Lords softly to raise him up.

Enter Eleazar, and stands sadly by. K. Phil. Lift me not up, I shortly must go
down,
When a few dribling minutes have run out;
Mine h^ur is ended: King of Spain farewell:
You all acknowledge him your Sovereign.

All. When you are dead we will acknowledge him.

K. Phil. Govern this kingdom well: to be a King
Is given to many: but to govern well
Granted to few: have care to Isabel,
Her virtue was King Philips looking-glass.
Reverence the Queen your mother. Love your sister,
And the young Prince your brother; even that day
When Spain shall solemnize my Obsequies,
And lay me up in earth; let them crown you.
Where Is Eleazar, Don Alvero's son?

Fernand. Yonder with crossed arms stands he malecontent.

K. Phil. I do commend him to thee for a man
Both wise and warlike, yet beware of him,
Ambition wings his spirit, keep him down;
What will not men attempt to win a crown.
Mendoza is Protector of thy Realm,
I did elect him for his gravity,
I trust he will be a father to thy youth:
Call help Fernando, now I saint indeed.

Fern. My Lords.

K. Phil. Let none with a distracted voice
Shreik out, and trouble me in my departure:
Heavens hands I see are beckning for my soul;
I come, I come; thus do the proudest die,
Death has no mercy, life no certainty.

Mendo. As yet his soul's not from her temple gone.
Therefore forbear loud lamentation.

Queen. M^. Oh he is dead, he is dead! lament and die,
In her King's end begins Spains mis^ry

Isa He shall not end so soon; Father, dear Father!

Fern. Forbear sweet Isabella, shreiks are vain.

Isa. You cry forbear, you by his loss of breath
Have won a kingdom, you may cry forbear:
But I have lost a Father, and a King;
And no tongue shall control my sorrowing.

Horten. Whither, g^d Isabella?

Isa. I will go,
Where I will languish in eternal woe.

Horten. Nay, gentle Love.

Isa. Talk not of love to me.
The world and the Wo^lds pride henceforth I Will scorn.

Exit. Hort. My love shall follow thee, if thou deny'st
To live with poor Hortenzo as his wife;
I Will never change my love, but change my life.

Enter Philip Hastily. Phillip. I know he is not dead, I know proud Death
Durst not behold such sacred majesty.
Why stand you thus distracted? Mother, Brother,
My Lord Mendoza, where is my Royal father?

Qu. Here lies the temple of his Royal soul.

Fernan. Here Is all that is left of Philips Majesty.
Wash you his tomb with tears; Fernandoes moan,
Hating a Partner, shall be spent alone.

Exit. Phil. Oh happy father, mise^ble Son!
Philip is gone to Joy Philip's forlorn:
He dies to live; my life with woe is torn.

Qu. Sweet son.

Phil. Sweet mother: oh! how I now do shame
To lay on one so foul so fair a name:
Had you been a true mother, a true wife,
This King had not so soon been robbed of life.

Qu. What means this rage, my son?

Phil. Call not me your son:
My father while he lived tired his strong arms
In bearing christian armor, against the Turk's
And spent his brains in warlike stra^agems
To bring Confusion on damned Infidels;
Whilst you that snorted here at home betrayed
His name to everlasting Infamy;
Whilst you at home suffered his bedchamber
To be a Brothelry, whilst you at home
Suffered his Queen to be a Concubine;
And wanton red cheekt boy's to be her bawds
Whilst she reeking in that leachers arms.

Eleaz. Me!

Phil. Villain it is thee, thou hel-begotten fiend at thee I stare.

Qu. Philip thou art a villain to dishonor me.

Phil. Mother I am no villain; it is this villain
Dishonours you and me, dishonours Spain,
Dishonours all these Lords, this Devil is he, that --

Eleaz. What! Oh pardon me I must throw off
All chains of duty: were thou ten Kings sons,
Had I as many souls as I have sins:
As this from hence, so they from this should fly;
In just revenge of this Indignity.

Phil. Give way, or I Will make way upon your bosoms.

Eleazer. Did my dear Sovereign live, sirrah that tongue.

Queen. Did but King Philip live, traitor I Would tell, --

Phil. A tale, that should rid both your souls to hell.
Tell Philip's ghost, that Philip tells his Queen,
That Philip's Queen is a Moor'sConcubine:
Did the King live I Would tell him how you two,
Rip't up the entrails of his treasury:
With Masks and antic Revellings.

Eleaz. Words insupportable; do hear me boy?

Que. Stand you all still, and see me thus trod down.

Phil. Stand you all still, yet let this devil stand here.

Mendo Forbear sweet Prince; Eleazar, I am now
Protector to Fernando King of Spain:
^y that authority and by consent
Of all these peers, I uterly deprive thee
Of all those Royalties thou hold'st in Spain,

Qu. M. Cardinal, who lends thee this Commission?

Ele. Cardinal, i will shorten thee by the head for this.

Phil Forward my Lord Mendoza, damn^ the feind:

Eleaz. Princes of Spain, consent you to this pride?

All. we do.

Qu. For what cause? let his faith be tried

Men. His treasons needs no trial, they are too plain;
Come not within the Court, for if you do,
To beg with Indian slaves I Will banish you.

(...) all, but Alvero, Queen, and Ele^ Act. I.
Scena IV.
Alvero. WHy should my son be banished?

Enter Maria Qu. Of that dispute not now Alvero,
I Will to the King my son, it shall be try'd^
If Castiles King can cool a Cardinall's pride.

Exeunt Queen and Alvero. Eleaz. If I digest this Gall; Oh! my Maria:
I am whipped, and rackt, and torn upon the wheel
Of giddy fortune: She and her Minions
Have got me down; and treading on my bosom.
They cr^, lie still: the Cardinal
(Oh! rare) would bandy me away from Spain,
And banish me to beg; I, beg with slaves.

Maria. Conquer wi^h patience these indignityes.

Eleaz. Patience; ha, ha: yes, yes: an honest Cardinal.

Ma. Yet smo^her the grief and seek revenge.

Eleaz. Hah! banish me, s'foot, why say hey do;
There Is Portugal a good air, and France a fine Country;
Or Barbary rich, and has Moors; the Turk
Pure Devil, and allows enough to fat
The sides of villainy; good living there:
I can live there, and there, and there,
Troth it is, a villain can live any where:
But say I go from hence, I leave behind me
A Cardinal, that will laugh, I leave behind me
A Philip, that will clap his hands for joy;
And dance levaltoes through the Castile Court.
But the deep'st wound of all is this, I leave
My wrongs, dishonours, and my discontents,
Oh! unrevenged; my bedridden enemies
Shall never be raised up by the strong Physical,
Curing of my sword, therefore stay still;
Many have hearts to strike, that dare not kil^
Leave me Maria: Cardinal, this disgrace,
Shall dye thy soul, as Inky as my face:
Pish, hence Maria.

Enter Alvero^ Maria. To the King I Will fly.
He shall reveng my Lord's indignity.

Exit. Alve. Mendoza woo's the King to bani^ thee;
Startle thy wonted spirits, awake thy sou^
And on thy resolution fasten wings,
Whose golden feathers may outstrip their hate,

Eleaz. I Will tie no golden feathers to my wings.

Alvero. Shall they thus tread thee dow^ which once were glad,
To Lacquey by thy conquering Chari^ wheels.

Eleaz. I care not, I can swallow mo^ sower wrongs:

Alve. If they triumph over thee; they spurn me down.

Eleaz. Look, spurn again.

Alve. what Ice has coold that fire,
Which sometimes made thy thoughts heaven aspire;
This patience had not wont to dwell wi^ thee:

Enter. Fernando and Maria. Eleaz. It Is right, but now the World's changed you
see;
Though I seem dead to you, here lives a fire,
No more, here comes the King, and my Maria;
The Spaniard loves my wife, she swears to me,
She Is chaste as the white Moon, well if she be.
Well too if she be not, I care not, I,
I Will climb up by that love to dignitye.

Fernan. Thou woo'st me to revenge thy husbands wrong,
I woo thy fair self not to wrong thy self;
Swear but to love me, and to thee I Will swear
To crown thy husband with a diadem.

Maria. Such love as I dare yield, I Will not deny.

Fernan. When in the golden arms of Majesty.
I am broke off; yonder thy husband stands,
I Will set him free, if thou ^nite my bands,
So much for that. Durst then the Card'nall,
Put on such insolence; tell me fair Madam,
Wher'es your most Valiant Husband?

Eleaz. He see's me, and yet inquires for me.

Maria. Yonder Is my Lord.

Fernan. Eleazar I have in my breast wri^ down
From her Report your late received disgrace:
My father loved you dearly, so will I.

Eliaz. True, for my wife's sake.

aside. Fernan. This Indignitye will I have Interest in for being your King,
You shall perceive I Will curb my underling:
This morning is our Coronation
And father's funeral solemnized,
Be present, step into your wonted place;
^ee'l guild your dim disgraces with our grace.

Exeunt. Eleaz. I thank my Sovereign that you love my wife;
I thank thee wife that thou will lock my head
In such strong armor, to bear off all blows;
Who dare say such wives are their husband foes:
Let Us see now, by her falling I must rise.
Cardinal you die, if the King bid me live;
Philip you die for railing at me: proud Lord you die,
That with Mendoza cried, Banish the Moor^
And you my loving Liege, you're best ^it sa^
If all these live not, you must die at last.

The end of the first Act.
Act. II.
Scena. I.
Enter two Lords, Philip his brother, Mendoza, Eleazar with him, the King
Crowned, Queen mother, Alvero, Zarack, Baltazar, and attendants. Mend. WHy
stares this Devil thus, as if pale death
Had made his eyes the dreadful messengers
To carry black destruction to the world.
Was he not banished Spain?

Phil. Your sacred mouth, pronoune'd the sentence of his banishment:
Then spurn the villain forth.

Eleaz. Who spurns the Moor, were better set his foot upon the Devil,
Do; spurn me? and this confounding arm of wrath
Shall like a thunderbolt breaking the clouds
Divide his body from his soul. Stand back.
Spurn Eleazar?

Rode. Shall we bear his pride.

Alve. Why not, he under went much Injury,

Mendo. What injury have we performed proud Lord?

Eleaz. Proud Cardinal; my unjust banishment.

Mendo. 'Twas we that did it; and our words are laws.

King 'Twas we repealed him, and our words are laws.

Zara. Baltaz. If not these are.

All the Moors draw Phil. How! threatened and out-dar'd?

King Shall we give arm to hostile violence?
Sheath your sword^, sheath them, it is we command.

Eleaz. Grant Eleaz. justice my dread Liege

Mendo. Eleazar has had justice from our hands,
And he stands banished from the Court o^ Spain,

King Have you done justice? why Lord Cardinal,
From whom do you derive authority,
To banish him the Court without our leav^

Mendo. From this, the Staff of our Pro^;
From this, which the last will of your dea^ Father
Committed to our trust: from this hig^ place
Which lifts Mendoza's spirits beyond the pitch
Of ordinary honor, and from this.

King Which too much overweening Insolence Has quite taken from you, Eleazar
up,
takes the staff from Mendoza and gives it to Eleaz. And from us sway this
Staff of Regency.

All. How Is this?

Phil. Dare sons presume to break their fathers will?

King Dare Subjects counter-check their Sovereigns will?
It Is done, and who gainsaies it is a Traitor.

Phil. I do Fernando, yet I am no Traitor.

Mendo. Fernando I am wronged by Peter's Chair,
Mendoza vows revenge. I Will lay afide
My Cardinals hat, and in a wall of steel
The glorious livery of a soldier; fight for my late lost honor

King Cardinal.

Mend. King, thou shall be no King for wronging me.
The Pope shall send his bulls through all thy Realm,
And pull obedience from thy Subjects hearts,
To put on armor of the Mother Church,
Curses shall fall like lightnings on your heads:
Bell, book and candle, holy water, prayers,
Shalallchim vengeance to the of Court Spain
Till they have power to conjure down that feind;
That damned Moor, that Devil, that Lucifer,
That dares aspire the staff, the Card'nall swaid.

Eleaz. Ha ha ha, I laugh yet, that the Cardinall's v^xt.

Phil. Laughts thou base slave, the wrinckles of that scorn
Thine own heart blood shall fill; Brother farewell,
Since you disprove the will our father left,
For base lust of a loathed Concubine.

Eleaz. Ha, Concubine; who does Prince Philip mean?

Phil. Thy wife, thy daughter, base aspiring Lords,
Who to buy honor, are content to sell,
Your names to infamy, your souls to hell:
And stamp you now? do, do, for you shall see,
I go for vengeance, and she will com with me.

Eliaz. Stay, for she is here already, see proud boy.

They both draw. Q. Mo. Hold, stay this fury, if you long for blood,
Murder me first. Dear son you are a King:
Then stay the violent tempest of their wrath.

King. Shall Kings be overswaid in their desires?

Roderi. Shall Subjects be opress'd by tyranny?

Q. Mother. No State shall suffer wrong, then hear me speak,
Mendo, you have sworn you love the Queen,
Then by that love I charge you leave these arms:
Eliaz. for those favors I have given you,
Embrace the Cardinal, and be friends with him.

Eliaz. And have my wife called strumpet to my face.

Qu. Mo. 'Twas rage made his tongue err, do you not know
The violent love Mendoza bears the Queen:
Then speak him fair, for inthathonied breath
I Will lay a bait shall train him to his death.
Come, come, I see your looks give way to peace;
Lord Cardinal begin, and for reward,
Ere this fair setting Sun behold his bride;
Be bold to challenge love, yet be denied

Aside. Mendoz. That promise makes me yield; my gracious Lord:
Although my disgrace has graven its memory
On every Spaniards eye, yet shall the d^ty
I owe your sacred Highness; and the love
My Country challenges, make me lay by
Hostile intendments, and return again
To the fair circle of obedience.

King Both pardon and our favor bids you welcome,
And for some satisfaction for your wrongs,
We here create you Salamanka's Duke,
But first as a true sign all grudges dye;
Shake hands with Eleazar and be friends;
This union pleases us, now brother Philip,
You are included in this league of love,
So is Roderigo to forget all wrongs:
Your Castle for a while shall bid us welcome,
Eleazar shall it not? It is enough,
Lords lead the way, that whilst you feast your selves,
Fernando may find time all means to prove,
To compass fair Maria for our love.

Exeunt Omnes. Act. II.
Scena II.
Enter Queen Mother, and Eleazar. Eleaz. MAdam a word now, have you wit or
spirit?

Qu. Mother. Both.

Eleaz. Set them both to a most gainful task,
Our enemies are in my Castle-work.

Qu. Mother. I; but the King's there too, it is dangerous pride,
To strike at those; that couch by a Lions side.

Eleaz. Remove them:

Qu. Mother. How?

Eleaz. How? a thousand ways;
By poison, or by this, but every groom
Has skill in such base traffic; no our policies
Must look more strange, must fly with loftier wings:
Venge ance the higher it falls, more horror brings:
But you are cold, you dare not do.

Qu. Mother. I dare.

Eleaz. You have a woman's heart, look you this hand,
Oh! it is too little to strike home.

Qu. Mother. At whom?

Eleaz. Your son.

Qu. Mother. Which son, the King?

Eleaz. Angels of heaven, stand lik^ his guard about him, how? the King
Not for so many worlds as here be stars,
Sticking upon th'imbroidred firmament.
The King? he loves my wife and should he die;
I know none else would love her, let him live.
(in heaven) good Lord Philip.

Aside Queen Mother He shall die.

Eleaz. How? good good.

Qu. Mo. By this hand.

Eleaz. When, good good; when?

Qu. M. This night if Eleazer give consent;

El. Why then this night Philip shall notlive,
To see you kill him. Is he not your son?
A mother be the murderer of a brat,
That lived within her; hah!

Qu. Mother It Is for thy sake.

Eleaz. Puh! What excuses cannot damned sin make
To save it self, I know you love him well,
But that he has an eye, an eye, an eye,
To others our two hearts seem to be locked
Up in a case of steel, upon our love others
Dare not look, or if they dare, they cast
Squint purblind glances; who care though all see all,
So long as none dare speak, but, Philip
Knows that the Iron ribs of our villains
Are thin: He laughs to see them like this hand,
With chinks, and crevises, how a villainous eye,
A stabbing desperate tongue, the boy dare speak,
A mouth, a villainous mouth, lets muzzle him.

Qu. Mo. How?

Ele. Thus.
Go you, and with a face well set do
In good sad colors; such as paint out
The cheek of that fool penitence, and with a tongue
Made clean and glib, Cull from their lazy swarm;
Some honest Friars, whom that damnation gold,
Can tempt to lay their souls to 'th stake;
Seek such, they are rank and thick.

Qu. Mo. What then, I know such, what is the use?

Eleaz. This is excellent.
Hire these to write books, preach and proclaim ab^oad,
That your son Philip is a bastard.

Qu. Mo. How?

Eleaz. A bastard; do you; know a bastard? do it;
Say conscience spoke with you, and cried out, do it
By this means shall you thrust him from all hopes
Of wearing Castiles diadem, and that spur
Galling his sides, he will fly out, and fling,
And grind the Cardinals heart to a new edg
Of discontent, from discontent grows treason,
And on the stalk of treason death: he is dead
By this blow, and by you; yet no blood shed.
Do It then; by this trick, he gone!
We stand more sure in climbing high;
Care not who fall it is real policy:
Are you armed to do this? hah!

Queen Mo. Sweet Moor it is done.

Eleaz. Away then, work with boldness, and with speed;
On greatest actions greatest dangers feed.
Ezit Qu. Mother. Ha, ha, I thank thee provident creation,
That seeing in moulding me thou did intend,
I should prove villain, thanks to thee and nature
That skilful workman; thanks for my face,
Thanks that I have not wit to blush.
What Zarack? ho Baltazar.

Enter the two Moors. Both. my Lord.

Eleaz. Nearer, so silence;
Hang both your greedy ears upon my lips,
Let them devour my speech, suck in my breath;
And in who lets it break prison, here is his death,
This night the Card'nall shall be murd'red.

Both. Where?

Ele. And to fill up a grave Philip dies:

Both. Where?

Ele. Here.

Both. By whom?

Ele. By thee; and slave by thee:
Have you hearts and hands to execute?

Both. Here Is both.

1 Moor. He dies were he my father.

Ele. Ho away?
Stay, go, go, stay, see me no more till night;
Your cheeks are black, let not your souls look white:

Both. Till night.

Eleaz. Till night, a word, the Mo Qu.
Is trying if she can with fire of gold,
Warpe the green consciences of two covetous Friars,
To preach abroad Philip's bastardy.

1 Moor. His bastardy, who was his father?

Eleazar. Who?
Search for these friars, hire them to work with you;
Their holy callings will approve the fact.
Most good and meritorious; sin shines clear,
When her black face Religions masque does wear.

Aside. Here comes the Queen, good; and the Friars. Act. II.
Scena. III.
Enter two Friars, Crab and Cole; and Queen Mother. Cole. YOur son a bastard;
say we do,
But how then shall we deal with you?
I tell you as I said before;
His being a bastard, you are so poor
In honor and in name, that time
Can never take away the crime.

Qu. Mo. I grant that Friar, yet rather I Will endure
The wound of infamy, to kill my name,
Then to see Spain bleeding, with civil swords
The boy is proud, ambitious, he woo's greatness,
(...) takes up Spanish hearts on trust, to pay them
When he shall finger Castiles Crown: Oh then
Were it not better my disgrace were known,
Then such a base aspirer fill the Throne.

Cole. Ha brother Crab, what think you?

Crab. As you dear brother Cole:

Cole. Then we agree,
Coals Judgment is as Crabs you see.
Lady we swear to speak and write,
What you please so all go right.

Queen. Mo. Then as we gave directions, spread abroad,
In Cales, Madrid, Granado, and Medyna;
And all the Royal Cities of the Realm:
The ambitious hopes of that proud bastard Philip,
And sometimes as you see occafion,
Tickle the ears of the Rude multitude,
With Eleazars praises; guild his virtues,
Naples recovery and his victories
Achieved against the Tutkish Ottoman:
Will you do this for us?

Eleaz. Say will you?

Both I.

Eleaz. Why start you back and stare? ha? are you afraid.

Cole Oh? no Sir, no, but truth to tell;
Seeing your face, we thought of hell.

Eleaz. Hell is adream.

Cole. But none do dream in hell.

Eleaz. Friars stand to her; and me; and by your sin,
I Will shoulder out Mendoza from his seat;
And of two Friars create you Cardinals,
Oh! how would Cardinals hats on these heads sit.

Cole. This face would look most goodly under it:
Friar, Crab and Cole do swear,
In those circles still to appear:
In which she, or you, do charge us rise;
For you, our lives we will sacrifice.
Valete, Gaudete;
Sipereamus flete;
Orate pro nobis,
Oramus pro vobis.
Cole will be burnt, and Crab be pressed;
Ere they prove knaves, thus areyoucrost and blessed.

Exeunt Frters. Eleaz, Away; you know now Madam none shall throw
Their l^aden envy in an opposite scale,
To weigh down our true golden happiness.

Queen Mo. Yes, there is one.

Eleaz. One, who? give me his name and I will
Turn it to a magic spell,
To bind him here, here, who?

Queen Mo. Your wife Maria.

Eleaz. Hah! my Maria.

Qu. Mo. She Is the Hellespont divides my love and me,
She being cut off.

Eleaz. Stay, stay, cut off; let us think upon it, my wife?
Humh! Kill her too!

Qu. Mo. Does her love make thee cold?

Eleaz. Had I a thousand wives, down go they all:
She dies, I Will cut her off: now Baltazar.

Enter Baltazar. Baltaz. Madam, the King entreats your company.

Qu. Mo. His pleasure be obeyed, dear love farewell;
Remember your Maria.

Exit Qu. Mo. Eleaz. Here a dieu;
With this I Will guard her, whilst it stabs at you.

Balt. My Lord! the Friars are won to join with us.

Eliaz. Be prosperous about it Baltazzar.

Balt. The watch word.

Eleaz. Oh! the word let it be treason;
When we cry treason, break open chamber doors:
Kill Phillip and the Cardinal; Hence

Balt. I fly.

Exit. Eleaz. Murder, now ride in triumph, darkness, horror;
Thus I invoke your aid, your Act begin;
Night is a glorious Roab, for th'ugliest fin.

Exit. Act. II.
Scena. IV.
Enter Cole and Crab in Trouses, the Cardinal in one of their weeds, and
Philip putting on the other. Both Friars. PUt on my Lord, and fly or else you
die.

Phil. I will not, I will die first; Cardinal,
Prithe good Cardinal pluck off, Eriers, slave,
Murder us two, he shall not by this sword.

Car. My Lord, you will endanger both ou^ lives.

Phil. I care not; I Will kill some bfeore I die:
Away, s'heart take your rags; Moor, Devil, come.

2. Friars. My Lord put on, or else.

Phil Gods foot come help:

Card. Ambitious villain. Philip, let us fly
Into the chamber of the Mother Queen.

Phil. Thunder, beat down the lodgings.

Card. Else let us break into the chamber of the King:

Phillip. Agreed,
A pox upon those Iowzy gaberdines,
Agreed, I am for you Moor; stand side by side,
Come, hands off, leave your ducking, hell cannot fright,
Their spirits that do desperately fight.

Cole You are too rash, you are too hot,
Wild desperateness does valor blot;
The lodging of the Kings beset,
With staring faces black as Jett,
And hearts of Iron, your deaths are vowed
If you fly that way, therefore shrowed,
Your body in Friar Coals gray weed,
For is it not madness man to bleed:
When you may escape untouched away,
Here Is hell, here is heaven, here if you stay
You're gone, you're gone, Friar Crab and I,
Will here dance friskin whilst you fly:
Gag us, bind u^, come put on
The Gags too wide, so gone, gone, gone.

Phil. Oh! well, I Will come again, Lord Cardinal
Take you your Castle, I Will to Portugal:
I vow I Will come again, and if I do:

Card. Nay good my Lord!

Phil. Black Devil I Will conjure you.

Exeunt Act. II.
Scena. V.
To the Friars ^king a noise, gagged and bound, Enter Eleazar, Zarack,
Baltazar, and other Moors, all with their Swords drawn. Eleazar. GUard all the
pa^ages, Zarack stand there,
There Baltazar, there you, the Friars,
Where have you placed the Friars?

Alvero. My Lord a noise.

Baltaz. The Friars are gagged and bound.

Eleaz. It Is Phil. and the Cardinal, shoot; hah stay!
Unbind them; where is Mendoza, and the Prince.

Cole. Sancta Maria who can tell:
By Peter's keys they bound us well,
And having cracked our shaven crowns,
They have escaped you in our gowns.

Eleaz. Escaped; escaped away? I am glad, it is good,
I would their arms may turn to Eagles wings,
To fly us swift, as time sweet air give way,
Winds leave your two and thirty palaces,
And meeting all in one, join all your might,
To give them speedy and a prosperousflight,
Escaped Friars, which way?

Both. This way.

Eleaz. Good: Alas; what sin is it to shed innocent blood;
For look you holy men, it is the King;
The King, the King, see Friars sulphury wrath
Having once entered into Royal breasts:
Mark how it burns, the Qu. Philip's mother;
Oh! most unnatural, will have you two
Divulge abroad that he is a bastard. Oh!
Will you do it.

Crab. What says my brother F^er?

Cole. A Princes love is balm, their wrath a fire:

Crab. It Is true, but yer I Will publish no such thing;
What fool would lose his soul, to please a King?

Eleaz. Keep there, good there, yet for it wounds my soul,
To see the miserablest wretch to bleed.
I counsel you (in care unto your lives)
To Obey the mother Queen, for by my life
I think she has been pricked, her conscience
Oh! it has stung her, for some fact misdon,
She would not else disgrace her self and son
Do It therefore, hark, she will work your deaths else, hate
Bred in a woman is insatiate.
Do It Friars.

Crab. Brother Cole? Zeal sets me in a flame,
I Will do it.

Cole. And I,
His baseness we will proclaim

Exeunt Friars. Eleaz. Do, and be damned; Zarack and Baltazar.
Dog them at the hee'ls, and when their poisonous breath
Has scattered this infection, on the hearts
Of credulous Spaniards, here reward them thus,
Slaves too much trusted do grow dangerous;
Why this shall feed,
And fat suspicion, and my policy
I Will ring through all the Court, this loud alarm:
That they contrived the murder of the King,
The Qu. and me; and being undermined,
To scapethe blowing up, they fled. Oh good!
There, there, thou there, cry treason; each one take
A several door, your cries my music make.

Balt. Where Is the King? treason persues him:

Enter Alvero in his shirt, his sword drawn. Ele. Where Is the sleepy Qu. Rise,
rise, and arm, against the hand of treason.

Alv. Whence comes this sound of treason?

King. Who frights our quiet slumbers,
Enter King in his shirt, his sword drawn. With this heavy noise:

Qu. Mo. Was it a dream? or did the sound
Enter Queen in her night attire. Of monster treason call me from my rest.

King. Who raised this rumor Eleaz. you?

Eleaz. I did my Liege, and still continue it,
Both for your safety, and mine own discharge.

King. Whence coms the ground then?

Eleaz. from the Cardinal,
And the young Prince, who bearing in his mind
The true Idea of his late disgrace,
In putting him from the Protectorship,
And envying the advancment of the Moor
Determined this night to murder you;
And for your Highness lodged within my Castle,
They would have laid the murder on my head.

King. The Cardinal, and my Brother bring them forth
Their lives shall answer this ambitious practice.

Eleaz. Alas my Lord it is impossible,
For when they saw I had discovered them
They trained two harmless Friars to their lodgings;
Disrobed them, gagged them, bound'em (...) two posts,
And in their habits did escape the Castle.

King. That Cardinal, is all ambition,
And from him does our Brother gather heart.

Que. Mo. The ambition of the one infects the other,
And in a word they both are dangerous;
But might your mothers counsel stand force,
I would advise you send the trusty M^
To fetch them back, before they had seduc^
The squint eyed mul^tude from true allegiance,
And drawn them to their dangerous faction.

King. It shall be so, therefore my States best prop,
Within whose bosom I durst trust my life,
Both for my safety and thine own discharge.
Fetch back those traitors, and till your return
Our self will keep your Castle.

Eleaz. My Liege; the tongue of true obedience
Most not gainsay his Sovereigns impose,
By heaven; I will not kiss the cheek of sleep,
Till I have fetched those traitors to the Court.

King. Why; this sorts right, he gone; his beauteous wife
Shall sail into the naked arms of love.

Qu. Mo. Why, this is as it should be, he once gone,
His wife that keeps me from his marriage bed,
Shall by this hand of mine be muthered.

King. This storm is well nigh past the swelling clouds,
That hang so full of treason by the wind,
In awful Majesty are scatt'red.
Then each man to his rest; good night sweet friend,
Whilst thou persu'st the traitors that are fled,
Fernando means to warm thy marriage^ bed.

Exit Ele. Many good nights, consume and dam your souls.
I know he means to Cuckold me thi^ night;
Yet do I know no means to hinder it.
Besides, who know, whether the lustful King
Having my wife and Castle at command,
Will ever make surrender back again:
But if he do not, with my falchions point
I Will lance those swelling veins in which ho^ lust
Does keep his Revels, and with that warm blood
Where Venus's bastard coold his sweltrin^ spleen,
Wash the disgrace from Eleazars brows.

Act. II.
Scena. VI.
Enter Maria. Maria. DEar Eleazar;

Ele. If they lock the gates
I Will toss a ball of wildfire over the walls.

Maria. Husband, sweet husband:

Eleaz. Or else swim over the moat,
And make a breach through the ^inty sides
Of the rebellious walls:

Maria. Hear me, dear heart.

Eleaz. Or undermine the chamber where they lie,
And by the violent strength of gunpowder,
Blow up the Castle, and the ince^tious couch,
In which lust wallows; but my laboring thoughts,
Wading too deep in bottomless extremes;
Do drown themselves in their own stratagems.

Maria. Sweet husband! dwell not upon circumstance,
When weeping sorrow like an Advocate
Importunes you for aid; look in mine eyes
There you shall see dim grief swimming in tears,
Invocating succor. Oh succor!

Eleaz. Succor. Zounds for what?

Maria. To shield me from Fernando's unchaste love,
Who with uncessant prayers importuned me.

Eleaz. To lie with you I know it.

Maria. Then seek some means how to prevent it.

Eleaz. It Is possible; for to the end that his unbridled lust
Might have more free access unto thy bed,
This night he has enjoined me
To fetch back Philip and the Cardinal.

Maria. Then this ensuing night shall give an end
To all my sorrows, for before foul lust
Shall soil the fair complexion of mine honor,
This hand shall rob Maria of her life.

Eleaz. Not so dear soul, for in extremities
Choose out the least, and ere the hand of death
Should suck this Ivorie palace of thy life:
Embrace my counsel, and receive this poison
Which in the instant he attempts thy love,
Then give it him: do, do,
Do p^on him, he gone, you are next;
Be sound in resolution; and farewell;
By one, and one, I Will ship you all to hell.
Spain I will drown thee with thine own proud blood,
Then make an ark of carcasses farewell.
Revenge and I will sail in blood to hell.

Exit. Maria. Poison the King, Alas my trembling hand
Would let the poison fall, and through my cheeks
Fear suited in a bloodless livery,
Would make the world acquainted with my guilt,
But thanks prevention, I have found a means
Both to preserve my Royal Sovereigns life,
And keep my self a true and Loyal wife.

Exit. The end of the second Act.
Act. III.
Scena I.
Enter Queen Mother, with a Torch, solus. Qu. Mo. FAir eldest child of love,
thou spotless night,
Empress of silence, and the Queen of ^leep;
Who with thy black cheeks pure complexion,
Make lovers eyes enamored of thy beauty:
Thou art like my Moor, therefore will I adore thee,
For lending me this opportunity,
Oh with the soft skinned Negro! heavens keep back
The saucy staring day from the worlds eye,
Until my Eleazar make return;
Then in his Castle shall he find his wife,
Transformed into a strumpet by my son;
Then shall he hate her whom he would not kill?
Then shall I kill her whom I cannot love?
The King is sporting with his Concubine.
Blush not my boy, be bold like me thy mother,
But their delights torture my soul like Devils,
Except her shame be seen: Wherefore awake
Christophero, Verdugo, raise the Court,
Arise you Peers of Spain, Alvaro rise,
Preserve your country from base infamies.

Enter severally at several doors, with lights and Rapiers drawn, Alvero,
Roderigo, and Christophero, with others. All. Who raised these exclamations
through the Cour^?

Qu. Mo. Sheath up your Swords, you need not swords, but eyes
To intercept this treason.

Alv. What Is the treason?
Who are traitors? ring the larum bell;
Cry arm through all the City; once before
The horrid sound of treason did affright
Our sleeping spirits.

Qu. Mo. Stay, you need not cry arm
Arm, for this black deed
Works treason to your King, to me; to you,
To Spain, and all that shall in Spain ensue.
This night Maria ( Eleazars wife)
Has drawn the King by her Lascivious looks
Privately to a banquet, I unseen
Stood and beheld him in him in her lustful arms.
Oh God! shall bastards wear Spains Diadem?
If you can kneel to baseness, vex them not;
If you disdain to kneel, wash of this blot.

Roder. Lets break into the chamber and surprise her?

Alve. Oh miserable me! do, do, break in,
My Country shall not blush at my child's sin.

Queen Mo. Delay is nurse to danger, follow me,
Come you and wi^nesse to her villainy.

Alvero. Hapless Alvero, how art thou undone,
In a light daughter, and a stubborn son.

Exeunt omnes. Act. III.
Scena II.
Enter King with his Rapier drawn in one hand, leading Maria seeming affrighted
in the other. Maria. OH! kill me ere you stain my chastity.

King. My hand holds death, but love sits in mine eye,
Exclaim not dear Maria, do but hear me;
Though thus in dead of night as I do now
The lustful Tarquin stole to the chaste bed
Of Collatines fair wife, yet shall thou be
No Lucrece, nor thy King a Roman slave,
To make rude villainy thine honors grave.

Maria. Why from my bed have you thus frighted me?

King. To let the view a bloody horrid Tragedy.

Maria. Begin it then, I Will glaldly loose my life,
Rather then be an Emperors Concubine.

King. By my high birth I swear thou shall be none,
The Tragedy I Will write with my own hand,
A King shall act it, and a King shall dye;
Except we^ mercies beam shine from thine eye.
If this a^ight thee it shall sleep for ever,
If still thou hate me, thus this Noble blade,
This Royal purple temple shall invade.

Maria My husband is from hence, for his sake spare me.

King. Thy husband is no Spaniard, thou art one,
So is Fernando, then for countries sake
Let me not spare thee, on thy husbands face
Eternal night in gloomy shades does dwell;
But I Will look on thee like the gilded Sun,
When to the west his fiery horses run.

Maria. True, true, you look on me with Sun set eyes,
For by beholding you my glory dies.

King. Call me thy morning then, for like the morn,
In pride Mar^a shall through Spain be born.
This (...) I prepared thine ears,
music plays within. Love me and thou shall hear no other sounds,
Lo here is a banquet set with mine own hands;
A banquet brought in. Love me, and thou shall feast thee like a Queen:
I might command thee being thy Sovereign;
But love me and I Will kneel and sue to thee,
And circle this white forehead with the Crown
Of Castile, Portugal, and Arragon,
And all those petty Kingdoms which do bow
Their tributarie knees to Philip's heir.

Maria. I cannot love you whilst my husband lives:

King. I Will send him to the wars, and in the front
Of some maine army shall he nobly dye.

Maria. I cannot love you if you murder him.

King. For thy sake then, I Will call a Parliament
And banish by a law all Moors from Spain.

Maria. I Will wander with him into banishment.

King. It shall be death for any Negroes hand,
To touch the beauty of a Spanish dame.
Come, come, what needs such cavells with a King?
Night blinds all Jealous eyes, and we may play,
Carowse that ^le to me, I Will pledge all this,
Being down, we will make it more sweet with a kiss.
Begin, I Will lock all doors, begin Spains Queen,
Locks the doors. Loves banquet is most sweet, when it is least seen.

Maria. Oh thou conserver of my honors life!
Instead of poisoning him, drown him in sleep,
Because I Will quench the flames of wild desire,
I Will drink this off, let fire conquer loves fire.

King. Were love himself in real substance here,
Thus would I drink him down, let your sweet strings,
Speak louder (pleasure is but a slave to Kings)
In which love swime. Maria kiss thy King,
Circle me in this ring of Ivory.
Oh! I grow dull, and the cold hand of sleep
Has thrust his Icie fingers in my breast,
And made a frost within me; sweet, one kiss
To thaw this deadness that congeales my soul.

Maria. Your Majesty has overwatch'd your self,
He sleeps already, not the sleep of death;
But a sweet slumber, which the powerful drugg
Instilled through all his spirits. Oh! bright day
Bring home my dear Lord, ere his King awake,
Else of his unstained bed he will shipwreck make.

Offers to go. Enter Oberon, and Fairyes dancing before him, and music with
them. Maria. Oh me! what shapes are these?

Oberon. Stay, stay, Maria.

Maria. My Sovereign Lord awake, save poor Maria.

Oberon. He cannot save thee, save that pain,
Before he wake thou shall be slain;
His mothers hand shall stop thy breath,
Thinking her own son is done to death:
And she that takes away thy life,
Does it to be thy husbands wife.
Adieu Maria, we must hence,
Embrace thine end with patience;
Elves and Fairyes make no stand,
Till you come in Fairy Land.

Exeunt dancing and singing. Maria. Fairyes or Devils, whatsoever you be,
Thus will I hide me from your company.

Offers to be gone. Act. III.
Scena. III.
To her, Enter Queen Mother suddenly, with Alva^o, and Roderigo, with Rapiers.
Q Mo. LAy hold upon the strumpet, where is the King?
Fernando, son; ah me your King is dead!
Lay hand upon the murdresse.

Maria. Imperious Queen, I am as free from murder as thy self,
Which I will prove, if you will here me speak:
The King is living.

Roder. If he lived his breath would beat within his breast.

Q. Mo. The life he leads, Maria thou shall soon participate.

Maria. Oh father save me!

Alvero. thou^rt no child of mine, had thou been owner of Alvero's spirit.
Thy heart would not have enterain'd a thought
That had converst with murder: yet mine eyes
(However my tongue want words) brim full with tears,
Entreat her further tryal^.

Verdugo. To what end: here lies her trial: from this royal breast
Has she stolen all comfort, all the life
Of every bosom in the Realm of Spain.

Roder. She Is both a traitor and murdrefs.

Q. Mo. I Will have her forthwith strangled.

Alv. Hear her speak.

Q. Mo. To heaven let her complain if she have wrong,
I murder but the murdresse of my son.

Alv. We murder the murdreffe of our King.

Alv. Ah me my child oh! Oh cease your torturing!

Maria. Heaven open the window^, that my spotless soul,
Riding upon the wings of innocence,
May enter ^aradice, Fairyes farewell;
Fernandoes death in mine you did ^retell.

She dies King wake, King. Who calls Fernando? love, Maria, speak:
Oh! whither art thou fled? whence flow these waters
That fall like winter storms, from the drowned eyes.

Alv. From my Maria's death!

King. My Maria dead?
Damned be the soul to hell that stopped her breath;
Maria, Oh me who durst murder her?

Q. M. I thought my dear Fernando had been dead,
And in my indignation murdered her.

King. I was not dead until you murdered me
By killing fair Maria.

Qu. Mo. Gentle son.

King Ungentle mother, you a deed have done,
Of so much ruth that no succeeding age
Can ever clear you of; Oh my dear love,
Yet heavens can witness thou were never mine:
Spains wonder was Maria.

Qu. Mo. Sweet have done:

King. Have done! for what, for shedding zealous tears
Over the tomb of virtues chastity;
You cry have done, now I am doing good,
But cried do on, when you were shedding blood:
Have you done mother; yes, yes, you have done,
That which will undo your unhappy son.

Roder. These words become you not my gracious Lord.

King. These words become not me, no more it did
Become you Lords to be mute standers by,
When lustful fury ravished chastity.
It ill becomes me to lament her death,
But it became you well to stop her breath:
Had she been fair and not so virtuous,
This deed had not been half so impious.

Alv. But she was fair in virtue, virtuous fair, oh me!

King. Oh me! she was true honors heir.
Hence beldame from my presence, all fly hence,
You are all murderers, com poor innocence,
Clasp thy cold hand in mine, for here I Will lie,
And since I lived for her, for her I Will die.

Act. III.
Scena. IV.
Enter Eleazar with a Torch and Rapier drawn. Eleazar. BAr up my Castle Gates;
fire and confusion
Shall girt these Spanish Currs; was I for this,
Sent to raise power against a fugitive:
To have my wife deflowered. Zounds where is my wife,
My slaves cry out, she is dallying with the King?
Stand by, where is your King? Eleazars bed shall
Scorn to be an Emperors brothelrie.

Qu. Mo. Be patient Eleazar, here is the King,

Eleaz. Patience and I am foes, where is my Maria?

Alu. Here is her hapless coarse that was Maria.

King. Here lies Maria's body, here her grave,
Her dead heart in my breast a tomb shall have.

Eleazar. Now by the proud complexion of my cheeks,
Tan'e from the kisses of the amorous sun;
Were he ten thousand Kings that slew my love,
Thus should my hand (plumed with revenges wings)
Requite mine own dishonor, and her death.

Stal^ the King. Qu. Mo. Ah me! my son.

All. The King is murdered, lay hold on the damned traitor.

Eleaz. In his breast that dares but dart (...) finger at the Moor,
I Will bury this Sharp steel yet reeking warm,
With the unchaste blood of that lecher King,
That threw my wife in an untimely grave.

Alv. She was my daughter and her timelesse grave
Did swallow down my joies as deep as yours:
But thus.

Eleaz. But what? bear injuries that can,
I Will wear no forked crest.

Roder. Damn this black feind, cry treason through the Court.
The King is murdered.

Eleaz. He that first opes his lips, I Will drive his words
Down his wide throat upon my rapiers point.
The King is murdered and I Will answer it;
I am dishonored, and I will revenge it.
Bend not your dangerous weapons at my breast:
Think where you are, this Castle is the Moors,
You are environed with a wall of flint.
The Gates are locked, Purculle^es let down
If Eleaz. spend one drop of blood,
Zarack and Baltazar above with Calivers. On those high turret tops my slaves
stand armed,
And shall con found your souls with murdring shot.
Or if you murder me, yet under ground
A villain that for me will dig to hell,
Stands with a burning limstock in his fist,
Who firing gunpowder up in the air,
Shall fling your torn and mangled carcasses.

Qu. Mo. Oh! sheath your weapons, though my son be slain,
Yet save your selves, choose a new Sovereign.

All. Prince Philip is our Sovereign, choose him King.

Eleaz. Prince Philip shall not be my Sovereign,
Philip's a bastard, and Fernando's dead;
Mendoza sweats to wear Spains Diadem,
Philip has sworn confusion to this Realm,
They both are up in arms, wars flames do shine
Like lightningin theair, wherefore my Lords
Look well on Eleazar; value me not by my sunburned
Cheek, but by my birth; nor by
My birth, but by my loss of blood,
Which I have sacrificed in Spains defense.
Then look on Philip, and the Cardinal:
Look on those gaping currs, whose wide throats
Stand stretched wide open like the gates of death,
To swallow you, your country, children, wives.
Philip cries fire and blood, the Cardinal
Cries likewise fire and blood, I Will quench those flames,
The Moor cries blood and fire, and that shall burn
Till Castile like proud Troy to Cinders turn.

Roder. Lay by these Ambages, what seeks the Moor?

Eleaz. A Kingdom, Castiles crown.

Alve. Peace devil for shame.

Qu. Mo. Peace doting Lord for shame, Oh misery!
When Indian slaves thirst after Empery;
Princes and Peers of Spain we are beset,
With horror on each side; you deny him,
Death stands at all our backs, we cannot fly him.
Crown Philip King, The Crown upon his head,
Will prove a fiery Meteor, War and vengeance
And desolation will invade our land,
Besides Prince Philip is a bastard born.
Oh! give me leave to blush at mine own shame;
But I for love to you, love to fair Spain,
Choose rather to rip up a Queens disgrace,
Then by concealing it to set the Crown
Upon a bastards head. Wherefore my Lords
By my consent crown that proud Blackamore,
Since Spains bright glory must so soon grow dim;
Since it must end, let it end all in him.

All. Eleazar shall be King.

Alv. Oh treachery! have you so soon ra^ out Fernando's love;
So soon forgot the duty of true Peers;
So soon, so soon buried a mothers name,
That you will crown him King that slew your King.

Eleaz. Will you hear him or me, who shall be King.

All. Eleazar shall be Castiles Sovereign.

Alv. Do, do; make have to crown him! Lords (...).
Here hell must be when the Devil governs you.

Exit. Eleaz. By heavens great Star, which Indians do adore,
But that I hate to hear the giddy world;
Shame that I waded to a Crown through; blood,
I Would not digest his pills, but since my Lords
You have chosen Eleazar for your King?
Invest me with a general applause.

All. Live Eleazar, Castiles Royal King.

Roder. A villain and a base born fugitive.

Aside. Christo. A bloody tyrant, an (...) slave.

Aside. Eleaz. Thanks to you all, it is not the Spanish Crown
That Eleazar strives for, but Spains peace.
Amongst you I Will divide her Empery;
Christofero shall wear Granado's Crown;
To Roderigo I Will give Arragon:
Naples, Navar and fair Jerusalem,
I Will give to other three, and then our vice Roys,
Shall Shine about our bright Castilian crown,
As stars about the Sun. Cry all, arm, arm;
Prince Philip and the Cardinal do ride
Like Jove in thunder, in a storm we will meet them;
Go levy powers, if any man must fall,
My death shall first begin the funeral.

Exeunt. Act. III.
Scena. V.
Enter Zarack and Baltazar with Calivers. Baltaz. IS thy cock ready, and thy
powder dry.

Zarack. My cock stands pearching, like a cock of the game;
With a red cole for his crest instead of a colme;
And for my powder, it is but touch and take.

Baltaz. I have tickling geer too, anon I Will cry here I have it,
And yonder I see it; But Zarack is it policy for us
To kill these bald-pates.

Zarack. Is It policy for us to save our selves,
If they live, we die. Is It not wisdom then
To send them to heaven, rather then be sent our selves;
Come you black slave, be resolute. This way they come,
Here they will stand, and yonder will I stand.

Baltaz. And in yonder hole I.

Zarack. Our amiable faces cannot be seen, if we keep close:
Therefore hide your cocks head, left his burning cocks-comb betray us.
But soft, which of the two shall be thy white.

Baltaz. That black villain Friar Cole.

Zarack. I shall have a sharp piece of service.
Friar Crab shall be my man.
Farewell and be resolut^.

Baltaz. Zounds Zarack I shall never have the heart to do it.

Zarack. You rogue think who commands, Eleazar.
Who shall rise Baltazar?
Who shall die, a louzy Friar?
Who shall live our good Lord and Master?
The Negro King of Spain.

Baltaz. Cole, thou art but a dead man,
And shall turn to ashes.

Exit. Zarack. Crab, here is that shall make vinegar of thy carcass.

Ezit. Enter Crab and Cole, two Friars, with a rout of Stinkards following
them. Friar Crab. I brother it is best, so now we have drawn them to a head,
We Will begin here in the market place.
Tut so long as we be commanded by the Mother Queen.
We Will say her son is a bastard, and he were ten Philips.

F. Cole. Take you one market form, I Will take another.

F. Crab. No, Gods so; we must both keep one form.

F. Cole. I in oration, but not in station mount, mount?

1 Well my masters, you know him not so well as I; on my word
Friar Crab is a sour fellow:

2 Yet he may utter sweet doctrine by your leave; but what
Think you of Friar Cole?

1 He all fire, and he be kindled once a hot Catholic.

3 And you mark him, he has a zealous nose,
And richly inflamed.

1 Peace you Rogues, now they begin.

Crab. Incipe Frater?

Cole. Non ego (...).

Crab. Nec ego.

Cole. Quare?

Crab. Quia?

Cole. Quaeso,

All. Here Is a ^ueaxy beginning me thinks; silence, silence.

Crab. B^thren, Citizens, and marketfolks of Sivell.

Cole. Well beloved and honored Castilians.

Crab. It is not unknown to you!

Cole. I am sure you are not ignorant.

Crab. How vi^anous and strong?

Cole. How monstrous and huge?

Crab. The faction of Prince Philip is;

Cole. Philip that is a bastard:

Crab. Philip that is a d^ard.

Cole. Philip that ki^'d your King.

Crab. Only to make himself King.

Cole And by Gads ble^ed Lady you are all damned, and you suffer it.

1 Friar Cole says true, he speaks out of the heat of his zeal;
Look how he glows.

2 Well Friar Crab for my money, he has set my teeth an edge
Against this bastard.

1 Oh! his words are like Vergis, to when a man's stomach.

All Silence, silence.

Crab. Now contrariwise.

Cole. Your Noble King the Moor.

Crab. Is a valiant Gentleman.

Cole. A Noble Gentleman.

Crab. An honorable Gentleman.

Cole. A fair black Gentleman.

Crab. A friend to Castilians.

Cole. A Champion for Castilians.

Crab. A man fit to be King.

Cole. If he were not born down by hi^ that would be King,
Who (as I said before) is a bastard, and n^ King.

1 What think you my masters? do you mark his words well.

Crab. Further compare them together.

All. S'blood, there is no comparison between them.

Cole. Nay, but hear us good Country men.

All. Hear Friar Cole, hear Friar Cole.

Cole. Set that bastard and Eleazar together:

1 How? mean you, by the ears.

Crab. No, but compare them.

Cole. Do but compare them.

2 Zounds, we say again comparisons are odious.

1 But say on, say on.

Pieces go of, Friars dye. All. Treason, treason, every man shift for himself.
This is Philips treason. Arm, Arm, Arm.

Exeunt. Act III.
Scena. VI.
Enter Eleazar, Zarack, and Baltazar. Eleazar. ZArack and Baltazar, are they
dispatched?

Zarack. We saw'em sprawl, and turn up the white of the eye.

Elea. So shall they perish, that lay countermines;
To erosse our high designments: by their habi^,
The Cardinal and Philip escaped our nets.
And by your hands they tasted our revenge.
Enter Queen Mother. Here come the Queen, away! under our wings,
You shall stand safe, and brave the proudest Kings.

Exeunt. Qu. M^. Oh! fly my Eleazar, save thy lite.
Else point a guard about thee, the mad people
Tempestuous like the Sea run up and down
Some ca^ing kill the bastard, some the M^;
Some cry, God save King Philip; and some cry,
God save the Moor; some others, he shall die.

Eleaz. Are these your fears, thus blow them into air.
I ru^he amongst the thickest of their crowds,
And with a countenance Majestical,
Like the Imperious Sun dispersed their clouds;
I have persum'd the rackness of their breath,
And by the magic of true eloquence,
Transformed this many headed Cerberus,
This py'd Camelion, this beast multitude,
Whose power consists in number, pride in threats;
Yet melt like^now when Majesty shines forth
This heap of fools, who crowding in huge, swarms,
Stood at our Court gates like a heap ofdung,
Reeking and shouting out contagious breath
of power to poison all the elements;
This Wolf I held by 'th ear^, and made him tame,
And made him tremble at the Moors great name.
No, we must combat with a grimmer foe,
That damned Mendoza over-turns our hopes.
He loves you dearly.

Qu. Mo. By his secret Letters he has entreated me in some disguise to leave
the Court, and fly into his arms.


Eleaz. The world cannot devize a stratagem
Sooner to throw confusion on his pride:
Subscribe to his desires, and in dead night
Steal to his Castle, swear to him his love
Has drawn you thither; undermine his soul,
And learn what villainies are there laid up,
Then for your pleasure walk to take the air:
Near to the Castle I Will in ambush lie,
And seem by force to take you prisoner;
This done, I have a practice plotted here,
Shall rid him of his life, and us of fear:
About it madam, this is all in all;
We cannot stand unless Mendoza fall.

Act. IV.
Scena. I.
Enter Emanuel King of Portugal, Prince Philip, Mendoza, Alvaro, with Drums and
Soldiers marching. King Port. POor Spain, how is the body of thy peace
Mangled and torn by an ambitious Moor!
How is thy Prince and Counselors abused,
And trodden under the base foot of scorn:
Wronged Lords, Emanuel of Portugal partakes
A falling share in all your miseries:
And though the tardy-hand of slow delay
Withheld us from preventing your mishaps;
Yet shall revenge dart black confusion
Into the bosom of that damned fiend.

Phil. But is it possible our Mother Queen
Should countenance his ambition.

Alv. Her advice is as a Steers-man to direct his course.
Besides, as we by circumstance have learnt,
She means to marry him.

Phil. Then here upon my knees
I pluck allegiance from her; all that love
Which by innative duty I did owe her,
Shall henceforth be converted into hate.
This will confirm the worlds opinion
That I am base born, and the damned Moor
Had interest in my birth, this wrong alone
Gives new fire to the cinders of my rage:
I may be well transformed from what I am,
When a black devil is husband to my dam.

K. Port. Prince, let thy rage give way to patience,
And ^^t a velvet brow upon the face
Of wrinkled anger, our keen swords,
Must right these wrongs, and not light airy words.

Phil. Yet words may make the edge of rage more sharp,
And whet a blunted courage with revenge.

Alv. Here Is none wants whetting, for our keen resolves
Are steeled unto the back with double wrongs;
Wrongs that would make a handlesse man take arms;
Wrongs that would makea coward resolute.

Card. Why then join all our several wrongs in one,
And from these wrongs assume a firm resolv,
To send this devil to damnation.

Drums afar off. Phil. I hear the sound of his approaching march,
Stand fair; Saint Jaques for the right of Spain.

To them, Enter the Moor, Roderigo, Christofero, with drums, colors, and
soldiers, marching bravely. Eleaz. Bastard of Spain?

Phil. Thou true stamped son of hell,
Thy pedigree is written in thy face.

Alarm, and a Battle, the Moor prevails: All Exeunt. Act. IV.
Scena. II.
Enter Philip and Cardinal. Phil. MOve forward, with your main battalion,
Or else all is lost.

Card. I will not move a foot.

P. S'^eart, will you lose the day.

Card. You lose your wits,
You're mad, it is no policy.

Phil. You lie.

Card. Lie?

Phil. Lie, a pox upon it Cardinal com on,
Second the desperate vanguard which is mine,
And where I Will dye or win, follow my sword
The bloody way I lead it, or by heaven
I Will play the Devil, and mar all, we will turn our backs
Upon thee Moors, and set on thee; I thee,
Thee Cardinal, s'heart thee.

Cardi. Your desperate arm
H^h almost thrust quite through the heart of hope;
Our fortunes lie a bleeding by your rash and violent
On set.

Phil. Oh! oh! s'life, s'foot, will you fight?

Card. We will not hazard all upon one cast.

Phil. You will not?

Card. No.

Phil. Coward.

Card. By deeds I Will try,
Whether your venomous tongue says true, fare well.
Courage shines both in this, and policy.

Exit. Phil. To save thy skin whole, that is thy policy;
You whoreson fat-chopt guts. I Will melt away
That Iarded body by the heat of fight,
Which I Will compel thee to, or else by flying;
To work which I Will give way to the proud foe,
Whilst I stand laughing to behold thee run.
Cardinal I Will do it, I Will do it, a Moor, a Moor,
Philip cries a Moor, holla! ha! whoo!

Enter King of Port. King of Port. Prince, Philip, Philip,

Phil. Here, plague where is the Moor.

K. Port. The Moor's a Devil, never did horrid feind
Compelled by some Magicians mighty charm,
Break through the prisons of the solid earth,
With more strange horror, then this Prince of hell,
This damned Negro Lyon-like does rush,
Through all, and ^pite of all knit opposition.

Phil. Puh! puh! where? Where? I Will meet him, where? you mad me.
It Is not his arm,
That acts such wonders, but our cowardice,
This Cardinal, oh! this Cardinal is a slave.

Enter Captain. Captain. Sound a retreat, or else the day is lost;

Phi. ^le b^at that dog to death, that sounds; retr^at.

K. Port. Philip.

Phil. I Will tear his heart out, that dares name but Sound.

K. Port. Sound a retreat.

Phil. Who Is that? you tempt my sword Sir.
Continue this alarm, fight pell mell?
Fight, kill, be damned? this fat-back Coward Cardinal,
Lies heavy on my shoulders; this, I this
Shall fling him off: Sound a retreat! Zounds, you mad me.
Ambition plumes the Moor, whilst black despair
Offering to tear from him the Diadem
Which he (...), make, him to cry at all,
And to act deeds beyond ^stonishment;
But Philip is the night that darks his glories,
This swords yet reeking with his Negro's blood,
Being grasp't by equity, and this strong arm
Shall th^ugh and through.

A^ A^ay then.

Phil. From before me;
Stay, st^d, stand fast, (...)? A Moor, a M^r.

Act. IV.
Scena. III.
To them enter Eleazar, Zarack, Baltazar, Roderigo, Christofero, and others,
they fight, Moors are all beat in, Exeunt omnes, manet Eleazar weary; stays, a
Moor lies slain. Eleaz. OH for more work, more souls to post to hell;
That I might pile up Charons boat so full,
Until it topple over, Oh 'twould be sport
To see them sprawl through the black slimy lake.
Ha, ha; there is one going thither, sirrah, you,
You slave, who killed thee? how he grins! this breast,
Had it been tempered, and made proof like mine,
It never would have been a mark for fools
To hit afar off with their dastard bullets.
But thou did well, thou knew'st I was t^y Lord;
And out of love and duty to me here,
Where I fell weary, thou laidst down thy self
To bear me up, thus: God a-mercy slave.
A King for this shall give thee a rich grave.

As he sits down, enter Philip with a broken sword. Phil. I Will wear thee to the
pommel, but I Will find
The subject of mine honor and revenge.
Moor it is for thee I seek; Come now, now take me
At good advantage: speak, where art thou?

Eleaz. Here.

Phil. Fate and revenge I thank you rise.

Elea. Leave and live.

Phil. Villain, it is Philippe that bids rise.

Eleaz. It had been good for thee to have hid thy name.
Forth discovery, like to a dangerous charm,
Hurts him that finds it, wherefore does those blood hounds
Thy rage and valor chase me?

Phil. Why to kill thee.

Eleaz. With that! what a blunt axe? think thou I Will let
Thy fur^ take a full blow at this head,
Having these arms, be wise; go change thy weapon.

Phil. Oh, Sir!

Eleaz. I Will stay thy coming.

Phil. Thou't be damned first.

Eleaz By all our Indian gods.

Phil. Puh, never swear;
Thou know it is for a kingdom which we fight;
And for that who will not venture to hellgates.
Come Moor, I am armed with more then complete steel,
The justice of my quarrel: when I look
Upon my Fathers wrongs, my brothers wounds,
My mothers infamy, Spains misery,
And lay my finger her, Oh! it is too dull,
To let out blood enough to quench them all.
But when I see your face, and know what fears.
Hang on thy troubled soul, like leaden weights,
To make it sink; I know this fingers touch
Has strenght to throw thee down, I know this iron
Is sharp and long enough to reach that head^
Fly not di^^, if thou do?

Eleaz How fly; Oh bast!

Phil Come then

Eleaz. Stay Philip, whosoever begat thee.

Phil. Why slave, a King begat me.

Eleaz. May be so.
But I Will be sworn thy mother was a Queen;
For her sake will I kill thee nobly:
Fling me thy ^word, there is mine, I scorn to strike
A man disarmed.

Phil. For this dishonoring me
^e give thee one stab more.

Eleaz. I Will run away,
Unle^e thou change that weapon, o^ take mine.

Phil. Neither.

Eleaz. Farewell.

Phil. ^'heart, stay, and if you dare,
Do as I do, oppose thy naked breast
Against this poniard; see, here is this for thine.

Eleaz. I am for thee Philip.

Phil. Come, nay take more ground,
That with a full career thou mai^ strik^ home.

Eleaz. Thou't run away then.

Phil. Hah!

Eleaz. Thou't run away then.

Phil. Faith, I will, but first on this I Will bear
Thy panting heart, thy head upon thy spear.

Eleaz. Come.

Enter on both sides, Cardinal, and King of Portugal, on the one side, and
Moors on the other side. Card. Side upon the Moors.

Moor. Side upon the Cardinal.

Phil. Hold Cardinal, strike not any of our side,

Eleaz. Hold Moors, strike not any of our side,

Phil. we two will close this battail^

Eleaz. Come, agreed.
Stand armies and give aim, whilst we two bleed.

Card. With poniards; it is too desperate, dear Philip.

Phil. Away, have at the Moor, s'heart let me come?

K. Port. Be armed with manly weapons, it is for slaves,
To dig their own and such unworthy graves.

Eleaz. I am for thee any way, thus, or see thus,
Here try the vigor of thy finewy arm,
The day is ours already, brainless heads
And bleeding bodies like a crown do stand,
About the temples of our victory.
Yet Spaniards if you dare we will fight it out,
Thus man to man alone, I Will first begin,
And conquer, or in blood wadeup toth' chin.

Phil. Let not a weapon sti^, but his and mine.

Eleaz. Nor on this side, conquest in blood shall shine.

Alarm. They fight a Combat, The Moor is struck down, which his side seeing,
step all in and rescue him; The rest join and drive in the Moors. Alarm
continuing, Spaniards and Moors with drums and colors fly over the stage,
persued by Philip, Cardinal, King Port. And others. Enter Zarack Christofero,
and Eleazar at several doors. Christo. Where is my Lord?

Zarack. Where is our Sovereign?

Eleaz. What news brings Zarack and Christofero?

Zarack. Oh fly my Lord! fly; for the day is lost.

Eleaz. There are three hundred and odd days in a year,
And cannot we lose one of them, com fight.

Christo. The Lords have left us, and the soldiers faint,
You are round beset with proud fierce enemies;
D^h cannot be prevented but by flight?

Eleaz. He shall Christofer^ I have yet left,
(...), atagem that in de^pite of fate,
She the wh^el of warabout once more,
The Mother Queen ha^h all this while (...) sadly,
Within our tent, exp cting to whose bosom,
White winged peace and victory will fly,
Her have I used as a fit property,
To stop this dangerous current; her have I sent,
Armed with loves magic to inchant the Cardinal;
And bind revenge down with (...) charms.
By this time does she hang about his neck,
And by the witchcraft of a cunning kiss;
Has she di^arm'd him, hark, they sound
Retreat. She has prevailed, a woman's tongue and eye;
Are weapons stronger then Artillery.

Exeunt. Act. IV
Scena. IV.
Enter Cardinal, Queen Mother. Soldiers, drums, and colors. Queen Mo. BY all
those sighs which thou (like passionate tunes)
Have often to my dull ears offered,
By all thy hopes to enjoy my roial Bed;
By all those mourning lines which thou have sent,
Weeping in black to tell thy languishment:
By loves best richest ^rea^ure, which I swear,
I will bestow, and which none else shall wear,
As the most pris'd Jewel, but thy self,
By that bright fire which flaming through thine eyes;
From thy love scorched bosom does arise.
I do conjure thee, let no churlish sound,
With wars le^d horror mydesires confound;
Dear, dear Mendoza, thus I do entreat,
That still thou would con inue this retreat;
I Will hang upon thee till I hear thee say,
Woman prevail; or chiding, cri'st away.

Card Is there no trick in this, forged by the M^r?

Qu. M. I would the Moors damnation were the ransom,
Of all that innocent blood, that has been shed
In this black day; I care not for the Moor,
Love to my kingdom^ peace makes me put on
This habit of a suppliant; shall I speed?

Card. You shall, were i^ to have my bosom bleed:
I have no power to spare the Negroes head,
When I behold the wounds which his black hand
Has given mine honor: but when I look on you,
I have no power to hate him, since your breath
Disolves my frozen heart, being spent for him;
In you my life must drown it self or swim,
You have prevailed: Drum swiftly hence? cal^ back
Our fierce pursuing troops, that run to catch
The laurel wreath of conquest: Let it stand
A while untouched by any soldiers hand.
Exit drum. Away? stay you and guard us, where is the Moor?
I Will Iose what I have got, a victors prize,
Yielding my self a prisoner to your eyes.

Qu. Mo. Mine eyes shall quickly grant you liberty,
The Moor stays my return, I Will put on wings,
And fetch him, to make peace belongs to Kings.

As she goes out, Enter Eleazar, Zarack, Baltazar, and soldiers well armed, at
sight of each other all draw. Card. Soldiers call back the drum, we are
betrayed.

Eleaz. Moors stand upon your guard, avoid, look back.

Qu. Mo. What means this jealousy? Mendoza, Moor,
Lay by your weapons, and embrace the fight,
Of this, and this; begets suspicion,
Eleazar by my birth, he coms in peace,
Mendoza by mine honor so coms he.

Car. Discharge these soldiers then.

Eleaz. And these.

Soldiers stand a loof. Cardinal. Away.

Eleazar. Go.

Q. M. Soul, rejoice to see this glorious day.

She joins them together, they i^brace. Car. Your virtues work this wonder: I
have met,
At her most dear command, what is your desires?

Eleaz. Peace and your honored arms: how loathingly
I sounded the alarums, witness heaven
'Twas not to strike your breast, bu^ to let out,
The rank blood of ambition: That Philip
Kakes you his ladder, and being climbed so high
As he may reach a diadem, there you lie.
He Is base begotten, that is his mothers sin.

Q Mo. God pardon it.

Eleaz. I, amen, but he is a bastard,
And rather then I Will kneel to him, I Will saw
My legs off by the thighs, because I Will stand
In spite of reverence: he is a bastard, he is,
And to beat down his usurpation,
I have th^n about this thunder, but Mendoza,
The people hate him for his birth,
He only leans on you, you are his pillar;
You (...), he walks on crutches, or else falls;
Then shrink from under him, are not they
Fools, that bearing others up themselves seem low,
Because they above sit high, why you do so.

Card. It Is true.

Qu. Mo Behold this error with fixed eyes.

Card. It Is true, well.

Eleaz. Oh! have you found it, have you smelt
The train of powder that must blow you up,
Up into air, what air? why this, a breath,
Look you, in this time may a King meet death;
An eye to it, check it, check it.

Card. How?

Eleaz. How! thus:
Steal from the heat of that incestuousblood,
Where ravished honor, and Philippo lies;
Leave him, divide this huge and monstrous body
Of armed Spaniards into limbs thus big;
Part man from man, send every soldier home,
I Will do the like; Peace with an Olive branch
Shall fly with Dove-like wings about all Spain:
The crown which I as a good husband keep,
I will lay down upon the empty chair;
Marry you the Queen and fill it, for my part
These knees are yours, Sir.

Card. Is this sound?

Eleaz. From my heart.

Card. If you prove false.

Eleaz. If I do, let fire fall --

Card. Amen.

Eleaz. Upon thy head, and so it shall.

Card. All of my self is yours; soldiers be gone.

Eleaz. And that way you.

Card. The rest I will divide:
The Lords shall be convented.

Eleaz. Good.

Card. Let Us meet.

Qu Mo. Where.

Eleaz. Here anon, this is thy windingsheet.

Exit Cardinal. The Moor walks up and down musing. Qu. Mo. What shape will this
prodigious womb bring forth,
Which groans with such strange labor.

Eleaz Excellent.

Qu. Mo. Why, Eleazar, art thou wrapped with joys,
Or does thy sinking policy make to shore.

Eleaz. Ha!

Qu. Mo. Eleazar, mad man! hear'st thou Moor.

Eleaz. Well, so; you turn my brains, you mar the face
Of my attempts i'^h making: for this chaos,
This lump of projects, ere it be lick't over,
It Is like a Bears conception; stratagems
Being but begot, and not got out, are like
Charged Cannons not discharged, they do no ^arm,
Nor good, true policy breeding in the brain
Is like a bar of Iron, whose ribs being broken,
And softened in the fire, you then may forgeit
Into a sword to kill, or to a helmet, to defend life:
It Is therefore wit to try
All fashions, ere you apparel villainy;
But, but I ha suited him, fit, fit, Oh fit!

Qu. Mo. How? prithee how?

Eleaz. Why thus; yet no, let us hence,
My heart is nearest of my counsel, yet,
I scarce dare trust my heart with it, what I do,
It shall look old, the hour wherein it is born,
Wonders twice seen are garments overworn.

Exeunt. Act. IV.
Scena. V.
Enter Cardinal at one door, Philippo half armed, and two soldiers following
him with the rest of the armor: the Cardinal seeing him, turns back again.
Phil. SIrrah, you Cardinal, coward, runaway:
So ho ho, what Cardinal.

Card. I am not for your lure.

Exit. Phil. For that then, Oh! that it had nailed thy heart
Up to the pommel to the earth; come, arm me,
Ha! ^foot, when all our swords were royally guilt with blood,
When with red sweat that trickled from our wounds,
We had dearly earned a victory! when hell
Had from their hinges heaved off her iron gates
To bid the damned Moor and the devils enter;
Then ^o lose all, then to sound base retreat;
Why soldiers, hah?

1. Sold. I am glad of it my Lord.

Phil. Hah! glad; art glad I am dish onored?
That thou and he dishonored.

1. Sold. Why? my Lord;
I am glad, that you so cleanly did come off.

Phil. Thou have a lean face, and a carrion heart:
A plague on him and thee too: then, s'heart then,
To crack the very hearts-strings of our Army,
To quarter itin pieces, I could tear my hair,
And in curfing spend my soul,
Cardinal; what Judas! come, we will fight,
Till there be left but one, if I be he,
I Will die a glorious death.

1. Sold. So will I, I hope in my bed.

2. Sold. Till there be but one left, my Lord, why that is now; for all our
fellows are crawled home; some with one leg, some with never an arm, some with
their brains beaten out, and glad they escaped so.


Phil. But my dear Countrymen, you will stick to me.


1. Sold. Stick! I my Lord, stick like Bandogs, till we be pulled off.


Phil. That Is nobly said, I Will lead you but to death,
Where I Will have greatest share, we shall win same,
For life and that does crown a soldiers name.

1. Sold. How! to death my Lord? not I by ga^led: I have a poor wife and
children at home, and if I die they beg; and do you think I Will see her go up
and down the wide universal world.


Phil. For every drop of blood which thou shall lose,
Coward I Will give thy wife a wedge of gold.

2. Sold. Hang him meacock, my Lord, arm your self, I Will fight for you, till I
have not an eye to see the fire in my touchhole.


Phil. Be thou a King's companion, thou and I
Will dare the Cardinal, and the Moor to fight,
In single combat, shall we? hah!

2. Sold Agreed.

Phil. We Will beat 'em to hell gate, shall we? hah!


2. Sold. Hell gate's somewhat too hot, somewhat too hot; the Porter's a knave:
I Would be loath to be damned for my conscience; I Will knock any bodies costard, so
I knock not there, my Lord; hell gates!


Phil. A pox upon such slaves.

1. Sold. Hang him, a peasant, my Lord, you see I am but a scrag, my Lord; my
legs are not of the biggest, nor the least, nor the best that e're were stood
upon, nor the worst, but they are of God's making; And for your sake, if ever
we put our enemies to flight again, by Gad's lid if I run not after them like a
Tiger, hoffe me.


Phil. But will thou stand to it e're they fly? ha! will thou?

1 Soul. Will I quoth a? by this hand, and the honor of a soldier.

Phil. And by a soldiers honor I will load thee
Whith Spanish pistolets: to have this head,
Thy face, and all thy body, stuck with scars,
Why it is a sight more glorious, then to see
A Lady hung with Diamonds: If thou lose
A hand, I Will send this after, if an arm,
I Will lend thee one of mine, com then lets fight.
A mangled Lame true soldier is a jem,
Worth Cesars Empire, though fools spurn at them.

1 Soul. Yet my Lord I ha seen lame soldiers, not worth the crutches they
leant upon, hands and arms quotha? Zounds not I, I Will double my files, or stand
centry, or so; But I Will be hanged and quartred, before I Will have my members cut
off.


2 Sold. And I too, hold thee there.

Beats 'em both in. Phil. Hold you both there, away you rogues, you dirt,
Thus do I tread upon you, out, begone?
One valiant is an host, fight then alone.

Enter Cardinal, Alvero, Christofero, and Soldiers. Car. Prince Philip.

Phil. For the Crown of Spain, come all.

Car. We come in love and peace.

Phil. But come in war:
Bring ^aked swords, not laurel boughs, in peace?
Plague on your rank peace, will you fight and cry
Down with the Moor, and then I Am yours: I Will dye,
I have a heart, two arms, a soul, a head,
I Will lay that down, I Will venture all; s'foot, all
Come tread upon me, so that Moor may fall.

Car. By heaven that Moor shall fall.

Phil. Thy hand, and thine,
Flings down his weapons. Give me but have your hearts, you have all mine,
By heaven, shall he fall?

Car. Yes, upon thee
Like to the ruins of a tower, to grind
Thy body into du^, traitor, and bastard,
I do arrest thee of High treason.

Phil. Hah!
Traitor? and bastard? and by thee? my weapons?

Car. Lay hands upon him.

Phil. I, you're best do so.

Car. Alvero there is the warrant to your hands,
The prisoner is committed, Lords lets part,
Look to him on your life

Exeunt Cardinal etc. Manen^, Philip and Alvero. Phil. Heart, heart, heart, heart,
Tears the warrant. The Devil, and his dam, the Moor, and my Mother,
Their warrant? I will not obey, Old gray beard,
Thou shall not be my Jayler, there is no prison,
No dungeon deep enough, no grates so strong,
That can keep in a man so mad with wrong.
What do thou weep?

Alve. I would fain shed a tear,
But from mine eyes so many ^howrs are gone,
Grief drinks my tears so fast, that here is not one,
You must to prison.

Phil. Do thou speak to me?

Alve. You must to prison.

Phil. And from thence to death;
I thought I should have had a tomb hung round,
With to^red colors, broken spears, I thought
My body should have fallen down, full of wounds.
But one can kill an Emperor, fool then why
Would thou have many? curse, be mad, and dye,

Exeunt. The end of the fourth Act.
Act. V.
Scena I.
Enter Ronerigo, and Christofero; two bareheaded before them, Alvero, Cardinal
alone, Zarack, and Baltazar bearing the Crown on a cushion, Eleazar next, Queen
Mother after him other Lords after her, Alvero sad, meets them. Card. A Lvero
it is the pleasure of the King,
Of the Queen Mother, and these honored States,
To ease you of Philip, there is a warrant
Sent to remove him to a stronger guard.

Alve. I thank you, you shall rid me of much care.

Eleaz. Sit down, and take your place!

Alve. If I might have the place I like best, it should be my grave.

Sits down. The Moors stand aside with the Crown, Eleazar rising, takes it!
Eleaz. Stand in voice, reach, away!

Both Moors. We are gone.

Exeunt. Eleaz. ^rinces of Spain if in this royal Court,
There sit a man, that having laid his hold,
So fast on such a jewel, and dare wear it,
In the contempt of envy as I dare,
Yet uncompeli'd (as freely as poor pilgrims,
Bestow their prayers) would give such wealth away;
Let such a man step forth; what do none rise?
No, no, for Kings indeed are deities.
And who'd not (as the sun) in brightness shine?
To be the greatest, is to be divine:
Who among millions would not be the might?
To sit in God-like state, to have all eyes,
D^zled with admiration, and all tongues
Showing loud Prayers, to rob every heart
Of love, to have thest ength of every arm.
A Sovereigns name, why it is a Sovereign charm.
This glory round about me has thrown beams,
I have stood upon the top of fortunes wheel,
And backward turned the Iron screw of fate,
The destinies have spun a silken thread
About my lef^, ^et Noble Spaniards see?
Hoc tantum ta^ti, thus I cast aside
The shape of Majesty and on my knee,
Kneels: the Cardinal fetches the Crown and sets it on the chair. To this
Imperial State lowly resign,
This usurpation, wiping off your tears,
Which stuck so hard upon me, let a hand
A right, and royal hand take up this wreath,
And guard it, right is of it self most strong,
No kingdom got by cunning can stand long.

Car. Proceed to new election of a King.

All. Agreed.

Eleaz. Stay Peers of Spain, if young Philippo,
Be Philips son, then is he Philips heir,
Then must his Royal name be set in gold,
Philip is then the Diamond to that ring;
But if he be a bastard, here is his seat,
For baseness has no gall, till it grow great.
First therefore let him blood, if he must bleed,
Yet in what vein you strike him, best take heed:
The Portugall's his friend, you saw he came
At holding up a finger, armed; this peace
Rid hence his dangerous friendship, he is at home,
But when he hears, that Philip is tied up,
Yet hears not why, he will catch occasions lock,
And on that narrow bridge make shift to lead
A scrambling army through the heart of Spain,
Look to it being in, he will hardly out again.
Therefore first prove, and then proclaim him bastard.

Alve. How shall we prove it?

Eleaz. He that put him out to making,
I am sure can tell, if not,
Then she that shaped him can, here is the Queen Mother
Being pricked in conscience, and preferring Spain,
Before her own respect, will name the man,
If he be noble and a Spaniard born, he will hide,
The apparent scarrs of their infamies
With the white hand of marriage; that and time,
Will eat the blemish off, say? shall it?

All. No.

Card. Spaniard or Moor, the saucy slave shall dye.

Hort. Death is too easy for such villainy.

Eleaz. Spaniard or Moor, the saucy slave shall dye.
I would he might, I know my self am clear
As is the new born Infant. Madam stand forth,
Behold to speak, shame in the grave wants sense:
Heaven with sins greatest (...) can dispense.

Q. Mo. Would I were covered with the vail of night,
You might not see red shame sit on my cheecke;
But being Spains common safety stands for truth,
Hiding my weeping eyes, I blush, and say;
Philippo's father sits here.

Roder. Here! name him?

Q. Mo. The Lord Mendoza did beget that son,
Oh! let not this dishonor further run?

Alve, What Cardinal Mendoza?

Qu. Mo. Yes, yes, even h^

Eleaz Spaniard or Moor, the saucy slave shall die.

Car. I Philips father? --

Coms down, the rest talk. Q. M. Nay! deny me not?
Now may a kingdom and my love be got.

Car. Those eyes and tongue bewitch me, shame lie here;
That love has sweetest taste that is bought dear.

Christo. What answers Lord Mendoza to the Queen?

Car. I confess guilty, Philip is my son,
Her Majesty has named the time and place.

Alv. To you, but not to us, go forward Mad^m.

Q. Mo. Within the circle of twice ten years since,
Your (...) King made war in Barbary,
W^n Tunis, conquered Fesse, and hand to hand,
Slew great Abdela, King of Fesse, and father
To that Barbarian Prince.

Eleaz. I was but young, but now methinks
I see m^ fathers woun^s, poor Barbaria!
No m^re.

Q. Mo. In absence of my Lord mourning his want,
To me alone, being in my private walk,
I think at Salamanca; I, 'twas there;
Enters Mendoza under show of shrift,
Threatens my death if I denied his lust,
In fine by f^rce he won me to his will,
I wept, and c^d for help, but all in vain;
Mendoza there abused the bed of Spain.

E'eaz Spaniard or Moor, that saucy slave (...) die.

Ave. Why did not you complain of this vile act?

Q Mo. Alas! I was alone, young, full of fear;
Bashful, and doubtful of my own defame;
Knowing King Philip rash and jealous,
I hid his sins, thinking to hide my shame.

Horten. What says the Cardinal?

Car. Such a time there was;
It Is past, I Will make amends with marriage,
And satis^e with Trentalls, dirges, prayers,
The offended spirit of the wronged King.

Queen and they talk. Eleaz. Spaniard or Moor, that saucy slave shall die;
Oh! 'twould seem best, it should be thus Mendoza:
She to accuse, I urge, and both conclude,
Your marriage like a comic interlude.
Lords will you hear this hateful sin confessed?
And not impose upon the ravisher death,
The due punishment, oh! it must be so.

Alve. What does the Queen desire?

Qu. Mo. Justice, revenge,
On vile Mendoza for my ravishment:
I kiss the cold earth with my humbl'd knees,
From whence I will not rise, till some just hand,
Cast to the ground the Traitor Cardinal.

All. Stand forth Mendoza.

Eleaz. Swells your heart so high?
Down Lecher; if you will not stand, then lie.

Car. You have bret^ai'd me, by my too much trust,
I never did this deed of Rape and Lust.

Roder. Your tongue confessed it.

Car. True, I was enticed.

Eleaz. Enticed? do you believe that?

Qu. Mo. Justice Lords! sentence the Cardinal for
His hateful sin.

Alve. We will assemble all the States of Spain,
And as they Judge, so Justice shall be done.

Eleaz. A guard! to prison with the Cardinal.

Car. Damned slave my tongue shall go at liberty
Enter Zarack, Baltazar and others. To curse thee, ban that strumpet; Dogs
keep off.

Eleaz. Hist, hist, on, on.

Qu. Mo. I cannot brook his sight.

Alv. You must to prison, and be patient.

Card. Weep'st thou Alvero? all struck dumb? my fears,
Are that those drops will change to bloody tears.
This woman, and this Serpent.

Qu. Mo. Drag him hence.

Car. Who dares lay hands upon me, Lords of Spain
Let your swords bail me, this false Queen did lie.

Eleaz. Spaniard or Moor, the saucy slave shall die.

Card. I Will fight with thee, damned hellhound for my life.

Eleaz. Spaniard or Moor, the saucy slave shall die.

Card. I Will prove upon thy head.

Eleaz. The slave shall die.

Card. Lords stop this villains throat.

Eleaz. Shall die, shall die.

Card. Hear me but speak.

Eleaz. Away.

Alve. Words are ill spent,
Where wrong sits Judge, you are armed if innocent.

Card. Well, then I must to prison: Moor, no more:
Heavens thou art just, Prince Philip I betrayed,
And now my self fall: Guile with guile is paid.

Exit. Qu. Mo. Philip being proved a bastard; who shall sit
Upon this empty throne?

Eleaz. Strumpet, not you.

Qu. Mo. Strumpet! and I not sit there! who then?

Eleaz. Down;
Back, if she touch it she will bewitch the chair;
This throne belongs to Isabel the fair,
Bring forth the Princes dressed in royal robes,
The true affecter of Alvero's son,
Virtuous Hortenzo. Lords, behold your Queen.

Act. V.
Scena. II.
Enter Isabella led in, in royal robes. Hortenzo. Qu. Mo. THou villain! what
intendst thou, savage slave?

Eleaz. To advance virtue thus, and thus to tread
On lust, on murder, on adulteries head.
Look Lords upon your Sovereign Isabel,
Though all may doubt the fruits of such a Womb,
Is she not like King Philip? let her rule.

Qu. Mo. She rule?

Eleaz. She rule? I she.

Qu. Mo. A child to sway an empire? I am her Protectress;
I Will pour black curses on thy damned head,
If thou wrongst me. Lords, Lords!

Eleaz. Princes of Spain,
Be deaf, be blind, hear not, behold her not,
She killed my virtuous wife.

Qu. Mo. He killed your King.

Eleaz. 'Twas in my just wrath.

Qu. Mo. 'Twas to get his Crown.

Eleaz. His Crown! why here it is: thou slewst m^ Maria,
To have access to my unstained bed.

Qu. Mo. Oh heaven!

Eleaz. It Is true, how often have I stopped
Thy unchaste songs from passing through mine ears?
How often, when thy luxurious arms have twined
About my jetty neck, have I cried out
Away, those scalding veins burn me it is true.

Qu. Mo. Devil, it is a lie.

Eleaz. Thou slewst my sweet Maria;
Alvero 'twas thy daughter, 'twas: Hortenzo,
She was thy sister; Justice Isabella!
This Serpent poisoned thy dear fathers bed,
Setting large horns on his Imperial head.

Qu. Mo. Hear me.

Eleaz. Hah! why?

Alv. Madam you shall be heard,
Before the Courts, before the Courts of Spain

Eleaz. A guard, a guard.

Enter two Moors, and others. Qu. Mo. A guard; for what? for whom?

Hort. To wait on you,
So many great sins must not wait with few.

Qu. Mo. Keep me in prison! dare you Lords?

Alv. Oh no!
Were your cause strong, we would not arm you so;
But honor fainting needs many hands,
Kingdoms stand safe, when mischief lies in bands:
You must to prison.

Exeunt. Qu. Mo. Must I? must I, slave!
I Will dam thee, ere thou triumph'st over my grave.

Exit with a guard. Act. V.
Scena. III.
Manet Eleazar. Eleaz. DO, do! my jocund spleen;
It does, it will, it shall, I have at one throw,
Rifled away the Diadem of Spain;
It Is gone, and there is no more to set but this
At all, then at this last cast I Will sweep up
My former petty losses, or lose all.
Like to a desperate Gamester; hah! how? fast?

Enter Zarack. Zarack. Except their bodies turn to airy spirits,
And fly through windows, they are fast my Lord:
If they can eat through locks and bars of Iron,
They may escape, if not? then not.

Eleaz. Ho! Zarack!
Wit is a thief, there is pick-lock policy,
To whom all doors fly open: therefore go,
In our name charge the Keeper to resign
His office; and if he have tricks of cruelty,
Let him bequeath'em at his death, for kill him;
Turn all thy body into eyes,
And watch them, let those eyes like fiery comets
Sparkle ou^ nothing but the death of Kings.
And. ah! now thus thou know I did invent,
A tortu^ing Iron chain.

Zarack. Oh! for necks my Lord.

Eleaz. I that, that, that, away and yoke them, stay
Enter Baltazar. Here Is Balt. go both, teach them to preach,
Through an Iron P^lory: I Will spread a ^et,
To catch Alvero, oh! he is is old and wise,
They are onfit to live, that have sharp eyes, Hortenzo, Roderigo, to'^, to it
all:
They have supple knees sleack'd brows, but hearts of gall:
The bitterness shallbe washed off withblood,
Tyrants swim safest in a crimson flood.

B^lt I com to tell your grace that Isabella,
Is with Hortenzo arm in arm at hand,
Zarack and I may kill them, now with ease,
Is It done. and then it is done.

Zarack. Murder thou the man,
And I Will stab her.

Eleaz. No, I Will speed her my self,
Arm in arm, so, so, look upon this Ring,
Who ever brings this token to your hands
Regard not for what purpose, seiz on them,
And chain them to the rest, they com, away,
Murder be proud, and Tragedy laugh on,
I Will seek a stage for thee to jett upon.

Enter Isabella, Hortenzo, seeing the Moor turn back. Eleaz. My Lord! my Lord
Hortenzo.

H^rtenzo. Hah! is it you,
Trust me I saw you not.

Eleaz. What makes your grace so sad?

Hor. She g^ievs for the imprisoned Queen her Mother,
And for Philip, in the sandy heap,
That wait upon an hour, there are not found
So many little bodies as those sighs
And tears, which she hathevery Minutespent,
Since her loved Brother felt Imprisonment.

Eleaz. Pity, great pity, would it lay in me,
To give him liberty.

Isabel. It does.

Eleaz. In me?
Free him, your Mother Queen, and Cardinal too.
In me? alas! not me, no, no, in you;
Yet for I Will have my conscience, white and pure,
Here Madam take this Ring, and if my name
Can break down Castle walls, and open Gates,
Take it, and do it, fetch them all forth: and yet,
It Is unfit you should go.

Hor. That happy office I Will execute
My self.

Eleaz. Will you? would I,
Stood gracious in their sight: well, go,
Do what you will Hortenzo, if this charm
Unbinds them, here it is; Lady, you and I
Aloof will follow him, and when we meet,
Speak for me, for I Will kiss Philippo's feet.

Hort. I shall be proud to see all reconciled.

Exit. Eleaz. Alas! my Lord, why true, go, go.

Isabel. Make have dear love.

Eleaz. Hortenzo is a man
Composed of sweet proportion, has a foot,
A leg, a hand, a face, an eye, a wit,
The best Hortenzo in the Spanish Court.
Oh! he is the Nonpareil.

Isabel. Your tongue had wont,
To be more sparing in Hortenzo's praise.

Eleaz. I, I may cu^e his praises, rather ban
Mine own nativity, why did this color,
Dart in my flesh so far? oh! would my face
Were of Hortenzo's fashion, else would your
Were as black as mine is.

Isabel. Mine like yours, why?

Eleaz. Hark!
I love you, yes faith, I said this, I love you
I do, leave him.

Isabel. Damnation vanish from me.

Eleaz Coy? were you as hard as flint Oh! you should yield
Like softened wax, were you as pure as fire,
I Will touch you, yes, I Will taint you, see yo^ this,
I Will bring you to this lure.

Isabel. If I want hands
To kill my self, before thou do it; do.

Eleaz. I Will cut away your hands: well my desire
Is raging as the Sea, and mad as fire,
Will you?

Isabel. Torment me not good Devil.

Eleazar. Will you?

Isabel. I Will tear mine eyes out if they temp^ thy lust;

Eleaz. Do.

Isabel. Touch me not, these knives.

Eleaz. I, I, kill your self,
Because I jest with you: I wrong Hortenzo?
Settle your thoughts, 'twas but a trick to try,
That which few women have, true constancy.

Isabel. If then my speeches taste of gall.

Eleaz. Nay faith,
You are not bitter, no, you should have railed,
Have spit upon me, spurned me, you are not bitter;
Why do you think that I Would nurse a though,
To hurt your honor? If that thought had brains,
I Would beat them out, but come, by this, H^rtenzo
Is fast.

Isabel. Hah! fast?

Eleaz. I fast in Philip's arms.
Wrestling together for the price of love;
By this, they are on the way, I Will be your guard,
Come follow me, I Will lead you in the van,
Where thou shall see four chins upon one chain.

Exeunt. Act. V.
Scena IV.
Enter Hortenzo, Queen Mother, Cardinal, and Philip chaind' by the necks,
Zarack, and Baltazar busy about fastening Hortenzo. Hort. YOu d^mned Ministers
of villainy,
Sworn to damnation by the book of hell;
You map^ of night, you element of Devils,
Why do you yoke my neck with Iron chains?

Baltaz. Many do borrow chains, but you have this
Gratis, for nothing.

Card. Slaves unbind us.

Both. No --

Exeunt two Mo^ Phil. I am impatient, veins why crack you not?
And tilt your blood into the face of heaven
To make red clouds like Ensigns in the sky,
Displaying a damned tyrants cruelty;
Yet can I laugh in my extremest pangs,
Of blood, and spirit, to see the Cardinal,
Keep rank with me, and my vile Mother Queen,
To see her self, where she would have me seen.
Good fellowship In Faith.

Hort. And I can tell,
True misery, loves a companion well.

Phil. Thou left'st me to the mercy of a Moor,
That has damnation died upon his flesh;
'Twas well, thou Mother did unmotherly
Betray thy true son to false bastardy:
Thou left'st me then, now thou art found; and staid,
And thou who did betray me, art betrayed.
A plague upon you all.

Card. Thou cursest them,
Whom I may curse; first may I curse my self,
Too credulous of Loyalty and love;
Next may I curse the Moor, more then a Devil.
And last thy Mother, mother of all evil.

Queen Mo. All curses, and all crosses light on thee,
What need I curse my self, when all curse me.
I have been deadly impious I confess,
Forgive me, and my sin will seem the less:
This heavy chain which now my neck a^ault,
Weighs ten times lighter then my heavy faults.

Phil. Hortenzo, I commend my self to thee,
Thou that art near'st, stand'st furthest off from me.

Horten. That mold of Hell, that Moor has chained me here,
It Is not my self, but Isabel I fear.

Act. V
Scena V.
Enter Eleazar, Zarack, and Baltaz^. Eleaz. It Is strange! will not Prince
Philip come with Hortenz^.

Z^rack. He swears he will live and die there.

Eleaz. Marry, and shall;
I pray persuade him you, to leave the place,
A pri^n? why its hell; Alas here they be,
Hah! they are they in faith, see, see, see, see.

All. Moor, Devil, ^oad, serpent.

Eleaz. Oh sweet airs, sweet voices.

Isabel. Oh my Hortenzo!

Eleaz. Do not these birds sing sweetly Isabella?
Oh! how their spirits would leap aloft and spring,
Had they their throats at liberty to sing.

Phil. Damnation dog thee.

Card. Furies follow thee.

Qu Mo. Come^s confound thee.

Horten. And hell swallow thee.

Eleaz. Sweeter and sweeter still, Oh! harmony,
Why there is no music like to misery.

Isabel. Have thou betrayed me thus?

Eleaz. Not I, not I.

Phil. Sirrah, hedgehog.

Eleaz. Hah! I Will hear thee presently.

Isabel. Hear me then, Hell-hound; slaves, Unchain my love,
Or by --

Eleaz. By what? is it not rare walking here.
Me thinks this stage shows like a Tennis Court;
Does it not Isabell? I Will show thee how:
Suppose that Iron chain to be the line,
The prison doors the hazard, and their heads
Scarce peeping ore the line suppose the bals;
Had I a racket now of burnished steel,
How smoothly could I bandy every ball,
Over this Globe of earth, win set and all.

Phil. How brisk the villain jetts in villainy?

Eleax. Prating? he is proud because he wears a chain:
Take it off Baltazar, and take him hence.

They unbind him. Phil. And whither then you dog?

Isabel. Pity my brother.

Eleaz. Pity him, no; away I come, do, come.

Phil. I pray thee kill me: come.

Eleaz. I hope to see
Thy own hands do that office, down with him.

Phil Is there another hell?

2 Moors. Try, try, he is gone.

Eleaz. So him next, he next, and next him; and then?

All. Worse then damnation, feind, monster of men.

Eleaz. Why, when? down, down.

Card. Slave, as thou thrusts me down,
Into this dungeon, so sink thou to hell.

Q. Mo. Amen, Amen.

Eleaz. Together so, and you.

Isabel. O pity my Hortenzo!

Horten. Farewell sweet Isabel, my life adieu.

All. Mischief and horror let the Moor pursue.

Eleaz. A consort, that amain, play that amain.
Amain, Amain. No; so soon fallen asleep,
Nay I Will not loose this music, sirrah! sirrah!
Take thou a drum, a Trumpet thou, and Hark;
Mad them with villainous sounds.

Zarack. Rare sport, let us go.

Exeunt Zarack, Baltazar. Eleaz. About it. Music will do well, in woe;
How like you this?

Isabel. set my Hortenzo free,
And I Will like any thing.

Eleaz. A fool, a fool?
Hortenzo free; why look you, he free? no;
Then must he marry you, you must be Queen,
He in a manner King, these dignities
Like poison make men swell, this Ratsbane honor
O it is so sweet, they will lick it till all burst.
He will be proud, and pride you know must fall.
Come, come, he shall not; no, no; it is more meet,
To keep him down, safe standing on his feet.

Isabel. Eleazar?

Eleaz. Mark: the imperial chair of Spain,
Is now as empty as a Misers Alms;
Be wise, I yet dare fit in it, it is for you,
If you will be for me, there is room for two.
Do meditate, muse on it: it is best for thee
To love me, live with me, and lie with me.

Isabel. Thou know I Will first lie in the arms of death,
My meditations are how to revenge,
Thy bloody tyrannies; I fear thee not
Inhumane slave, but to thy face defy
Thy lust, thy love, thy barbarours villainy.

Eleaz. Zarack.

Enter Zarack. Zarack. My Lord!

Eleaz. Where Is Baltazar?

Zarack. A drumming.

Elea. I have made them rave, and curse, and
So; guard her:
Your Court shall be this prison, guard her slaves,
With open eyes; defy me? see my veins,
S^ruck'd out, being over heated with my blood,
Boiling in wrath: I Will tame you.

Isabel. Do, do.

Eleaz. Hah!
I will, and once more fill a kingdoms Throne
Spain I Will new-mould thee, I will have a chair
Made all of dead men's bones, and the ascents
Shall be the heads of Spaniards set in ranks;
I will have Philip's head, Hortenzo's head,
Mendoza's head, thy Mothers head, and this,
This head that is so cross, I Will have't:
The Scene wants Actors, I Will fetch more, and cloth it
In rich Cothurnall pomp. A Tragedy
Ought to be grave, graves this shall beautify.
Moor execute to the life my dread commands,
Vengeance awake, thou have much work in hand.

Exit. Zarack. I Am weary of this office, and this life,
It is too thirsty, and I would your blood,
Might escape the filling out: By heaven I swear,
I scorn these blows, and his rebukes to bear.

Isabel. Oh! Zarack pity me, I Jove thee well,
Love deserves pity, pity Isabel.

Zarack. What would you have me do?

Isabel. To kill this Moor.

Zarack. I Will cast an eye of death upon my, face.
I Will be no more his slave, swear to advance me;
And by yo'n setting sun, this hand, and this
Shall rid you of a tyrant.

Isabel. By my birth;
No Spaniards honored place shall equal thin^.

Zarack I Will kill him then.

Isabel. And Baltazar.

Zarack. And he,

Isabel. I pray thee first, setch Philippo and Hortenzo
Out of that Hell; they two will be most glad
To aid thee; in this Execution;

Zarack. My Lord Philippo; and Hortenzo; rise;
Your hands; so, talk to her; at my return
This sword shall reek with blood of Baltazar.

Exit. Phil. Three curses (like three comendations
To their three souls) I send; thy tortured brother
Does curse the Cardinal, the Moor, thy Mother.

Isabel. Curse not at all dear souls; revenge is hot,
And boyles in Zaracks brains; the plot is cast,
Into the mold of Hell: You freemen are;
Zarack will kill the Moor; and Baltazar.

Hort. How can that relish?

Isabel. Why? I Will tell you how?
I did profess; I, and protested too:
I loved him well, what will not sorrow do?
Then he professed; I, and protested too
To kill them both, what will not devils do?

Phil. Then I profess; I, and protest it too,
That here is for him, what will not Philip do?

Hort. See where he coms.

Enter the two Moors. Balt. Zarack, what do I see?
Hortenzo and Philip, who did this?

Zarack. I Baltazar.

Balt. Thou art half damned for it, I Will to my Lord.

Zarack. I Will stop you on your way, lie there; thy tongue shall tell no tales to
day Stabs him.


Phil. Nor thine to morrow, his revenge was well.
Stabs him. By this time both the slaves shake hands in hell.

Isabel. Philippo and Hortenzo stand you still, what; dote you both? cannot you
see your play? well ^are a woman then, to l^ad the way. Once rob the dead, put
the Moors bit^ on, and paint your faces with the ^l of hell, so waiting on the
Tyrant.


Philip Come no more, it is here, and here; room there below, stand wide, bury
them well since they so godly di'd.


Hort. Away then, fate now let revenge be placed.


Philip. Here.

Hort. And here, a tyrants blood does sweetly taste.


Exeunt. Act V.
Scena VI.
Enter Eleazar, Alvero, Roderigo, Christofero, and other Lords. Eleazar. WHat,
I imprison, who?

All. Philip and Hortenzo.

Eleax. Philip and Hortenzo, Ha, ha, ha.

Roder Why laughs the Moor?

Eleaz I laugh because you jest; laugh at a jest, who I imprison them? I prize
their lives with weights, their necks with chains, their hands with Manacles?
do I all this, because my face is in nights color died.

Think you my conscience and my soul is so,

Black faces may have hearts as white as snow

And it is a general rule in moral rowls,

The whitest faces have the blackest souls.


Alvero. But touching my Hortenzo.

Eleaz. Good old man, I never touched him, do not touch me then with thy
Hortenzo.


Christofero. Where Is Philip too?

Eleaz. And where is Philippo too? I pray I pray, is Philip a tame Sp^niard,
what can I philip him hither, hither make him ^ve. First where is Hortenzo,
where is Philippo too?


Roderigo. And where is Isabel, she was with you.

Eleaz. And where is Isabel, she was with me, and so are you, yet are you well
you see but in good time, see where their keepers come. Come hither Zarack,
Baltazar, come hither; Zarack, old Lord Alvero asks of thee, where young
Hortenzo is.


Enter Philip and Hortenzo like Moo^s. Horten My Lord! set free.

Eleaz Oh is (...); come hither Baltazar, Lord Christofero here would ask of
thee where Prince Philippo is.


Phil. My Lord set free.

Eleaz. Oh is he so! Roderigo asks me for Isabel,

Philip I say my Lord she is free.

Eleaz. Oh! is she so.

Phil. Believe me Lords.

Hortenzo. And me.

Philip. I set Philippo.

Hortenzo. I Hortenzo free.

Eleaz. My Lords because you shall believe me too,
Go to the Castle, I will follow you.

Alv. Thanks to the mighty Moor, and for his fame,
Be more in honor, then thou art in name;
But let me wish the other prisoners well,
The Queen and Cardinal, let all have right,
Let law absolve them or disolve them quite.

Eleaz. Grave man, thy gray hairs paint out gravity,
Thy counsels wisdom, thy wit policy.
There let us meet, and with a general brain,
Erect the peace of spirit and of Spain.

Alv. Then will Spain flourish.

Eleaz. I, when it is mine.

Roder. O heavenly meeting!

Eleaz. we must part in hell.

Chri. True peace of joy.

Exeunt manent Ele. Phil. Hor. Ele. It Is a dissembling knel. Farewell my Lords,
meet there so ha, ha, ha.

Draws his Rapier. Now Tragedy thou Minion of the night, Rhamnusias pew-fellow;
to thee I Will sing Upon an harp made of dead Spanish bones, The proudest
instrument the world affords; When thou in Crimson jollitie shall Bath, Thy
limbs as black as mine, in springs of blood; still gushing from the
Conduit-head of Spain: To thee that never blushest, though thy cheeks are full
of blood. O! Saint revenge to thee: I consecrate my Murders, all my stabs, my
bloody labors, tortures, stratagems: The volume of all wounds, that wound from
me; mine is the stage, thine is the Tragedy. Where am I now? oh at the prison?
true, Zarack and Baltazar come hither see, survey my Library. I study, I,
whilst you two sleep, marry it is villainy. Here Is a good book, Zarack behold it
well, it is deeply written for 'twas made in hell. Now Baltazar, a better book
for thee, but for my self, this, this, the best of all; and therefore do I
chain it every day, for fear the Readers steal the art away. Where thou
stand'st now, there must Hortenzo hang, Like Tantalus in a maw-eating pang:
there Baltaza^ must Pr^nce Philip stand, like damned Pr^metheus, and to act his
part; shall have a dagger sticking at his heart. But in my room I Will set the
Cardinal, and he shalpreach Repentance to them all. Ha, ha, ha.


Phil Damnation tickles him, he laughs again, Philip must stand there and bleed
to death: Well villa^n I only laugh to see, that we shall live to out-laugh him
and thee.


Eleaz. Oh! fit, fit, fit, stay a rare jest, rare jest. Zarack, suppose thou
art Hortenzo now? I pray thee stand in passion of a pang, to see by thee how
quaintly he would hang.


Hort. I am Hortenzo, tut, tut, fear not man, thou look like Zarack.


Eleaz. I Hortenzo, here he shall hang here, In Faith, come Zarack come, and
Baltazar take thou (...) room. First let me see you (...)


Phil. We Are placed.

Eleaz. Slaves, ha, ha, ha, you are but players, they must end the play: how
like Hortenzo and Philippo ha, stand my two slaves, were they as black as you.
Well Zarack I Will unfix thee first of all, thou ^hale help me to play the
Cardinal; This Iron engine on his head I Will clap, like a Pope^ Miter, or a
Cardinals Cap. Then Manacle his hands as thou do mine: so, so, I pray thee
Zarack set him free, that both of you may stand and laugh at me.


Phil. It Is fine In Faith, call in morecompany,
Alvero, Roderigo, and the rest,
Who will not laugh at Eleazars jest.

Eleaz. What? Zarack, Baltazar.

Phil. I, anon, anon, we have not laughed enough, it is but begun.


Who knocks. Eleaz. Unmanacle my hands I say.

Phil. Then shall we mar our mirth and spoil the play.

Who knocks, (...). Alv. Alver^.

Phil. Let Alvero in.

Eleaz. And let me out.

Enter all below. Phil. I thank you for that flout,
To let Alver^ in, and let you out.

Eleaz. Villains, slaves, am I not your
Lord the Moor, and Eleazar.

Qu. Mo. And the Devi^ of hell,
And more then that, and Eleazar too.

Eleaz. And Devils dam, what do I here with you.

Qu. Mo. My tongue shall torture thee.

Eleaz. I know thee then, all women's tongues are tortures unto men.


Qu. Mo. Spaniards his was the villain, this is he who through enticements of
alluring lust, and glory which makes silly women proud, and men malicious, did
incense my spirit beyond the limits of a woman's mind, to wrong my self and that
Lord Cardinal; And that which sticks more near unto my blood, he that was
nearest to my blood; my son to dispossess him of his right by wrong. Oh! that
I might embrace him on this breast, which did enclose him when he first was
born. No greater happiness can heaven shower upon me; then to circle in these
arms of mine, that son whose Royal blood I did defame, to Crown with honor an
ambitious Moor.


Phil. Thus then thy happiness is complete:
Embraces her. Behold thy Philip ransomed from that prison
In which the Moor had cloistered him.

Hor. And here is Hortenzo.

Eleaz. Then am I betrayed and cozened in my own designs: I did contrive their
ruin, but their subtle policy has blasted my ambitious thoughts: Villains!
where is Zarack? where is Baltazar? what have you done with them.


Phil. They Are gone to Pluto's kingdom to provide a place for thee, and to
attend thee there; but least they should be tired with too long expecting
hopes. Come brave spirits of Spain, this is the Moor the actor of these evils:
Thus thrust him down to act amongst the devils.


Stabs him. Eleaz. And am I thus dispatched; had I but breathed the space of
one hour longer, I would have fully acted my revenge. But oh! now pallid death
bids me prepare, and have to Charon for to be his fare.

I com, I com, but ere my glass is run, I Will curse you all, and cursing end my
life May thou Lascivious Queen whose d^mned charms, bewitched me to the
circle of thy arms, unpitied dye, consumed with loathed lust, which thy
venereous mind has basely nursed. And for you Philip, may your days be long,
but clouded with perpetual misery. May thou Hortenzo, and thy Isabell, be
fetched alive by Furies into hell, there to be damned for ever, oh! I faint;
Devils com claim your right, and when I am, confined within your kingdom then
shall I, out-act you all in perfect villa^y.


Dies. Phil. Take down his body while his blood streams forth, his acts are
past, and our last act is done. Now do I challenge my Hereditary right, to the
Royal Spanish throne usurped by him. In which, in all your sights I thus do
plant my self. Lord Cardinal, and you the Queen my mother, I pardon all those
crimes you have committed.


Qu. Mo. I Will now repose my self in peaceful rest,
And fly unto some solitary residence;
Where I Will spin out the remnant of my life,
In true contrition for my past offenses.

Phil. And now Hortenzo to close up your wound,
I here contract my sister unto thee,
With Comic joy to end a (...).
And for this Barbarous Moor, and his black train,
Let all the Moors be banished from Spain.

Exeunt. The end of the fifth Act.
FINIS.

