Dr. Martin Luthers PROPHECIES OF THE DESTRUCTION OF ROME, AND THE DOWNFALL OF
THE Romish Religion.

And how the Papists for Treachery and Hypocrisy shall at last become hated,
and contemned by all Nations.

Here are likewise some of the eminent Prophecies of that most Learned
Mathematician and Prophet Michael Nostredamus, concerning England and France,
and those strange occurrences which are likely to happen to both those
Countries in these later days, with an Account of some of the Prophecies of
Michael Nostredamus which have been fulfilled here in England already.

Lather's Motto Writ by himself, Pestis eram vivens, moriens ero Mors tua Papa.

Licensed, May 7. 1^79.

LONDON, Printed for W.W.

Dr. Martin Luther's Prophecies of the Destruction of Rome, and the Downfall of
the Romish Religion.
TO waste much time in the needless Commendation of that Learned, and Pious
Reformer, Dr. Martin Luther, would be as great an Impertinence as that of the
young Rhetorician's, who spent three hours in an elaborate Declamation on the
refulgency of the glorious Sunbeams. They are both so apparent to any Rational
or Inquisitive Creature, that it would be but a Tautologie to applaud them; we
daily enjoy the inestimable benefit of either: for as the one delivered us from
that uncomfortable darkness which first brooded on the primitive Chaos, and
hatched nothing but Confusion; so the other like a Friendly Pillar of Divine
Light, kindly conducted us out of those dangerous paths of Superstition, and
Idolatry, which would have led us into everlasting Destruction.

But if after all those mighty obligations he has done all the Reformed
Churches in Europe, there should any one yet remain bruitishly ignorant of his
Virtues and Indowments, I shall in a word acquaint them who this Luther was.

1. It was he who (if I may speak it with reverence) like our Savior had the
honor to be prophesied of before he was born; and this even the Romans
themselves cannot deny, since their own Histories acquaint us that one John
Hilton a person they themselves held in great veneration for piety and gift of
Prophecy, wrote thus almost a hundred years before Luther had declared himself
against the Church of Rome. Much about the year 1516. the Mystery of
Ungodliness shall begin to be discovered, and the Son of Righteousness shine
forth in the Truth of the Gospel, and Popery shall in Germany, and other parts
of the World then receive a Sudden Declension. This Prophecy was certainly
fulfilled by Laither who appeared at that time against Rome, and in spite of
all her then domineering Tyranny gave her a greater blow than ever she received
either before or since.

2. It was he of whom the Martyr John Hus on that day he suffered at Constance
said; You now roast a Goose (for so Hus signifies) but one hundred years hence
you shall hear a Swan sing, whom you shall not be able neither to roast, nor
overcome.

3. It was he who was graced with the Honorable title of Master of Arts at
twenty years of Age. 'Twas he who whilst he was perusing certain Books in the
Library of the College of Orphord happened to meet with a Copy of the Latin
Bible, which he never had seen before, and having to his great admiration
observed there were more Evangelical and Apostolical Texts in it than were
suffered to be read openly in Churches, he thereupon set himself to the
Translating of the five Books of Moses, and afterward finished both them and
the remainder of the Old and the New Testament, which was by some Popish
Bishops and Priests forbid to be read to the People. In fine, it was Dr. M.
Luther whom God in his infinite wisdom raised, and furnished with a sufficient
portion of Care, Courage and Learning to Inspect and Detect the damnable
Superstition and Idolatry of the Church of Rome, which he resolutely performed,
notwithstanding all the Threats and Dangers he knew he was to go through if he
persisted in so doing. And lastly it was he to whom Germany, Denmark, Bohemia
and most of the Protestant Churches in the world are in a great measure
beholding for their glorious Reformation.

Thus much I thought fit to premise, that the most scrupulous Reader may less
wonder that the Almighty should entrust this worthy Champion of the now
Reformed Religion with the Spirit of Prophecy which he was pleased to exercise
on himself, saying some weeks before he Dyed, When I return to Wittemberg, I
will be lodged in a Coffin, and will render to the worms a fat Luther to feed
on; and so it sell out, for within two days after he came thither he dyed, but
a little before his Expiration called for Pen and Ink, and wrote this following
Verse, Pestis eram vivens, moriens ero mors tua Papa. Which Melancthon, one of
his dear Friends, taking as a prophetic rapture, turned into a Distick of the
same meaning: Thus, Qui fuit dum vixit tua pestis (Papa) Lutherus,
Hic tibi causa, suo funere, mortis erit.
Both of which may be thus paraphrastically turned into English: As Luther
Living was Romes plague, so shall
Her Fall be caused by his mourned Funeral.


But long before this Luther was observed by all the Students at Wittemberg to
be endowed with the Spirit of Prophecy which he frequently committed to
posterity, the greatest part of which were in presaging the Dissolution of
those two grand temporal enemies of truth and Religion, the Turk and the Pope.

Concerning the later of which, in Luther Colloq. p. 328. he thus prophesies,
The Pope must fall and Popery with him, since it is downright Blasphemy to hold
as he does, viz. that the final cause of the Institution of Humane Traditions,
is the true Service and worship of God: and that it is necessary to salvation;
contrary to that of St. Paul, If either we or an Angel from Heaven preach any
other Doctrine to you than what we have preached, let him be accursed.

In another Prophecy Luther thus Infers the Popes Downfall. Idem page 312.
Antichrist, says he, must fall, and it plainly appears that the Pope is the
true Antichrist, because those that transgress his Decrees or violate his
Statutes are far more vigorously and severely punished than those who offend
the Laws of God, which is a palpable exalting of himself above the Almighty,
and therefore he is most properly called Antichrist, etc.

Again says Luther, the Pope must and shall fall by reason the blindness of the
Popelins is so great and horrible that they hold the Reconciliation of the
Living (which though they pretend is a Sacrifice) yet all their Canonists,
School-Divines and Pulpit preachers utterly disapprove it.

And in another place he predicts the Papal overthrow thus, The Pope says he,
must fall, for that like a right Jew he boasts to enjoy by Christ a Temporal
Kingdom, he alone will have all the Power, and Authority, he will rule and
Determine all Councils, and incroach upon them under the Name of Christ. If one
should have deslowred the Virgin Mary, or Crucified Christ, yet the Pope for
money would undertake to pardon and forgive the same. Therefore his Dominion is
but short and will be brought to ruin according to the time signified by the
number of the Beast, in the thirteenth of the Revelations. Page 306.

Again says he, Popedom must fall, for that it has been always managed by
wicked persons and correspondent to the impiety of their Doctrine: for as the
Creator is in this case, such must be the Creature. Pope Alexander was a Moran,
that is a Baptized Jew, he believed nothing at all; he had a Concubine called
Lucretia to whom he after espoused his own Son. The Pope that succeeded him was
so great an Enemy to him, that he caused all the Windows, Gates, Doors, etc.
whereon his Name or Arms were fixed, to be demolished or pulled down. When God
speaks the word, [ Rome be destroyed and lie in Ashes; Pope come down from
your Throne,] the word of God will be obeyed and must be immediately brought to
pass: L. Colloqu. 302.

Pride, again says Luther, must undoubtedly have a Fall, and consequently so
must the Pope.

Another of his remarkable prophecies to the same purpose is expressed (in Lu.
time p. 314.) to this effect. The Pope and his accomplices presuming on their
great power that they shall never fall, do thereby hasten their fall; and God
will overthrow him, and that suddenly, if our own Secureness, and contempt of
Gods word does not hinder it: Let us pray therefore that the same misfortunes
they design us, may light on their own heads: they have Burned, Hanged, Drowned
and Banished those that were amongst us, they will in no wise be recalled from
their Devilish Practices.

To conclude, we have great hopes these Prophecies of Luther may accordingly
come to pass, as well as some others of his prediction have been accomplished
already (though upon other occasions) as plainly appears in his Tom. 2. Epist.
p. 10. and 207. where he foretold the Combustion which arose in Germany: as
likewise the Death of Frederick Elector of Saxony, Tom. 2. Epist. p. 10. he
also in the same Book prophesied the Dearth or Famine which happened in Germany
according to his prediction. And now I shall detain you no longer about this
Excellent person, but only present you with a small Manuscript written by his
own hand, and not unproperly called,

The Generation of Theological Corruption; or a Pedigree of Popish Principles.
By Dr. M. Luther.
THE Devil begat Darkness, Darkness begat Ignorance, Ignorance begat Error and
his Brethren; Error begat Freewill and Presumption, out of Self conceit; Free
will begat Merit, Merit begat Forgetfulness of God, Forgetfulness of God begat
Transgression, Transgression begat Superstition, Superstition begat
Satisfaction, Satisfaction begat Oblation of the Mass, the Oblation of the Mass
begat Unction, Unction begat the Priest, the Priest begat Mischief, Mischief
begat Misbelief, Misbelief begat Hypocrisy, Hypocrisy begat Trading with
Offerings for gain, Trading begat Purgatory, Purgatory begat yearly solemn
Vigils, yearly Vigils begat Church Livings, Church Livings begat Mammon, Mammon
begat Superfluity, Superfluity begat Excess, Excess begat Rage, Rage begat
Licentiousness, Licentiousness begat Dominion, Dominion begat Pomp, Pomp begat
Ambition, Ambition begat Simony, Simony begat the Pope and his Brethren; the
Pope begat the Mystery of Iniquity, the Mystery of Iniquity begat Sophistical
Divinity, Sophistical Divinity begat rejecting of the Holy Scriptures, the
rejecting of the Holy Scriptures begat Tyranny, Tyranny begat Murdering of
Saints, Murdering of Saints begat Abomination, Abomination begat Desolation,
Desolation begat Anguish, Anguish begat Questioning, Questioning begat the
searching out the Grounds of Truth; out of which the Pope, called Antichrist,
is Revealed. Ex Luthers Prophecies page 12.

I Shall now according to my Title, give you a brief account of Mich.
Nostredamus, and then present you with some of his Prophecies which
particularly concern England and France.

He was Born in St. Remy a Town in Provence on the fourteenth of December. 1503.
he was bred up in all the Learning in France, and having betaken himself to the
Study of Physic, grew so excellent therein, that at last he became Physician
to three successive Kings of that Country. I shall give my self the less
trouble to demonstrate to the Reader that this learned person was endowed with
the Spirit of Prophecy, because I could instance above a thousand Prophecies
of his which have already come to pass: but before I give you one or two which
concerned our Nation as an Instance; I shall give you the Judgment of one of
the greatest wits in our last age who in brief says thus,

God Almighty has chosen out Mich. Nostredamus to impart to the world many
prodigious and extraordinary things which shall happen for the Future: again
says he, next the Apostles, and Canonical Prophets, Nostredamus is to be
preferred before any other in these four things; viz. in the Certainty, the
Infallibility, in the Generality and Quantity of his predictions, of which
here is an example, written as he did all his other, in old Law French, of which
I shall only give the beginning, and then set you down the English of them.

Trente de Londres secret -- Englished thus,

Thirty of London shall conspire against their King;
The Plot shall be made on London Bridge.
What could appear more perfect in number, place and substance, to any one that
can remember the Plotters against King Charles the First of blessed Memory,
whose Conspiracy was contrived at the Bear on the Bridge foot: this he foretold
almost a hundred years before it came to pass: he also prophesied that a King
of England should appear on a Scaffold without his Doublet; that he should be
taken off; and that in the place where he was to be beheaded, another had been
killed three days before; all which Circumstances were sadly made true by the
Lamented Catastrophe of that most pious Monarch and Martyr.

I shall now proceed to those Prophecies which as yet are unaccomplished, Page
231. 5. -- A quarante huit dei^^^, etc. At the Clymacterical year of 8. and 40.
at the end of Cancer, shall be such a Drought that the F^sh in the Water shall
be boiled to a Consumption; Bearn and Bigorre, by heavenly Fire shall be in
distress.

I shall say no more but that Bearn and Bigorre, are two Provinces in France;
of the rest let the Reader judge.

Another, Paix uberte long temps on ne louera, etc.

Thus Englished. Peace and plenty shall not long be praised; before the end of
his Reign the Flower de Luce shall be Deserted; bodies shall dye by water,
Earth shall be brought, but therein they shall not be buried.

By Flower de Luce is meant France, expound the rest your selves. Proph. 82.
page 141. de Nostredamus.

But afterward he ends his tenth Century, page 444. with this Prophecy
concerning the future Welfare of England.

Le grand Empire sera per L'Angleterre, etc.
England at last the Worlds Empire shall be
And so shall remain for Three Hundred and three,
Great Armies shall pass both through Land and through Sea
To which the proud Spaniard shall Strike and give way.
THE END.

