A Warre-like Treatise OF THE PIKE.

OR, Some Experimental Resolves, for lessening the number, and disabling the
use of the Pike in War.

With the praise of the Musket and Halfe-Pike As also the Testimony of
BRANCATIO, concerning the disability of the Pike.

Penned for the general good of our Nation, by a well wisher to the complete
Musquetier.

Horat. -- Quid enim concurritur horae
Momento aut cita mori venit, aut victoria laeta.
LONDON: Printed by Richard Hodgkinsonne in Little-Britaine. 1642.

TO THE Right Honorable, ROBERT, Earl of Essex and Ewe, Viscount Hereford,
Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Bourchier, and Lovain, Lord Chamberlain of his Mties
household, and one of his Mties. most Honorable Privy-Counsell.
MY LORD:
LOW shrubs are sheltered by lofty Cedars; I hope the same from your Honor.
The Subject which I present is warlike, though my Profession be peaceable: it is
compendious, and not traced by many, scarce by any before: I have made the
discovery; and refer the whole, being discovered, to your Honors judgment.
It Is not the mere fancy of a Scholars brain, but many years Experience
abroad in foreign Leaguers, with great danger, which produced it.

Accept it (Great Lord) though presented at no less a distance than the foot
is from the Head: and when your weighty Military Engagements will afford your
Honor some small recesse, vouchsafe it a perusal.

I have been so bold to present my self, and this small Tract of war unto
your Honors protection, in regard your Honors Regiment ran the same hazards
of war in Germany with three more of our English Nation, under the Command of
our General the Lord Morgan; wherein I was imbarqued, and with whom I suffered
resolutely and willingly the utmost of dangers that a professed Enemy with all
his power and policy could proportion for our troops. Secondly, I know your
Honors ability to determine of a Subject of this Nature, and to protect both
the Parent and the Child from public Injury.

That the Great God of Hosts may safeguard your Honor, and that your goings
Out, and commings In, may be for ever prosperous and successful, prays the
meanest of

your Honors Servant, DONALD LUPTON.

To the Right Worshipful and Generous Gentlemen, the Colonells, Captains,
Lieutenants, and Ensigns of the Honorable City of London. Sir Edward
Broomefield Col. Cap. Martin Bond. Cap. Marmaduke Rawdon. Cap. George Langham.
Cap. Thomas Covell. Cap. Robert Davies. Thomas Soame Col. Cap. John Venn. Cap.
William Geere. Cap. John Bradley. Cap. Rowland Wilson. Cap. Thomas Buckstone.
John Geere Col. Cap. Edward Dichfield. Cap. Randall Manwaring. Cap. Henry
Sanders. Cap. Matthew Forster. Cap. Thomas Chamberlain. Cap. Edmund Forster.
Cap. Samuel Carleton. Cap. Tobias Massy. Cap. Nicholas Beale. Cap. James Bunce.

Right worshipful and worthy Commanders:
THIS Tract of war cannot (I hope) be unwelcome to your Hands, whose Bodies
are daily employed in Martial affairs. Nor let it seem strange that one of
my Profession should produce a subject of this Nature; seeing there are seldom
any Leaguers without men of our Quality: The Ministering Levites were not only
in the Camps of Israel, but also had their special Offices and Charges
allotted to them. Such grace the Helmet, animate the Soldier, and fit him at
all goings Out for his happier dissolution.

When I was abroad with our Armies (I speak it to their honor) I found large
maintenance, and fair respect, though with a great deal of hazard both of
fortune and life, in regard of the Enemies too great forces, and our long and
hasty Marchings, together with tedious Beleaguerings: yet (by the all-ruling
Providence of God) I came off enriched with some knowledge, and Military
experience; which I account a rich prize, though purchased at an high price.

I will not relate unto you the fearful and horrid issues and effects of
war; such as are poverty and decay of Trading, famine, violence, depredation,
destruction of Justice and Civility, slighting of Magistracy, firing and
plundering of Countries, death of famous Commanders, the vast slaughtering of
men, women, and children, profanation of Churches with the violation of
Virgins and Matrones; For -- Quis talia fando
Temperet a lachrimis?


But yet I hold it conducing to my Countrymens advantage and profit, to show
unto them some Conclusions concerning Soldiers weapons which I have
experimentally seen tried; and specially of that ancient weapon the Pike;
which (though in former times and services has been of excellency and
usefulness) yet in these latter of small or no consequence. As also a short
and compendious Discourse of the excellency of the Musket and Halfe-Pike above
other weapons, practiced now with Ease and Activity by many ingenuous and
Martial spirits; and in times of needful trial would be as full of Advantage.

What I have here with pains and experience thus composed and digested, I
present to your Loyal hands, whose Judgments (I know) can well determine of
Military affairs, being so constantly employed in that Noble and Heroic
profession of Arms.

Not doubting, but that you who so love the practice, will also favor and
encourage such who shall to their utmost advance and maintain that noble and
valorous Calling.

So praying for the increase of your Fames, as well as of your Numbers, I
commend you all, and all your weighty occasions to the protection of the Lord
of all Victory: being

Yours, in all fair and honorable respects, DONALD LUPTON.

The Contents.
SECTION I. OF the dignity, necessity, and lawfulness of a Soldiers Calling.
SECT. II. What men are fittest to be chosen for Soldiers. SECT. III. What
weapons are fittest for Soldiers: and that the Pike is not of Consequence in
these times. SECT. IV. That the Pike cannot offend, or do Execution. SECT. V.
That the Pike is unfit for Convoyes. SECT. VI. That it is a great disadvantage
to have all the properest men to carry Pikes. SECT. VII. That to have as many
Pikes as Muskets, or to have such great store of Pikes in an Army, is a means
to bring on the Enemies Horse. SECT. VIII. That to have equal numbers of Pikes
to Muskets, or to have such great numbers of them, is a great charge, and a
loss to the Prince that sets them forth. SECT. IX. That if the Pike be still
retained, yet to have all the Pike-men to be experien'd as well in the use of
the Musket as of the Pike. SECT. X. Answers to the Arguments that have been,
or that now are made in and for the defense of the Pike in these times. SECT.
XI. A compendious and brief Commendation of the complete and expert use of the
Musket and Halfe-Pike. SECT. XII. The Testimony of Brancatio concerning the
disability of the Pike.
SECTION 1. Of the dignity, necessity, and lawfulness of a Soldiers Calling.
THere is no Calling under Heaven which has not been by slanderous and
malignant Spirits traduced and vilified: and amongst all, none has been more
disgraced with opprobrious language than this of a Soldier. For some have held
it unlawful; others have imputed the Personal Crimes to the very Calling it
self: some have held that all Soldiers are irreligious and perfidious, as that
old verse has it: Nulla sides, pietasque viris qui
Castra sequuntur.
So that there have been those who have condemned the Calling for the Persons,
and the Persons in the Calling: Now, briefly in this first Section, the Calling
shall be cleared from these foul and unjust Aspersions which Malice or
Cowardice has cast upon it.

First, therefore if any will hold the Calling unlawful, because of many
gross and heinous Abuses daily committed by Soldiers; as suppose, Sacrilege,
Swearing, Murders, Rapes, Stealing, Pillaging, Firing of houses, Drunkenness,
or the like; (though it is to be wished that none of these were to be found in
the Tents of Israel) yet, nor any, nor all these can prove the Calling to be
unjust: for so it will follow, that the best and strictest Calling amongst men
(even the very Calling of the upright Magistrate, nay, even the sacred Function
of the Ministry) shall be in this respect made void: for who knows not, but
that in some Age or other, some, or most of these Enormities have been found in
some of the Professors. Now, how untrue and ridiculous such fond conceits are,
any one may easily judge: it may as well be proved, that Wine is not to be
used, because many men are drunk with it; gold and siilver are to be rejected,
because many are covetous for them; Good meats are disalowable, because many
follow gluttony and riot; and good clothes are to be cast aside, because so
many abuse them to pride and luxury: how soon should the best and most
warrantable Calling be left off, if such absurd positions were once approved
for Authentical.

Therefore men should not rashly accuse or condemn the Calling, because some or
many of the followers do abuse themselves in it. And let me speak truth, there
neither is, nor has been any Calling, which has had stricter or severer
Discipline proclaimed and executed in it, than this of the Soldier; for most of
the Transgressors of warlike Orders are punished with death, and torture of the
Delinquents; the Sword-law rather inclines to justice than mercy; Peccants in
Armies (without the special favor of the Prince interveening) are usually
made exemplary by some fearful execution or other, in terrorem, to daunt and
terrify others from running such unhopefull hazards: A Court of war sets
forth the strictest orders, and heaviest punishments, hence have they such
variety of tortures; seldom is there any connivence, if once they be put over
into the hands of the Executioner, for he rather adds some kind of misery
(being commonly such who has forgotten to show pity or mercy) than lessens
that which is enjoined him to inflict; nor is it any safe course for him to use
or show favor, for that will be but a means to procure to himself the like
punishment which he should have inflicted upon the condemned Malefactor.

To come therefore to show the dignity and excellency of this Calling: Appears
it not sufficiently, whereas the sacred Oracles give God himself these
Attributes; The Lord of Hosts; The Lord is a man of war; The Lord walks in
the midst of thine Army; The Lord overthrew Pharaoh; Oh thou sword of the Lord
rest and be still: And is not the Eternal Son of God called the Captain of
our Salvation, and He led Captivity captive; He it was that triumphed over the
spiritual Goliath, and by his unconquered power has got himself the victory,
and ransomed us when we were Prisoners. To descend; Are not the glorious Angels
termed by the warlike phrase of legions of Angels? two destroyed 5 Cities, one
cut off 185000 of Senacheribs Army in one night. To come yet lower; Did not
those radiant lamps of Heaven, the Stars in their courses fight against
Sisera? What are all the creatures but Militia Caeli? Hail, Snow, Wind,
Vapors, Storms, Tempests, are so called by holy Job: Who (says he) can number
up his Armies? Now to speak of men (if I intended length of discourse) what
might I say of great Abraham, valiant Moses, unconquered Ioshuah, mighty
Sampson, stout Gideon, resolute Iephte, renowned Deborah and Barach,
experienced David, with diverse others? Could I not speak of those Centurions,
the one was commended by our blessed Savior for his faith; the other was said
to be a worthy man, for he had built the people a Synagogue; and the third
devout and charitable Cornelius, whose prayers were so forcible, and
almsdeeds so manifold, that they came up before God for him; and who can but
confess these to be Commanders in war? To shut up all, the Church by King
Solomon is said to be terrible as an Army with Banners; and St. Ambrose
divinely has sung it, The noble Army of Martyrs praise thee.

Now, if any shall urge, that all these were excellent indeed for piety as well
as valor; but what can be said for the common (but more properly) the private
Soldier? they are known to be full of all impieties; witness warlike Histories
of all times, which largely show the fearful and horrible villainies and
abuses of them. It may be said first, it is not for want of good Examples, nor
good Orders, nor is the Objection generally true: For Examples, it is manifest
their Generals have been good; and if that common Rule fail not, Magis ducimur
Exemplis quam Praeceptis, what hinders the Soldier from following? Gideon said
it to his Army, and it was performed; As ye have seen me do, so do ye: and
before him Iosuah, when he put the people to declare in point of Religion; his
pious and resolved example, That he and his House would serve the Lord, brought
in all the Army to do the same: and when that great Army which did surmount
the number of 380000. men, were put to answer whose side they would take; when
they heard that worthy speech of their General King David, answered all with
one heart, Thine we are o David, and for thee will we fight: So that it is plain
if good examples have any force in them, the Soldier may be conscionable, just,
and pious, as well as his Commander.

Nor secondly, are they naught for want of good orders or Discipline; for an
Army is but a well-governed Commonwealth in Arms: Now it is held by all men,
that where good Orders are, there usually are the fewest abuses, men being
afraid to transgress, formidine paenae, for fear of the lash; That Centurion
which spoke to our blessed Lord, mark his language: I am also a man under
Authority, and have Soldiers under me, and I say to one go, and he goes; to
another come, and he comes; and to a third, do this, and he does it. Of
Cornelius it is said, That he feared God with all his House; and without
question, those his servants which he sent to bring St. Peter to his house were
Soldiers, and yet who can justly tax their honesty, fidelity, or piety? And
who can accuse those Soldiers who came to St. John Baptist to enquire what they
should do? I should, and do verily suppose them to have been good and
virtuous men, for it seems so by their coming, first to be instructed, then
secondly for asking such a question which might inform them how they might be
honest and religious; and thirdly, because St. John did not any ways increpate
or chide them, as elsewhere he did the Scribes and Pharisees, (and I am sure he
would not have spared to have told them their own, had he known them to have
been peccant.) Therefore it is plain that good Discipline has not only been
enjoined unto, but also observed by the inferior Soldier.

Then thirdly, what hinders Soldiers to be well governed, and conscionable men?
when they are always next door to death; now it is known, that the remembrance
of the shortness of life, and the certainty of death, and Judgment to come,
is and has been a main incitement to goodness, and has wrought mainely upon
men's hearts; witness that disputation of Temperance, Righteousness, and of
the Judgment to come, which that Divine Doctor of the Gentiles had before the
Governor Felix, who, though an Heathen, yet was so struck and convinced at the
matter, that he trembled at the hearing of it, and dismissed the Orator till
another time: So that I see not, but that the Soldier as well as the Commander
may be virtuous and religious.

Secondly, as the Calling is worthy and excellent, so it is as necessary: For
how should a Prince be able to defend his own Right, but by such instruments?
How should he offend him that has wronged him, his Allies, or his Territories,
but by the Soldiers valor? These are necessary in times of war, for the
punishment of Rebels, or other Enemies; necessary in times of Peace to be in
readiness upon all extremities: they are necessary by Sea, necessary by Land;
for war is not tied or confined to one place alone, but sometimes on one,
sometimes in the other, sometimes by both: Necessary in Frontiers against
Invaders; necessary in Field, to get victory to their Prince: It Is hard for a
State to be long in safety, where the helmet and musket are cashierd: old Rome
could never so long have triumphed over the world, had she not maintained her
legions of old Soldiers? but when she slighted these, mark what one has
spoken of her: The Roman State did then begin to shrink,
When they began to Court, to Coach, and Drink.


How quickly will Effeminacy and Cowardice surprise a Nation, without exercises
or employments for war? To preserve the power of the Turkish Empire, they
always make choice of their Emperor who is naturally addicted to wars. Grave
Maurice the Prince of Orange had wont to say, that he was naked when he was not
enquartered amongst the old English Regiments. As it is injustice without great
cause to begin war, so it is as little Policy to let the sword rust. I cannot
see how long the plough could subsist in quietness, nor yet the Master reap
his corn with joy, if he was not defended by the sword: it is held wisdom to
have the plough going within, and the Soldier marching without: a right Soldier
is the joy of the Farmer, the defense of the City, the shield for Learning, the
credit of his Nation, and the glory of his Prince. And what though the times be
not always for their present service and employment? A wise man (I hold) may
lay up his sword, but I shall not count him so who breaks it: it is good
always to have (as in all other occasions) good store beforehand; so also in
this: for Soldiers are not like Poets, who are so borne; but they are made by
long and dangerous hazards and experience; it is not one Summers march, or
twice or thrice drilling by his Corporal, nor yet his great oaths will
qualify him for present service: they were the veterani milites that stood it
out: a winter leaguer, with hard duty, will freeze the courage of such as are
not experienced: Though their charge runs high for the Prince, yet when He
pleases to use them, they will quickly bring in all costs and charges, or else
dye for the cause. Who now would hold them unfitting or unnecessary to be
employed and maintained, who will willingly meet death in the face for the
honor and profit of their Master.

It was wittily jested by the Marquess Spinola, concerning the old English in
the Low Countries, when he heard one of his Lords term them old Dogs; it is true
(said he) they are so, and if it was not for such old bitten Curres, I would
quickly worry the United Provinces. It Is well when the General can say, he
has as many Soldiers as men: 'twas a sharp one of him who told a Lord
General who brought a great multitude of raw and unexpert Soldiers into the
field; Sir, I see abundance of Serving-men, but no Soldiers. I could (if I
pleased) be large in this Theme, but I intend brevity: for Soldiers delight
more in Actions than words.

Lastly, that this Calling is warrantable, who can doubt it, seeing the God of
Heaven approves it? has not He appointed it for a punishment unto the Nations?
He gave Nebuchadnezzar hire and wages for his service which he performed for
him. St. John Baptist did not disallow of the Soldlers Calling who came to him,
but only gave them cautious directions, as not to do violence, and to be
content with their wages Was it not lawful; why then have Kings and Princes in
all ages (who were wise and holy men) used it, and have prospered.

And if it shall be objected, that therefore K. David should not build the
Temple, because he had shed blood, and had been a warrior: That Is not
principally meant of the blood of Gods enemies, or his own; but spoken of the
blood of Vriiah which was killed with many more of his Seconds by David's
council and direction. If any shall say, that sucking children and Innocents of
young years are murdered in wars, as well as others: What Is that to the
purpose? Is not the case of pestilence and war in this point alike? Where God
commands the Rule to be general, it is no safety to put in exceptions: Saul
smarted for his foolish and indirect mercy showed to the Amalekites.

Certainly, war is lawful in respect of the Cause, Gods worship, or
Religions defense: it is warrantable in respect of the effect, working what
Heaven decreed; and who dare question the Actions supreme? it is questionless
good, because Heaven commands it; being good, why may it not be undertaken? It
is justly allowable in respect of the end, being Gods glory, the Churches
prosperity, the Kingdoms peace, the subjugating of Enemies, the establishment
and confirmation of Right and Justice, with diverse other consequences needful,
just, and pious.

Though there be an old law, Bellum quasi minime bellum: that is either the
taunt of some Satyricall fancy, or beggarly Poet, or else spoken of that war
which is injustum (.i.) unlawful and unrighteous: So that, nor that, nor all
the phantastique conceits of Anabaptists against war under the Gospel can
any ways disparage that high, heroic, generous, noble and honorable Calling,
allowed by God, and followed by the best of men in all Ages.

SECT. II. What men are fittest to choose for Soldiers.
THere has been no small controversy and dispute about this Subject: And for
certain, the advantage or disadvantage of foiling the Enemy consists much in
making choice of Soldiers; ex quolibet pigno non fit Mercurius. All Spirits are
not borne under the Planet of Mars, nor all Conditions fit to follow Drums and
Trumpets: Let not the Soldier be nomine infamis; for it is certain, frustranea
erit Executio, cum debilis fuerit Electio. Some (with Zerxes) care not what
valor be in the men, so that they abound in numbers and multitudes: But is not
this to set chafe to encounter the wind; or as to appoint Hares against
Lions? It is not the number but the virtue and valor that gain Conquest; and
who march to the field of victory through slaughtered carkases? who knows not
how often few numbers of the English Regiments have not only affronted, but
also overthrown great Armies of the French, and that even in the heart and
bowels of all France, whenas the French have been as good as five for one (a
mighty odds to all probability) had there not been great difference in the
courage of the Combitants: and did not that noble and never to be forgotten
Christian Soldier, the renowned Scanderberg, with an handful of his Epirots
not only defend themselves and their Province from the insulting threats and
menaces of the great Turk; but upon all affronts offered did also bravely
revenge themselves by overthrowing those huge and vast Armies which were sent
against them by the Turkish Sultan.

And it has not only been so by Land, but also by Sea: Have not great Navies
been dispersed and scattered by small numbers? Witness that unparaleld
Sea Fight betwixt the Christians and Turks in the Levant; for though the
Christian General Don John of Austria with the Venetians and others were great
in numbers, yet the Turk far surmounted them; but in conclusion, what a
fearful slaughter did the Christians make of them? and what a famous victory
was obtained over them? And how often have great Navies of Spaniards been queld
and conquered by a few English little ships, by the valor of our Commanders,
such as were Clifford, Frobisher, Cavendish, Haukins, Drake, who when they met,
made the Spaniards know, that though they had gotten, yet they should not dare
to keep their Indian Gold, but yield themselves and it to their conquering
swords: And is it not true, that 4 or 5 Merchant ships of London well appointed
for Sea, dare not only look upon, but also grapple with three times so many of
the Turks: and whence is this? (next to the providence of Almighty God, who
can overthrow with few as well as with many, and who is the sole giver of all
victory) it may be accounted that it is the valor and expertnesse of the
Soldiers: an ounce of Steel being worth a pound of Lead, and a few Lions
better than a great company of Stagges. So, that certain it is, that it much
concerns a State to make choice (in times of need) of such Spirits as are
naturally the fittest for that great employment of war.

The colder Climates have usually produced the terriblest Soldiers; and the
Country has commonly yielded hardier men for all hazards, than populous
Cities, they being (for the most part) too tenderly and effeminately bred. As
well Vegetius observes it, Aptiorem armis esse Plebem Rusticam, quae sub Dio
and labor nutritur, solis patiens, umbrae negligens, Balnearum nesciens,
deliciarum ignara, simplicis animi, parvo contenta, duratis membris ad
tolerantiam omnis laboris, cui gestare ferrum, fossam ducere, onus far,
consuetudo de Rure est: (.i.) The Country men are more apt for Arms, who are
hardly and laboriously bred, patient of heat, not regarding shades or shelters,
ignorant of Bathes, not given to Luxury, honest and simple of heart, content
with little, whose joyntes and members are rough and tough to undergo all
work, who are inured to carry iron, to make ditches, to bear burdens: And as
Horace has it, that the Country young men, not the Citizens of Rome conquered
Hanniball; but as he, Sed Rusticorum mascula militum Proles. (.i.)
Great Hanniball was beaten down
By the sturdy Country-Cowne.
And Pliny confirms the same, Rusticae Tribus (says he) laudatissimae;
Vrbanae vero in quas transferri ignominiae esset probro. (.i.) Country clownes
are most commendable for warlike employment; but Citizens are given to
idleness, sloth, etc.

I should approve of the choice Black-smiths, Carpenters, Masons, Plough-men,
Butchers, Sawyers, and all other rough and laborious Trades, especially such
who use their limbs most forceably at work. In Cities choice may be made of
Car-men, Porters, Watermen, Wine-Coopers, Roape-makers, Dyars, with Brewers
servants and Attendants; amongst which many able, lusty, strong, and hardy men
may be found fit for service. As for Shoo-makers, Tailors, Ostlers,
Chamberlains, Tapsters, Coach men, Footmen, Weavers, cashierd Serving-men;
Fiddlers, Vintners-Journy-men, etc. though these may be better spared both for
their great numbers, and uselesnesse at home, than the former; yet they are
held not so good to fight, or to endure the hardness of the wars, as the
former; yet from the mixture of both there may be a complete Army gathered up.

Amongst the Nations of Europe, it is held, that the French be too hasty to
offer injuries, but too light to hold on against stout resistancies: most count
the Cavallery of France better than the Infantry, they being for the most part
well bred for the saddle. The Italian is much degenerate; and Rome in stead of
sending forth Consuls, and Legions of stout Soldiers, sends out Friars, Monks,
and Jesuits. The High Dutch (unless mixed with other Nations) are of
themselves too dull and slow. The Dane (much like the Low Dutch) drowzy, and is
so far from being excellent by himself, that neither of them are good with
others: hence is it that both of them in any occasion are forced to be beholden
to other Nations; as to the English, Scots, French, Wallons, and Switzers: nay,
the Low- Dutch trust not any of their frontier Garrisons with companies of
their own Nation alone, as well knowing how easily they would yield upon
furious assaults; they are so wary at Sea, that usually they man their ships
with English, Scots and French; have they not maintained them selves at home by
others valor for many years, and gained from their Enemy? In their Western
Plantations, where they have effected any thing against the Spaniard, or hold
any thing safely now, is it not by other men's hearts more than their own? The
Swede and Pole are much alike, yet it is thought that the Pole is the better
horseman and the Swede the stouter footman; however the long wars in Germany
have fleshed them both. The Spaniard usually is held to school or Trades till
14 or 16 years old, and ever after for the musket: and to speak truth, he
has valor enough to make attempts, and to get ground, and he wants it not to
hold it: he is fit for heat, cold, hunger, or thirst; yet he is better for land
then sea, and better to hold a Fort then to fight in field.

Now for certain (without any disparagement to other Nations) it is known that
there is not a truer bred spirit for war by land or by sea, then the English:
for who ever affronted them without sufficient proof of their ability;
especially if they pleased to call in their Seconds to accompany them? What
Country of Christendom has not felt the force of their steel? and the Turks
at sea confess it, that they had rather deal with any Nation then the
English. So that if they be well ordered, and kept in by the rules of good
Discipline, they fear not the faces or forces of their stoutest foes: and have
one singular virtue beyond any other Nation, for they are always willing to
go on; and though at first stoutly resisted, yet will as resolutely undertake
the action the second time, though it be to meet death it self in the face.

To be brief; most men would have Soldiers to partake more of the Country then
the City, to be sturdy and stiff, rather then courteous and affable: I would
have them stout, hardy, temperate, watchful, patient, faithful, obedient,
religious; for an an Army of such persons is most likely to prove to the honor
of their Prince, and glory of their Nation.

SECT. III. What weapons are the fittest for Soldiers; and that the Pike is not
of consequence in these times.
WIse Commanders have always had great care to have their forces, both Horse
and Foot, to be well and completely furnished with the most serviceable Arms
and weapons: for it is good Policy to take all advantages in field, especially
against such Enemies who neither take nor give fair Quarter; such as are
Dragooners, Gravats, with some partees of Freebooers and Hannovers; against
whom any sort of murdering weapons may be used: However, for the generality of
weapons, most men will approve of them best, which have these five properties:

First, they should be Defensive against Assaults, fit and able to safeguard
the persons of those Soldiers who bear them into the field: these make the
Enemy loath to come on, and encourage our Soldiers to make attempt: by this
course many great Armies have been discomfited. In this regard the Spaniard is
much to be commended, for he still keeps himself in his Arms: but above all
others, the Turks are vigilant this way; for they in their march against
Enemies, move like a complete Armory for variety and choice of weapons: Our
Nation of late has been much to blame, who against all Orders have many times
for the enjoying a little ease, cast away their Arms for the present, though
after strictly and severely punished by their Officers for their fault; and
though they have been by this course unfit to have made Resistance (if any
occasion should have been offered.)

Secondly, it is not enough to have weapons for a Defense, unless also they can
Offend: the former respecting the good of our own persons, these aiming at the
annoying and destroying our Enemies; it is the end of war to weaken his
forces, and to subjugate his Armies by cutting off and lessening his numbers;
and therefore those weapons must needs be counted excellent which are fit to
bring to pass our intended desires: herein the Polish and Hungarian horsemen
are commendable, and it is to be supposed they have learned that Custom from
their neighboring Enemy the Turk. And indeed defensive weapons may be used in
times of Peace, but offensive are the best for war: why need men go forth to
kill their Enemies, except they be allowed such instruments as can perform the
deed?

Then thirdly, it is good, as to have weapons so qualified, so also is it as
convenient to have them light and portable: it is not to be expected, that a
Soldier can fight stoutly upon the sudden, whenas by long marches and hot
weather he is tired under his Arms: Soldiers should take a pleasure in
beareing them, but they should not be burdened under them: Hereupon it is
thought that Buffe-coats came so much in request, because they are so easy and
comely, and (if good) as fit for defense as common Corslets: The High Dutch and
Imperial forces are excellently well accommodated with nimble Arms, being
most of them proper able persons, and also furnished with very light Muskets.

Fourthly, though these three things be fit to be in Soldiers weapons, yet they
are then far better, when they come from the hands of the Artificer dexterously
and sufficiently tempred and made; to effect which, there is no better
inducement then to see that the Laborers be paid their wages, (good and
certain Pay being the spur to Workmen to make their work complete and
serviceable:) and for certain, when they are truly paid, if they fail in the
delivering in good Arms, they are then liable to severe punishment by the
Magistrate, and are fit to be made Examples, and discarded their places with
Ignominy and disgrace: Our Army was ill provided for swords, those which were
delivered to the Soldiers being so brittle, that with any blow almost they
would break to pieces: there is no Nation that may have better then our own,
if care be had; we having first, excellent matter; and secondly, as expert
Artificers to give them form as any Nation, nay, in many respects far better.

Then lastly, weapons should be so made, that they may be with convenience, and
(as much as can be with advantage too) used in all places, and at all times:
for their chiefest virtue is in their generality of use. Hereupon the short
strong Sword is held better then the long Rapier, or (as the Switzer uses)
two-handed swords: the Musket and Fire-lock are held excellent, because
seldom can an Army be so instraightned, but that Soldiers may use these with
terror and advantage: these are good for all convoyes, marchings, intrenchings,
pillagings, onslaughts, near or far off; they are easy of carriage,
terrible in their execution, doing their message quickly and thoroughly, as
after shall be proved.

And though the Musket be but of late Invention, yet none that ever went
before it was more approved and commended; nor was any weapon (except the sword
only) so generally received of all Nations as the Musket has been. Now for
certain, the Pike has been of great repute in former times also; yet in these
latter losing much of it is ancient authority, as being experimentally known for
true, that it is not of an offensive virtue against professed Enemies: for it is
antiquity is not a sufficient argument to tie our times to conformity to the
practice of the former; after-Ages having altered and changed, nay, quite left
off many kinds of weapons that were anciently in use: Now it shall briefly
appear to all, how un-usefull the Pike is in Military occasions at this
present, and that in many respects.

SECT. IV. That the Pike cannot offend, or do Execution.
AS there is nothing does more encourage the Enemy to assault, so, nor is there
any thing that does more dishearten Soldiers to fight valiantly, then the
knowledge and certainty of a disproportionable disability of Arms: and
therefore it has always been counted the best Policy in war against open
Enemies, as to take the advantage of Time, Place, Numbers and Valor, so also
of warlike Instruments: And they have been accounted excellent Commanders, who
have invented new Stratagems to foil the Enemy; and hence those Arms have
been accounted most admirable, which can most offend and annoy the adverse
Party.

Now it shall plainly appear, that the Pike cannot effect, or do execution;
For whereas it is pretended that they alone keep off the Enemies Horse, nothing
less, as shall after be proved: and admit they did, yet that service was to be
accounted defensive only. Now suppose the Enemy invading be either Horse or
Foot, the former can kill at least 120 yards off, the latter at least 400
yards: now is the Pike able to kill at either of these distances, being 16 foot
at most in length, and then pushed (perhaps) with arms of an impotent, sickly,
weake-bodyed Soldier, or, which is as bad, by one that wants skill or courage,
or both.

And what more, there is not one private Soldier of twenty shall by his utmost
strength and skill together run through a common Corslet, nay, not through a
Buffe-coat which is good, to wound mortally; and what wisdom or policy is it
to have so many standing men in Arms, which are not able to kill the Invaders:
Further, has it not been seen that three or four good resolute Soldiers with
their swords and Buffe-coats only have cut off ten or twelve Pike-heads, and
come off safe without wounds, and purchased to themselves honor and reward?

For an instance of this: The Prince of Orange his Leaguer lying before
Scenke-Sconse, it so fell out, that there was a great uproare betwixt the
English and Switzers, they being enquarter'd one next to the other; the
occasion was small, being about a stiver or two lost at Cards; but the issue
had likely to have produced wonder and amazement (if by fair persuasions and
entreaties both parties had not been pacified) for the Tumult began to grow to
an intestine Mutiny (many men being wounded on both sides) so that the English
first, and Switzers at last called to Arms: whenas there stood one of the
Divisions of the Switzers pikes ready charged, did not then two Soldiers of
Collonell Burlacyes Regiment with their swords only enter by force into that
Body, and cut off diverse Pike-heads, and came off again with three or four of
them in their hands, which in fury and great derision they flung again amongst
them, with this jeere to boot, Oh do us no harm good men!

And because other Arguments shall be used; Can there be any hopes of much
slaughter of the Enemies by our Pikemen, when not above three ranks at once
can do any hurt without prejudice and danger to their fellows more then to
their foes? which shall be thus proved:

Admit the Pike be 16 foot long, the first Rank indeed have use and liberty of
the whole length; but then the second Rank loses the benefit of three feet,
and the third Rank of six feet, if they stand charged at three foot distance:
Or if upon close-charge at one foot and an half distance, (which though the
stronger, yet disadvantageous, because the Enemies bullets seldom miss) then
the second Rank loses one foot and a half, and the third three foot at
least; so that at the best, (the men being able and skillful in Arms) yet what
with the terror of the Alarm, the confusion of Ranks by the death of some,
the time of night when the Enemy may fall on, the hazard of wounding in their
thrust their own Commanders or Comrades (by their close standing) sufficiently
show that it is not the Pike that does the feat.

For, the liberty of the Enemy being horsemen, with speed and fury of
charging, will, and does so puzzell and nonplus the Pikemen, that in a Body of
Horse varying their motions, the Pike must play the Ape of force, and in case
they fail in variety of Postures for defense, all is lost; which, in a Body so
beset with furious Assailants, (conscious to themselves of their own
insufficiency of Resistance) easily yield to their Betters. And if the Enemy be
Musketeers, who knows not but that a thousand expert, able Fire-men (using
their utmost skill and advantage) are able to reduce two thousand Pikes to
their own desired conformity? And all this is only in regard that the Pike
cannot answer like for like, but is forced to suffer the volleys of shot, and
is no ways able for Replies. To proceed.

SECT. V. That the Pike is unfit for Convoyes.
ARmies are like great Families, must have all sorts of Provision; there is
little, or no hopes of the long subsistence of that Body which wants Ingresse,
Egresse, and Regresse: it is a dishonor to a Prince not to be able to come to
his own home; therefore it is, and always has been the wisdom of Chiefes to
sit down and enquarter in such places, to which there may be a confluence of
Trading; so that the Camp and Leaguer shall be but like a City removed into
the fields: every house must have a door of entrance.

Yet it often so falls out by the casualty of wars, and opposition of
Enemies, that men cannot always enjoy this liberty; For sometimes the Enemy or
Neutrall friends block up passages, and then few men do desire to go to that
Market where there is nothing to be bought but blows. It has been known that
many good Spirits have paid deer for fetching in others Provision; it shall
appear in one instance:

Whenas four English Regiments lay in Bremeland, under the Command of that
experienced and truly valiant General of the English, the Lord Morgan, at the
Long-Line; part of the Provision came up the River of Wesar, but that which
came by Land was conducted by our Soldiers through our own Horse-quarters;
who, as they were many and neutrall, so they were as treacherous, for they
would usually plunder and pillage our wagons, and kill our men if they
resisted; and all under a pretext of want of pay, and that they hoped to
requite us in another course: So that in plain terms, the first war in my
apprehension was with our seeming friends, for our own victuals too dearly
bought.

But if the Enemy or others do not hinder, yet distance of place, difficulty
of way, time of year, Covenants of paying, want of ready moneys, Remove of
Armies, sudden alterations of Princes minds may cause Convoyes to be full of
hazard: Else why is it called a Convoy, but because it is cum Via and Vita, for
way and life; and who are indeed more exposed to dangers then Convoyers: being
men whose lives hang upon Wagon wheels, or, as I may say truly, Persons who
always carry their lives in their hands.

Now, whosoever rightly conceives the necessity of Convoyes in Armies, and what
a great charge is laid upon the undertakers; For sometimes they bring along
great treasure, as the pay for the whole Army; sometimes they undertake the
protection of some great Prince or Commander: sometimes they bring Commissions,
and letters of Intelligence, for the safety of the whole Body; may easily
conclude, that seeing their way does often lie through the Enemies Countries,
they had need to pick men of singular valor, admirable courage, and choice
dexterity for feats of Arms, and such as go with Arms fitting to offend
upon all assaults and occasions, such as shall any ways, at any time dare to
make approaches.

Now it is plain, that the Pike-men are altogether unfit for such high service
as this is; not that any can question or disparage their valor or skill, but
their unfitness for that imloyment; which is thus proved to all:

First, from the place where they may be set upon; if it should be in a Wood
amongst trees, as such places are fittest for, and fullest of Pillagers and
Freebooters for Ambush; I would feign know how the Pike could be in such places
charged without a great deal of incombrance in regard of the branches of
trees, which would hinder them to use their Postures? If, secondly, it should
be upon the passage of some Bridge, were not 100 good firelocks able to keep
that passage against 500. Pikes, and pillage at their pleasure? If the place be
a Narrow lane set with hedges, Bullets will force their passage through,
whereas Pikes cannot. And if the ground be spacious and champaigne, gives it
not the more compass and liberty to the Enemy to come off or on, and to keep
distance until the Pikes be either most shot or killed; for in such places what
are the Pike-men upon their charge, but even standing marks to be hit the
sooner?

Then secondly, from the time that the Enemy may fall on: If first, in the
night, what a confusion will there be, for every man, first, to find his own
Arms? and then, what a deal of toil to put them on? And if in the day time,
are not the Pikes fit only to take wounds, but not able to give any? Now, can
they be held fit to safeguard others, who cannot help or relieve themselves?

And thirdly, Is not the Pike-man as unfit for Convoyes, in respect of swift
Marches: For Convoyes upon Intelligence of any Enemies approach, will haste
away for safety and shelter: now the Pike is not good for speed; and as they
cannot go apace from, so, nor can they pursue, with any speed, an Enemy when
he has affronted them; so that as they have been powerful to purchase their
booty, they have as large liberty to go off with their prizes, without fear
of surprise or pursuit.

And as the Pike is full of disadvantage in respect of place, time, and
marching; so, lastly, is it as insufficient in some cases to return to their
own leaguer again: For if any Enemy has heard of their marching by, may he
not with a few Musketeers block up their passage for return, so that their
General had need to send out another Convoy of Fire-men to bring home his
Pikes again, or else he must give them for lost, or be forced to ransom
them, who, if they had been Musketeers, would have been able to have freed
themselves.

And to conclude: In an Army mixed of Muskets and Pikes, why should not the
one as well as the other perform services, and run equal hazards, seeing they
are all alike engaged and interested in the same cause? which yet they cannot:
For the Pike is so far unfitting for any present service upon the Enemy, that
after ten a clock at night he is not reputed to be a sufficient Sentinel,
especially in any out-workes, as Halfe-moones, Horne-workes, etc. For all the
Alarm he can give, must be by word of mouth; which, at many times, especially
if there be any distance betwixt his Sentinels place, and the Corps-du-Guard;
or else if the wind be high and blustering, or contrary (as many times it may
be) cannot be well performed: And is not that a poor course to have 20000. men
in field, and only all, or at least the hardest service to be done by 10000.
To what end need their persons be there, whenas they stand us in little, or no
stead; for certain, great are the inconveniences that have issued in public
services, by having either equal numbers, or such great store of Pikes with
Muskets. But to go on to other Arguments.

SECT. VI. What a great disadvantage it is to have all the properest men to
carry Pikes.
BY Counsel (says King Solomon) make war; it is indeed the Hinge of great
services: none are likely to be well managed without Policy and Advice. It has
been always determined by able Commanders, to have strong, hardy, lusty,
courageous, and active men to be set forth for Soldiers; and thereupon it is
thought fit by Great States to give liberty to servants and Apprentices to use
public exercises of Recreation, as Leaping, Running, Wrestling, Pitching the
bar, Riding, Swimming, Fencing, etc. in the times of Peace, that in the times
of war they may choose men of lively and active spirits, to do their King
and Country service.

Which course cannot be by discreet men reproved: But the mistake follows;
that when such men are appointed for service, and chosen for war, then the
Officers make choice of the tallest, and, to all likelihood, of the strongest
men to be for Pike-men. Now it is certain, were the weapons as serviceable as
the men, it might be good in consequence; but here it is clean otherwise: for
the men, though apt and ready for service, are yet mainely disabled by the
Arms they are enjoined to use: for to speak plainly, what reason is it, while
that others can send the messengers of Death to their Enemies at a large
distance, Pikes only cannot? and while others are discharging their Bullets,
these may stand and look on only, not being able to do any thing.

Now it shall plainly appear what a great disadvantage it is to an Army, to
tie such able men to such a kind of weapon which cannot affront an insulting
foe: for, does it not spur on the Enemy to take the advantage, whenas he
knows we cannot hurt him? and will he not have matter enough to laugh at, to
see our Pikes stand charged, and to sink down shot in their Ranks by their
Pistols or Muskets, and no ways able to answer like for like; as is plain in
this Instance.

Whenas the Town of Stoade was beleaguered by the forces of Count Tilly and
others, and defended by the English; for a good while we kept many Outworkes
and Scoutes without the walls: It so fell out, that many Musketeers being
employed in other services, and being, by reason of the perfidiousnesse of the
Citizens, forced at all times to leave a sufficient number within, lest they
should have betrayed the Town; that there were an 100. or an 150. Pike-men,
able, stout, expert, and well armed, appointed (with some few Musketeers) to
keep a Scout not far from the Town: whereas 'twas thought there was little
or no danger to be feared, came it not to pass, that the Enemy (roving about
to spy all advantages) marched that very night against that Scoute which was
manned chiefly with Pikes; the Alarm was taken first by one of our Pike-men,
by the sight of a Dog, which (as he supposed, and so all the rest) came not
alone; which proved true: for presently the Enemy gave fire, and hearing but
one or two discharge from the Scout, supposed that we had either left the
work, or else were asleep, and so unable to resist: 'twas true, that when the
Enemy had twice or thrice furiously given fire, our men did retreat toward
the town; but upon notice given to our General, they were charged to
maintain and defend the work, and to beat out the enemy again: so they going
on, did by their sudden return, and the darkness of the night, terrify the
Enemy so that they left their easy gotten purchase for a time (supposing that
either we had increased our numbers, or else might have some plot to encompasse
them in:) but hearing no further pursuit, made a stand; and upon advice set
upon the Scoute the second time, wherein they made a fearful slaughter,
casting our men which were shot into the fire one upon another; killed and
burned all that stood it out, shot diverse of them who cast away their Arms to
save themselves by swimming: so that we lost most, or almost all our men.

Now was not this an unequal fight, to set Pikes against Muskets? And had
these men had Muskets, they would have defended that work against double so
many Musketeers coming on. This was much lamented, but the loss was
unrecoverable.

Nor yet will any impute any indiscretion to our General: for this Act could
not at that time have been remedied, most of our Musketeers doing daily
service in all places, both within and without the Town, and half our forces
almost (if not altogether) were Pikes; who, when they perceived how that the
heat of duties lay all upon the Musket, did all of them very well like of
their weapon, because it freed them from the most dangerous and forlorn
places; which inconvenience as soon as it was so deerly understood, was
remedied; and most of our Pike-men were urged to use the Musket; and such as
did not, were adjudged to be Cowards, as indeed they deserved.

And it must needs be a great disadvantage to an Army to be so set forth:
whenas, first, the Musketeers cannot amount to those numbers that otherways
they would; and so in case the Enemy outvy us in numbers (as usually they do)
how hard service must needs lie upon the small quantity of Musketeers that we
have: and if they be daily forced to fight, what help or assistance can they
expect from their fellow Pikes, in regard that though they would, yet they
could not relieve in respect of their Arms?

And it has done, and will cause great complaints and murmurings daily amongst
Soldiers, whenas the Musketeers perceive that the Pikes usually are like men
priviledg'd or exempted from Sallies, Convoyes, Skirmishes, Onslaughts, all
dangerous and tedious Enterprises, especially to beat out an Enemy from a
work, or to gain a passage and keep it; for in all these and many other the
like services, the Pike may rest in his Quarters, and only the Musket must
out (if we mean to speed in what we undertake) may it not produce
heart-burnings amongst Soldiers, to see some in a manner doing nothing, while
the whole heat of the day lies upon, and is undergone by others? Now seeing the
service does equally concern all, why should not eevery sworn servant do his
task.

Brieflly, concluding that the highest and chiefest service for Honor is
either going on against an Enemy, or lying down before him, or else retreating
from him; it shall appear to all, that in all these Considerations our great
number of Pikes is a great disadvantage to us.

For first, suppose that we are marching against the Enemy, any one of
experience knows that there will fall out sundry skirmishes and Salutes, much
playing by Partees as well of ours as of their men, before we can come to take
a view of their Body in gross, or they of ours. Now this cannot be done by
Pike-men, for the fight is yet at distance, and so unfit for them: it is quickly
and suddenly done, and usually in such places where the Pike-man will scarce
have liberty to manage his arms: and to speak truth, what was it but to expose
the lives of so many Pikes to the mercy of the Enemies shot, if they should be
set out? and does not the Enemy by such discover that we either are but few
Musketeers, or else we would never have begun the fight with Pikes. And I may
justly speak it, that those who carry Pikes intend not to hurt the Enemy
until they have parlyed with him; for though they may be ready and resolved to
fight a great way off, yet they cannot, until they come close up to them;
which privilege (I believe) the Enemy being Muskets, will not afford them.

Then secondly, if it be to lie against an Enemy, in case we keep any watch in
Outworks, as (for the better safeguard of the Army) we usually do; then if the
watch be set with 200. men, half of them Musketeers and half of them Pikes;
if any service be performed, I do account that it must be all done by the
Muskets; for to what purpose should the Pikes hazard themselves, whenas they
are not within reach to offend: so that I suppose (excepting only their doing
service by standing Centinell) that there are but 100, in the place to beat the
Enemy; and therefore it has been seen in service (even in Trenches) when the
Musquetier has been giving fire furiously upon the Enemy, that the Pikes have
sat safe in the Trenches, taking Tobacco, or telling tales, as though the
matter had not any ways concerned them.

And lastly, if it be to make a Retreat from an Enemy (which includes a great
deal of honor, valor, and skill;) for it must not be done dishonorably,
confusedly, or cowardly, (especially if the Enemy pursue,) but with good
Intelligence, resolved Hearts and singular Policy: for Cowards run away, but
valiant and wise Soldiers make retreats from a Foe. Is it not manifest that
even at this time also the Pike proves disadvantageous? for it is to be
concluded and resolved, that the Enemy following will not make assaults upon us
with Pikes, but with Muskets, Carbines, and Pistols, and will any man of
experience judge our Pikemen fit instruments to beat off such fiery Blades? For
if the Horse fall on (as usually they are the quickest for pursuit, and
terriblest for charge) it cannot be held safe to put our Pikes in the Rear to
keep them off; for the Pikes must stand, they cannot well come off, or follow
the other part of the Army, unless they intend to go backward charged, and how
ridiculous would such a Posture prove? so that of force we must send able
Fire-men to learn the horse to keep aloof, or else we should seem very
unkind to our fellows, to leave them to such mortal danger: And if so, then
the old rule is true, Frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora, Two
are needless where one will serve the turn. But it is clear that the Pikes
cannot, and therefore the Musquer must.

Or if (as in Germany we had experience of it) the Enemy follow with Horsemen,
and every Horseman carrying a Musquetier behind him (which may be done to win
ground of them whom they intend to visit, for four legs will rid more ground
then two) I desire to know what good our Pikes can do, whenas our Enemy
resolves to keep out of the Pikes reach, and yet be within length to effect
what they came for? So that we (if we intend to get off fairly) must do it by
placing good stout Musketeers in our Rear, who (like Parthians) can fight and
fly, or (as we say) can give fire and retreat: thus had our Army feign to do
when we came off from the Long-live, being followed close by the Imperial
Horse, each of them bringing a Musquetier with him, until we enquarter'd at
the Berke not far from Breme: which could not have been performed, had we not
maintained our Reere (not with Pikes) but with stout shot.

And that was held the best Method in our marching from our Quarters at the
Berke along to Stoad; for we left 150. or 200. resolute fire-men in a work to
find the Enemy play, whilst the maine of our Army gained almost a whole days
journey; neither was it a slow March to show State, or refresh the Soldier,
(for our safety lay in our speed;) but it was quick and hasty, so that those
which were left behind were of most reputed for lost men, and all supposed that
had not Captain Hamonds Company received the Enemy coming after us, though to
the loss almost of all his Soldiers lives, that our men had been served with
the same sauce, (the Enemy intending us for slaughter as well as his men) yet
those few men taking the best opportunity in such a desperate straight, and
having a good guide, recovered our Troops again. Now what service did our
Pikes do all this while? did they not cause our March to be the slower? and in
case the Enemy had overtaken us (as it was generally suspected he would) should
not our. Musketeers then have been the best defense for our Pike-men? and was
it not the wish of all, that all our Pikes had been Fire-men* and had not that
Order been observed, we might have all been cut off before we could have entered
into Stoad. So that it is evident enough what an hinderance it is to an Army to
have the ablest men to be for Pike-men.

SECT. VII. To have as many Pikes as Muskets, or to have such great store of
Pikes in an Army is a means to bring on the Enemies Horse.
WEapons should be to terrify, not to encourage an Enemy; to keep him off, not
to allure him on: The very Ensigns and Colors have a Terror to amaze, (as King
Solomon has it) Terrible as an Army with Banners. All warlike Instruments are
dreadful; the Shield, the Sword, the Trumpet, the very Drums and Fifes sound
and beat fear and horror: for Soldiers are not for sport and jest, but for
earnest: neither is War to be accounted as a May Game or Morrice-dance, but
as a Plague and Scourge. Therefore in Wars Soldiers use offensive weapons to
wound and destroy, such as can strike through the loins of all Opponents. And
care is to be had, that as weapons should be made serviceable, so they should
be made with all the Art that can be, to usher in death the speediest way.

It was the saying of Queen Elizabeth, That she never fared better, then when
she kept the Spaniard out at Daggers point: So it may be said in all wars,
It Is never better with our Armies, then when we keep the Enemy at Distance; so
that though he has a desire to make attempts, yet knowing our Forces to be
well armed, he shell nor dare to make approaches.

The old Grecians had usually the advantage of their Enemies by virtue of their
weapons: so it is known, that the Romans could not have subjugated so many
Countries and Provinces had they not had great advantage of warlike Instruments
more then of Numbers: And it is judged by able men, that the Norman Duke at
Battle-Abbey won the day, and so the Crown, by the excellency of his weapons;
his Shields being made large for defense, and having a Pike of sharpened Iron
without-side to wound and gore; so that they were his Arrows and Shields that
made Harold and so many thousands of our Nation to fall slain in that place.
Invention herein is commendable: who knows not how Archimides in Syracuce by
skillful Engines by him made and invented, battered the Roman ships so, that
Marcellus and all his stout Romans were struck with amaze? And as worthy of
perpetual memory is that of King Henry the Eight before the Maiden-town of
Bulloigne, which device so daunted the Citizens, that at sight of his Engines
they yielded themselves and the Town to the Kings mercy.

Now let us examine whether or no the Pike be a weapon of that worth and
excellency, that it can keep off the Enemy with any kind of terror? or
whether the multitude of them does not rather hearten and hasten on the Enemy
to assault? First, it is manifest that of it self it cannot keep off neither
Pistols nor Muskets: for, in case the Horse pretend an onset are not Commands
given out presently to the Divisions of Muskets to draw out certain files to
beat off the horse which are fallen on the Pikes: and certain it is, that
should not the Pikes this way be speedily relieved, what a fearful slaughter
would the Enemies Horse make, and what a speedy havoc of our Pikes, without
any prejudice to their own Bodies or danger to their Horses: and cannot their
Muskets do as much? And certainly I should account it but folly in the Enemy
(if he does outstrip us in Horse, or in Foot-forces) not to set upon our
Pikes: for who can hinder him from taking advantages? or why should not he make
entrance at the weakest place? But now mark the inconvenience that follows:
If it be demanded, who beats off their Horse? you will say, our Muskets: then
to what purpose serve the Pikes, but to cause many others to fall for coming
in to help them? but that is not all neither; for, may not the sudden
alteration of a formed Battle cause an overthrow of the whole? for while there
are Muskets drawn out of all Regiments to relieve the Pikes, does not their
drawing out weaken the strength of that Body out of which they came, which
perhaps was before overmatch'd in numbers of the Enemies shot? and what is this
but to draw out a great deal of good blood from a Body which may quickly
perish for want of it?

But yet further; if it be said our Pikes keep off, or beat off the Enemies
Horse, why then do they retreat for our Muskets? or why do they not set upon
our Musketeers? or why need there be such sending for our Muskets to free the
Pikes? for they were set upon, and were in danger, not the Muskets: and they
were not able of themselves to spoil the Enemy, or safeguard themselves. Now I
shall easily prove all this to be true, by this demonstration.

Admit we come 700. men into the field, thus ordered: 300. Pikes, 300.
Musketeers, and 100. Horse: The Enemy also comes with 700. but he has no
Pikes, but embattles with 500. shot, and 200. Horsemen; will any now conclude,
that because we are as many in Number as they, and as old, experienced,
resolute Soldiers as they, caeterisque paribus, that therefore thus ordered, we
are able to maintain fight with them? That we are not, I will prove.

First, the Enemy has 100. Horse to play with ours, and another 100. to play
upon our Pikes, or to join with their other Troop to rout our Horsemen, which
to all likelihood they may being joined in one, being 200. for 100. which if
they do, may they not then entertain service against our Pikes, who at that
pinch must be relieved, for they cannot help themselves against Pistol
bullets, but must fall down shot in their Ranks and Files, without our aid:
Now the Enemy surmounts our numbers in shot when we are at most, being 500. to
300. Admit we send 100. from 300. Musketeers, (which are as few as can be sent
against such a power of Horse) but indeed too many to be sent from their
fellows; has not the Enemy great advantage to be 500. Musketeers against
200. or else may he not spare an 100. of his Muskets to play against ours who
are sent to relieve our Pike-men, and yet have the better against us, being
still 400. against 200. and also be as able to foil our Pikes as before.

Or admit, secondly, that we have 400. Muskets, 200. Pikes and 100. Horse: and
that the Enemy has 600. Muskets, and 100. Horse: Are we in this state able to
oppose them? It shall appear briefly that we are not. Grant that our Horse
answer theirs, yet may they not draw out 100. of their shot to foil our Pikes,
which will presently be effected, and yet have (to all probability) the better
of our Musketeers, being 500. against 400.

Now, in both these cases, if we be overcome and beaten, (as what hopes are
there else, but that we shall?) I demand who were the cause? Let us suppose no
defect in the Officers for matter of Direction or Encouragement; (nor any other
advantage of Wind, or Sun, or Ground:) yet who may not easily perceive, that
our great numbers of Pikes did procure our overthrow and ruin? For, what
offense did our Pikes, or could they do? none: Nay, they were not only unable
to offend, but as unfit to defend: so, that in plain troth, they neither did
hurt to the Enemy, nor good to themselves: this is as true in an Army
consisting of many Thousands, as in one of certain Hundreds. And certainly,
our Forces may at all times defend themselves, and effect more against Enemies
for the glory of our Nation, if they shall increase their Musketeers, and
lessen or take away their Pikes; for the Imperial forces scarce have any: nor
do Soldiers desire to be troubled with that kind of weapon; all are proud of
their muskets, which yield more command to them than Pikes, and bring in more
plenty of pillage.

Now briefly, for the second, It may appear to all, that our multitude of
Pikes hearten the Enemy to charge: for, will it not be an encouragement, to
fight against such who only take, but cannot give wounds, whenas the Enemy
perceives that he can come on, or go off without danger of death to himself,
and by discharging at his pleasure sink his Adversary even at his best posture
for resistance: for, may it not be said of the Pike-man, that he would have
killed his Enemy if his Pike would have reached him, or if he could have come
at him? This was that that made the Imperial forces so desperately often set
upon our work because they knew it for certain, that we usually manned them
with as many Pikes as Muskets. But I suppose I have spoken enough of this to
satisfy any judicious Soldier: And it is wished, that our Officers would
augment their Musketeers, they would find that in any service they would be
able to perform more than other ways they can, or formerly have done: and it
must needs give spirit to the Leaders, when they know that they have no
ciphers, but all such Blades as thunder out death to their Enemies at large
distance: It would prove also to the Honor of their Prince, and Credit of
themselves.

SECT. VIII. To have equal numbers of Pikes to Muskets, or to have such great
numbers of them, is a great Charge, and a Loss to the Prince that sets them
forth.
THough there be sundry Arguments to confirm this subject, yet I hold this not
to be the least: For, considering the care that every one in particular ought
to have toward the good of his Prince, it is held, that those which are
entrusted in public services of war, are bound especially to study, and lay
down conclusions, how they may keep their Sovereign freest from damages,
seeing all the members strive and endeavor to defend their Head: and for
certain, such may be termed Cauponantes Bellum, who aim rather at their
private gains, than their Princes benefit. Now it shall plainly appear, that
it is a great charge to a State to set forth as many Pikes as Muskets in
public services against an Enemy.

For first, the price of the furniture for a Pike-man runs higher then that
of a Musquetier; the one is, and may be completely now put in Arms fit for
service for betwixt 22s. or 24s. at most; the other scarce under the rate of
35s. even for the meanest and slightest sort of Armor. Now suppose the Army
going out consists of 20000. men, half Musketeers, and half Pikemen; the
charge to the Prince for Muskets will amount to, if valued at 22s. the head,
11000l. or if at 24s. the man, to 12000l. But the charge for Pikes at 25s.
apeece, will rise to the sum of 17500l. at the lowest; so that had they all
been Musketeers, there had been 5500l. saved to the Princes coffers: hence it
is, evident, that there is a whole weeks pay reserved for the number of 20000.
men, and 1500l. overplus, at the rate of 5s. the week for a Soldiers pay: and
who can deny, but that this course is advantageous to a State?

But now, if any shall say, But we will not have Pikes equal for number with
Muskets, but let there be 15000. Muskets, and only 5000. Pikes: yet who
knows not that the rate and charges still holds proportionably? For, 5000
Pike-mens furniture will amount to as much as will set forth 8000. Musketeers:
the charge for the one (being after 35s. the man) coming to 8750l. And the
cost for 8000. Musketeers coming (after the rate of 22s.) but to 8800l. in
all: So that there is in arming out 5000. Pikes, as much disburs'd as would
have set out 8000. Musketeers, within one 50l. only, which is nothing. Now
were not the Musketeers more necessary, it was something to the purpose; but
if they be not, why should their numbers be allowed for advantageous? Or if the
Pikes be not so excellent, Parcatur sumptui, it is then good to save charges; or
if not, yet to lay out moneys for those Arms which are most useful.

Then secondly, when both are ready furnished, and completely armed; the
maintaining the Pike with it is furniture, is a great deal more costly than
that of the Musket: And though care be had by the Soldier (which is rare) yet
what by casualties and accidents, he can scarce ever be at all points ready;
and then if his furniture do fail, it is harder and costlier to be repaired
and mended then the Musket: For proof hereof, is it not manifest that Rainy
weather rusts and spoils a Corslet, but not a Musket; or any little blow, or
sudden touch many times breaks off a Pikes head, which makes it altogether
unserviceable; as also the tases, with the hooks, buckles, and other
materials, are quickly broke; and then the Corslet is unfitting for defense
and unseemly to wear.

Add to these inconveniences, That to be put upon long and quick Marches in
hot Summer weather, with Arms complete as well for Pike as for Corslet, (and
Soldiers are subject, and liable to such duties,) cannot but be wonderful
burdensome, and the more by reason of the excessive heat which he is forced to
suffer, being (as I may so say) imprisoned in his Arms; whereas the Musquetier
marches with a great deal of liberty, and is free and open to the air, which
is no small benefit and happiness to him upon such occasions: And as these
Arms are more combersome to the Soldier, so they are the more chargeable for
carriage; for they take up, and employ more wagons, waggoniers, and horses for
draught, neither can they belayd up so closely or safely as Muskets may.

And as the Pike out-vies the Musket for charge and combersomnesse, so they
cause more loss than Muskets; for though there go as many out, yet there
come fewer home: for, let the Officers lay never so strict a charge upon the
Soldiers for preservation of Arms, yet (upon advantages and opportunities
offered) what by their running away, and what by their wearines upon long and
hot marches, and so not recovering the Army again (being often cut off by the
Boores, or Enemies parties that wait upon such occasions, or dying in the place
there) many Pikes and Corslets are lost daily, and miscarry; which casualties,
as they are a weakening to an Army, so they prove a loss to the Prince: for, I
suppose, the Captains would be unwilling to answer the charges of all Arms
that are lost these ways; neither indeed is it fitting that they should: for
notwithstanding all their care and vigilance, yet these inconveniences do, and
will often happen in great Armies and long marches. The best course that I know
how to remedy this loss and damage, is, to furnish the Soldiers with Arms
that are cheaper, lighter for carriage, and such as Soldiers will not be easily
persuaded to part withal; and them (I hold) to be good Muskets, and
half-pikes.

SECT. IX. That if the Pike be still retained, yet to have all the Pike-men to
be as well experienced in the use of the Musket, as of the Pike.
HAving sufficiently proved the Pike to be unusefull in military occasions in
the precedent Sections, I now come to show one Particular, which is necessary
to be put in practice, which is this; That in case for the present there shall
not be a full discharge of the Pike, yet it is fit that all the Pike-men should
be expert and able to use the Musket upon any need or occasion; which may be
confirmed for these considerations following.

First, that in case our Musketeers be too few in number for the Enemy, that
then by this means they may have supplies near them to give them assistance;
and it is but equity for one member to relieve another, and as much as it can to
afford ease and supportment to it is fellow. Now, it is not fit that the
Musquetier should perform duty oftener, or harder then his Comrades; which yet
he must needs do in marchings, Convoyings, Sallyings, etc. except the Pike-man
upon occasion afford ease by exchanging his Corslet for a Musket.

Secondly, Suppose we match and equalize the Enemy in Troops of Horse, then
for certain there need not be any divisions of Pikes; for what shall they
perform, when there are none to make opposition against them? And by this
means we shall much increase our volleyes of shot, which are indeed the glory
and strength of our Army, and the only instruments to daunt the Enemy.

Then thirdly, Is it not a great benefit to go often out upon Convoyes, and
Parties? And comes there not profit by freedom of pillaging, upon lawful
Command, in an Enemies Country? And who acts these services but the Fire-lock
and Musquetier? For the Pike-man may play the part of a good huswife, stay at
home upon expectation what the Musket will bring in; but cannot fetch in any
thing of, or by himself: so that unless (out of charity) the Musquetier be
pleased to give him some part of his booty, he must either buy, or else want
it; which he needed not have done, had he been furnished with the like weapons:
this I have known to be true, in many places where our Leaguer has been: And
to speak truth, the Boores and Peasants of the Country are not terrified to
yield their goods at the command of Pike-men; but will, and have made
resistance (even to the loss of our men's lives) with their loap-staves, and
other Country weapons, because they have not seen Muskets to force their
obedience and subjection.

And to conclude; Do not Pikemen, by being tied only to that sort of Arms,
offer great injury to their Prince, to themselves, to their fellows? For, is
it not an injury to take pay, and yet do not half so much labor and service
as others? Why should they be maintained with equal pay to Musketeers, whenas
they undergo not half such hazards? nor yet do any notable exploit against
the Enemy? For, let any one by experience speak it; when any skirmish or set
Battle has, in these latter times, been ended, (upon the view of dead
carcases) have there been found any quantity, or great numbers, who have
received their deaths by the wounds given by Pikes? the slaughter being made,
for the most, now with Muskets, Carbines, Pistols and Swords. Now is it fit or
just, that such chargeable Numbers should be kept on foot for doing nothing, in
respect of others?

And the injury is little less which they do to themselves: for in any
public service they stand exposed to as much danger, nay many times to more
then diverse others do; for while they are not able to offend, they are fit to
be offended; and though they cannot send death to others, yet others can send
it to them: Now is not this a wrong done to themselves, that although they be
valorous and able men, yet they willingly bind themselves to such Arms as are
not offensive, and will rather be killed in them then leave them for others
which would much more beat off their foes, to the safety, perhaps, of the whole
Army, and to the greater security of their own persons.

Then lastly, The injury is great (if strictly considered) which they offer to
others; for whereas they put great confidence in them (as I believe they may
for matter of courage and faithfulness;) yet they must needs fail their hopes
upon necessity, in regard the Arms which they use, are not able to perform
any great service: Now, their safety consists in the well coming off of the
Musketeers; for they failing, how long can these hope to stand sure? The Enemy
will quickly command their throats at his mercy, if once the Musket be foiled.
And therefore to uphold the forces decaying and lessening, it is fit, that at
least the Pike-men should have so much art, as to know how to handle the
Musket as well as the Pike, skill and experience being no burden to the
master; and the advantage and benefit which may come by thi^ practice, being so
great and weighty.

Let us now come to answe^ all the Arguments that are made for the defense of
the Pike.

SECT. X. Answers to the Arguments that have been, and that are now made, in,
and for the defense of the Pike, in these times.
I Know I shall not want Opponents; for a point of thi^ Nature, at first,
seems like a project; every man will have an ill conceit of it, and as many as
can will cry it down, though they know not well what it is, or why they do
so. As first, I suppose,

Object. What Is he that set it out to the world, and is never able to prove it?
or the like. To which I answer,

First, That I am Iure Anglico, Accademico, Sacro, Bellico, Religioni,
Principi, Patriae, Marti, Mercurio addictissimus: In plain English, more I am
not, less I am not.

Now, why I had need to do it, appears, first, In that all the writers of
Martial affairs have kept silence in this one particular; and is it not
lawful for me to make a discovery of what may in time conduce to the general
good of our Nation? A Mine of Gold is not therefore to be disliked, because
'twas no sooner found out: nor is any good thing therefore to be disparaged,
because it is lately disclosed.

Then secondly, knowing by Experience, that in foreign services our Nation
has been disabled to perform such execution as they might, in regard of the
great multitude, and extraordinary number of Pikes which are put into our
Regiments, whereas the Enemy consists most of Muskets, and usually out-strips
us in Numbers; and so has performed more against us, then we could against him.

Now, that I am able to prove it, let but any Martialist read this Discourse,
and lay aside all prejudicacy of Opinion; I doubt not, if he please to speak
truth, (as a true-bred Soldier should do) but that he will allow my Positions
to be just, and advantageous to public services. To come now to the Arguments
which seem to plead for the necessity of Pikes.

Arg. 1. Some argue the Pike to be full of Necessity, because of it is
Antiquity; and it is pity (say they) that a weapon which has been so generally
approved of, and used with such applause for so many hundreds of years should
now be left off, seeing that it was used in Military occasions before the
Musket was ever thought upon. To which I thus reply:

I will, and do ingenuously confess, that the Pike has the privilege of the
Musket in respect of it is Antiquity: But that is no safe conclusion, to say
that all old things are the best, and that it is pity to leave off an old
Custom, merely because it is so. Indeed, where Antiquity holds correspondency
with present usefulnes, and when old things retain their former necessity and
benefit in after Ages, I hold they are not to be slighted, but honored and
retained: But wherein it is found by experience, that the aftertimes have
out-stript the former, and that the latter Inventions are most excellent and
useful, then sure it is no Policy to be tied to the practice of our
Forefathers. For example: Was not the Caliver and Flasques all in use of late;
but who knows not that the Musket and Bandileeres are now more easy, safe,
and needful. So, was not the Lance of prime excellence amongst Horsemen, yet
now who will not prefer the Carbine and Pistolls? So Crosse-bowes were used
in Sea Fights, but now the thundering bullets of Culvering and Demi-Canons gave
discharged them. The Bow and Arrow, what a renowned weapon, and for long time
how terrible, how victorious? yet not at all now used, but for recreation;
though much more may be said for that then for the Pike. So that it is plain,
that the Pike is not therefore to be still used, only because it is so ancient
a kind of weapon: But that as occasions vary, so it may be either not used so
much, or else not at all.

Arg. 2. There be diverse that plead for the Pike, because it does (say they)
keep off the Enemies Horse; and this they verily conclude is undeniable: nay,
some are so confident of the truth of this, that they have hereby disclosed to
men of experience and trial, that they them selves never were in any real
service: hereupon they conclude the Pike to be as good and necessary in
earnest, as it seems to be in jest. Well, I shall easily remove this strongly
received Opinion.

This is surely grounded upon Tradition; and true it is, that in former times
when the winged Cavalry were fenced with sword and lance only, then the Pike
had that virtue to keep off their invading Horse, because the Lance was made
4. feet shorter then the Pike, the Pike being 16. and the Lance being but 12
foot long: So that of necessity, if the horsemen intended execution upon them,
they could not choose but hazard themselves, or horses, or both. But now the
Horse having left off the Lance, and using their Pistols and Carbines in place
of it, which can kill and sink 120 yards off, and above; I would desire to
know, whether it be any wisdom or safety to stand charged with Pikes only
against Pistol bullets? for now the Horse having that advantage, need not
approach so near, as to endanger their own bodies, or their Horses: And
therefore it is high time for the Pike-men to look after another weapon, which
can and will better defend themselves, and offend their Enemies, then their
Pikes can do. That Is for the clearing that objection.

Arg. 3. There be others that come in with another kind of Argument to supply
(as indeed they had need) the former Tenants: For they say, it is true indeed,
that the Pikes alone of themselves cannot keep off the Horse; but being well
lined and seconded with shot, then they can: and therefore they are very
necessary in public services.

Now mark what the conclusion of this will be: For if the Musketeers beat off
the Horse with their shot, what service do the Pikes all that while, hut only
stand for Ciphers? and being unable to offend the Enemy, or by themselves to
defend their own, are feign to be succored by the Musket. Now can that be
held an useful and necessary weapon, which of it self can neither offend the
Invader, nor yet defend the Manager? I proceed.

Arg. 4. Others maintain, that the Pike is the most valorous kind of fight,
and the truest distinguisher of courageous Spirits: for (say they) men are
killed by the Musket a great way off, and that now there is little or no
manhood tried in the Wars, because any young stripling may with a Musket
kill the ablest and stoutest man in an Army; or such who at handy-blowes
(suppose with Browne-bills, Swords, or Pikes) would be able to beat down three
or four such Punies: and therefore not the Musket, but the Pike is the
courageous manner of fight. I shall answer this briefly.

Is the Pike therefore the more valorous kind of weapon, because it plays
closer and nearer then the Muskets usually do? I trow not: for the
close-fight may be performed by necessity; and for certain, that man will
never fight stoutly when the Enemy is near, who dare not fight with him when
he is at a good distance: and I shall ever approve him to be of spirit good
enough, and man able enough, who dare look his Enemy in the face,
notwithstanding the great and murdering volleyes of his shot. And it has been
seen, when young Striplinges have upon Commands gone resolutely forth by
Sallies, in a dark, cold, blustering, rainy, tempestuous night, whenas a lusty,
tall Pike-man has been glad that he has had such Arms allotted him, which
kept him from such dangerous Onsets. Nay, upon sudden Alarmes in the Night,
when the Sergeants have come to fetch men out of all Companies to march out,
with their usual word, Up Musketeers up; 10. or more out of every Company: At
these times the lusty and able Pike-man has said, Well, I would not be a
Musquetier, I am glad of my Corslet, I had rather lie still in my Quarters, let
the Musketeers get the honor, I desire it not at such times as this is: this
has been the language of the supposed valorous Pike-men, and I believe that
they spoke as they thought. Now what hinders, but that a young man may have as
good a heart as a tall able man of person or limbs? Valor, as it is not tied
or confined to the bulk, so neither to the age; little men and young men may
be vigorous and active, when great Bodies may be more dull and slow for action:
the spirits in the one being (as I may so say) imprisoned, desire always to
break out into performances: but in the other they have such a spacious
liberty within, that they never urge to break forth: hence it is commonly seen
and allowed for truth, that little persons are the most nimble, fittest, and
readiest for any weighty employment or hazards.

And again, what matters it whether a man kill or be killed at a great
distance, or hard by, so that he either gives satisfaction to his Enemy, or
else receives it from him. And I say further, that suppose the Sword and Pike
be such a valorous kind of fight as is pretended, yet before this can be
performed all parties must be first agreed; the Enemy must also be persuaded to
leave or lessen his Muskets, and come and fight with us nearer hand with
Pikes; which will prove a difficult point to compass: for, what have we to do
to tie or bind our Enemies to be conformable to our practice and customs? He,
I do verily believe, will in such cases be his own Carver, and at his own
free choice: so that if he finds that he prevails most against us with
Muskets, he will not be brought to use the Pike: So that AEnaeas speech to
Turnus is out of date, -- Pugnandum est comminus Armis. That Is for satisfaction
for that Argument.

Arg. 5. But, say some, what that is strange, is the Pike unusefull? Alas, who
knows not but that the Musketeers may have spent all their powder and shot,
and then woe unto us if it were not for our Pikes.

This seems to be an uncontrolable Argument at the first view: but let it be
well examined, and it will prove otherwise. For certain, wise Generals will
not present themselves with their Armies for encounter, without sufficient
furniture; and not one Musquetier of a hundred, who is not sped before he have
emptied all his charges upon his Enemy. And in case all our powder and shot
were spent, I desire to know what great exploits our Pikes could perform, for
they would be altogether unfitting to keep off the Enemies bullets? How long
would they be able to stand it out, if once we had done? It is certain that
they would be reserved as a remnant for prisoners, or else for present
slaughter, if the Enemy should deny them Quarter: for there would be little
hopes to see the Enemies shot beaten out of the field by our Pike-men: 'twould
prove a wonder to see or hear of such a kind of victory purchased by Pikes:
this would indeed make some plea for them. But when or where was ever that
heard of? Dic quibus in terris? So that that Argument is no ways valid and
firm.

Arg. 6. There be yet others who are very stiff to prove that the Pike is of
singular virtue and excellency in Trenches to keep the Enemy off, and to hinder
him from entering forceably upon us in our works.

Now this was good if it could be made good* but in services it is clean
otherways: for it is certain if the Enemy have a mind to visit us in our
Trenches, may he not the easlier enter by reason of our Pikes? for they stand
in the place of a Musquetier, and fill up his room and yet cannot do any thing
against an Enemy, unless at a proportioned distance only: Now, if indeed the
Enemies Muskets had but power to kill at the like, then the Pike might effect
his desire against him, but who knows not but that the Enemy may stand off,
and yet send death to the Pikes in case they show their heads above the
Trenches.

Arg. 7. In the last place, there be many that hold that the Pikes are of
singular use now, because there is much mention made of them in Sacred Writ;
for, say they, for certain they would not have been used by such men, and
recorded in such a place, had they not had admirable virtue for management.

This seems to carry weight and force with it; and it is certain that often
mention is made of the Pike or Spear, and Speare-men: Job speaking of the
great Leviathan, says that the Sword cannot touch him, nor will he rise for
the spear nor Habergeon: And the Prophet David has it, The multitude of the
Speare-men, and such as delight in war: And that Convoy which the chief
Captain sent along with St. Paul to bring him safe to Faelix, had 200
soldiers, 70 Horsemen, and 200 Speare-men: And our blessed Lords side was
pierced with a Spear. All this is true; and yet it will not make for the Pike
now.

For though it was then used, it may first be doubted whether they were the
same in form as ours are, some reading Darts for Spears: But admit they were,
yet it is unquestionable but that they were maintained by others also; so that
both parties used them in fight, and so there was no disadvantage in them, but
they might be serviceable, if they that managed them wanted neither skill nor
courage: and in this respect there may be as much said for the use of great
Shields and Bucklers; yet they are not used nor desired, unles by some persons
of great eminency and quality, who have them carried by their Pages, more for
state then use.

Secondly, we see that the face of war, and form of weapons alter almost
every day every Nation striving to outstrip each other in excellency of
weapons: So that if it be found that other weapons are more forceable and
prevalent in services then Pikes or Spears, it is not to be denied but that they
may be left, and others entertained: So that as Horace said of old words, Quae
nunc sunt in honor vocabula si volet usus, may be said of Pikes; After times
having privilege to use what weapons they find most necessary for Defense and
Offense; that being true, that if one kind of meat will not serve the stomach,
any wise man will make choice of another; and if one kind of tool will not
perfect our work, we may use and choose that which will.

So having answered all the Arguments that are urged for the defense of the
Pike, I will shut up this Tract with a Compendious discourse of the Musket and
halfe-Pike; wherein it shall appear to all that please to read it, how useful
and excellent a weapon it is to be managed by one person, and that with great
ease and safety, as shall appear.

SECT. XI. A compendious and brief Commendation of the complete and expert use
of the Musket and halfe-Pike.
I Thought it not unfitting to end this Subject with adding some praise and
commendation to that lately invented weapon of Musket and halfe-Pike, above
others that are yet extant: And I do it the rather, because it may be as an
incitement to our Nation to exercise themselves in this kind of Arms. And
though it cannot plead Antiquity, yet it may Safety and Usefulnes: The latenes
of it is invention being no disablement or disparagement for service; being now
with ease, and public applause exercised by generous and heroic Martial
Spirits. There is not any that ever saw the management of it, but was ready to
maintain it, (if he had any skill in, or affection unto Warlike exercises.)

And I believe I may justly say it, that there can scarce be a fairer
conjunction of Offensive and Defensive weapons to be practiced by one Soldier
with such ease and pleasure, as the Musket and halfe-Pike: For what could not
(without a great deal of combersomnes) before be practiced by Pikes and
Muskets, may this way be performed by one person, with more safety, and less
danger and hazard to the Defendant. The benefit of it may be perceived in these
particulars following.

1. It saves a great deal of charges laid out in Arms and Pikes; for a
Soldier may be furnished with these for as little as will buy a Pike: so that
by this means all the charge for Corslets and Head-pieces may be saved, which
in great Armies will amount to a mighty sum of money, and yet do as much
service for the Prince as they could before.

2. Those weapons must needs be excellent which are so advantageous to the
Prince: for what need there be any Pike-men, whenas the Musquetier thus armed
and accoutred, is able of himself to make good their room: for he by this
weapon is able at all times to keep off the Horse if they should offer
assaults, and yet give fire as well as otherwise, and be as ready for any
sudden execution. Now, in the other, (though it should be said that to Pike-men
keep the Horse from running furiously upon our Ranks and Files,) yet it
cannot be denied, but their own persons are endangered by the Enemies volleyes
of shot: In this the Horse are kept off, and the persons of the Soldiers
secure, and able to revenge themselves freely upon their Adversaries. So that
it is plain that there may be as much service done by 1000. Soldiers thus
accommodated, as there could before by so many more armed with Pikes.

3. As it is advantageous in the two former respects, so is it as good for ease
and safety to the Musquetier: for upon any occasion his halfe-pike may stand in
stead for a Rest, and that used with comeliness and decency, with gracefulnes
and nimblenesse upon all postures as the Rest may, or can be managed: so that
if a Rest be accounted comely, decent, graceful, and nimble for a Musquetier,
the same may the half-plke, because it has all these qualifications: but yet
it is not only serviceable as a Rest, but it is also full of safety to his
person: for a Division of Musketeers cannot be entered upon by any
Horse-forces, because they stand barricadoed, as it were, within so many
steeled Pallizadoes: and may by a little retreat give fire to the utter
destroying of such as shall dare to affront them: they being so made that they
are fitting to fasten in any earth; and so light that they are carriagable in
any place; and to any man of Arms useful upon almost all occasions.

4. Whereas most opposition, stoutest resistances, and greatest hazards are
made in entering breaches, (for usually most blood is spent there in defense and
offense, every one there aiming either to gain or dye;) it is manifest that
this weapon cannot choose but be of singular use: for (if managed with a stout
heart, and a strong arm) it will force passage through the bodies of the
Enemy; there being no resistance made against the Assailants, but with eminent
danger of the Defendants lives.

5. Soldiers desire such weapons usually, which stand them in the most general
stead; and such as they can use in any place, or upon any service. Now it is
certain that the Musket and halfe-Pike are of that general use, that they
may be practiced and managed upon all Convoyes, skirmishes, Retreats, Sallies,
Onslaughts, etc. For Convoyes, no safer posture for the Musquetier can be, then
to be impaled within such fences and Barricadoes: and it is impossible that any
troops of Horse can enter, before the Musketeers can so fortify themselves:
for it is no great toil or difficulty, but may quickly and speedily be
performed, and can vary, alter, or change any way as the Enemy shall wheel
about; so that the Reere may be as safe as the Front, and the Flanks as either.

And as it is good for Convoyes, so it is excellent in skirmishes, for it fights
with quickness, advantage, and safety: and if they please to maintain their
ground, who can force them to leave it? or if they be minded to retreat, who
can gain any thing by the pursuit? So that the Musketeers thus armed, go on
with advantage, fight with terror, and retreat with honor. So for Sallies and
Onslaughts, which are desperate kind of services, none go out with so much
hopes to speed, as men so guarded; being (as I may justify it) two Soldiers in
one person. And there is no such spur to make Soldiers valorous in Execution,
as the the knowledge of the advantage they have of their Enemies by the
excellency of their weapons.

Briefly; for the (...) of this is better for Practice than Discourse: It
cannot be denied, but that the Musket and halfe-Pike is easily purchased, and
as quickly for exercise to be learned: any Soldier may as soon be expert in
the use of it, as he can of Musket and Rest; nay sooner, if his Corporal or
Commander have any skill to drill him to it. And (I say) let any one that
either doubts of, or objects any thing against the excellency and benefit of
this kind of weapon, give but that Martial Plot of ground, the Artillery
Garden, a visit; and he shall and may receive ample satisfaction to all his
demands: For it is not to be questioned, but that the present and aftertimes
w^^^ speak in praise of, and justify the Invention as rare, and as yet I am
sure by none paralelld: And it is to be wished that it was once generally known
to our Nation; for the practice of it would prove wondrous advantageous. This I
have spoken without flattery; for I would not do so Noble and Heroic a
Soldier as the Inventor is, nor yet my self, that injury; Flattery being no
ways compatible either to our, or their Profession. But I thought it an injury
to so worthy a Member, if (notwithstanding all hit labor and ingenuity,
together with his charges) either He, or the Weapon should have been slighted
or forgotten: It being a high degree of base Ingratitude, not to be thankful
for such general benefits. But I have done; leaving both his dextrous
Invention, and this Discourse to men of judgment in Arms.

SECT. XII. The Testimony of Brancatio that famous Commander, concerning the
disability of the Pike. In his Art Military, Page 7.
THE Pike is the evident ruin of those that trust in is, others defend it,
though it bethought to defend others; for, it offends not, neither near nor
far off.

Again, p. 8. and 10. The Turks use not the Pike, nor will be brought to
practice it; because it is the most unserviceable Arms used in field Champain,
as by infallible experience, and by the great, manifold, and too late victories
gained over those Christians who too much trusted in that weapon, is manifestly
known. So was the K. of Portugal overthrown in Afric, by having grand
squadrons of Pikes; and so, the vast divisions of High Dutch and Switzers
Pikemen have rendered the Italian Regiments weaker then they would have been
with Harquebuziers: and Charles the 8. K. of France brought the first Pikes
into Italy.

And page 105. lib. 5. he says, This settled Opinion, and so maintained even
to this present, is in my opinion false, and of no moment, with pardon to those
whom it may concern: for that the Pike is the weakest Arms in the field, how
many soever they be; and much worse against the Turks and other Nations, more
powerful in Horse (for which they are held to be good) which is not against
Christians, and the reason is this. The pike offends not a far off, nor near,
except we come to the encounter; it cannot make great way, nor pursue an
Enemy; when it retires cannot make you master of the field; they cannot be
divided from their squadrons, nor pillage with terror, they cannot force a
street, guard a passage speedily, give a Camisado of a sudden, escarmouch or to
make an assalt, and to use diligence on a March, with other feats of war.
And p. 106. he says, That for these last 40 years, the Turks have gained
upon the Hungarians and other Christians ( sempre in Ongaria) because they
placed only great divisions of Switzish and High Dutch Pike-men to keep off
the Turkish vast troops of Horse, being armed with Harquebuzes and Pistols: so
that by this means that Nation is almost brought under the Turkish slavery. So
that battle of Ceresola renders a good proof of the weakness of the
Pike-service. And John Frederick Duke of Saxony in Almaigne, and Peter Strozzi
in Tuscany were defeated in regard of their abundance of Pikes. Likewise Paul
the 4 at Rome, so also at the battle of S. Quintines: and the Marshall of
Terms. I say nothing (says he) of the Army of the Lord Cherche, nor of the
battle of Dreus in France, and of Moncountor; all which proved fatal to their
Leaders, and were despised by their Enemies, because their mainest bodies were
none but Pikes. Thus this great Warrior gives his judgment of this weapon the
Pike: which to a wise Commander is of great authority.

FINIS.

