A SERMON Preached before the Right Worshipful COMPANY OF THE LEVANT MERCHANTS
At St. Olav's Hart-street LONDON, Thursday December. 15. 1664.

By JOHN LUKE, B.D. Fellow of Sidney-Sussex College in Cambridge.

(...) Chrysostom.

Seculum Resurrectionem mortuorum, nec quum errat, ignorant. Tertull.

LONDON, Printed by R. Daniel. 1664.

Illustri and magnifico Domino D. D. D. Smyrnae vetustissimam urbem, Evangelii
causa, petiturus

Devotissimus in eodem Christo Servus JOHANNES LUKE.

Imprimatur

Joh. Hall, R. P. D. Episc. Land. a sac. Domest.
Ex aedibus Londinens. Feb. 11. 1664.
1 Cor. 15.29. Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the
dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead.


A Verse by consent of dissenting Interpreters placed first in the order of the
(...), those hard intelligibles, Voss. de Baptism. disp. 12. th. 2. Bertam.
Lucbr. Franktal. Tarnov. Exerc. Bibl
truths retired into the depth, mysteries bound up in a fast knot, which the
Apostle Peter admonishes our Christian Caution to observe in the writings of
his beloved Brother Paul. 2 Pet. 3.16. In which are some things hard to be
understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also
the other Scriptures unto their own destruction. He who had been rapt into the
third Heavens, 2 Cor. 12.^
he sometimes speaks in the Clouds, he whose mind was conversant with sublimest
contemplations, no wonder if his abstruse conceptions leave a tincture of their
mystery in dark sayings. Psalm. 49.4.
Holy Scripture is a plentiful storehouse of the food of life accommodate to
all ages and constitutions. Here you have milk for babes and strong meat for
grown men: Hebr. 5.13.14.
plainness to descend to our weakness, difficulty to exalt our industry;
plainness to invite our study, obscurity to keep off contempt; perspicuity for
our institution, obscurity for our veneration; we bless the goodness of God in
the clear discoveries, we adore his wisdom in the veyled mysteries. The plain
instructions of Scripture, the precious truths we are sure of, we will improve
by the grace of God for our salvation; the knots and difficulties; the doubts
and uncertainties if we cannot unfold and state them to our satisfaction, at
least from the warning of the blessed Apostle, we will take heed with the same
divine help that we do not wrest them to our destruction.

In the reading this chapter you have observed that Saint Paul therein makes
it his work, largely, variously, undeniably to prove and establish that grand
article of Faith, the scoff of the Heathen, the comfort and joyful expectation
of the Christian, the Resurrection of the dead, this verse among others
evidently to contain an argument, whatever it be, of the same important
affirmation, quickened and sharpened in form of a question, a repeated question,
the better to touch, pierce and awaken the irrational stupid sons, whether of
ignorance or heresy that opposed themselves to the Gospel truth. Else what
shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why
are they then baptized for the dead? An Aenigma without an Oedipus, an oracle
without an interpretation, a pearl of truth locked up, Luke 11.52.
no key of knowledge that we understand, either from Scripture or the Histories
of the age when it was written wherewith to open to our view it is sacred
luster. Augustinus ex Varr. 1.19. de Civ. Dei.
The old Heathens numbered two hundred eighty eight opinions concerning the
summmm bonum, the chief good and true felicity, and in this at last they ought
all to have agreed that never an one was true. Magnen. de atomis.
The Philosophers reckon two and forty concerning the constitution of a body,
the composition of continuous quantity and still such digladiations remain in
the Physiek and Mathematick Schools concerning these minutes and motes in the
Sun, as if they would have their own opinions like the subject whereof they
argue divisible in semper divisibilia. How many the several opinions and
conjectures touching the true sentence of these words are, I am not able to
say, Ex iis quatuor hic infra sequuntur. 5. Baptizati pro scipsis in spem rei
quam post mortem assequuturi sint. viz. Resurrectionis. Castal. 6. Tanqu^
commortui Christo, agentes, repraesentantes mortuos. Theodoret. Cajetan. 7. Ut
Christo commoriantur cum eo resurrecturi. Sedul. 8. pro corporibus natura
mortuis Isid. Pelus. 9. Superside resurrectionis mortuorum. Chrysostom. 10. Pro
peccatis. (quae opera sunt mortua) abluenelis. Aquinas. 11. Lotionibus usi
propter immunditie contractam in sepeliendis mortuis, Bertram. 12. Lavantes
super mortuos, abluentes cadavera. 13. Lustrali aqua purgati jam mortui, vel
post mortem. Beza, Pareus. 14. Fideles qui cadavera abluentes and ipsi
tinguntur pro mortuis i. e. mortuorum abluendorum causa. refert Lud. de la
Cerd. not. in Tertul. 15 Supplicio affecti, martyrio coronati, pro asserta
mortuorum resurrectione vid. Estium. 16. Ut mortuos resurrectionem expectare
doceant. Voss. 17. Supra and praeter eos qui jam antea extrema passi sunt.
Tarnov. 18. Memorat Estius ablutionem quandam vicariam Judaeis usitatam. 19.
Item quid A. Montanus nove statuerit. 20. Apponat and numerum protrahat sicui
vacat and lubet.
sixteen or seventeen I have had the patience to number, and question not but
in consulting new Authors, we may be furnished with new conceits: many an one
disliking what went before him, and himself as little regarded by him that
follows.

To bring in an Inventary of all Opinions, were not to preach, but to tell a
story, and to make a rehearsal without a Sermon: yet should I propose any one
single, such notable objections are in readiness against it, and such a number
plead fair for competition with it, that I fear you will wish for the
non-apparents, and think best of those that are withdrawn from your choice. If
any consentaneous to the analogy of Faith, had above other particular interest
in the occasion of our meeting, 'twere perchance no unpardonable error to
speed the match, and taking confidence from the innocent circumstance to
commend that truth to your prepared minds, which the opportunity had made you
all willing to believe. The eye fixed on a pleasing and suitable object, is
willing to terminate its sight and look no farther. Thus in case of this
present Text, the learned Dr. Stuart, in his elegant Sermon extant upon it,
being a funeral Sermon, interprets this baptizing for the dead, to be the
washing the bodies of the dead, the regards had to the dead corpse in funeral
Ceremonies, a sense, if I mistake not, as improper to the Text, as proper and
graceful to that solemnity. Thus if a Martyrs memorials were to be celebrated,
and an Eloquent Interpreter should dictate this Baptism for the dead: to be
understood of Baptism in the Cup of blood of suffering affliction, persecution
and death, in witness and hopes of the resurrection of the dead: how forwardly
would our minds with gratulation assent to an excellent truth indeed, but
unduely seated in this place. When the occasion presents it self, as the
enclosure of Silver: Prove. 25.11.
an accommodate interpretation suites with it like the Apple of Gold.

Yet what season more excellent, or can be more desirable then the present
opportunity, this equipoise of the balance, this unbiassed liberty of truth?
what is always law, is now necessity too; to describe truth in it is innocent
venerable nudity, divest and released of all external, by-respects, which may
sometimes make it gay and gaudy for an hour, but never conciliate it any true
beauty and durable amiability; may please and gratify the Auditour, while the
floating humor holds, but rarely sink into the depth and enter the heart to
remain a root of life, an operative principle of lasting edification.

(...)

The Jesuits are wondrously industrious to spell the Fable of their (...) out
of these Elements; to fetch fire out of water, the flames of purgatory out of
the Baptism in the Text. Baptized for the dead, say they, how can it be
understood, Bellarm. l. 1. de Purgat. c. 6.
unless de Baptismo Lachrymarum and poenitentiae, qui suscipitur orando,
jejunando, eleemosynas faciendo, etc. Tears and Afflictions, Weepings and
Mournings, Fastings and Prayers, Alms and Oblations for the dead, for the help
of the dead, for relief of the faithful deceased from the Pains of Purgatory.
Not to mention the improper acception of the word (...), never used in sacred
Scripture for the Baptism of Affliction, without some explication adjoined by
the more known metaphor of the Cup; excepting one place only, and when so
used, it signifying the last of sufferings, that of Death it self; nor to
remind them to read plainly that it is not said, they who baptize themselves,
but they who are baptized; to let pass these and other incongruities and
abuses; these men may do well to take notice how opposite this figment of
theirs, maintained so stiffly for establishing the wicked, but gainful
merchandise of indulgences, how opposite it is to other places of Scripture;
how it is condemned by the light, and then think whether it be courage or
guiltiness to seek refuge in the dark, let them first reconcile their Fable to
plain Scriptures, before they attempt to confirm it from obscure. The Scripture
blesses them that die in the Lord, Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead which die
in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from
their labors, and their works do follow them. It dismisses the faithful
departed from the labors of this life, not sends them to the pains and
excruciations of another. In the place where the tree falls there it shall
be. Eccl. 11.3.
The dead, if good, they are happy, and stand not in need of our prayers, if
bad, they are miserable; and our fastings, prayers and alms cannot help them.
The holy Martyr S. Cyprian, whom these men's own Decretals, and that not
undeservedly, place first of all the Fathers, In hac vita, says he, ad Demetr.
vita acquiritur vel amittitur, ubi hinc excessum fuerit, nullus est
poenitentiae locus, nullus satisfactionis Effectus.

Among the opinions and conjectures of the Fathers and orthodox modern Divines
there are about six or seven which speak of such Sacramental Baptism as is
common to all Christians, to all who have taken on them the Discipleship of
Christ, and sealed their profession by the use of his sacred institutions.
Others with diversity of opinion interpret it of ordinary ceremonious
ablutions, which likewise or other usages of equal respect and argument for the
present purpose were in fashion among all people, Heathens and Jews as well as
Christians. Others not without some variety will have it to be understood of
Baptism metaphorical, the Baptism of blood, persecution and death for the
truth of Christ.

In all likelihood the Apostle speaks not of Baptism common to all, in which
sense he would rather have said, what shall we do who are baptized, and why are
we baptized? It never being his manner to attribute to believers in the third
person those things he speaks of which pertain in common to all believers. In
all likelihood he speaks of a Baptism then in use among the Corinthians,
peculiar to some certain persons in certain cases and supposed necessities.
(...). And for figurative Baptism that of persecution and death in witness to
the truth of the Gospel, Baptism being very rarely used in Scripture in this
sense; and when so used in every place, except only that in S. Luke 12.50. it
having some plain explication annexed, we see little probability of reason why
we should leave the ready and usual, for a remote and unwonted signification.
But then the following words, the (...), do so constrain and puzzle, so
entangle and nonplus both this and all the forementioned opinions, that we have
no encouragement at all to crowd in the dark with this throng of groundless
peradventures; to involve our selves with them in the Labyrinth of inextricable
perplexities and improprieties. We seek a truth which may freely flow forth,
not be forcibly haled up: which the Text may clearly and kindly own and
embrace, not be bound to with the rough chains of harsh and coacted
interpretations.

Three Expositions there are touching Baptism in the notion of a Sacrament,
and that not as common to all, but as particularly administered to some certain
persons in certain cases and circumstances. The most ancient, (two of them
especially) and the most probable; of longest standing, and of firmest
foundation; maintained by the best Authors, and the best reasons, and which
our English translations of the Holy Bible have at one time or another seemed
to prefer, to each of which we will do that right as fairly and impartially
to admit them to your audience.

The first is that of Luther, Baptismus super mortuorum sepulchris.
(for that is the oldest date I find thereof) and his Sectatours, and to which
the learned Vossius in his These. de Resurrect. has subscribed his assent:
Luther in his enarration of this Epistle thus writes upon the place, Ad hunc
articulum (de Resurrect. mortuorum) penes homines Confirmandum apud demortuorum
sepulchrase baptizari sinebant, and significandum and testandum quod
constantissime crederent mortuos qui ibi sepulti jacerent, and super quibus se
baptizari sinerent resurrecturos esse. The Christians of old had a custom to
administer or receive Baptism over the dead, that is to say, upon the tombs
and graves of Martyrs and other faithful servants of God departed this life,
thereby signifying and testifying that they firmly believed both themselves and
they over whom they were baptized should rise again to immortal life. This
sense preserves the original inviolate, which may as truly be rendered super
mortuis, over or upon the dead as pro mortuis for the dead, the preposition
(...) equally admitting either translation, as any child of the Grammar is able
to bring examples. And hereto accords our old English translation of use in
K. Edward the sixth's days. Else what do they which are baptized over the
dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized over them?
Neither can any thing be excepted against this interpretation, could the proof
and certainty be produced of the history, the custom whereon it is grounded.
But this the work we may sweat at, and do no good on it. Whom should we rather
consult to reach home the interpretation to us then the Centuriators of
Meydenburgh, and the learned and laborious compiler of the Loci Theologici, all
Authors of the Lutheran persuasion. The Centuriators Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 6. about
the beginning have thus recorded. In Corinthiaca Ecclesia super mortuis, hoc
est, in eo loco ubi sepeliebantur mortui baptizatum esse ex 1. Cor. 15.
constat. That in the Church of Corinth they used to baptize over the dead, that
is to say, in the place where the dead were buried, it is manifest, say they;
from the 1. Cor. 15. This you see is to bring the Text to assert the History,
but the Text being of obscure and doubtful signification we want the History
to clear the Text. The Author of the Theological common places Cap. 7. de
baptismo alleges a certain Epistle of the Church of Smyrna, and the testimony
of S. Austin for the evidence of this story; but when we have taken the pains
to read the said Epistle and quotation out of S. Austin, we find that to take
place which the frequency of the accident has now turned into a proverb --
minuit praesentia famam.

In S. Austin I find nothing so far applicable to the purpose as that I may not
choose to save time in passing it by. The Epistle of the Church of Smyrna
extant in Eusebius, l. 4. c. 15. concerning the martyrdom of their famous S.
Polycarp, writes indeed that the Christians used to assemble at his tomb for
performing festival celebrations in honor to his memory, and for exercising,
preparing and confirming others to the same conflict for the holy Faith; a
custom well known to many here present to be in some part continued by the
poor relics of that once famous and flourishing Church to this very day: but
not a word of administering Baptism there, which if it had been used, no doubt
but the Historian who triumphs in relating the circumstances of honor done to
the Martyrs and the holy Christian profession, would with all advantages have
recorded it to posterity. Yet say, they did administer Baptism over the tomb
of this single Martyr, what does that argue for the (...) in the Text written
above an hundred years before the martyrdom of S. Polycarp. Certainly the use
of burying in Churches, where the sacred Ordinance of Baptism is administered,
was very seldom if ever known in the world for several hundreds of years
after; neither then do I find it received in reference to any such
testification which is here alleged. Wherefore we will disturb this first
opinion no farther; we leave it asleep among the tombs and graves where we
find it, we object nonage and minority against the custom it produces, it
must not add several hundreds of years to it is time without showing the
Register, if ever such custom did obtain upon the intent here disputed, it is
not above eleven or twelve hundred years old at the most, and that is not
sufficient age to give suffrage for determining the debate.

The second interpretation is that of Baptismus Clinicoru^
Haeres. 28. Haec interpretatio prae caeteris arridet Doctori Done. conc. ult.
in locum.
Epiphanius, De Baptismo Clinicorum, received and pursued by Estius, Calvin,
Capellus, and many other learned men, among whom the forementioned Vossius, in
his Theses de Baptismo notwithstanding before in his these. de Resurrect. he had
assented to the former, an argument not of his forgetfulness or inconstancy,
but of his uncertainty or doubtfulness in determining the difficulty. I forbear
citations which would deceive us of the time and fill a volume. The story of
the opinion in short is this. There was a custom came early into the Church,
and continued till at least about the 400. year of our Lord, that many who
desired to be baptized into the Name of Christ thought good to defer their
Baptism till the latter end of their life, till they lay sick upon their
deathbed; hence by the ancient Church called Clinici, Epist. 76.
whom S. Cyprian elegantly opposes to Peripatetici, for that they were fixed
to their bed, not able to walk up and down, thinking, according to the error
of Novatian, destructive to all faith and repentance, from a wrong
understanding of that place of the divine author to the Hebrews, c. 6. v. 4.
that if after they were baptized they then fell into sin, there was no
Sacrament remaining for them, no hopes of reconciliation to God. Wherefore
conscious of their infirmity and proneness to evil, the danger they were in of
being again more or less defiled with the pollutions of the world, the flesh
and the Devil, which they had renounced they chose to delay their Baptism till
the time of their death, that so they might have a pure transmigration out of
the body; and, before the commission of more sins, depart this life in sure
hope of resurrection to life immortal. Thus the Emperor Constantine long
deferred his Baptism, ^useb.
and his Son Constantius (...) desired to be baptized at the point of death.
Athanas. de synodis.
The same delay we find admitted by the Emperors Theodosius the Great, Ambros.
in obit. Theodos. and Valentin.
and Valentinian; which last, purposing to be baptized when he came home, was
prevented by death. This rash and dangerous omission this neglecting God's time
and choosing our own, witnessed against by Almighty God in the death of many
before they were baptized Saint Gregory Nazianzen with his contemporaries
earnestly opposed in the Eastern, and S. Ambrose with other learned men in the
Western Churches. Now the Patrons of this interpretation thus read the Apostles
argument, what shall they do which are baptized for dead, (and that we find
indeed to be the reading of our Bibles in Queen Elizabeth's Reign) why are they
then baptized for dead? that is to say, as dead, when taken for dead, when
ready to die and go out of the world; that which they do so late, which they
put off to the last time of their life, why do they do it at all, except in
hope of the resurrection and immortal life? To the learned assertours of this
exposition besides that the custom cannot be proved to have been in use in the
Apostles time and that, had it obtained so early, it equally lies open with the
next and last to be named to that charge, which many eagerly urge, that without
doubt the zeal of S. Paul would never have let pass so gross an omission
without a severe reprehension, we offer to be considered the incongruous
rendering the words (...) which if with the learned Vossius they render pro
statu mortuorum (pray help me through these knots and perplexities with your
continued attention) if with the learned Vossius, who acknowledges the not to
be suffered harshness of the other version, they render pro statu mortuorum, ut
sibi post mortem sit been, for the estate of the dead, that it may be well with
them after they are dead; even this seems at a far remove from the original,
especially when we remember that the Ms. of Alexandria and other ancient copies
read the repetition in the end of the verse (...), with which reading agree
several citations of the ancient Fathers, the vulgar Latin and likewise our
old English translation before named, why are they then baptized over them?
plainly signifying not an estate or condition, but the persons in such
condition; withal, this version pro statu mortuorum reduces us to the hazard,
and incredible, from which first of all we kept at distance, it speaking of
Baptism not peculiar to some certain persons, but common to all who are
baptized. For we are all, beloved Brethren, thus baptized for the dead, for the
estate of the dead, that it may be well with us after we are dead, not for the
enjoyments of this transitory life, but for the remission of sins for the hopes
and pledges of immortal felicities. But if as the most do they will have the
words (...) to signify tanquam moribundi, jam morituri, sub mortis tempus,
quasi mortui, they well know they can never defend themselves with so much as
one instance, either out of Scripture or any approved Greek Author, and then
to put us off with the Latin pro mortuis in the sense of pro deplorato, pro
derelicto, and to be pleased with the sound of the English for dead, taken for
dead, left for dead and the like piteous shifts, Genesis 11.
this is to reduce us to the condition when we toyled at Brick and Mortar, and
were dispersed abroad upon the face of the earth because a man could not
understand his neighbor, and to make one language not the interpretation but
the confusion of another.

We propose to your charitable judgment in the last place the most ancient and
first received exposition of these words, Baptismus vicarius.
touching proxy-Baptisme, baptizing the living for the dead. A custom in use
among certain Heretics, who if any of the Catechumeni, converts to the
Christian faith not yet baptized but in their Catechism in order to Baptism,
were surprised by death before the time appointed for Baptism, which was
Easter or Whitsontide, and before that as some write the sixth of January or
feast of the Epiphany, Adi. sis, Ios Scal. in locum.
the day on which they supposed our Savior was baptized, a custom they say
still retained in the most ancient Ethiopian Churches, if any were taken away
by death before he were baptized, their manner was to substitute some friend
alive to answer and to be baptized for him that was dead. You may laugh at the
fond ridiculous custom but notwithstanding approve the interpretation,
acknowledged by Tertullian in his most learned tractate de Resurrectione
Carnis, allowed by S. Ambrose or whoever else be the Author of the explanation
of this Epistle which passes under his name, commended by Iustellus in his
Codex Can. Eccles. Vniversae not to detain you in naming Camero, Casaubon,
Grotius, Musculus and several other modern Authors famous for learning and
labor in interpreting the mysteries of the sacred Oracles.

1. If this were the undoubted sense, how could the words be better framed to
it (...), they which are baptized for the dead, as our present English Reading
settleth it, no doubt upon mature search and advise of the learned
Translatours: For the dead, in the place of the dead, for the sake, for the
benefit, as they imagine, of the dead. I had almost pronounced what I have
sometimes heard of another text, these words had been clear, had not the vain
curiosity of expositours made them obscure.

2. It Is the most ancient interpretation. The Authors hitherto mentioned are
all punyes to Tertullian, who once and again makes mention of this
interpretation. Epiphanius about 160. years after Tertullian though himself
prefer the opinion next before recited yet acknowledges this sense to be
(...), Haeres. 28.
a tradition handed to him, probably, the commonly received opinion till his
time. What History of any days would you rather read then that whose Author
can entitle Historia sui temporis who more likely to hit right upon the true
intent of this sacred ambiguity then they who living nearest the time wherein
it was written could best acquaint themselves with the History and matter of
fact upon which questionless the undoubted determination of it does much depend.

3. It Is not improbable but this corruption might be crept into the Church in
the Apostles days. Not to enter the maze of profane reading, to hold you long
in telling you the tale of the Calends of February, the lustrations or
purgations with respect to the dead in use among the Romans and before that
among the Graecians, Graecia principium moris dedit. Ovid. Fast.
from whence possibly this custom might be derived, or at least obtain some
easiness of reception: where many things must be passed by, to stand and note
only the most necessary, and proceed under the more sure conduct of
Ecclesiastical story, we find Epiphanius to write that the followers of the
pestilent heretic Cerinthus had this fond fashion in use among them. This
Cerinthus, as the same Author affirms, being come out of Egypt into Asia,
consenting in part to the Jewish religion, and being circumcised, did
frequently resist the blessed Apostles, particularly was one of them who raised
the troubles and dissensions at Antioch touching Circumcision; Act. 15.
for reconciling and composing whereof the first Counsel assembled at
Jerusalem. That he and his accomplices stirred up the people against S. Paul,
Act. 21.
when he was purifying himself in the Temple: and opposed S. Act. 11.
Peter for going to Cornelius, the conversion of which Cornelius Chronology
places within 4 or 5 years after the conversion of S. Paul, and about 15 years
before the writing of this Epistle to the Corinthians. This that infamous
heretic of whom Irenaeus a most ancient Author in his book against heresies,
written about the 178th. year of Christ, from the testimony of Polycarpus has
recorded, 1.3. c. 3.
that S. John the Apostle entering the Bath at Ephesus started back and made
all have out again, saying, he feared the Bath would fall down cum intus esset
Cerinthus inimicus veritatis, for that Cerinthus the enemy of truth was within
it. And from the relation of the same Irenaeus it is spread abroad to the
knowledge of the world, l. 3. c. 11.
that the damnable blasphemies of this detestable Heretic, against the
Divinity of our Lord and Savior and his miraculous birth of the blessed Virgin
were the occasion of the same holy Evangelist his writing his sacred and
precious Gospel, in the very beginning whereof he is so plain and large in
declaring and asserting those main Articles and immovable foundations of our
Christian Faith. You have heard how old the Serpent; hereto if we add how
easy the spreading his poison, the plausible shows of reason that might be
alleged for introducing the custom, the proneness that has discovered it
self to be natural in all nations to superstitious rites, and how very credible
it is that these Corinthians might be persuaded to take up a fond vain custom,
in testimony of their belief of the Resurrection, whom afterward we see so
easily drawn in to deny the Resurrection, I had almost determined that to this
anxious and difficult (...) we may here at length affix the (...), and
re-establish and confirm this ancient exposition of the words, which many new
ones have shaken and removed, but never could place one more free from
exception in it is stead. The objection you all bear in mind is with fear and
caution to be urged as well as to be answered. Who among us shall prescribe
Ethics for Apostolic prudentials? I am in any wise to rebuke my Brother, and
not to suffer sin upon him; the law of love requires it, Lev. 19.17. yet if I
cannot take off all, let me first remove the heavyest burden: this is not to do
evil that good may come of it, but to destroy a greater evil that the lesser
also with good speed may haste to ruin. Silence does not always give consent.
S. Paul could well discern the time to be silent, and the time to speak, which
the wise man in his index of seasons has by name distinguished Eccl. 3.7. we
read S. Luke 16.8. The Lord commended the unjust Steward propter solertiam non
propter fallaciam, because he had done wisely, not because he had done
wrongfully. In S. John 9.2. we find the question put Master, who did sin, this
man or his Parents, that he was born blind? Originally we are all sinners, can
a man sin actually before he is born? The Disciples ask this question upon
supposal of the (...) or (...) animarum the praeexistence of Souls, or
transmigration of Souls from one body to another, tenants then held by many of
the Jews. Now he that from this place shall gather our Saviors assent to the
opinion of praeexistence of Souls shall do just as the followers of the
heretic Marcion, who in the age next succeeding this of the Apostles, not only
kept up this idle folly of baptizing the living for the dead, but as S.
Chrysostom assures us, Homil. in
did allege this place of the Apostle to prove and maintain what they did. Our
Savior gives his answer according to the purpose in hand, that wonderful work
and mighty miracle he then intended: and our Apostle quickens his question, not
that he likes of their foolish usage, but that from their own doings he might
convince and shame them of their pernicious error. Noli novum authorem aut
confirmatorem denotare, says Tertullian, adv. Marc. 5.
don't think the Apostle joines himself an approver of their corrupt custom,
but he so much the more firmly proves the resurrection of the dead, by how much
they, who were vainly baptized for the dead, did do this in belief and hope of
the resurrection of the dead. Thus far, salvo meliore judicio, in attempt to
show some light to this dark sentence. I have held you too long in the cold,
chilled your hearing with frigid narratives and remote uncertainties, the
difficulty of the subject shall plead my defense, and the facility of your
benevolence shall grant my absolution. After all that has bin said, after all
that can be said, give me leave to conclude this part of my discourse with a
passage I find in the works of a learned and pious Divine of our own, Mr.
Bolton; who in his discourse concerning Heaven, speaking of the excellent
knowledge the blessed shall there enjoy, particularly of the mysteries of the
sacred book of God, among other difficult places of Scripture, he gives
instance in this our Text, as an obscurity to be cleared by the light of glory,
the meaning thereof to be known when we come to Heaven. A. Gel. 12.7.
And as the Judges of Areopagus adjourned a difficult case, they knew not well
what to say to, for an hundred years: so truly after all the exactest enquiries
and most accurate discussions of this sacred doubt, though no doubt to the
Corinthians, for whose uses more especially it was adapted, I am much of
opinion, that for the clear and uncontroverted resolution of the true sense of
this argument for the resurrection, the world must now be content to wait till
the resurrection day.

Three things I proposed to my self from the first view of this Text.

The sense of the Words. The force of the Argument. The use of the Doctrine.
The Argument, which has already been touched, and comes next more
particularly to be declared you see plainly, according to the best probable
interpretation, to be of that make which we call Argumentum ad hominem, an
argument accommodated to the temper and constitution of the persons against
whose errors it is directed. If the dead rise not at all, what means that
superstitious usage of baptizing for the dead? why more solicitude for dead men
then for dead beasts, if both equally perish, be alike involved in the darkness
of oblivion, and desperation of revival? (...); why are they baptized for the
dead, why do they not lay the rotten carcass out of sight without any farther
ado, or if they will wash the body, and adorn the hearse, and carry forth the
dead in pomp and splendor, to testify, as they may say, the affection and
honor they did bear toward them when alive, though they never look to see
them live again, yet why are they baptized for them? why are they solicitous,
least the dead should want the influence and benefit of an instrument of life,
if there be no hope of life to come, no Resurrection of the dead? for it is more
then probable from several passages of the chapter that the poor deluded
Corinthians, to whom S. Paul directs this discourse, who denied the
Resurrection of the body, denied also, or at least doubted of the Immortality
of the soul, these two errors of old time being commonly joined together, or
to keep more strictly to the resurrection of the body, why are they baptized
for the dead, Dum sacramentum impenditur corpori, corpus consecratur
immortalitati. Tertull.
why have they a remedy of life applied to the body? why do they consign and
consecrate the dead to future happiness by a bodily Sacrament, if there be no
Resurrection of the Body? Thus the holy Apostle in his ample and excellent
discourse upon so concerning a point, he leaves no way unassayed to convince
them of their pernicious errors, to shame and put them upon self-condemnation
for their inconsistent follies, committing not only truth with error, but one
of their errors with an other; not consenting to one, but overthrowing
another, healing rather then wounding them with their own weapon, and like a
skillful Physician turning poison into an antidote. Truth, beloved Brethren, is
like a vein of Gold, whose head and beginning if you have once sure hold of,
you may pursue it in it is native branches, unforced emanations and consequences
to the plentiful riches of assured understanding: Errors are like ropes of
sand, rude heaps of absurdities, confused mixtures of incoherencies and
inconsistencies, the building sinking under it is disorderly, ill contrived
fabrication, the enemies of truth at variance and destroying one another. Thus
S. Epiphanius notes (...) among the profane positions of the forenamed
Cerinthians, and S. Basil concerning the Sect of the Manichees, pronounces
(...), Homil. 8. in hexaem.
their abominable errors betray themselves. And if time sufficed, 'twere no
unsupportable undertaking to show, that there is neither false Religion nor
Heresy in the world, but arrows may be taken out of it is own quiver to shoot
against the face of it, but carries weapons about it to destroy it self. Thus
does Error stumble and fall at the obstacles and blocks it self casts in the
way, and like a guilty criminal faultring in his speech and forgetting one lie
when he tells another, is convict by self-evidence, and perishes through it is
own discovery.

Shall I now take leave to substitute the living in place of the dead, to
pursue the design of the Text by leaving the words of it? to initiate,
solemnize and prosecute the arguments of universal vigor, and everlasting
strength for confirming this important Truth in place of this, drawn from a
local custom, a superstitious vanity, a foul corruption, dead and gone long
ago with it is heretical authors, instead of this of particular aspect upon
some certain persons to introduce those general probations which look wishly on
us all: after you have seen the confusion and overthrow of Errors from their
own repugnant mixtures and inconsistent weaknesses, shall I attempt to present
to your view the unconquerable stability of Truth on it is own native, proper,
homogeneous principles, foundations immovable as the earth, durable as the sun
and moon. Psalm. 104.5. Psalm. 72.5. Luke 21.33. Luke 17.26.
Heaven and earth shall pass away, but the word of the Lord shall not pass
away, the resurrection shall amaze the world with it is unexpected appearance,
the truth and prophesies of Scripture shall be consummated in glorious
performances, vindicated by unavoidable events.

This were to pass out of one depth into another, from the straights of
intricate inquiries to the vast ocean of interminable discourses; from the
Labyrinth of doubts and perplexities, to the spacious fields of perspicuous
propositions and intelligible methods of illustrious argumentations. So
positive the affirmations of holy Scripture, so clear the promises, so
convincing the reasonings, and all so numerous, that I can find no proportion
between the amplitude of the matter and the scarcity of the time, and of so
splendid and diffusive an argument ought rather to be silent then to say a
little. You in your sound understandings and joyful expectations have
superseded me the essay, looking I should explain the Text, not expound the
Chapter or interpret the whole Gospel, not only believing a Resurrection from
the grave, but partakers of a Resurrection from your sins, enjoying the Grace
of the first Resurrection in sure pledge of the Glory of the second.

Wherefore, beloved Brethren, leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ,
as the Apostle speaks Hebr. 6.1. the doctrine of Baptismes and the probation
of the Resurrection of the dead, suffer me in a word or two to direct you
toward perfection, by closing with the third and last particular of our
present undertaking, and touching very briefly upon the important usefulness of
this Gospel treasure, which the blessed Apostle with this excellent artifice
and industry contends to repose for ever in our established minds.

And first, beloved Brethren, let us establish our minds, assure our hearts in
the belief of this truth. Be steadfast, unmovable, v. ult.
let that be the first point of advise, that what we have not time here to
discuss, that we never want time seriously to meditate, and determine to our
selves in the immovable judgment and awakened conscience of our Souls. Though
you know it, let me put you in remembrance, to be frequent in these exercises
of a circumspect considering mind not to doubt of the truth, but daily to
expect the performance, to fix your faith on the promises of God and from the
power of Scripture arguments to be steadfast in the full assurance of effectual
understanding. The Doctrine of the Resurrection is an Article of Faith, a point
of Christian wisdom, no discovery of natural reason, no investigation of
secular Philosophy. One of the faithful sayings of the Gospel unknown to the
wise men and disputers of this world, whose beggarly understandings have not
been replenished with the salutary relief of divine revelation. Of this
mysterious revolution if you consult the institutes of the heathen, you find
not a biennial, A. Gal. 1.9.
as the Pythagorean discipline once was, but a perpetual silence, not only in
the gardens of Epicurus, but in the walks of Aristotle, in the porch of Zeno,
in the Academy of Plato, and if there be any other School of fame for the
investigations of humane wit and acquists of natural ratiocinations. Cicero,
Seneca, Socrates, the best of the Heathen have doubted of the immortality of
the Soul, for evincing whereof to indubitate certainty whether there be indeed
a weapon of proof in the armory of reason, I must not now digress to examine,
they have doubted of the immortality of the Soul, but for the resurrection of
the body it has ever been (...), Luc. 2.34.24.11. Act. 17.32.
a matter to make merry with, to mock and scoff at: Caecil. apud Minut. Foel.
aniles fabulae with some, pueritia deliramenta with others, the best word that
Pliny, that most diligent searcher of the effects of nature, (meeting with some
fictitious show hereof in the roving conceits of the laughing Philosopher) can
afford it, in the seventh book of his Natural History, c. 55. where he derides
them who think it shall be otherwise with them after they are dead, then it was
before they were born, whose blasphemies tonching this matter in another place
I abhor to repeat, but you may read, if you can abide it, in the seventh Chap.
of the 2d. Book of that History, with these and some such exceptions,
incomparable, and in this particularly admirable, that it should be written by
one who thought himself every whit mortal.

Soles occidere and redire possunt,
Nobis cum semel occidit brevis lux,
Nox est perpetuo una dormienda.
That the ditty wherewith the Heathen people used to lull themselves asleep.
Whether tends all this? 1 Timothy 6.20. 2 Pet. 1.19. 2 Timothy 1.10.
O Christian keep that which is committed to thy trust. Thou have a sure word
of prophecy, the light of the Old, but especially of the New Testament,
wherein besides the many plain propositions of faith, the blessed Apostle in
this chapter condescends to treat with our reason, and argues us into found and
efficacious belief, unless we not only think we shall perish with beasts, but
have already sunk our selves below them in want of understanding. The
Resurrection, without a proverb, it is as sure as death. Read and humbly learn
the price at which God has set thee. Pierce through the clouds with the eye of
faith, and live in the sight and influence of things invisible.

Which brings me to the 2d. and at this time the last use: It Is needful I
deliver all in the mass and sum which the time though renewed would fail me
to number out in parcells. Accept and preserve it in the words of S.
Chrysostom (...). Homil. de resurrect. mort. fine.
Let our Ethics be suitable to these Dogmaticks; our life answerable to this
doctrine; and especially in the confortable and powerful language of our
blessed Apostle in the conclusion of this his excellent discourse: Therefore,
my beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work
of the Lord, forasmuch as you know that your Labor is not in vain in the Lord.
The resurrection of the dead, is the calling the whole world before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, 2 Cor. 5, 10.
that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he
has done, whether it be good or bad. How should this restrain us from all sin,
the wages whereof we know to be death, Romans 6.23.
how should it animate us to all holy conversation and godliness, which we are
sure shall receive the gift of God, eternal life. To work out our own
salvation, to act with an eye on the recompense on reward to the glorifying of
God is not derogatory from God's glory, but the highest advancing it; is not in
a Christian to be mercenary, but to be dutiful and thankful. 2 Cor. 4.17.
Our light affliction which is but for a moment works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Death it self and the grave are
vanquished, and made the passages to eternal life. Are we not startled at the
thoughts of these approaching glories? Be not weary of this burden of
mortality? don't we long with the blessed Apostle to be clothed upon with our
house which is from heaven? 2 Cor. 5.2.
To hear the melody of Angels, to speak in the dialect of glory, to see in the
perspectives of immortality, to enjoy what eye has not seen, 1 Cor. 2.9.
nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God
has prepared for them that love him; to crowd about the eternal throne with
Cherubims and Seraphims and all the heavenly host, Rev. 4.10.
and fall down and worship him that lives for ever and ever, to give thee, O
God, in thy own heaven some worthy praise for all thy infinite goodness and
loving kindness to thy sinful, vile and miserable creatures, which we cannot
do as we would whiles lost in flesh, and abused with corrupted senses; but when
it shall please thee to call us above, to consort us with thy holy Angels, to
cause this corruptible to put on incorruption, this mortal immortality; we
shall not neglect one moment in the ages of eternity; Phil. 5.20.
Be our conversation in heaven from whence we look for the Savior, the Lord
Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like
unto his glorious body. Raise we our minds to eternal vigours, be our hearts
inflamed with victorious joys, and our lips opened in the voice of triumph.
Persume your minds with the sweet spices of the East, feed your eyes with the
fair beauties of the morning, the morning, after which no evening shall follow.
Value your Souls capable of everlasting glories, your bodies improveable beyond
the light of the Sun, and disdain a glance at the decitfull allurements of this
transitory life. Your minds obsequious to heavenly attractives, and aspiring
without fainting to the perfections and exaltations of immortality. Ioh. 11.25.
Which blessed estate Christ Jesus, the Resurrection and the Life, grant unto
us for his own mercies sake. Amen.

FINIS.

