A NEW HISTORY OF ETHIOPIA.

BEING A Full and Accurate DESCRIPTION OF The Kingdom of Abessinia, Vulgarly,
though Erroneously called the EMPIRE of PRESTER JOHN.

IN FOUR BOOKS.

Wherein are Contained I. An Account of the Nature, Quality and Condition of
the Country, and Inhabitants; their Mountains, Metals and Minerals; their
Rivers, (particularly of the source of the Nile and Niger;) their Birds,
Beasts, amphibious Animals, (as the River Horse and Crocodile;) Serpents, etc.
II. Their Political Government; the Genealogy and Succession of their Kings; a
description of their Court, and Camp; their Power and Military Discipline;
their Courts of Justice, etc. III. Their Ecclesiastical Affairs; their
Conversion to the Christian Religion, and the Propagation thereof, their Sacred
Writings, their Sacraments, Rites, Ceremonies, and Church Discipline; the
decrease of the Romish Religion, their Contentions with the Jesuits, their
Separation from the Greek Church, etc. IV. Their private Economy, their Books
and Learning; their common Names, their Diet, Marriages, and Polygamies, their
Mechanic Arts, and Trades, their Burials, their Merchandise and Commerce, etc.


Illustrated with Copper Plates.

By the Learned Job Ludolphus, Author of the Ethiopic Lexicon.

Made English, by J. P. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Smith Bookseller, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1682.

J. LUDOLPHUS TO THE Courteous Reader.
AT length I present you with my Ethiopic History, long-promis'd, long
expected by my friends. Nor will this delay be wondered at by those that
consider how I am tied to public duty and employment, utterly dissonant from
these sort of Studies. Beside which, there were many other Reasons. For I had
collected indeed the Body of the matter from the Writings and Discourses of
Gregory the Habessinian, but the Circumstances of time and place, and the names
of persons were yet wanting. So that there was Timber and Bricks for the
Building, but only Lime and Cement was wanting. Moreover after so many Fables
had been Printed upon this subject, I thought it would not be so prudently done
to utter more novelty upon the credit of one single person; lest a new truth
might be looked upon as a new Tale. At length having got into my hands Balthazer
Tellez, from whom as well to supply what I wanted, as also to confirm what
might seem to be doubtful, yet then likewise I wanted Leisure. Which when the
most Serene Saxo-Gotan Dukes had indulged me, I Translated my family to
Frankfort upon the Main, to the end that I might have the benefit of several
famous Libraries in that Noble City, and the opportunity of a Learned
Conversation, and by that means accomplish my intended work, which by Gods
Assistance I did in six weeks.

After this, when all was ready for the Press, there still wanted what was
necessary to forward the Publishing of this work. A proper Amanuensis to
transcribe the whole matter, and to attend upon the Correction of the
Impression; which my occasions would not permit me to do; and then in the next
place such Foreign Characters as this work required, which Impediments were
also at last removed. For there was a certain Young Gentleman recommended to
me, eminent for his Learning and integrity, by name John Henry, Majus, a
Student in Theology, and the Oriental Tongues. Who being well skilled in the
Hebrew Language, and the Dialect of the Rabbis, by my help easily made himself
Master of the Ethiopic, and so fitted himself for the employment I designed
Him. He therefore by my directions made the heads of the Chapters, the
Sections, the Index, and Translated the Ethiopic into Latin, assisted the work
and put it forward, taking upon him the whole Correction of it: For which
reason I can recommend his deserts the more justly to all good and learned Men.

The Printing part was undertaken by Balthazar Christopher Wustius, as well for
that he was well known among Forainers, as because he had a Printing House
furnished with all sorts of Letters for Foraign Languages. He also caused the
Ethiopic and Amharic Characters to be engraved in Copper by the famous John
Adolphus Schmide, and afterward to be cast for farther use. But these could
not be brought to perfection, so soon as the Compositers required, and
therefore there was a necessity of mixing some old and less elegant, with the
new and neater Characters.

As to the Work it self, I have said enough in the Proem: No man understands
the warts and defects better than my self. Therefore I resolved to deferr the
Publishing till newer and fuller relations returned out of Ethiopia; or that I
might receive them from the bordering Regions, as being furnished for that
purpose with very great and most generous Recommendations, till I had brought
my design to a full and elaborate perfection. But many Illustrious men, and my
most honored friends, interceded with me, telling me, That never any thing
came forth perfect at first in all its parts: And that therefore this History
was no longer to be concealed from the Christian and Learned World, which it
concerned to know these things: For that if any thing should fall out hereafter
worthy of remark, it might be put into an Appendix, or added to a new Edition.
Which makes me hope for pardon from the more Candid Reader, if his desire or
expectation be not satisfied in all particulars. For I relate not altogether
things beheld with my own eyes, but what I have either read my self or heard
from others, yet congruous to Truth and well cohering between themselves. If I
have not reached the sense of my Authors, I will amend upon admonition; or else
return my thanks and satisfaction to the admonisher. That I should please all
men, a thing which never mortal yet attained, none in prudence can exact from
me; nor dare I hope to have done it. However I propose to my self to injure no
man, but every where to study moderation. So they who take offense, ought to be
offended with my Authors not with me. There are some perhaps who believe I
might have spoken more in matter of Religion, others that I have said too much,
certainly I had rather I could have omitted all; so ungrateful to me are the
Altercations of Christians among themselves in matters of Religion, chiefly
where the Decisions tend to Force and Arms. For they who think mutual Love and
Charity is only due to men of their own sect, certainly wander much from the
scope of Christian perfection, according to the precepts of Christ and his
Apostles.

I have not aimed at my own advantage, nor my own increase of Reputation, hard
to be acquired, now the world is so fertile in soaring Genius's, I have only
endeavored to be in some measure profitable to the Commonwealth of
Christianity and Learning, out of a peculiar kindness, to that, for ought we
know, most ancient Nation of the Habessines: I confess I have frequently
bewailed their misfortune for this, that the enmity ran so high between them
and the Portuguesses, that for their sakes all the other Europeans are
suspected to that Nation, and not permitted to have any commerce among them.
But it has afforded me much more matter of grief, that there should be such and
so great Animosity nmong the Western Christians, that as things stand, there is
no Counsel or help to be afforded for the ease and restitution of the Eastern
Church, or for the suppression of those Barbarous Idolaters.

The HEADS of the several CHAPTERS in the following HISTORY.
Book I. Of the Nature of the Country and Inhabitants.
THe Proem contains the Chief Writers of the Habessine Affairs, which the
Author follows or contradicts: where he takes an occasion to give an account of
Gregory the Habessinian, whom Ernestus Duke of Saxony sent for to his Court at
Gota together with the Argument and Method of the whole Treatise.

Chap. I. Of the various Names of the Habessines, and the Original of the
Nation from Arabia the Happy. Chap. II. Of the true Situation and Bounds of
Habessinia, and the Kingdoms and Regions bordering on every side upon it. Chap.
III. Of the Division of Habessinia into several Kingdoms and Regions, and what
is at this day under the Dominions of the Negus. Chap. IV. Of the vulgar
Chorographical Table of the Country, and the Authors new one; with the Authors
advice, in reference to a Universal Geographical Alphabet. Chap. V. Of the
temper and nature of the Air and Soil: of the three not four Seasons of the
Year; the stupendous Winds, and other Meteors. Chap. VI. Of the high Mountains
of Habessinia, and their Rocks of a most Miraculous Form; their advantages and
conveniencie: more especially, of the Rocks of Amhara, Geshen, and Ambasel.
Chap. VII. Of their Metals and Minerals: more especially, their Salt and
Stibium. Chap. VIII. Of the Rivers of Habessinia; more especially Nile, its
Fountains and Course; that Niger is a Channel of Nile: whether the Course of
the River may be altered or turned another way, to prevent its overflowing of
Egypt; as also of the Lake Tzana. Chap. IX. Of the Fertility of the Soil in
general, double, and threefold Harvest; Of the Vegitables and Plants: Of the
Psylli, proving their Art of relieving the Poisoned to be artificial not
natural. Chap. X. Of the Fourfooted Beasts; the Bull Elephants, the Unicorn,
etc. Chap. XI. Of Amphibious Creatures; the River Horse, the Water-Lizard and
the Torpedo. Chap. XII. Of Birds, the Casawaw and Pipi, their tame Geese, and
Feeders. Chap. XIII. Of Serpents and Insects; the Boa, Salamander, Hydra,
Chersydra, Locusts and Ants. Chap. XIV. Of the Nature and Disposition of the
Inhabitants of the Jews and other Nations in Ethiopia. Chap. XV. Of the
Languages used in Ethiopia; the Amharic, and Gallanic Dialects. Chap. XVI. Of
the bordering Nations; more especially, of the Gallans, and the manners and
customs of the Kingdom of Zender and their King who resembles an Ape.
Book II. Of their Political Government.
Chap. I. Of the Kings of the Habessines, and their various Titles, Names, and
Atchievments, both true and fictitious: Of the Name of Presbyter John, the
Style of their Letters: The Queens, and the Titles of the Princes and
Princesses of the Blood. Chap. II. Of the Catalogues of the ancient Kings of
the Habessines, for the most part Fictitious. Of the Royal Families, their
Antiquity, and first of the Ethnic Family. Chap. III. Of the Salomonean Family,
descended from Menihelec, Son to Solomon by the Queen of Sheba; whose Parentage
and Place of Nativity where she Ruled, is discoursed. Chap. IV. Of Menihelec,
the Son of Makeda, and his Posterity. Of Candace. Of Abreha and Atsbeha
brothers; and of Caleb, who Subverted the Kingdom of the Homerites. Chap. V. Of
the Zagean Family, and the Kings that sprung from that Line; more especially of
Lalibala. Chap. VI. Of the Restoration of the Salomonian Family, and the
Succession from thence, David and Claudius, etc. in whose Reign the Jesuits
first entered Habessinia. Chap. VII. Of the Kings of this Centurie, till the
present time. Of the Counterfeit Jacob, and the Impostor Tzaga-Christos in
France. A genealogical Table of the Habessinian Kings. Chap. VIII. Of the Royal
Succession; and Imprisonment of all the Kings Sons but the Eldest in the Rock
Geshen. Chap. IX. Of the Kings Prerogative in Civils and Spirituals. Chap. X.
Of the Puissance of the Kings of Habessinia, and how the Power of the Gallans
might be Eclipsed; as also, of the Royal Revenues. Chap. XI. Of the Royal City
of Axuma: and the Inauguration of their Kings. Chap. XII. Of the Kings Court,
his Table, and manner of Feeding: the Custom of receiving Ambassadors; and of
the Grand Court Employments. Chap. XIII. Of the Royal Camp, which may be
compared to a Royal City. Chap. XIV. Of the Military Discipline of the
Habessines. Chap. XV. Of the Wars of the former Century; more especially, the
Fatal Adelan War, and how they were relieved by the Portugals. Chap. XVI. Of
their Leagues and Embassies to the Portugheses and the Pope; and the King of
Portugal's reciprocal Embassies to them. Chap. XVII. Of the Viceroys,
Governors, and Rulers of Provinces, and their various Titles. Chap. XVIII. Of
the Tributaries to the King of Ethiopia, and the manner of presenting Petitions
and Complements to the King. Chap. XIX. Of their Courts of Judicature, and Law
Proceedings, their Appeals and Punishments.
Book III.
Chap. I. Of the Ancient Religion of the Habessines, and Tzagazaab's idle
Confession of Faith; their Judaic Rites; their Circumcision, abstinence from
Swines Flesh, and observing the Sabbath, etc. Chap. II. Of the Conversion of
the Habessines to the Christian Faith. Cedrenus and Callistus Confuted. Chap.
III. Of the advancement of Christianity by the assistance of Nine Holy Men. Of
the Portentous Miracles of their Saints: Their rigid Monastical Life: of Tecla
Haimanot and Eustathius, and the Orders and Institutions of their Monks. Chap.
IV. Of the Holy Book among the Habessines, the Translation of the Scripture
into their Language, their Division of the Bible. Their Councils, and Epitomie
of the Habessine Religion: the Book of Enoch, and their Magical Prayers. Chap.
V. Of the present Religion of the Habessines, and the Errors imputed to them
by the Fathers: what they Believe concerning the Trinity, the Communion,
Transubstantiation, Purgatory, the Immortality of the Soul, Angels, etc. Chap.
VI. Of the Modern Rites and Ceremonies of the Ethiopic Church. Chap. VII. Of
their Ecclesiastical Government. Chap. VIII. Of the separation of the
Habessines from the Greek Church. Chap. IX. Of their first Quarrels with the
Jesuits. Chap. X. Of Susneus's Submission to the Pope, and the Tumults, and
Rebellions that arose thereupon. Chap. XI. Of the Arrival of a Patriarch from
Rome, and the Progress of the Roman Religion during the Reign of Susneus. Chap.
XII. Of the decrease of the Jesuits Power, and their fall, the Restoration of
the Alexandrian Religion, and the causes of so great an Alteration. Chap. XIII.
Of the Expulsion of the Patriarch. Chap. XIV. What happened after the
Expulsion.
Book IV. Of their private Affairs.
Chap. I. Of the Ethiopian Letters, and manner of Reading. Chap. II. Of their
Books and Learning; their Lawyers and Physicians: certain of their Opinions in
Philosophy: their Poetry. Chap. III. Of the Appellative Names of Men used by
the Habessines. Chap. IV. Of their Domestic Oeconomie, Matrimy, Polygamie,
Diet, Habitations, and Burials. Chap. V. Of their Mechanic Arts, and Trades.
Chap. VI. Of their manner of Traveling, and the several ways into Ethiopia.
Chap. VII. Of their Merchandise, and the Commodities of the Country.
THE HISTORY OF ETHIOPIA: OR THE KINGDOM of the ABESSINES.
I Am now about to write the History of the Abessines; concerning whom, there
have been many large, but few true Relations. For these People having
translated themselves from the Maritime Regions of the Arabian Gulf, into the
more upland Parts of Africa, by reason their Commerce with Foreigners has been
very inconsiderable, have been known to very few of the Europeans. Besides that
the Name of Ethiopians, which they assume to themselves, is common to so many
Nations, that it has rendered their History very ambiguous; for that many
things generally spoken of the Ethiopians, were more particularly attributed to
the Abessines. Neither were they wanting to their own honor, while they
appropriated to themselves whatever was said either in Scripture or elsewhere
to their advantage.

Others there are, who to wast their idle hours, and designing some fabulous
Inventions, or to represent the Platform of some Imaginary Commonwealth, have
chosen Ethiopia for the Subject of their Discourse. Believing they could not
more pleasantly Romance, or more safely license (...) Age, and then an Exile,
for that contrary to the King's Command, he had followed the Fathers of the
Society into India, and consequently exercised in Misfortune, he had laid aside
all Levity and Ostentation, the Vices of Fortunate Youth. So that although in
truth, I was sufficiently able, by virtue of his Instructions, and the
knowledge which I obtained from him of the Ethiopic Language, to have out done
all those that have gone before me, yet I was unwilling to refell the Errors of
others upon the Credit of one single Person, till I had more Authorities to
support me.

Nor did I therefore underake this difficult Task, only to consume my leisure
hours in confuting the Errors, or mustering up the different Opinions of
Authors, without any prospect of Publick-Benefit. The History it self of this
Nation deserves the Labor of an Accurate Pen. For whether you consider the
Temper of the Clime, or the Condition of the Soil, you shall hardly find in any
other Part of the World more frequent Miracles of Nature.

The Country is situated between the Tropic of Cancer, and the Equinoctial
Line, and enjoys a wonderful variety of Air: The Champion Levels feel the Heat,
the Hilly Parts are no less subject to Cold. For this reason, the Thunders are
most dreadful, and frequent Tempests terrify both Man and Beasts. Their
Prodigious Mountains overlook the Clouds themselves. Neither Olympus nor
Athos, here accounted Wonders; nor Atlas it self, which the Ancients fancied to
be the Support of Heaven, are to be compared with them. Their Rocks of various
Shapes and Figures, so amazingly steep as not to be ascended, yet inhabited.
Their surrounded Valleys rugged, and representing Abysses for profundity.
Metals they also have; but chiefly Gold, did they know how to find and dig it
forth. Their dryest places in Winter are overflowed in Summer: For those
Advantages which the Rains afford the Fields in other places, the Rivers supply
in Ethiopia. Among those Rivers, Nilus for vastness and fame, far exceeds all
the Rivers of the whole World: Whose Fountains so diligently sought by the
Ancients are not only here found, but it also now appears, that the River Niger
is no more than its left Channel. Nor do all the Rivers of Habassia, as in
other Places, empty themselves into the Sea, but are some of them sucked up in
the Sand; so that it is more difficult to find the Mouths of those, than the
Sources of other Streams. Plants they have of admirable Virtue; and Beasts of
all sorts, many of which are unknown to us. The largest also both of Foul and
four-footed Beasts are here to be found. The celebrated Unicorn, so curiously
sought for in all other Corners of the World, was first seen here. Cattle
without number, much larger than ours, feed in the vast Woods, affording
Pasture sufficient as well for the Wild as Tame. Nor is the variety of the
Nations and People less to be admired; so strangely differing in Language,
Customs, and Ceremonies, that it may be thought some distinct Part of the
World, rather than a particular Kingdom.

However all Abessinia Obeys one King, who by reason of certain Princes that
are subject to him, calls himself Negusa nagast zait joperia, King of the Kings
of Ethiopia. He derives his Descent from Solomon King of the Israelites, by an
ambitious, tho dubious Claim; defending the long series of his Family, whether
true or false, with the force of Antiquity. However it be, this is certain,
That the Monarchy of the Abessines, and the Royal Line, are no less Ancient
than any among the Europeans. And for their Power, they were formerly more
Potent than any other of the African Kings: But their Wars in the preceding Age
with the Adelenses, has brought them very low. Afterward they were so
debilitated by the Fury of the Gallani, that Abessinia is scarce to be found in
Habessinia it self, if you compare it with what it was in the times of
Alvarezius.

But that which deserves the greatest admiration is the antiquity of the
Christian Religion, which first began under S. Athanasius, Patriarch of
Alexandria, at what time Frumentius Preached among them; the Opinions and
Ceremonies of which Church they still retain. So that many Primitive Rites in
other Places obsolete, are here still in Use. But that deplorable Schism which
arose in the Council of Calcedon, for which they allege other Causes than our
Writers do, withdrew the Abessines all together from the Catholic Church, at
that time Flourishing; while they followed the Patriarch of the Jacobites, and
rejected the Patriarch of the Melchites. Yet all this while for so many Ages
they have suffered no considerable Change in their Divine Worship till the
beginning of this last Century, at what time being split into Divisions by the
Artifices of the Jesuits, they have been cruelly shaken with Civil Discord and
Bloody Wars; some Adhering to the Romish, other the Alexandrian Religion.

Of which and other things it is our Design to treat more fully in this our
History; and so to handle the matter, as to discourse in the First Book, Of
Natural Things; as the Situation and Names of the several Counties, the Temper
of the Climate, the Condition of the Soil, the several Customs and Languages of
the Nations and Inhabitants. In the Second Book, Of the Political Government,
the Succession of their Kings, their Laws, their Acts of War, the Revenue of
the Kingdom, and the like. In the Third, Of their Ecclesiastical Affairs, the
beginning of the Christian Religion, and its Advance in those Countries, their
Differences with the Greek and Latin Church. And Lastly, in the Fourth Book, Of
their Domestic Concerns, and Private Economy.

An ETHIOPIC ALPHABET Divided into seven Orders according to the seven sounds
of their vowells
Hoi ^ ha ^ hu ^ hi ^ ha ^ he ^ he ^ ho ^ Lawi ^ la ^ lu ^ li ^ la ^ le ^ le ^
lo ^ Haut ^ ha ^ hu ^ hi ^ ha ^ he ^ he ^ ho ^ May ^ ma ^ mu ^ mi ^ ma ^ me ^
me ^ mo ^ Saut ^ sa ^ su ^ si ^ sa ^ se ^ se ^ so ^ Rees ^ ra ^ ru ^ ri ^ ra ^
re ^ re ^ to ^ Sat ^ sa ^ su ^ si ^ sa ^ se ^ se ^ so ^ Kaf ^ ka ^ ku ^ ki ^ ka
^ ke ^ ke ^ ko ^ K. Eth. Bet ^ ba ^ bu ^ by ^ ba ^ be ^ be ^ bo ^ Tawi ^ ta ^
tu ^ ti ^ ta ^ te ^ te ^ to ^ Harm ^ ha ^ hu ^ hi ^ ha ^ he ^ he ^ ho ^ Nahas ^
na ^ nu ^ ni ^ na ^ ne ^ ne ^ no ^ Alph ^ a ^ u ^ i ^ a ^ e ^ e ^ o ^ Qaf ^ qa
^ qu ^ qi ^ qa ^ qe ^ qe ^ qo ^ Wawe ^ wa ^ wu ^ wi ^ wa ^ we ^ we ^ woe ^ Ain ^
a ^ u ^ i ^ a ^ e ^ e ^ o ^ Zai ^ za ^ zu ^ zi ^ za ^ ze ^ ze ^ zo ^ Z. French
Jaman ^ ja ^ ju ^ ji ^ ja ^ je ^ je ^ jo ^ Y. French Dent ^ da ^ du ^ di ^ da ^
de ^ de ^ do ^ and English. Geml ^ ga ^ gu ^ ghi ^ ga ^ ghe ^ ghe ^ go ^ Tait ^
ta ^ tu ^ ti ^ ta ^ te ^ te ^ to ^ T. Eth. Pait ^ pera ^ peru ^ peri ^ pera ^
pere ^ pere ^ pero ^ P. Eth. Zadai ^ tza ^ tzu ^ tzi ^ tza ^ tze ^ tze ^ tzo ^
Tz. Eth. Zappa ^ tza ^ tzu ^ tzi ^ tza ^ tze ^ tze ^ tzo ^ tz. Eth. Af ^ fa ^
fu ^ fi ^ fa ^ fe ^ fe ^ fo ^ Psa ^ pa ^ pu ^ pi ^ pa ^ pe ^ pe ^ po ^

A Specimen of such of their diphthongs that could be gotten.
^ kua ^ kua ^ kue ^ kue ^ hua ^ hue ^ hue ^ qua ^ qua ^ que ^ gua ^ gua ^ gue
^ gue

A Specimen of their numbers or numerall figures taken from the Greek
^ 1 ^. 3 ^. 4 ^ 8. ^. 10 ^. 60 ^. 100 etc.

A Specimen of the Amharie Letters
Sh Engl. ^ sha ^ shu ^ sha ^ she ^ she Tj Hung. ^ tja ^ tje n^ Spanish. ^ nje
Ch Germ. ^ hha ^ haa ^ hho s French. ^ ja ^ ji ^ ja ^ jo D Bohem ^ dja ^ dje
Cia Ital ^ tjha ^ tjhu ^ tjhi ^ tjha ^ tjhe ^ tjhe

OF THE Nature of the Country, AND THE INHABITANTS. BOOK I.
CHAP. I. Of the Various Names of the Abessines, and Original of the Nation.
The Original of the Name of the Abassines is Arabian: But they rather chose to
be called Ethiopians; more particularly, Agazjan, (i. e.) Free, as the Germans
called themselves Franks. They transported themselves out of Arabia-Felix into
Africa, for they derive their Original from the Sabeans, or Homerites. Their
Language agrees with the Arabian. The Grecians call them Axumitae, others
Indians; hence confusion of Story: Erroneously called Caldeans. The Name of
Abassia or Ethiopia, to be retained.

IT behooves us to begin with the Name of the Nation. They are now generally
called, Habessines, by others Abessines, or Abassenes; the Name being given
them by the Arabians, in whose Language, [Habesh] For Habesha, speaking of a
multitude of People, is no more than Convenit, or the multitude gathered
together, in the Second Conjugation Habesha, congregavit, or Congregated
together: From whence the words Habesh etc. signify a multitude of men
gathered together from several Tribes of People. So that the Abessines may not
be improperly called by one Latin word, Convenae, or such as come together.
signifies a The Germans sound it Shabash or Hhabash, the Italians, Habascia;
the French, Habech, the Portugueses, Abex, pronounced after the same manner
with variety of Letters; in regard of the Arabic, Habesh, which is the
Original of all these words. Ill written Chabatti for Chabassi, in the
Prolegoniena of Walton's Poly-Glotton. Cap. 15. Page 98.
Confusion, or mixture of People; which Appellation, as being somewhat
ignominious, they for a long time despised, neither do they yet acknowledge it
in their Writings. For they rather choose to call their Kingdom, Manghesta
Itjopia, the Kingdom of Ethiopia, and themselves Itjopiawjan, Ethiopians;
assuming the Name from the Greeks, tho it be too general, and were formerly
common as well to all tho swarthy Complexion'd People in Asia, as to the Blacks
of Ethiopia. Hence Ethiopia was by the Ancients divided into Oriental and
Occidental, into African and Asiatick: Of which those Places of Scripture that
speak of the Cushites are to be understood. Now adays Ethiopia is only
Attributed to Africa.
But if you require a special Name from them, then they call their Kingdom
Geez: also the Country of Ag-azi; or the Land of the Ag-azjan, or For which
Gregory is my Author in a Letter to my self.
, Freemen, either from the Liberty they enjoy; or their transporting themselves
from one place to another, for that the radical Word Geeza admits of both
significations. Perchance, See my Ethiopick Lexicon. Col. 405.
because that in ancient times, translating themselves out of Arabia and
Africa, in search of other Habitations, they assumed that Name in sign of
Liberty, as of old, the Germans, passing the Rhine, gave themselves the Name of
Franks. Which I believe, as Agreeing with those Authors cited by Pontanus
concerning the Original of the Franks.
For they are not Natives of the Land; but came out of that Part of Arabia
which is called The Happy, which adjoyns to the Red Sea* and from whence there
is an easy Passage into Africa. For the Abassenos formerly inhabited Arabia,
and were reckoned For the Sabeans and Homerites are the same from the Region of
the Axumites, the Red Sea lying between, as says Procop. Gazeus upon the Tenth
Chapter of the Third Book of Kings, Ver. 1. upon the words, Queen of Sheba.
into the number of the Sabeans or Homerites, as the ancient Geographers
testify, Stephanus in his Book concerning Cities, upon the word Abasseni,
writes, Abasseni, a Nation of Arabia, and relates out of the Arabicks of
Uranius, that they bordered upon the Sabeans.
and many other Convincing Arguments sufficiently prove. For their Ancient
Language, which we call the Ethiopick, is very near a kin to the Arabic. They
have also many Customs, as Circumcision, which are common with the Arabians.
Their Genius, and the shape of their Bodies, and the Lineaments of their
Countenances resemble the Arabians much more than the African Ethiopians.
Besides, that Severus the Emperor, among the Vanquished People of Arabia,
caused the Name of the Abessines to be Scaliger in Comput. Eccles. Ethiop. de
Emendat. temp. Lib. 7.
Engraven on his Coin. The Habessines themselves also, while they claim the
Queen of Sheba for their Princess, betray their Original. For the Arabians
unanimously confess, That she was descended from the Lineage of the Homerites.
The Grecian Writers, ignorant of the proper Name, from the Royal City Axuma,
called them Axumites. Stephanus makes mention of these in the word Axumites.
Cedrenus, An. 15. of Justinian, and Ptolomie. Scaliger mentions the Name of
Axumite upon certain Pieces of Coin, in the fore-recited place.
Others in reference to their Original, have confused them with the Homerites;
others, by reason of their vicinity, with the Nubeans. Most of the Ancients
called them Indians, as they did all those Nations under the Torrid Zone, whose
particular Names they understood not. Yea the Red Sea it self is by some So
Procopius Gazeus, calls it in his Comment upon the forementioned Tenth of
Kings; and others, as Scaliger observes in Comp. Eccles. Ethiop. etc.
of the Ancients called the Indian Sea; so that it is no wonder that the Nations
bordering upon it should be called Indians. Neither did the Portugueezes know
any other Name in the beginning of the former Century. For Damianus de Goez
calls their King, the great Emperor of the Indians. In his Relation of the
Embassy of Mattheus to the King of Portugal.
Which diversity of Names has begat no small Confusion in our History. For some
things are attributed to our Abessines, which are appropriated to the true
Indians. Which chiefly happens in the History of the Conversion of the
Habessines, set sorth by Adesius and Frumentius; which the Writers of
Ecclesiastical History, have hitherto almost all of them understood, concerning
the true or Asiatic Indians. Theodoret in Hist. Ecclesiast. Lib. 1. Cap. 22.
And some things written concerning another Nation of Ethiopia, are imposed as
peculiar to the Habessines. At Rome, upon the first Printing of certain
Ethiopick Books, their Language was said to be Chaldean, and they themselves
erroneously called, sometimes Chaldeans, at other times Indians. But the Name
of Abessinia or Abassia, now known to all the World, shall be the Name which
Posken in Paersat. Psalt. Ethiopic. Edit. Romans Ambrose Theseus Intred. in Ling.
Orient. Page 1^.
we shall retain, with that of Ethiopia sometimes: More especially when we
shall discourse concerning their Kings, their Ancient Language, or their
Ecclesiastical Affairs; all which admit themselves to be distinguished by the
Title of Ethiopick; which the Abessines themselves do also allow.

CHAP. II. Of the Situation and Bounds of Abessinia.
The Situation above Egypt, and degrees of Latitude. The Error of Jovius, and
the vulgar Tables. The true Latitude. The conjectural Latitude. The Bounds
toward the North, and toward the East. Toward the South. Toward the West.

IN Africa, above Egypt, beyond Sub Egypto most write, but erroneously.
Nubia, lies Habassia very near between the Eighteenth and Sixteenth Degree of
Northern Latitude; being So B. Tellez, Historia general. de Ethiopia alta.
called by some the Upper Ethiopia. It extends not altogether so far as the
Equinoctial Line, much less can it be said to cross it. Which notwithstanding,
almost all Geographers and Historians have hitherto asserted; whether it were
that they did not rightly understand the Sayings and Writings of others; or
whether deceived by the Credit of Paulus Jovius, who writes that the Kingdom of
Sceva, (Sewa or Scheva) beholds the Anartick Pole elevated in two and twenty
degrees; whereas it is in no place to be seen where Shewa lies. Which mistake
as seems most probable, he too unwarily drew, not from the Abessines, utterly
ignorant of those things, but from a certain Ancient Geographical Map of
Africa; the Author of which has so far extended Habessinia, that he has joined
it to another Region known only to himself; fearing to seem ignorant of what
lay between by leaving a space. As if it were a shame to be ignorant of that
which flies the piercing examination of human wit, and can be no otherwise
discovered but by experiment.

But the Jesuits, mores kilful in Spherical Discipline, by the Assistance of
the Astrolabe, were the first who taught us that same true Latitude, from the
North to the South, already mentioned. But they were not able to make it out:
Yet so far as could be rendered most probable and certain, by conjecture, and
the length of Journeys, the Portugals do reckon this Kingdom, where it is
broadest, to contain a a Hundred and Forty of their Leagues. But the longest
Journey directly Westward, is to be accounted from the Red Sea to the farthest
Limits of Dembea. For most sure it is, that the Bounds of this Empire do from
the East and West, as it were Conically lessen; besides that the Gallans have
torn several of its Members from it.

Toward the North it has adjoining to it, the Kingdom of Fund, otherwise
Sennar, by the Portugals called Fungi; a part of Ancient Nubia. Toward the East
it was formerly bounded by the Red Sea: But now the Port of Arkiko, with the
adjacent Island of Matzua being taken, all that Coast obeys the Turk, who are
Masters of that Sea. A Sea that affords but little convenience for Harbors,
full of Shelves and Quicksands, and besides that, the Islands which belong to
it are Untilled, ill Inhabited, and laboring under such a scarcity of Water in
the amidst of the Sea, that they neither afford Accommodation nor Security to
Strangers, for which reason they are but little visited. The Mouth of the
Straight is very narrow, and of so ill a fame for frequent Shipwracks, that the
Arabians call it Bab-elmendeb, the In the Vulgar Mapps, tho of later Editions,
mistakenly called Babelmandel. The Interpreters of the Nubian Geographie,
pronounce it Bab-Almandab, and render it, The Dreadful Mouth, Page 20
Port of Affliction. To those that enter into it, the Kingdom of Dancale
appears upon the left hand. The Prince of this Territory is a Friend to the
Abessines, and Commands the Port of Baylur, where the Patriarch sent from Rome,
first Landed, and traveled thence into Abessinia. More within the Straight
lies the King of Adela, a Mahumetan; a Professed Enemy, and in the last Century,
the Scourge of the Habessines. Next follow in their Order the Kingdoms of
Dawaro, Bali, Fatagar, Wed, Bizamo, Cambata, with several other Provinces,
either possessed or wasted by the Barbarous Nation of the Gallans. From thence
the Countries winding about the Eighth Degree toward the South, Alaba and
Jendero, by the Portugals called Gingiro, Kingdoms of the Gentiles, terminate
Habessinia; till you come to Enarea, the last Kingdom, seated between the
Eighth and Ninth Degree of Latitude, toward the Northwest. Lastly the River
Maleg, and Nilus it self, rolling along through several vast Deserts, close up
the Western Limits. Nor are there any other Nations worthy to be mentioned
thereabout, till you come to the North, and the Kingdom of Sennar, already
named, unless the wandering Ethiopians, which the Ancients called Numades and
Troglodytes; and the Abessines Shankala.

CHAP. III. Of the Division of Habessinia, into diverse Kingdoms and Regions.
The Regions and Kingdoms of Habessinia are variously recounted, and numbered
up. Nnumerical faults. Gregory's enumeration and pronunciation. The Limits of
Ambara, and the Prvinces. Angota, Bagemra, with its Prefectures, Balia, Bizama,
Brigna, Cambata, Conta, Damota, Dewaro, Dombeja, and its Provinces. Enaria,
Fatagara, Gafata, Gajghe, Ganna, Ganz, Gidm, Gojam. Gombo. Gongha, Guraghe.
Ifat, Samen, Se^. Sowa* Shat. Tigra and its Prefectures. Those which are under
Bahrnagassus, Walaka, Wed. Tellez reckons more. Others he omits. More
remarkable Provinces. What the King of Habessinia possesss at this day.

THE Regions of which Ethiopia consists, are neither equally, nor with the same
observance of number, but variously set down. Most of them enjoy the Name of
the Kingdom, Menghest, or Ethiopia, in General; perhaps because in ancient
times they had their proper Princes and peculiar Laws, as we know that formerly
Spain was divided into several Kingdoms of the same nature. The rest, in the
Amharic Dialect, are called Shumet, Prefectures, which are not however Governed
by Viceroys, but are under peculiar Governors of their own; which being
confounded with the Kingdoms so called, Hist. l. 18.
must needs render the number of the Kingdoms uncertain. Paulus Jovius
distinguishes the Empire of the Habessines into more than forty Kingdoms;
others add yet more, which are more easily set down in writing, than
demonstrated. In Epist. Ev. Johan.
Matthew the Armenian, first Ambassador to the Portugals from the Abessines,
will needs have Dam. a Goez. de legate. Indorum ad Emanuel. 3. Lus. Reg.
sixty. Tesfa Sionus, who set forth the New Testament in Ethiopic, affirms
sixty two Kingdoms in Subjection to his Emperor. Unless perhaps the Numerical
Character for sixty, be mistaken for that denoting only twenty; of which sort,
there are most frequent faults both in Profane and Ludovic. Capell. in Critic.
Sacr. Lib. 1. Cap. 10. brings an Example of Sam. Bochart. in Hieroz. suo. lib.
2. cap. 27. ad Maccab. 1.6.36. concerning thirty two Soldiers upon one Elephant.
Sacred Writers. P. Nicolaus Godignus, from the Relation of John Gabriel, a
Portugueze Colonel, a Person of great Fame, and one that had long resided in
Ethiopia, asserts, That the Abessine Empire, according to its ancient Right,
comprehends no less than twenty six Kingdoms, and fourteen Provinces. But he
mixes some Neighboring Kingdoms, which are no way Subject to the King of the
Abessines, and some he also omits. Certainly Godignus's enumeration is most
confused: for the most part ill pronounced, as Leca, for Waleka. And why does
he reckon Adela, and Aucagurece among the number of the Kingdoms, when the
latter is only the Metropolis and no Kingdom; watered by the River Hawashi
(for so it ought to be written:) and yet confesses that the Inhabitants are no
way Subject to the Abessine Emperor.
However most certain it is, that we may safely reckon twenty, computing those
which the Gallans have subdued. Gregory named thirty to me, adding perhaps some
small ones, which others allow to be no more than Prefectures. These I shall
reckon up from his own mouth, and as he wrote them down himself, that the This
was very necessary by reason of the great variation and corruption of Names, so
frequent in all Authors.
Reader may be assured of their true and genuine Pronunciation. The first, and
that the best and most fertile, is the Kingdom of Tigra; but for Nobleness
Amhara exceeds it, which we shall put in the first place, the rest following
according to the Order of the Latin Alphabet.

Amhara is now the most noble Kingdom of all Ethiopia, by reason of those
inaccessible Fortified Rocks, Ghesen and Amhacel, where formerly the Kings
Sons, excluded from the Kingdom, were secured; and is therefore accounted the
Native Country of the late and present Kings, and of all the Nobility. It lies
almost in the Center of Habessinia, having on the North the Kingdom of
Bagemder; upon the West, Nile; and beyond that, the Kingdom of Gojam. Upon the
South it views Walake, and Eastward beholds Angota. The Provinces that belong
to it are these that follow: 1 Akamba 2 Amhacel 3 Anbacit 4 Armon-em 5 Atronca
Marjam 6 Bada-Bad 7 Barara 8 Batata 9 Beda-gadal 10 Dada 11 Dad 12 Demah 13
Ephrata 14 Ewarza 15 Feres-Bahr 16 Ganata-Ghiorghis 17 Gesha-bar 18 Grumghe 19
Ghel 29 Gheshe 21 Gheshen 22 Hagara Christos 20 Karna-Marjam 24 Kicarja 25
Lai-Kueita. 26 Macana-Celece, where Gregory was Born. 27 Malza 28 Shegla 29
Tabor 39 Tadbaba-Marjam. 31 Tat-Kueja 02 Walsa 33 Waro 34 Wagda 35 Wanz-egr 36
Zar-amba.


The Second Kingdom is Angot, which is also called Hangot.

The Third Kingdom is Bagembder, in the vulgar Mapps Bagamidri; a large and
fertile Kingdom, watered with many Rivers. Gregory compared it with our
Germany, saying, Here is much water, as in Bagemhder. The River Bashlo divides
it from Amhara. It is distinguished into several Territories.

1 Andabet, the Trumpeters Country. 2 Atcana 3 Dahr, more particularly like
Germany, as Gregory said. 5 Este 3 Guna 6 Koma 7 Maket, bordering upon Angota.
8 Mashalamja 9 Nafasmauca 10 Smada 11 Tzama 12 Wainalga, famous for the
slaughter of Grainus in the former Century. 13 Wudo.
The fourth Kingdom is Bali, most Easterlie, which the Gallans first subdued;
and thence afflicted the Abessines with so many Calamities.

The fifth Kingdom is Bizamo, divided from Gojam by the River Nile.

The sixth Kingdom is Bugna, in some Mapps called Abugana, a mountanous and
small Kingdom.

The seventh Kingdom is Cambata, the Inhabitants whereof are called Hadja, or
Hadiens. From whence it comes to pass, that Adea, or Hadea is in the Mapps
erroneously called a Kingdom. It is the last Kingdom toward the South, lying
not far from Enarrea; for the most part Christians, but mixed with Pagans and
Mahumetans.

The eighth Kingdom is Cont; by the Portugals called Conch.

The ninth Kingdom is Damot; a Southerly Kindom, seated beyond Nile, and the
Gafats.

The tenth Kingdom is Dawaro; the Eastern limits of the Empire, adjoining to
the Southern part of Bali.

The eleventh Kingdom is Dembeja, or Dembea, a Kingdom now famous for the Royal
Camp, continually pitched there. The Prefectures belonging to it are, 1 Arebja
2 Decal-ariva 3 Dehhana 4 Edn 7 Gaba 6 Guender 7 Kuara 8 Nara 9 Sarako 10
Sera-karn 11 Takuesa 12 Tenqel 13 Tshelga as it were the Gates of Abuassia
toward Sennar. 14 Walwad.


The twelfth Kingdom is Enarea, inhabited both by By the Portugals called
Narea, by Godignus Nerea. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Christians and Gentiles. This Kingdom was subdued by Melech-Saghed; who
converted the Governor thereof to the Christian Faith. Gregory very much
applauded the Inhabitants for their Probity and Integrity: he said it was a
fertile Soil, and abounding in Gold, adding That he had heard from the
Portuguezes, that this Kingdom was five and thirty days journey distant from
the Indian Ocean; but would not assert it for Truth.

The thirteenth Kingdom is Tatagar; formerly inhabited by Christians, Eastward
adjoining to Bali.

The fourteenth Kingdom is Gafat, bordering upon Damota.

The fifteenth Kingdom is Gajghe; pronounce it as the French do, Gajegue.

The sixteenth Began, by the Portuguezes called Ganhe.

The seventeenth, Ganz. Erroneously joined with Bali, and in the feigned Title
of the King, contracted into Baleganz.

The eighteenth Gedm, bordering upon Dawaro toward the East.

The nineteenth Gojam; Erroneously Goyame in the Mapps. Worse Goroma by
Godignus. Lib. 1. cap. 4. page 15.
pronounce it with the French, Gojam. A Kingdom wonderful for its situation,
and famous for the Fountains of Nile therein now discovered. For the River Nile
almost surrounds it in manner of a Peninsula. But that it cannot possibly be
the Island of Meroe, as Tellezius believes, we shall prove in our Commentary.
Godignus affirms, that it contains twenty Provinces, but conceals their Names.

The twentieth Kingdom is Gombo.

The one and twentieth, Gonga.

The two and twentieth, Guraghe.

The three and twentieth, Ifat, adjoining to Shewa toward the East.

The twenty fourth is Samen; by Tellezius called Cemen, and numbered among the
Provinces.

The twenty fifth Set, whose Inhabitants are Pagans.

The twenty sixth Sewa, in the Amharec Dialect Shewa, as the Portugals call it
Xoa, or Xaoa, a very large and most opulent Kingdom; formerly much frequented
by the Abessine Kings, and then more famous than Amhara. It is distinguished
into the Upper and the Lower, there are in it several Monasteries and some
Towns, as may be seen in our Mapp. Dabra Libanos, the seat of Jeeghi, chief
Overseer of all the Monks, was formerly in this Kingdom.

The twenty seventh is Shat, in Portugueze, Xat.

The twenty eighth is Tegre or Tigra; one of the principal Kingdoms, and the
first as you enter into Ethiopia. The Native Country of the former Kings, who
kept their Courts at Axuma. The most noble part of it lies toward the Red Sea,
and is called Bahr, the Sea, or Medra-Bahr, the Land of the Sea, or a Maritim
Province, comprehending under it three Toparchies. The Governor, Bahr-Nagash
resides in Dobarwa. In the Mapps of Dobarua, Erroneously Barva; worse Barna.
The Prefectures belonging to Tegre are, 1 Abargale 2 Acsum, or the Prefecture
of Axuma, the ancient Residence of the Kings. 3 Adet 4 Afa-macuonen 5 Agamja 6
Amba-Sanet By Tellez called Ambacanet. Page 119.
7 Bora 8 Upper-Bura 9 Lower-Bura 10 Beta-Abba Garima 11 Doba, near Angora,
inhabited by Pagans. 12 Enderta 13 Garalta 14 Hagarai 15 Memberta 16 Nader 17
Sahart 18 Salawa 19 Sanafe 20 Sire 21 Taderar 22 Tamben 23 Torat 24 Tzam-a 25
Tzerae 26 Wag 27 Wajrat.


All which are inhabited by several Nations and People. But there are not so
many Governors as Prefectures: For that sometimes two or three Prefectures are
under one Governor. For Bora, Salawa, and Wag, are all under one Tetrarch.

The Prefectures under Bahrnagas, are 1 Bakla, whose Inhabitants are all
Graziers, and change their habitations, abiding in the Summer in one place; all
the Wintertime in another. 2 Egala 3 Hamacen, It consists of three Towns,
which are subject to the King of the Habessines, however they choose their own
Magistrates, and are Governed by their own Laws, like a Petty Commonwealth,
and often give Protection to Exiles and Fugitives. 4 Marjan 5 Marata 6 Sarawe 7
Zangaren.


The twenty ninth Kingdom is Walaka, in the Portugueeze Language Oleca, or
Holeca.

The thirtieth, Wed, by the Portugals called Ogge.

These are the Kingdoms which Gregory numbered up to me, and left the Names of
them written down in the Ethiopic Characters: to the end I might pronounce them
genuinely, and express them as adaptly as could be done in conformity to the
Latin Letters. Tellezius reckons more, which nevertheless, he does not
distinguish in his Mapps by great Letters, as he does the other Kingdoms; that
is to say, 1 Alamale 2 Aura 3 Bahargamo 4 Betezamora 5 Boxa, which nevertheless
he says, is a Country of Enarea, l. 1. c. 8. Guniar Manz Marrabet Mota.


On the other side some Kingdoms he omits, some of which however he has
inserted in his Geographical Mapp, and of some he makes mention in his History;
l. 1. c. 13. as Fatagar Gafat Gajghe Ganibo Ganga Set Shat


The most remarkable Provinces which have their peculiar Governors, are 1
Emfras, between Bagemdra, and Dembea. 2 Mazaga 3 Mugar, near to Sewa 4 Tzagade
5 Wagara 6 Walkajit


The rest you shall meet with in our Geographick Tables. Now of all these
Kingdoms and Provinces the King of the Abessines enjoys at present, 1 Amhara 2
Bajemdra 3 Cambata 4 Damota 5 Dembea 6 Enarea 7 Gojam 8 Samen 9 Part of Sewa,
with some other Kingdoms of lesser note.


And for Provinces, those of 1 Emfras 2 Mazaga 3 Tzagade 4 Wagara 5 Walkajit


Which Kingdoms and Provinces comprehend the best part indeed; but not the half
of the ancient Habessia. The rest the Galans have either subdued, or else
utterly laid wast, as we shall relate in due place.

CHAP. IV. Of the Vulgar Chorographic Table or Mapp of Habessinia, and the
Author's new one.
The New Mapp of the Habessines. The new one found fault with as Erroneous:
Looked on as ridiculous by Gregory; by reason of the ill writing and because of
the ill understood Names of Barnagassus, Tigremahon, Ambiancantiva, which are
explained. The ambiguous powers of Letters. Advice to concert a certain
Geographical Alphabet. The Authors contest about his own Mapps.

BUT to the End that all things may the more clearly appear, we shall produce a
new Chorographical Mapp of Habessinia, the old one that goes begging about the
World for an Author, being altogether uncertain. I was not a little ashamed to
hear the sedulous Ethiopian, Gregory, upbraiding as he did, the vanity and
carelessness of our People, to obtrude such absurdities upon the Commonweal of
Learning, and to defile otherwise most As those of Ortelius, Jansonius; the
Atlas's of Gerand, Mercator, Bleau, and others.
beautiful Pieces of Geography, with such fabulous impertinencies. While they
made public to the World Mapps of such consequence, without any sufficient
Authority, or any light by what Pen, of what Nation, or in what Language they
were first written, as if they designed on purpose to deceive the Reader, that
so he might not be in a Capacity to judge of the Truth: which if it were their
aim, they did not miss of their intentions, in regard they led several persons,
otherwise eminent, and of great judgment, into foul mistakes, who cried up the
Empire of the Habessines for the largest in the World, as being little less
than all Europe, too unwarily trusting to their fictions.

When I first showed the vulgar Mapps to Gregory, sometimes I made him laugh,
sometimes I made him angry. For before I called to mind that the Latin Letters
were to be pronounced after the Portugal mannet, I asked him concerning the
Kingdoms of Xoa, Gojam, and other Regions, from whence the Portuguezes had
either taken away, or to which they had added the Latin Letters, a, d, do, as
being their Articles of declension, As Abugno, for Bugna, Barua; worse Barua,
for Dobarua; Amara for Amhara; Ambadora, for Ambadarho, etc.
without any regard to the Letter h. But when I expected an Answer, he knew not
what I meant, till I pronounced for Ksoa, Shoa; for Goyam, Gojam, and so
onward: But he laughed outright when I questioned him concerning the Kingdoms
of Barnagassus, Tigremahon, In the vulgar Tables also you shall find Tigre and
Tigray, as if they were two distinct Kingdoms: Which error B. Tells severely
reprehends. L. 1. Chapter 4.
and Ambiancantiva. For after a short hesitation he understood them to be
compound words, in which the Titles of the Viceroys, were conjoined with the
Names of the Regions over which they were made Governors; and besides that,
very much corrupted by the Portugal pronunciation and spelling. For Barnagasso
in the Amharic Language extends it self to Bahr-Nagash, a compound word of Bahr
which signifies the Sea, and Nagash a Governor, as much as to say a Commander
or Admiral at Sea. Tigremahon corruptly for Tigre-macuonen, that is to say,
Judge or President of Tigre: Ambian-cantiva, for Dembea-cantiba, that is,
Governor or President of Dembea. The same inference happens to the most noble
City and Court of Royal Residence, Axuma, which never appears in the Mapps, by
reason that the Portugals pronounce Axum, Acassum; for they cast away the A, as
an Article of declension, and adding their own termination O, made it Cassumo.
Upon which City we stood pausing a long time, before we could tell what to make
of it. I pass by an innumerable company of other mistakes, which rendered the
Mapp altogether useless to me. Nor is it to be doubted but the same thing often
falls out in other Exotic Tables: So that unless a Man can divine the Language
of the Author, or where he was born; it is impossible but he must read the
Names of the plaes most extravagantly. For we find that because the Modern
Europeans have no Letters of their own, but only have accommodated the Latin
Letters to their own sounds, it comes to pass, that one and the same Letter is
variously pronounced by various Nations; which frequently appears in Consonants
conjoined. As for Example, Ch, among the Germans, Belgians and Polonians, is a
rough Aspiration like the Hebrew, or the Greek. Among the Italians Ch, is
pronounced like a k, among the French like an Hebrew. But among the English,
Spaniards and Portugueses, who alone genuinely pronounce the word China, there
is a kind of hissing composed between the Letter Z. and sch. which the Italians
express by a C before e or i; the Polonians by Ch, the Hebrews more lively in
their, the Germans Sch, the English by Sh, the French Ch, the Italians Sc
before e, and i; and which the Portugueses would do by their Letter X, but that
they are unwilling to have it a superfluous Letter in their Alphabet.

For which reason it would be very requisite, that the Publishers of Foraign
Mapps, should also Publish their Instructions, and tell the World according to
what Pronounciation, the Names of Countries and Cities ought to be read: Or
else that in the compiling of some universal Geographical Work, care might be
taken to add such an Index as should be the standard of Pronunciation in every
Country, to prevent the common mistakes.

We must acknowledge that our Chorographick Table is not without its defects:
For though Gregory were sufficiently skilled in the Names and Situation of
places, yet he was ignorant of the Degrees of the Sphere and Elevation of the
Pole. Therefore in the first Mapps of Habessinia which I made, I followed the
Longitude and Latitude of the vulgar Tables; but because I found them false in
that too, we thought it more prudence not to Publish any at all. I must confess
being in company with certain Persons of Learning and Quality, upon a There not
makes mention of that which I gave to the Elector of Ments, in his Remarks upon
the History of Ethiopia. I presented one also to Frederick 3d. King of
Danemark, another to Charles Lewis the Elector Palatine, and some others I
could not refuse the same satisfaction of their curiosity.
discourse that happened concerning Ethiopia, after I had made my Apology, I
produced a Manuscript exemplar of both sorts: But such they were, that should
they ever come to light by any misfortune, I dare not be responsible for their
Credit. But at length having happened upon the Chorographick Table of
Tellezius, delineated by the Fathers of the Society, with the help of the
Astrolabe, I made no scruple to retain the Degrees, as by them set down, and
then to make them common, together with a new Mapp, for universal information.
I have added the Midland Regions, tho without any adventure of justification,
in regard those Regions by reason of their vast distance, being so seldom
visited by Travelers, afford little of certainty.

CHAP. V. Of the Nature of the Soil, Temper of the Air, Tempests, Winds, and
such like Meteors.
The Air uncertain. Wonderful effects of heat. The Torrid Zone is nevertheless
habitable. The high places cold. No Snow. The temper and wholesomness of the
Air. Horrid Thunders. A dirty Winter described by Gregory. Diversity of
Tempests in the same situation. The four seasons of the year different from the
Europeans. The beginning of the Spring the 25th. of September. They have only
three seasons of the year; the days and nights almost always equal. Their
dawnings and evenings very short. The most impetuous wind, called a Snake. The
two sorts of Whirl-winds, Prestor and Typhon, most raging and pernicious.

IN so many and such various Regions, the Constitution of the Air is as
various. In low and open places which the Abessines call Kolla, the heat of the
Sun is intolerable, such as Seneca describes in these words. The stones burn as
if neal'd in the fire, not only in the middle of the day, but also toward the
evening, the Silver unsoders; the footsteps of men are impatient of the
scorching sand. The fastening of the standard melts: No exterior covering of
outward Ornament remains. In which respect both coasts of the Red Sea have but
a bad report; as also the Islands, especially Suaquena, whose heat Gregory
many times used to call Infernal. For said he, it excoriates the Skin, melts
hard Indian wax in a Cabinet, and sears your shoos, like a red hot Iron.

But these Persons considered not the nature of those People; that inhabit that
Country; much less have they weighed with themselves, the strange Patience of
those that covet rule and dominion, who can endure the parching beams of the
Sun, and willingly too, though unused to those immoderate violences of raging
heat. However the ancient Philosophers were in a very great error that believed
the Aristot. Meteorotog. L. 2. c. 11. and his followers.
Torrid Zone unhabitable; or that the middle parts of the Earth, where the Sun
continually moves, should be parched up with flames, and tosted with the raging
fire. The Spaniards have a Proverb, he that is intent upon his own Interest,
minds not in conveniences.
Assuredly there are some Philosophers who deliver things uncertain and
unprov'd for real and assured truths, and discourse in such a manner of the
nature of the Air, the Heavens and the Stars, as if their residence had long
been there. For that the Air is colder upon the Mountains, all Nations in their
own Countries find by experience; but that the Air is cold of it self, and not
warmed but by the repercussion of the Suns beams among the exhalations of the
Earth, is the opinion of other sage Philosophers: which exhalations in the
lower Region near the Earth rise more close and condensed, in the upper parts,
more thin and rarified; so that tho the lower parts fry with heat, high places
freez, the cool nature of the Air not suffering any alteration through the
defect of heat.

Therefore the higher you ascend the Mountains of Ethiopia from the coast of
the Red Sea, the more temperate you shall feel the Air; insomuch that as
Tellezius witnesses in many Regions of Ethiopia, the Summer heats are more mild
then in Portugal, so many degrees distant toward the North. Nay there are some
Mountainous Countries, as in Samen where the cold is more dreaded than the
heat. Nevertheless there falls none or very little Snow in those parts, only a
certain small sort of Hail sometimes covers the ground, which at a distance
looks like Snow. It was a thing not known to Gregory, for as I Traveled with
him over the Mountains of Tirol, toward the end of September, seeing some Snow
that had fallen a little before, crying out Haritz, Haritz, full of admiration,
he called it Meal. From such a temper of the Air it follows that the Country
must needs be healthy; and consequently the Inhabitants sane and vivacious,
insomuch that some of them live to a hundred years of Age. Only in Tigra,
toward the beginning of the Ethiopic Spring, that is to say, in the Months of
September and October, Fevers are very rise.

However this variety of the Air is the cause of most dreadful Thunders. Which
when Gregory described, he astonished his hearers. For upon the rising of
several Tempests altogether, the Sky is of a sudden covered over with black
and thick as it were Globes of smokie Clouds; by and by the Thunder breaks
forth on every side, rattling continually, with Lightning as incessantly
flashing, enough to amaze the most resolute and most accustomed to the noise.
Their Rains are very violent, powering from the Clouds not by drops, but as it
were in streams. With those the torrents being swelled, roll along with that
rapid fury, that they carry Trees and Stones and all things before 'em. All
their Rivers overflow; and then the high ways being either covered with water,
or else all mirie and dirtie, it is a most tedious thing to Travel: And this
enduring three Months together renders their Winters very unpleasant. Gregory
described the Ethiopian Winter to me in these words.

The Ethiopian Winters are not caused only by the Rain which falls from the
Sky; for the Earth also opens her mouth, and vomits up water. There is a
Fountain in every man's house, if it stands low. And therefore we never Build
in low places, but in high grounds: So many and so great Rivers, and Springs of
water out of the Earth; and such violent Rains are no where the like to be seen
as in our Country.

This tempestuous weather is so troublesome and tedious to Forraigners, that in
a dispute which happened between an Abossine and an Egyptian, about the
excellency of their Countries, when the first vaunted to the latter, the
natural fertility of Abessinia, the temperateness of the Air, their double
Harvests, and other benefits of the Country, adding withal, That the Egyptians
cannot live without the assistance of Ethiopia, in regard that Nilus fatten'd
Egypt with the Mud of Ethiopia, without which, both Man and Beast would perish
for want of Sustenance; the Egyptian retorted upon the Abyssinian, upbraiding
him with the prodigious Showers, the rapid Torrents, the steep and rugged
Mountains, and the dreadful Thunders that rendered the Country so unpleasant;
upon which the Victory was allowed on his side.

Nor does the season of the Winter keep the same Months, nor the same
Temperature in all places alike, tho the situation may be the same; for it is
not only milder in some places, sharper in others, but also in different Months
from our Climate. Which was of old observed by In the History of his Embassy,
some Collections out of which are to be seen in Bibliothec. Photii. n. 3. p.m.
2.
Nonnosus, Ambassador from the Emperor Justinian to the King of the Axumites,
who traveling those Parts himself.

(...), etc. From the City of the Adulites as far as Aue, the same Summer and
Drouth affects the Air as with us. From Aue toward Axuma, the Winter is very
rigorous, etc. Gregory told me, That the Coast of the Red Sea, and all that two
days Journey, from the Shore to the Mountains of Ethiopia the Winter keeps its
Station in November, December, and January, as in Europe; but they differ
nothing in the Degrees of Latitude. So that it is not always true what some See
the Notes upon Cluverius's Introduction to Geography, l. 1. c. 5. and Aristot.
l. 2. de Meteorologic. who without experience writes, That the Heat and Cold do
not exceed in regard of the Longitude, but in regard of the Latitude.
Geographers have written, That the Perioeci, or those that dwell under the
same Meridian, have the same Winter and Summer.

Now what the Winter of that Coast is, you may easily guess, from the answer of
Gregory, who being asked upon a very sultry day, whether it were not very hot
in Germany, made answer,

To day has been something hot: Such is the Winter in Suaqena, which is an
Island upon that Coast.

Being asked concerning the Seasons of the Year, he answered,

The Season Matzau, the Season of Flowers or the Spring.

The Season Tzadai, the Season of Harvest or Autumn.

The Season Hagai, or the Summer.

The Season Crampt, or Winter.

Thus he reckoned the four Seasons: But there is not the same reason for them,
nor the same benefits by them, as with us; nor could Gregory himself reconcile
them with ours.

Matzau indeed may deservedly be called the Spring, because it succeeds the
Winter, and covers the Fields with Grass and Flowers. It begins upon a certain
day of the Month, that is, upon the 25th of September.

But the Tzadai of the Ethiopians cannot be called properly Autumn, as Gregory
imagined; for it is the second part of the year that succeeds the Spring, and
exhilarates the Husbandman with ripened Fruits, and therefore ought more truly
to be called Summer. But how Hagai is to be interpreted, is a question; it is
the third part of the year, yet cannot justly be called Autumn, in regard the
Habessines are ignorant of any benefit they receive by it: They get no Vintage
in, but are parched with extremity of Heat, and therefore they oppose this
hottest time of the year to the sharpest Cold of Winter.

For which reason we rather ought to conclude, that there are but three Seasons
among the Abyssines, that is to say, the Spring which begins upon the 25th of
September. Then the Summer, which may be divided into two parts; the first, and
the best, called Tzadai, which begins upon the 25th of December; and the last,
and worst part, called Hagai, which begins upon the 25th of June, and ends upon
the Gregory differs from our Poet one day, who puts it upon the 26th.
succeeding Winter, which is the third part of the Ethiopic year.

The Days and Nights in that Climate, being in a right Sphere, are, for the
most part, always equal. Their Dawnings and Evenings much shorter than ours.
Gregory wondered, that it should be light when he could not see the Sun; and
again, after Sunset, that the Twilight should last so long. For there
immediately after Sunset it grows dark, and all the Stars, in the absence of
the Moon, appear.

The Winds, upon the Mountains frequent and pleasant, render the Air healthful
and temperate; but in open and flat Levels, the Air, for want of motion, grows
hot and unwholsom, especially in the Islands of the Red Sea. This a certain
Merchant attested, who carrying several rich Indian Commodities from the Port
of Suaqena to the Court, and being asked by one of the King's Daughters, What
there was that could not be purchased at the Port of Suaqena, answered, The
Wind; that being only wanting in that place, otherwise a happy and pleasant
Island.

But all Winds are not equally grateful or beneficial in Ethiopia, for there
are some which are most impetuously violent; among the rest, the Whirlwind,
called Sendo, which in the Amharic Dialect signifies a Snake, a Wind so
furious, that it throws down all before it, Houses, Oaks, and Stones, and
hurries them along in the Air. The Belgioms call this Wind Hoof, and report it
frequent upon the Coasts of Asia, as they sometimes experience to the loss of
their Ships. The Whirlwind by the Greeks, called Typhon, is that of which Pliny
thus writes: A principal Plague to the Mariners, which not only throws down the
Masts, but rives the Ship in pieces. And again, The same Wind meeting
opposition, carries all before it, and sweeps whatever it meets into the Air.
Gregory affirmed, it might be seen, and that it represented the form of a
Snake, whose thicker part, like the Head, brushing upon the ground, the Body
advanced it self in curls and windings to the Sky. Nor do I believe this Wind
to differ much from that Wind which the Greeks call (...) (Prester), there
being the same Equivocal in both; for that Prester signifies a kind of Serpent,
and perhaps may be the same which the Venetians call Bissaboba, Biscia
signifying a Serpent in Italian. Anno 1679.
Such a Whirlwind last Autumn happening in Dalmatia, swept into the Air, Men,
Cattle, Carts and Horses laden with Hay and great Bells, if there be any faith
in Report; and after the ruin of many Houses, Churches, Towers, and Palaces,
left behind it the deplorable Testimonies of the havoc it had made. P.
Organtino of Brescia wrote from Goa, That a Whirlwind tossed up several empty
Ships from the Water into the Air, and carried them beyond the Shore: Which if
it be true, Plin. l. 2. c. 56.
those prodigious showers of Stones, Iron, and Bricks, are the less to be
wondered at, if we may be allowed to say, That the time has been when it rained
Men, Ships, and great Bells.

CHAP. VI. Of the high Mountains of Habessinia, and Rocks of strange forms.
High Mountains. Lamalmona most dangerous. Amhara and Samen the gibbose part of
Abyssinia; higher than the Alps and Pyreneans. Steep Rocks of a wonderful
shape, not to be ascended without Ropes and Ladders. Spacious at the top. The
Rock where the Kings Sons were formerly kept, described. A Rock in Gojam
hollowed like a Looking-Glass. Deep Abysses. Plains very rare, one great one in
Dembea. The benefits of the Mountains, temperate Air, security and pleasantness
of the Fountains.

ALL Habessinia is egregiously Mountainous: So soon as you have traveled two
days Journey from the Red Sea, you must presently climb the high Mountains of
Tigra; amongst which Lamalmona lifts up her head more lofty than the rest,
which they that travel to the Royal Camp in Dembea, are forced to clamber over:
The Steps of which, if they may be so called, are so dangerous, and the Path or
Track so narrow, that if Company meet, Men and Horses giving the way, fall
headlong into a bottomless Abyss, never to be any more seen. But not only this
Region is the Plain that seems as it were planted with Mountains, Bagemdra,
Gojam, Waleka, Shewa, and all the rest, Dembea excepted, are but one continued
Chain of Mountains. Among the rest, the vast and high Mountains of Amhara and
Samen are as it were the Embossment of Habessinia.

Here are many Aorni, or Rocks of an A Rock in India called Aornos, as being
above the slight of a Bird, Curt. 8. n. 2. There are also Lakes of this name,
but from another cause, for that the pestilent Exhalations that they send up,
kill the Birds that fly over them, Plin. 2.4. by the Latins called Averni.
incredible height and ruggedness, in so much, that, as Tellezius writes, they
strike a terror into the Beholders; the Alps and Pyreneans, compared with the
Abessine Mountains, are but low Hills. The Mountains of Portugal, tho very
high, are but trifles to them.

Amongst those Mountains, and frequently in the Plain it self, and in the
middle of the Fields, rise up Rocks every way steep, yet varying their shape;
some looking a far off like Towers, some like Pyramids, some like apiece
Towers built by Art, and so even on the sides, as if the Workman's hand had
done it so; so that there is no way to get to the top but by the help of
Ladders and Ropes, by which means they Crane up their Cattle, and other
necessaries: And yet so spacious at the top, that they contain Woods, Fields,
Meadows, Fountains, and which is more wonderful, Fish Ponds, and all other
conveniences for humane Support. These sort of Rocks the Natives call Amba; as
Amba-Dorbo, That is the Rock of the Hen, in the Map erroneously called Ambadora.
etc.

This puts us in mind to describe that famous Rock in the Kingdom of Amhara,
called Geshen, of which, and of the Mountain Ambacel, we have already made
mention, which we shall do in the words of Tellezius. In the Confines of
Amhara, toward Shewa, stands Amba-Geshen: It is a Mountain almost impregnable,
every way steep, prodigiously high, and in the form of a Castle made all of
Freestone: At the top it is about half a Portugal League in breadth, at the
bottom near half a days Journey about: At first easy to be ascended, then
steep and rugged, in so much, that the Abyssine Oxen, that otherwise will
clamber like Goats, must be cran'd up and let down with Ropes.

Formerly those miserable Ethiopic Princes were here cag'd up in wild places,
in low Cottages, among Shrubs and wild Cedars, starved from all things else but
Air and Earth; as if they, who were descended from a high Parentage, were to be
confind in a high and lofty Exile. In Gojam, as In Mulurgia sua Univers. T. 3.
l. 9. c. 6. where instead of Iches Fays, read Petrus Pays.
Kercher tells us, from the Relation of Peter Pays, there is a certain Rock so
curiously hollowed by Nature, that afar off it resembles a Looking-Glass; and
over against it another, on the top of which there is nothing that can be so
softly whispered, but may be heard a great way off, and the reverberation of
the sound is like the encouraging Ho up of Mariners.

Between these Mountains are immense Gulphs, and dreadful Profundities; which
because the Sight cannot fathom, Fancy takes them for Abysses; whose bottoms
Tellezius will have to be the Center of the Earth. Nor did Gregory describe
them otherwise, than as places most dreadful and formidable to the Eye.

Levels are very rare; the largest Plain is that in Dembea, near the Lake
Tzanicus, about twenty Portugal Leagues in length, and four or five broad.

A Region so Mountainous, and so like to Switzerland, may be looked upon justly
by all people as a most rude and unhusbanded Country; but they that consider
the benefits which the Habessines receive thereby, will from the same reasons
be drawn to an admiring Contemplation of Divine Providence: For that
stupendous height of their Mountains contemns the scorching heat; which
renders their Country the more inhabitable in those high places, where the
people breath a more serene Air. In the next place, Heaven has thereby provided
for their security, so many inaccessible Mountains, being like so many Castles,
which afford them not only Habitation, but a safe defense against their
Enemies. For had it not been for those Fortresses of Nature, they had been
ruined long e're this, by the Adelenses and the Gallans. Moreover, thorough all
those Mountains you shall find most pleasant Springs of Water, which are
wanting in the Levels of the torrid Zone: The reason of which, we shall give
you in another place.

CHAP. VII. Of Metals and Minerals.
Abassia abounds in Metals and Minerals, especially Gold, which is found in the
Sand of the Rivers; and in Damota and Enarrea upon the Superficies of the
Earth. Silver they have not, and yet not without Lead. They neither know, nor
care to know, what belongs to Metals. Salt plentifully dug out of the Earth.
Gems they want. They more esteem black Lead, with which they color their
Eyebrows.

THat so many and so vast Mountains afford plenty of Metals and Minerals, the
Fathers of the Society attest. And certainly, it is a thing easily credible,
that that part of the Earth, lying under the fiercest and most maturing heat of
the Sun, cannot be without Metals, and more especially Gold, which is found in
the shallows of Rivers, polished and pure in great quantities, about the
bigness of a Tare or Vetch. Whence it is conjectured, that the Gold is brought
to perfection in the neighboring Mountains, and carried away together with the
Sand, by the forces of the Stream. Pliny affirms that sort of Gold to be the
finest and most perfect. Damota, but more especially Enarrea, enjoy this
advantage, it being the chiefest Tribute which they pay. They are destitute of
Silver; whether it be that Nature denies them that benefit, or that they know
not how to dig it out and refine it: For they have Lead, which is said to be
the Mother of Silver.

But they are altogether ignorant of the Minery Trade. For the digging of
Wells, boaring of Mountains, supporting of Mines with massy Timber, hewing of
Stones, or forcing Rocks with Gunpowder or Fire, to live in the dark, sometimes
hours, sometimes days together, and to be half strangled with Smoke and Damps,
to Thus Pliny discourses concerning Minerals.
search the Vains of the Earth, and examine the Secrets of Rocks, are things
altogether unsuitable to the Genius of the Habessines. Rather they count it a
piece of folly to pine after Minerals, and heap up Riches, to encourage the
Turk to make War upon them. They think themselves far more safe in Iron, as
being that with which Gold may be won: And for Iron, they have no occasion to
delve for it, in regard they find it in great plenty upon the Superficies of
the Earth, as P. Antonio Fernandez testifies.

Moreover, in the Confines of Tigra and Angora, from a place called the Land of
Salt, there Concerning such kind of Salt, see Pliny, l. 31. c. 7.
are natural Mountains of Salt, from whence they supply themselves with
inexhaustible quantities, cutting it out of the sides of the Mountains in great
pieces of a white and solid Substance. In the Mountain it is soft, and sliver'd
off with little labor; but in the Air it hardens. From thence it is fetched by
great numbers of Merchants, who conveigh it away in Caravans, which are called
Cafila, and vended through all the neighboring Nations and Countries where it
is a scarce Commodity. Alphonsus Mendez the Patriarch, writes, That there is in
another place a Mountain of Red Salt, very useful in Physic. So propitiously
has Heaven compensated their want of Money with plenty of Salt; which by virtue
whereof, as with ready Coin, in other places they purchase other necessaries.
Thus they abound in Salt, which the Life of Man cannot want; but they are
destitute of other things that less conduce to the happiness of Human Being.
Nor do they desire those things, of whose dazzling Beauties and glittering
Colors they are ignorant; I mean Gems and Jewels, rarely yet seen in Ethiopia,
whatever that same Trifler, Valentinian Romances. The Royal Diadem it self
glitters only with counterfeit Jewels, thinking it not worth their while to
send their Salt or Gold to foreign and barbarous Nations to purchase true ones;
and admiring at our imprudence, for expending our Money so idly. They much more
esteem those Minerals, that conduce to the health and preservation of the Body;
chiefly among the rest Stibium, or Black Lead, which they in their Language
call A word well known in all the Eastern Languages, from the Hebrew word
(...), which signifies Stibium from (...) Fucavit, or besmeared with Fucus; and
whence the Greek word Collyrium, as it were Cohollyrium, seems derived. The
Arabic word Elcohol still remains in the Spanish Language, wherein there is a
Proverb, Elpolve de las ovejas, Elcohol es para el Lobo; The Dust which the
Sheep raise is a Collyrium to quicken the Wolf's sight.
Cuehel, or Cohol, and believe it to be a great preserver of the Sight; nor do
they less esteem it for Ornament, and to beautify their Faces with it: For
being powdered, they mix it with Soot moistened, and with a small Pencil which
they call Blen, besmear their Eyebrows, according to the frequent and ancient
custom of the Orientals.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Rivers of Habessinia, more especially of Nile, its
Fountains and Course; as also of the Lake Tzana.
Many Rivers there more precious than Metals. The Fountains originally from
Rainwater. An Encomium of Nilus: In Scripture it is called, The River (...),
and Schichor, or Niger: By some of the ancients Astapus, and Astaboras: In the
Amharic Dialect called Abawi, or the Patent of Rivers; it flows not in
Paradise, as some of the Fathers thought. Admiration caused the desire of
knowing its Original, that the Ancients placed in the Mountains of the Moon.
The Portugals discovered the true Fountains; their description from Peter Pays,
not different from Gregory's: It rises in Sicut; it has five Heads. It mixes
with the Lake in Dembea. It passes by the principal Kingdoms of Habassia,
encircles Gojam, runs through Egypt, and so into the Sea; Gregory's Ethiopic
Description. He alleges, That all the Rivers of Africa fall into Nile. He
limits that assertion. Some fall into the Sea. The true causes of the
overflowing of Nile. Jovius blamed. A double Channel of Nile. Niger the other
Channel. The old Relation in Herodotus, explained. Whether the King of
Hebessynia can divert the Course of Nile. Rivers sucked up in the Sand. Zebeus
falls into the Indian Sea. The Habessines unskilled in Navigation. The Tzanic
Lake, with its Islands.

BUT much more excelling, and far more precious Gifts of Nature than those of
Metals, flow from the Mountains of Habessinia, that is to say, several
remarkable Rivers more profitable to the Natives, and the neighboring Nations,
than Gold it self, so much the Subject of human Avarice. For the Rainwater
soaking through the pores of the Earth, and the clefts of the Rocks, is
received, and, as it were, cistern'd up in the hidden Caverns of the Mountains,
where, after it has passed through many secret conveyances of Nature, at length
it meets with some hollow place, and breaks forth. Sometimes oppressed by its
own weight, it reascends, and seeks for passage at the tops of the Mountains
themselves; which is the reason, that in Countries where there is little or no
Rain, there are few or no Fountains; but where there are frequent Rains, the
Rivers are large and swelling: The Effect demonstrating the Cause. No truer
opinion concerning the Original of Rivers. Aristotle quotes it in his
Meteorologies, l. 1. s. 4. c. 1. but without reason dissents. Most Neoterics
defend it. See Isaac Vossius, De Origin Nili and Fluminum. c. v.
But Nilus, owing to Habassia for its source, for plenty of Water, for
sweetness, wholsomness, and fertility of the same, excells all other Rivers of
the World. In sacred Writ, by reason of its Excellency, it is sometimes called,
Isa. 23.3.
The River absolutely, and particularly (...), from its black Color, and by
the Greeks, for the same reason, (...), because it runs with black a muddy
Water. Some of the Ancients tell us, Plin. 5.9. and 7.3.
that it was then by the Ethiopians called Astapus, and that the left Channel
of it about Meroe was named Astabora, which others have understood concerning
other Rivers that flow into Nile. But this we let pass as obscure and doubtful,
whether meant of Nilus and our Ethiopians or no; for the Habessines, in their
vulgar Language, have no other name for Nile than that of Abawi: And that, as
some think, from the word Ab, which signifies a Parent, as if Nilus were the
Parent of all other Rivers. But this derivation neither suits with Grammar,
neither does It is in the form of an Adjective, Heavenly, Golden; So Abawi
signifies Paternal.
Abawi simply signify a Parent, neither, if you rightly consider it, is it
agreeable to Sense; for Nilus does not send forth from his own Bowels, but
receives the Tribute of all other Rivers: So that he may be rather said to be
their Captain and Prince, than the Father of them. And therefore the Egyptians,
out of a vain Superstition, called him their Preserver, their Sun, and their
God, and sometimes Poetically, Parent. In our Ethiopic, or the Language of the
Books, this River is called Gejon, or Gewon, by an ancient mistake from the For
in the time of the 70 Interpreters it was so called, who rendered Shichor, Jer
2.18. where the Prophet speaks positively of Nile, (...), Gihon. The same you
shall find in the Book of Syras.
Greek word (...), Geon, and that from the Hebrew word Gihon, because it seemed
to agree with the Description, Genesis 2.13. which encompasses the Land of
Ethiopia, whereas it only encircles Gojam, but only glides and passes by all
the other Kingdoms of Ethiopia.

If you object, That Gihon had its source in the Terrestrial Paradise; it is
twenty to one, but that they extol their own Country for Paradise: For you must
understand, that many of the Fathers of the Theodoret, in c. 2. Genesis 9.19.
Austin, l. 8. de genesis c. 7. Abulens, in c. 2. Genesis 9.15. and 26.9.2.
Church were of the same opinion; which that they might defend, they brought
the River Nile under Ground, and under the Sea, into Egypt, well knowing that
no body would follow them thither, leaving their Readers to find out the way.

Certainly the Ancients never inquired so curiously into the Nature or Source
of any River, as they did in that of Nile, neither were they ever so deceived;
for it was a thing altogether unusual for any other Rivers in the World to
overflow in the most sultry Season of the year; an Inundation so wholesome and
profitable to Egypt. So that the ignorance of the cause of it filled the minds
of the Ancients with so much admiration, that both Princes and private Persons
desired nothing more than to know the Head of that River, which was the
Original of their Happiness; in so much, that there were some Emperors and
Kings, who sent great Armies in quest of the satisfaction of their Curiosity,
tho with all success. As Cambyses, Alexander, Ptol. Philadelph. J. Caesar,
Nero, etc.
Most of the ancient Geographers, by mere conjecture, placed the Fountains of
this River beyond the Equinoctial Line in I know not what Mountains of the
Moon, to the end, they might deduce the cause of its swelling from the Winter
Rains of those Regions: For they could not persuade themselves, that the Sun
being in the Northern Signs, so much Winter or Rain could be so near to cause
so great an increase of the Flood, tho there were So Pliny, l. 17. c. 18.
wherever Summer Rains are not as in India and Ethiopia.
some who made it out plainly enough, but that Credit would not be given to
them. Photin. in Bibl. n. 249. in the Life of Pythag. Agatharchides, Strabo,
and others. See Vossius, d. l. c. 20.
But by the Travels of the Portugals into Habessinia, and the sedulity of the
Fathers, those Fountains and Spring-heads have been since discovered, so long
and unsuccessfully sought for by the Ancients. Athanasius Kircher has described
them from the Relation of Peter Pays, who viewed them himself. In the Kingdom
of Gojam, says he, and in the Western Parts thereof in the Province of Sabala,
which the Agawi inhabit, are to be seen two round Spring-Heads, very deep, in a
place somewhat raised, the ground about it being quaggy and mershy;
nevertheless the Water does not spring forth there, but issues from the foot of
the Mountain. About a Musket Shot from thence, toward the East, the River
begins to flow; then winding to the North, about the fourth part of a League,
it receives another River; a little farther, two more flowing from the East
fall into it; and soon after, it enlarges it self with the addition of several
other Streams. About a days journey farther, by the Relation of the same Peter,
it swallows up the River Jema; then winding Westward some twenty Leagues, it
turns again to the East, and plunges it self into a vast Lake. This Relation
differs not from what Gregory has discoursed to me, only he particularized the
names of the Countries, that perhaps were the more special Denominations of
those places, of which Sabala was the more general Name. For as he related to
me, the Springhead of Nile is in a certain Land called Secut, upon the top of
Dengla, which perhaps is the name of a Mountain. He also affirmed, that it had
five Spring-heads, reckoning in the Heads of other Rivers, which have no
particular name, and are therefore taken for the Nile. But it passes through
the Lake Tzanicum, preserving the color of its own Waters, like the Rhosne
running through the Lake Lemann, and the Rhine through Acronius, or the Lake De
Zell. Then winding to the South, it washes on the left hand the principal
Kingdoms of Habessinia, Bagemdra, Amhara, Waleka, Shewa, Damota, and takes
along the Rivers of those Countries Bashlo, Tzohha, Kecem, Jema, Roma, and
Wancit. Then on the right hand embracing Gojam, its Native Country, almost like
a Circle, and swelled with the Rivers of that Region, Maga, Abaja, Aswari,
Temci, Gult, and Tzul, it turns again to the West, as it were bidding farewell
to its Fountains, and with a prodigious mass of ramass'd Rivers, leaving
Habessinia upon the right hand, rolls to the North through several thirsty
Nations, and sandy Deserts, to enfertile Egypt with its Inundations, and there
makes its way through several mouths into the Sea. For the more certain
Demonstration of the Truth, it will be of particular moment to insert the
Relation of Gregory himself, perhaps the first that was ever made public by an
Ethiopian. Epist. d. 20. October. 1657.


The Course of Nile is like a Circle; it encompasses Gojam, but so, that it
never returns back to its Head, making directly to Sennar. And therefore Gojam
lies always upon the right hand of Nile; but all the other Kingdoms of
Ethiopia, as well those that lie near, as those at a distance, remain still
upon the left. As it flows along, it takes in all the Rivers great and small
with several Torrents, as well Foreign as Habessinian, which by that general
Tribute, acknowledge him their King; who having thus mustered together all the
Waters of Ethiopia, jocundly takes his leave, and proceeds on his Journey, like
a Hero, according to the Command of his Creator, to drench the Fields of
thirsty Egypt, and quench the drowth of Thousands.

The Springhead of this famous River first shows it self in a certain Land,
which is called Secut, upon the top of Dengla, near Gojam, West of Bagemdra,
Dara, the Lake Tzana, and Bada: Rising thus, it hastens with a direct course
Eastward, and so enters the Lake of Dara and Bed, as it were swimming over it.
Passing from thence, it flows between Gojam and Bagemdra; but leaving them upon
the right and left, speeds directly toward Amhara. Having touched the Confines
of Amhara, he turns his Face toward the West, and girdles Gojam like a Circle,
but so, that Gojam lies always upon the right hand of it. Having past the
Limits of Amhara, it washes the Confines of Walaka, and so on to the extreme
bounds of Mugara and Shewa. Then it slides between Bizama and Gonga, and
descends into the Country of the Shankelites. Whence he winds to the right
hand, and leaves by degrees the Western Clime upon the left hand, to visit the
Kingdom of Sennar. But before he get thither, he meets with two great Rivers
that plunge themselves into his Streams, coming from the East; of which one is
called Tacaze, that falls out of Tigra, and the other Guangue, that descends
from Dembea. After he has taken a view of the Kingdom of Sennar, away he
travels to the Country of Dengula, and so comes to the Kingdom of Nubia, and
thence turns to the right hand, in order to his intended Voyage for Alexandria,
and comes to a certain Country which is called Abrim, where the Stream is
unnavigable by reason of the Cliffs and Rocks; after which, he enters Egypt.
Sennar and Nubia are seated upon the shore of Nile, toward the West, so that
they may drink of his Waters; besides, that he guards their Eastern Limits, as
far as he approaches near them. But our People and Travelers from Sennar,
after they have crossed Nubia, quit the River Nile, leaving it upon the right
hand toward the East, and ride through a Desert of 15 days journey upon Camels,
where neither Tree nor Water, but only Sand is to be seen; but then they meet
with it again in the Country of Riffe, which is the Upper Egypt, where they
either take Boat, or travel a foot in Company with the Stream.

But as to what he wrote concerning the flowing of great and small Rivers into
Nile, he explains himself in these words.

All great Rivers and smaller Torrents flow into Nile, excepting only two: The
one is called Hanazo, which rises in Hangota; and the other Hawash, which runs
near Dawara and Fatagara.

But as if this had not been enough, he goes on with a farther Explanation in
another Epistle, as follows.

But whereas I told you in a Description of Nile, that all the Rivers of
Ethiopia flowed into it except two, I am not to be understood, as if I spoke of
all Ethiopia. For those Rivers that are upon the Borders of the Circuit of
Ethiopia, which are near the Ocean, they fall into the Sea, every one in their
distinct Regions. Now the Countries adjoining to the Ocean, are these; Canbat,
Guraghe, Enaria, Zandera, Wed, Waci, Gaci, and some others.

The Native Country of Nile being thus discovered, the cause of his Inundation
is manifest: For most of the Countries under the Torrid Zone, when the Sun
returns into the Winter Signs, are washed, as we have said, with immoderate
Showers. So that the prodigious mass of Waters that randevouzes from all parts,
cannot be contained within his Channel, and therefore when it comes into the
Levels of Egypt, it presently disburthens it self. Those Northern Winds, from
their Anniversary Breezes, called Etesiae, add little to the Increase. Tho some
have written, That their forcing the Sea against the Mouths of the River,
drives back the Waters of Nile, and augments the cause of the Deluge. A thing
not likely, in regard they are the most temperate of all the Winds, and blow
only in the daytime. Thus far indeed they may prevail, as they blow slacker or
stronger, to render the Increase somewhat the more unequal, and that is all.
Vainly therefore did many believe, that the Snow that melted from the Ethiopian
Mountains, deluged into the River Nilus; for them, that profound Tracer of
Nature, Seneca, Quest. natural, l. 4. c. 2.
has solidly refuted. Which makes it a wonder that Paulus Jovius should report
the same, as what he had gathered from the certain Conjectures of the
Habessines; who at another time speaks of the very same thing, as a great
Secret of Nature, which no Man had ever dived into; nay, he reproves it for
weakness, with an ostentatious Wit to be over diligently curious in the search
of such matters.

Yet tho the Fountains of Nile are known, the course of it is not so well
discovered to the Habessines themselves after it has left them. But the ancient
and constant report is, that it does not fall Jul. Solin in Polyhist. c. 43.
The Ethiopians and Atlantic Nations are divided by the River Niger, which is
believed to be a part of Nilus.
entire into Egypt, but that it is divided into two Channels, and that the
right Channel runs to the North, as is well known; but that the left runs
Westward, and keeping a long course, divides the Country of the Nigrites, 'till
it fall into the Ocean. This the ancient Egyptian Priests were not ignorant of;
for Herodotus, the foremost in History, after he has discoursed concerning the
Springs of Nile, learnedly reports, That he had heard from an Auditor of the
Money sacred to Minerva, That half of the Water of Nile flowed Northward into
Egypt, the other half Southward toward Ethiopia: Which none of our Geographers
either observed or mended. Clim. 1. Part. 4.
But the Nubian Geographer puts me quite out of doubt, when he writes,

And in this part of Ethiopia are the two Niles parted; that is, Nilus which
waters out Country of Nubia, directs his Course from South to North, and most
of the Cities of Egypt are seated on each side of his Banks, and in his
Islands. The other part of Nile flows from the East toward the West, and upon
this part of Nile lies the whole Country of the Nigrites, or at least the
greater part of it.

A little after he adds concerning a certain Mountain; And near to that, one of
the Arms of Nile turns off, and flows to the West: And this is the Nile that
belongs to the Country of the Nigrites, many of their Provinces lying upon it.
But near the Eastern side of the Mountain, the other Arm turns off, waters the
Country of Nubia, and the Land of Egypt, and is divided in the Lower Egypt into
four parts, of which three fall into the Syrian Sea, and the other empties it
self in a Salt Lake which is near to Alexandria The words are every way most
clear; and very probable it is, That the separation of the two Niles might be
caused by the resistance of some rocky Mountain that constrained the two
Streams to part, since they could not undermine it. To which, the words of Leo
Africanus relate; The Region of the Nigrites, In Descript. Afric. l. 1. c. 7.
through which Nilus is said to flow: Which seem to intimate, that he had heard
something by report concerning this same left Channel. Nor am I a little
confirmed by the judgment of Gregory, which he expressed to me by writing, in
these words.

But as to what is reported, that Nile does not flow altogether and entirely
into the Land of Egypt, but that it is divided another way. This all those
persons of whom I have inquired, averr to me to be truth. This I also incline
to believe, for should it descend entirely thither in the Winter time, the
Egyptians could never be safe in their Houses. But as to what concerns its
separation, they say, That Parting happens after the River has passed by Sennar
in the Country of Dengula, before it arrives in Nubia: However, they say, That
the greatest mass of Water flows into Egypt, and that the separated part runs
directly to the western Ocean; yet so, that it comes not into Barbary, but
descends toward the Country of Elwah, and so throws it self into the western
Ocean.

Now that the River Niger should be the left Channel of Nile, is most probable
from hence, for that as Pliny writes, and Experience confirms, l. 5. c. 8.
it partakes of the same Conditions with it, agrees in color and taste of the
Water, it produces the same sort of Reed, the same sort of Papyr, and the same
sort of Animals; and lastly, increases and overflows at the same Seasons.
Neither does the Name it self contradict the Conjecture, in regard that, as we
have said, Nilus it self is by the Hebrews and Greeks called Niger. But as to
what the Egyptian related to Herodotus, That the left Channel flowed toward the
South, that perhaps might be for such a certain distance of Land, not but that
afterward it might vary its Course, and wind toward the West. Which opinion,
after I had communicated to the most famous Bochart, so highly skilled both in
the ancient and modern Geography, and the best Judge of these matters, he wrote
me in answer, Il est tres vray, que le Niger est une party du Nile; Most
certain it is, that Niger is a part of Nile.

Now follows a Question, no less admirable than it is of moment; Whether it be
in the power of the Abyssine Kings so to divert the Court of Nile, that it
should not overflow Egypt? Many Writers assert the Affirmative, trusting partly
to Fame, and partly to a Relation, which we shall produce out of George
Elmacine; adding, That the Turks therefore pay a Tribute to the Abessines.
Others also upon the sight of the Geographical Map, believe it a thing easy to
be accomplished, to turn the Stream of Nilus into the Red Sea; which
Albuquerquez, that magnanimous Portugueze, Viceroy in India, was contriving to
do. However Alf. d'Albuquerque, in Comment. ejusd. part. 4. c. 7. as Tellez
alleges, p. 20.
Tellezius denies it feasible, to turn the Course of such an immense mass of
Waters, for so vast a space of Earth, through so many steep and rugged Rocks;
and that the Course ordained by the Prince of Nature, is no way to be altered.
Of the same opinion are In Orb imperante. tit. Africa. Period 2. Sect. 2.
Hornius, and others; but they make no mention of Elmacinus: Perhaps they never
read, or never considered his words, which we shall here expose to the Readers
view, taken from the Saracenic History.

In those days, that is, in the days of Michael the Patriarch, Nilus failed
extremely; Mustansir therefore, a Mahumetan, Prince of Egypt, sent him to the
Country of the Habessines, with costly Gifts, and other things of high value.
Whereupon the King of the Country came forth to meet him, whom the Patriarch
reverenced publicly. After that, the King demanded of him the cause of his
coming. Then the Patriarch made known to the King, how that the Waters of Nile
failed in Egypt, to the unspeakable detriment of the Land and Inhabitants.
Thereupon, in favor of the Patriarch, the King commanded the Channel to be
opened, through which the Water ran into Egypt, which was then stopped up.
Which being done, Nilus increased three yards in one night, and the River was
so filled, that the Fields of Egypt were watered and sown. So that the
Patriarch returned with great Honor into Egypt.

I could wish to hear the opinions of those that deny this place. The words are
clear of themselves, that the King commanded the Channel that was stopped to be
opened. The Historian himself is accounted a credible Author, bred and born in
Egypt, as also Secretary to the Mohammedan Princes of that Country. So that he
could not possibly be ignorant of such an accident; and besides, he wrote his
History above a hundred and twenty years after the thing happened: And
therefore had it been an untruth, he durst not have mentioned it for fear of
being contradicted, which he might easily have been. But it may be objected,
That the Historian does not mention by whom the Channel was obstructed, or
whether it happened, as many times it does, naturally, when the course of a
Stream is damm'd up by trunks of Trees, Mud and Stones driven by force, and
heaped together in the narrow passages of the Water. But this Objection does
not resolve the doubt; for such remarkable stops rarely or never happen in such
large or violent Rivers. Or if Nature could effect so much, what might not be
accomplished by Art? Athanasius Kircher, a person not only generally versed in
the Affair of Egypt, but more particularly in what related to the River Nile,
in his Catalogue of the Patriarchs of Egypt, relates, That one In Supplement.
Prod. and Lexic. Capt. p. 524. c. 2. This Michael was the 68th Patriarch of the
Jacobites, and died about the year 1110.
Michael was sent into Ethiopia, for the restoring of Nile to its Channel, from
whence the Ethiopians had directed the Course of its Waters; tho it be the
fault of that learned Man to write much, rather than accurately; nor does he
always commend his Authors. The Question being put to Gregory, he did not
remember the Story of Michael, but that he had heard from persons of great
Credit, That not far from the Cataracts of Nile, all the Land toward the East
lies level; and unless it were for one Mountain that stands in the way, Nile
would rather flow that way, than into Egypt or the Northern Sea. So that if
that Mountain were dug through, a thing to be done with pains and
difficulty, the Course of the River might be turned and carried into the
Red Sea; which is well known to the Turks, and many of the Portugals: And for
this reason have the Emperors of Ethiopia obtained those advantageous
Conditions from the Saracens. Nay, it is said, That once one of the Ethiopian
Emperors had an intention to have done it, and had commanded his Subjects to
undertake the Work, but that he was prevailed upon to desist at the entreaty of
the Egyptian Christians.

I must confess, this thing has very much perplexed my thoughts; nor are the
Reasons that are brought against it to be contemned: For either to raise a Mole
or Dam of Stones, and then to remove it again, are things requiring so much
toil and labor, that the Task does no way agree with the nature of the
Abessines. And it seems somewhat unlikely, that so vast a River, so long
accustomed to a declining and headlong Course, should be diverted and compelled
to change its Channel. I considered also with my self, that if the King of
Habessinia had the River Nile so much in his Power, he might have all Egypt
easily at his Devotion, and that the Turk could deny him nothing whatever he
demanded. Nor would he ever suffer the Christians of his own Religion, and the
Patriarch, who is the Head of his Church, to groan under such a miserable
Bondage. Lastly, I did not a little wonder, that the Jesuits did not insinuate
it into the heads of the Abessines to make use of that Power which Nature had
put into their hands, and that they did not use Threats, rather than Entreaties
and Bribes to obtain those conveniences which they enjoy by the favor of the
Turkish Basha, who commands the Ports of the Red Sea. But all things
considered, and rejecting the History of Elmacine, we may answer Tellez from
the Relation of Gregory, which is, That a new Channel may be carried on, not
from those parts of Abessinia, which lie upon the Nile, and are so many Leagues
distant from the Sea; but from that part which is near the Cataracts, and
formerly perhaps belonged to Nubia. My first Opinion was, That the Channel of
Nile could no where be so easily altered as in that place where it divides it
self into two Channels, for that there, by the direction of Nature her self, it
seemed, that the whole might be more easily turned another way, where a part
turns naturally without compulsion. For tho other Rivers empty themselves into
Nile beyond this separation, and flow into Egypt, yet are they not enough to
make the Inundation so great as necessity requires; which would not only be the
ruin of Egypt, but a great diminution of the Turkish Power. But however it be,
this I believe to be certain, That the King of Habessinia is now no more Lord
of those places where the River Nile ever was, or ever can be diverted from
Nile; nor are the Princes of those places now at his Devotion; neither are they
indeed Christians, but unhappily revolted to Paganism. So that whatever
formerly might have been done, cannot now be brought to pass; not that the
nature of the place obstructs the design, but that the Prince of the Country
wants Power, or else has no inclination to the Project. Otherwise I should not
think it either absurd or improbable, that some Rivers that make their way
through the high Fields of Habessinia, might be conveyed another way by the
descents of the Hill, through the sandy Levels that lie below to a vast
diminution of the Egyptian Stream, provided that skilful Artists were employed
to survey the declivities of the places, and the places most proper to carry
off the Water. For though it be a difficult thing to alter the Course and
Limits of Rivers, which Nature has settled, yet Examples are not wanting. We
read in Herodotus, L. 1. called Clio.
That Nitocres King of the Babylonians turned the Course of Euphratis several
ways, by sinking several new Cuts and Dikes. And Cyrus King of the Persians,
being in wroth with the River Gyndes, by reason of one of the Sacred white
Horses drowned therein, divided it into a hundred and sixty small Streams, the
Summer's labor of his whole Army.

But there are other remarkable Rivers that owe for their Springs to Habessinia
besides Nilus. Of these the most famous is Tacaze, which rising in Angota, not
far from Bagemdra, out of the Mountain Ahguaga, divides Tigra and Walkajit, and
so passing through the Ethiopian Nomades, and the Kingdom of Dequin, at length
falls into Nile. Melegi, according to Tellez, takes its rise in Damota, and
falls into Nile westward of Habessinia. As for the other Rivers, sufficiently
large, which Nilus receives from all the Kingdoms of Habassia, we have set them
down in our Chorographical Table, and therefore forbear to name them here.

All these Rivers, as well as Nile, in the Winter time swell to that height, as
not to be contained within their own Banks.

Nor must we omit the admirable nature of two more Rivers, of which the one
called Hawash, rising in the Confines of Shewa and Wed, hastens into the
Kingdom of Adel, to quench the drought of those thirsty Soyls. Nor are the
Inhabitants wanting to themselves; they gladly go to meet their welcome Guest,
and bring it in several large Cuts to water their Grounds. And thus being
frequently intercepted, and wasted by degrees, as if ashamed to carry a small
portion of Water to the Sea, it plunges it self into the Sand. In imitation of
this, the other River Mareb, rising in Tigra, not far from Fremonia,
encompasses a great part of that Kingdom; then falling into the Kingdom of the
Cafers, as if the Stream disdained that Nation, it hides it self for a long
space under ground; yet not so, but that it affords both Water and Fish to them
that dig eight or ten spans deep, and at length disperses and leaves its
divided Waters in the miry Fields of Dequin.

As for those Rivers that fall into the neighboring Ocean, Gregory remembered
no more than those already recited. Zeb rising in Enarea, and embracing the
adjoining Kingdom of Zendero, from whence it turns to the South, and near to
Mambasa is thought to fall into the Indian Ocean. For as for the Abyssines
themselves, they are utterly ignorant of Navigation, in regard that the Rivers
being full of Rocks and Cataracts, will not admit of it; nor have they any
Ports upon the Red Sea. Only upon the Lake Tzana, which they call the Sea of
Dembea, they make use of little Cock-boats made of thick Water-torch, or
Cats-tail, tho with great hazard and jeopardy to themselves. It is situated on
this side the Equinoctial Line, in the thirteenth Degree and a half of
Latitude. The length of it is thirty, the breadth twelve Portugal Leagues, or
somewhat R. T. says, where longest, 35 Leagues. Pet. Pays allows it 14 in
breadth. It is more largely described by Kircher, in his Oedipus. Synt. 1. c.
7. p. 57.
less. It contains many Islands, of which the biggest is 1. Tzana, from whence
the Lake derives its name, for from thence it is called Bahr-Tzana, or the Sea
of Tzana. In some Maps Barcena, but ill placed.
2. Berghida. 3. Dabra-Antons: The Monastery of Antony. 4. Dabra-Marjam. 5.
Daga. 6. Dek, famous for the Exilement of great Men. 7. Galila. 8. Mecrahha. 9.
Metzle. 10. Qebran. 11. Rima.


All which Islands, Dek excepted, are possessed by the Monks. There are also
other Lakes in Habessinia, but it is not of any importance to name them. But
since we have given an account of the true Rivers, let us not omit that
Fabulous Stream, which they will have to run between Prester John, and their
own Countrymen, found out among the Figments of the Jews. They call it
Sabbation, or the Sabbath River, because it never runs upon that Consult,
Buxtorf's Lexicon concerning this word.
day; but upon the other days of the Week so rapid, that it carries all before
it. And therefore their Religion, they say, forbids them to visit their
Brethren on the other side; as if they could not send some person of another
Religion to bring them News from that Region, or were unwilling to put their
Pigeons upon that Employment. With so frivolous a fiction do they endeavor to
comfort themselves for the loss of their Kingdom: Ignorant where this River
rises, or where it ends, whether in Asia, in Africa, or in Utopia; nor do they
trouble themselves to enquire how those miserable Souls got thither, or how
they shall get out, should that unfortunate River deny them passage upon a Calm
day. Yet the Story is ancient, tho not of any River in the extreme parts of
Asia or Ethiopia, but of a River in Judea. For Pliny writes of a River in Judea
which used to be dried up every Sabbath day. Josephus Of the Wars of the Jews,
l. 7. Nic. Fuller, Miscel Sacr. l. 1. c. 9.
also makes mention of it, and unless it be corrected, in a plain contrary
sense. He reports, it was observed by Titus the Roman Emperor, as he marched
along. But the later Jews, more cunning at Invention, lest it should be found
no where, have placed it in a corner of the World where no body shall find it.

An Addition to part of this Chapter.
What Gregory tells us briefly concerning the Fountains of Nile, Tellez more at
large recites out of the Relations of the Jesuits, agreeable to those things
which we have produced out of Peter Pays: In the twelfth Degree of Northern
Latitude, to the West of Gojam, in the Kingdom of So write for Sabala.
Sacabala, there is a certain Field, and in that Field a certain Lake filled
from two Fountains, about a Stone's cast distant one from another. From them,
through a Subterraneal Channel (which yet the verdure of the Grass betrays) the
Water flows eastward for about a Musket shot; but by and by bends to the
North, and about half a Portugal League farther, bursts forth into a River; and
being soon after that enlarged with the addition of other Streams, after a
Course of 15 Leagues, the River Gema, bigger than Nilus, loses its Name, and
gives Nilus the honor of her Torrent. Then insensibly winding to the East, and
receiving two Rivers more, Kelti and Branty, it hastens A Lake by others called
the Tzanic Lake.
directly for Dembea, which it glides through preserving its own Waters entire,
as if disdaining to mix more noble Waves with a viler Puddle. These things are
all delivered by consent, that there may be no farther reason to doubt of the
Fountains and Original of Nilus for the future.

CHAP. IX. Of the Fertility of the Soil in general, and of the Vegetables and
Plants in particular.
In Habessinia, sometimes two, sometimes three Harvests. Tef, a sort of Corn
unknown to us. They want Rice; despise Oats; feed their Horses with Barley;
Grass always; no Hay; sundry sorts of Herbs. Amadmagda cures broken Bones.
Assazoi intoxicates Serpents. The ancient Psylli safe by the virtue of this
Herb. Oil of Saffron: They want Hops. Grapes they have, but no Wine. They
abound in Sugar; want Spices. The Indian Fig, Manz; perhaps the Dudaim of the
Hebrews. No Pears nor Apples. Citrons, etc. they have. Their Trees. Ensete, a
Pot-herb. Another Tree that kills Worms in Children.

THE fertility of the Soil in Habessinia is to be admired; for the Land where
it admits of Tillage, abounds in all sorts of Fruits. The long Summers
affording that extraordinary plenty, that in the same place you shall find
Seed-time and Harvest; which is in some places double, in other places
threefold. For Grain and Pulse the Habessines have not only those known to us,
as Wheat, Barley, Millet, and the like; but also another sort unknown to us,
which they call Tef, which makes very good Bread: The Seed of it is extremely
small, less than Pepper, but longer. Rye they have none: Yet when Gregory smelt
to a Rye Loaf, he said, It was the true Tef, and that it had the true smell of
Tef. He looked upon Oats as not worth sowing, saying, It was no better esteemed
than Cockle in their Country: For that Barley or Grass only was the general
Food of their Horses. They neither sow nor mow, for the sake of their Cattle;
Grass abounding in the more temperate places; by reason of the perpetual heat,
and the moisture continually distilling from the Mountains: For the solid
Stones not admitting the Rain, the Water falls off from them, and spreading
under the fertile Turf, wonderfully recreates and enlivens the growing Plants.
For which reason, the Fields are always pleasing and verdant, always smiling
with a flowery Grace. From whence an extraordinary superfluity of Honey, the
Trees being so plentifully fed. In the midst The Herb and Fruit Called in
Hebrew Dudaim. Genesis 30.14. and Cant. 7.13. In the Arabic language Mauz, or Muza
The Indian Figg.

Book 1. Chap. 9. P. 48. 1. The Herb it self growing like a tree. 2. The ripe
fruit; 40 or 50 upon one stalk. 3. One Figg to the full proportion. 4. The
young shootes that spring from the root of the tree every year.


depiction of the cultivated banana (tree and fruit) of such abundance, the
Habessines neither lay up, nor provide against the years ensuing, whether
trusting to their Plenty, or destitute of Storehouses. They never stack their
Hay; tho for the sake of the Locusts it many times falls out to be very
necessary. For that same pestilent Vermin devouring Corn and Grass, occasions
frequent Famines, destructive to Man and Beast. Grtgory, observing afar off
certain Cartloads of Hay, compared them to Elephants at a distance.

Herbs of all sorts grow in this Country, not only the fragrant and medicinal
Plants of Europe, but some more peculiar, and of admirable virtue. The
Amadmagda cures broken and dis-joynted Bones, contrary to the Ossifraga of
Norway, which snaps the Bones of Cattle that tread upon it. The Herb Assazoe is
of that rare virtue against the biting of Asps, that the most hurtful Serpents
touched with this Herb, are straight intoxicated, and lie for dead. He that
eats of the Root of this Herb, may walk without danger in the midst of Adders
and Water-Snakes, and for many years shall be free from the fear of them: In so
much, that some of the Habessines have been seen, after they have eaten of this
Root, to handle the most venomous Snakes like Eels, twist 'em about their
Necks; and then to kill 'em, when they had done showing tricks with 'em. So
Providence ordering the most efficacious Remedies where the Poisons are mos
pernicious. Which makes me believe that it was not a thing peculiar, or a
particular faculty in the Psylli, an ancient People of Africa, that they could
cure the biting of Serpents, but got by the use of this Herb; only they kept
the thing secret to render themselves the more admired. For they made a Trade
of it, by carrying Venomous Animals about the World without danger, for the
sight whereof, the more curious gave them Money. Garden Saffron, which the
Ethiopians call Denguelet, is frequent in Habesinia; the Seed of it Gregory
showed me for a great Rarity: and cried up the Oil which was to be pressed out
of it, against the Hypocondriacal Evil, and Obstructions of the Spleen. They
want Hopps, and boil their Drink without it. And therefore Gregory finding,
that it was the virtue of the Hopps, which kept our Drink so long, took great
care to carry some of the Seed along with him into his own Country. Their Vine
and Grapes are most Transcendant, but they never make any Wines, whether out of
ignorance, or because the Grapes being ripened in Summer, the excessive heat
hastens the fermentation and sowers the Liquor before the Lee be settled. They
abound in Sugar, but as for Pepper, Ginger, and other such like Spices they
have none; rather out of carelessness to Plant, as I believe, than through the
fault of the Soil; which considering the variety of the Air, and the continual
heat of some Places, seems most proper for such a sort of Husbandry. The
Indian Figg also, which the Arabians call Muz or Mauz, grows plentifully here,
a most Excellent Fruit it is; and you shall have fifty Figgs, about the bigness
and shape of a Cucumber hanging upon one stalk, of a most delicious odor and
taste. They are ripe in June, as I learnt from the Itinerary of Prince
Radzevile, who had seen some of them near Damascus, where they are rare; for
they require a hotter Climate. Which Circumstances make me believe, that this
same Fruit may be the (...) Dudaim mentioned in Genesis, which occasioned so
much discontent between the two Wives of Jacob. Soon after I observed that many
others, Learned Men, lighted upon the same Conjecture, though they do not give
their Reasons. For in my Opinion, it should be some rare and pleasant Fruit,
that should move the Boy to gather it; yet not so much a Boy neither, as to
think it worth his while to carry home a stinking Mandrake, which could be a
fruit little worth contending for. Besides, Rachel might have sent her Servant
as well to have gathered Amiable Flowers, (as some render the Word) that is to
say, Lillies, Violets, or the like. And besides the Hebrew word seems to
confirm this Opinion: as being in the dual Number, and seeming to infer a
relation of more than one Fruit to one and the same Stalk.

Apples and Pears, such as grow in our Climates, they have none. For at what
time they Ripen with us, Storms and Tempests rage in Habessinia. For the Trees,
as I have heard the Habessines acknowledge, observe our Seasons, sprout forth
and shed their Leaves in the same Month with ours; but with the Plants it is
otherwise, which Flower there in our Winter. However, they have Pome-Citrons,
Abricots, Peaches, and Pomegranates, rip'ned to their full and due Perfection.
Gregory admired to behold our Woods of tall Firrs, some seventy, some eighty
Foot high; and often called them Arbores benedictas, blessed Trees: especially,
when he heard how useful they were toward the building of Ships and Houses.
However we do not find but that Ethiopia has its share of tall Trees, as well
as other Countries. But the Tree which goes by the Name of Ensete, is not to be
passed over without Admiration; being like that which bears the Indian Figg,
two fathoms in thickness. For being half cut down, it renews again by means of
innumerable shouts that spring again from the remaining Trunk, all which is fit
to be eaten; so that there is no need that the Tree should bear any other
Fruit, it being all Pot-herb of it self. For being sliced and boiled it
asswages the Thirst of the common sort of People, who bruise the Leaves and
boil them with Meal, and then eat the Composition instead of a Hastie-pudding.
There is another Tree which Godignus praises, most excellent against the Worms
in the Belly: a Distemper frequent among the Abessines, by reason of their
feeding upon Raw Flesh. For remedy whereof the Habessines Purge themselves once
a Month with the Fruit of this Tree, which causes them to Void all their Worms.

CHAP. X. Of Fourfooted Beasts.
Oxen of a stupendous bigness; the Cause. Bull-Elephants; their Horns. The
Herds of Africa. The Graziers of Bek. Generous Horses, of various Colors;
Horses for War. Mules for other occasions; taught to amble by Art. Camells
only useful in level Grounds. The ponderous tails of their Sheep: in Sacred
Writ, (...) Alia. Flocks of Elephants: They lay the Country waste, make
Highways, they fodder upon Trees; Docible: they observe the Laws of
Hospitality. The Habessines more properly call those things Horns which we call
Teeth: they never make any attempt upon Man: they are careful of their
Probosces: none tame in Ethiopia. The Camelopardalis, why so called? the name
in Arabic in the Amharic Dialect. Zecora, the most lovely of Fourfooted Beasts;
described, high prized. The Lion Magnanimous, a Terror to other Beasts. Tigers
and Leopards more truculent: how they differ. Wolves Slothful. The Hyaena
Cruel. Flocks of Apes; they greedily devour Emmets, they devour Fruit but
warily; they are a Prey to the wild Beasts, they Defend themselves wonderfully.
The Cercopitheculus concerning which, a Rythme in three Languages. Whether the
Callitrix of the Ancients. Arvve Haris the Unicorn, seen by John, Gabriel, and
other Portugals: the Ancient Descriptions of the Unicorn various. Many
Unicorns, no Bears, but Hearts, Boares, and wild Goats.

BY reason of the Plenty of Grass, and the perpetual heat of the Country, it is
not to be wondered at, that the Beasts should be larger and fuller grown in
those Countries than in other Regions. Their Cows are of an unusual bigness,
far exceeding those in Russia and Hungaria. The biggest that I could show to
Gregory, he called Middle-siz'd; for where there is Milk and Fodder sufficient,
the boby easily enlarges after the Birth, and extends it self by reason of the
heat, which proves to be quite contrary in the Northern Climes, L. 17. c. 45.
which justifies Elian in his Relation, concerning the Ethiopic Bulls, that
they were twice as big again as ours; and this put me in mind of the
Bull-Elephants, of which, Philostorgius Writes, L. 3. 11.
that he had seen them at Rome, brought out of the Southern Countries: for it
is not to be thought that a Bull twice as bigg as ours differs much in
Magnitude from an Elephant. L. 8. c. 45.
And what Pliny reports concerning the Indian Oxen, which he relates to be as
high as Camels, Book 1. Chap. 10. P. 53.

An Eastern Sheep drawing his fatt Tail in a Cart weighing 40 pound weight or
More.

depiction of a large-tailed, curly-horned sheep, pulling its tail behind it in
a cart. Another sort of Sheep whose fatt Tails are very heavy by which the
Sheep mentiond. Exodus. 20.22. Levit. 7.3. and 9.19. are said to be meant.

depiction of a twisted-horned sheep with cropped tail. I rather believe,
should be taken for those of Abissinia. For that Habessinia was by many of the
Ancients comprehended under the name of India. And that Oxen so large should
wear vast Horns, four Foot broad, is as probable altogether, as Pliny relates
in the same place.

Africa was formerly Famous for the Herds and Droves of Cattle fed therein;
and at this time there are some Nations that support themselves merely by
Grazing: of this sort are the Bektences, not far from Suaquena, who in the
Summer Inhabit the Mountains; in the Winter spread themselves upon the Plains,
changing their Seats as the Tempestuous Seasons vary, and settling where they
find most Fodder for their Cattle.

Their Horses are courageous and strong; but they never make use of them,
unless it be in Battle, or when they run Races; so that they never take care to
shoe them: for if at any time they cannot avoid passing through Stony and
Rocky passages, they lead their Horses, riding themselves upon Mules. They are
of various Colors, as our Horses are; bright Bay, Sorrel, cole Black, Roan,
etc. but most commonly Black. Elmacin reports, That Cyrtacus King of Nubia
brought into Egypt an Army of a Hundred thousand Blacks, all mounted upon
Black Horses. Gregory pitied our Horses, when he saw them drawing great Carts;
admiring at the Patience of the Beasts: and our Cruelty, in putting so Noble
and Warlike a Creature to such base and servile Exercises. And therefore the
Abissines make more frequent use of Mules, as well to carry their burdens, as
when they travel long Journeys; for no sort of Beast treads more safely in
their rugged ways: and for the greater ease of the Rider, they teach them
sometimes to Amble. It was very troublesome to Gregory when he traveled, to
ride a Horseback; especially, if the Horse either Trotted or Gallopp'd: a
vexation which he frequently complained of.

Camels are never used but in the plain Country, for they tread upon the Sand
though scalding hot, without any harm to their Feet; but in Mountainous and
Rocky ways, they are altogether useless.

That same sort of Sheep also, so much admired and so well known, both in the
East, and in Africa, is here very common; the Tayls of which are so fat and
ponderous, that the least of them weigh Ten and Twelve, the biggest of them
sometimes above forty Pound, so that the Owners are forced to tie a little Cart
behind them, wherein they put the Tail of the Sheep, as well for the
convenience of Carriage and to ease the poor Creature, as to preserve the Wool
from dirt and nastiness, and being torn among bushes and stones. And it is a
probable conjecture that Exodus speaks of this sort of Ram, Exodus 29.22
where Moses commands, among the rest of the fat parts of the Ram of Impletions
that were to be cut off and burnt, the Tail of the Ram (...) Aljah to be cut
off for the same purpose; For that the Word Aljah seems to import as much,
which signifies only the Tail of a fat Ram, (...) or Nahab being the general
word for the Tail of all other Beasts; among which, the leaner sort of Sheep
like ours are included. Bochart in Hierozoico. L. 2, c. 45. p. 494.
As for other tame Beasts, they have the very same as are to be seen common in
these parts of the World.

But as for Wild Beasts, Abissinia breeds more, and more bulkie than any other
Region: of which, we shall give a short account, beginning from those which
appear most Monstrous in their Creation. In the first place Elephants,
conspicuous for bulk of Body and Docility, heard together in the Plain and
Woody places in great Numbers. H. Lodowic Azevedez saw in Tigra a hundred of
them together differing in Bigness; and he attests, that as great a Number went
but a little before them. This number may easily be believed by them who shall
read Nennosies in Bibliothec. Photii. n. 3. Where he writes of Elephants, no
small Number near five thousand.
But it is almost incredible to be told, what a havoc they make in the Fields
and Woods: they will shake Trees bigger then themselves in Bulk, so long, till
either their Trunks break, or the whole Tree be torn up by the Roots, as with
an Earthquake. Smaller Trees they snap off about a hands breadth from the
Ground. As for shrubs and underwoods, and all sorts of fruit Trees, they either
eat 'em up, or trample 'em under their feet. Gregory was wont to say, That they
opened High ways, and where they had gone before, Travelers would rather
choose to follow, as being less cumbersom. But least Food should be wanting to
such Massy Creatures, Providence has provided: For in those Places there grow
certain Trees about the bigness of Cherry-Trees, full of Pith, like Elder; upon
which they banquet, as upon Grass. Of all the dumb Beasts, this Creature
certainly shares the most of Human Understanding: kind usage excites their
Ambition, contumely fires their Revenge. Of which many Examples are extant
among the Writers of Natural History. Gregory told us, that where they like
their Entertainment, they are very punctual in observing the Laws of
Hospitality; though one of the Females would have served her Host but an ugly
trick after her departure from her Lodging. This Elephant had brought forth a
Young one, in a certain Field which her Landlord had sowed with Corn; who
willing to dislodge such an unwelcome Guest, had resolved to kill the said
Elephant: his Neighbors dissuaded him, assureing him, that the slaughter would
not be unrevenged; but on the other side, that she would defend his ripe
Harvest against all others, and therefore advised him to let her alone, till
she had brought up her Cubb; but withal, so soon as she had done that,
forthwith to reap his Harvest. The Husbandman following this Counsel, preserved
his Harvest untouched, suffering no other Injury than what the Beast spoiled in
her passage to and fro. After the Female had carried away her young ones from
that Place, the Husbandman by the help of his Neighbors got in his Harvest
with all speed. The next Night the Elephants came in Troops, with an intention
to have Supped with their Landlord before their departure, but found the Table
taken away, and the Buttery Empty. The People of the Country aver, that they
are not their Teeth, but their Horns of which the Ivory is made; and indeed,
their substance and situation demonstrate the same thing: for they grow out of
the Head and not out of the Jaws: and besides that, they only adorn the brows
of the Males; the Females like our Does have none at all. The Elephant never
offers to attempt upon any person, unless provoked; if he be threatened with
sticks or cudgels, he hides his Probosces under his Belly, and goes away
braying; for he is sensible it may be easily chopped off: the extreme parts of
it being very nervous and tender, which cause him to be afraid of hard blows.
At the end of it three little sharp pointed Langets come forth, by the help of
which, he can take up the smallest thing that is, as men do with their fingers.
They never take care to tame them here, where there is no use of them, either
in Peace or War, among so many high Mountains.

The next is, the Camelo-pardalis, or Panther-Camel, which is and bulkie as the
Elephant, but far exceeds him in tallness. For this Beast is so very high, that
a man of a just Statue, reaches but up to his knees, so that it seems very
credible what is reported, That a Man on horseback sitting upright on his
saddle, may ride under his Belly. He derives his Name from hence, that he has a
long Head, and a long Neck like a Camel, but a Skin spotted all over like a
Panther. The Romans, when they first beheld this Beast, called it a Wild-Sheep,
tho being more remarkable for its Aspect, then its Wildness, or Fierceness; as
we read in Pliny. By the Abissines, by reason of the smallness of his Tail, he
is called Jeratakaein; that is, slender Tail: by the Italians Giraffa: from the
Arabian word Zucaffa.

But there is a Beast which is called Zecora, which for beauty exceeds all the
Four-footed Creatures in the World. They of Congo give it the Name of Zebra.
This Creature is about the bigness of a Mule, and is brought out of the Woods
of Habessinia, and the Countries possessed by the Galans, and easily tamed. A
present of great esteem and frequently given to the Kings of Habessinia. Tellez
briefly describes him thus, A Circle of a black Color encompasses his Loins
like a girdle; adjoining to which, Nature has pencill'd out several others,
some broader some narrower, some black, and some of a bright shining
Ash Color; with so much Elegancy and Order, as no Painters Art can equalize.
His Ears are the only thing that disfigures him; being of a disproportionable
length: for which reason he is called by the Portugals Burro do Matto, (though
improperly) the wild Ass. But you may guess at his beauty, by his price. For
King Susneus having given one of these Beasts to the Turkish Basha of Suaqena,
he sold the same for Two thousand Venetian Pieces, to a certain Indian, that
bought him for a Present to the great Mogul.

The Lion, tho he excel in fierceness and cruelty all the rest of the wild
Beasts; yet he shows a certain kind of Magnanimous respect to Man. For he never
injures him, unless he be ready to Famish, so that he do not betray his own
Solin. in his Polyhist. c. 17. al. 40. allows them many marks of Clemency: they
sooner assail Men then Women; they never kill Infants, unless pinched with
hunger.
fear. But there is hardly any other Creature that does not tremble when he
either hears or sees a Lion. The hugest Book. 1. Chap. 10. Page. 57

A Description of the APES. 1. Scrambling about the Mountains 2. Remoueing
great huge Stones to come at the worms. 3. Sitting upon Ant Hills and
devouring the little Creatures 4. Throwing sand or dust in the eyes of wild
beast that came to set upon them.


Primates (possibly macaques) playing, digging for food and counter-attacking
lions. Bulls are so terrified that they tremble every joint, unable to contain
their Urine: and yet the Habessines will venture to Encounter him. Tellez
relates a story of a Shepherd, who killed a Lion, that was eight Cubits in
length from Head to Foot, without the help of any other Weapon than two
Javelins. They also use to tame their Whelps, but there is no trusting to their
Education.

Tigers and Panthers are much more Cruel and Fierce than Lions, for they never
spare Mankind: yet they covet the Ethiopians before White-men, as more
accustomed to that sort of Diet. These two Beasts differ only in Panthers and
Tigers are the only Beasts remarkable for the variety of their Spots, says
Pliny, L. 8. c. 17. In which place, the Panther is taken for the Leopard; but
when the Panther is opposed to the Leopard, then it is to be taken for the
Tygre. For the Ancients have not accurately enough distinguished these Beasts,
as being very much like to one another, and very rarely or never seen together.
They knew there were two sorts of Beasts, but to which to give the true name,
they either knew not, or very much doubted.
Color; for the Panthers are brown spotted with black: the Tigers
gold-Coloured, with fine black Spots, like Five leaved Grass: they are Beasts
of a dreadful celerity and boldness; by Night they break into Villages, and
make doleful Massacres among the poor innocent Cattle: yet Alvarez affirms,
That these Burcheries never happen in Midra-Bahra.

As for their Wolves, they are small and lazy, such as Africa and Egypt bred
in former times, as Pliny testifies: L. 8. c. 22.
But the Hyaena, or the Crocuta near akin to the Wolf, is the most Voracious
of all the wild Beasts; Begot between a Hyena and a Lioness: familiar to
Ethiopia. See Solinus c. 65. and Salmatius upon him.
for she not only by Night and by stealth, but openly and in the day time Preys
upon all she meets with, Men or Cattle, and rather than fail, diggs down the
walls of Houses and Stables. Gregory described her to be speckl'd, with black
and white spots.

Of Apes there are infinite Flocks up and down in the Mountains themselves, a
thousand and more together: there they leave no stone unturned. If they meet
with one that two or three cannot lift, they call for more Aid, and all for the
sake of the Worms that lie under; a sort of Diet which they relish exceedingly.
They are very greedy after Emmets. So that having found an Emmet-hill, they
presently surround it, and laying their fore Paws with the hollow downward upon
the Ant-heap, as fast as the Emmets creep into their treacherous Palms, they
lick 'em off with great comfort to their Stomachs: and there they will lie till
there is not an Emmet left. They are also pernicious to fruit and Apples, and
will destroy whole Fields and Gardens, unless they be carefully looked after.
For they are very cunning, and will never venture in till the return of their
Spies, which they send always before; who giving Information, that all things
are safe, in they rush with their whole Body, and make a quick dispatch.
Therefore they go very quiet and silent to their Prey; and if their young ones
chance to make a noise, they chastise them with their fists, but if they find
the Coast clear, then every one has a different noise to express his joy. Nor
could there be any way to hinder them from further Multiplying, but that they
fall sometimes into the ruder hands of the wild Beasts, which they have no way
to avoid, but by a timely flight, or creeping into the clefts of the Rocks. If
they find no safety in flight, they make a virtue of necessity, stand their
ground, and filling their Paws full of Dust or Sand, fling it full in the Eyes
of their Assailant, and then to their Heels again.

But there is another sort of Creature very harmless, and exceeding sportive,
called in the Ethiopic Language Fonkes, in the Amharc Dialect Guereza, (which
is a kind of Marmoset) and in Latin Cercopitheculus. Of which the following
Rhyme is common in several parts of Ethiopia.

I put no Man to pain,
I eat not his Grain,
They hate me in vain.
They are varie-Colour'd, and skie-Colour'd mixed with gray: India breeds them
white, and beautiful; but so tender, that unless they be wrapped very warm, and
carried in your bosom, they cannot be brought into these Parts. Whether it be
the Calli-triches, or Fair-hair of the Ancients, I leave to others to judge. Of
them, after a Discourse of Apes, thus Pliny, The Calli-tricks differ in the
shape of the whole Countenance. The Beard is in the midst of the face, the Tail
is broad in the forepart; This Creature they say, lives no where but in the
Ethiopian Climate where it was bred. Solinus has the same words, only adding;
To catch these is easy, to bring away very difficult.

Besides these, Gregory named to me another sort of Beast, Book. 1. Chap. 10.
Page. 52.

The Ethiopian Fonkes, in the Amharic dialect called Guereza.

A sort of little Animal of the Kind of those which the Hollanders call
Danguinen.

It seems to be the Callithrix or fair-haire of the Ancients.

We thought fit to call it Cerlopitheculus or Galeopitheculus, The marmoset
with a tail or a Capp

depiction of Marmosets, one on the ground and one in a tree. Flocks of
Elephants that lay wast whole Forests. A cornfeild defended by a She Elephant.

Book. 2. Chap: 10. page 38

depiction of a herd of elephants destroying trees. both Strong and Fierce,
called Arweharis, from the Arabic Harish, or Harshaw, which signifies with one
Horn. This Beast resembles a Goat, but very swift of Foot; whether it be the
Monoceros of the Ancients, which as Jeronimus Lupus reports, is found in
Habessinia, I leave to the Scrutinie of others. Many skilful Authors looked
upon this Four-footed Beast as a kind of Chimera, considering the idle
Relations as if it could not be taken alive; that it was a Beast composed of
two Creatures of different Forms: as if Writers were framing Fables concerning
some Error of Nature. However the Portugals tell us, that the Report was not
altogether vain. For one of them was seen by John Gabriel, whom we have already
named, in the Province of the Agawi, in the Kingdom of Damota; it was a Beast
with a fair Horn in the Forehead, five Palms long, and of a whitish Color,
about the bigness and shape of a middle sized Horse, of a Bay Color, with a
Black Main and Tail, but short and thin (though some have been seen with longer
and thicker) a lively Creature, haunting the thickest Woods, and seldom
appearing in the Fields. And lest there should be any doubt of the Truth of the
thing, there was a young Colt brought to one of the Fathers of the Society, who
was an Eyewitness of the reality of the thing. Moreover, several Portugueses,
who were banished by the Emperor Adamas Saghed, into a certain high Rock in
the Province of Nanina, which is a part of Gojam, have attested, that they saw
several such Unicorns feeding in the Woods that lay under the said Mountain.
From whose Relations John Bermudes, and Lodowick Marmolius made their Reports
concerning In his Relation Translated into English; Tit. a short Relation of
the River Nile.
this Beast. The Description of the Portugueses seems most agreeable to Truth:
For what the Ancient and Modern Writers have written concerning At large by
Bochart, in the place already cited.
Unicorns are so confused, that some things have reference to the Monoceros;
other things to the In the relation of Paulus Venetus concerning the Unicorn in
Java the less. L. 3. c. 15.
wild Stag, or wild Goat, somethings to the wild Indian Ass; and other things
in reference to the Groinland-Whale, or Plin. L. 8. c. 39. Solin. in Polyhist.
c. 30. al. 43.
By Bochart in Hierozoico. L. 3. c. 26.
Nahrwhale; so many Beasts were required to form this Chinlaena: however there
is no question to be made, but that there are many Unicorns up and down the
World. Only there is still some Controversy remaining, what those Beasts
should be, of which the Scripture makes mention; in regard that all
Interpreters, after the Seventy Seniors, agree, that the Hebrew (...) or (...),
Numb. 23.22. and 24.8.
Rim, or Reem was a Beast altogether unknown to the Israelites. The Ethiopic
Interpreter, whether ignorant of that Beast in Ethiopia; or believing some
other Creature to be thereby understood, renders the Greek Monokeros, the Beast
with one Horn. L. 3. c. 27. and l. 6. c. 12.
The most famous Bochart tells us, That the Arabian Rim, is a sort of wild
Goat; or which seems more probable to me, a kind of wild Bear. The Word Dok in
the Arabia, and Deb in the Hebrew Language, are the two words that signify a
Bear: yet is that Beast unknown in those Parts. L. 8. c. 36. L. 9. c. 28.
Pliny also Affirms, That there are no Bears in Africa: But as for Boars,
Hearts, and Goats they are granted to breed there, as in other places; contrary
to Plinies Opinion: unless he may be thought to speak only of Africa properly
so called.

CHAP. XI. Of Creatures Amphibious, and those that live only in the Water.
The River-Horse, whence his Name: the Behemoth of Job: pernicious to Corn.
Boars, and Men; frightened with fire; why taken. The Crocodile. Job's Leviathan.
The Angueg described. Many Fish. The wonderful Nature of the Torpedo. A cure
for Fevers, and the Gout: touched with a wand it waxes number it self.

WE shall now Treat of Amphibious Creatures, and such as live altogether in
the Water. Among which, the first is that Monstrous Beast called Hippopotamos,
or the River-Horse: in the Ethiopic Language Bihat, in the Amharic Dialect,
called Gomari, So correct Bochart in Hieroz. l. 5. c. 15. for Bicht. and Gomar.
a vast Book. 1. Chap. 11. Page. 60.

The Behemoth Job the 40. 10.

Hippopotamos The sea Cow or the River Horse By ye Italians

The sea Horse putting up his head a boue the water; thence called the river
Horse by the Greeks.

depiction of Hippopotamuses, one on land and one in water. Bulk of Flesh, and
of a Prodigious Strength. The Greeks when they invented that name for him,
beheld only his Head above the Water; for his Snowt, Nose, and especially his
Ears are like to those of a Horse. But the shape of his Thus Tellez Writes,
They are rightly called Horses, for that their Noses and Ears are much alike.
Body and Feet is altogether different; and beside that, he wants a Mane;
Otherwise than Pliny thinks, who makes them to Neigh. L. 8. c. 25.
as appears by the Picture: for he has very short Feet, and a short Tail, a
rough Skin without any Hair; and for bulk, twice as big as an Ox. The Italians
considering the vastness of his Bulk, call him Bomarin, or the Sea-Oxe.
This is that Beast, which Job describes by the name of Behemoth, making use of
an old Egyptian Word; of which many end in Oath in the singular number. And that
as Bochartus learnedly teaches, was the Language that first taught the World.
Nor does Job's description disagree from that of the Hippopotamos, if compared.
There are many of them in the Lake of Tzana, which infest the Neighboring
Fields, to the great damage of the Corn. They overturn small Boats, which
renders all passage by Water very unsafe to the Inhabitants, in regard they lie
in wait for the Men themselves. They are afraid of Fire, as are most wild
Beasts Even Lions themselves. Solin. Polyhist. c. 27. al. 40. And therefore the
Abyssines keep Fires all Night next the Gates of their Towns.
with which alone a Child may scare them. Some poor People there are that make
it their livelihood to hunt them, and feed upon their Flesh. Their Skins being
very thick, are employed for several uses, especially, to make Shields.

His Companion the Crocodile is much more mischievous, which however does not
frequent the said Lake, so much as the River Tacaze, that flows as we have said
into the River Nile. This is that which Job calls the Leviathan, c. 41.
as many Learned Men have Beza, and Diodati, as Bochart alleadges. c. 15.
observed; to whom Bochart also gives his consent.

Water-Lizards are very frequent every where, and those very large. Among
which, there is one sort called an Angueg, deformed to look upon, with a sharp
Tail, and that so strong, as to be able almost to cut a man's Thigh in sunder;
and therefore by the Italians called, Caudi-verbera. To me it seems to be the
Waril of the Arabians, and the Coahh of the Hebrews, and to have derived its
name from Coahh, Levit. 11.30. L. 4. c. 3.
which signifies strength. Bochart has a more copious Description of it: but
that which follows Gregory gave me.

The Angueg lives in the Rivers; but when he comes forth, he feeds upon the
Grass; he is Four-footed, very deformed: shaped like a Dragon, without any
hair. His Tail is sharp like a Sword, strong enough to cut a Man's thigh in two;
as big as a Cat, but slenderer.

But setting these strange Creatures aside, the Lakes and Rivers abound with
Fish; even those that run under Ground: as we have already related concerning
the Mareb.

Among the rest, the Torpedo is very remarkable, frequent in Africa. The
Hollanders O. Dapper in his Description of Africa.
call it Fitterfish, or the trembling Fish. For it is of that Prodigious
Nature, that if it be touched with the hand, it strikes a most intolerable
Trembling into the Members. This They showed him says Tellez, meaning Almeyda
the Fish, called in Latin Torpedo, which he had no sooner taken in his hand,
but immediately he felt such a cruel pain in his hand and Arm, that he threw
it presently away again, not able to endure such a tormenting Experiment. More
see in Godignus. L. 1. c. 11. See the Author himself. L. 9. c. 42.
Peter Almeyda the Jesuit experimenting, paid for his knowledge. The Habessines
cure Quartan and Tertian Agues with it. The manner thus, the Patient is first
to be bound hard to a Table, after which the Fish being applied to his joints,
causes a most cruel pain over all his Members; which being done, the fit never
returns again. A severe Medicine, which perhaps would not be unprofitable to
those that are troubled with the Gout, in regard some say that Disease is to be
Cured by Torment. Those Ethiopians would certainly believe it, who affirm, That
the Virtue of this Fish will dispossess a man of the Devil himself. And yet if
you touch this Fish with a Spear or Wand, the sinews of it, though very strong,
presently grow numb; and the Feet of it, though otherwise a swift runner, lie
as if they were bound, as Pliny reports. Which Modern Writers also Testify to
be no untruth.

CHAP. XII. Of Birds.
The Struthiocamel, and the Casawaw, swifter than Horses; frequent in Africa: a
great enemy to Dogs: the flesh of it good against Poison. The Ibis and
Ophiomachus kill Serpents. The Pipi betrays the wild Beasts to the Fowlers: the
same Bird in Guiny. No tame Geese. Gregory wondered at his lying in Feather
Bedds. No Cuccows nor Eagles. The Ruch and Birds of Condora Fabulous.

AS the largest Four-footed Beasts are found in the Regions and Seas of
Habessinia; so do also the largest Fowl breed in the same Places. Though
indeed, they may not properly be called Birds, for that they never rise upon
the Wing, as the Struthiocamel or Ostrich, and the Casawaw or Casuarius next to
him in Bulk. However, the swiftness of their Feet compensates the slowness of
their Wings; they being able to outrun a Horse upon his full speed. As for the
Ostrich, he is so well known, that he needs no further description. The
Casuarius, or Casawaw is a Bird frequent in Africa: by the Inhabitants of
Guiney called Eme, but the Habessines, and particularly those of Tygra give it
the name of Casawaw, denoting thereby the Bulkiness of the Body. But for the
Tinshemeth or Mergus, or as others Interpret it the Swan, mentioned Deuteronomy.
14.16. The Abessines are in an Error to mistake it for this Bird. For that is
no more than the Greek (...) or Cygnus in Latin, which perhaps they had heard
by report was bigger than all other Birds: this Fowl has a great antipathy
against Dogs, which she eagerly pursues though with hazard of her Life. I had
a young one sent me out of India which was killed by a Mastive; but the Skin I
still preserve. The Flesh of the Fowl whether new or smoked is made use of in
Remedies against the biting of Serpents, which was found out by observing how
eagerly they devour them without harm. But Providence has not provided one
single Enemy to their Serpents only. For the Egyptian Ibis, and the
Ophiomachus, from his continual Enmity to those Vermin, called in the Amharic
Dialect, the Serpent devourer, make great havoc of those Venomous Creatures.
So that Africa, though it breed most pernicious Animals, yet it affords most
excellent Remedies against those Mischiefs. And indeed, some of those Birds
seem to be granted to Man for the Extirpating the Enemies of their well being,
which because they cannot vanquish themselves, they betray to them that they
think more able. For there is a little Bird, by those of Tygra called from the
Noise which it makes Pipi, which, strange to tell will, lead the Hunters to the
Places where the Wild Beasts lie hid: never leaving their Note of Pipi, till
the Hunters follow them, and kill the discovered Prey. Gregory related to me,
That as he was walking with one of his acquaintance, an Inhabitant of Tygra;
this Bird cried Pipi over their heads; thereupon, understanding the meaning of
it from his Friend, he resolved to try the Truth of the Story. The Bird
conducted them to a shady Tree, about the boughs of which, a Monstrous huge
Snake had Curled her self; at the sight whereof, he and his friend made more
have back again, than they did coming to satisfy their Curiosity. And indeed,
it is not safe to follow this Bird, unless a man be provided with all his
Hunting Instruments: nevertheless, the Bird has her own ends in her double
diligence too: for she is sure to have her share of the Slaughtered Carcass
whatever it be. Nor is this Bird to be found only in Habessinia, but also in
Guiny in the Kingdom of Quoja, where they give it the Name of Fonton, being
about the bigness of a Lark, where it is reported to betray not only wild
Beasts, but also Serpents and Bees.

They have no tame Geese: and therefore Gregory observing a Flock of Geese once
driven along by their Keeper; pleasantly demanded of me, Whether those Birds
were obedient to their Keeper? to whom, when I replied yes; he asked me a
second, Whether if they flew, the Keeper flew too, and Whether before or
behind? but when I told him what profitable Birds they were, he extolled them
for blessed Feather-bearing birds; especially, when he had layn upon their soft
Down at the Castle of Gota: for he had never layn upon a Feather-bed before he
came into Germany: So that he thought that the German beds swelling with light
Down, had been blown up with the Wind. But he Admired that the Germans were
Arrived at that height of delicacy, that Men should stoop to so much Effeminacy
as to lay themselves, where it was only fit for Children, and Women in
Childbed to lie. For he did not believe they would easily take the Field,
unless their soft beds followed them. As for other European birds, they have
most of them: and for their Water Fowl I have nothing to relate worth Remark.
By the way, I have this further to add, That there are neither Eagles nor
Cuckows in all these Parts; and therefore they tell Stories and Fables of their
bigness and strength: such as the Arabs recount of their Of which Bochartus in
Hieroz. L. 6. c. 14.
Ruch; which as they say, lays an Egg, as bigg as a Mountain. Not to mention
the winged P. Bolivar the Jesuit says, that he saw one of the smaller Feathers
of that Bird, twenty Spans long, and three broad: and the Quill it self being
three Spans long, and as thick as an ordinary Man's Arm: He is cited by the
Most Noble Theuenot in his Remarks upon the relations of Ethiopia.
Horses of Monomotopa, and of other Monsters, half-birds, half-beasts, by the
Ancients and Moderns either believed or heard to have been in Africa.

CHAP. XIII. Of Serpents and Insects.
Dragons only mischievous by biting; the biggest in India: their Scales and
Color. The Boa. Salamander. Snakes, and water-Snakes most Venomous. Gregory's
description. Cure from Human Excrement; which perhaps the Panther taught: they
are killed with a stick bent like a Bow. Torrid places impassable by reason of
Serpents. The Oxen put to trample upon and break their Eggs. Locusts most
pernicious, but good to eat. The Food of St. John Baptist. Bees, some unknown
to us, they have no Sting. Emmets, of several kinds.

FRom hence we pass to another sort of Creatures, mischievous to Men and
Beasts, of which there are diverse kinds. In the first place, Dragons of the
largest size are in Habessinia to be found; mischievous, only in their
voracity, but not at all Venomous; Nature providing that they should not be
doubly hurtful to men. However they grow to such a bigness, that Gregory
allowed there were some in India so large, as to swallow whole Insants, Piggs,
Lambs and Kidds: he further said, that they were covered with Scales, which in
Color very much resembl'd the bark of an old Tree, and hard to be
distinguished from the bigger boughs. Of the Boa, that devoured Oxen, he had
never heard; neither did he believe that ever any other person would. Of the
Salamander, Gregory could tell me nothing; which of all Venomous Creatures, as
Pliny reports, is accounted the most Exquisitely Mischievous. In Java the
Greater, it is called See the Itinerarie of Volcard Iversen, L. 1. c. 7. It is
somewhat like an Est or Newt. Consult Bochart Likewise Hieroz. P. 1. l. 4. c. 4.
Jeko, as some think from the sound that it makes; or as others believe, from
the most pernicious Effects of its Poison. However there are in Habessinia
other Serpents, whose Venom is of a most searching Nature. Such are those sort
of Snakes called Hydri, inferior to none for their Poison; they breed in Ponds
and Marshy Puddles which are dried up in the Summer: and then the Serpents
appearing in the same places, are by the Greeks called As much as to say (...).
Aetius L. 13. c. 35. or Water-Snake upon the Land.
Chersydri: at which time, they are also far more Mischievous, as being
exasperated by Thirst and Heat; and of these, unless I deceive my self, is the
Description of Gregory to be understood. There is, said he, a Serpent among us,
about as long and as bigg as a Man's Arm, of a dark red or brownish Color,
which lurks under Bushes and Weeds: thither if any Person or Beast happen to
come, the Serpent breaths forth a Poisonous Breath This circumstance induced me
to believe, that Gregory meant the Serpents called Hydrus and Chersydrus, or
Land-water-Snake, by reason that Authors allow them a venomous noysom breath.
Virg. L. 3. Georg. Aelian. Hist. L. 8. c. 13.
so Pestilent, and of so noisome a smell, that in a short time proves Mortal,
unless speedy Antidotes be applied. Which Nature has afforded ready at hand,
where the mischief requires so speedy a prevention. For, as he said, it was to
be cured by drinking Human Excrement in Water. Which Remedy perhaps the Panther
taught: which Beast, if at any time he has devoured Flesh laid for him by the
Hunters rubbed over with Henbane, cures himself by eating Human ordures: for
many things which are beneficial to Beasts, are in like manner advantageous to
Mankind. Other sorts of Serpents commonly and generally known I forbear to
mention. The vulgar sort of People contemn 'em, walk among 'em, and kill 'em at
their pleasure. Therefore as often as they go into the Country, they carry with
them a crooked stick; for being straight, it hits only with the Point; but being
bent like a Bow, it strikes with greater force and certainty. Gregory hearing
there were a great many Serpents about Helburgh in Franconia, belonging to the
Duke of Saxony, provided himself with such a sort of Weapon, and when he met a
Snake, never struck it upon the head, but upon the middle of the back; by which
means, having disabled the Serpent from creeping any further, he easily killed
it.

Those parts of Africa which are most subject to heat, are most Infested with
Serpents; which being for the same reason uncultivated, are therefore
impassable. And therefore Gregory seeing our Boots, said they were excellent
defenses against the Biting of Serpents. Sometimes they drive their Cattle, as
I am apt to believe, fortified beforehand, by feeding upon the Plant Assazoe,
into the Fields and places that are strewn with Serpents Eggs, on purpose that
they should trample 'em to pieces with their Hoofs: otherwise, they are so
Fruitful that they would increase beyond Imagination.

But much more pernicious than these are the Locusts, which do not frequent the
Desert and Sandy places like the Serpents; but places best Manured, and
Orchards most laden with Fruit. They appear in Prodigious Multitudes, like a
thick Cloud that obscures the Sun: nor Plants, nor Shrubs, nor Trees remain
untouched: and wheresoever they feed, their leavings seem as it were parched
with the Fire. Sometimes they enter the very Bark of the Trees, and then the
Spring it self cannot repair the Damage. A general Mortality ensues, and
Regions lie wast for many years; in regard the Habessines never take care
Dapper in his Description of Guiny, or the Golden-shoar, p. 459. but in this he
is deceived; because he says, they came out of Arabia the Happy, so far off.
for Stores of Provision, or to stack their Hay. Indeed, for some time they may
support themselves by feeding upon the Locusts themselves, which they greedily
eat, as well to satisfy their hunger as in Revenge; for it is a very sweet and
wholesome sort of Diet: by means of which, a certain Portuguez Garrison in
India, that was ready to yield for want of Provision, held out till it was
Relieved another way. And therefore it is not to be doubted, but that St. John
the Baptist fed upon these Locusts in the Wilderness.

Concerning other Insects, of which that Climate is sufficiently fruitful, it
will be needless to say much more; only as to their Bees, we have this to
observe; That they swarm in Habessinia, and produce Prodigious quantities of
Honey: They are a small sort of black Earthing- Be, which make the whitest and
the sweetest Honey that is used in Medicaments. From their Labors the
Habessines gather their wild Honey, of the same nature with that which fed John
the Baptist; but in regard they want Stings, they seek for security in
concealment; for they build their Architecture under Ground, into which the
entrance is so narrow, that upon the sight of a man, five or six of them will
fill it, and place their little heads equal with the ground so like Artists, as
to delude the quickest sight.

Next to these their Ants or Emmets are very remarkable; of which, there are
likewise several sorts, not so bigg as a small Dog, This I rather believe,
than the story of Pliny, L. 11. 9. 30. concerning Emmets among the Northern
Indians, that dig up great pieces of Gold; themselves as big as Egyptian Foxes.
Soline also makes them as big as great Dogs. Polyhist. c. 40. al. 27.
such as Thuanus relates, was sent among other Presents, by Thamus the Persian
King, to Solomon Emperor of the Turks, but bigger than those in our Climates;
as the African and Indian Insects generally are. Among the rest, the most
observable are those which they call Gundan, for they always march in a kind of
Military Array, observing Order and Discipline, leaving a kind of Highway
behind them. They do not gather with industry, but presently devour; and the
pricks of their Stings are not a little painful. The next to these, are those
which by the Inhabitants are called, the Gundan's Servants, being as it were
Slaves to the Greater sort; they march in Order, but carry their Provision in
the nippers of their little Snowts, and lay it up; when it is moist they bring
it forth again and dry it in the Sun: of these, by reason of their great
Industry, it is thought, that Solomon spoke. There are some that have Wings at
certain seasons, with which they can Fly; which happens sometimes in Germany:
once I saw such in my own Country; and these flying Ants, I remember, were
easily devoured by the Poultrie.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Nature and Genius of the Inhabitants.
The Habessines of a towardly disposition. The commendations which Tellezius
gives them. The best of all the Africans. Servants of this Nation prized all
over the World. Prester-Chan, why so called. The Habessines desirous of Arts
and Sciences; especially, the Latin Tongue. The causes of Gregorie's going
into Germany. They want the Opportunities of attaining to Learning, and why?
They of Tygra are blamed. For shape and features the Habessines excel. White
Ethiopians in Guiny. They prefer Blackness. They paint the Devil White. The Men
very strong. So are the Women, and bring forth with little pain. Nor are they
unfruitful, and therefore the Country Populous. The Jews Inhabiting among them,
formerly enjoyed their own Privileges, now Dispersed and Exiles. They use a
corrupt Talmudic Dialect. Mahumetans mixed with Christians, Pagans innumerable,
wandering; Naked Creatures, by the Portugals called Cafres, or Infidels.

HAving thus given an account of the Beasts, Insects, and Fish, peculiar to
these Regions, we are now to speak of the Inhabitants; Man being the most
perfect of all the Creation, and for whose benefit the rest were designed. And
first, we must confess, That there is not the same harshness and roughness in
the Dispositions of the People, as in the nature of the Soil: for the
Habessines, as Tellezius Witnesses, in other things not so just to them, are
well inclined, and of an excellent good Nature.

All the Habessines, (says he) are endu'd with a pregnant Wit, and goodness of
Disposition; not Cruel, nor Bloody: they easily forgive Injuries; there are few
Quarrels among them, or if any do arise, they are seldom determined by the
Sword; only Boxing and Cuffing decides the difference: They are Naturally given
to Justice and Equity; so that having Cufft a while, they presently choose
Arbitrators, or repair to the Lord of the Place, and there set forth their
Complaint in Words, without any of our Parchment Ambiguities, and hearing the
Sentence which he gives, submit without any delay or tergiversation: So that
they have no need of Answers and Replies, and Rejoynders, and Exceptions; but
avoid the noise of the Bar, and the expenses of Pleading.

And when he inveighs against Adamas -- Saghed, the Prince of the Habessines,
he adds, That he had forgot the Lenity, Truth, and Christian Piety, which
wonted to be almost natural to the Abessines.

But before all the rest he prefers those of Enarea by the Confession of the
Habessines themselves. For For those are his words, L. 4. c. 30. page 177. a.
those he commends above all others, both for their Endowments as well of Body
as Mind; and for their Courage and Fidelity. A Testimony which certainly
contains a very high Applause of a Nation, otherwise rude and impolish'd; so
that if they had but the advantages of Education, most certain it is, that the
Abessines, would prove the most ingenious and understanding people of all
Africa; which is well known all over the East: And therefore Servants out of
this Nation, are sold for more, and more esteemed than Slaves out of any other
of the Black Nations whatever. For which cause some Learned Men are of Opinion,
that the King of the Abissines was therefore called Prester-Chan, for that in
the Persian Language Prester-Chan signifies Jacob Golius, at Blancard alleadges
in his Notes upon Curtius.
A Prince of the best Servants, being taken in War, or otherwise by Pirates,
and sold to the Mahumetans. If they were not well grounded before in the
Christian Religion, they are easily seduced to renounce their Christianity, for
that there is no Circumcision exacted from them, as being already Circumciz'd:
and then again, though they be Foreigners and bought with Money, yet are they
often advanced to Dukedoms and Governments, and rise to great Preferments above
the Natives and Freemen. They are most Covetous after Learning, and desirous
of the knowledge of Arts and Sciences. Nor was there any other greater reason of
that kindness which was showed to the Fathers of the Society toward the
beginning of this Century, in Habessinia, but that they were skilled in all
sorts of Arts and Sciences, and therefore admired by the King and Princes of
the Nation. For they love and reverence all sorts of Foreign Christians that
are adorned with the Ornaments of Art and Learning. Gregory related to me, That
when the Portuguess Patriarch carried thither a great number of very fair
Books, sundry of the Nobility, and among the rest, Tine, one of the King's
Counselors, expressed himself with a Sigh in these words. Oh happy he that can
understand all these Books! And many persons of full years, hearing of the
excellency and large use of the Latin Language, have most Ardently desired to
learn it. And that indeed seemed to me to be the most prevailing reason, why
our Gregory though stricken in years, undertook so long a journey after me into
Germany; and why Acalex a young Habessine followed him soon after; though not
being understood in Germany where he pronounced Ehrfaher instead of Erfurt he
had the ill fortune to lose his labor. Therefore they neither want ingenuity
nor industry, but only Opportunity and Assistance, for they never travel long
Journies: our Europeans are hindered by the difficulties of getting into their
Country, and the tediousness of the Journey, whether by Land or Sea: and
besides all this the Envy of the Turks joined to their implacable Avarice will
not permit them to suffer us to Import our Arts of Peace and War, to their own
and the disadvantage of the rest of the Mahumetans. Lastly, their continual
Civil Broyls, and Foreign Wars with the Gallans are such as will not allow the
Nobility leisure to mind the Studies of Tranquillity.

But among such a variety of people, it is impossible, that the same manners
and dispositions should be in all; for Nature has brought forth nothing so good
in the Universe, which has not something of Evil mixed with it. Thus Tellez
sets a very bad Character upon the Inhabitants of Tigra; who, as he says, are a
People irresolute and faithless; inconstant, and false-swearer, bloody and
Vindictive; so that Enmities in Families among them remain from Posterity to
Posterity. Godignus gives the same report: saying, That in all Ethiopia there
is no Nation like them for their vile manner of living and ill Customs.

But as the Habessines generally excel in generosity of Mind and smartness of
Understanding, so do they far exceed all other Ethiopians in shape of Body, and
symmetrie of Lineaments; the rest of the Africans being generally marked with a
Blubber Lipp'd and Flat Nosed deformity.

The Habessines, says Tellez, are remarkable for the complete shape of their
Bodies; of a due procerity, free and cheerful Countenance, and thin Nosed, that
is not flat Nosed, nor blubber Lipp'd; so that our Europeans exceed them only
in Color: in other Perfections of Proportion they differ little or nothing.
They are generally Black, which they most admire: Some are Ruddie Complexioned;
some few White, or rather Pale and Wan, without any grace or welfavouredness.

True it is, there are some Whites among the Ethiopians in other places, but
they look like the countenances of Dead Men, or as if they had the Leprosy:
which other Authors also Testify, but write withal, that it proceeds for some
Disease in the Body, and therefore other Ethiopians avoid being The Famous
Isaac Vossius in his Book of the Original of Nile and other Rivers, believes
that those Ethiopians are truly Leprous, and that the difference of Color
proceeds from the Disease: but with submission to so great a person, I should
think that a Nation so Infected could not long endure: nor that the King of
Lovangi would admit Leapers into his Guard.
breathed upon, or touched by them, as believing them Contagious. Also in the
Midland parts of Guiney there is a Nation consisting all of White People, which
are therefore called Leuc-Ethiopes, Plin. l. 5. c. 8.
or White Ethiopians, and of these the ancient Authors make mention. However,
the Ethiopians are pleased with their own Blackness, and prefer it before the
White Color. Neither would Gregory permit himself to be overcome with this
Argument, That our Children were frighted at the sight of an Ethiopian;
averring, that their Children were as much terrified at the sight of our White
Europeans: they are not born Black, but very Red; and in a short time turn
Black: Some Authors write, that the Ethiopians paint the Devil white in disdain
of our Complexions.

Their strength of Body is extraordinary. And by reason of the admirable temper
of the Air, they are extremely vivacious and patient of Labor; nor are they
easily wearied with clambering their own Rocks. They live till merely dissolved
by pure decrepid Age, unless they fall by the Sword, or are devoured by the
Wild Beasts, as Salust writes of the Africans in his time. I am apt to think,
that the Macrobii, or Long-livers, formerly Inhabited some part of Habessinia,
for that the Ancient Writers report them settled beyond Meroe. Solin in
Polyhist. c. 43. al. 30. out of Pomponius Mela. The Long-livers, or Macrobii,
says he, Honor Justice, Love Equity; they are very strong, and particularly
well-favoured. But presently after he brings in the old Fable, the Fable of the
Sun; which Herodotus sets forth at large, L. 3. where he Treats of the Ambassie
of Cambyses to the King of the Macrobii.
Their Women are also strong and lusty, and bring forth with little pain, as
most Women do in hot Countries. When they are in Labor they kneel down upon
their knees, and so are Thus did the Hebrew Women; as it is said of Elis
Daughter in Law, She fell upon her knees and brought forth.
delivered, without the help of a Midwife, unless very rarely. And that they
are Fruitful you may well imagine from the Multitude of People; for though
Habessinia be not so numerously Inhabited; yet the Latin Patriarch Alphonsus
Mendez, going his Visitation, in one little Province, reckoned Forty thousand;
in other places, a Hundred thousand: and in other places, others of the Fathers
Baptized a Thousand two hundred and five. Nor is it to be questioned but that
if the Kingdom were at Peace; if their Cities and Towns were Fortified, and
that they took care of their Granaries, that the number of Inhabitants in so
healthy a Country would soon be multiplied.

Besides the Abyssines, several other Nations Inhabit this Kingdom, Jews,
Mahumetans, with several Pagans mixed amongst the rest. The Jews formerly held
several fair and large Provinces, almost all Denbea, as also Wegara and Samen,
stoutly and long Defending themselves by means of the Rocks, till they were
driven thence by Susneus; at that time they also lived according to their own
Customs; whence perhaps arose the report, already hinted at by us, That they
lived either within the Dominions of Prester John, or near them; under a Prince
of their own. Now they are dispersed, though many still remain in Dembea,
getting their livings by Weaving, and exercising the Trade of Carpenters.
Others have retired themselves without the bounds of the Kingdom, to the
Westward near the River Nile, adjoining to the Cafers, whom the Ethiopians call
Falusjan, or Exiles. Most of them still keep up their own Synagogues, have
their own Hebrew Bibles, and speak in a corrupt Talmudic Dialect. The Fathers
of the Society never took care to enquire, when, or upon what occasion the Jews
came first into Ethiopia? whether they are addicted to the Sect of the Karri,
or the Jews? what Sacred Books they use, whether with Points, or without
Points? whether they have any other Books, especially Histories, or whether
they have any Traditions concerning their own, or Nation of the Habessines?
which to know, would certainly be most grateful to many Learned Men; in regard
it seems very probable, that there may be found some Ancient Books among them,
since they have lived so long and so securely in such inaccessible holds.

Next to these the Mahumetans are frequently admitted into this Kingdom
intermixed up and down the Country with the Christians; employing themselves
altogether in Tillage or Merchandising; Trade being all in their hands, by
reason of their freedom of Traffic which the Turks and Arabians grant them,
and the liberty of Commerce which they have by their means in all the parts of
the Red Sea, where they exchange the Habessinian Gold for Indian Wares.

There are yet many other Barbarous Nations, that wander about in the sandy
Deserts, having no knowledge of God, and living without any Government of King
or Laws; varying in Customs and Language, having no certain Habitations, but
where Night compells them to rest: Savage, Naked, flat Nosed, and blubber
Lipp'd. Agriophagi, devourers of wild Beasts, or rather Pamphagi, All-eaters,
for they feed upon For many of the Barbarians have been named from the
particular Diet they fed upon, as the Man-Eaters, Fish-Eaters, Ostrich-Eaters,
etc. Solin in Polyhist. c. 30, al. 43. Plin. L. 6. c. 30.
Dragons, Elephants, and whatever they meet in their way. The most sordid and
vilest of Human Creatures. L. 5. c. 8.
Gregory described them to me, as Pliny described the Troglodytes, for they dig
themselves Dens in the Earth, which are instead of Houses; they feed upon
Serpents Flesh; their Language being only an inarticulate Noise: the
Portuguezes called these sort of people Cafers, borrowing the Word from the
Arabians, who call all People that deny one God Cafir, in the plural Number
Cafruna, Infidels or Incredulous. There are also other Pagans that have their
peculiar Names, and Regions, as the Agawi, that Inhabit the Mountainous part of
Gojam: the Gongae, Gafates; and the Gallans themselves, otherwise the most
professed Enemies of the Abessines; but being expelled by Factions of their
own; the King Assigned them certain Lands in Gojam and Dembea; and makes use of
them against their own Countrymen from whence they Revolted.

CHAP. XV. Of the various Languages used in Ethiopia, particularly of our
Ethiopic, Erroneously called Chaldaic, in the last Century.
The Antiquity of the Ethiopic Language; its various Appellations: formerly the
natural Language of those of Tigra: in that all their Books written. The Tegian
Language what. Joh. Potken, first divulged the Ethiopic in Europe, and called
it Chaldee by mistake: more like the Arabic: the use of it in the Hebraics. An
Example in the words Adama, and Adam; not so called from the Redness of the
Earth. What now the natural Habassian, It differs from the Ethiopic, which is
much more noble: to be learnt by reading and use: for that they have neither
Grammar nor Lexicon. Few understand it: difficult to pronounce. Multitude of
Dialects. Eight Principal Languages. They understand not the Greek. The number
of Languages in vain prefixed: not so numbered in Africa.

AMong so many and such variety of Nations, it is no wonder there should be
such diversity of Languages. The most Noble and most Ancient Language of this
Kingdom is our Ethiopic, commonly so called by the Learned: for the Attaining
of which, we set forth a Lexicon and Grammar some while since in England; 1661.
the Abissines call it Lesana Itjopia, the Language of Ethiopia, or Lesana
Gheez and sometimes singly Gheez; or the Language of the Kingdom: or if you
please, the Language of the Study; for that the Word signifies both: also the
Language of Books; either because it is only used in Writing, or else because
it is not to be attained without Study and Reading of Books: It was formerly
the Natural Language of those of Tigra, when the Kings kept their Court at
Aexuma, the Metropolis of Tigra; in this Language all their Books, as well
Sacred, as Profane, were written, and still are written: and into this
Language the Bible was formerly Translated. For whereas others Write, that the
Abessines read the Scripture in the Tegian Language, Walton in his Prolegomena
before the Bible, c. 15. out of Alvarez, for the r. and the i. written without
a Point after the Italian manner, deceived the Readers.
that is a mistake; for the Tegran, or the Language of Tigra, is to be
understood of our Ethiopic. Though it be true, that since their Kings left
Axuma, the Dialect of this Country is very much altered; yet still it
approaches nearest to the Ancient Language, which is as we but lately said, now
called the Ethiopic: so that the Abissines themselves if they meet any doubtful
word in this Language, presently consult those of Tygra, concerning the
signification.

John Potken, a German of Cologne, now Ancient and Gray, was the first that
divulged this Language in Europe; and then setting up a neat Ethiopic
Printing House in Rome, there Imprinted the first Ethiopic Books, that is to
say, the Psalter, with the Hymns of the Old Testament, and the Canticles. In
this deceived that he gave too much Credit to certain Idle Habessines, who
Affirmed, That as well their Language, as their Ethiopic Characters were
Ambrose Theseus, his Contemporary, mildly reproves him for it, in his
Introduction to the Oriental Languages; for says he, with tenderness to his
age and friendship, Thy Learning very much fails thee in this matter. Now
Theseus stiffly affirms, The Habessines to be Indians, and their Language
Indian: perhaps the more tolerable Error of the two.
Chaldaic. I could not find out the Cause of so Gross an Error; neither had
Gregory ever heard it in his own Country: perhaps it fell out by reason of the
likeness of the Language, though indeed it agree with the Chaldaic no more than
with the Hebrew or Syriac; for it approaches nearest to the Arabic, of which it
seems to be a kind of Production; as being comprehended almost within the same
Grammatical Rules; the same forms of Conjugations; the same forms of Plurals,
both entire and anomalous; so that whoever understands either that, or the rest
of the Oriental Languages, may with little labor understand this our Ethiopic.
Neither is it useful alone for the understanding of the Habessine Books and
Affairs, but for Illustrating and Expounding the rest of the Eastern Languages,
and first the Hebrew; of which there is yet a small remainder in the Bible;
insomuch that the genuine significations of many words are to be fetched from
the neighboring Dialects: and many texts of Sacred Writ borrow that Light from
hence; as shall be more amply demonstrated by Examples in our Commentary. One
more then ordinarily remarkable we shall here produce. The Latins called the
most Elegant and Delightful piece of Workmanship of the Most Omnipotent God,
Mundum, or the World: in imitation of the Greeks, who named the same thing
(...), or Ornament; For the Greeks borrowed their Letters, and many other
things from the Phoenicians, as Bochart and many others declare at large.
assuming the same Word not from Native Invention, but from the Phoenicians, by
whom the World, but more especially the Earth, is called Adamah, or Beautiful.
I know it is vulgarly derived from the signification of So most
Lexicon-Writers; Buxtorf tells us, that Adamah, Earth, is so called as being of
a Red, or Clay Color. Schindler affirms, The true Earth, before it is dig'd is
Red; and that Adam was Formed out of Red Earth. Which are said vainly and
gratis; neither does Kimchi in his Book of Roots mention any such Derivation.
Redness, because the Hebrew Root Adam signifies to be Red. But how much of the
Earth can we aver to be Red; certainly a very small quantity; so that it is
most insipid to derive the Etymology of so vast a Mass from Redness. Therefore
first Created Human Being himself, the common Parent of us all, derived his
Name Adam, not from the redness of the Earth, but from the Absolute Perfection
of his Frame and Shape, as being the Masterpiece, to speak more Humano, of his
But after his Fall, having lost his Primitive Beauty, he was admonished of his
Mortality, by an Allusion to the Word Earth, out of which he was Created.
Creator. For this signification, which has hitherto been unknown to the
Lexicon-writers of most of the Oriental Languages, is most apparent from the
Ethiopic; in which Language Adamah signifies Beautiful, Elegant, and Pleasant.
Nor do the Ethiopians understand the Word Adam, otherwise than of a thing that
is Beautiful. And there is no doubt, but that the City Adamah, before it was
destroyed with Sodom and Gomorrah, seated upon the Banks of Jordan, which are
often compared to the (...) Gaz-Jehovah, the Paradise of God, according to the
Vulgar Latin Version.
Garden of the Lord, was so called, from the Pleasantness of its Situation.

But Axuma being relinquished, and the Empire being translated into the Heart
of the Kingdom, the Vulgar use of this our Language ceased. For the Zagean Line
failing, when they set up a Sewan Prince, where the Amharic Dialect is vulgarly
spoken, and that some others who were Exiles in the Rock of Amhara, were called
to the Government, the Amharic Dialect came into request. For the new King not
well understanding the Language of Tygra, and having advanced about his Person
his own Friends that spoke the same Language with him, brought his own Dialect
into the Court and Camp; which being long fixed there, and in the Parts
adjoining, was seldom removed into Tygra. In imitation of whom, the rest of the
Nobility and great Personages used the same Speech. Thus the Amharic Dialect,
otherwise called the King's Language, being carried along with the Camp and
Court over all the Kingdom, (t) got the upper hand of all the other Dialects,
and the Ancient and more Noble Ethiopic Language it self: and at length became
so Familiar to all the Chief of the Abissines, that you may easily by the use
of that one Dialect Travel the whole Empire, though in several Parts so
extremely differing in Dialect from one another. It differs from the Ethiopic,
both in Construction and Grammar; so that he who understands the one, cannot
comprehend the other; yet he who understands the one, may easily learn the
other, because that for above half the Language, as far as I can judge, the
words are common to both. Gregory could hardly be persuaded to Translate me the
Lords Prayer, and some few Texts of Scripture into the Amharic Dialect, by
reason of the difficulty to write it. For it has seven peculiar Characters not
usual in the Ethiopic: however the Ethiopic retains its pristine Dignity, not
only in their Books, but in their Divine Worship; as also in the Kings Letters
Patents, and Commissions, which are dispatched in his Council.

Therefore they are accounted Learned in Ethiopia, that can but Read and Write
it: for it is to be learnt out of Books, and by long use, as also by the
Assistance of Schoolmasters too, though they are very rare there; for they
have neither Grammar nor Dictionary, which Gregory beheld here, not without
Admiration. At first he extremely wondered what I meant, when I requested of him
the Root of any Ethiopic Word, at what time I was compiling my Lexicon; and
seeming to be much offended, asked whether I thought the Ethiopic Words grew
upon Roots. But when he understood the scope and use of the Question, he cried
out, O the Learning of Europe! They are contented only with a Vocabularie,
wherein according to several Classes, the Ethiopic Words are Explained in the
Amharic Dialect. They call it a Ladder, in imitation of the Arabians, who call
such a kind of Book, a Such is the Great Kopto-Arabic Scale, which Kircher
published at Rome.
Great Scale, or Ladder. The more unskilful seek for such words therein which
they do not understand in the Ethiopic; but there are very few that speak
Ethiopic in Ethiopia it self. Gregory was persuaded to speak it for my sake,
using at first many Amharic Words, which I observed also to happen in the
Writings of their more unlearned Authors, before he could accustom himself to
the true Ethiopic. Both, but especially the Amharic are very difficult to
pronounce, for there are Seven Letters in both k. t. d. t. e. p. tz. whose true
Power unless it be that of d. is altogether unknown to the Europeans, so that
it is almost impossible for them to shape their Tongues to speak several words,
which makes me very ready to believe Pliny, when he Writes, L. 5.
That the Names of the People and Towns in Africa, are not to be uttered but in
their own Languages. Besides, the sound of their Vowels is so harsh and
unpleasant, that they almost scare the hearer; the obscurity of their Language
and Pronunciation corresponding with the Darkness of their Complexions.

But this variety of Speech is much more conspicuous in other Kingdoms and
Provinces of this Empire. Tellezius Elegantly Writes, That there are as many
Languages as Kingdoms; nay; that there are different Dialects and Inhabitants
in one and the same Kingdom. In Gojam, says he, there are some Towns not far
distant one from another, the Damotans, Gafatans, Shewans, Setans, Shatans,
besides the Agawi, the Gonge, and the Natives, whose Dialects differ as much as
Portugueze from Italian or French: But the Nobility and Learneder sort, as we
make use of Latin, so they speak generally Amharic. That which follows, I had
from Gregorie's Lips; by which the difference of their Language may be the
better understood.

The Language of Tigra comes the nearest to our Ethiopic; as being least
corrupted of all the rest.

To the Amharic Language, those of the Neighboring Kingdoms come the nearest;
though their Dialects are different one from another; for that of Bagemdra is
peculiar: Angota, Hata, Gojam, and Shewa, use a Dialect common to one another.

Gafata makes use of many Amharic words, but in so difficult a Dialect as
requires a long time to understand it.

Dembea speaks a Language, altogether different as well from the Ethiopic as
Amharic.

The Language of Gonga, is the same with that of Enarea, but different from all
the other Speeches of Ethiopia.

The Inhabitants of Cambat the Gallans, Agawi, and Shankali, have each of them
their distinct Languages, so that there are Eight or more Principal Languages
in this Kingdom, and many more Dialects. For an Example of some of these
differences, the following Words signify all one thing; that is to say, Lord,
or Dominus.

Ethiopic. Amharic. Tigran. Dembean. Enarean. Egzi-e. Abet. Hadari Ieg-ja.
Donza.

Gregory left me some words of the Gallan Language, which I here insert, to
show the difference between the Amharic and Ethiopic Dialects.

Ethiopic. Amharic. Gallan. English. Semaj. Idem. Kake. Heaven. Mabereke. Idem.
Dagae. Thunder. Asat. Idem. Jbije. Fire. Amatzea Asat. Anetza Asat. Hije fuje.
bring Fire. Maj. Wahha. Bisan. Water. Firese. Idem. Tarej. A Horse. Qalebe.
Wesha. Sareti. A Dog. Hobaje. Janedjero. Tledesha. A Baboon. Halibe. Watote.
Anne. Milk. Negus. Idem. Nekus. A King. Quesate. Setotje. Fute. A Woman. Ahuja.
Wanedama. Abletsha. My Brother. Ahuteja. Hate. Ablete. My Sister. Hubalte. Jaba
Budeno. Bread.

We shall say nothing of the Forrainers scattered over all the Kingdom, who
being naturally Arabians, use their own Native Language, which at Court and
among the Merchants is well enough understood; and therefore they who can speak
that Language, negotiate their own Affairs with ease in any public Place. The
Jews make use of their own corrupt Talmudic, which by Converse with the Natives
is daily more and more corrupted. As for the Greek Language, the Habessines are
utterly Ignorant of it; though several Greek Words were transferred into their
Country, together with their Sacred Writings, upon the Change of their Religion.

When I consider this great Variety of Languages, I cannot sufficiently wonder
at the vanity of those People, who have presumed to confine the Languages of
the World to a certain Number. Clemens Alexandrinus believed, there were
Seventy sorts of Languages. Euphorus reckons up Seventy five upon an idle
computation. Pliny tells a strange thing, Lib. 6. c. 5.
That when the City of Dioscurias a City of the Colchi flourished, by the
relation of Timosthenes it held three hundred Nations of different Languages;
and that afterward the Romans were forced to make use of a Hundred and thirty
Interpreters to manage their Affairs in the same place: but mistakes in Figures
are easily committed.
Whereas all the Nations of the World are not yet known; for if it be true,
what I have been told by several Mariners, that upon the Coast of Africa, the
Languages vary at every Fifteen or twenty German Miles Distance, it follows,
that that one Quarter of the World contains more Languages then all the rest,
by reason of the innumerable number of Nations which are cherished within the
Bowels of so large a Continent.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Neighboring Nations; and particularly of the They are
called Galla, briefly by the Habessines: we give them the name of Gallans; lest
while we discourse the Barbarism of the Galli, we should injure one of the
Politest and Civillest Nation in the World.
Nation of the Gallans.
The Adelans have almost ruined Habessinia; the Turks possess the Sea Ports;
The Gallans more formidable: The Relation of Gregory concerning their Original:
Another of Tellez: both reconciled. Their Laws. Polygamy lawful among them.
Incitements to Courage. Their Arms. Graziers. Their Diet. A formidable,
unquiet Nation. Their Prince at present. Their Deity. Circumciz'd: capable of
the Christian Religion. Their acquisitions: divided into Two Nations: The
Kingdom of Zendero described. Inchanters allowed. The cruel Election of their
King; the Kingdom of Alabat, etc.

HItherto of the People at this time or formerly subject to the Kings of the
Habessines. Now it remains, that we speak of their Neighbors, that we may the
better judge of the State and present Condition of the Kingdom.

The most cruel and bloody War which the Inhabitants of Adela waged in the
foregoing Century under the Conduct of their Captain The French read the word
Gragne, the Portuguezes Granhe.
Grainus, against the Habessines, so ruined their Affairs, that they could
never since recover their losses. From whence, as well the Turks as the Gallans
have taken an occasion continually to vex them with Wars and wastful Inroades.
And first, the Turks, after they had possessed themselves of Egypt, and slain the
King of the Mamalukes, sent a Fleet into the Red Sea, to secure the Indian
Navigation, which is vastly profitable to Egypt: for that the Portuguesses, to
the intent they might enjoy the sole Trade of India, took all the Ships of the
Saracens they could meet with, pretending a hatred of their Religion. The Turks
therefore to shut up all the Ports of that Sea, made themselves Masters of
Suaqena, and Matzua, Islands that formerly belonged to the Habessines, which
they might the more easily do, in regard the Habessines having their handsful
by Land, took no care of their Sea Affairs. But soon after they became
sensible, how vast an Inconvenience it was to have so Powerful a Neighbor;
finding what Potent Succors of Men and Firearms the Turks sent to assist
their Enemies and those that revolted from them. Nor are they less frequently
sensible of it to this day; in regard that neither Men nor Merchandise can be
admitted into the Gulf, unless they request it from the Basha or his Deputies,
with vast Expenses of rich Presents.

But the Fierceness and Cruelty of the Gallans is much more Formidable. For
they having Subdued many Kingdoms and Provinces thirst after all the rest;
whence it is very probable what Tellezius writes, That unless they had fallen
into Factions among themselves; or that the Habessines were not so Invincibly
secured within their own Rocks, they had been e're this utterly destroyed.
Therefore it seems but requisite, that I should here give an Account of the
Original and Customs of these People: which I shall do as well from Tellezius,
as from the Lips of our Gregory himself.

What time Etana-Denghel, surnamed David was entangled in that fatal War with
the Adelenses; that other Plague brake forth about the Year One thousand five
hundred thirty seven, from the Kingdom of Bali. A certain number of Servants
being cruelly handled by one Matthew a Nobleman, Revolted; and despairing of
Pardon, associated to themselves all the Fugitives and Criminals that fled from
the Punishment of their Mis-deeds, and lived upon Public Spoil and Plunder,
which they did with more success, in regard the Inhabitants of Bali were not
able to oppose 'em: And for the Habessines, they being involved in Wars with
the Adelans, contemned those inconsiderable Robbers. Tellez affirms them a
particular Nation, and the same that Inhabited the Eastern Coast of Africa, and
the Places adjoining to the Indian Sea: perhaps those Servants, of whom Gregory
makes mention, belonged to that Neighboring Nation, and flying to their own
Countrymen for Aid, discovered Habessinia, and those Countries which were by
their Servitude well known to them.

And now the Gallans, puffed up with their success and rich Plunder, and
increased in their number, having Subdued Bali, overran the neighboring
Kingdoms; But when they saw that what was won by Force must be defended by
Force, they began to make Laws among themselves, very advantageous for the
Enlargement of their detestable Dominion, and the preservation of their untamed
and barbarous fierceness. They are not so unlimited, as to despise Matrimony,
like the Garamants, nor do they live commonly with their Women; but they have
as many Wives as they please. The young Men are not permitted to cut their
Hair, before they have killed an Enemy in the Field, or some wild Beast, an
encouragement of boldness and hardiness to adventure; that by such a
conspicuous Mark, the sluggish and cow-hearted should be distinguished, from
the bold and daring.. In their Banquets and Feasts the best Bit is always set in
the middle, and he that takes it, must be the first in any Perilous
undertaking: nor is there any long consideration: every one prepares to win
that Honor to himself, Ambition stimulating their Fortitude: but then there is
a necessity of bringing some proof of an Enemy Slain, first they bring the
Head, as the most modest part of the Body; but if there be any doubt of the Sex
for want of a Beard, they cut off the most Obscene Parts of the Slain; a thing
foul to relate: these they number, and heap up before the Army, as if their
barbarous Fortitude could not be made appear without such kind of Testimony.
However by those parts it is not manifest, whether he be a Friend or an Enemy
that is Slain, and therefore the Head decides that Question. But their most
prevailing encouragement in Battle is, that because no man should be thought to
Fight for base hire, or out of servile Obedience for another man's honor, but
only for his own Reputation, the Plunder is equally divided among them all.
They go to War, as if they had devoted themselves for Victory, with a certain
Resolution, either to Overcome or Dye: from whence proceeds great obstinacy in
Combat. They use but few Weapons, at a distance they fight with Lances or
Darts; hand to hand with Clubs or Stakes burnt at the end; relying more upon
their Courage, than their Hands: They make their Shield of the skins of Oxen,
or wild Bufalo's; formerly they fought for the most part afoot, now more
frequently a Horseback. And though the Abessines are generally more in Number,
and better Armed, as also more skilful Horsemen, yet are they not able to
withstand the violence of their furious Onsets. But how they may be Subdued we
shall then declare, when we come to the Chapter concerning the Power of the
Kings of Habessinia.

Being thus bred up to War, they abhor all peaceful Callings, believing it much
better to ravish wealth, then get it by honest Labor; they willingly eat the
Bread which they find among the Abessines, but do not love to grind the Corn;
for they neither till nor sow their Lands, never minding Agriculture, but only
grazing of Cattle: their Herds they drive before 'em, as well in War as in
Peace, through the most fertile Pastures; upon the raw Flesh of which they
generally feed without Bread, and then drink their Milk; using the same sort of
Food and Drink, both at home and in the field.

They never cumber themselves with any Baggage, not so much as Kitchen
Utensils, only wooden Cups to drink their Milk in. Such wild Nations are
generally a Terror to civilized People, whom Abundance renders slothful, and
Riches effeminate. Thus the Cimbrians, Goths, Vandals, and Normans overran the
more civilized Kingdoms of Europe. Thus the Oriental Tartars formerly Invaded
China. The Gallans, if at any time overcome by the Habessines, retire with
their Herds into remote Corners; Opposing only wild Deserts, and Solitudes for
their Enemies to Encounter. Every Eight Years they choose one amongst them for
their Leader, as it were a kind of Master of the Horse, whom they call Luva;
and him all the rest of the Captains obey; but that is only in time of War: his
first Enterprise is, to Muster the People together, and Invade Habessinia, for
the sake of Honor and Booty.

They have a Language peculiar to themselves, and different from all the rest
of the Habessinian Dialects; which argues their Original both foreign and
common to all their Tribes; they admit of Circumcision among themselves,
whether it be by any ancient Custom, observed by many of the Neighboring
Ethnics, or for that they find the Arabians and Abessines to do the same.

They have no Idols, and but very little Divine Worship. If you ask them
concerning God, or any Supreme Numen, or who it is that Governs the Earth with
so much Order and Constancy? they answer, Heaven, which embraces in their view,
all the rest; however they adore that Heaven with no Solemn Worship, more
barbarous than the Barbarians themselves: nor yet are they altogether void of
Humanity, for they aspire to a large share of Ingenuity, and in aptness to
learn equalize the smartest of the Habessines. From whence we may observe, that
there is no sort of Humankind so fierce and savage which may not be civilized
by Education and Learning. Many have submitted to the Instructions of
Christianity, and persisted constant in the Faith. Tellezius testifies, and
Gregory farther witnessed, That several Thousands of the Gallans were Converted
to the Christian Religion, and submitted to Baptism under King Basilides. Now
let me tell you, this is that formidable Nation which has ruined the Power and
Dominion of the Abessines; insomuch, that they have torn from the Abessine King
above the half of those Territories which his Ancestors enjoyed; for after
their Irruption out of Bali, they made themselves Masters of the Provinces of
Gedmam, Angota, Dawara, Wed, Fatagar, Ifat, Guragea, Ganza, Conta, Damota,
Waleka, Bizama, part of Shewa, and many intermixed Kingdoms. Nor had they
stopped there, had they not, being rent into Divisions among themselves, turned
their Arms one against another, and given the Habessines a little breathing
time: for Concord among Equals rarely long attends Prosperity. At this time
they are divided into certain Tribes, (Seventy or more,) and as it were into
Two Nations; of which the more Westerly are by the Habessines called Bertuma
Galla, those that lie to the East, Boren Galla: those Easterly and Southerly,
in a manner encircle Habassia, and harrase it with frequent Incursions. They
have also separated Cambata and Enarea from the rest of the Body, as having
subdued the Kingdoms that lie between; which makes it very difficult for the
Abessine Prince to convoy home the Tribute of those Kingdoms. Thus there is a
necessity for the Habessines to be always in War with these People; nor is
there any hopes of regaining their ancient and pristine Glory, unless that
Nation be first reduced into order. The King has prudently made use of their
Intestine Discords; for he has placed the Revolters in Dembea and Gojam, and
successfully makes use of their Arms against their Countrymen: for as they are
the most excellent Antidotes, which are composed of the most Venomous Animals
themselves; so the Barbarians themselves are the most prevalent Force against
the Barbarians.

Now let us take a view of the Kingdom of Zandero, till lately undiscovered,
although contiguous to Habessinia, as being not above four or five days from
it. The Inhabitants are but little more civil than the Gallans, only that they
acknowledge a King, and have an awful respect for something, whether it be God
or Devil. The King being dead, the next of Kin retire into the Wood, and there
modestly wait the Election of the Nobility, who in quest of their King newly
Elected among themselves, enter the Wood, guided by a certain Bird, of the
Eagle-kind, which by the Noise it makes discovers the Concealed Person:
presently they find him surrounded with a Guard of Lions, Dragons, and
Panthers, (d) assembled together by a sort of Incantation to the Ancients
unknown: At first he makes a resistance against the Electors, and wounds those
that he can, that he may seem to be Constrained to take the Government upon
him: soon after, as they are going along, another Gang, to whom it belongs of
ancient Custom, endeavor to Rescue their King from the other Party, claiming
to themselves the Honor of being the Persons that set the Crown upon the
King's Head, and purchasing the hopes of Royal Favor, by means of a seeming
Sport, which oft-times proves very Bloody. Thus instead of Inauguration, the
African Gentiles think it Lawful to atone the Devil with human Blood. The King
proud in the height of Poverty, not contented with the few steps to his Throne,
gets upon the Beam of his House, from whence he looks down, as from a Gallery,
and gives Answers to Ambassadors. Antony Fernandez, Traveling with the
Habessinian Ambassador into that Kingdom, having viewed this same Lybian
Sovereign, compares him for color and gesture to a Rampant Monkey. Nor does
the word Zendero, which is the Name of the Kingdom intimate much less, in
regard that Zendero signifies an Ape. Tellezius adds, That it is the Custom of
those Barbarians, if their King be wounded to kill him, which is conformable to
the Nature of Monkeys, who having received a wound, tear and scratch it so
long, till their Entrails drop out, or that they lose all their Blood.

The next Kingdom is Alaba, conterminous Easterly to Cambat; the Governor of
which, in the Sixteenth Year of this Century was called Alico. To the East,
Habessinia is bounded by vast Deserts, and open Solitary level Wildernesses,
and therefore altogether unknown. Southward, it joins to the Kingdom of Sennar
or Fund, Governed by its peculiar King, formerly a Tributary to the Abessines,
but now Absolute. He Possessed a part of the ancient Nubia, near to which
adjoined the Kingdom of Balou, whose Inhabitants are by the Portugueses called
Balous: their King was formerly Lord of Suaqena, and in friendship with the
Abessines; now he only receives the half of the Maritine Tribute from the
Turks. From what we have said, it may be easily gathered, with how many
Adversaries and Enemies Ethiopia is surrounded; so that the Abersines may not
improperly compare their Country to the Flower of Saffron Denguelat, set about
with Thorns. For being perpetually struggling with their Foes, they rather
apply themselves to the Arts of War, then Peace; which seldom thrive amidst the
Noise of War and public Contention.

An Addition.
It remains to speak of the Portugals in Habessinia, who are neither Africans
nor Forreiners; for that some time since they have submitted themselves to the
Habessine Jurisdiction. For of the Four hundred, which Christopher Gamez
brought to the succor of the Abissines in the Adelan War, about One hundred
and seventy superviving, in the space of one Age multiplied so fast, that when
the Fathers of the Society came thither, they were able to Muster Fourteen
hundred Fighting men: a small handful, but very considerable to the Party to
which they adhere, as retaining their ancient Courage and dexterity in handling
their Arms; for the use of Firearms superior to the Habessines or any of the
Barbarians.

When the War with the Adelenses was ended and Grainus slain; having certain
Lands and Possessions granted them by Claudius, they chose themselves Wives,
got Children, and being furnished after the manner of the Country with Mules
and Servants and other necessaries, began to live comfortably; for while the
success of their assistance was fresh in memory they were courted, and every
where kindly entertained, and had the free liberty of their Religion: but these
Privileges were abridg'd by Menas successor to Claudius. They impatiently
brook'd to see their kindness so ungratefully retalliated; it being the nature
of Soldiers rather to do, than receive injuries. However, their Lands were
taken away, (for jealousy began to Rule) or else exchanged for worse, and
those bordering upon the Enemy; so that at length the Kings of Portugal were
forced to allow them Twelve hundred Patacks a year to maintain them. In this
last Century while the Fathers of the Society flourished they wanted for
nothing, but lived in great Prosperity: but the Fathers losing their Credit,
they were again reduced to the extremity of Misery. So that it was the fear of
Mendez, lest in that miserable Poverty, forgetful of their Native Language and
their Ancestors, they should revolt to the Religion and Customs of the
Habessines.

The End of the First Book.
CONCERNING Their Political Government. BOOK II.
CHAP. I. Of the Kings of the Abessines, their Various Titles, their Names and
Arms.
The King of the Abessines why called Prester John? The King of Portugal sends
to discover the Indian Trade, and to find out Prester John; One of them not
finding him in India, causes a false Report in Europe. The true Presbyter John
in Asia. Why so called? Ridiculous Expositions of his Name. The true Title of
the Kings of Abessinia. They have a double Name relating to their Baptism, and
the Government; sometimes treble, which renders the Story uncertain. Their
Arms. Their Titles. The Queens Title, retained during Life. The Title of the
Noble Women.

THE King of the Habessines has been hitherto known to the Europeans by no
other Title than that of Presbyter John, which was first given him by the
Portugueses. The Occasion thus: Peter the Son of Peter, Prince of Portugal,
returning home from Venice, carried along with him a Treatise of Paulus
Venetus, being a Discourse of the Affairs of India; Itiner. c. 52.
wherein many things were more especially and magnificently written concerning
Presbyter John: which as the Portuguese Chronicles witness, was the chief
Motive to prosecute the Design of the Indian Navigation, that Henry the Son of
John the First had begun. He being induced into a certain belief that there
might a Compass be fetched about Africa, by which means the Passage would be
open into India, as having read in the Relations of the Ancients, that Hanno
the Carthaginian, sailing out of the Streights of Gibraltar, came at length
through the Ocean into the Red Sea, and sent a Navy into the unknown Atlantic
Sea, to discover the Shore of Africa. Whose Design John the Second pursuing, to
bring the Discovery to Perfection, sent two Portugueses, Skilful in the Arabic
Language, Peter Covillian, and Alphonsus Payva, to try what they could do;
among other things, giving them more especially in charge, to find out that so
much celebrated Presbyter John, that most wealthy King as he was reputed,
either in Asia or India, hoping easily to obtain a League and Friendship with
him, as a Christian Prince. They Traveled through Egypt several ways into
India, and after a long and vain Search for Prester John, Payva came home; but
Peter more inquisitive, at length in some of the Ports of the Red Sea, heard
much talk of a most Potent Christian King of the Abessines, that used to carry
a Cross in his Hands; as also of his Subjects, who were great Favorers if not
Followers of the Christian Religion. Believing it therefore to be of little
moment whether this famous Monarch lived in Asia or in Africa, he certainly
persuaded himself, as being Ignorant both in History and Geography that this
was the Prince so much sought after; and thereupon gave Intelligence thereof to
his own King, while he himself continued his Journey into Ethiopia, with a
resolution to take a view of this Celebrated Presbyter Emperor, who was looked
upon as another Pope. These glad Tidings the Portugals sooner believed, than
considered; and so spread the News all over Europe for real Truth; Credulity
gaining easily upon those that are ignorant of Foreign Affairs and Kingdoms.
And now the Learned Men began to enquire into the Cause and Original of this
same Appellation. As it is the Custom generally to search for true Originals of
feigned Names, and wrest them after a strange manner to make good their own
Opinions.

We find among the most Eminent Historians, that formerly there was a certain
Christian Prince, that reigned in the utmost Parts of Asia, not far from the
Kingdom of Tenduc toward The most Skilful Geographers teach us, That Cataya is
no peculiar Kingdom, but a Part of North China. See Newhostus's China Embassy.
Cataya; who being of great Power and Fame, was by the Neighboring Persians,
to signify his remarkable Sanctity, called Prester-Chan, or Prince of the
Adorers; that is to say, Christians; or as Scaliger will have it, Fristegiani,
the Apostolic Prince. However the Name is to be pronounced, we shall not
contend; but this is certain, that the unskilful Vulgar having learnt the Name
from the Italians, who at that time were great Traders into the East, called
him by the Italian Name of Priest, or Pretegianni or Giovanni: after which, the
same Name prevailed with all the People of Europe.

Thus his Name and his Fame continued for some Ages, though under much
obscurity. For few understood, that that same Asiatic Prester Chan was Scal. in
his Notes ad Comp. Ethiop. but by what Authority he writes that the Ethiopians
were beaten out of Asia by the Tartars, I cannot apprehend.
driven out of his Kingdom by Cenchi or Cynges, King of the Tartars. Therefore
for this reason, because the Portugueses were greatly mistaken, first in the
Name, and secondly, in the thing it self; that Name was given to this African
King, which belonged to a King reigning some Ages since in Asia, some Thousands
of Miles distance.

Now after this Surname prevailed among the Habessinians, and yet there could
be found no Cause or Signification of the same, they began to find out In the
Itineracie of Hierome Wolsus.
words Foreign, and altogether from the purpose to uphold their own Vanity, as
Gian-Belul, Beldigian, Tarasta Gian: one among the rest super-exquisitely
Critical, persuading himself that Prete-Janni was faulty, would have it to be
Pretious-John, as a Title more becoming the Person of a King. This Epithete the
Pope once assumed, and that he might not be thought to be in an Error, many
there were that obstinately maintained it; l. 2. c. 2.
so that Tellezius had much ado to instruct them better. It would be too
tedious to rehearse the Originals of these Chimera's: only we must take notice
of this by the way, that Beldi-gian, and Taras-ta-gian were the figments of Men
of no Credit; but Gian-Belul derives its Original from the Cries of
Petitioners, with which they address themselves to the King. But setting aside
all these idle Derivations, and Surmises, which are ridiculous even to the more
ingenious sort of Habessines themselves, most certain it is, that the Name of
the King of the Habessines is no more in the Ethiopic Language than Negus,
King; But in the Titles which both he himself, and all the Habessines use, he
is called Negusa Nagast Erroneously Nuguca Nagasta in Tellezius, l. 1. c. 2. p.
5.
Zaitjopia; King of the Kings of Ethiopia, As Urreta, and Tzagaxi.
in Reference to some Rulers of Provinces, and Viceroys that are under him, who
are also dignified with the Title of Negus, or Nagash. In the Amharic Dialect
he is saluted Hatzeghe, which they render Supreme Prince; and given to none but
to the Prince, as the French in their Address use the word Sir. Hence the
Arabian word Aticlabassi, or as Ortelius pronounces it, Asiclabassi; compounded
from the forementioned word, Hatzeghe, the Arabic Article El, and the National
name Habesh, Hatzeg-el-Habesh; or Supreme Prince of the Habessines. When they
add the Proper Name, they cut the word short, Hatze, as Hatze-Susneus,
Hatze-Jacob; Hatze-Basilides. The Persians and Indians honor him with the
Title of Padeshah, which is given to none but the greatest Kings in the Empire;
as to our German Empire; the Kings of India, Persia, Turkey, and China, who have
several Governors and Princes under their Subjection, which the common People
call Emperors; and as this King by Tellez is called in the Portugal Language, O
Emperador Abexim, Emperor of the Abessines: which his Title seems to Intimate,
in regard a King of Kings may not unproperly be called an Emperor. Neither
shall we derogate in the least from his Title, as being so highly Eminent above
all the Barbarous Kings of Africa, both for his Power, and the Honor of being
a Christian. Among the Ancient Arabians, the Kings were always called Najashi,
as the Kings of Pharao in the Egyptian Language signifies a King, Joseph. L. 8.
c. 5. al. c. 2. Bochart in Hieroz, P. II. L. V.
Egypt were called Pharo's; and the Roman Emperors Caesar's. But as to the
Proper Name of the King; it was the ancient Custom, that at his first coming to
the Crown, he was saluted by the Soldiery with a new Name, for lucks sake; and
generally the change was made of the Christian Name. However they do not cast
it quite off, as the Popes do, but assume both together. Thus Zar-a-Jacob in an
Epistle to the Tome of Councils, writes himself Zar-a-Jacob, and our Imperial,
or Inauguration Name Constantine. This Name designed for a good Omen, generally
signifies Reverence and Veneration, as Atznaf-Saghed; Venerable to the Ends of
the Earth; Melec-Saghed, a venerable Ruler. Sometimes they take the Names of
Gems; as Adamas-Saghed, the venerable Diamond. Encua-Saghed, or Wanag-Saghed, a
Precious Gemm. This was the Name of David, the Son of Naod, the Father of
Claudius. Whence I believe it came to pass, that his Ambassador Tzagazaabus,
being sent into Portugal, called him Precious John, instead of Prete-Gianni, as
judging that the Person could not but be precious, that bare the Name of a
Precious Gem. Sometimes several Names, and those variously pronounced are
clapped together. For that same David, besides the two Names already mentioned,
was Baptized Etana Denghel, The Virgins Incense; or as others will have it,
Lebna Denghel, The Virgins Storax. But this multitude and variety of Names
often renders the History imperfect, while many times that is spoken of many
Persons, which should be only said of one. Thus that famous King Caleb, that
ruined the Kingdom of the Homerites, was by the Greeks called Elesbaas.

The King's Seal which they use in Sealing their Letters, is a Lion holding a
Cross, with this Motto: The Lion of the Tribe of Juda has won.

Ridiculous therefore are those Arms which are set forth by a certain French
Author in the Fabulous History of Tzagaxi, and which the Impostor himself
assumed in his Epistles to John Wisling, a Physician of Padua.

King David's Titles which are vulgarly published, are very tedious and
corrupted; but here by us amended.

I Etana Denghel, The Virgins Incense, by my Name in Baptism; by my
Inauguration Name called David, beloved of God, the Pillar of Faith, descended
from the Tribe of Judah, the Son of David, the Son of Solomon, the Son of the
Pillar of Sion, (Amda Tzeonis) The Son of the seed of Jacob, Zar-a-Jacob. The
Son of the hand of Mary (Baeda-Mariami) the Son of Nahu, or Naod, according to
the Flesh. Here some have interlarded ( The Son of St. Peter and Paul,
according to Grace) that there might be something to oppose the Flesh. Emperor
of the Upper and Lower Ethiopia, and of many other Kingdoms and Provinces; King
of Shoa, Gafata, Fategara, Angota, Bara, Dawara, Hadea, Bali, Ganza, Vanga,
Gojam, where are the Fountains of Nile, Amhara, Bagemdra, Dembea, Vagna, Tigra,
Sabaim, whence the Queen of Sheba, Midre Bahr, etc. Methinks I am now writing
out not the Abessine, but the long Scroll of Russian Ostentation. But the
Portugals taking the Advantage of the Abessine Simplicie, swelled up this Title
for them, or else over-perswaded the Habessines to do it themselves, that after
the European manner, their Epistles, which Alvarez was to (g) carry to the Pope
and the King of Portugal, might render his Negotiation more formidable and
magnificent. For neither before nor after did the Letters which the Habessinian
Kings sent to the Princes of Europe, appear with any such tumid Style or
ostentatious Loftiness.

The first Letter from Helena brought by Matthew into Portugal, began with
only a bare Salutation without any Title; to omit the false and forgotten
names of Kingdoms in those other forged Titles. Again, how nonsensical it is
for a Prince to mention such an uncertainty as the Queen of Sheba's Country, or
the Fountains of Nile among the Titles of his Empire? as if the Fountains of
Nile were such a Miracle to the Abessines, as they were to the Greeks and
Latins. What a pleasant thing it would be if any one should add to our
Emperor's Titles, the Fountains of the Danaw in the Dukedom of Schawben, which
were also unknown to the ancient Philosophers? How idly are those proper names
of Son of the Pillar of Sion; Son of the Seed of Jacob; Son of the hand of
Mary, turned into Appellatives? Then for Naod, Alvarez reads Nabu; which makes
me believe him to be the Author of that surreptitious Title; because he
mistakes the word all along in his Itinerarie. But to insist no longer upon
these figments, the Genuine style of the Ethiopic Letters, which was made known
and attested to me by Gregory is also to be found in Tellezius, where the King
writing to the Pope, uses only this Introduction;

Let the little book of the Letter from Malec-Saghed, King of the Kings of
Ethiopia come to the hands of the Holy Roman Patriarch.

In the same manner, writing to the King of Spain.

Let the little book of the Epistle or Letter from Atznasf-Sagned, King of the
Kings of Ethiopia, come to the hands of our Brother, the Lord Philip, King of
the Kings of Spain.

Thus he also writes to his Subjects.

Let the Codicile of the Letter sent from Sultan-Saghed King of the Kings of
Ethiopia come to the hands of our Servant N. N. Hear what we say to thee, and
what we write to thee.

But Tellezius, a Person of a more excellent Wit, condemns and laughs at this
Catalogue, of which, he accounts Damianus-Goez to be the Author. He himself
produces another, as appears by the Order of the Kings, and the years of their
Reigns, wherein he has traced the Succession as far back as from King Solomon,
trusting to the Credit and Tradition of the Habessines. So that he numbers
ninety and nine Kings, but does not name them all.

He also omits all the Kings of the Zagean Family, as unlawful Successors,
though it be the part of a Historian, to recount as well the evil as the good,
the unjust, as well as the just Princes, in honor, of their Virtues, and in
detestation of their Vices. Moreover he says, it is not the least part of that
Glory which belongs to the Abbessines, that they have such a long and ancient
Series of Kings. Nor is it to be questioned, that though they cannot fetch
their pedigree from Solomon, yet they are able to deduce it from Atzbeha and
Abreha, two Brothers, under whom the Christian Religion was first received
among the Axumites; and may contend for antiquity of descent, with the most
ancient Royal Families of Europe: not to speak of the diuturnity of the
Monarchy, which is much more ancient. Formerly the Sea the learned Egyptian
Cronical Canon of Sr. John Marsham, and the Authors by him cited.
Egyptians boasted the antiquity of their Kingdom, before that of all other
Nations. The Sea John Newhoff's description of China, c. 8.
Chinese extend the Pedigree of their Kings beyond the Flood. Johannes Magnus
reckons up Kings of Swedland from the Deluge. Others in other places take the
same liberty, whether out of love to flatter or fiction I cannot tell: as if
there were more pleasure in deceiving the Credulous, then shame in being
deceived by the Wise. For no wise men will contaminate their works with such
Fables; or if indeed such Kings had ever been, what does it signify to them,
or their posterity, if nothing more be known of them but only a monstrous kind
of a name? Our Gregory had never See the Catalogue annexed to Tzagaxi's
fabulous History, and Jerome Veechietti, c. 39.
heard of that same Cusus not his Nephevvs, whom these Genealogy Writers put in
the Front. But being asked concerning King Arwe, he made answer, that there was
an ancient Tradition among them that the most ancient Ethiopians worshipped for
their God a huge Serpent, in that language called Arwe-midre. Whence it came to
pass that some would have Arwe for the first King: but however that he was
slain by one Angab; who for that bold attempt was created King, and had for his
Successors Sabanut, and Gedut; Tellez, omitting all these Ethnic Kings as
fictitious, begins from the Queen of Sheba; whom we shall follow, rejecting
that fabulous and corrupt Catalogue which numbers up a hundred seventy and two.

CHAP. III. Of the Salomonean Family, which is said to have its Original from
Menile-heck the Queen of Sheba's Son, who came to visit Solomon.
The Ethiopians derive their Kings from the Queen of Sheba. The relations of
Tellez and Josephus: Both reconciled. The Tradition of the Arabians: Their
Contention with the Abessines. Mendez his Argumuets for the Abessines. The
Opinions of Tellez and Gregory. The Author suspends his judgment for several
reasons.

WE find in Sacred Writ (that we may begin at the Fountain of Antiquity) that
the Queen of Sheba came to Jerusalem to hear and behold the Wisdom of Solomon,
and that she brought along with her, precious Gifts, as Gemms, Gold, and
Spices. Our Savior tells us, A Queen of the South, (...), that came from the
ends of the Earth to hear the Wisdom of Solomon. The Ethiopic version renders
the Queen of the South Nagasta-Azeb, Tellez erroneously takes Azeb for a proper
name, p. 63.
which signifies the same thing.

Her therefore the Ethiopians assert to be their Queen; and have her History
written at large, but mixed with sundry Fables. We shall transcribe the Sum of
it out of Tellez, who says, That the Queen of Ethiopia Maqueda, understanding
from her Merchant Tamerin the certainty of the Report which had bin spread
abroad concerning the great Power and Wisdom of Solomon, with a great train of
her Nobility, and Royal presents gave him an Interview at his own Court; where
she learnt from him the true Worship of God: And at her return, after a certain
space of time she brought forth her Son Menilehec begot by Solomon, and whom he
had named David. This young Prince was afterward sent to Jerusalem, to his
Father, where by his order and care he was Exactly instructed in the Law of
God. Being grown up, he was anointed King of Ethiopia, and sent back into his
own Kingdom, accompanied with several noble Israelites and Doctors of the Law,
who were joined with him, as Friends and Companions, and Ministers of State;
among the rest went also Azaria, the Son of Zadoc the High Priest. And this is
that Prince from whom all the Habessine Kings and the chiefest of the Nobility
derive their Pedegrees to this day.

But then follows a Tale no less insipid, then misbecoming the new King. That
these noble Jews, nefariously and Sacrilegiously took away with them the Ark of
the Covenant, together with the Tables of the Ten Commandments, the Temple
being carelessly looked after, and the Gates being left open as it were by the
Providence of God. Presently the Mother, upon his return, resigned her Kingdom
to her Son David, obliging him and all the Nobility of the Nation, That they
should never for the future admit a Woman to rule over them; but only males of
the Line of David.

But it has bin the Long and Serious Enquiry of the Ancients, of what Country
and of what Progeny this same Queen of Sheba was. Josephus, while he writes
the Antiquities of the Jews, an Author not to be contemned; tho in Foreign
matters not so well versed, affirms her to be one Nicaule, mentioned hy
Herodotus. And yet in the Modern Editions of Herodotus, there is no such Name
to be found, unless she should be the same whom he calls Nitocris. That
Nicaule, according to Josephus, was not only Queen of Ethiopia, but of Egypt;
in which it is to be feared he is foully mistaken. However, that she came out of
Ethiopia, many of the Ancients agree, as Origin, Austin, and Anselm, whom
Cardinal Toletus Cites. Others on the contrary, declare her to have come out of
Arabia, as Justin, Cyprian, Epiphanius, Cyril, Alexandrinus, Cardinal Baronius,
Suarez, Lorinus, and at large Pineda in his Treatise of the Acts of Solomon;
where he labors by ten Reasons to confirm his Opinion. Of which, those that
seem to carry most weight are these: That Saba is seated in Arabia to the South
of Judea. That Camels, Spice, Gemms and Gold are more consistent with Arabia
than with Ethiopia. But these different Opinions are easily reconciled; if as
many of the Old Writers held, the ancient Ethiopia extended it self into
Arabia. For they assert the Sabeans and Homerites to have bin Nations of
Ethiopia, which without question were formerly seated in Arabia the Happy. That
Region which the Hebrews call by the Name, of Cush, by the 70 Interpreters is
rendered Ethiopia. From hence Moses chose his Wife, who is called the Ethiopess;
and yet that County is a part of Arabia, according to the Common acceptance
now a days, whence the Arabians are called Cushites. Therefore was the Ethiopia
of the Ancients twofold, Asiatic and African, or Oriental and Western. For the
Ancients did not limit the principal Parts of the World as we do now; while
they extended India into Africa, and brought Ethiopia into Asia, and believed
that the Indians inhabited beyond the Ethiopians. Nor did they think that Asia
and Africa were distinct parts of the Orb of the Earth, but only particular
Regions. Egypt seemed to belong sometimes to Asia, sometimes to Africa; and
others made Nilus, to be the bounds between those two Continents. And, which is
most remarkable, the Ancient Arabia was not of so large an Extent, as now the
Modern is. For the Sabeans and Homerites were placed beyond the Limits of
Arabia. The Arabian Gulf was also taken only for a part or Bay of the Red
Sea. All which things the Geographers of later Times have much more distinctly
reformed. So that although by Us, the Sabeans are accounted to be a Region of the
Southern Arabia that lies upon the Indian Ocean, and consequently toward the
utmost Limits of Land there, yet may the Queen of Sheba, according to the
Opinion of the Ancients, be said to come out of Ethiopia. Nor does it argue any
thing of absurdity to conjecture that she might at the same time command that
part of Ethiopia which lay upon the Opposite Shore, and at so near a distance.

The Arabians made no question, but that she was descended from the Line of the
Sons of Homer, or the Homerites, and that she was the daughter He was the
twenty first, as is to be seen in the Catalogue of the Homerite King, which the
learned Pocock set forth in his Specimen of an Arabian History p. 59.
of King Hod-hadi, They call her Belkis, and affirm her to have bin, not the
Concubine, but the Anubian Geographer, speaking of the City Mareb, There, says
he, was Belkis born, the Wife of Solomon the Son of David.
wife of Solomon: from whence we gather, that they themselves believed that
Tradition to be true, that she had a Son begotten by Solomon. The Arabs and
Ethiopians contend about this, to this very day, as if the Modern Franks should
contend with the Germans about Charles the Great. Alphonsus Mendez the
Patriarch adheres to the Tradition of the Abessines, In his Epistle to Tellez
us.
moved thereto by these Arguments: because the continuation of Officers both
Civil and Military, and other customs and Ceremonies made use of in the Hebrew
Commonwealth so long since, are still observed there to this day. So that
Ethiopia seemed to him to be a certain lively representation of the Ancient
Hebrew Government. And his other reason was, for that he understood many places
of Scripture much better since he came into Ethiopia. Tellezius, none of the
mildest Censurers of the Ethiopic Traditions, in this thing, agrees throughout
with the Patriarch, adding, That it ought to seem strange to no Person, that
Solomon, who took to wife the Daughter of Pharaoh, and also loved the
Moabitish, Idumean, Sidonian and Hethic Women, should desire to taste the
Ethiopic Variety. The Habessines also called the Posterity of their Kings
Israelites: neither do they think any other persons worthy of the Scepter but
the Male Issue of Menilehec; who for that reason bear the Lion in their Royal
Coats, with this Imprese, The Lion of the Tribe of Judah has overcome: to
demonstrate that they are descended from the Tribe of Judah, and the Line of
David: nor that Candaces Eunuch learnt the Orthodox Religion from any other
then from the Israelites. Gregory also averred to me the same things, and that
the Book wherein those things were recorded, was called the Glory of the Kings,
and was of great authority among them; and that no person in Ethiopia doubted
of the Truth thereof. He added, That all the Offices, both Civil and Military,
of which the Patriarch discourses in his Letter, (q) are still continued in the
same Families, and that they who Enjoy them, can make it appear how long those
Employments have been officiated by their Ancestors, from Generation to
Generation. However, I do not think it convenient, to augment or lessen the
Credit of these things, until those Ethiopic Institutions, Offices, Customs
and Manners, of which the Patriarch speaks in general, shall be more
particularly made known to me; that I see the Genealogies of those public
Ministers, whom Gregory mentions; and that I hear the answers to such doubts as
I shall propose. I find indeed the Consent of the Nation, and the affirmation
of their Kings; for Claudius calls his Ancestors Israelitish Kings: and at the
time of Inauguration, they proclaim the Creation of the Israelitish King: and
they who are kept in the Rock Geshen, bear the Name of Israelites: And lastly,
I find some Rites and Customs agreeing with those of the Jews. Nor is it any
wonder to me more than to Tellezius, or disagreeable from Salomon's practice,
that after so many profound and knotty Riddles unloos'd, he should unty the
Queen of Sheba's Marriage Girdle. Again, if the Habessines are Colonies of the
Sabeans and Homerites, it may as well be granted that the Queen of the South
derived her Pedigree from them. Yet there are many things that seem to persuade
the contrary. For as to the Israelitish Rites, we shall hereafter show, that
they might have bin introduced long after Salomon's time upon other grounds;
and that they were common as well to the Gentiles as to the Christians. For if
the true Worship of God began from that time, how came it to be preserved
without Synagogues, and the Sacred Volumes? But they have them not, either in
the Hebrew Language, nor translated into their own. Nor does the Appellation of
Israelitish Kings, argue the Verity of their Descent, no more than if any one
should assert our Emperors descended from the Ancient Romans. But if, as the
Posterity of the Israelites they continue in their Offices, or are so
sollicitous to preserve their Posterity; why not as well in preserving the
Histories of their Ancestors? and in perpetuating Kindnesses between their
Relations and those of the same Tribe or Family? why not more choice in their
Marriages? more earnest in Visiting the Temple of Jerusalem? and in giving
mutual assistance to their Brethren? Especially when Rehoboam the Brother of
Menehelec, suffered that great Loss of the revolt of the Ten Tribes? and when
he was invaded by Sisack King of Egypt, whom no man better than the King of
Ethiopia could have diverted? when the Jews were oppressed by so many Enemies;
when they were carried away Captive to Babylon? when ruined by the Kings of
Assyria? and when subdued by the Romans? For then the Passages were free
thorough Arabia or Egypt; and the Red Sea was open. Lastly, which is of most
moment, if the Ethiopians received their divine Ceremonies and Religion from
Solomon, why not his human Learning? For Learning and Religion generally go
together, as may be proved by the Examples of many Nations. But as to this,
their manner of writing and reading differs very much, though some of their
letters seem to be borrowed from the Samaritans. Lastly, the Jews inhabiting up
and down all over Ethiopia, it would be of great Concern to put these Questions
to them, When? and how they came thither? What they think of these Traditions
of the Habissines? and what they find in their Books concerning them? it not
being probable that all their Books should be lost in a Country so well
defended by nature? But we have made too long a Digression: now let us return
to Menilehec.

CHAP. IV. of Menilehec, the Son of Makeda, and of his Posterity, to the
interrupted Succession of the Salomonians.
Menilehec first King; the interpretation of his name: nothing certain of his
Son or Posterity. Christ born in the Reign of Bazen. No mention here of Queen
Candaces. She reigned in Meroe, not in Habessinia. Abreha and Atzbeha, Brothers
and Kings: first Christian Kings: A Triumvirate of Kings. Their Successors. The
Subversion of the Kingdom of the Homerites by Caleb. He restores Nagra to the
Christians. His Successors: Saif-ibn-de-Jazan advanced by the Persians; Slain.
Bazen the last, submits to the Mahumetans. The Greek Histories Confused:
Caleb's Encomium. The Martyrdom of the Nagranites. Caleb's Successors: The
Salomonean Line interrupted.

NOW then they acknowledge Menilehec-El-Haqim to be the first King. Which name
some interpret, As He. Others, As God created him like me. Neither of which
interpretations can be picked from the Ethiopic Language. However,
Ebn-El-Haqim, is apparently in Arabic the Son of Wisdom, or of Solomon.
Tellezius gives to his Son the name of Zadgur; whereas Gedur, in Marianus
Victor's Catalogue precedes Queen Makeda. Then, says he, four and twenty Kings
succeeded, till Bazen reigned; and yet in the next Chapter, writes him to be
the Twentieth from Menihelec the Son of Solomon: but neither does he name them,
neither will we detain the Reader amidst these uncertainties.

There is less doubt, that Christ our Savior was born in the time of Bazen,
more particularly in the Eighteenth Year of his Reign. Here is no mention made
of Candaces, whom some of the Ethiopians acknowledge for their Queen: in this
contradictory to themselves, while they will not admit a Female to the Throne.
And therefore it is more proper, that we should in expounding that place in the
Acts, c. 8. v. 27. which speaks of the Queen of Ethiopia's Eunuch, find out
some other more probable part of Ethiopia bordering upon Egypt: which with
some probability we may conjecture to be the Island of Meroe; in regard that
Pliny testifies, That in that Island reigned a Certain Woman called Candace, and
that the succeeding Queens assumed that name afterward for many Years. After
Bazen, for the space of 327 Years Ethiopia was governed by Thirteen Kings, as
Tellezius records it. But he mentions not one of their names, perhaps because
he found there was nothing of certainty. From the time that Abreha is an Arabic
word, contractedly spoken. Abra: Erroneously taken for Abraham, which they
pronounce Ibrahim.
Abreha, and Atzbeha held the Scepter, the Ethiopic History has afforded much
more clearness and light, and the names of the Kings are more certainly
recited. Of these and several other Successive Kings, there is mention made in
the Ethiopic Liturgy, and otherwhere. For in their Commemoration of the Dead,
there is this Ejaculation, Remenber, Lord, Abreha, and Atzbeha, Kings of
Ethiopia. My Ethiopic Poet also gives them this Encomium.

Peace be to Abreha. and Atzbeha,
They in one Kingdom did the Scepter sway;
And yet in Love, and yet in Concord still,
They lived as Princes with one Heart and Will;
Like those good Men, that with Religious awe
Walked in the Precepts of Mosaic Law,
Their Lips the words of Christ's own Gospel taught;
To build him Temples with their hands they wrought.
They are applauded for their Concord; rare among Brothers, who are partners in
Royalty; yet that it may so happen, is clear by that great Sentence, A Kingdom
may endure Colleagues in Kingship, so They can but endure themselves. But much
more were they to be Extolled, for embracing the Christian Religion, at what
time Frumentius Preached; of which more in due place. But more then this, the
Habessines give us another Example of a Concording and Unanimous Triumvirate.
These Royal Triumvers were Atzfa, Atzfed, and Amey, who governed the Empire
long and prosperously by turns, as they agreed. A thing which the Habessines
will hardly persuade most people to believe; unless it were in reference to the
hearing such businesses as afterward required common Consultation, or the
executing such Decrees as were made by Common Consent; tho in such Transactions
likewise there must be harmony and agreement. To them succeeded Arado; Aladoba
and Alamid, at what time several Monks went out of Egypt into Ethiopia, to
propagate the Gospel. To Alamid succeeded his Son Tacena, and after him Caleb
his Nephew, who flourished in the time of the Emperor Justin, about the Year
522. The Greek and Latin Authors call him Eles baan: Perhaps from the Ethiopic
name of Baptism, Atzbeha, with the Arabic article El. El-Atzbeha, from whence
Eles baas. He was famous for the Subversion of the Kingdom of the Homerites,
and revenging the blood of the Christians slain by that Impious Dunawas: for
which he was placed in the Calendar of the Saints. It is a Story most worthy
remembrance; wherein the Arabic and Ethiopic Historians very punctually agree
with the Greeks and Latins. This You have the History at large in Baronius
Anuals, who, says he, had the Story from an Author of an unspotted Credit, and
the Writings of that time.
Dunawas was the Last King of the Sabeans, who were afterward called
Homerites, in opinion a Jew; and therefore one that afflicted the Christians
with a most dire Persecution. For he caused large Pitts to be dug, and then
commanded the Christians to be burnt therein in heaps, as it were for quicker
dispatch. Three hundred and forty perished in this manner in the City of Negra
by Niceph. Cullisto. l. 18. c. 6. by others Najram
Nagra, together with St. Areta, entombed in Fire. Caleb, being admonished by
the Patriarch, would not endure so much barbarous Cruelty; but with an Army of
a Hundred and twenty thousand Men, and a Navy of 423 Vessels, he crossed over
into Arabia, and having vanquished Dunawas, he he utterly destroyed the Kingdom
of the Homerites, restored Nagra to the Christians, and made St. Areta's Son
Governor of the place. To Dunawas succeeded Abreha Elasbram, Jacsum F. Masruk
F. but their Kingdom remained Seventy two years under the Yoke of the
Habessines. After these, Saif-ibn-Di-Jazan, of the race of the Homerites, by
the assistance of Anusherwan, King of the Persians, recovered the Throne of his
Ancestors, but was soon after slain by the Abessines. However, the Persians at
that time prevalent, set up over the Sabeans other Kings, whom the Abessines
opposed, and some they slew. And thus this Kingdom harrass'd with continual
Wars between the Persians and the Habessines, at length, when the Saracens
began to grow powerful, under Bazen, the last King, became tributarie to
Mahomet. And by this perhaps we are to understand what Abdelbachides writes
concerning a Nagash of the Abessines, whom he calls Atzhama, as if he had
revolted to Islamisin at the invitation of Mahomet. But these things are
confused and imperfectly delivered by the Arabes, Greehes and Latins; and
besides that, the diversity of names adds obscurity to the History. For as to
those Acts which Procopius attributes to Hellesthiaeus, King of Ethiopia, as if
he, having slain the King of the Homerites, (of which many were Jews) set up
another in his place, Emsiphaeus by name, and a Christian, those things are
proper to none but Caleb: in regard that Kingdom being destroyed by Caleb,
could not be again subverted by Ellesthiaeus. But as for those things which are
reported by Cedrenus and Nicephorus of Adad or David, a certain Ethnic King of
the Indian Axumites, who demolished the Kingdom of the Homerites, and by
occasion of a former vow, became a Christian, they are altogether false. For
that there is no other History than that which we have related of Caleb to this
purpose, we shall hereafter declare, when we came to discourse of the Original
Christianity in Ethiopia. For that the corrupt names of Damian, of Damnus, from
Dunaam, or Dunawas, and other Circumstances demonstrate. But it is no wonder the
History of the Homerites should be so confused among Strangers, when the
Arabians themselves complain, that among all other Histories that of the
Homerites is the most imperfect.

Our Poet before cited thus praises Caleb in the following Lines.

Peace be to Caleb, who with the Laurel wreathed;
Behind him left such Monuments of his Power.
To Salem he his Royal Crown bequeathed
An Offering to his dreaded Savior.
For he, great Hero, from his mighty deeds,
Vain glory scorned, that proud ambition feeds.
The dismal Slaughter of Sabean Host,
So dismal that not one alive remained,
Swelled not his thoughts of Victory to boast;
Yet glad to see his Sword so nobly stained.
Glad that by him the Homerites enslaved,
Martyrs were now revenged, and Christians saved,
Concerning the Martyrs of Nagra, the same Poet goes on thus.

Your beauteous Stars of Nagra I salute;
Such Themes would force loud Language from the Mute.
You brightly shine before the Mercy-Seat,
And like rich Gemms the world illuminate.
Oh may your Luster reconcile my Sin
Before the Judge of what my Crimes have bin.
Show him your blood which you for him have spilt,
And beg Pacification for my Guilt.
To Caleb succeeded Gebra-Meskel, or the Servant of the Cross, so named at his
Baptism, whom the Poet thus honors.

Peace to thee also, King of high renown,
That in the Strength of God so much have won.
Yet with thanksgiving, to thy heavenly Lord
Did still ascribe the Trophies of thy Sword.
Concord and Peace adorned thy happy days
Thy reign resounded only Hymns of praise.
Glory to God thy Pious Cares obliged;
And Peace on Earth from fear of thee proceeded.
The next to him in the Ethiopian Liturgy are Constantine, and Fresenna, or the
good Fruit.

Then followed an Interruption or discontinuance of this Line, in the time of
Delnoad, who reigned about the year of Christ 960. But then the Scepter was
usurped by another Race, of which we are next to discourse.

CHAP. V. Of the Zagaean Line, and the Kings that descended from that Race.
The Zagaean Line originally from the wickedness of a woman: the Successors
uncertain: yet some of them very Famous.

UPon the Death of Delnoad, the Zagean Family invaded the Kingdom, and enjoyed
it Three Hundred and Forty years. They first obtained it by the devices of a
wicked Woman. The word signifies Fire.
Essat by Name, Stigmatized for Unchastity, Sacrilege, and Avarice in the
highest degree. Her Successors are uncertain, and the Names which Marianus
Victor produces, together with the several years of their Reigns are very much
to be suspected; to omit what Tellezius learnedly writes, That the Queens are
never inserted in the Catalogues of those that Reign. Nevertheless, Victorius
nominates one Tredda-Gadez, who Murdered all the Posterity of the Salomonean
Family, that he might Establish the Kingdom to his Son. Yet in the midst of
the Slaughter, there was one young Lad of the Royal Blood, who making his
Escape to the Lords of the Kingdom of Shewa, most passionately zealous for the
Salomonean Line, was there privately preserved. The Kings of this Line are very
enviously traduced by Tellezius as unjust, and unworthy to be remembered; tho
it has honored Ethiopia with many Renowned Monarchs: of whom there is still a
happy Memorial both in the Ethiopic Liturgy, and among the Encomiums of my
Poet; as Degna Michael and Newaja-Christos, or the Wealth of Christ, who never
appears in Victorius's Catalogue: However he is thus Praised by the Poet.

Peace to Newaja, from whose Royal Loins
Illustrious Princes born for high designs,
Ennobling more their high Descent, his Praise
Advanced, and thence their own Renown did raise.
No wonder he died Poor; his Zeal was such
He stripped himself, his Temple to enrich.
Himself had built the House of God, and scorned
To leave God's House behind him unadorned.
But the most famous, and most renowned for his Magnificent Structures was,
Alvarez makes mention of him, c. 54. and 55. where he relates the same Story of
the swarm of Bees.
Lalibala, whose future Greatness was portended by a Swarm of Bees, that while
he was an Infant newly born, lighted upon his tender Body, without doing him
the least prejudice. Of him the Poet thus sings: To mighty Lalibala Peace,
Who stately Structures reared,
And to adorn the Pompous piles
For no Expenses spared.
By vast Expense and hideous pains,
The Rock a Church became:
The Roof, the Floor, the squared Sides
All one continued Frame.
No stones in blended Mortar laid
The solid parts divide;
Nature has carved all without,
Within the Workman's Pride.
But newly born, and hardly swathed,
The tender Infant lay;
When strait a Wonder, that portends
The Honor of that day.
A Swarm of Bees, Prophetic swarm!
His Princely Head surround,
Thus Jove himself on Ida Mount
The Martial Insect Crowned.
It was their Errand thus to show
The grandeur of the Child;
That he should Conquer and Command,
And yet be wondrous mild.
That done, as if by sight the face
Of Majesty they knew,
With such a fear as awed their stings,
Away again they flew.


This great Monarch when he came to Rule, sent for Artists out of Egypt, and
after a wonderful and unheard of manner of Building to that day, he did not
cement Stones or Bricks together with Lime, or Lome, nor join the Roof together
with Rafters, but hollowed whole solid Rocks, leaving Pillars for Ornament
where Pillars were requisite, the Arches and Walls being all of the same Stone.
Nor do the Rocks of Ethiopia withstand that kind of Structure, for that most of
them advance equilaterally toward the Sky, as if they had bin squared by Art;
and besides, the Stone is so soft and tender, that the Tools of the Artists
easily make their way. Alvarez gives an account of Ten Temples framed after
this wonderful manner, which were Four and twenty years finishing. He saw them
all, and gives you a draught of them in Picture, and lest any one should doubt
of the Truth of what he says, he confirms his Relation with an Oath. This
Magnificent King reigned Forty years; and after him his Son Imra ruled as many.
The last of this Race was Naacueto-Laab. Of him the Poet thus, Hail
Naacueto-Laab, thy Renown
I sing, and all the Glories of thy Crown
In Peace and Love, which thou did love, thy Reign
Concord and Peace did mutually sustain.
And thnt no fear of Death might him dismay,
God placed him where there is no end of Day.


CHAP. VI. Of the Salomonean Line, restored again by Icon-an-lac.
The Salomonean Family restored. The Successors of Icon-Im lac. Etana-Denghel
preferred before his Elder Brother. Helena a Woman of a great Spirit. David's
various Fortune. Claudius succeeds him: who restores his ruined Kingdom by the
Assistance of the Portugueses. His Encomium and miserable Death. The Succession
decided by Arms. Menas succeeds; his Cruelty. Bahrnagassus revolts.
Malac-Seghed succeeds; better than his Father: Prosperous in War, not in
Marriage. He designs his Brother his Successor; but repents, and Prefers his
Natural Son Jacob: He recommends his lawful Son to the Nobility upon his
Deathbed; but they Imprison him. Susneus in the same Danger, but Escapes. They
make Jacob a Child King: afterward Depose him, and place Za-Dengel in his
room; his Mildness and Fortitude: a bold act of his. His Kindness to Pays, and
the Latins cause him to be hated. A Conspiracy against him: he Consults the
Portugueses; despised the Counsel of Pays: He loses the Day, and dies in the
Field.

THE Zagean Family being thus Extinct, about the year of Christ 1300. The
Nobility of Shewa restored Icon-Imlac, a Prince of the Salomonean Race to the
Scepter of his Ancestors; whose Posterity have continued in Habessinia to our
time. Tellezius reckons up Sixteen Kings to Zar-a-Jacob, In his Account of
Sacred Times, L. VI. Vlt. Success. c. 44.
which we shall insert out of Vecchietti, adding the Ethiopic Names of them
which we have found mentioned in the Liturgy, or elsewhere. Icon-amlac, or as
the Ethiopians write him, 1. Aycuna-amiac. 2. Jagrea-Tzegon. 3. Bahar Sarda. 4.
Esbraad. 5. Cadem-Saghed. 6. Zen-Saghed. 7. Vdimrad. 8. Amde Tzegon. 9.
Scifaarad. 10. Udmaasfan. 11. David. 12. Theodorus.


Of whom the Poet thus makes mention in his 29 Encomium, June 3.

Hail Theodore, wide Ethiopia's King;
Thee, by thy Name Anbasa, must I sing.
For thee thy Mother Tzejon-Mogusa
TO adorn thy great Inauguration Day,
Whole Herds of Sheep, and fatted Oxen stew:
And not she only, for the Clouds to show
Themselves contributary to thy Feast,
Rained Fish from Heaven, to supply the rest.
13. Isaac. 14. Andreas. 15. Hesbinaani, whose Son was, 26. Amde-Jesus.
To him succeeded Zar-a-Jacob, by the Name of his Inauguration, Constantine. An
Emperor of great Renown, and inquisitive after Foreign Affairs: for he sent his
Ambassadors to the Council of Florence; of which more in due place.

Baeda-Marjam, as I Collect out of Alvarez, came to the Crown, about the year
1465. and died Ten years after, leaving his Widow Helena behind him, of whom
more anon.

Alexander ascended the Throne about the year 1475. and died in the year 1491.
At what time Peter Covillian found the way into Ethiopia; the first Portuguese
that did so.

Amda-Tzejon This Succession is taken out of Tellez, and agrees with the vulgar
Order of the Ethiopic Kings, which Gregory himself did not contradict. Alvarez
here erred very muth, or else forgot himself: for he apparently leaves out
Ambda-Tzeon. c. 59. and makes Alexander the Father of Naod, c. 98. and 89. when
he was really his Brother. He also calls Helena the Mother of David, when she
was his Grandmother; but, only looked upon as his Mother in respect of her
care. Neither is Tellezius without his Mistakes, for L. 2. c. 4. He omits
Ambda-Tzion, and writes that Helena never had any Children.
his Son, reigned but a short time, and dying without Male Issue, made way for
his Uncle.

Naod, The Son of Baeda-Marjam, who while his Brother Alexander possessed the
Government, was shut up in the Rock Gheshen; but the Male Issue failing, he was
called forth by the Nobility, and reigned Thirteen years. He died about the
year 1505.

Etana Dengel, or Lebna-Denghel, called afterward David, by his Inauguration
Name. Some few years expired, he assumed a third Name, Wanag-Saghed, which
Tzagazab interprets, Enkua-Saged, or the Precious Gem. He was the second Son of
Naod by his Wife Mogesa, the Nephew of Baeda-Marjam. For the Eldest, whom Naod
begat in the Rock of Amhanira, Helena and Marcus, the Metropolitan, who had
then the Government in their hands, did not think worthy to Rule, by reason of
his Pride and Cruelty; adding, That he was born when his Father was but in a
private Capacity before he came to the Crown: unless it were, that they thought
that they should carry a greater sway during the Minority of the young Prince.
For then was David but Eleven years of Age; as he himself declares in his
Letter to King Emanuel.

Helena therefore his Grandmother, took upon her the Management of Affairs, as
his Tut'ress, being preferred before the Mother; in regard the Junior Queens
always give place to the Senior, and then too she is always looked upon as the
King's Mother. A Woman of great Prudence and Courage, that has left a great
Fame behind her still in Ethiopia; insomuch, that King Susneus would often
praise her for her Virtue and Moderation. She is famous among the Europeans for
her Letters sent to Emanuel the First, King of Portugal, of which we shall
hereafter speak more at large. David at the beginning of his Reign very
prosperous in his Undertakings (for he had won several Victories from the
Adelans) after his Grandmothers Decease, as if he had now the Curb in his
teeth, giving himself up to Luxury, and the love of Women, was very Unfortunate
toward the end of his days. For being driven out of all his Kingdoms and
Territories, he was forced to betake himself with some few Soldiers to the Rock
Damo, where he died in the Forty sixth year of his Age. In this the more
unhappy, that during his Reign, the Nation of the Gallans, the Scourge of
Habessinia made their first Incursions out of Bali. He had four Sons; of whom,
the first Victor, died before the Father; of the other three we shall have
occasion to speak in due place. He was very well versed in Holy Writ, and in
the three first Councils, as may be understood by his Discourses with Alvarez.

Claudius, by his other Name called Atznaff-Saghed, the Son of David, came to a
Kingdom miserably shattered, and overburthen'd with Calamity; and lurking in
the utmost Confines of his Dominions, there attended some miraculous assistance
from Heaven; which soon after answered his Expectation; John the Second, King
of Portugal sending him Succor, under the Conduct of that most Valiant and
Noble Portuguese Christopher Gamas, who with a small Band of Four hundred
Portuguese Foot Soldiers, overthrew vast Armies of the Barbarians, and laid the
Foundations of regaining the Habessinian Empire. Claudius was a man of a most
Princely Port. For besides the outward Grace of his Person, he was endu'd with
many Virtues of the Mind, which made him judged by all worthy of the Royal
Dignity. The Fathers of the Society applauded him for a most Prudent Prince,
though otherwise not so well pleased with him, because he had not showed that
Affection to the Roman See, as they required; though he did not prohibit the
Divine Worship of the Latin Church; nor hindered the Roman Priests from the
free Exercise of their Religion. He was also Learned, and well instructed in
Ecclesiastical Antiquity. So that, as Tellezius witnesses, his Teachers seemed
illiterate in comparison of their Scholar. For in Disputes with the Fathers of
the Society, he himself for the most part would argue, with so much vehemence,
that sometimes he put them hard to it to make him an Answer. And when he
observed that the Habessines were blamed for retaining certain Judaic Rights
contrary to the Christian Laws, he put into Writing a succinct Confession of
Faith, by which he cleared all Objections, and excused himself and his
Subjects. That Confession we formerly In England, Anno 1667. It is also added
to our Ethiopic Lexicon and Grammar.
set forth, and shall publish again in our Commentary: So that the Fathers of
the Society could object nothing but Schism against so great and famous a
Monarch. He reigned Eighteen years and some Months, with great toil and
trouble, by reason of his continual Wars with the Adelans, who mindful of the
overthrows they had received, frequently attempted Revenge. The King stout of
hand and indefatigable, never refused Battle, till at last in the Month of
March, 1559. fighting against Nurus, the Captain of the Adelans, his Army being
vanquished, guarded only with Eighteen Portugueses, and Combating more
furiously than warily, he fell by an Immature but not unrevenged Death. He left
no Children behind him; whence it came to pass, that the Right of Succession
being very ambiguous in Ethiopia, the Contention was long dubious between his
Brother Menas, and Tascar, the Natural Son of Jacob, the second Brother
deceased. For this claimed the Kingdom in right of his Father, while he lived,
the Elder Brother, the other alleged himself to be the nearer in Blood, than
he who was Illegitimate. The Controversy being decided by the Sword, Tascar
was taken in the Battle, and thrown headlong down a Rock.

Menas, otherwise Erroneous here, some Historians ignorant that the word
signifies a Gem, call him Adam.
Adamas-Saghed, having obtained the Kingdom by Arms, being of a Cruel
Disposition, degenerated altogether from the Lenity, Sincerity, and Piety of
the Habessines; as if he had learnt the savageness of the Tvrks and Arabians,
among whom he had been long a Captive. For he hated the Portugueses, as minding
their own Affairs; and forbid the use of the Roman Religion, not suffering any
of the Habessines to go into the Latin Churches. He also revoked the Liberty
which his Predecessor Claudius had granted to the Wives and Families of the
Portugueses to frequent the Roman Chapels; which caused many to wish again for
the Clemency of Claudius, with which they were not contented however before. He
despised the Romish Bishop Andrew Oviedo, who in the Reign of Claudius, was
sent to make way for the new Patriarch; and for some Months kept him in Prison.
Nor was he much more kind to his own Subjects. For which reason, out of an
aversion to his Proceedings, they revolted from him in several Parts. Among the
rest, Isaac Bahrnagassus, a man in great Power, and skilled in Military
Discipline, calling the Turks to his Assistance upon the Twentieth of April,
1562. overcame the King in Battle, and slew him: to the great detriment of
Habessinia. For ever since that time, the Turks have been Masters of the Coast
of the Red Sea. He left three Sons, Sarza-Denghel, Lesanax, and Tazcar. Of
which the last died without Children.

Sarza-Denghel, taking the Government upon him, called himself Malac-Saghed,
and was Inaugurated after the ancient manner at Axuma. His Fortune was equal to
his Virtues; for he was stout of Hand, and wise in Counsel. And first he drove
the Turks, who were Masters of Dobarva, the Metropolis of the Maritime
Province, out of Tigra. He would also have driven them out of the Port of
Arkiko, and the Isle of Matzua, had he not been recalled to defend his Upland
Dominions from the Incursions of the Galans. These People by the Rapines and
Plunder of five and twenty years, while the Habessines were busied in so many
other Wars increased to that power, that now they overran Habessinia not with
scattering Troops, but with complete Armies. So that all the time of his Reign,
though otherwise prosperous in War, he was forced to struggle with them.
However he subdued Enarea, and caused the Prince thereof to turn Christian. For
he carefully observed the Christian Religion, according to the Constitutions of
the Church of Alexandria. The Latin Rites he left indifferent. And for the
Fathers of the Society; he often commended their Conversation of Life, and
their Studies, but despised their Doctrine, saying, That their Manners, and not
their Doctrine was to be imitated. Certainly Manners and Doctrine do not always
accord. And therefore, sometimes the Doctrine is to be approved, where the
Manners are not Correspondent; and sometimes the Manners are to be imitated,
where the Doctrine is not to be followed. But tho he were Prosperous in his
Affairs of Government and War; yet in his Marriage he was unfortunate; for his
Wife Mariamsena brought him many Daughters, but not one Son. He had two Natural
Sons, of which one was called Za-Marjam, and the other Jacob; but they could
not succeed by the Laws of the Tellezius tells us, l. 3. c. 14. that the
Ethiopian Laws will not allow Bastards to succeed. Which nevertheless is not
agreeable with what he says in another place, l. 3. c. 29.
Kingdom. And therefore it fell out with him as with many others, who are more
addicted to illicit Concubinage, than lawful Matrimony, that they want
Successors from their own Loins; and frequently expose their Kingdoms to War
and Bloodshed upon Disputes of Succession. First, therefore he showed to the
Nobility Za-Denghel, his Brother Lecanax's Son, as the Son of a Prince adorned
in Royal Habit. Then again, some few Months before his Death, he began to
change his mind, either envying a greater Adoration to the Rising than the
Setting Sun; or whether it were that Za-Denghel himself, certain of the
Succession gave the less respect to his Uncle, or whether his Disposition were
not grateful to the Nobility. However it were, Jacob, a Child of Seven years of
Age, never seen before to the King, came to Court; which was no obscure
intimation, that he would be preferred before Za-Denghel, as being of the
King's own Blood. The Grandees, whether they durst not admonish the King; or
whether they had an intention to usurp the Government, under pretense of being
Guardians to the Minor, consented to the King: But soon after they taught us to
understand how uncertain the Tranquillity of Kingdoms is, where the Right of
Succession is uncertain, or that there are no Rules; but that the grand Affairs
of a Kingdom are at the disposal of Courtiers, intent upon their own Interest.
Nevertheless, most wonderful to relate, when the King upon his return from the
War with the Gallans, fell sick, and found himself near his end, Right and
Justice more prevailed with him, than Hatred against his Brother's Son, or love
to his own Illegitimate, and therefore calling before him the chief of his
Nobility, he is reported to have spoken thus:

Seeing that the end of my life Approaches, I thought that next the Care of my
Soul, that of my Kingdom was the chiefest, the safety of which I have always
held no less dear to me, than the Salvation of my own Soul. True it is, that
having none Legitimate, I always loved Jacob as my own. And I have observed in
him Endowments of Mind not unworthy so fair an Inheritance; so that I could not
have had any reason to repent, had I Established him my Successor; nor you, had
you yielded him Obedience. But now I prefer the Love of my Country, and the
Laws of the Kingdom before my private Affection. Therefore it is, that I
recommend to your Allegiance Za-Denghel my Brother's Son, my nearest Kinsman,
stout in War, Mature in years, conspicuous for his virtues, and one that by
those virtues Merits the high Dignity which is due to him by Birth. Having thus
said, in a short while after he expired. An. 1596:


But as it was a thing absolutely unexpected by the Nobility, that the King
would change his Mind; so the Management of Affairs among themselves during the
Minority of the King, was that which they had already deeply fixed in their
minds; nay more, they had underhand already divided the great Offices of the
Kingdom. And therefore repining to find the Power thus as it were ravished out
of their hands, they perfidiously enter into a Conspiracy. To which purpose
they conceal the Death of the King, and sending away some few Bands of Soldiers
drawn together in have, they cause Za-Denghel to be apprehended, and carried
away into the Island of Udeka, lying in the Tzanic Lake; and then changing his
Imprisonment from Rock to Rock, carried him up and down to prevent his
Conspiring with the Neighboring People. The same Trap was laid for Susneus;
for that they feared least he being youthful, and brave, seeing the Order of
the Succession so disturbed, should put in for a share and assert his Claim; as
afterward he did. But he escaped in good time to the Gallans, where he fixed
himself among them against the threatening Danger, resolving if need required to
make use of their Assistance. The Chiefs of the Faction were Ras-Athanasius, a
man of high Authority; and Keflawahed, Viceroy of Tigra, who having cajoled
into the Conspiracy, the Queen Dowager his Mother-in-Law, covetous of
preserving her Power, by means of her Son's nonage, as it were under color of
lawful Power, they presently set the Crown upon the head of Jacob, then a Child
of Seven years of Age, and therefore called the Infant King; reserving the
management of Affairs to themselves. A trium-virate unusual with a Woman, and
therefore not like to endure long. For, seven years after Jacob coming to be of
Age, impatient of so many Tutors, assumed the Reins of Government into his own
hands; perhaps more imperiously than might become a Lad of 15 years of Age. The
Guardians therefore taking it ill to be so soon deprived of their Power, seeing
their Obedience would immediately follow, chose rather to obey their lawful
King, and render themselves deserving of his new Favors. Therefore before
Jacob could fix himself in his Throne, as it were induced out of Repentance,
that they had preferred an Infant and Illegitimate before a lawful Successor
and of ripe Age, they recall Za-Denghel then lurking in the most remote
Mountains of the Kingdom, and salute him King by the Name of Asnaff-Saghed;
which they did the sooner, and that with the more speed, that they might have
the less reason to give an Account of what was done, to the new King.

Jacob with only Eight of his Guard, for the rest had deserted him with his
Fortune, hastens to Samena to his Mothers Kindred; but being known in his
flight and taken, he was brought back to Za-Denghel, who showing the Effects of
a strange Compassion, received his Rival with a singular Affection and
Clemency, and trusting to his own Right, would never incur the censure of being
Cruel in cutting off his Nose and Eyes, which was usually done to others in the
same Condition, and to which he himself was advised. For he scorned to pollute
himself with a Crime after the manner of Tyrants, who distrustful of their own
Right, or the Peoples Affections, count it a piece of Policy to cut off their
Rivals in Empire, how innocent soever, imputing to them beforehand the future
Crimes that may happen to be committed not by them, but any Promoters of
Sedition: However he sent the degraded King into Enarea, the most remote
Kingdom of Habessinia, under a strict Guard, in a short time to be restored to
the Kingdom to his own Ruin.

Za-Denghel, for Grace of Utterance and Majesty of Countenance was equally
Venerable (as are most of the Princes of the Royal Blood of Habessinia) in the
most flourishing years of pleasing Youth; and through his Experience of
Adversity and Prosperity worthy of the high degree, to which he had arrived;
and which was more than all, mild and ready to Forgive. For among all the
crow'd of so many Enemies, he never punished any, as by Law he might have done:
but without any disgrace, suffered them to continue in their several Offices,
and in the same degrees of Honor even the Queen her self: so mild and gentle
even to a fault is the Disposition of those Kings, says Tellezius. Moreover he
behaved himself with an undaunted Courage in all sorts of Danger: For he had
hardly grasped the Helm of Government in his hands, when the Gallans
understanding the Divisions at Court fell into Habessinia with three Armies,
and overthrew the Governor of Gojam, who presumed to fight against the King's
Command, whereupon the King arriving soon after, leading an Army tired by a
long March, with a greater Courage than Force, he assailed the Enemy; who pufft
up with Victory, bore down the Habessines with so much Violence, that the
Captains finding their Battalions recoil, persuaded the King to betake himself
to an early flight. When he, disdaining the motion, as arguing Effeminacy,
leapt from his Horse, and advancing with his Sword and Buckler, cried out, Here
will I die; you if you please, may fly; perhaps you may escape the fury of the
Gallans, but never the Infamy of deserting your King.

The Habessines moved with such a Speech, and the Countenance of their Prince,
cast themselves into a Globe, and with a Prodigious fury, like Men prepared to
dye, broke in among the Gallans, and constrained them to give back; which the
Fugitives perceiving presently returned, and renewing the Fight, gained a
glorious Victory with such a Slaughter of the Enemy, that a greater had not
been made among them at any other time. The King believing that the Advantages
of such a Victory were not to be let slip, did not indulge himself to be as
soon overcome with Banquets and Luxury, under pretense of Refreshment, but with
a swift March, led his Army over Mountains and Rocks, against the other Body of
the Enemy, which with the same success he put to Flight; The third Army, not
daring to withstand the force of the Habessine, retreated into the Fastnesses
of their Country. Of these, Four hundred thought themselves secure with their
Prey, in a steep, and almost inaccessible Mountain. But the Habessines now
contemning their Enemies, already terrified with the Slaughter of their own
People; courageously drove them from their Holds, and slew them every Mothers
Son.

About the same time Peter Pays a Jesuit, arriving in Habessinia, at the
Request of the King went to Court, and so obliged him with several Discourses
concerning Matters as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, that at first privately,
then publicly he embraced the Latin Religion, which he testified by Letters as
well to the Pope, as to the King of Spain, then Philip the Third; and preferred
the Portugueses before his own Habessinians. But this same Kindness of his to
Strangers, and a Foreign Religion, begat him the Hatred of his People, and
caused his own Destruction. For the Nobility of the Kingdom took it in great
disdain to see their Ancient Religion changed, and that the Patriarch of
Alexandria should be deserted: And they were the more enflamed out of their
Envy to the Portugals, and the Rancour which they bore to Laeca-Marjam, the
King's principal Friend. Therefore they Conspire against him among themselves.
The Head of the Faction was one Saslac, born of mean Parentage, but of great
fame for his Experience in War, and for that reason proud. He was exiled by
Jacob, but recalled by Za-Denghel, and made Governor of Dembea; consequently
ungrateful, and out of an inbred Stubborness, frowardly disdaining Obedience.
Ras-Athanasius was drawn into this Society, a famous Captain, and a Man of
great Conduct; and being first in Dignity, frowned to see that he was but
Second in the King's Favor; and therefore he proves a Traitor to a most
excellent King, as one that had forgot who set the Crown upon his Head. But the
Cause of Religion was the main pretense; the most prevalent to put the Minds of
People into disorder: for they were not ignorant what Preparations were making
at Court for the introducing of the Latin Religion. Frequent Complaints were
therefore divulged abroad, That the King was Revolted from the Church of
Alexandria, the Common Mother Church: and that there was nothing intended by
his frequent Discourses and familiarity with the Jesuits, but the Abrogation of
the Institutions of their Ancestors, and the Introduction of new Ceremonies and
Foreign Priests into the Kingdom. That the Portugals would come in and
establish their Religion by force of Arms; and when they had done that, would
endeavor also to take the Kingdom from them. That it behooved them to succor
their Distressed Country, and that such a King was not to be endured, who had
first deserted the True Worship of God. These things were easily inculcated
into those that were of the same mind before. But there was nothing which
alienated so much the minds of the People, as that the Portugueses had been
heard to say, That the Reduction, so they called the Conversion of Ethiopia,
was but vainly attempted, if it could not be upheld by force of Arms. The King,
having detected the Conspiracy, calls the Portugueses together, confiding in
them, as Foreigners and Men of the Latin Religion: then marching with all speed
toward Gojam, he was deserted by the way, first by Ras-Athanasius, whom tho he
suspected, he durst not apprehend; then by Jonael, one of his Principal
Captains. Their example many others following, forsake the King. The King
seeing himself left with a slender Guard, applying himself to Peter Pays, spoke
these words, This therefore befalls me, because I am desirous to show them the
way of Truth, and to set free the Weak from the Oppression of the more
Powerful. Thereupon Peter, and the Commander of the Portugueses, John Gabriel,
advised him to Protract the War, till the heat of the Rebels fury waxed cool;
that his Friends with his Innocent Subjects would repair to his Assistance;
that the rest would in time come to themselves, and repent their folly: That
Sedition was like a Torrent, violent at first, but that it abated by degrees.

But the King impatient of delay, looked upon Protraction as a Diminution of
his Honor; and being too full of Courage, and in his boiling Youth, resolved
to try the Fortune of War, that rarely accompanies rashness, before the Rebels
should increase their Numbers. So he Marches with a small Army of scarce Twelve
thousand Men, thinking to fall upon them e're they were aware of his coming.
This over-hastiness had but ill success. For most of his Adversaries were Men
experienced in War, who did not follow their business negligently; and besides
they were as eager to come to a Field decision, before the King should gather
Strength.

In the mean time the Enemies of the new Religion Rendevouz'd together from all
Parts; and among the rest Abuna Peter, the Alexandrian Metropolitan, and chief
Head of the Rebellion; who by an unheard of President in Ethiopia, contrary to
the Laws of God and Man, absolved the Rebels from the tie of their Oaths which
they had Sworn to their lawful Prince, which they themselves had already broke,
by virtue of a detestable Excommunication of his Prince. Thus more and more
embold'nd, and contemning the Majesty of the King, they turned their Veneration
into Hatred. And so with mutual Animosity they join Battle. The Portugueses,
who fought in the right wing, maintained their ground a long time, believing
the Kings and the Cause of Religion to be their own. But in the left Wing, of
which the King himself took charge, all things went to rack; for many fled over
to the Enemy, many looked on without striking a stroke, resolved to follow the
Fortune of the Day. Thus the King forsaken by his own, fought bravely for a
long time, till Laeca-Marjam, and the rest of his Guard being slain, he was
himself struck down from his Horse with the sling of a Lance. After that
getting up again to renew the Fight, he was stuck through the body, and slain
with several Darts thrown at a distance; reverence of his person not permitting
them to come near to hurt him. The third day after the Fight, he was taken up
and buried without any Funeral Pomp in a little Chapel hard by the Field of
the Battle. Such was the end of the short Life and Reign of this Famous and
Lawful King of Ethiopia. A doleful Warning to admonish us, that the Cause of
Religion ought to be moderately and prudently handled. And that it behooves a
Prince not to thrust himself rashly into a Battle, especially when there is no
certain Successor. For proof whereof, the fatal Example of Sebastian King of
Portugal may serve among the rest.

CHAP. VII. Of the Kings of this Centurie, To our Times.
Susneus aspires to the Crown; acknowledged by Ras-Athanasius. He requests the
same from Zaslac. Who refuses at first; then submits. But Jacob appearing, he
takes his part: So does Ras-Athanasius. Jacob again made King. He desires an
agreement with Susneus, but in vain. They take Arms. Zaslac beaten: he goes
over to Susneus; A new War. Jacob and Abuna slain. The Victor's Clemency.
Zaslac imprisoned; he escapes; invades Waleka, and Gojam. Killed by the Pagans.
Ras-Athanasius dies. Susneus kind to the Portugals and Jesuits. He submits to
the Pope. A Counterfeit Jacob; but dares not stand the coming of Susneus. An
Impostor of the same kind comes into France. His Conditions; his Epitaph. Alibi
boasts himself the Son of Arzo. Susneus's Nativity, Conditions, Virtues, Vices,
and Death. His Son Basilides drives the Jesuits out of Ethiopia. He kills his
Brothers. A General Table of the last Kings of Habessinia.

KIng Zadenghel being thus slain, the War indeed ceased, yet Peace did not
presently ensue. For the Rebels not dreaming of such a speedy Victory, had not
considered of a Successor. Wherefore, as it were stupid with Emulation,
Ras-Athanasius departs for Gojam, and Zaslac for Dembea, without ever holding
any common Consultation. Thereupon Susneus, hearing of the King's death, and
believing that the Kingdom was now fallen to Him, as being the Son of
Basilides, the Nephew of Jacob, and Grandchild of David; and then being also a
Young man, trained up in the Gallan Wars, beloved and surrounded with the
choicest of the Military Bands, he conceived no small hopes of his design.
First therefore he sends before one of the Faithfullest of his Friends to
Ras-Athanasius, with instructions to declare to him in short, That whereas the
Kingdom belonged to him by right of Inheritance, he should come presently and
join Forces with his. In the mean time, Susneus, not expecting an Answer,
follows the Messenger with the nimblest of his Army, and writes to Athanasius
as if already made King, That he was at hand, and that therefore he should come
to meet him and pay him the accustomed honors due to him. Athanasius amazed at
the unexpected approach of Susneus, void of Counsel, the Danger being Equal on
both sides, either to refuse or admit him, at length, finding all assistance
far distant, and no hopes of delay, to give him time to consult with Zaslac, he
rather chose to be beforehand with the new King's Favors, than to hazard the
uncertain Fortune of a Battle. So that Susneus, being honorably received into
the Camp, was saluted King. Which done, he presently writes to Zaslac, That by
the Providence of God he had recovered the Throne of his Ancestors; and was now
marching for Dembea: therefore he should take Care that there might be Forces
there ready to receive him, and those deserved Favors which he was ready to
bestow upon them. But he, tho astonished at the sudden News, was unwilling to
acknowledge him for King, whom he had not made himself; and therefore consulting
with his Friends, returned for answer, That he would then obey him, if Jacob,
to whom he had already by Message offered the Kingdom, did not come before
June; and therefore begged that short delay. Susneus, no way pleased with the
Condition, wrote back to him again, That he was King already, and therefore
would give place neither to Jacob, once before adjudg'd unworthy, nor to his
Father Malec-Saghed, though he should return from the other World. Zaslac,
having received this surly Answer, equally mettlesom and diligent, turns his
Arms upon him, and comes on briskly to meet him. Susneus finding himself
prevented with the speedy March of his Adversary, and perceiving himself
overmatch'd, and, which was worse, not well in health, retired to the Craggy
Mountains of Amhara. Ras-Athanasius also, whose precipitancy Zaslac had
upbraided, retreated into other Fastnesses to avoid the Fury of his Associate.
In the mean time there being no News of Jacob, the other Captains and
Commanders of the Army began to scatterwords of discontent, That they would not
be without a King, that if Jacob would not come, there was no Person fitter
than Susneus, neither would he be at rest, till he had obtained by force, what
they would not give him by fair means. Zaslac, fearing the Inconstancy of his
own People, and consequently a Revolt, orders Commissioners to be sent; and by
them surrenders the Scepter to Susneus, who presently sent a Person to whom
Allegiance should be sworn in his Name. Which being done, Ten of the chiefest
Peers ride forth to meet the new King, and to conduct him with a Pomp befitting
into the Camp. And now Shouts and Acclamations are to be every where heard.
Neither were Banquets wanting, with all other Solemnities usual at the
Inaugurations of their Kings; when on a sudden new Commissioners from Jacob,
quite disturbed their mirth, with such a sudden alteration, as with which
Fortune never more odly mocked before the hopes of those that thought
themselves in the possession of a Throne. For Jacob twice Deposed, twice
restored, between the Highest and the Lowest, (which is most rare) had twice
Experience of the Mean betwixt both. While the Promoters of these Troubles
exercised their Hatred and their Love without fear of punishment, that one
might think it the sport of Scenes, rather than a serious possession of
Royalty. For immediately Zaslac, without any hesitation, rode forth to meet
Jacoh, as if he had bin Susneus himself, to whom he had but just before sworn
Fidelity, and received him with the usual Honors due to Ethiopic Majesty, and
with his whole Army saluted him King, the Commissioners, sent to Susneus, being
privately recalled. Susneus, knowing Time was to be watched, once more gave way
to Fortune, and retired to his former lurking holes, and hid himself again in
the Natural Fortresses of Amhara. For he had learnt from the Example of
Zadenghel, to give way to Popular Heats and Tumults, till they cooled of
themselves: for that the People after their first Passions are spent, resume
their former Modesty, and return repenting to their duty. Ras-Athanasius also,
tho so great a Person, yet accustomed to follow Fortune, rather than his Faith,
he, I say, with the same Easiness that he had acknowledged Susneus, fell at the
feet of Jacob.

And now Jacob, did not think it prudent to suffer a Rival in his Dignity, and
therefore resolving to try what might be done by way of agreement, he commanded
Susneus's Mother to go to her Son, and offer him the Kingdoms of Amhara,
Waleka, and Shewa, as also all the Lands which his Father possessed, and he had
hitherto claimed in vain. But Susneus bearing a lofty Soul, denied, That what
he had received by the Gift of God, could be taken from him by Men. That the
whole Kingdom was his due, which he would not relinquish but with his Life;
That Jacob would deal with more Justice and Uprightness, to quit his Diadem,
than to hasten Ruin to himself and his Country.

This haughty answer being delivered, Jacob decreed to decide the business not
with Messages, but by the Sword. However, Susneus Expert at delays, by the
assistance of the Rocks and Mountains, avoided the pursuit of Jacob, watching
for those Opportunities which soon after presented themselves. For Zaslac,
whether out of a vainglory to behold the Event of the Battle, or out of any
private Indignation, did not join his Forces with Jacob; but on the contrary,
and as it were in despite of Military discipline, acted all things carelessly
and remissly; believing his fame a Terror sufficient to the Enemy. This was not
concealed from Susneus, who taking a shorter way came upon Zaslac so of a
sudden, that his Soldiers had not time to handle their Arms, much less to put
themselves into order: so that they were slain like sheep, and utterly routed,
and Zaslac, having lost his Army, was forced to entrust his Safety to an
ignominoous flight. Which Victory as it dejected Jacob's Friends, so it raised
the spirits of Susneus's Party. Zaslac himself had lost the Kings favor, and
began to be suspected. Thus the business began to work; for Zaslac jealous of
these disparagements, notwithstanding Jacob had heaped so many favors upon
him, for he had created him Legate Royal, began to Enter into a Correspondence
with Susneus, using Treachery as the hire of those that valued him most.
Susneus standing in need of his Power, accepted his Propositions, and
dissembling his Hatred, made him a Confederate in the War, to lessen the force
of his Enemy. Jacob hearing of his Revolt, judging that it behooved him to make
have, before the rest should follow his Example, resolved to put it to the
hazard of a Battle; well knowing that he far exceeded Susneus in number of men:
nor did Susneus refuse him, tho inferior: however, he cunningly kept the rough
and hilly Grounds, watching like a Lion when to take his fatal jump.

The Enemy judging his delay to proceed from his fear, and confiding in their
multitude, began to act more daringly, and to provoke Susneus with upbraiding
Language, until he had brought them into a narrow place where he could not be
surrounded by his Enemies. Then Exhorting his Soldiers, Now, said he, the day
is come, that You may make me King of Ethiopia: and for Your selves, You are to
be either Masters or Slaves, as You behave Your selves. I will not be only the
Companion of Your Victory, but your Dangers: Victory is in your own power, so
that you do not turn your backs to your Enemies, before you see me begin to
fly.

Having thus Encouraged his Soldiers, he gave the Signal of Battle. Which
seen, they gave so furious an Onsett, that the Enemy was every where beaten
down, without resistance, amazed and astonished, to be so subdued by those whom
they reck'ned for fugitives. The slaughter was great, with little loss on
Susneus's side. Jacob himself, together with Abuna-Peter, who had in vain
thundered out his Anathema's against the Enemy, were both slain. Which Susneus
understanding, sounded a retreat, that by his clemency to the Common Soldiery
and his own Countrymen, he might win to himself the Reputation of Gentleness,
necessary for the Establishment of a New Prince.

But such was the Terror that possessed the hearts of the Jacobeans, forced on
by the crowd of Fugitives, ignorant of the Country, tho there was no pursuit,
that they threw themselves headlong in the night time from a Rock dismally
steep and cragged. Among the rest, there was a certain Portuguese, by name
Emanuel-Gonsalvo, who betimes perceiving his Horse as it were flying in the
Air, quitting his Stirrups, left him, and taking hold by chance of the branch
of a Tree, made a shift to recover a Seat in the bough, where he sat all
night. Nor did he well understand his danger, till day appearing, he
discovered, not without horror, at a prodigious distance underneath him, a vast
heap of Men and Horses with their Limbs and Members broken all to flitters.

Susneus having obtained so great a Victory, exercised no so sort of Severity
or Reveng against any Person; only Maharhin he commanded to be beheaded, as
being a follower of the sect of Islamism, and the Person that had first wounded
Zadenghel.

After that he departed for Coga, there to, settle the Affairs of his Kingdom,
where Zaslac whom he could not endure to see, was still in his Eye, the grand
promoter of all these troubles. He was the first that went over to Susneus's
Party, and therefore was looked upon by Susneus as one that would be constantly
casting in his Dish the kindnesses he had done, and pride himself to be the
setter up of kings. And indeed in one of his vainglorious humors, of which
deserving Soldiers are generally too much guilty, he had unwarily given out,
That it was foretold him, That he should pull down three Kings, which was
fulfilled in Two. So that the New King seemed only to be wanting for the third.
It being therefore a Maxim, That jealousy and friendship cannot long remain in
one and the same Breast, and that the fruit of Treason being reaped, there is no
farther need of the Traitor, the King commanded him to be apprehended and
carried away into the steep Mountain of Gueman, in the Kingdom of Gojam. He
would not put him to death, as not believing it became a noble Prince to take
away a man's life for fear of a future crime. But he making his Escape, about a
year after, invaded Waleka, where having gathered together some Troops of
Vagabonds and dissolute Persons, he supported himself by Robbery and Rapine;
till at last, making his Incursions into Gojam, he was there slain by the
Pagans. His head being brought to the King, was fixed upon a Lance, and set up
before the Royal Pavillion, to be viewed by all the World; no man pitying his
misfortune, in regard that all people knew his advancement had cost the loss of
so many innocent lives.

Not so inglorious was the end of Ras-Athanasius, and yet sufficiently
miserable. For he every day losing more and more of the Kings favor, was at
length the contempt of all men; Insomuch that his wife, the daughter of
Malec-Saghed, unaccustomed to brook indignities, forsook his bed. Thus once the
next to Supreme authority, now the next to most dejected misery, not able to
overcome the anguish of his mind, he fell into a Fever, of which he died.

But Susneus, to establish himself in his Dominion, by all ways courted the
friendship of the Portugueses, as being skilful in the art of Gunnery and
Firearms, the chiefest terror of those Nations: hoping, and that not without
reason, by their assistance, to defend himself as well against his own
Subjects, too much addicted to Tumults and Seditions, as the Kindred and
Friends of the slain Kings. And not only so, but to render himself formidable
to the Gallans. To that purpose he kindly received the Fathers of the Society
then living in Dembea. He sent for Peter-Pays, and most courteously gave ear to
him; and treated him as his familiar Friend.

And as he was favorable and bountiful to them; so did he daily afford many
testimonies of his kindness to the rest of the Portugueses, and the more to
oblige them he set up the Latin Religion; nothing terrified by the example of
Za-denghel. And indeed the Fathers had such a power over him, that at length he
surrendered himself to the Pope, and together with his Son, swear obedience to
him as Universal Bishop, and Vicar of Christ, abrogating the Religion of
Alexandria. Which was afterward the occasion of horrid uproars, bloody wars,
and the slaughter of many great Personages.

But the possession of a Kingdom won by the Sword, seldom enjoys a perfect
tranquillity, especially when the death of the Predecessor comes be in question.
For presently, that is to say, the very next year, up starts a counterfeit
Jacob, who alarmed all Habessinia with the fear of a new War. Some there were,
that acknowledged they both knew and saw the dead body of King Jacob, after the
blood was wiped away, but no man durst assert himself to be the Person that
killed him. The Counterfeit therefore addresses himself to the Monks of the
famous Monastery of Bizan, in the prefecture of Bahrnagassus; where he
remained, and to hide the fraud, as if his face had bin disfigured with his
wounds, went always veiled. Nor was it long before his Story was believed. Not
so much out of respect to his own Person, as out of malice to Susneus, whom
they hated as a Person that was unknown to them, and by his exilement inured to
the Savage Customs of the Gallans. Neither were they pleased with Raas-Seelech;
his brother by the Mother's side, whom he had made Viceroy of Tigra, whom they
looked upon also as a forraigner. So that he not being able himself to quell
the Disturbances, the King was forced to advance himself. But the Rebels having
intelligence of his coming, fled several ways, to avoid fighting. Their
Captain, with only four of his Associates, and some few Goats, which he carried
with him for their milks sake, secured themselves by a painful Pilgrimage
through the most wild and uncouth concealments of Nature, that the Rocks could
afford him, where it was impossible to trace him. So that the King dispairing,
after a tedious search, to find him out, returned to Dembea, and having
solemnized his Inauguration at Axuma, after the ancient Custom of the Country,
he made Ansalax Governor of Tigra, in the room of his Brother, who afterward
by the help of two Noblemen that counterfeited themselves their friends, having
apprehended the Rebels, put them to death.

But what was more strange, our Europe it self could not, some time after,
discern an Ethiopian Counterfeit of the same name.

For in the Year 1631. a certain Impudent Counterfeit, by the names of For so
the Ethiopic word Tzaga, Christos is pronounced. There is a Relation of this
Person extant, Entitled, The Strange Accidents of the Travels of His Highness
Prince Zaga-Christ of Ethiopia, etc. very absurd, and full of Fables.
Tzagax, assuming to himself to be the Son of Jacob, came into France, and
producing several Recommendatory Letters, and Certificates from the Credulous
Monks of Palestine, was taken for a Great Prince, and expelled Heir to the
Kingdom of Ethiopia, and Entertained with a large Pension from the King: after
the Example of some of the Princes of Italy, which is, to consider what may be
Correspondent with their Munificence toward an Exile of so great Dignity,
rather then to enquire who he really is. Which was to be admired: For that both
at Rome and in Portugal there were at that time extant several annual
Relations, by which it was apparent that Jacob was slain in Battle, Young, and
never married, above Twenty years before. But that which added to the Credit of
the Impostor, was his graceful Presence, with a Countenance wherein Seriousness
and Frankness were wonderfully intermixed, that while he kept company with
other Princes, (as Bochart himself told me) he seemed to excel them all both
for beauty of form, and sweetness of disposition; and particularly that his
Majestic Aspect struck all his beholders with admiration. Whether that Beauty
were really in his Person, or whether the Novelty of the thing, or the Opinion
that he was of the Race of Solomon, biased their Judgments. Tho otherwise, no
reason could be given why he acted the part of the Son of an Ethiopian King,
unless it were to contend with Relating to the Daughters of Thespius.
Hercules or See Suetonius in Claud. Juvenal. Sat. 6. Tacit. Annal. l. XI.
Plin. X. 23.
Messalina for the prize of most enormous Lust: And indeed it may be thought,
that fearing his Imposture should be discovered, he rather chose to bring
himself to his end by the pleasing debaushes of Luxury, than to fall under the
Hangman.

Being dead, he was branded with this Epitaph, Cy gist le Roy d'Ethiopie,
L'Original, ou la Copy.
Here lies the King of Ethiopie,
The Original, or else the Copy.


Gregory being questioned concerning him, made answer, That the Report of him
reached Egypt, and the Countries next adjoining; and he had heard from the
Governess of Ruma, being a Woman of noble descent, that Tzagax came to her, and
told her he was the Son of Arzo, who was the Brother of Zadenghel, the Son of
Lesana, and Grandchild to Menas. The same thing he affirmed to his Countrymen
in Egypt, and to those that lived at Jerusalem. For to them he did not dare to
counterfeit himself the Son of Jacob, in regard they well knew that Jacob was
slain in the Eighteenth year of his Age, or thereabout, without any legitimate
offspring. But for Arzo, he lived an obscure life, and whether he had any
Children or no, there was no body knew. Let us now therefore return to Susneus.

Susneus, descended from the Royal Line, bigg, tall, and strong Limbed; and in
such a Body a large Soul. His Countenance affable and pleasing, with a high
Nose and thin Lips; nothing different from the Europeans, but only in color.
He was Prudent, Courteous and Liberal, and well read in the Ethiopic Books; and
which is most necessary to him that will ruffle for a Crown, he was Warlike,
Patient of Labor, and had among the Gallans learnt to be Content with any sort
of Diet. However he was unhappy during his Reign, by reason of his continual
Wars, and the frequent Rebellions of his Subjects, whom he sent to compel by
force to submit to what he thought convenient to enjoin them. He swore
obedience to the Pope; before he had weighed what benefit he might get by it.
And therefore toward his latter End, he was forced to indulge that Liberty, for
the maintaining of which, many Thousands had already lost their Lives. He died
in September, in the Year 1632. leaving several Sons and Daughters behind him.

Basilides, by his Inauguration name Seltan Saghed, after the Death of Marc his
Eldest Brother, succeeded the Father, Who to quiet the Minds of his Subjects,
Exterminated the Jesuits, together with their Patriarch, out of all his
Dominions; so that he would not permit the Portugals a Priest to say Mass,
which the severity of Menas allowed them. All the rest of his Brothers, if the
Fidelity of Tellezius do not here give way to his Passion, he put to death,
upon bare allegation of Crimes committed. Neither do we know any thing more of
certainty concerning him, he refusing any farther Commerce with the Europeans,
for fear of the Forces, for which he heard the Fathers were soliciting both at
Rome and in Portugal, to revenge the Indignities he had put upon them.

After this I saw certain Letters, which the King of Abysinia Af-Saghed, the
Son of Alam Saghed, sent to the Governor of Batavia, written in Arabic; of
which we shall have occasion to say more in another place, for I am not certain
whether or no Basilides did not make use of a double Surname, nor whether he
were the Father of that same Af-Saghed. I have here inserted a Genealogic Table
of the Last Kings of Habessinia, which I had from Gregory, but now more
Corrected out of Tellezius.

A GENEALOGIC TABLE of the Kings of Habessinia, from BAEDA-MARJAM Son of
Zara-Jacob, Grandchild of Amda-Jesu, who lived about the year of Christ 1460.
to the Reign of Basilides, 1632, etc.
BAEDA-Marjam, Son of Zara-Jacob, otherwise Amda Jesu, Born about the year
1465. whose Second Wife was Helena. 1. ALEXANDER came to the Crown about the
year 1475, and dyed without Children, 1490. 2. AMDA-SION died in the year 1491.
after he had Reigned Six Months. 3. Naod fetched from the Rock of Amhara to the
Crown, died in the year 1504. leaving his Widow Moghesa behind. 1. N.N. The
Eldest born in the Rock Amhara, before his Father came to the Crown, therefore
forced to yield to the Second Brother. 2. David, Sirnam'd Etana-Denghel,
Lebna-Denghel, and Wanag-Denghel, Born about the year 1492. made King 1504.
died 1540. leaving his Widow Kabelo-Wanghel behind. 3. Romana Warck wife 1. to
N. N. 2. to Abucher. 4. N. N. who Escaped from the Rock of Amhara. 1. Victor in
the Field, Slain before his Father's Death. 2. Claudius, Sirnam'd Atnaf-Saghed,
Born toward the end of 1522, made King 1540. Slain March 1559. in a Battle
against the Adelans. 3. Jacob, died before his Brother Claudius. 4. Menas,
Sirnam'd Adamaes-Saghed made King 1559. Slain in Battle, April 20. 1562. 5. N.
6. N. 7. N. three Daughters of whom Alvarez, c. 61. Tascar's Natural Son, made
King by the Rebels in Opposition to his Uncle, taken in Fight, July 1561. and
thrown Headlong from a Rock. 2. Basilides, Slain in a Battle against the
Gallans. His Wife was Hamel-Mala, the Viceroy of Amhara's Widow, who had Three
Sons, Rasselach, Afach, and Almanach. 3. Zertza-Denghel, otherwise
Malech-Saghed, made King 1562, and died 1579. His Wife was Marjam-Sena.
AQUIETER, ABALE Lecanaxos. Susneus, Sirnam'd Malech Saghed then Seltan Saghed,
Born 1571. made King, Jacob being slain March 10. 1607. died Sept. 1632. He had
many Wives, but dismissed all except the First. N. N. The Wife of
Ras-Athanasius. Jacob a Natural Son, Born 1589. Made King at 7 years of Age,
called the Infant King, deposed 1603, Recalled 1604. Slain March 10. 1607.
Za-Marjam, another Natural Son. Za-Denghel alias Atznaf-Saghed, Born 1577,
Slain in Battle by his own Son, October. 13. 1604. Arzo whose Son Tzaga-Christos
called himself.





Lecanaxos. Marcus -- These two Deceased before their Father. Malacotawit, Wife
of Elias, Viceroy of Tigra-Basilides, sirnam'd Seltan-Saghed, then Alam-Saghed,
Born 1607. made King 1632. Claudius, Basilides Brother by the Father's side.
Canafraxos. Jacobus. Justus. Za-Denghel. Za-Marjam. Lebna-Denghel, and others.
For as Tellez writes, he left 25 Sons, and many Daughters behind him, as
Wanghelawit, the Wife of Tecla, George Viceroy of Tigra, N. Wife of Za-Marjam
Viceroy of Bagemdra, N. Wife of Anda Michael Bahrnagash.
1. Constantine died before his Father. 2. Justus. 3. David. 4. John. 5.
Becuerta-Christos, Wife to the Viceroy of Tigra, with others whose Names are
not known.
Place this Table in the Second Book, between Folio 192, 193.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Royal Succession, and the Imprisonment of the Kings
Children in the Rock Geshen, now quite out of use.
Certain Succession the Safety of Kingdoms. Two Bonds of Government. How far
Prudence, how far Nobility and Power prevail. Election not always to be
preferred before Succession: more agreeable to Liberty. The Males only succeed
in Abassia. Their Claim dubious: hence Wars. The Inconveniences of Hereditary
Kingdoms. The ill Events of uncertain Succession. The Imprisonment of the Kings
Children. Tellezius's Relation of it. The Custom for 300 Years, abrogated by
Naod. Alvarez's Relation: it disagrees with Tellezius: reconciled: No president
for half a Century. The pleasantness of those Rocks fabulous. The severe usage
of those Princes there. The severity of the Governor displeasing to the
Prince: pleased him when King.

FRom what has bin said, it appears that the Succession of the Kings of
Habessinia is uncertain; and that there is no great difference made between the
Legitimate and he Illegitimate. However, the most assured Safety of Kingdoms
consists in a Constant and Established Settlement of Succession But if in
Hereditary Kingdoms, it may be lawful either for the King to choose one of his
Sons; or if it may be lawful for the Nobility, not so much to regard the order
of birth, as the disposition and conditions of him that is to govern, or to
respect the favor of the People, War and Sedition must of necessity follow.

They that are set aside will never be quiet; nor shall they want Factious
Abettors and Associates. The Grand Pretense, more Especially in Elective
Kingdoms, is this, That Conditions cannot be distinguished by Nativities; but
the best may be taken by Election and Judgment. A specious pretense in words,
but vain in Reality; while the Imbecility of human Nature prevails, which is
guided by the affections, and obeys rather Favor and Hatred, than Virtue;
which usually happens in great Assemblies. But there are two Pillars which
sustain the Safety of great Monarchies, Reverence and Authority, which they
that Govern never can reconcile to themselves either by Wisdom or Probity
alone. For there are many who will esteem themselves if not their Superiors,
yet their Equals: and men very unwillingly obey their Equals, much less their
Inferiors: so that it is altogether vain and pedantic, what Plato writes
concerning the Felicity of Kingdoms, That they should be Governed by
Philosophers, while other Aids are wanting. A Philosopher, how wise soever,
would hardly find a Subject that would obey him three days together for his
Philosophies sake. There ought to be something External and Visible, which as
well the vulgar and ordinary sort, as the prudent, Equally acknowledge, which is
not subjected to the fluctuating and inconstant determination of Men. For this
reason in the Election of Kings and Princes, Nobility and Power are preferred
before Wisdom and Sanctity of disposition. Yet the one requires the assistance
of the other. The one is the cause that the Subject willingly and freely obeys;
the other compels the refractory to submit. And therefore because Election does
not bring much more advantage to a Kingdom, than the chance of birth, but is
rather liable to Tumults and Seditions, many People have The Swedes in the last
Century. The Danes in our memory; The Chinese of old. Joh. Newhoft. Descript.
Chin. c. 18.
abandoned it of their own accord. However, it approaches nearest to Liberty,
because the Electors may prescribe Laws and Conditions of Government to the
Person that is to be Elected; tho that same wariness proves many times
ineffectual: Because the Prince, upon refusal, either positively cannot, or
else will be very unwilling to be brought to an account. So impossible it is,
that there should be a complete happiness in this World. And therefore it is
the part of a good and prudent Statesman to prefer that form of Government
which he finds That the Wise call (...), to preserve the present state of the
Republic. Isoc. against Collimalh.
Established.

But I return to the Habessines, among whom there is this most prudent
Constitution, That only the Male Issue shall govern, or the Male kindred
nearest in blood; But because the Determination of the Fathers and Mothers, and
the chief Nobility happens frequently to be intermixed; and that the natural
Issue is likewise, if male, allowed the same Privilege for want of Legitimate
Offspring: hence it comes to pass, that their Successions are most unhappy and
turbulent; the chief cause of all their Calamities.

We have already declared, how Helena, with the consent of Marc the
Metropolitan, preferred David the second Son before Naod the Elder Brother, as
having nothing else to advance him but a mere brutish strength. The Civil Wars
between Menas and Tazcar his Brothers Eldest Son; between the Illegitimate Son
of Malec-Saghed, and Zadenghel his Legitimate Kinsman; and lastly, between
Jacob and Susneus, and all about the doubtful right of Succession, are
sufficient Arguments to prove what we assert. Tellezius indeed declares, That
according to the Laws of Ethiopia, the natural Sons do not succeed. But in
another place, he so discourses concerning their Law, alleging the Example of
John the First, King of Portugal, that the Reader may perceive, that he varies
in this, from his other Relation. But the chiefest Inconvenience which uses to
arise in hereditary Kingdoms, where the Succession is tied to a certain Family,
proceeds either from the sense of Rivalship and a jealousy which they that
rule have of them that are nearly related in blood; or from their Ambition,
which always animates the Factious. Dismal are the Examples among the
Barbarians, where there are no Laws or Rules for Succession, but all things are
at the Will of them that bear sway, or else of Fortune her self. What ruined
the Family of the Caesar's? What the Roman Empire? but only that the Creation
of the Emperors was inconstant and unfix'd, and at the Will of the Soldiery.
Certainly it was a great Oversight in Augustus Caesar, after he had vanquished
all his Rivals, and had all the Power in his own hands, that he ordained no
certain Settlement of Succession. The Emperors of the Turks, to prevent the
Crimes of their Brothers, more impiously put them to death, and punish that
Disloyalty which perhaps was never intended. The Ancient Kings of Abessinia, to
rid themselves of these Fears, were wont to shut up their Brothers under safe
Custody, where they might abide unknown to turbulent Spirits; and so be
incapable of attempting any thing against the reigning Prince; and yet be ready
to supply the want of Successors. The Rocks of Geshen and Ambasel were set
apart to this end. The whole Story from the Relations of Antonie d' Almeyda
runs thus. The Emperor Icon Imlac had five Sons (others say nine) which he
loved all alike. Out of which affection he most imprudently advised them to
reign all with Equal Power; or which was worse, to govern by turns. The
Youngest impatient of the delay of so many Years, designed with himself not to
part with the Scepter, when once he had got it into his hands, but to send away
his Brothers to some distant Rock, and so continue the Kingdom to his own
Posterity. But being betrayed by one of his peculiar Friends, who rather chose
to accept of a reward from the reigning Prince, than to expect a guerdon from
him that was to reign, he was taken in the same snare which he had laid for his
Brothers, and sent to the Rock Geshen. But lest the King might seem to have
consulted more for his own than the Security of the Kingdom, he also shut up
all his own Sons, which he then had, in the same place. After which this Custom
continued as a Fundamental Law in Ethiopia, for above Two hundred and thirty
Years, by which means the reigning Kings were secured from danger of Civil Wars
among Brethren; till in the Year 1590, at what time King Naod was sent for from
the Rock to ascend the Throne. He had a Son, about Nine years of Age, whom he
dearly loved; which Child, one of his chief Courtiers steadfastly beholding,
Certainly, said he to the King, this Child grows apace. The Boy was of an acute
Wit, and understood what the Courtier drove at, and therefore fixing his
weeping Eyes upon his Fathers Face, Oh Father, said he, Have I grown thus fast,
to be hurried from your sight to the Rock Geshen? Which word struck his Father
so deeply to the heart, that having assembled the Nobility of his Court and
Kingdom, he told them, That such a wicked and inhuman Custom was to be
renounced. Which was immediately done, neither he nor his Council considering
that private affections are not to be preferred before the Safety of a Nation.
And thus it came to pass, through the Kings unseasonable tenderness, that this
same Custom received and continued in Habessinia, so much to the Health of the
Government, was abrogated to the unspeakable detriment of the Kingdom: And from
that time never any Prince was Exiled to those Rocks.

Alvarez writes, That David being advanced to the Throne, his Younger Brother,
with the rest of the Sons of Naod, were sent away to the Rock; and afterward,
That one of the Younger Sons Escaped, but was taken and sent back; and that he
saw him there. From whence it may be objected against Tellezius, That this
Custom continued after Naod's time. But we have some reason to believe, That
he foresaw this Objection, because he binds it with an Asseveration, saying,
The thing is certainly true, and is easy to be confirmed as well by the
Fathers of the Society, as by the Example of Susneus, who tho he had several
Sons, yet never went about to send any of them to the Rock. But then again when
he says Alvarez is to be believed in all things that he saw, there is some
need of Reconciliation: That is to say, That the Sons of Naod, the Brothers of
David, were then carried to the Rock, and that one of them after an Escape was
taken and sent back. So that the new Constitution might not help them, tho it
were a kindness to the Sons of the succeeding Kings. The Reports concerning the
Pleasantness of those Rocks, and the splendid attendance upon those Royal
Exiles, are all ridiculous Falsities. The Rocks we have described already. And
as for the splendidness of Attendance, when the Custom was in force, most
certain it is, that those Princes were kept close Prisoners, and they that
either attempted to Escape, or were assisting to their Escape, lay under great
Penalties. The Princes themselves were harshly used; Neither was any person
permitted to come at them, so that their Education could never fit them for a
Crown, but was rather to put them out of Hopes of having any thing to do with
the Affairs of this World.

It is reported of one of the Keepers, that one morning observing one of his
Royal Prisoners putting on a Garment somewhat neater than ordinary, he not only
chidd him, and tore the Vestment, but gave notice of it to his Father: all
which the poor Prince was forced to take patiently. Afterward the same Prince
coming to be King himself, did not only forbear to revenge the Injury, but
hearing that his Keeper was gone aside, as dreading some heavy punishment,
caused him to be sought out, and being brought before him half dead for fear,
both praised and rewarded him; Exhorting him to continue in his Office as
Faithful to Him, as he had bin to the King deceased. And thus we generally
impose upon others, what we are very unwilling to endure our selves.

CHAP. IX. Of the Privilege and Power of the King in Ecclesiastical and Civil
Affairs.
The Kings Power absolute: Experienced by the Jesuits. Alphonsus the Patriarch
offends the King. He claims the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. He abrogates the
Latin Religion; calls Synods: He forbears the right of Nomination: not bound by
the Secular Laws. He has no Estates. The benefit of them: He enjoyes all Royal
Privileges, but makes not use of all: Hunting Lawful for all. Private persons
have nothing proper. The King takes and gives as he pleases: Certain Families
excepted.

THe Power of the Abessinian Kings is absolute, as well in Ecclesiastical as
Civil Affairs. Of which the Fathers of the Society have had sufficient
experience; in whose favor, and to whose disadvantage he has exercised his
supreme Ecclesiastical Authority, without ever consulting the Patriarch of
Alexandria: First when he put forth several Edicts, for receiving the Roman
Religion, and abrogating the Alexandrian Ceremonies: which was done with the
consent of the Fathers. Afterward the state of Affairs changing, when he
dispensed by public Edict with certain Ceremonies that were indifferent,
Alfonsus the Patriarch reproved him. It is not lawful, said he, for a King to
put forth any such Edict, as being purely Ecclesiastical, and belonging to the
Priestly Office: and You ought to remember what the High Priest said to King
Uzziah. It belongs not to thee, O King Uzziah, to offer incense to the Lord,
but to the Priests, the Sons of Aaron, who are consecrated to that Ministry,
get thee forth out of the Sanctuary, for it will not be imputed to thee as an
honor by the Lord God; to which the Patriarch added the Punishment that
followed. The King for that time gave way to the Patriarch, and published the
Edict in another manner and form. But not brooking the Comparison made between
him and Uzziah, among other things he gave the Patriarch this answer. Wherefore
did thou bid us be mindful of Uzziah, and wherefore did thou compare us
with him? He was therefore punished by God, for usurping the Office of the
Priest which did not become him; and because he offered Incense and Sacrifice
to God, which We never attempted to do: only We commanded an Edict to be
published about those Indifferent things which were agreed on between Us both.

Nothing more incensed the King, but that he saw his Prerogative called in
question, which for so many Ages had bin enjoyed by his Ancestors, and which
was never denied by the Patriarch of Alexandria, even before the Schism. Nor
was he ignorant what the ancient Emperors after Constantine had done in the
same Cases. Nor was he so dull of apprehension, as not to be able to
distinguish between Episcopal rules, and Kingly Jurisdiction, which he thought
belonged to himself. Which Prerogative, tho he had a great Reverence for the
Patriarch, he would not part with, but rather chose to publish another Edict,
which tended manifestly to the Diminution of the Patriarchal Power. For the
Patriarch had ordered a certain Monk to give some part of his Ecclesiastical
Revenues to a certain Parish. The Monk would not obey; but complained to his
Superior, one Iceg, who obtained a Decree from the King, wherein the Patriarch
was enjoined to keep to the Rules of the Metropolitans of Ancient Ethiopia; and
that Iceg should enjoy his due Privileges.

His Prerogative in Ecclesiastical Affairs was most apparently made manifest,
by the making of that severe Decree for the abrogating the Latin Worship, and
restoring that of Alexandria. Moreover, the King summons the Synods of the
Clergy, as often as need requires; he sends for the Metropolitan out of Egypt;
exercising plenary Jurisdiction over him and all the rest of his Clergy: and
punishing them according to the nature of their Offenses, which the Examples
recited by Alvarez, sufficiently demonstrate. In one thing however he differs
from our European Kings, that he never nominates to Ecclesiastical Benefices.
For the Patriarch of Alexandria, sends a Metropolitan, at the request of the
King indeed; but he knows not who or what he is. He also admitted the
Patriarch, whom the Pope sent, tho not he but the King of Portugal named him.

Neither are there in Ethiopia any other Ecclesiastical Dignities; and
therefore the Prerogative of nominating Bishops and Archbishops, signifies
little or nothing. In Seculars he acknowledges no positive Laws. And well it
were that he did not think himself also altogether free from the Fundamental
Laws of his Realm, upon which the Safety of the Kingdom depends.

For Naod dispensed with the wholesome Constitutions of his Ancestors, by
virtue of which the Kings Children were sent to the Rock of Amhara. And
Malec-Saghed would have preferred his natural Son Jacob before his Brothers
Legitimate Son Zadenghel; both which proved very disadvantagious presidents to
the whole Nation.

But such things frequently come to pass, where the Kingdom is without
Estates. For they are the most Trusty Guardians of the Law, and the true
Bulwarks of the Peoples Liberty against the Encroachments of the Ambitious. For
they have a more vigilant eye and tender care over the Commonweal, of which
they are themselves Members, than the Friends of Princes, whose Fortunes hardly
descend to their Heirs; so that a man may admire at their Counsels, who taking
away the Privileges of Estates, endeavor to assume the whole Power into their
own hands, as deeming every slight bond of the Law, to themselves heavy and
intolerable. So that they are forced to distribute those Favors and
Kindnesses which are due to their fellow Citizens, among the Soldiery, whose
fidelity is brittle and inconstant: not caring who are poor, so they be rich:
and many times the Soldiers turn those Arms which were put into their hands
for the defense of their Prince, against him; being put upon the ferment either
by the Ambition or the Wealth of some particular person. Which in Habessinia,
as in all other absolute Goverments, frequently happens to the destruction of
those that bear the sway.

He has also the sole disposal of Peace or War, and indeed all the
Prerogatives that a King can claim (both the greater and the lesser Regalia)
are solely at his devotion; tho he makes no use of many of them, merely because
he is ignorant of them; as the Prerogative in reference to Metals, Coining of
Money, and the like. As for the liberty of Hunting, he grants it to all; in
regard there are such multitudes of Wild Beasts that breed up and down in the
overgrown Woods and high Mountains, that it is not only troublesome but
dangerous to find out their haunts: by which means that which in other
Countries is a Pleasure, to the Abessines becomes a Toil and Detriment.

One thing is much to be admired, and rare even among the Turks, which is, that
no private person, whether Peasant or Lord, except some few can call any thing
his own. All the Lands and Farms in the Country belong to the King, and are
held by the Subjects only at the Kings pleasure, so that no man takes it
amiss, if the King takes away their Lands and bestows them upon another as he
pleases himself; and that not only after two or three years, but also the same
year they were given: So that it often happens that one man ploughs, and
another man sowes. Whence it comes to pass, that they are more submissive to
their Kings, then a Servant to his Master, or a Vassal to his Lord: they serve
him in Peace and War; and bring him Presents according to their Ability, in
hopes of obtaining new Farms, or for fear of losing those they have. For being
commanded out of possession, they never grumble, but presently obey without the
least distaste against the King, or envy to the person that succeeds in their
Room. Custom and long use prevailing, while they see the same happening to
others. However there are some ancient and Illustrious Families, especially in
Tigra, who enjoy by right of Inheritance not only Lands and Possessions
purchased by their Ancestors, but some certain Prefectures also, retaining
their ancient Title; as Bahr-Nagash, Shum Serawe Sire, Temben, and others; as
also Cantiba in Dembea; over whom the King claims no other Authority, than to
confer the public Employments every two year, or yearly, or as he pleases, upon
others; yet so as that they be of the same Family.

CHAP. X. Of the Power and Revenues of the Habessine Kings.
The Power of the Habessine Kings formerly great; Formidable to their
Neighbors; it failed after the Saracens came in Play. Yet strong at home till
the Adelan War, and Incursions of the Gallans. Easy to be restored. The ways
and means. Our Princes unkind to Foreign Christians. Demonstrated by Examples.
They took no care of their Sea Ports. The Kings Revenues the Natural
Commodities of the Country; what they are. His Tribute, Farms; Herds; the
Prices of things low. The King has enough to supply him both in Peace and War.

SO great and so absolute a Power, and so uncontrollable a Dominion over their
Subjects, one would think should render the Kings of Ethiopia vastly Potent:
and so no doubt it would, if other things were correspondent. Certainly of old
it was vastly great, when they kept their Courts at Nonnosus in Bibliothec.
Phot. n. 3. calls the Ethiopians, the Homerites and Saracens (...), the
stoutest of the Nations at that time.
Axuma; for there was no considerable Empire near then to withstand their
Fortune: and for that cause the adjoining petty-Princes were all at the
devotion of the Habessinian Kings. But as to what several have written, through
mistake or misapplication of the name, Scal. in his notes ad Comp. Eccl.
Ethiop, but I know not by what Authority.
of their Expeditions into the North parts of Asia, they are all mere fables
and figments. Yet this cannot be denied, but that formerly they were very
terrible to the neighboring Nations: for they made several Expeditions into
The Arabians wont to use this Computation. From the Invasions of the Abessines.
For so Altcodajus. They computed their years from the Arabians invading
Abessina.
Arabia.

We have already mentioned the Famous and Successful War with Caleb made
against the Homerites. With no less Renown, King Cyriacus hearing of the
Christian Persecution in Egypt, led a very numerous Army against the So the
Mahometans call themselves.
Muslims. Wherefore Merwan, Captain of the Saracens, upon promise of mitigating
his severity, besought the Patriarch of Alexandria, to persuade the King to
desist from his design; which he did, and stopped the Progress of the King,
till he Elmacinus Hist. of the Saracens l. c. 17.
heard that the Christians were better used. Which tho it be reported of the
King of Nubia, yet several Authors attribute the same to the King of the
Abissines; in regard that by the Nubian Geographer, Nubia Bochapts Sacred
Geography l. 2. c. 23. However most certainly Cyriacus had another name.
extended to the Fountains of Nile. Gregory also affirmed the same, and that
the History was to be seen in his Country. But when the Saracens grew stronger,
and had invaded the Neighboring Kingdoms, the Abissines, relinquishing Axuma,
and turning the force of their Arms against the more upland parts of Africa,
enlarged their Empire by the Overthrow of several weak and effeminate Nations,
no more regarding foreign Countries, or the subduing of far distant Regions:
which was the reason that after that, they performed nothing that was memorable
abroad. However they were Potent at home, and had under them several
petty-Princes that were their Tributaries. And in this Greatness they
flourished, in the time of Helena and David, till it was not only shaken by
that Dreadful War with the Adelans; but so overturned, that it never could
recover it self afterward. For about that time the Gallans also breaking out,
and never after that subdued, laid wast and harrass'd the most Opulent and most
Noble Provinces of the Empire: and still to this day every year gain upon the
rest with their continual Incursions. However, that Power which yet remains is
so considerable, that if they would but make use of the Arts and Arms of the
Europeans, they might not only subdue those Barbarians, but also recover their
Lost Dominions. For a Kingdom well ordered within, under such a Monarch, where
the People are under so much subjection; so large a liberty to do well or ill;
if Concord and Unity attended these Opportunities, together with a constant
method of Counsels, it is impossible, but that they must soon prevail over a
wandering Nation, divided among themselves into so many Tribes and Factions. All
their truculent and savage fury would be in vain, if the streights of the
Mountains were but well fortified and guarded with Fieldpieces. They should
also send forth several Colonies, and give them a taste of the Blessings of
Peace, by which the wildest of Nations oft-times grow tame. But which is more
than all, and which the Habessines most earnestly desire, Towns should be
built, and replenished with people, and an increase of Wealth be permitted by
the Encouragement of Arts and Arms. Lastly, if the Kng would remit something of
his Prerogative which he has over the Estates of the Subject, and reserving
those Lands which are already tilled, to himself, would distribute to his
Soldiers and the rest of his People such Lands as should be won from the
Enemy, every one his proportion, and grant them an irrevocable Inheritance of
such Lands; settling also Dukedoms and Earldoms in fee-simple out of the
Conquered Countries, upon his Nobility, and best deserving Captains, no doubt
but in a short time, it would prove the most flourishing Kingdom in Asia,
greatly to the propagation of the Christian Religion.

And it seems but reason, that in the settling and ordering his Kingdom, the
Habessinian Prince should be advised and assisted by the European Princes, not
only out of Christian Charity and hopes of propagating Christianity over
Africa, but also to lessen the Power of the Turk, which would follow, were the
Dominion of the Red Sea but wrested out of his hands, and the Commerce of Egypt
spoiled. Ah! what pity it is, that we should be so ill affected toward other
Christian Nations, that unless they are of the same Opinion with us in all
points of Divinity; or unless they promise us large Rewards, or an ample share
of their Profits, we can patiently look on, and see them perish, while the most
inveterate Enemies of the Christian Faith are enriched with the spoils of their
Wealth; not considering that in the end the mischief will redound to our
selves: and that we shall one day, unless God in mercy prevent it, dearly pay
for our Dissensions.

Thus we forbore to assist the Grecian Emperors, and several of the Eastern
Princes, till they became at last a prey to the Ottomans. Thus, while none of
Us laid it to heart, Egypt was reduced under the Power of the Turk; a vast
addition to their Empire: as if it were a Crime to breed up Dogs to hunt the
Wolves. Now the reason why the Abissines do not court with greater ardour the
Alliances of the Europeans, is plain: for it is to be attributed either to
their ignorance, or their difference in Opinion from the Latins. Moreover,
they fail very much in this, that they permit the Turk to be Masters of the
Ports and Islands of the Red Sea, whereby it is absolutely at their pleasure
what Persons or Commodities shall pass in and out. But they understand not,
that there is no Nation can be truly Powerful and Great, that does not Command
some Sea-Towns.

As for the Revenues of the King, they are not paid in ready money, but in the
natural Productions of the Countries, the most equal sort of Tribute. For some
Provinces afford Gold; others Horses, Cattle, Sheep, Corn and Ox Hides, and
some few, where Weavers live, send him Garments. They bring their Gold rough
and unrefin'd, as they gather it up among the Sands of the Rivers, or digg it
out under the Roots of Trees, or else with less Labor find it loose upon the
Earth. For they know not how to coin money, but after the ancient manner, weigh
their Metal, wherein they are many times gulled by foreign Merchants, who
frequently deny the Gold to be pure; and therefore change it for the meanest of
their Commodities. How much better might the King provide for himself and his
Subjects, should he with Money of his own Coin, buy up all the Gold in his
Kingdom, to his own and the great advantage of his People. Enarea 15000 Patachs
of Portugal or German Dollars.
pays a Thousand and five hundred Ounces of Gold: formerly much more. To
Susneus it paid but a Thousand, and sometimes but Five hundred, when the
Enareans were either at Wars with the Gallans, or else embroiled one with
another. Gojam pays every Year Eleven hundred Ounces, and some Garments, to the
value of 3000 German Dollars, together with Two hundred Fustian Tapestries,
very broad and close woven. Formerly they also paid a Tribute of Horses, but
Malec-Saghed remitted that, to the end they might be the better able to
withstand the Gallans. Out of Tigra he receives Five and twenty thousand
Patachs. Out of Dembea Five thousand. As much out of other Kingdoms, or
sometimes less. There are also several Tolls paid, but generally granted to
the Nobility for their subsistence; except those of the high Mountain,
Lamalmona, over which all the Merchants and Merchandise must pass from the Red
Sea into Habessinia, which the King reserves to himself. He also has his Lands
and Farms, from whence he is served with Provisions for his Table, ten or
twelve Horse-Loads at a time. Lastly, Dembea, Gojam, and Bagemdra find him Corn
and Flesh. That which he receives out of Dembea is distributed among the
Soldiers which have no Land, or else among the Poor. But his chief Tribute is
from the Graziers, who are bound to pay him every Tenth Ox or Cow every Three
Years: which is as much as if they should pay the 30th every Year. And the
whole Empire is so divided, that every Year he has his certain Tribute of Cows
and Oxen. Besides, every Year every Christian Weaver pays him a Fustian
Garment; Every Mahumetan a Drim, or Patach, which amounts to a Thousand
Imperials every Year.

Most certainly the Revenues of this Empire seem to be very small, if we
consider the Extent of so many Large Provinces. But on the other side we are to
observe, That the Prices of all things are very low. A huge Ox may be bought
for half a Dollar. The Soldiers live upon Flesh and Fish without bread; and
Servants Wages are paid in necessary Commodities not in money.

Again, if we consider the plenty of all things; the Abissine Emperor has
enough and to spare: not that his Diadem glisters with Gemms or Pearls, or that
his Treasuries are full of Money; or that his Cupboards shine with Silver and
Gold Plate; or that his Table is spread with Foreign Banquets while his
Subjects are in want, -his Courtiers poor, and his Soldiers under penury. But
he has that which suffices to afford him moderate Diet, and slender Clothing.
Then for his Soldiers and his Warlike Subjects, that is to say, his poor
People, they, detained at home by no delicacies, are ready still to gird on
their Swords. Which they who dexterously and courageously know how to weild in
a good Cause, need never want Gold nor Silver, nor what ever Mortals esteem
precious and desirable.

CHAP. XI. Of the Royal City of Axuma, and the Inauguration of the King.
Axuma the Metropolis of Habessinia formerly. Now more like a Village. Thus the
West forsak'n by the Greek Emperors. The Situation good. The King there
formerly Crowned. The Ceremonies of Inauguration. Some other Towns of
Habessinia: They live in Villages. No Forts nor Castles. They wonder great
Cities can last.

THe Royal City of the Abissines, and formerly the Metropolis of the whole
Empire, is by the Of which Nonnosus in Bibliothec Phot. n 3. p. m. 2. (...).
Auxuma is a very great City, and as it were the Metropolis of all Ethiopia;
erroneously Chaxumo in Alvarez, c. 17.
Habissines called Ascum: from whence, as we have already observed, they were
formerly called Axumites. Of old this City was adorned with most beautiful
Structures, a fair Palace, and a Cathedral proudly vaunting her Obelisks,
Sculptures, and several sumptuous Edifices. Some of the Pillars are still to be
seen, with Inscriptions of unknown Letters, remaining arguments of their
Antiquity, now demolished by the Wars, or defaced with Age. The City it self,
now totally ruined, looks more like a Village, than a Town of Note; so fading
and inconstant are those things which men account most durable. How many
Cities, how many Monuments now lie in ashes, whose Founders are well known? and
how many are yet in being, whose Founders are unknown? As for this, it began to
fall to decay by degrees, presently after that the Kings of Habessinia
relinquished it, and removed their Court from thence, as being deprived of
those advantages that attend the abodes of Princes. Thus the Seat of the Empire
being Translated to Byzantium, the West was neglected. And the same Fate, no
doubt, had certainly befallen Rome, had it not bin sustained by the Care of the
Bishops, now the Roman Pontiffs. In the time of the Adelan War, the Revolt of
the Viceroy of Tigra in the Reign of King Menas; and lastly, when the Turks
invaded that Country, it was totally laid wast; and now can scarcely shelter a
hundred Inhabitants: only the Ruins still remain, to testify that once it
was great and populous. It is Seated in the Fourteenth degree and a half of
Northern Latitude, Encircled with pleasant and fertile Fields which afford a
Prospect becoming a Royal Mansion. It lies distant from the Red Sea Five and
forty Portugal Leagues, or six or Seven tiresom days Journey by reason of the
Mountains that lie between. The ancient things of Ethiopia were wont to be here
inaugurated; nor would Susneus admit of his Coronation in any other place,
though when he related the particulars of the Ceremonies to the Commander of
the Portugueses, he could not but laugh at them, as ridiculous himself, For
many things are to be done by Princes to please the Vulgar, which to others may
seem superfluous, Such as were for the most part the Solemn Ceremonies of the
Ancients invented by mean Capacities, but retained by the more prudent.
Tellezius thus sets them down. When Susneus was to be Crowned, first the
Masters of the Ceremonies, read to the King out of their Memorandums, how and
in what order every thing was to be performed. The Army being drawn up, the
Foot marched first: then followed the Horse with their Trappings: after them
the Courtiers Combed, and neatly habited: presently appeared the Emperor
himself upon a stately Prauncer, clad with a close Purple Damascene Tunic, and
over that a magnificent Attalic Vestment, with narrow Sleeves hanging down to
the ground. When they came to a great Stone engraven with Foreign Characters,
not far from the Church of Axuma, near to which the Solemnities of the
Inauguration used to be performed, the Emperor with all the Courtiers
alighting from their Horses, stood upon the Ground that was spread with rich
Carpets. At what time the Virgins of Axuma, holding a Silken Cord cross the
Street stopped the Way, and as the King pressed to go forwards, they hindered
him, and asked him, Who he was? who answering, I am the King of the Israelites.
They replied, Surely thou art not our King. Which said, he retired smiling. At
length being asked a third time; he replied, I am the King of Sion: and drawing
forth his Cimitar, cut the Cord: which done, the Virgin cried out, Of a
certainty, thou art our King of Sion. Presently all the Guns they have are
fired, and the neighboring Mountains rang with loud Acclamations; the Drums
beat to the noise of the Flutes, and the Trumpets filled the Air with
harmonious Levets. Which done, the Metropolitan Simeon accompanied with all the
Ecclesiastical Orders of Clerks, Monks, and Canons, singing several Songs and
Hymns, conducted the King to the first Porch of the Church, and there set the
Diadem upon his Head. The King being crowned, if it may be so called; proceeded
forward into the Temple, and there received the Eucharist; which having done he
rode back to the Camp with his Diadem upon his head. For in Ethiopia they use
no Scepter. Nor is the Crown any other than a Hatt twice doubled, with an Azure
colored Silken broad brimm trimmed with Gold and Silver Plates, in the
likeness Lillies; with a row of false stones glistering between every Plate.

Besides Axuma, there are no Cities in Habessinia, and but few Towns. In the
Kingdom of Tigra, Dobarva is the Seat of the Viceroys: Fremona, the first
Residence of the Fathers of the Society, enlarged by the Portugueses. Gubay, a
Town in Dembea, where the Queen resides. Nanina in Gojam, long inhabited by the
Portugueses. Macana celace, in Amhara. To reck'n up more is not worth the
while: neither is it certain whether those already mentioned are standing or
no. For in regard of the meanness of the Building, there is nothing of
invitation to hinder their being deserted and laid wast by the Inhabitants
themselves; in regard the Habessines choose rather to live after the manner of
Villagers, not caring that their Houses should join one to another; which saves
them many Suits in Law. For they never fear any Actions about Party-Walls,
stopping up of Lights, or Nusances of Watercourse. In places that are fertile
and tilled, you shall see the Fields, as it were, planted with Houses, which
affords no unpleasant Prospect. They have neither Castles nor Forts. The
Celebrated Mountains of Amhara are their only Citadels, where the Kings
Children were formerly committed to Custody. The Habessines wonder to hear of
so many great Cities among Us. For they do not believe the Country can afford
Timber and Food sufficient for so many Houses, nor the Cattle that must support
such Numbers of People, remaining so long in one place. For they pitch their
Tents up and down the Country, and cut down and make havoc of what ever they
have need of, without any consideration of the damage, or regard to the
future. For they neither Navigate their own Rivers, neither do they know what
belongs to Carriage or Stores; living without any care of to Morrow.

CHAP. XII. Of the Kings Court, his Titles, and his Court-Officers.
The Kings live in Tents: P. Pays built a Palace. The Kings Table. Women
attend: Plain diet. The King and the Nobility crammed. They drink after they
have done: They read the whole Psalter before meals. The ancient manner of
receiving Ambassadors: now changed. Formerly two Court Officers: discontinnu'd.
The Ras now chief Minister in Peace and War. Officers beside.

AFter the Kings of Habessinia left Axuma, they never had any constant Mansion,
nor any Palaces, but contented themselves to live in Tents. But at length Peter
Pays built the King a Palace after the European manner, which cost him an
incredible deal of Labor and Industry; for that in regard of the want of
Artists, he was forced to teach them every thing, and to look after the Work
like a Master Builder. He chose to build this House in a most commodious and
delightful place called Gorgora, being a kind of Peninsula, almost surrounded
by the Tzanic Lake, where the King was wont to take up his Winter Quarters, and
contrived it very spacious and beautiful, with Rooms of State, Bed-Chambers,
Galleries, Battlements and Balconies, which yielded a most pleasant Prospect
over the Lake, and the Neighboring Fields. Insomuch, that it was not inferior
to the Country Palaces of some of our Europeans Princes. The Abessines were
amazed when they saw one story raised above another, which they thought could
never have bin done: and called it House upon House. Nor till that time did
they believe the Fathers, when they told them of the numerous and splendid
Palaces, Sumptuous Cathedrals, and Stately Monasteries in Europe. For those
things they related to the Abessines, to make them in love with the
Magnificence and Majesty of the Roman Church.

The Garniture of the Kings Table is much different from ours. For no person is
admitted into the Room while the King is at Dinner; or if any of the Nobility
be invited, they must stay till the King rises: then they take their places at
the same Table, and eat the Kings Leavings, which is looked upon as a very
great Honor. Yet the Fathers of the Society were admitted to Dine by
themselves, in the same Room next to Susneus's Bedchamber. To which purpose
there were two low little round Tables, about Eighteen Spans in Compass,
brought in to the Room and placed upon the Ground which was spread with
Carpets; one lesser for the King, another bigger for the Fathers, but without
Table-Cloaths or Napkins: instead of which they made use of thin Wafers made of
Wheat or Rye past. So that their Tablecloaths served them for Bread, which
there was no need for the Servants to take away, fold up, or wash: no
Trenchers, Knives, Forks, nor Spoons: no Salt-seller, no Pepper or Sugar-box;
nothing of Extravagant was there to be seen: A great Ease to them in time of
War; to us an impediment, while so many Carts, so many Wagons are required to
carry Kitchen Utensils, and Kitchen Officers, to pleasure our Luxury. The Meat
is served up by Women, not in Gold or Silver Dishes, but in broad Earthen
Platters, which would never tempt an European Thief. They are made of black
Clay, with covers of Straw neatly woven and painted. The meat is very ordinary,
Flesh and Broths of several sorts boiled after their fashion. So soon as the
Dishes are marshalled; the Hangings are presently let down, lest any one should
see the King while he is eating: and truly there is good Reason why. For, the
King and the chief Nobility, a thing you would think almost incredible, account
it a great trouble to lift their hands to their mouths. And therefore the
Children belonging to Court, take the meat and put it in their mouths, and if
the Gobbets be too bigg, they thrust 'em in, as they do that cramm Capons. The
crumms that fall, sometimes they put again in their chopps after they are well
soaked in the Broth. A way of eating that may well deserve a good thick
covering: as being a sight, that would certainly cause our squeamish Stomachs,
that will hardly eat off of one another Trenchers, to rise a hungry. But this
is common both to Lord and Peasant, that they never drink till they have done
feeding.

One thing we must not omit, which is, that they always read Prayers both
before and after meals: a thing that some of our Courtiers are in a manner
ashamed of, who will hardly tarry to hear a short Grace; while here you shall
have the whole Psalter repeated at their great Feasts, without any
inconvenience to the Guests: For he whose Office it is, distributes to every
one a part. The King and they that are accustomed to it, know their proper
time. The larger Psalms are divided among more, the shorter to one singly. And
thus by several, the whole Psalter is read, as it were, in a moment. For the
Psalter is made use of by all: neither have they any other Book for daily
Prayer.

Their manner of giving Audience to Ambassadors is different from what it was
in former times. For Alvarez relates how that after long waiting, and a deal of
haughty formality, the Portugal Ambassador, Lodowic Limaeus, was four times
asked From whence he came? and that he received no other answer the first day,
but that They were Welcome: nor were they admitted to the King; and yet
Presents were to be left. Nor was the Ambassador to be Visited by any one,
before he had kissed the Kings hands. At length, after he had bin several times
called, he was first admitted to discourse the King, the Hangings being let
down between them; and at last, with much ado, to see and salute the King. Of
which the chief Reason was thought to be, because he had brought no Present
(for it is not lawful to appear before the Eastern or African Kings, without an
acknowledgment) or else because he wanted the Kings Credentials. Which
superbness is now a days laid aside; for that being humbled by so many Losses
and Calamities, they begin to reckon Urbanity and Civility among the rest of
the Virtues.

Among the Court Employments, the chiefest Dignity was that of the Person who
was called Bahtudet, of whom one was of the Right hand, and the other of the
Left. They were the chief Ministers of State, and managed all Affairs, and were
entrusted with all the Kings Secrets; with them alone the King consulted; few
others being admitted into his Presence: as if Majesty were more Venerable when
concealed. But afterward so much Greatness in Subjects began to grow irksome
to the Kings; and some there are also that abuse their Power: few men being
able to contain themselves within those Bounds of moderation, to be able to do
all things, and yet not to covet all things. For there are many Examples of
those, who out of a desire of preserving their Greatness, have requited their
Masters with ill Turns for Favors of the highest nature; making use of that
authority which they received from their Princes, to their mischief. By which
means Kings have bin overwhelmed by the hatred of the People; or else have bin
forced to pull down that Greatness with extreme hazard, which they themselves
advanced. Those Princes act more prudent that keep the Power in their own
hands, never trusting to the Management of one single Person. Neither are they
less provident Ministers, who never affect it: For the Grand Affairs of a
Kingdom are more safely and easily managed by Plurality.

To these succeeded another Chief Officer whom the Ethiopians call Ras, from
the Arabic word which signifies a Head. The reason of whose institution at
first, was for the Command of the Army. But as Warlike Command, and Martial
Fame excel all other accomplishments; it came to pass in a short time, that
these chief Generals advanced themselves above all others, to govern the Kings
Counsels, and so by degrees to be the chief Ministers of State for the
management of all Affairs, both Foreign and Domestic, such a one was
Ras-Athanasius, who first deposed Zadenghel, and then Jacob, so that Susneus
did not hold it convenient to confer so great a dignity upon any person, unless
it were by his Brother by the Mothers side, by name Ras-Selach. Next to him,
there are two Comptrollers of the Court. The upper Comptroller, who is called
Bellatenot-Gueta, as much as to say Master of the Officers, whose jurisdiction
reaches all Inferior Viceroys, Prefects, Governors of Provinces, and Judges.
The other is called Dakaka Bellatenot-Gueta who comtroles the Household
Servants, the Grooms and such like, who are generally of mean Condition, and of
several Nations. Slaves also set free are admitted to Dignities and Offices.
For the Kings believe their Slaves, when freed, will be most faithful, as owing
to their Fortunes to none alive besides.

Next in Dignity to the Court Officers, are the Viceroys, and Princes,
Camp-Masters, Senators, and Kings-Counsellors, who are called the lesser Judges
and Magistrates without any distinction of Superior or Inferior Judges: for
they have equal Jurisdiction and Cognizance of all Crimes. The Captain of the
Kings Guard they call the Guardian of the Fire, not without reason comparing
the King to Fire. For that they who are Servants to Kings and Princes, receive
heat and warmth from them as from the Fire; though if they act not prudently,
they may chance to be cruelly burnt.

CHAP. XIII. Of the King's Camp.
The Kings Tent described: The Camp pitched in great order. The same always. It
consists of four parts: formerly in Shewa, now in Dembea. How large. As it were
a Marching City; the great Power of the Camp-Masters.

WHatever others have feigned concerning any other Royal City or Metropolis,
besides Axumas, are mere Fables. For the Kings of Habessinia live continually
in Tents, whether it be that they are not accustomed to Houses, or that their
frequent Wars and tedious marches will not admit of long rest. The Kings
Pavilion is a very large one, of white color placed in the middle of the Camp;
there being a large space of Ground left void round about it; as well to
prevent the Casualties of Fire, as also to receive the Horses of the Nobility
and those that bring Provisions. Next to him, the Grandees, the Friends and
kindred of the King and the rest of the Courtiers pitch up their Apartments.
The whole Camp consists of four parts, every one of which has his Camp-Master.
The first part is called the Front; and the Camp-Master is called Fit-aurari.
The Hindmost part is called Chuala. The First Camp-Master goes before to take
up convenient Ground where there is store of Wood and Grass, chiefly near some
River or Lake, to prevent want of Water. Having chosen out his Ground; he fixes
a Pole in the Earth with the Royal Banner at the Topp; upon the sight whereof,
they that measure for the Nobility, set up their Masters Lodgings. After them
the Common Soldiery, and others that follow the Camp either for Victuals, or
else upon business. And thus in a few hours time the whole Camp appears in the
same Order as it was before. For every one knows his place and his proportion,
there being never any alteration of the Order, but the same Streets and Lanes,
the same distance of Tents, so that were it not for the variation of the
Prospect, other Mountains, other Rivers, and another Face of the Country, you
would think your self still in the same place. When the Crier has once
proclaimed the day of Removal, they presently know how to pack up their
Baggage, and in what order to march without any more ado; who are to march in
the Front, who in the Rear; who on the Right, who on the Left hand: so that all
things are done without Noise or Tumult.

Neither is there any thing which more commends the Industry of the Abessines.
For what they have acquired by long use and continual War, they still retain;
never pestered with confusion either marching or sitting still. The constant
disposal and largeness of the Camp may be understood from hence, that the same
Dialect and the same words continue in the same Streets and Quarters: in other
Quarters another sort of words, and a different Dialect: as for Dala, a word
used in the Front of the Camp, which signifies to put in; the Vulgar in the
Rear Quarter say, Tshammara. Of old, before the Gallans conquered it, the Camp
was pitched in Shewa, a fertile and most plentiful Country. But for the most
part in December, and that for three or four years together in one place. In
the beginning of Susneus's Reign in the year 1607, they pitched at Coga. Thence
they removed to Gorgora, in the year 1612, from thence to Dancaza; and lastly
to Guendra which place, Bernier because he had heard perhaps that it was the
Residence of the King, calls the Metropolis of Ethiopia; of which perhaps in a
few years there will be nothing to be seen.

These Camps take up a vast deal of room, as well in the Summer as in the
Winter, for they do not only contain the Soldiers, but their Wives and their
Children, whose work it is to bake their Bread, and make their Hydromel. So
that the weak and helpless multitude far exceeds the number of the Soldiery.
Nor are they without Merchants and Tradesmen of all sorts, besides Slaves and
Lackeys, necessary for such a Multitude: So that the Camp looks more like an
Ambulatory City, and moving Houses, then a Martial Camp. So many Tents and
Pavilions seeming a far off to represent the Prospect of some great Town. But
less wonderful is that which is reported out of India; That near the Island of
Sumatra, there are certain Cities, if they may be so called, which are always
swimming, and yet great Markets and Fairs are kept therein; and many People
live there who have no other Country or Habitation.

Now for the Camp masters whom the Ethiopians call Sebea Catine, they carry a
great sway in managing the Succession of the Kings, and affairs of greatest
moment. The Kings also themselves are guided by them in making and abrogating
Laws; and generally they are the first springs of Faction and Sedition. And as
formerly the Pretorean Bands gave Laws to Prince and People, so among the
Habessines the effect of all Consultations good or bad derive themselves from
the Camp.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Military Affairs of the Habessines.
Continual war. The Winter causes a Truce. The Habessines good Soldiers. Strong
and active. They serve without pay. They plunder the Countries as they march.
The Gallans secured by their Poverty. The Habessines ignorant in Firearms. Few
Muskets, and fewer Musketeteers. Their Armies consist most of Foot. Light
Armor. Drumms used by the Horse. Their Weapons. Bad Discipline: because they
count it no shame to fly. Their Onsets furious. Their Rocks are their
Fortresses. The King Commands in chief. Theives unpunished.

THat the Habessines are a Warlike People and continually exercised in War, we
have already declared: neither is there any respit but what is caused by the
Winter, at what time by reason of the Inundations of the Rivers, they are
forced to be quiet. For they have neither Ships nor Boats: neither do they know
how to make Bridges to command a passage over their violent Streams. Concerning
which, Gregory wrote to me in these words.

There is no making War in Ethiopia in the Winter time; neither does the Enemy
attack us, nor we them; by reason of the great falls of Rain and the
Inundations of the Rivers.

Tellezius also further testifies, That the Habessines are good Soldiers. They
ride and manage a Horse well; and readily take Arms; as well in obedience to
their Sovereign, as for other causes already mentioned. They are strong, They
endure hunger and thrist beyond belief, and with little sustenance can brook
any unseasonable sort of weather. They serve without pay: contented with honor
and applause, and such Lands, as the King after the Roman Custom bestows upon
the well deserving. Therefore they must certainly be thought to sight much more
generously and faithfully in the defense of their Country then Hirelings. They
expect no part of the Enemies Booty, nor no redemption, and therefore never
serve them in the Field. and because they know not the art of protracting a
War, therefore they never are sparing of themselves to return home rich.
However the Poverty of the Soldiers impoverishes the Countries through which
they march. For in regard it is a difficult thing to carry Provisions over such
steep and rugged Mountains, and long ways, they take by force what is not
freely given them; and by that means lay wast their own Countries no less then
their Enemies: whereby the poor Country people are constrained to turn
Soldiers, and so taught to deal by others, as they were dealt with themselves.
For which reason they neither can vanquish nor make any long pursuit after the
Gallans; who being retired with their Droves, the Pursuers find nothing left
behind but Lands untilled, and empty Cottages. So invincible a Fortress is
Poverty to withstand the stoutest Enemy. But, as we have said already, Those
Gallans might easily be vanquished, did but the Habessines know the use of
Muskets. Tellezius writes, that they have among them about fifteen hundred
Muskets, but not above four Musketeers, and they but very bad Fire-men
neither; neither do the Commanders know how to place and order them to the best
advantage: and therefore after they have once discharged, the Enemy rushes on
so furiously before they can charge again, that they they are forced to to
throw their Muskets away: and then another thing is; they have but very little
Powder.

The biggest Army which the King brings now into the Field hardly amounts to
Forty thousand Men, among which he has not above Four or Five thousand Horse,
the rest are all Foot. Their horses are courageous and mettlesome, but they
never get upon their backs till they are ready to charge the Enemy: at other
times they ride their Mules, and lead their Horses. They are slightly armed
after the manner of the ancient Velites; and tho their Stirrups are no bigger
then only to thrust in their great Toes, least if the Horse should fall, their
feet should be hung in the Stirup, yet they sit very fast. Their Weapons are
Swords and Darts, as also Lances and short Javelins, with which they fight at
a distance; after which they dispute it hand to hand with their Swords or
Lances, and Bucklers. Their War like Music for the Horse are Drums much
bigger then ours, and the King's, which are the biggest, go by the name of the
Bear and the Lion. Besides which, several Horns and Fifes march before Him.
They for the most part, are armed with two Spears, of which they dart away the
one at a distance, and maintain a close fight with the other, defending
themselves with their Bucklers. The Horse never fight a foot, nor the Foot a
horseback: a practice very necessary in such a Country, where many times there
is no use of Horse. In brief, the Military Discipline of the Habessines is very
irregular; rather the fault of the Captains that know not how to command them,
than of the Soldiers. For they run away without any fear of Infamy or
Punishment: neither do they know how to rally when they are once disordered; so
that the first array being broken, the rest are carried away like a Torrent:
neither do they strengthen their Wings with Reserves; neither do they separate
the Veterans from the Raw Soldiers, disheartning the Courage of the one, by
the unequal mixture of the other. The fury of the first Onset for the most part
wins the Field: for which reason, the Gallans surpassing the Habessines in heat
and violence, have so often vanquished them. They are not easily persuaded to
avoid the Combat, believing it sloathful and dastardly to tire out an Enemy by
delay, and wait for opportunities. Which has bin the Ruin of many of their
Kings, that have joined Battle with more Courage, than Prudent Advice. The
Kings themselves, for the most part bred up in the field, command their own
Armies themselves; or else they create a Ras, to command in their stead.

One thing more remains behind, That this Country is very much infested with
Robbers as well as Enemies; who many times robb in Troops like Soldiers, and
very much infest the Roads; and this without any searching after, or care taken
to punish them; by reason that the King and the Governors being wholly busied
with continual Wars, have no time to ridd the Nation of these Vermin, who being
pursued, presently shelter themselves among the Rocks and Mountains.

CHAP. XV. Of the Wars in the last Century, Especially of the Fatal War of the
Adelans.
Their ancient Wars uncertain; the distance between Egypt, and our Ethiopia.
Caleb's Expedition into Arabia. The Wars of the last Century: First the Adelan
dreadful. The Lamentations of the Ethiopians at Rome. Caused by the sloth and
voluptuousness of their Princes: The assistance of the Turk, and Firearms: The
Portugals assist the Habessines. The Enemy vanquished by Gomez. His Fame; His
Fidelity tempted by Grainus: but in vain: They both act warily: Grainus fights,
and his Horse shot under him. A second Battle. The Enemies Camp taken. Gomeus
forces the Jews Rock. Gomez wounded, killed, his death revenged by Claudius.
Grainus overcome and slain. The Kingdom at quiet. The Adelans recover strength,
vanquish and kill Claudius. To whom Menas succeeds, who is also slain in the
Field. Serzadenghel vanquishes the Turk. Civil Wars after his death.

WE shall forbear to set down over-ancient or uncertain Relations, concerning
the Expeditions of the Kings of Ethiopia into Egypt, in regard it does not
appear to us, what part of Ethiopia those Writers mean; or how far the Empire
of the Abessines of old extended. For those things which Historians have
delivered to memory in reference to the Ethiopians adjoining upon Egypt, are
not presently to be applied to the Ethiopians. For that the distance between
Egypt and our Ethiopia, comprehends Eight or nine degrees, or a hundred German
Miles and more. In which wide space, Nubia was seated, so that there might be
Kings of other Ethiopick Nations next to that. And therefore till we see the
Histories themselves of the Abissines, we are unwilling to publish
Incertainties for Certainties. But that the Habessines did make several Famous
Expeditions into Arabia, is a thing not to be questioned; insomuch, that some
of them have made a Computation of their Years from thence: and that the
Kingdom of the Homerites was totally subdued by Caleb, we have already
declared. To omit then several other Wars waged with their Neighbors, the
Stories of which are to us unknown: as for example, that with the Nubians in
the 25th Year of the former Century, recorded by Alvarez; the most lamentable
and most fatal was that War which they entered into with the Adelans their
Ancient Enemies. True it is indeed, that in the beginning of his Reign, David
vanquished them in several Battles. But after the Turks had vanquished Egypt,
and some Ports of the Red Sea, the Adelans, strengthened by their assistance,
turned the Scale of Fortune, and were always Victors. For King Adelis sent one
Ahmed, a Mahumetan, vulgarly called Grainus, or Grannus, that is to say,
Left Handed, with an Army to invade Habessinia, and revenge the Losses of the
Adelans. He, about the Year 1526, subdued all Fatagara. For the first two Years
the War was carried on with various Success; but the next Twelve Years to the
Year 1540, at what time King David deceased, the Habessines had the worst of
it. The King having lost the choicest of his Kingdoms, and his Second Son
Menas, who was taken Prisoner, languish'd out the rest of his days in the Rock
Damus. And indeed the Habessines were brought to that low and miserable
Condition, that they began to despair of their Country. For such are the
Lamentations which we find made by those that lived at Rome, in the Epilogue
printed after the Gospel of St. John.

Not without reason do we weep, when we call to mind the Captivity of our
Brethren, our Country laid wast, Our Temples Burnt, our Books and our
Sanctuaries consumed with Fire, and the Profanation of our Monasteries by that
wicked and impious Grainus, a Companion for Goats, a Perscutor and Invader of
the Sheep, from Waigaci, to the Red Sea.

Among the Causes of such a Torrent of Calamities, these may be reck'nd not to
be the least: for that the King, vanquished by his own sluggish humor, had
given himself wholly up to the Temptations of Pleasure; so dedicated to Women,
that he permitted some of them to have their Idols in his Palace. Next, the
Turks, out of their inbred hatred to Christianity, had supplied their Mahumetan
Friend with Firearms, and such as knew well how to use them; whose Thunder,
then by the Abessines first heard, they were not able to endure; nor did they
know how to cure the Wounds which the Bullets made, as not being accustomed to
them: besides, that on the other side, the Mahumetans so numerously abounding
throughout Abessinia, favorably every where entertained those of their own
Sect. Many also of the Abessines themselves, following, as is usual, the
Fortune of the Victor, forsook their Native Sovereign: So that now every thing
threatened utter destruction and desolation, when the King, lurking among the
Rocks, began to bethink himself of craving Succor from the Portugals. To that
purpose in the Year 1535, one John Bermudes, a Portuguese, was sent. Who first
arrived at Rome in the Year 1538, where he was made Patriarch jointly of
Ethiopia and Alexandria, and afterward went into Portugal in the Year 1539,
and there obtained a Commission from John the Third, to the Viceroy of India,
to send Assistance to the Abessines. Their Commander was Christopher Gomez, a
Person of great Valor, who in the Month of July, in the Year 1541, entered the
Kingdom with Six small Fieldpieces, and Four hundred and fifty Musketeers. At
first they had a very severe March: for they wanted Horses and Teams: the
Country being so wasted, that they were forced to carry their Luggage and
Conveniences upon their shoulders over most rugged and steep Mountains.
Nevertheless, these Soldiers, few in number, but all choice men, and coveting
the honor to restore the King of Habessinia to his Kingdom and his Liberty,
patiently underwent all sorts of hardship. This caused a change of Fortune, so
that now the late Victors were every where put to flight, astonished at the
Execution of the Guns. In the first place, Gomez assailed the Rock Amba-Sanet,
which was thought invincible, and forced the Enemy to quit it. Whereby he won
to himself great Fame, and highly Encouraged the Habessines. First therefore
the Kings Mother, confiding in this small Force, left a certain Rock, which
gave access to none, nor permitted any to ascend, but as they were drawn up or
let down with Ropes, and cheered them with her presence. Claudius, who lay
sculking in the Kingdom of Shewa, had writ word he would be suddenly with
them, but durst not adventure through so many Numbers of the Enemies that lay
in the way. So that Gomez with some few of the Habessinians, was constrained to
bear the whole burden of the War with a most incredible Courage. The
Barbarians were not ignorant of the Gallantry of the Portugals, nor did they
believe their own People had hearts sufficient to withstand the Fury of the
great Guns. And therefore thinking it convenient as well to try the Disposition
of Gomez, as to spy what Force he had, they sent certain Commissioners to him,
pretending to blame blame his rashness, and to offer him safe Conduct, as being
deceived by the Abessines, if he thought fit to return. But Gomeus, as it were
provoked with the indignity they had put upon him, gave them an answer that
favored both of fierceness and contempt, telling them, That he was sent by the
most Potent King of the Portugals, to revenge the Injuries done to the
Habessines; and that his coming was not to return again, but to fight Grainus.
The Enemies Force in that place was 15000 Foot, and 1500 Horse, together with
200 Turkish Musketeers, whom Gomeus had most reason to fear. But he confiding
in the Courage of his own men, tho but a small parcel, resolved upon a Battle.
However, he keeps within his Camp. On the other side, Grainus would not stir,
well knowing the Portugals had Provision but for a few days; which being spent,
they would be forced to forsake the Hill where they lay Encamped, and so might
be easily environed by his Numbers. Nor did that cunning in part fail the
Barbarian; for the Portugals were forced to forsake their Camp, but could not
be surrounded by the Enemy, in regard their Fieldpieces and Muskets struck
such a Terror into the Mahumetans, that they, contemning all Orders of their
Captain, would not stir. And it so happened, that Grainus himself, riding about
to force his men on, was wounded in the Hips with a Musket Bullet, and had his
Horse shot under him. The fall of the Captain quite damped the Courage of the
Soldiers; so that they presently retreated, and the Portugals keeping the
Field, looked upon themselves as Victors. Twelve days after the Barbarians
renewed the Fight, for which the Portugals were prepared. While both sides
fought at first with equal Success, an Accident happened, lamentable in sight,
but yet the cause of the Victory. For while the Soldiers went with their
lighted Matches to fetch Powder, a Barrel took fire, the noise of which so
terrified the Barbarians Horses, that their Riders not being able to rule them,
they disordered the Body of the Army; which the Portugals observing, laid all
their force upon the Turks, who being put to flight, the rest easily followed.
However, they could not pursue them far, because they had but Eight Horses.
Nevertheless the Enemies Camp was taken and plundered. This was the work of
that Summer: for the Winter coming on, put an end to farther Action. The Winter
now declining, the Portugals, who thought nothing too difficult for them to
undertake, attacked another steep Rock in Samen, called the Jews Rock, which
was kept by the Adelans, with a Garrison of 1500 men. For it was large, and
contained many Fields, Meadows, Fountains and Streams. The attempt was
occasioned by a Jew, who had bin formerly Governor of the Rock, who hearing of
the Courage of the Portugals, advised the taking of it, in regard there were
many Horses in it, which the Portugueses principally wanted: and the more to
encourage them, he promised to show them such by-ways, that they might be able
to surprise the Garrison; adding withal, That there would be no safe Passage
for Claudius, so long as the Enemy held that Pass. Gomez understanding by the
Queen that the Jew spoke truth, undertook the Enterprise with prosperous
Success: for having slain all the Barbarians, he got a Booty there of Fourscore
brave Horses, Three hundred Mules, several Slaves, and other good Plunder
beside. After which he restored the Rock to the Jews, understanding they had
always bin faithful to the Habessines.

In the mean while Grainus finding there was no good to be done against the
Portugals without Guns and Firearms, sent for immediate Assistance from the
Neighboring Turks, and petty Basha's of Arabia. So that he obtained from the
Bashaw of Zebid a fresh Supply of Seven hundred, some say, Nine hundred
Musketeers, and Ten Fieldpieces. Some noble Arabians also that were his
Friends came to his assistance. Gomez, either knowing nothing of this, or else
heightened by his two former Victories, never staying for Claudius, as he ought
to have done; in regard he delayed somewhat longer than was expected, nor yet
tarrying for some of the Portugals who brought Horses along with them: Or
whether it were, that he was constrained to it, as having no place of Retreat,
and did not believe that Grainus himself would appear before the Winter was
over, gave the Enemy the opportunity of a Battle. But being over-powr'd by the
Turks, he was wounded with a Musket Bullet in the Thigh. He himself, having
lost many of his own Soldiers, and the stoutest of his Commanders, by the help
of the Night escaped to a Rock. The wounded and weary were all slain, the rest
dispersed themselves into the Woods, while the Camp became a Prey to the Enemy.
Fourteen only accompanied Gamez, the most of them wounded; who void of all
assistance, without food or medicaments, refreshed themselves by the Fountains
which afforded but small relief. There they were apprehended by the Turks and
Arabians, and carried to Grainus exulting for joy of his Success. He causing
about a hundred of the heads of the Portuguezes to be brought and laid down
before him, upbraided Gomez for his madness in undertaking a War against him:
and then after he had received a stern answer from his Captive, caused him to
be tormented to death.

After that misfortune, the King came up, sad for the loss of Gomez, whom he
desired most earnestly to have beheld with his Eyes. Nor were they less sad to
whose assistance he came, as well for the loss they had received, as because he
had brought so few Forces with him. Therefore they lay still three or four
months, till they could raise more. They being come, the Portugals, who were
now reduced to a hundred and twenty, and yet zealous to revenge the death of
their Captain, were very urgent with the King to fight, giving him great hopes
of Victory. For they had intelligence that the Turks were returned home,
leaving only two hundred behind them: whether by Command of their Bassha, or
taking it ill that Gomez was not delivered to them. The King, though he had not
above Eight thousand Foot, and Five hundred Horse, resolved to follow the
Inclinations of the Portugals. And first in a slight skirmish he routed some of
the Barbarian Forces that marched before; Then sets upon Grainus himself, who
led an Army of 13000 men, and vanquished him; Grainus himself, the Terror of
Habessinia for so many years, was shot with a Musket Bullet by a Portugueze,
who revenged the death of his Captain. All the Turks but fourteen were slain.
The head of Grainus was exposed to the view of the People in several Provinces
and Kingdoms of Habessinia, to the great comfort of the beholders. For upon the
sight of it, the Abissines recovered Vigor and Courage; They congratulated
their Kings Success; and they who had revolted, returned to their duty,
pretending necessity for the fault committed. The King considering the
condition of those times, thought it convenient to pardon all, to confirm the
wavering, to win the hearts of his People by Clemency, to rally his scattered
Forces, and to do all those things which were necessary for the
re-establishment of his Kingdom. Only one of the principal Commanders, to whom
the King had granted his pardon, the Portuguezes put to death as laying to his
charge the Murder of Gomez. His perfidiousness was thought to have deserved
death; and so justice prevailed, without any further notice being taken of it.
In the mean time, the Gallans, till then an obscure Nation, were neglected, tho
they had invaded many Provinces already laid wast by the Adelans; not being
looked upon as such as would have increased so much to the future damage of
the Kingdom. There was still a greater fear of the Adelans, who having in time
repaired their Losses, only waited an Opportunity to make a New Invasion. Soon
after their Spies returning with intelligence that the Habessines were grown
secure, and consequently careless, under Nurus their Captain, they again broke
into Habessinia with a mighty Force; overthrew Claudius who advanced to oppose
them, and slew him. After his Death, Menas obtained the Crown, hated by the
People for his Cruelty. From thence Intestine Wars ensuing, the Turks being
called into the Kingdom, overthrew the King in Battle and slew him; which gave
them an easy advantage to make themselves Masters of the Port of Arkiko, and
the Island of Matzua. His Son Zerza-Denghel, much more fortunate than his
Father, performed many brave Achievements, and beat the Turks of Tigra, but
could not regain Arkiko, nor the Island of Matzua. He reigned Thirty Years
continually vexed with the Gallans, or harrass'd with Intestine Broyls. After
his Death, Civil Dissensions, and deadly Strifes between the Royal Offspring
about the Crown, so weakn'd the Habessines, tormented at the same time with the
Gallans, that from that time to this day, they could never Master that Potent
Enemy. As to their Wars about Religion, that arose in the time of the Fathers
of the Society, we shall speak more hereafter.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Leagues and Embassies of the Habessinians.
To the Portugueses. Helena sent Matthew an Armenian, and wherefore. After a
long stay in India. he Arrives in Portugal, Suspected. From Portugal, Odoardus
Galvan sent Ambassador. To whom Roderic Linaeus Succeeds. Alvarez his Priest.
He after six years dismis'd with Tzagazaabus to the Pope. Which Letters Alvarez
carried to Rome. Read at Bononia, and with what effect. Upon receiving the
Portugueze Succor, they do not refuse the Latin Religion. Whence hopes of
their Embracing the Roman Faith. Letters sent to the Pope. An Ambassie
appointed: without Effect. Commerce with the Europeans interrupted: nor
admitted unless tried by Matrimony. Embassies rare in Habessinia, unless to
Constantinople: or to Batavia. Ambassadors Forrainers. A League with the
Persians.

AT what time the Portugueses, making several Voyages into India, made War upon
several Nations, their fame reached the Abessinians also; who glad that the
Power of the Saracens was brought low, and that Egypt and their Patriarch of
Alexandria was restored to freedom, were in hopes that the Passage to Jerusalem
would be open. At the same time also was Peter Covillian among the Habessines,
who had given them more certain Relations concerning the Portugueses. Therefore
Helena, the Grandmother of David, and Governess of the Kingdom, as we have
said, sent an Ambassador into Portugal, one Matthew an Armenian, skilful in
Foraign Affairs, and one that understood the Arabic Language, joining with him
a Young Nobleman of Habessinia. She was willing to employ a Forraigner, either
because she could find none among her own People that were fit for such an
Employment; or that she believed none of that Nation could get safely into
Portugal, that Kingdom being hated by the Neighboring Nations, by reason of
the Pyracies of the Saracens. Mattheus was certainly in danger, and sometimes
detained a Prisoner among the Arabians, out of whose hands he used many devices
to escape; and at length got safe to God, to Albuquerquez, Viceroy of India,
together with his Colleague. By whom, tho he were nobly there entertained, yet
he questioned the sending him into Portugal: Because such an Embassy seemed no
way Correspondent to the Dignity and Grandeur of the famous Presbyter John. And
therefore he resolved first to expect the Kings Pleasure. Thereupon Matthew
being detained Three Years in India, at length in the Year 1513. he arrived in
Portugal. The They are to be found after the Preface of Alvarez's Itinerary, as
also in the Treatise of Damianus a Goez, concerning the Great Emperor of the
Indians, to Emanuel, King of Portugal, first printed at Dordrecht. But
Tellezius forgot himself, when he writes, That Matthew brought David's Epistle
full of Titles: for that is to be attributed to Alvarez or Tragazaabus.
Letters which he brought from Helena, being written with the Ethiopic
plainness, without any bombast of gaudy Titles, seemed to contain more than
they that sent them were able to perform. For they freely offered safe Conduct,
and a Thousand other necessary Conveniences for Ships, which was looked upon as
a piece of boasting Vanity by the Portugals, who perhaps thought the Queen had
spoken of the Indian Vessels of those Nations that lay upon the Red Sea.
Matthew himself an ordinary Merchant, without any Magnificence of Train, was
hardly thought worthy so high an Employment; and they were afraid of future
shame for having acknowledged a false Ambassador. After many and long delays,
at length they were satisfied; and in return, another Embassy was decreed to
the Habessines, and Odoardus Galvan was sent upon that Employment. He dying by
the way, Rodorick Limez was sent in his room, whose Priest was Francis Alvarez,
who left behind him an Itinerary, written in the Portugueze Language in a plain
and ordinary style, tho afterward, for Curiositie's sake, translated into
several By Michael de Selves, into Spanish; by others into Italian and Dutch:
Jovius promised also to do it into Latin, but failed.
Languages.

Six Years Rodoric Limez resided in Ethiopia, before he was dismissed by the
King, that he might be in a Capacity to make the same return of Kindness to the
Portugals. At length he sent him back, joining with him Tzagazaabus, with
Letters to the Pope and the King of Portugal, flourished at the beginning, with
those usual Titles, which we have already recited. But what is to be admired
(...) Tzagazaabus arrived not at Rome, till the Year 1539, being detained at
Lisbon. Certain other Extant in Alvarez. Damianus a Goez. of the Ethiopian
Customs. and Tom. 11. Hispian. Illustrat. p. 1250.
Letters were also recommended to Alvarez, who carried them to Bononia, and
made a long Discourse of the Respect and Reverence which the Kings of
Habessinia had to the Sea of Rome. They were read before Clement the Seventh,
and the Emperor Charles the First, with the general Applause of the Court of
Rome; but with no Success. For that Claudius the King plainly denied to ratify
either those things, or what John Bermudes afterward related at Rome to the
same effect; as if never given in Command, nor so understood, but that the
business of the Embassy, and consequently the Letters themselves had bin
faign'd and contrived by the Portugals. However, the Habessinians being reduced
to very great streights, at the Intercession of Bermudes, had an assistance of
Four hundred and fifty men granted, and sent into Habessinia by the Command of
John the Third. But Peter Pays positively writes, That this was done at the
request of the Queen of Ethiopia. And that Stephen Gomez who sailed into the
Red Sea to burn the Turkish Ships, and by chance came to an Anchor before the
Island of Matzua, after he had consulted his Council of War, resolved to send
the said Supply, as seeming to be for the honor of God and the King. Of which
Consultation there had certainly bin no need, if the King had Commanded the
Supply before. However it were, that Succor was not only very necessary, but
very advantageous to the Habessines. From which time the Habessines were not
only gratefully, but honorably received among the Habessines: nor did they
then refuse the Latin Religion, but frequently went to the Portugueze Chapels,
and admitted Them into Theirs. Moreover, they also gave Liberty to the
Habessinian Women that were married to the Portugueses, to go to Mass with
their Husbands, and to partake of the same Ceremonies with them. So that during
the Reign of Claudius, there was great Hopes both at Rome and at Lisbon, that
the Habessinians might be persuaded to embrace the Romish Religion. But that
Hope proving vain, there was for some time a Cessation of Embassies, and the
Abessinian Friendship with the Lusitanians was almost interrupted; until by
the Artifices of the Fathers of the Society, the Minds of the later Kings were
somewhat more inclinably disposed to give Obedience to the Sea of Rome.

Upon that, Letters were written to the Pope and the King of Spain, who was
then also King of Portugal, and answers upon them, which gave an Occasion to
Susneus to decree an Embassy into Europe. To that purpose Mistakenly
Tecur-Egzy in Tellezius, l. 2. c. 3.
Fecur-Egzie was chosen, and with him Antonie Fernandez was joined; who were
commanded by unknown and by-ways to Travel Southward, till they reached
Melinda, upon the Shore of the Indian Ocean, from whence the Passage was more
Easy and Safe into India. Thereupon setting forth out of Gojam, they Traveled
through Enarea, from thence into the Kingdom of Zendero, and so to Cambata, the
Last Kingdom under the Habessine Dominions. Thence Traveling into Alaba, they
were forbid to go any farther, by the Governor of the Province, who was a
Mahumetan. He apprehended the Ambassador with his Train; and had not the Law of
Nations bin of some force among the Barbarians (for they had about them to show
both their Letters and Presents from the Emperor) they had bin put to death,
with the Law in their own hands. Being by that means set at Liberty, after a
Years and seven Months time spent in hard Travel, after many sad Experiences of
Savage Barbarity and a Thousand Jeopardies, they returned home without
effecting any thing. Nor can any reason be certainly given, why those unknown
and dangerous Ways were chosen, thorough so many Barbarous Nations, so many
Wild and Desert Countries, when the Road lay so plain through the Kingdom of
Denoale in Friendship with the Abissines, to the Port of Baylur, which the
Patriarch of Portugal afterward securely made use of: as if so tedious a
Journey had bin imposed upon the Undertakers, not so much to go upon an
Embassy, as for the Discovery of Foreign Countries, and By-Roads, for the
Direction of Travelers.

After that, there happening a difference between them and the Sea of Rome, all
manner of Commerce and Communication with the Europeans ceased: Insomuch, that
now they would with great reluctance admit those whom before they so highly
admired, and with great difficulty would dismiss, out of their affection to
Arts and Sciences; especially, if they suspected them to be Clergymen, or
under Religious Vows. For which reason they tried them first, by offering a
Wife to every Stranger.

Otherwise, they rarely send any Ambassadors abroad, unless it be into Egypt,
when they have need of the Metropolitan. For they are not only ignorant of
foreign Affairs and Languages, but of the Ways and Roads of other Countries.
By reason of their Vicinity to the Turks, and thence their frequent Commerce
one with another, sometimes they are forced to send Ambassadors to
Constantinople, as in the Year 1660. So in the Year 1661, one Michael was sent
thither with the wonted Presents; a living Tecora; several Skins of dead ones;
Pigmies and the like, as Thevenot writes. In the Year 1671, another Ambassador
was sent, with some of those painted Beasts, and Letters to the Dutch Governor
of Batavia. But they who are sent, are generally Forrainers, Maronites,
Armenians, or else Arabians. But as for what Leonardus Rauchwolf writes in his
Itinerary, it is altogether vain and false: That Presbyter John having made a
League with the Persians, sent a Persian Bishop with so many Priests, that in
Two years time they converted Twenty Christian Cities to the Christian
Religion. It seems to be an old and confused Relation, and to be understood of
that same ancient Asiatic Prester Chan, Neighboring at that time upon the
Persians. But he ascribes this passage to the Emperor of the Abessines, and
that it came to pass Twelve years before his coming. Philip Nicolai believed
him, and inserted this Figment into his Book concerning the Reign of Christ,
adding the Year 1562, at what time the Affairs of the Habessines were in their
most afflicted Estate.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Viceroys, Presidents and Governors of Provinces.
The various Titles of Viceroys and Governors. Ded Azmat the Common Title of
Presidents. The cause and Original of this Variety; And of the Imperial Title.

THE Viceroys, Presidents and Governors of Countries which the King appoints
and lays aside at his pleasure, are not called by any common sort of Title:
but according to the several Kingdoms which they govern, derive to themselves
particular Appellations. Some there are who are honored with Royal Titles; as,
Negus Began. King of Began, Enareja Negus, King of Enarea.


Others are thought worthy the ancient appellation of Nagasi, in the Amharil
Dialect, Nagash; which word signifies a Ruler, Commander or Lord. And was
formerly more especially attributed to the Ethiopian Kings by the Arabians, as
has bin already said: as, Bahr-Nagash, Ruler or Regent of the Sea Coast.
Gojam-Nagash, Regent of Gojam. Walaka Nagash, Regent of Walaka.


The word Ras, put absolutely, or with the proper name of the person signifies
the Chief Commander or General of an Army: but if the name of the Kingdom be
added, it signifies the Governor thereof; the same with the Germans, Hauptman
or Lands-Hauptman; as, Angot Ras, Captain of Angot. Bugna Ras, Captain of Bugna.


This Title Tzagazaabus assumed, although he were but a Monk, while he subscribed
to the Confession of Faith by him set forth, as follows.

Bugna Ras, Arch-Presbyter, Tzagaza-ab, Ambassador from Jan Beluli Hatze Lebna
Denghel.
Some suffice themselves with the Title of Shum, which is otherwise common to
all the Governors of Guraga and Cambata. Guraga-Shum, Governor of Guraga.
Cambata-Shum, Governor of Cambata.
whom at other times they call the King of the Hadians.

The Viceroy of Tigra, is called Macuenen, as Tigre Macuenen, President or
Judge of Tigra.

The names of the rest are not to be expounded out of the Ethiopic Language;
being perhaps words significative in the vulgar Dialects; as, Amhara,
Tzabfaldam. Damota, Tzabfaldam. Shewa, Tzabfaldam. Dembea Cantiba. Bagender
Azmat. Gedma-Katen. Ifata Walasma. Fatagar Asgua. Samen Aga-fari.


The Governor of Diabai is called Ded-Asmat, which is properly the common Title
of all Presidents, and signifies the Captain of a Provincial Militia, or a
Colonel. This diversity of Titles seems to arise from hence, for that the
ancient Possessors of these Kingdoms, before they came to be reduced under the
Power of the Habessines, assumed those Titles of Dignity to themselves, which
afterward the Vulgar People gave to their several Governors in their distinct
Idiomes. Or else the Governors themselves retained the ancient names; the Kings
of Ethiopia conniving at it, as esteeming it for their Honor to have so many
Persons of several Dignities at their devotion. For because the Governors and
Viceroys of Provinces assumed to themselves the Titles of Negus, and Nagasi,
therefore the Ethiopic Kings took an occasion to give themselves the Title of
Negusa Nagast, or King of Kings.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Princes that are Tributary to the Kings of Ethiopia, and
of others subject to him, that claim absolute Dominion in their own Territories.
Tributary Princes never Forty, much less Sixty; Gregory acknowledged but Four:
appointed by the King for a time. That Dignity hereditatary to some few. The
next equally Subject. The reason. All called Servants, even the Queen herself
which seemed very severe to the Portugals. The same Custom among the Rasses.
The Kings Pavilion sacred. The strange behavior of Suppliants: and various
manners of supplicating. How the King carries himself toward Suppliants. The
Ceremonies of Suppliants among the Turks and the Indians. The gentleness of the
European Princes begets them love.

THat the Kings of Ethiopia formerly had several Tributary Kings under them, we
have already declared. This Dam. de Goez. relates of him, in his Book,
concerning the State and Kingdom of Presbyter John, 11.11.
Matthew the Armenian reckn'd them up, tho untruly, to the number of Fifty, tho
most erroneously. Nor did they write with more Truth, who tell us of Fifty or
Forty; when as they have not so many Viceroys. Gregory knew but Four, that is
so say, the Kings of Sennar, Dancala, Garaga, and Enarea. As for the King of
Sennar, he has often revolted and made War upon the Abessines. The King of
Dencala is a firm Allie, but obliged to no sort of Tribute. All the rest,
whether Kings or Governors, are by the King himself appointed to govern such
and such Kingdoms and Provinces, and are only pro tempore. Some few there are,
that claim a supreme Dignity by right of Inheritance. But all of Royal descent;
and all other of the Nobility, who are reputed to derive their Pedigrees from
the Israelitish Race, are equally subject to the King; without any distinction
of Dukes, Earls, Marquesses and Barons, as Ibid. n. 13. There are, says he, in
Abassia, Lords, Dukes, Earls and Barons innumerable. I would be willing to know
how they are called in the Ethiopic Language.
Matthew fabulously asserts. For the Kings of Ethiopia, as most of the Eastern
Kings, deem it not a decent thing to command Illustrious Families. Not
believ^ng that Servitude can be expected from those that are accustomed to
Command themselves. Moreover, they presume that Hereditary Dignity is an
obstruction to Virtue; that Men are more certainly made, than born great; and
that they will prove more faithful, whom they have raised from the Dust, then
such as claim their Fortunes from their Ancestors. Therefore the Kings of
Ethiopia account themselves only Lords; all others they look upon as Servants:
in that particular not sparing their Brothers or their Kindred. So that when
they bestow any Government upon them, they use this form, We have created our
Servant such a one Governor of this, or that Province. Nor do they ever
discourse them but in the singular number, Thou: whereas we generally make use
in our Language of the second person plural. No other Epithet do they afford
their own Queens, tho of the highest Rank of Nobility. We have caused to Reign,
that is, We have taken to Wife our Servant such a one. Nor do they disdain
these Titles: but on the contrary call themselves reciprocally his Servants.
This word Servant, was very ill digested by a generous Portuguese, as looking
upon the title of Slave, to be a disgrace to him that was a Freeman. And
therefore he offered a good Sum of Money to him, that, according to Custom,
was to proclaim the Government conferred upon him, to leave out the word
Servant, and only to proclaim his bare name; but could not obtain it. Nor is
the Negus of Ethiopia to be taxed for this alone, seeing all the Princes of
Africa and Asia use the same Custom. The same Sovereignty is claimed and
maintained by the Russian Emperor; whose Grandees never call themselves any
other then Golop, his Servants; nor in their Letters which they write to him do
they subscribe their names any otherwise than in the As for Example; Hansellus,
Stephanuel, Laurentioll, thy Servant. Olear. his Itinerary.
Diminutive. We are also to understand, That the word Gabre, or Servant, has a
more diffusive signification among Them than among Us. For it extends not to
real Slaves alone, but their Subjects and Domestics. And indeed, to say truth,
they differ but little from Slaves, who are bound to observe their King at all
times with Body, having nothing at all of Property, to which they can lay the
least claim. Nor are the Ceremonies less servile by which they testify their
Submission and Reverence to their King. The Bah-tu-ded himself the Chief of his
Ministers, as Alvarez relates it, stood before the King's Pavillion, naked up
to his Thighs, with his Head and his right hand almost touching the Earth, and
a poor Linen swath-band about his forehead, crying out thrice, Abeto, or most
merciful Lord. Being asked according to Custom, Who he was? he answered, He
was the meanest of the Court, that Saddl'd the Kings Carriage Horses, ready
prepared to obey all Commands. When the Kings Messenger, whom they call Kol
Hatze, the King's Voice, declares the King's Commands afoot, it behooves all
that hear to be afoot. Neither is it lawful to ride up to the King's Pavillion,
no more than if it were to some Altar, but the person must always alight at a
distance.

Suppliants having occasion to make their Petitions to the King, stand in a
certain place, and instead of Petitions which they know not how to write,
betimes in the Morning with loud Voices and different Tones, whereby they may
be severally distinguished by their Countries, they wake the sleeping King,
beseeching him to hear their complaints. They of Amhara and Shewa, and those
that use the same Dialect, redouble these following Exclamations as fast as
they can speak, Shan Hoi, Shan Hoi, My King, My King. Some add Belul Hoi, Shan
Hoi, Belul Hoi; My Apple of my Eye, My King, My Apple of my Eye.

Hence Tzaga-za-abus composed his ridiculous Shan Belul, (by others more
corruptly Beldigian) King Apple of my Eye, much more ridiculously rendered In
his Confession of Faith above mentioned. Tom. 2. Hispan. Illustrat. p. 1311.
High or Precious John.

The Tigrenses, in their Supplications, cry out, Hadurije, My Lord.

The Inhabitants of Dembea and Dara, Jegja, or Our Lord.

Those of Gafata and Gojam, Abkawo, O Father of Orphans.

The Mohammedan implores his own Ja Siddi, or, O my Lord.

Those of Gonga and Enarea, Donzo, Lord.

The Lusitanians in their own Language make use of their own Senhor, Senhor,
Senhor, till they are heard. The Barbarians, the more savage they are, so much
the more harsh and obstreperous in their Tones. For the Gallans, like so many
Wolves, howl out their Hu, Hu, Hu. Others bark like Dogs, or imitate the
inarticulate noises of Wolves, Apes, and other Wild Beasts, to the end they may
be thereby the better distinguished. But the more Civilized, and those that
belong to the Camp use no other exclamation, but that of their Abeto, Abeto,
Abeto, or Lord, Lord, Lord: which Appellation of Honor is attributed not only
to the King, but to all those whom we call See the Relation of Jerome Lupus,
Printed in English, Entitled a short Relation of the River Nile. p. 40. see
more in Sandovall de Restaur. Ethiop. Salut. 250.
mild and merciful Lords. Others addressing themselves for relief, make use of
other expressions, by which they think the King may be most honored; saluting
him by the name of Sun, or Lord of their Hearts. But the Monks, unless access
be permitted them, sing a certain Hymn.

These particular Tones of Suppliants are taken norice of; and as soon as day
appears, such and such are commanded to be admitted, and heard: or if it be a
business of moment, the King himself gives them audience and returns them their
answer. And surely it is the chief Office of Kings to hear the Complaints of
their Suppliants, and to administer timely Justice to their Subjects. Of which
the Barbarian Kings not being unmindful, gave opportunity to poor and miserable
people, to whom their Court was shut up from access, to convey their Complaints
to the Kings Ears. Among the Turks, the Suppliants always carry a lighted fire
upon their heads before the Window of the Sultan. In the Bedchamber of the
Great Mogul, there always hangs a Bell, which it is lawful for the Suppliant to
ring, standing at the farthermost end of the Palace, but he is taken into
Custody by the Guards; and if afterward he do not make good his Accusation, he
loses his Life for his presumptuousness. Our Princes after a more noble manner
receive Petitions from the hands of their Suppliants, and thereby greatly win
the love of their Subjects. They who despise that sort of Clemency, or whip out
at their back doors to avoid the sight or giving Ear to the miserable, do but
only procure Sadness to their People, and Hatred and Contempt to themselves.

CHAP. XIX. Of their Judiciary Proceedings and Punishments.
Their Judicial Proceedings very plain. Witnesses slightly and cursorily
examined. Appeals rare. Their Punishments, Stoning, Drubbing, and Banishment.
Homicides how punished. A Discourse of Like for Like.

THe manner of their Judicial Proceedings is very plain and ordinary. For all
Controversies are determined by word of Mouth, without any noise of Process,
without any Writs, or Writings, of which the most part of the Nation is
ignorant. The Plaintiff has liberty to produce his Witnesses, which the
Defendant may refuse, if he have any reason to suspect them But in regard of
their ignorance of the true Proceedings by way of Interrogatory and proof, nor
understand how to examine a Witness, it must of necessity follow, That Justice
is but ill administered, where the Witnesses are so cursorily heard. It is
lawful to appeal from Inferior Sentences either to the King or the
Court-Tribunals: but that is seldom done; by reason of the Poverty of the
People, and the tediousness of Traveling: and partly out of the Little hopes
they have of redress. For the Governors and Judges of Provinces are offended
with appeals, as seeming to them an accusation of Injustice; and therefore the
wronged Parties fearing their displeasure, rather choose to lose their right,
than the favor of the Judges. Neither does the resigning of Office afford any
relief against an unjust Sentence. For either through Favor or for Money they
obtain a Pardon for all things done amiss in their Magistracy.

Among the sorts of Punishments inflicted upon Offenders, besides Beheading and
Hanging, the most ready at hand is Stoning to death: the Soil affording
sufficient materials for that sort of Execution. The next is Drubbing, if the
Crime be not Capital.

The punishment of the Nobility, is Exilement into the Zanic Lake, or into
their high and steep Rocks, which are in a manner like Islands; from whence
however they frequently escape by reason that the People are easily corrupted
by Bribery.

Homicides are delivered up to the next of A Custom still used in Persia, as
you may read in Tavernier and Olearius.
Kin to the Party murdered, at whose free will it is, to pardon the
Malefactors, sell them to foreign Merchants, or put them to what death they
please. If the Homicide escape unknown, the Inhabitants of the place and all
the Neighborhood are obliged to pay a Fine; by which means many Murders are
either prevented or discovered.

Most certainly the Law of Like for Like, was always and still is accounted the
most just, and plainest among several Nations. Hence that of Moses, An Eye for
an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth. But because there is not the same use of all
members among men, some men according to their various Callings having more use
of one Member than another; some being better able to lose their Hands than
their Legs: others the^r Legs than their Hands: therefore among the Civilized
Nations this Law grew out of custom. And it seems unjust to surrender the
Offender to the Malice and Fury of the Offended Party, when they may have
unbiased Judges, to give Sentence without Favor or Affection.

The End of the Second Book.
OF THE Ecclesiastical Affairs OF THE ABISSINES. BOOK III.
CHAP. I. Of the ancient Religion of the Abissines, and their Judaic Rites.
The Ecclesiastical History of the Abissines corrupt: and why. The first
Relation of Matthew the Armenian false; Tzagazaabus's Confession as little to
be credited. Those of the Fathers, and Tellezius more certain. Ecclesiastical
History commended. The Tradition of some concerning the Original of the Judaic
Rites. Circumcision used by many. How it differs from the Judaic. No piece of
holy Worship among the Habessines. Females circumcised. Why the Abissines
abstain from Swines Flesh. The Various Customs of Nations concerning Meats. The
Sabbath observed in the Primitive Church; Different from the Lords Day, and
how. Whether lawful to marry a Brothers Wife. They abstain from the shrunck
sinew What to be thought of Candaces Eunuch. Menihelec's Posterity revolted
from the true Religion. Claudius disclaims the Judaic Religion.

NOw we proceed to the Ecclesiastical History of the Habessinians, then which
there is not any other more corrupt. For whatever we find scattered in our
Relations, were neither collected out of the Books which are publicly
authentic in Habessinia, nor taken from the report of any persons there skilled
in the Ecclesiastical Affairs of that Country, but partly ill related through
the Rashness of the Writers themselves; partly by the same persons or others
ill understood through their ignorance of the Ethiopic Language.

The first Relation concerning the Religion of the Habessines, was set forth by
Damianus a Goez, a noble Lusitanian, from the Report of Matthew the Armenian,
First Ethiopic Ambassador to Emanuel King of Portugal; which Narrative of his
In a little Treatise often quoted, Of the Embassy of the Great Emperor of the
Indians.
contains many things ambiguous, many other things altogether false. Insomuch
that Tzagazaabus, the second Habessinian Ambassador, plainly taxed the Author
of it, For thus he says in his Confession of Faith, Matthew, in regard he was
an Armenian, could not so perspicuously understand our affairs, especially
those that related to our Faith. And therefore he reported many things to King
Emanuel, which are not in use among Us. Which he did not out of desire to tell
an untruth, because he was a good man, but because he knew little concerning
our Religion. But in my opinion, that good man Matthew spoke many things, which
he knew much better.
for his ignorance. Tho he himself in the Confession of his Faith, which the
same Extant in the 2. Tom. of Spain illustrated, p. 1302.
Goez set forth, did not much excel him either for truth or probability, for
which reason Tellezius not undeservedly reprehends him. Certainly Gregory was
very much offended with him; And when he heard his following Doctrines,

1. That Jesus Christ was the Son of the Father, and the beginning of himself:
in the same manner that the Holy Ghost, was the Spirit of himself, and
proceeded from the Father and the Son.

2. That he descended into Hell where was the Soul of Adam, and Christ himself,
which Soul of Adam Christ received from the Virgin Mary: and toward the latter
end of the Book, That Christ descended into Hell for the Soul of Adam and not
for his own.

3. That the Souls of men piously deceased are not crucified in Purgatory upon
the Sabbath and Lords Day.

4. That by the Decree and Commandment of Queen Maqueda the Women were also to
be Circumcised, as having a certain glandulous piece of Flesh, not unfit to
receive the Impression and mark of Circumcision.

I say, when Tellezius heard these things, and many other of the same mixture,
in no small heat and Passion, he cried out, That they were Fictions, Dreams,
nay mere Lies: frequently repeating these words; If he said this, he was a
Beast of the Field.

Yet out of these Books most of those Stories have flowed, which our Writers
have made public, concerning the Religion of the Abessines. But the Fathers of
the Society, having bin conversant so long in Ethiopia. and viewed the
Habessine Books, after several Disputations and Discourses with them, have bin
able to afford us more Truth, whose Acts and Writings being free for the
perusal of Tellezius, we shall cull the choicest of his accurate Relations, and
what he has reported more ambiguous or more partially, out of his dislike of
the Alexandrian Religion, we shall correct out of their own Writings, or from
the Discourses of Gregory himself.

Certainly to Christians, no History can be more pleasant than that of
Ecclesiastical affairs; especially if we look back to the Primitive Church. For
whom would it not ravish into a high admiration of the wonderful Providence of
God as well in founding as preserving his Church? when he shall consider that
it grew up, and increased, not by the Propagation of Arms or human Arts, but by
the Oppression of Heathenish persecution. To whom can it be unpleasing to
consider with a Pious Contemplation, the undaunted Courage of the Martyrs, the
Constancy of her Doctors, the Sincerity of the Christian People, the Purity of
the Faith, the Strife of Good Works, the Patience of the Weak, the plainness of
the Rites and Ceremonies? Which when they once began to be altered, with the
reverence to the Church be it spoken, then also entered in Pride instead of
Modesty, Ambition instead of Charity, together with Faction and Contention. As
if our leisure and our Quiet were therefore granted us by Heaven to consume
that time in making Scrutinies into all the mysteries of Faith, and moving such
impertinent Questions, which ought to be spent in exercises of Charity and
Piety.

But I return to the Religion of the Habessines, concerning the Original of
which, there are various Opinions of sundry Authors. They that admit the
Tradition of the Habessines concerning Queen Maqueda, are of Opinion, that the
Abessines had the true knowledge of God, ever since the Reign of King Solomon,
and that their Judaic Rites, such as Circumcision, abstaining from meats
forbidden, Observation of the Sabbath, Marriage of the Brothers Wife, and the
like, had their Original from thence. But in regard these things were commonly
practiced as well in other Nations, as among the Primitive Nations, who
conformed to the Jews in several things, It is not a thing to be easily
affirmed, that these were the footsteps of those Ceremonies received so many
Ages before from the Jews. For not only the Jews, but several other Nations
made use of Circumcision, and still so do to this day, tho not out of any
knowledge of its Original, or any Consideration of Divine Worship. The most
Herodot. in Thalia.
ancient Historians tells us, That the Egyptians were the first that
instituted that Ceremony, or else learnt it from the Ethiopians. From thence it
came to be in use among the Colchi, Phoenicians, and Syrians. They of Alnajah,
an Ethiopian Nation, circumcise with sharp Stones. And Ephinanius expressly
mentions the Homerites, from whence the Habessinians are descended, for the
same Custom. We omit the Troglodytes, Nigrytes, and other innumerable Nations,
which either do not understand the cause of it, use it for (...) for
cleanliness sake. idem.
cleanliness; or else pretend it to be conducible Philo Judaeus in his peculiar
Chapter of Circumcision, brings these and many more reasons.
to generation; or that they have a longer Preputium, and therefore thought it
convenient to have it cut away, as In his Oriental Itinerary. c. 32. p. 1.
Thevenot writes: for fear those more pure Musulmen, should be polluted with
their own Urine.

Neither did Mahomet recommend it to his Arabians, as learnt from the Jews; but
left the Custom as he found it; nor does he make any mention of it in all his
Alcoran. Besides, there is a great difference between the Circumcision of the
Jews and that of other Nations. For other Nations only round the Skin with the
Knife, but the Jews slit the Skin with their nails, till the Prepution falls
down, and leaves the Nut altogether bare; for unless there be Perignah
denudation, they do not think the Circumcision accomplished. For so their
Doctors teach, Who circumcises and does not lay bare, is as one that never
circumcised. So that if the Skin should happen to grow together again, it must
be again dissected. Whence it is easier to understand what is meant by those
Places in Scripture which mention the If any one be Circumcised, let him not
draw over, etc.
drawing over of his Preputium. For being cut off, it can never be restored by
any Art, but being only slit or torn, it may be sowed together again. Whence
it is easy to find that the Habessines do not use the same manner of
Circumcising with the Jews. Neither is it performed with any signal Ceremony or
Commmemoration. For it is done privately by some poor woman or other, without
any Standers by, not so much as the Father himself. But the Confession of
Claudius King of Ethiopia, takes away all doubt, who to clear himself and his
people from all Suspicion of Judaisme, says thus.

But as to the Custom of Circumcision, we do not Circumcise like the Jews, For
we understand the words of St. Paul, the Fountain of Wisdom, who says, It
profits not to be Circumcised, nor does Circumcision avail: but rather the new
Creation, which is Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. And then to the Corinthians
he says, again, who has taken upon him Circumcision, The Printed Copy varies
from this, where the words are more obscure. If any one goes in uncircumcised,
let him not go forth.
let him not keep his Preputium. All the Books of St. Paul's learning are among
us, and tell us of Circumcision and the Preputium; but our Circumcision is done
according to the custom of the Country, like incisions of the Face in Ethiopia
and Nubia, and boaring the Ears among the Indians.

This puts us in mind of the Circumcision of Females, of which Gregory was
somewhat ashamed to discourse, and we should have more willingly omitted it,
had not Tzagazaabus in his rude Confession of Faith, spoken of it as of a most
remarkable Custom introduced by the command of Queen Maqueda; or had not Paulus
Jovius himself, Bishop of Como, insisted in the same manner upon this unseemly
Custom. This same Ceremony was not only used by the Habissines, but also
familiar among other people of Africa the (k) Egyptians, and the Arabians
themselves. For they cut away from the Female Infants something which they
think to be an Indecency and Superfluity of Nature. The most impudent women
that inhabit about the Cape of good Hope, still retain this Custom, and for a
small matter, expose themselves to the Seamen. Jovius calls it, Carunniculam,
or a little piece of Flesh. Golius, an oblong Excrescence. The Arabians by a
particular word called it Bedhron or Bedhara, beside which they have many other
words to the same purpose. Among their Women it is as great a piece of
reproach, to revile a woman by saying to her, O Bandaron: that is, O
uncircumsised, as to call a man Arel, or uncircumsised among the Jews. A
strange thing, that only in Africa and some Parts of Asia, the Women should be
noted for those extuberancies: for the Jewish women in Germany, being
acquainted by their reading with this Custom, laugh at it, as admiring what it
should be that should require such an amputation.

Nevertheless this seems to have some reference to the forbidden use of Swines
Flesh, and other Meats not allowed by the Mosaic Law, as the same King Claudius
manifestly gives us to understand in his Confession.

But as to what relates to the Eating of Swines Flesh, we are not forbid it,
out of regard to the observance of the Mosaic Law, as the Jews were. For we do
not abhor him that feeds upon it; nor do we force him that does not, to make it
his diet, as our Father Paul writing to the Romans has written. Who eats, let
him not contemn him that eats not, for the Lord accepts all. The Kingdom of
Heaven consists not in meat or drink. But it is not good for a man to eat to
the scandal of another: And Matthew the Evangelist says, Nothing can defile a
man but that which goes out of his mouth. For what ever goes into the belly,
and is retained in the stomach, that at length is cast into the Draught. And
thus he pronounces all meat clean. Now while he spoke those words he destroyed
the whole structure of the Jews Error, who were learned in the Books of the
Mosaic Law.

Most Nations have a particular Diet, some by custom, some through
superstition.

Not to speak of the Mahumetans, who abstain not only from Swines flesh, but
from Wine, is not the custom of the Bannians, not much different from the
ancient Pythagoreans, to be strangely admired? who only feed upon Herbs and
Meats made of Milk, which we hardly believe sufficient to sustain Nature.
Others there are that devour all sorts of Creatures which the flesh consuming
Beasts themselves refuse, and otherwise nauseous to the most part of Men. The
Oriental Tartars feed upon Camels, Foxes and all sorts of wild Beasts. Some of
our Europeans indulging their appetites, please their palats with a sort of
Diet abominated by all other People, as Frogs, Cockles, and I know not what
sort of Insects. Gregory had an utter aversion to Lobsters, Crabbs, Crayfish
and Oysters, which we account our chiefest Delicacies: and it turned his
stomach to see Turkies, Hares, and several other Dishes to which he was
unaccustomed, brought to our Tables. Being asked, why he abstained from Swines
flesh? he retorted still, and why we from Horseflesh? And most certainly were
we to banquet with the Tartars, there are but very few of us that would easily
be induced to eat Horseflesh with an Appetite, tho it be one of their
principal junkets. Nay their Ambassadors to our Princes desire fat Horses for
their Kitchins.

However they abstain from blood and things strangled, not out of any
observance of the Mosaic Law, but an Apostolic Decree always in force in the
Eastern Church: which was also for many Ages observed in the Western Church,
and revived in some Councils. They also rebuke us, for that we suffered that
Decree to be laid aside.

Nor do they allow the Jews Sabbath out of a respect to Judaism, or that they
learnt it from some certain Nations that kept the Seventh day holy. But because
the ancient Custom of the Primitive Church, who observed that day perhaps out
of complacency to the Jews, being long retained in the East, was at length
carried into Ethiopia. For thus we find it written in some ancient
Constitutions which they call the Constitutions of the Apostles.

Let the Servants labor five days, but let them keep the Holydays, the
Sabbath, and the Lords Day in the Church for the sake of Pious Instruction.

The Council of Laodicea decreed that the Gospels with other parts of Scripture
should be read upon the Sabbath; when before the Paragraphs of the Law of Moses
were only read upon the Sabbath, and the Gospels upon the Sunday: the Texts of
the old Law being thought most agreeable to the Old Sabbath, and the Texts of
the New Testament, to the New Sabbath.

Socrates also farther testifies that the People used to assemble at Church
upon the Sabbath and Lords Day.

And Gregory Nyssen, whose Writings the Ethiopians have among them, says,

With what Eyes do thou behold the Lords Day, who have defiled the Sabbath?
Know thou not that these two days are Twins, and that if thou injur'st the
one, thou do injury to the other?

But Claudius makes so much difference between both days, that he prefers the
Lords day before the Sabbath.

But as to what pertains to our Celebration of the ancient Sabbath, we do not
celebrate it, as the Jews did, who Crucified Christ, saying, Let his blood be
upon Us and our Children. For those Jews neither draw water, nor kindle fires,
nor dress meat, nor bake bread; neither do they go from house to house. But we
so celebrate it, that we administer the Sacrament, and relieve the Poor and the
Widow, as our Fathers the Apostles commanded Us. We Celebrate it as the Sabbath
of the first Holiday, which is a new day of which David says, This is the day
which the Lord made, let us rejoice and exult therein. For upon that day our
Lord Jesus Christ rose: and upon that day the Holy Ghost descended upon the
Apostles in the Oratory of Sion. And in that day Christ was incarnated in the
Womb of the Perpetual Virgin St. Mary: and upon that day he shall come again to
reward the Just, and punish the Evil.

Gregory also testified, That the Habessines abstain from no sort of Labor
upon the Sabbath, but from the most servile sorts of Labor. This Custom
continued long in the Church, till it was abrogated by degrees; for by the 22d
Canon of the said Council of Laodicea the Christians are forbid to work upon
the Sabbath. Nevertheless the Sacred Lectures were continued for a time, as
appears by the Canon above mentioned, till at length those were also left off;
perhaps because that the People having a license to work, there were but few
that repaired to Church.

Moreover, according to the Custom of the Jews, it is lawful in Abessinia to
marry the Widow of the Brother deceased, as Alvarez testifies. Adding, That the
Habessinian defend their so doing by the Laws of the Old Testament. But Gregory
positively denied that it was lawful, but only connived at by the Magistrate.
However, that such Wives are also prohibited from coming to the Holy Communion,
wherein Alvarez agrees with him. However it does not therefore follow, that
this Custom was translated from the Jews to the Habessines, no more then if any
one should assert that the Laws of Polygamie and Divorce were derived from the
Jews. And yet this is somewhat strange, I must confess, that they abstain from
that Muscle, which the Hebrews call Ghid Hannesheh, or the Sinew mutilated: the
Ethiopians, Sereje Berum, the forbidden Nerve: the Amharies, Shalada. Which
very probably they might learn from the Jews in their own Country, of which
Nation there are several Colonies in Ethiopia.

But as to what is reported concerning Queen Candaces Eunuch, we have already
showed that she was not Queen of Habessinia, but of the Ethiopians that
inhabited the Island of Meroe: and if the Eunuch were a Jew, it does not follow
that his Lady the Queen shall be so too. Others there are who tell us. That
Menilehec's Successors in a short time returned to the worship of Idols. Which
if it be true, the assertion of the Continuation of the Jewish Religion till
the time of the Apostles, will prove altogether vain: tho in Europe most
certainly the Habessines were long suspected of Judaisme, and so are many to
this day. Which King Claudius observing by his Disputations with Gonsalo
Rodriguez, and the Writings which he composed to refute the Errors of the
Habessines, set forth a Confession, of which we have already cited several
parcels, as they related to our business. The chief Scope of which was, to
remove that Suspicion of Judaism from himself, and his Subjects, which in my
opinion he very effectually did.

CHAP. II. Of the Conversion of the Habessines to the Christian Faith.
The Conversion of the Habessines attributed to Queen Candace's Eunuch; but
contrary to authentic Histories. Candace no Habessinian. Other Traditions
nothing better. Demonstrated when, and by whom: To which the Book of Axuma
agrees. The Reasons of doubting and deciding, Frumentius how called. His
Encomium. Cedrenus and Nicephorus refuted.

IT is the Common Fame among the Europeans, That the Conversion of the
Habessines to the Christian Faith was begun by that Ethiopic Eunuch, Acts 8.27.
And perhaps the Habessines themselves, believing it to be for their Honor,
were the authors of the Story: confiding in the Credit of the Book of Axuma,
where, the same history is set down as in the Acts of the Apostles, and without
any other Circumstances: by which it may seem this story had not its first
original among them, but was transcribed. Neither was Tzagazaabus better
informed, as appears by his Confession of Faith. Nevertheless it seems very
strange, that King David should either assert or give his assent to Alvarez
asserting the same thing: whereas the Credit as well of the Ethiopic as Greek
History absolutely tells us the contrary. Some endeavor a Reconciliation of
this difference, as if the first dawnings of Christianity, tho but very dark
and obscure, began at that time first to glimmer. But then this should have bin
demonstrated by solid Reasons relating not only to the Ethiopic Nation in
general, but to the Habessinians in particular. Whereas the Testimonies which
we shall cite by and by do not speak of the Conversion of those that were half
Christians before, but either of the Jews, or Heathens. For we have already
showed that Candaces was never Queen of the Habessines. Neither is her Proper
Name Lacasa, which we find in the Vulgar Catalogues to be found in Tellezius.
For Hhendaqe, or Hindaqe, is a quite different word from Candace, from whence
others casting away the Aspirate, derive the name Judith: others, as if they
would correct the Error, have strained it to Judith. Nor was the name of
Candace ever known to the Habessines, tho familiar to the Inhabitants of Meroe.
Others refer the Conversion of the Habessines not to Candace's Eunuch, but to
the times of the Apostles, and particularly ascribe it to St. Bartholmew:
others to St. Matthew; or because there is no such thing to be found in his
life, to St. Matthias. Of all which Fancies the Habessines knew nothing, who
hearing such Whimseys from our Countrymen, not without reason answered, That
perhaps those things were to be understood of the Lower Ethiopia, that lies
between Abassia and Egypt. However we can never find out what the Success of
those Apostles Preaching was: what Kings or People withstood that Conversion:
what Pastors, what Ceremonies, what Books they made use of: what form of
Discipline, or what was the Doctrine of that time. Concerning all which things,
in regard there is so deep a silence, we cannot acknowledge any such beginnings
of the Christian Religion in Habessinia.

However this is certain, That both the Habessine, Grecian, and Latin Writers,
Especially Ruffinus and his followers, agree with one consent, That the
Conversion of the Ethiopian, happened in the time of St. Athanasius, Patriarch
of Alexandria under Constantine the Great, about the Year of Christ 330. or not
long after, and that in this manner. One Meropius, a Merchant of Tire,
(Ruffinus calls him a Philosopher) intending for India, put into Harbor upon
the Coast of Ethiopia in the Red Sea, which at that time was also called the
Indian Sea. There dying, or, as Ruffinus will have it, slain by the Barbarians,
he left two Young men, Frumentius and Adesius, Fremonatum and Sydracum, the
Habessines call them, who being taken and brought to the King, became highly
favored and caressed by reason of their Ingenuity and Industry; and at length
being made free of the Country, were preferred by the King to keep his Books
and Papers. The King dying, they remained in the same Employment under the
Queen Regent, till the Young King came of age.

All this while they entertained the Christian Merchants that Traffick'd into
those Parts, with all kindness, and did them all the good offices Imaginable,
and made themselves so remarkable for their Virtue and their Integrity among
those Nations, that the Christian Religion was highly esteemed by all. Which
foundation being laid, Frumentius took a Journey to St. Athanasius, Patriarch
of Alexandria, and was by Him, for his great parts, and Constancy in the Faith,
created the first Bishop of Ethiopia. Thereupon returning into Ethiopia, he
initiated the Inhabitants in the Christian Religion by Baptism, then he
ordained Presbyters and Deacons, built Churches, and so introduced the
Christian Religion into Ethiopia. Agreeable to this, are those Relations which
the Ethiopians have in their Book of Axuma, only that there is this addition
to the Story of the Conversion made by Candace, that these Tyrian Young men
admired, that the Ethiopians should believe in Christ and adore the Holy
Trinity, and that the Women wore Crosses upon their heads, seeing that the
Gospel had bin preached among them by none of the Apostles. We wonder much
more, that Ethiopia should be converted in the time of the Apostles, and yet
have no Bishop, no Baptism, no Priests nor Deacons, and that all these things
should be first settled in the time of St. Athanasius. Besides, no man can be
easily persuaded that such a beginning should remain so long time without a
farther progress, and that the Ethiopians themselves, or the Bishops of the
Neighboring Christians should be so neglectful as not to lend their helping
hands to the advancement of such fair Beginnings, Especially at such a time,
when the Christians over the whole Roman Empire, chiefly in Egypt, suffered a
most dreadful Persecution under Dioclesian. How came it to pass that they did
not seek for refuge in this Kingdom out of the reach of their Enemies, where
they were sure of Sanctuary and Protection from a Prince of their own Religion?
Could all the Ecclesiastical Histories, and the Annals of the Patriarch of
Alexandria have forgotten a Prince, the first in all the World that had
received the light of the Gospel? Were there no Martyrs, whose memories the
Habessines are so sollicitous to preserve? No War, no Seditions upon the change
of Religion, but so great an Alteration without any noise? To assert a thing of
so much moment, and yet to bring no Circumstances, no particular Events and
Casualties, seems very discrepant from the Truth of History.

It is sufficient that the Ethiopians agree with us in the principal matters.
For whether Meropius died or were slain, whether Frumentius and Edesius were
called Fremonatus and Sydrac, signifies little. Yet in that Place Ruffinus was
strangely deceived. For he seems with others to have meant India properly so
called, when he neither knew the Bounds or Situation of it, where he says,
That the Hithermost India adjoyns to Ethiopia: Between which and Parthia he
places the farthermost India. So that he makes the farthermost India nearest to
Ethiopia, and Parthia more remote. This was the reason that Baronius believed
there were two Frumentius's; and that one was a Preacher of the Gospel at
Axuma: whereas it was but one and the same person, that was Apostle and Bishop
of the Habessines, call them Indians or Axumites, which you please.

This reconciliation of differing Writers was not known till this time, nor
does he undeservedly give the honor of the discovery to the Jesuits: and that
then and not before the Christian Religion was first introduced in Form, as he
calls it; as being led by tradition also, that Christianity had some kind of
bloomings before in Ethiopia. But what it was, or to what growth it arrived,
there is no man that can unfold. Neither does Ruffinus make mention of any
Jewish Religion, or any other deformed Sect that preceded. On the contrary, to
use his own rough expression, he says, That this Land (meaning Abassia) was
never broken up with the Plough-share of personal Preaching. In short, Gregory
affirmed to me, that there was not any other Preaching of the Gospel in
Habessinia, then what was first begun by Abba Salma, in the time of St.
Athanasius, and in the Reigns of Atzbeha, and Abreha, Brethren. And this Abba
Salma was Frumentius. He is celebrated among the Metropolitans of Ethiopia, in
the Ethiopic Liturgy, as also by our Ethiopic Poet, as being the first that
displayed the light of the Gospel in those Parts; for which he gives him this
Encomium.

Peace to the Voice of Gladness I pronounce,
The fair Renowned Salama, for he at once
Did open wide the Gate of Mercy' and Grace:
And Ethiopia showed the splendid Face
Of Truth and Zeal by which we Christ adore,
Where only Mist and Darkness dwelt before.
Where we are to take notice of the words Mist and Darkness, which the Poet
would not have made use of, if, according to the Tradition aforesaid, there had
bin any knowledge of Christ in Habessinia, before that time.

Moreover the same Poet makes this addition upon the same subject.

Peace to thee Salama, who did obey
Divine Command, Hid Doctrine to display;
That Doctrine which in Ethiopia shone,
Like the bright Morning Star, and which alone
To Ethiopia first by Thee conveyed,
Still makes the Grateful Ethiopian Glad.
Which Story of the first Conversion of Ethiopia being grounded upon a firm
foundation, must of necessity overthrow what In the 15 year of Justinian. N. 14.
Cedrenus, and after him Many famous men were deceived by their Authority, as
Joseph Scaliger. in emendat tem. Calvisius in Op. Arron. John Laet in Comput.
Hist. Univers. and Cherer. in Hist. Univers. in Justinian.
Nicephorus Callistus, a Historian of little credit, have delivered concerning
the Conversion of the Habissines, as happening a long time after this. For they
write, That Adad, King of the Axumites, (who are no other than our Abessinians)
about the Year of Christ 542, and the 15th Year of Justinian 's Reign, made a
Vow, That if he overcame the King of the Homerites, he would Embrace the
Christian Faith. Whereupon succeeding in his Enterprise, he sent Ambassadors to
Justinian, and desired him to send him certain of his Bishops, who were the
first that divulged the Doctrine of Christianity in those places. But we have
already showed, that the Kingdom of the Homerites was utterly subverted near
Seventy Years before by Caleb, Emperor of the Ethiopians: afterward it fell
under the Dominion of the Persians, the Habessines who were then Masters of
those Territories, and the defenders of Christianity, in vain contending with
the Persian Power, which not long after was also constrained to yield to the
Victorious Arms of the Saracens. How then could it happen, that the King of the
Homerites should be overthrown by Adad? Neither is it likely that Adad, if
there were any such King, would send for Bishops so far off, altogether
ignorant of the Language and Customs of his Country, which he might have had at
that time, much nearer at hand, either from Alexandria or Jerusalem. Besides
that, if it had bin so done, Justinian would not have sent Jacobites, but
Melchites; and so the Habessines would have followed the Opinions of the
Melchites, whereas they always were and still are known to be Jacobites. Not to
mention the So in the Edition of Turrian, but the 84. in the Version of
Abrahamus. Ecchellensis. They are both in the Arabic and Ethiopic languages,
and brought into Europe in the last Century.
36. Nicene Canon, in which the Seventh Seat of Dignity in the Council, is
assigned next after the Prelate of Seleucia, to the Prelate of Ethiopia. Which
may certainly teach us, That our Ethiopians, at the time of that Council, were
most certainly Christians, and were under a Christian Superintendent or
Metropolitan. And therefore it is apparent that those Historians were false in
all their Circumstances.

CHAP. III. Of the Increase of Christianity in Habessinia; the Original of
their Monastical way of Living, and of their Saints.
After Frumentius many Monks. Some out of the Roman Empire, and some out of
Egypt. Nine, more remarkable, named. The first Aragawi Extolled by the Poet for
destroying the Kingdom of Arwe. What that Kingdom was. Pantaleontes Cell, his
Sepulcher and Encomium. The Encomium of Likanus, another of the Nine. Other
Doctors and Martyrs. Portentous Miracles of their Saints. Their Austerity.
Gabra Monfes-Kaddus, the restorer of Monastical Living, which began in Egypt by
the Institution of Anthony. Imitated by several Anchorites. Their Spontaneous
torments. Anthonie's Successors. The Tradition of the Monastical Scheme. Icegue
the Abbot -- his Habitation. Abba Eustachius famous for Miracles: He left
Successors, but no Institutions. Habessinia full of Monks. Their Institutions
and Habits different from the Greek and Latin. They practice Husbandry, and
bear Civil Offices.

THe Conversion of Ethiopia being thus begun by Frumentius, many Pious men,
partly called by him to his assistance, and partly of their own accord,
repaired thither to Him. We find in the Chronicle of Axuma, that in the Reign
of King Amiamid, the Son of Saladoba, many Monks came from Rome, and grew very
Numerous in the Country. But by the name of Rome, the Ethiopians mean the Roman
Empire. For in Imitation of the Arabians they call the Frequent in the Saracen
History of Elmacin, where by the Lantin Language, of Greek is still meant.
Greeks Errum, who at that time were most prevalent in the Eastern Parts. Nine
of these Persons were more Famous then the rest, who seated themselves in
Tygra, and there erected their Chapels. It is most probable that they came out
of the Neighboring Parts of Egypt, which at that time was under the Greek or
Constantino Politan Emperors; but their names were all changed by the
Habessinians, except that of Pantaleontes, by whom they are numbered in this
Order.

1. Abba Aragawi. 2. Abba Pantaleon. 3. Abba Garima. 4. Abba Alef. 5. Abba
Saham. 6. Abba Afe. 7. Abba Likanos. 8. Abba Adimata. 9. Abba Oz, who is also
called Abba Guba.
I find the most of them mentioned by my Poet, who highly applauds them for
their singular Piety, and their extraordinary Miracles.

Of Aragawi, otherwise called Michael, he has this Encomium.

Peace be to Michael, Aragawi named,
Wisdom his Life, his Death true Prudence famed.
With him was God, the Holy Three in One.
To all those Saints an everlasting Crown,
Who by their Prayers true Concord did enjoy,
That they might Arwe's Kingdom quite destroy.
By Arwe, which signifies a Serpent, he either means in general the Kingdom of
Satan, which was destroyed by the propagation of Christianity; or in particular
the Ethiopic Gentilism. For, as we have already said, the most ancient
Ethiopians worshipped a Serpent, as their supreme Deity, to which the Poet
seems to allude. There are to be seen to this day the Cells wherein those holy
Men sequestered themselves, by the names of Beta Pantaleon, the Domicil of St.
Pantaleon in Tigra: where his Sepulcher also remains. Of whom the Poet thus,
Peace to Pantaleon's Bones, who studied here,
In the inner Cell, next to his Sepulcher.
Who by the aid of Heavens most precious Word,
Speech to the dead miraculously restored.
Who by his Prayers, and his Soul-saving Voice,
Made the afflicted Widow soon rejoice.
Her Sins were dead, but he unlocked the grave,
And freed those Souls which Death did late enslave.


He also makes mention of the Nine Saints in his Hymn to Likanos.

Peace be to Likanos, who of the Nine
Makes one, who did their Lives to God resign;
With lasting wreaths would they my Temples crown,
How should I then set forth their high renown!
Like lighted Lamps his fingers burned in prayer,
His Hand was pierced, when he the Staff did bear.
Besides these, there are several other great Doctors among them, who have
highly merited for propagating the Christian Religion; as also many Martyrs,
frequently celebrated by the Ethiopians and Coptices in their Religious
Panegyricks. But as to their Saints, they relate of them, several Miracles more
than Extraordinary: as the removing Mountains, appeasing the rage of most
Tempestuous Seas; raising the Dead; causing Water to spring from smitten Rocks,
and walking over Rivers, which are reported for common Miracles among them: so
that if the Truth of the Ethiopic Church were to be grounded upon such Wonders,
there could be no purer Religion in the World. For tho we have a St. Martin,
that gave a piece of his Cloak to one in necessity, they have among 'em a
Saint, that parted with his whole Garment to relieve the distressed. There are
among them not only several Stories of persons that have walked upon the Asp
and the Basilisk, and trampled upon the Dragon and the Lion, but also those who
have rode upon those Beasts, as upon Horses and Mules. Never were the Ascetae
more austere. There are some who have lived for whole days together upon three
little Dates, others upon no more than one poor little dry Biscuit.

But there is not one more renowned for Sanctity among them, then
Gabra-Menfes-Keddus, or the Servant of the Holy Ghost, in honor of whom they
keep a Holyday every month.

Next to him is Tecla-Haimanot, or the Plant of Faith, who restored the
Monastical way of Living, in Ethiopia, about the Year of Christ 600. Whom the
Ethiopic Poet extolls in a most singular manner.

All hail to thy Navity, great Saint,
It was at first thy Mothers great Complaint,
That she should barren dye, till the Angels Voice
Declared thy Birth, and made her Son rejoice.
Then Tecla-Haimanot Thou did appear
Like to the Sun, that rules the Day and Year:
Thy Glory filled the Earth from end to end,
And to the Heavens thy Luster did ascend.
This Austere way of Living was first practiced in Thebais; a Desert of Egypt,
whither many Pious men had retired themselves from the Persecution of the
Heathen, that through abstinence and temperance they might be more intent upon
the Duty of Prayer. Among the rest, St. Antonie, as it were the Captain of the
Hermites, prescribed certain Laws to be observed by the Professors of this
sort of severity: for which reason, next to Paul, he was looked upon as its
first Institutor. The Affairs of the Church being settled, many Anchorites, in
imitation of him, voluntarily chose a solitary way of Living: for that reason
called Monachi, Monks, or People that lived alone by themselves. Some merely
out of a Pious and godly end; some out of an opinion of merit; some out of
vainglory and a desire of worldly fame; because they found that austerity of
life, as being a thing hard to be undergone, was vulgarly much admired and
highly applauded. Many also did not think it sufficient to abstain from lawful
enjoyments, or to bridle and restrain the ordinary desires of Nature, but
voluntarily tormented themselves with new invented Tortures, or macerated
themselves with hunger and famine. This Custom spread it self also into
Ethiopia, where some without any advantage to themselves or others, invented
several ways of afflicting their own Carcasses: as for example, To stand whole
days together in cold water, to gird their Loins with a heavy Chain, to feed
only upon Pot Herbs and Roots, and that very sparingly too. Nay, which is
hardly to be credited, some there were, who would thrust themselves into the
clefts of Trees, and so as those closed together again, suffered themselves to
be buried alive.

To Antonie succeeded Macarius, after whom lived St. Pachom, to whom in
Ethiopia succeeded Aragawi, the first Abbot or Ruler over Monks among the
Abessinians.

His Successors were Abba Christos Bezana. Abba Mesket Moa. Abba Johanni,
Who left bequeathed his Asqema, that is, the Badge of his Abbotship, or his
Monastical Habit to Tecla-Haimanot. For the Tradition is among them, That the
Archangel St. Michael brought that Habit to St. Antonie, for which reason it
was afterward delivered from Successor to Successor, as it were from one hand
to another. The Greek word it self is (...), Schema. Alphonsus the Patriarch
compares it to a Scapulary. The Life of this Saint is extant in Ethiopia,
written at large, and stufft with several Miracles, and rendered famous for
several Apparitions and Pilgrimages. Mention is also made of him in the
Ethiopic Church Registers after this manner.

Remember Lord the Soul of thy Servant our Father, Tecla-Haimanot, and all his
Companions. This Tecla-Haimanot gave new Rules and Precepts to his Monks, and
ordered them to submit themselves to a Governor, who is called Icegue, and is
always of highest authority and dignity next to the Abuna. He either Visits his
fellow Monks himself, or sends some one in his stead to reform Errors and
punish transgressions. Before the Kingdom of Shewa was won by the Gallans, he
had his habitation in a place called Debra Libanos, or the Mountain of Libanus,
which was afterward translated into Bagemdra. And hence it is, that
Tesfa-tzejon, who set forth the Ethiopic New Testament, in the Epilogue to St.
Matthew, thus speaks of himself and his fellow Monks.

We are all the Sons of our Father Tecla Haimanot, of the Monastery of Mount
Libanus. The other Abbot or Governor of the Monks called Eustathius, is no
less famous than he, nor is his Memory less esteemed in their Sacred Registers,
while they cry, Remember, Lord, our Father Eustathius, with all his Children.

Of him the Ethiopic Poet thus sings: Hail to thy precious Mantle, once the
Boat,
Which with thy Burden on the Sea did floate;
Thy Pilgrimage a mighty Wonder showed,
Th'Obedient Ocean smooth and smiling slow'd
And Rocks removed, abandoned ancient Rest,
To give free Passage where thy footsteps pressed.


He also prescribed Laws to his followers, but imposed no Governor upon them,
neither are they very solicitous about that neglect; pretending, That
Eustathius went into Armenia, having named no Successor; and that therefore it
is not lawful for them to appoint any one. Every Abbot therefore is Supreme in
his own Monastery; and if any one dye, another is chosen by the Suffrages of
the rest of the Monks. Habessinia is full of these sort of people, to the great
burden of the Commonwealth, to which they are no way profitable; as being
useless in the Field, and free from Tribute. However their Rules and Orders are
very much different both from the Greeks and Latins. For excepting their
Sheemas and Crosses which they carry, you can hardly distinguish them from the
Laity: in regard they neither wear any Coat or Monastical Habit. Nor do they
live in Monasteries, but in some Village in scattered Cottages near to some
Church or Temple. They have certain Prayers of which they say such a number,
believing their Piety fully satisfied if they finish their Task; which that
they may make the more have to accomplish, they huddle over the Psalms of David
with such a dextrous celerity, that I who have heard 'em at Rome, holding the
same Copy in my hand, could never follow them with my voice, and hardly with my
eyes. Every one manures his own Ground, and lives upon the product of his
Labors, of which they are also very liberal. Otherwise they go and come, every
one without control, as they please themselves. So that by no means their
Farms can be called Cloisters, nor they be said to be really Monks, but only
unmarried Husbandmen, and that only while they preserve their Continency
entire. However they are branded with infamy, if they forsake their Monastical
way of living to marry Wives. Nor are their Children capable of being admitted
into the Clergy; and it is taken for an affront to call any man the Son of a
Monk. Nevertheless they bear Civil Offices, and are sometimes made Governors of
Provinces, as is apparent by the Example of Tzagazaabus; who was a Monk, as
appears from Alvarez's Itinerary. Of such as these the Question may be asked
with St. Jerome, If thou desire to be accounted a Monk, what do thou do in
the Cities, what in the Camp, or why do thou undertake Civil Employments?
They could not choose but highly displease the Fathers of the Society; which is
the reason, that they have always spoken of them with contempt: on the other
side, the Monks have bin the main Obstacles of the Fathers Successes; for which
Reason, Tellezius calls them Persecutors of the Catholic Faith. Their
Monasteries (if we may so call their Villages) are very numerous and dispierc'd
over all Parts of the Kingdom: and commonly go by the name of Daber, a
Mountain; in the plural number Adebaruti, Mountains: as, Dabra Bizen, Dabra
Hallelujah, Dabra Damo, Albamata, and the like, as being formerly built upon
steep Hills: Beside which, they possess all the Islands in the Tzanic Lake,
except Deka.

An Addition to the Third Chapter, concerning their Nuns.
THat there are also Nuns in Ethiopia, I gather from Tellezius. But they are
very ignorant, and therefore the more obstinate in their devotion. For proof of
which, the same Tellezius produces a very remarkable Story of one, who by
chance becoming blind, was admonished by one of the Fathers, to make
Confession, and embrace the Latin Religion, unless she intended to go headlong
to Hell. To which the Nun made answer, That she was willing to go thither of
her own accord, for that she found there was no Room for her in Heaven, as
being a person with whom God was displeased, and had therefore deprived her of
her sight, without any cause of offense by her committed. Upon which the Father
pressed her the more urgently, in hopes to deliver her from that more dangerous
blindness of her Mind. But finding her to continue obstinate after all his
pains. Since then, said he, thou refusest Heaven, get thee to Hell with all the
Devils, with Dathan and Abiram. But I would not have thee take thy Religious
Habit along with thee, which is only proper for those that desire the Joys of
Heaven. And so saying, he presently ordered her to put off her Nuns Vestments,
and to put on a sordid Vulgar Habit; which wrought in her such a sadness and
contrition, that she soon after made her confession, and reconciled her self to
the Church of Rome.

CHAP. IV. Of the Sacred Books of the Habessines.
The Ethiopians, together with the Christian Religion, received the Holy
Scripture, according to the Version of the 70 Interpreters -- the New Testament
from an Imperfect Copy and ill Printed. The Old Testament divided into four
parts: The New Testament into as many- The Revelation added as an Appendix. To
the New Testament are added the Constitutions and Canons of the Apostles, as
they call them, divided into Eight parts: Therefore they reckon several Sacred
Books. Three Ecumenical Councils. A fair Manuscript of the Councils at Rome.
Books therein contained. A Counterfeit Book of Enoch. Magical Prayers. Wherein
Monstrous words seeming to be taken from the Jews. The Form of the Jewish
Anathematizing.

DIvine Worship is seldom found among any sort of Nations in the World to be
without Books, by which we apprehend from whence every particular kind of
worship derives it self, and by what means it got footing among the People: for
the words and the worship generally go together. Which is the reason there are
so many Hebrew and Greek words in all the Versions of the Bible, and that we
have so many Latin words in our Theology.

The Habessines together with the Christian Religion received the holy
Scripture. And this Scripture was translated into that Idiom of the Ethiopic
Language, which was at that time more peculiar to the Inhabitants of Tigra,
from the Greek Version of the Seventy Interpreters, according to a certain Copy
used in the Church of Alexandria; which the innumerable various Readings, that
are inserted into the English Polyglotton Bibles, from one of the same Copies,
plainly demonstrate, with which the Ethiopic Translation perfectly agrees,
Especially in the 35 and 39 Chapter of Exodus, which in other Copies are
wonderfully mutilated. Nor is it without reason that a Colonie, as it were, of
the Alexandrian Church, should follow the Sacred Copies of their Metropolis. As
for the Author and Time of the Translation, I find nothing certainly delivered
concerning either: however it is most probable that it was begun at the time
when the Habessines were There is one who has written a certain Ethiopic
Martyrologie, who asserts, That Frumentius, otherwise Abba-Salama, was the
Author of the first Translation; but before I see it, I will not undertake to
affirm it.
converted, or a very short time after, and not in the time of the Apostles, as
some have reported; and brought to perfection by several; because the more rare
and difficult words, such as are the names of Gemms, are not all alike in all
the Books. For example, the Topaz in the 118 Psalm, 127 Verse, is called
Pazjon, in Job 28.19. Tankar, in Revelations the 21.20. Warauri: and so in many
other words the same difference is observed.

But for the New Testament, they have it Translated from the Authentic Greek
Text, tho as yet it has not bin brought into Europe pure and entire. For the
Roman Edition is printed from a lame imperfect Copy, so that I was forced to
fill up the Gapps which Tesfa-Tzejon had left, from the Greek and Latin
Exemplars. This was observed by some Learned Men, but not understanding the
Cause, it made them think that the Ethiopic Version had bin drawn from the
Vulgar Latin. Perhaps they did not understand these following Ethiopic Lines.

These Acts of the Apostles, for the most part, were translated at Rome out of
the Latin, and Greek, for want of the Ethiopic Origiginal. For what we have
added or omitted, we beg your pardon, and request of You to mend what is amiss.

More then this, the Publisher of the Book beggs pardon, and excuses the defect
of the Edition, in regard of the ignorant Assistants which he had to help him.

Fathers and Brethren, be pleased not to interpret amiss the faults of this
Edition; for they who Composed it could not read; and for our selves we know
not how to compose. So then we helped them, and they assisted us, as the blind
leads the blind; and therefore we desire you to pardon us and them.

This Excuse he also repeats in other places, as being conscious of its being
defective in several other places. Nevertheless the same Edition was afterward
printed in England, as an addition to that famous Poly Glotton; of which there
is no other reason to be given, but that there was no other to be procured.

However they enjoy the holy Scripture entire, and reck'n as many Books as we
do, tho they divide them after another manner. For they distinguish the Old
Testament, which contains 46 Books into four Principal parts; to which they
join certain other Books of a different Argument consulting more, perhaps, the
Convenience of the Volumes, then the Dignity of the Matter. They also mix the
Apocryphal with the Canonical, whether out of Carelessness or Ignorance is
uncertain. And as for Gregory, he plainly confessed he had never heard of any
such word as Apocrypha.

The first Tome is called Oreth, or the Law, and the Octateuch; for it contains
Eight Books, which are called 1. Zasteret, or the Creation, called also by
another name Kadami Aret, or the First Book of the Law, or Zaledate, or the
Generation or Genesis. 2. Zatzat, Exodus. 3 Zalewawejan, of the Levites. 4.
Zahuelekue, or Numbers. 5. Zadabetra, of the Tabernacle. 6. Ejashu. Joshua. 7.
Masafenet, of the Dukes. 8. Rute. Ruth.


The Other Tome is called Nagaste, or Kings, and is divided into Thirteen Books.

9, 10. 1 Samuel, or Samuel 2. Which nevertheless they call after the manner of
the Greeks, the 1.2.3.4. of Kings. 11, 12. Ebrewejen, of the Hebrews. II. Which
nevertheless they call after the manner of the Greeks, the 1.2.3.4. of Kings.
13, 14. Hatzutzan. Of the Lesser, or Inferior. II. Thus they seem to understand
the Greek word Paralipopomena. 15, 16. Ezra, or Ezra II. 17. Tobed, Tobia. 18.
Judic. Judith. 19. Ester. Ester. 20. Jjob. Job. 21. Masmare. Of the Psalms.
The Third Tome is called Solomon, and contains Five Books.

22. Maste, the Proverbs. 23. Maqebeb. The Sermon. Properly a Circle, or an
Assembly of Men Assembled together in a Ring. 24. Mahaleja, Mahuleje, the Song
of Songs. 25. Tobeb, the Book of Wisdom. 26. Sirach. Sirach.
The Fourth Tome is called Nabijat, or the Prophets, and contains Eighteen
Books.

27. Esjajas, Isaiah. 28, 29. Eremjas. Tanbitu, Wakkakibu. The Prophecy of
Jeremie and his Lamentations. 30. Baruch. 31. Ezechiel. 32. Daniel.
The next that follow, as among us, are Nesan Nabjat, or the Minor Prophets.

33. Hoseas. 34. Joel. 35. Amos. 36. Obadijah. 37. Jonas. 38. Michejas or
Micah. 39. Nahum. 40. Habacuc. 41. Sophonijas. 42. Hag. or Hagjah. 43.
Zacharias. 44. Malaqijas.
To these they add, 45. Maqabejan, the two Books of Maccabees.


Of all which there are at Rome in Manuscript, the 1. Pentateuch. 2. Joshuah.
3. Judges. 4. Ruth. 5. Four Books of Kings. 6. Isaiah.


In Print are Extant 1. The four first Chapters of Genesis. 2. The Book of
Ruth. 3. The Psalter. 4. The Song of Songs. 5. Joel. 6. Jonas. 7. Sophoniah. 8.
Malachi.


With the Hymns of the Old Testament.

The New Testament contains Four and twenty Books, and is also divided into
Four parts, of which the first is called Wenghel, or the Evangel, comprehending
the Four Evangelists.

1. Matthew, 2. Mark, 3. Luke, and 4. John.
The second the Gober, or the Acts, viz. of the Apostles.

The third called Paulus, comprehends the 14 Epistles of St. Paul.

6. To the Romans. 7. To the Corinthians, II. 8. To the Galathians. 10. To the
Ephesians. 11. To the Philippians. 12. To the Colossians. 13, 14. To the
Thessalonians. 15, 16. To Timothy. II. 17. To Titus. 18. To Philemon. 19. To
the Hebrews.
The fourth Hakreja or the Apostle, containing the Seven Books of 20. St.
James. 21, 22. St. Peter II. 23, 24, 25. St. John, III. 26. St. Jude.


To which they add as a Supplement, the Vision of John, sirnam'd Abukalamsis: A
word corrupted out of the Greek Apocalypsis, which they ignorantly took for the
Surname of St. John, as compounded of the Arabic word Abu and Kalamsis. Here we
are to observe, that in the written Eastern Copies, the Epistles of St. Paul
are found single by themselves; and this is the reason that in the Roman Copy
of the Ethiopic New Testament, they were Printed apart, and not in the Order by
us observed.

To the New Testament they generally annex a Volume, which they call, according
to the Greek word, Synodum, or the Book of Synods. It contains those most
ancient Constitutions, which are called the Constitutions of the Apostles: in
their Language Tazazate, Precepts, or Canons, being an Explanation of the
Primitive Rites and Ceremonies, written by the Industry of St. Clement, but
they are very much different from those that are dispersed among Us under the
name of the Apostles. These the Habessines divide into eight parts, adding
withal to the Canonical Writings of the Evangelists, and Apostles, as it were
certain Novels, as if they were of the same Authority, and the most absolute
Pandects of Christianity. Hence it was, that King David said to Alvaresius,
That he had Fourscore and one Books of Sacred Scripture; that is to say, Six
and forty of Old Testament (reckoning the Lamentations by themselves), and
Thirty five of the New Testament, adding to the Twenty seven, those Eight Books
of Constitutions and Canons, which the Ethiopians call Manda and Abtelis, the
Signification of which were unknown to Gregory, as being words altogether
Exotic. This was also the reason why Tefa-Tzejon has this Expression in the
Title of the New Testament, I have caused a New Copy to be Printed, but without
a Synod, because he did not Print together with the said Copy, those Canons and
Institutions before specified. Next to this Book which is also called Hadas, or
absolutely New, the chiefest Reverence is given to the three Oecumenic
Councils, the Nicene, Constantinopolitan, and Ephesine, with some other
Provincial Councils, which were received in the Church till the Schism of
Chalcedon. But we are to understand, that beside the Twenty Nicene Canons,
always received by the Greek and Latin Church, they also admit of Eighty four
other Canons, which are extant among the Copies in the Arabic Language. And
these in the foregoing Century, Baptista the Jesuit Transcribed and brought to
Rome, where they were Translated into Latin. They were all formerly fairly
written in Parchment, and by Zer-a-Jacob or Constantine, Emperor of the
Habassines in the year 440. sent to Jerusalem, and thence brought to Rome in
the year 1646. where I saw it in the Habessine House, in the year 1649. It
contains the following Books: The Synod of the Holy Apostles for the Ordering
of the Church of Christ, together with all the Precepts Decrees and Canons,
which Clement the Disciple of Peter wrote. The First Synod is that of the
Council of Ancyra. The Second Synod is that of the Council of Caesarea. The
Third the Council of Nice. The Fourth of Gangra. The Fifth of Antiochia. The
Sixth of Laodicea. The Seventh of Sardis.
Afterward follow the Acts of 318 Orthodox Holy Fathers. Then a Treatise of
the Sabbath Composed by Retud-Halmanor. Next a Declaration of the Doctrine of
the Law, by Constitutions and Exhortations. Lastly, a Decree and Canon of
Penitence. The Book was written at Axuma, with a Preface of the Kings written,
dated from Shewa.

Adjoining to this Book are the Liturgy, or the Public Prayers for the Use of
the whole Ethiopic Church. They call it Kanono Kedasi, the Canon of the
Eucharist, as being the Rule of Administration, and of all the other Liturgies;
They are Printed in the Roman Copy of the New Testament, before the Epistles of
St. Paul, but intermixed with Foreign Insertions. For there we find it written
concerning the Holy Ghost, who proceeds from the Father and the Son; which
latter proceeding neither the Greeks nor Ethiopians admit.

Besides this General Liturgy, they have several other Liturgies, which are
appropriated for several Holydaies.

Kedasi Za-gezen, the Liturgy of our Lord. Kedasi Za-Ghezeten, the Liturgy of
our Lady. Kedasi Za-Warjat, the Liturgy of the Apostles. Kedasi Zawedus
Martium, the Liturgy of St. Mark.
Which Inscriptions have deceived some Learned Men, who have branded them with
the Characters either of Apocryphal or false Titl'd, for that they were not
called so by the Composers of them, both the Text it self, and the Name of the
Author sometimes added to the Title, demonstratively evince; as for Example.

The Liturgy of our Lady Mary, which Abba Cyriacus, Metropolitan of the
Province of Behens composed.

Of this Nature, they have also sundry other Manuscript Liturgies, which the
Ethiopians call Equtet Korban, or the Thanksgiving of Oblation: It being their
Custom to use Eucharistical Prayers and Homilies in the Administration of the
Sacrament.

But their Symbolic Book, or Compendium of the whole Habessine, Religion, is
called Hajma Monoto-Abaw, The Faith or Religion of the Fathers; of which Tellez
writes, That it is a Book among them, almost of great Authority and Credit, as
being as it were a Library of the Fathers: it being Collected out of the
Homilies of St. Athanasius, St. Basil, St. Cyril, St. John Chrysostom, and St.
Cyril, as also Ephrem the Syrian, and the St. Gregory's, of which there are
Four whom they acknowledge and highly esteem.

Gregory of Neo-Cesarea, the Wonder-worker. Gregory Nazianzene. Gregory
Nyssene, and Gregory the Armenian.
Tellez adds St. Austin; but of that I very much doubt the Truth, the Writings
and Names of the Latin Fathers, being utterly unknown to the Abessines. And
indeed had that Book been Composed out of the Writings of the Fathers
abovementioned, it might have been easily admitted by the Jesuits as an equal
Judge between both Parties in their Disputes concerning the two Natures in
Christ. They have besides these several other Books that treat upon Sacred
Subjects, as Books of Martyrs, and Lives of Saints, which are called Synaksar
in the Ethiopic Idiom; Among the rest, The History of the Fathers. The Combats
or Wrestlings of Martyrs. The History of the Jews. The Constitutions of the
Christian Church. A Book of Mysteries, which Treats of Heresies, written by St.
George. A Book of Epiphanius upon the same Argument. The Spiritual Old Man. The
Harp of Praise, in honor of the Trinity and the Virgin Mary. Padab Tzahje, The
Splendour of the Sun, which Treats of the Law of God. Wedasi Ambatzi, The Praise
of God. Matzehfe felsit bagzeten Marjam, The Book of the Death of our Lady Mary.


In whose Praise and Honors there are several Hymns and Verses, among which,
the most extolled is that which is called Organon Denghel, The Virgins Musical
Instrument, Composed by Abba George, an Abassine Doctor, a Book not very
ancient, but in high esteem by reason of the great number of Similitudes and
Allegories; as also for the Elegancy of the style and words. But as to what
Egidius the Capuchin writes to the famous Petreskius, concerning the Prophecy
of Enoch, as if such a thing were extant in the Ethiopic Language, in a Book
called Matzhe Henoch, the Book of Enoch, the Story is altogether fabulous. So
soon as that noble Gentleman heard of this Book, he spared for no Cost to get
it into his hands; till at length the Knavery of those he employed, imposed
upon him another Book with a false Title. The Book was afterward lodged in
Cardinal Mazarine's Library, and the Preface, Middle and End being Transcribed
by a Friend of mine, was presented to me, but there was nothing in it either of
Enoch or his Predictions; only some few Notions there were, and some very clear
discourses of the Mysteries of Heaven and Earth, and the Holy Trinity, under
the Name of one Abba-Bahaila-Michael.

There is another little idle and impertinent Pamphlet, hardly worth taking
notice of, were it not so frequently current in Europe, Gregory called it
Tzalot Betzet, or a Magical Prayer, and averred, That it was not only not
esteemed, but rejected in Ethiopia; tho by us charily hoarded up in several
Libraries. It is writ with so much stupidity, that you shall find therein many
Prayers of the Virgin Mary to her Son, stufft with monstrous words, to which
are attributed Virtues and Efficacies more than Divine; as, Adnael, Adotavi,
Adotael, Tilelmejus, Cuercuerjam, Flastaslaque,


With many others more horrid to Pronunciation. But from hence it is apparent
how much the Habassines resemble the Jews, as affecting words of uncouth and
unheard of insignificancy, by which they thought to command both Heaven and
Hell, which carrying a kind of a dreadful sound, the Habessines also use them
in their forms of Anathematizing, they cry,

And let him be accursed by Addirion and Actariel, by Sandalphon, and Hadarmel,
by Ansiciel, and Patchiel, by Seraphiel, and Zeganzael, by Michael and Gabriel,
and by Raphael and Meschartiel, and let him be interdicted by Tzautzeviv, and
Haueheviv, He is the great God; and by the Seventy Names of that great King;
and on the behalf of Tzortak, the great Ensign-Bearer.

CHAP. V. Of the Religion of the Habassines at this Day.
The Reports of Matthew the Armenian and Tzagazaab false or uncertain. The
Fathers have omitted their soundest Opinions -- And fixed their several Errors
upon them. The Confession of Claudius Genuine. The great Authority of the
Synodal Writers. They admit the Nicene and other Councils till that of
Chalcedon. They acknowledge the Trinity, one Person of Christ, and his
sufficient Merit. The Proceeding of the Holy Ghost from the Son they deny.
Gregorie's Dispute and Opinion. The Ethiopian interpretation of the word
Proceed. The Sacraments, Baptism, Communion under both Kinds. The real
Presence. The words they use in Reference to it. Gregorie's Opinion of
Transubstantiation. Of the Soul after Death. They pray for the Dead. Deny
Purgatory. Gregorie's Opinion concerning it. The Original of Prayer for the
Dead. They pray to Saints and Angels. Their Catechism for Children and
Neophytes.

WEre the Symbolical Book of the Habessines, which they call Hajmanot-Abau to
be found in Europe, we might easily Collect from thence, the true and genuine
Sense and Doctrine of the Ethiopic Church concerning the Heads and Articles of
the Christian Faith: for hitherto we find the most of them uncertainly
delivered, and for the Confession of Faith set down by Matthew the Armenian,
and Tzagazaab, we have already taken notice of the failings in it. The Fathers
of the Society, that have been conversant among the Habessines both in this and
the former Century, and frequently discoursed with their Learned Men, passing
by their sound and serious Opinions, tax them of many Errors which they have
received from the Greeks and Jews. As for Example,

That the Spirit proceeds only from the Father.

That the Human Nature of Christ is equal to his Divinity.

They acknowledge but one Will and one Operation in Christ; for which reason
they believe that we affirm Four Persons in the Godhead, seeing that we confess
two Wills and two Natures in Christ.

They repeat the Ceremony of Baptism every year upon the Feast of the Epiphany.

They believe that the Souls of the Just shall not be received into Heaven
before the end of the World; nor do they think them to be Created, but produced
out of Matter.

They neither confess the Number, nor the particular Species of their Sins, but
cry in general, I have sinned, I have sinned.

They use not the Sacrament of Chrism, nor Extreme Unction upon the approach of
Death; nor do they mind the Consolation of the bread of life. Insomuch that
many of them stick not to say, That they who follow the Roman Religion, are not
only Heretics, but worse than the Mahumetans.

They reject the Council of Chalcedon, casting many reproaches upon Leo the
Great; but highly applauding Dioscurus.

They deny Purgatory.

These things I chose to deliver almost in the very words of Godignus, who
Collected them out of the Relations and Letters of Gonzalez Rodoric, Alphonsus
de Franca, Emanuel Fernandez, and others of the Society. Neither do they seem
to be improbable; but how they evade or excuse them, we shall shortly declare.
As to what is said that some of them believe the Followers of the Romish
Religion to be worse than Mahumetans, I could not hear any such thing from
Gregory: neither did he think it was to be understood in reference to their
Doctrine, but their Tyranny over their Subjects; it being the Custom of the
Mahumetans only to vex and oppress all those who are under their Power,
professing a Religion contrary to theirs, but never to rage against them with
Fire and Sword.

In the mean time we have a Confession set forth by King Claudius; but the
scope of that Confession was only to clear himself and his Subjects from the
Imputation of Judaism, which he found to be the only reason that impeded the
Amity between him and the Portugals. Therefore leaving this Confession, by what
we can gather from their Public Liturgies, and the Writings and Sayings of
Persons, both Public and Private, the sum of the Habessinian Doctrine seems to
consist of the following Heads.

First, They acknowledge the Holy Scripture to be the sole and only Rule of
what they are to believe, and what they are to do: insomuch that King David
said to Alvarez, That if the Pope should impose upon Him or His Subjects, any
thing what the Apostles had not written or permitted, he would not obey him;
nor his own Metropolitan if he should attempt to do the like. But with the
Scripture they are so much in love, that there is nothing more delightful to
their Ears, than the repetition of it. Therefore says Tellez,

Nothing more pleased the Habessines than to hear the Scripture often quoted in
Sermons; and the more Citations a man brings out of Scripture, the more learned
be is accounted.

Nor do they give much less Credit to the Three Ecumenical Councils, as
appears by the Confession of Claudius. They generally make use of the Nicene
Creed, which they call Tzalot Hajmanot, the Prayer of the Faith. That which we
use they have not, no more than all the rest of the Eastern Churches; a strong
Argument, that it was not compiled by the Apostles, though in regard of the
Doctrine which it contains, it may be truly called Apostolic. For certainly the
Nicene Fathers would not have stifled such a Creed, or set forth another of
their own, had the Apostles left such an Epitome of their Doctrine behind them.
The Ancient Greek Councils then are the Councils which the Habessines have in
reverence, together with the Eighty four ancient Canons added to those of the
Nicene Council, till they come to that of Chalcedon, which they do not only
utterly reject, but also Criminally reproach.

Whatever therefore the Catholic Church admitted and believed before that
Council, concerning God, Three in one; the Three distinct Persons in one
Essence; the Eternity of the Son of God, the Existence of the Holy Ghost, and
other Articles of Faith, all those things the Habessines willingly consent to
and allow, condemning those that Dispute against them. By the way, we are here
to observe, that the Ethiopic words, Sabsatu Gaz Gaz Egza Bahr, Three Persons
and one God, are vulgarly ill Translated, being to have bin rendered, Three
Faces, One Lord; for the word Gaz, signifies as well the Face or Countenance,
as it bears the force of the Greek word (...), or Person.

The Nestorian Heresy asserting two Persons in Christ, they so abhor, that for
that very reason they will not admit of his two Natures, and two Wills, tho
they positively acknowledge his Divinity and Humanity. For they affirm Christ
to be true and perfect God; and also true and perfect Man, and to consist in
one Individual Person of Divinity and Humanity, without Confusion and
Commixtion.

Farthermore, They acknowledge the most Sacred Merits of Christ; to be most
sufficient and efficacious for the Sins of the whole world, and consequently of
all Mankind; and this Gregory himself affirmed to be true: nor have I found in
any of their Books which I have happened to see, any thing that contradicts
what he asserted. However, as the Greeks do, they deny the Proceeding of the
Holy Ghost from the Son; yet all this while they acknowledge him to be equally
the Spirit of the Father and the Son, and to be a Person subsisting of himself.
For thus they declare in their Liturgy.

We believe the Father sending, that the Father is in his own Person. And we
believe the Son who is sent, that the Son is in his own Person, and we believe
the Holy Ghost who descended upon Jordan, and upon the Apostles, that the Holy
Ghost is in his own Person; Three Names, One God. Not as Abraham who is elder
than Isaac, nor as Isaac who is Elder than Jacob. It is not so, The Father is
not Elder than the Son, because he is the Father, nor the Son Elder than the
Holy Ghost, nor the Holy Ghost lesser or Younger than the Father and the Son,
nor is the Son Younger than the Father, because he is the Son. Not as Abraham
who commanded over Isaac in respect of Generation, because he begat him, nor as
Isaac who commanded Jacob. It is not so in Divinity; The Father does not
command the Son, because he is the Father; neither is the Son greater than the
Holy Ghost, because he is the Son. The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are
Equal; One God, one Glory, one Kingdom, one Power, one Empire.

But concerning the Hypostasis, or Person of the Holy Ghost really distinct
from the Father and the Son, the Author of the Organon thus discourses.

But least any one, from what has been already said, should infer, that the
Holy Ghost is not a perfect and distinct Person; therefore said Christ to his
Apostles, I will send you another Comforter. By which we know that the Holy
Ghost does exist together with the Father and the Son, and also together in his
own proper Subsistence or Person. Not that the Holy Ghost is partly in the Son,
partly in his own Person, but one and the same, existent in his proper Person,
and existent with the Father and the Son.

Gregory being asked, whether this were the unanimous and constant Opinion of
all the Ethiopian Doctors? replied, It was. I thereupon urged, Why they denied
that the Holy Ghost proceeded from the Father? seeing they asserted, that he
was equally the Spirit of the Father and the Son? He desired, That I would
first expound what was meant by Proceeding from the Father, and then he would
give the reason of the Denial; and that for his part, he kept to the words of
the Scripture, John 15.26. and 16.24. Who goes out from the Father, and takes
from the Son; and that he sought no farther. For that it was not lawful in
Disputes concerning the most abstruse Mysteries of the Holy Trinity, to argue
by Consequences; but to stick close to the very words and Expressions of
Scripture themselves. That I should consider what would follow, if we should
argue from the Unity and Equality of Essence to the Characteristical
Proprieties of the Persons. As if any one should undertake to averr, That
Christ is the Son of the Holy Ghost, because the Holy Ghost is one and
Coeternal God with the Father. Some such kind of Argument his Countryman
Tzagazaab may be thought to have had in his Brain, when he wrote, That Christ
was the Son of himself, and the Beginning of himself, because he was
co-essential with the Father, whose Son he was. By the way we are to
understand, That the Ethiopians, instead of the word Vazzea, went forth or
proceeded, and in the Preterperfect tense, use the word Saraz, to budd or
sprout forth. Thus Claudius in his Confession.

I believe in the Holy Ghost, reviving Lord, Zasratz em Ab, who proceeded or
sprung from the Father.

They never add from the Son, although the Liturgy Printed at Rome, and
Tzagazaab's Confession runs thus, Zasraz em Ab vavalde, who sprouted forth or
proceeded from the Father and the Son. Where it is much to be doubted, that from
the Son was inserted by another hand

We proceed to the Sacraments, of which they neither have the common name nor
number. For they are utterly ignorant of Confirmation and Extreme Unction. They
make use of the word Mastar, for a Mystery, whenever they go about to intimate
the Mystery of the Participation of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ.
Otherwise they do not think it necessary, to signify the Seals of Faith, by
any other Vulgar name not used in Scripture, or to make much dispute about the
Number. Only said Gregory, They make use of Baptism according to the
Institution of Christ, and with the Ceremonies anciently made use of by the
Church. But the Fathers of the Society reported, That the Ceremonies of Baptism
were so depraved and corrupted among the Habessines, that they were constrained
to Rebaptize great Numbers under a Condition.

As for the Holy Communion, they Administer it indifferently to all, both
Layety and Clergy, as it is the Custom in all the Churches of the East. Neither
has any thing more alienated their minds from the Fathers, than their finding
the Layety to be deprived of the Cup by the Latins. Gregory being demanded what
he thought of the real Presence of the Body and Blood in the Lord's Supper?
made answer, That he acknowledged it. Adding withal, according to his manner,
when any Discourses arose of Matters more difficult and abstruse than ordinary,
Retzitze nagare vet, it is a nice business; or, Mastar vet, It is a Mystery.
When I produced him these words in the Liturgies.

Lord now lay thy hand upon this Dish, Bless it, Sanctify it, and Purify it,
that so thy Body may be made holy therein.

Again,

Lay thy hand upon this Cup, and now bless it, sanctify it, and purify it,
that thy Blood may become holy therein.

In another place.

Lay thy hand upon this Spoon of the Cross, to prepare the Body and Blood of
thy only Son our Lord and God.

And in another place,

Convert this Bread, that it may become thy pure Body, which is joined with
this Cup of thy most precious Blood.

And out of the Eucharistic Prayer, which bears the Title of the 318 Orthodox
Divines, these following words:

Let the Holy Ghost descend, and come and shine upon this Bread, that it may be
made the Body of Christ our Lord, and that the taste and savor of this Cup may
be changed, that so it may be made the Blood of Christ our Lord.

And when I asked him withal the Exposition of the words Majete vat valto, to
be changed or converted; and then demanded of him, Whether he did not think
that the substance of the Bread and Wine was not changed and converted into the
Substance of the Body and Blood of Christ? He made answer, That no such sort of
Transubstantiation was known or understood by the Habessines. That his
Countrymen were not so scrupulous, nor used to start such thorny Questions.
Nevertheless it seemed to him probable and like, that the vulgar Bread and Wine
was changed into the mysterious Representation of the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ; and so was altered from Profane to Sacred, to represent the true Body
and Blood of Christ to the Communicants. Tellez confesses his dissatisfaction
touching their Consecration, it being their Custom to say over the Body of
Christ, This bread is my Body; and over the Wine, This cup is my Blood. Which
words have not in them the true force of Consecration. For the Doctors of the
Roman Church are of Opinion, That whoever speaks those words, does nothing;
These words, This is my Body, being only of Efficacy to operate a true
Transubstantiation. Which being true, no man can pretend that the Abessines
acknowledge Transubstantiation, especially seeing they do not attribute those
Divine Honors to the Sacraments, which the Consequences of real
Transubstantiation require.

Concerning the state of the Soul after Death, there are several Opinions among
the Habessines, every one having free Liberty of Opinion in those things that
do not directly concern Eternal Salvation. So that it is no wonder that so many
various Sentiments of private persons are brought away by our Doctors, as the
public Opinions of the Habessines.

Some of them believe that the Souls of Men piously deceased, shall not behold
the Beatifical Vision of God before the Resurrection of the Body; which is also
the Opinion of many of the Ancient Latins: as if the Soul remained in
Expectation of the Body in some certain third place. Others, convinced by the
Authority of the Scripture, acknowledge only two Mansions of the Souls, Heaven
and Hell; believing no Damnatinn to those that are in Christ, and dye in his
Faith. Which they gather from the Example of the Penitent Thief, and the words
of Christ, thus Translated by the Ethiopians, Verily I say unto thee, firmly
believe, that thou shall be with me in Paradise.

Therefore, as for those that Piously sleep in Christ, they believe them not to
be in a worse Condition than this Thief, who at the point of Death was saved
through Penitence actuated by Faith, without any satisfaction given for his
Thieveries. Now to prove that the Soul of Man is not created, they produce this
Argument, That God perfected the whole Work of his Creation upon the Sixth day.
Nevertheless they believe it to be in its own Nature immortal, as being
inspired into Man by God, at his first Creation. But on the other side, they
think it very absurd that God should be tied to create new Souls every day for
Adulterate and Incestuous Births.

However the first Opinion seems to be the more vulgarly received among them;
in regard of their Prayers for the Dead: As for example.

Remember, Lord, the Souls of thy Servants, and our Father, Abba-Matthew, and
the rest of our Fathers, Abba-Salama, and Abba-Jacob.

And a little after,

Remember, Lord, the Kings of Ethiopia, Abreha; and Atzbeha, Caleb, and
Gebra-Meskah, etc.

Then they add,

Release, O Lord, our Fathers Abba Antony and Abba Macarius.

Remember, Lord, the Soul of thy Servant, our Father Tecla-Hajmanot, with all
his Companions.

From whence it may be fairly justified, that the Abessines admit of a
Purgatory. And yet Gregory constantly denied it. And Godignus confesses, That
there are no sacred Services said for the deceased among the Habessines. The
same thing Tellez confirms. However he derides them, as not constant to
themselves; for that, to pray for the Dead, and distribute Alms to the Poor, is
no other than to assert Purgatory. Nor do I see how they can reconcile their
Praying for the Rest of happy Souls; and at another time, their imploring the
Intercession of the same Souls.

But they nothing moved with these Arguments and Inferences, affirm them to be
the Pious Conception of their good wishes, and only a Commemoration of the
happy Estate of the deceased; and that it is none of their business to make any
farther scrutiny into the Traditions of their Ancestors. Gregory added, That
many Prayers of the Christians were so conceived, that many times those things
were Petitioned for, which were already performed and answered. That the Lord's
Prayer contained Petitions of that kind. For that it would be a thing but badly
inferred, that the Name of God was not Hallowed, or that his Will was not done
both in Heaven and Earth, because we daily put up those Prayers: besides we all
beg every day for Daily Bread, when most of those that make that Prayer, do
generally live in wealthy abundance. He had heard perhaps among us our general
good Wishes for the departed, That God would vouchsafe to grant the Interred
Body a Quiet Repose, and at length a joyful Resurrection. And thereupon, said
he, Do not you your selves wish the same good wishes for the Dead? Do not you
believe that the Carcasses of the Dead may be vexed with Spiritual Evils? or
that a happy Resurrection may be obtained by your Prayers. And he took so
heinously the suspicion of his belief of Purgatory, that he cried out, Would it
not be an irreverent Injury to so many Kings and Fathers, should we interpret
the Commemoration of their Souls to that height, as to think they should be
tormented for so many Ages in Purgatory, and want the aid of our indefatigable
Prayers to release them after so long an Imprisonment? For those Kings and
Fathers were men among the Habessines most Innocent, and had bin dead above a
Thousand years since or more. So that whether they be in Paradise, or remain in
any other place, expecting the Resurrection of their Bodies, in both cases
Prayers of that Nature seem superfluous.

Besides, were there any Question to be made of the happy Condition of Men
Piously deceased, we should rather pray for those whose lives were more loose
and vain, than for those whose Conversations were without blame. And therefore
what has bin delivered about the Opinions of the Habessines concerning
Purgatory, leans rather upon Conjecture than any sufficient Authority, they
being ignorant of the very Name. Insomuch that Jacob Wemmers the Carmelite, in
his Ethiopic Lexicon, was constrained to forge a Word, by calling it Mantzehi
Hatate, the Purger of Sin. But we are to understand, that it was the most
Ancient Custom of the Church first of all to read the Names of the Holy Martyrs
out of the Public Registers, as being a Duty owing to the memory of the
invincible Testimonies for Christ. Which the following Ages strained another
way, as if they had need of our Intercession; and others, as if we could not be
without their Intercession, made it a presence to invoke the Holy Saints, as if
they were present and heard them. To which we may add, That the Ancient
Christian Orators, and Writers of Homilies, making use of their Rhetoric, by
virtue of that Figure, commonly called Prosopopocia, bespoke the blessed
Saints, and introduced them as it were returning Answers; from whence it is not
improbable that Suspicion might introduce the Custom of giving the same
Adoration to them as to God himself, and worshipping them with Temples, Altars,
and other Divine Honors. Which nevertheless the Habessines do not do; for
though they keep Holydaies in memory of their Saints, they do not call them
Bagnabat, Solemnities; but Tjabarat, Remembrances. They also invoke them, tho
they know not after what manner they may be able to hear them; and beg their
Intercessions also, especially of the most Holy Virgin Mary, to whom they bear
such an affectionate Reverence, that they think whatever the Church of Rome has
invented to her Honor, all too little; and yet they erect no Statues to her
memory for all that, being contented only with her Pictures. When they were in
a rage against those of the Roman Religion, and pursued 'em in their fury with
Sticks and Stones, they cried out, Kill, Kill; whoever is not an Enemy of
Marie, let him take up a Stone to stone her Enemies to Death.

But more than this, they many times invoke the Angels, as having for that
perhaps a more specious pretense, because they have bin frequently said to
appear to good Men and Women, and hear their Prayers.

Of these the Ethiopians reckon no less than Nine Orders, which they borrow
from their Names and Epithites given them in Sacred Scripture.

Malaeket, Angels particularly so called, or by another Name, Manofsat,
Spirits; Bitean Malaeket; Archangels.

Agaezet, Saltanot, Manoberet, Hujebat, Maqinenet, Qirubil, Surafel, Lords,
(...) Magistracies, (...) Thrones, (...). Powers, (...). Princes. Cherubims.
Seraphims.
Some there are who give them several other Sirnames, as Bikanot, Primores or
Cheiftains, and Arbabe, or Arbab Asat, as much as to say fiery Myriads.

Others there are who affirm, That first of all there were Ten Orders, of which
the first, whose Chieftain was Satanael, together with his Associates, revolted
from God; and that the Blessed hereafter shall succeed into their places; which
they assert to be the cause of the Devils inveterate hatred toward Man.

As to their forms of Catechizing Youth and Neophytes, the following Account
may afford very great Satisfaction; as being written by Gregory with his own
hand, and all that he could then call to mind.

A Brief Account of the Heads of the Ethiopic Faith, in which they usually
instruct their Youth and Neophytes. They are Extant more at large in Ethiopia,
but more succinctly, as follows.

What God do thou Worship?

The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three Persons, but one Deity.

Of these Three Persons, which is the first, which the last? which the
greatest, which the least?

Their is no Person first or last, no Person Superior, or Inferior; but all
equal in all things.

How many Persons?

Three.

How many Gods?

One.

How many Deities?

One.

How many Kingdoms?

One.

How many Powers?

One.

How many Creators?

One.

How many Wills?

One.

Is God limited by time?

No, For he is from all Eternity, and shall endure to all Eternity.

Where is God?

Every where, and in all things.

Is not the Father God?

Yes.

Is not the Son God?

Yes.

Is not the Holy Ghost God?

Yes.

Do thou not therefore say there are Three Gods?

I do not say Three Gods, but Three Persons, and One only God.

Who begat the Son?

God the Father. But the Holy Ghost proceeds from Father, and takes from the
Son.

Pray show me some Similitude how Three Persons can be in one Deity?

The Sun, tho he be but one in Substance, yet in him are found three distinct
Things, Rotundity, Light and Heat. Thus we also believe that in one God there
are three Persons, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, equal in all things.

Of those Three Persons, which was born for our Redemption?

The second Person, viz. The Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ.

How many Nativities had he?

Two.

Which were they?

His first Nativity was from the Father, without Mother, without time; The
second from the Virgin Mary our Lady, without Father, in time she always
remaining a Virgin.

Is Jesus Christ our Lord a Man, or is he truly God?

God and Man both, in one Person, without Separation, and without Change;
without Confusion or Commixture.

In the same manner do the Habessines Believe and Teach all matters of Faith;
viz. Concerning the Baptism of Christ, his Fasting, his Passion, his Death, his
Resurrection, his Ascension into Heaven, and sending of the Holy Ghost.
Moreover, That he shall return in Glory to Judge the Quick and the Dead. That
he is present in the Holy Sacrament. That the Dead shall rise at the last Day.
That the Just shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; but that Sinners shall be
condemned to Hell. They also believe the Catholic Church, according to the
Creed compiled by the 318 Orthodox Fathers, that met at the Council of Nice.

We shall not add more at present, till more and those Publicly approved Books
shall come to our hands, that we may not imprudently attribute, as some have
done, the Opinions of private persons to the whole Church.

CHAP. VI. Of the Rites and Ceremonies of the Ethiopic Church, as also of the
Habessine Temples.
Sacred Rites often an Occasion of Disturbance in the Church. The Prudent
Decree of the Apostles. Paul's Condescension necessary. Judaish Rites retained.
Many new Ceremonies invented by the Pope, by the Alexandrian Metropolitan none.
The most ancient Ceremonies retained by the Abessines. Their Churches dark,
like the Synagogues. The Divisions of them, and Quires. The Nobility made
Deacons. The Bishops Lodgings. Much honored. They admit of Pictures. They sign
with the Cross. Baptism of grown People. Undertakers why so called. The
Eucharist given to baptized Infants. Some frivolous forms of the Habessines
constrained the Fathers to Rebaptize. The Custom of Annual Bathing not
effectual for Baptism. The abuse of it. The State of Ecclesiastical Affairs
miserable in Habessinia. The Reasons. General Confession. Absolution. Before 25
years of Age they believe themselves Innocent. Much Preaching. Gregorie's
Opinion of their Sermons. They Read Homilies, etc. The Sacred Vessels for the
Eucharist. Why the Stone Consecrated by the Romans is called a Chest by the
Habessinians. A particular Discourse of the Author. Leavened Bread. The Wine
distributed in a Spoon. The defect of it supplied, The time and place for the
Holy Supper. Two Holydaies in a Week. They want Bells. Their Music unpleasing,
yet they Dance about. Fastings, and fourth and sixth Holydaies whence. None
during Easter. Of the Fasts of the Protestants in Europe. The beginning of the
year. Their manner of Computation, Nuptial Rites. Polygamy. Marriages of Cousin
Germans, or first Cousins. Divorces. Burials.

HItherto we have set forth what the Habessines believe concerning the Trinity,
and the Principal Articles of the Christian Faith. The order of our Story now
requires that we should say something of their Rites and Ceremonies. For tho it
nothing avail at what time or in what manner sound Doctrine be Preached, so
that all things be done decently and in order; nevertheless these Rites and
Ceremonies have begat great Disputes, and produced great Disturbances in the
Church.

For indeed from the very Infancy of the Gospel, various were the Contentions
of Holy and Pious men about Ceremonies. Some believed that the Judaic Rites,
not being expressly abrogated by Christ, were of necessity to be observed,
together with the Doctrine and Sacraments of the New Testament, even as helps
to Salvation. Others there were who judged that they might be profitably
retained, though not of absolute necessity, as well in remembrance of the
ancient Church of God, as to gain the Souls of the Jews. The first Opinion the
Apostles themselves Condemned. In other things using Apostolic Prudence and
Moderation, they made a distinction between Jews and Ethnics newly Converted.
For they not only permitted the Jews to retain their ancient Rites, but
persuaded Paul to comply with so many Millions of unbelieving Jews, who were
Zealous Admirers of the Law, and accused Paul, for teaching a Defection from
the Law, for forbidding Infants to be Circumciz'd, and for not living according
to the Jewish Customs. Paul obeyed, and purified himself with his Companions,
shaved his Head, and so entering the Temple together, offered up an Offering for
every one of them. Nay, more then this, what would be now accounted a heinous
Crime, he caused Timothy to be Circumciz'd, being induced thereto by the
Necessity of those times. Yet at another time he condemned Circumcision, if it
were done with a Judaic Intention.

Thus an Action in it self indifferent, becomes bad or good, from the Reason
and Intention of the Agent. But then, what what was to be done with the
Gentiles that embraced the Faith of Christ, the Apostles took into their
Deliberation. Nevertheless they would not oblige them to the Observation of the
Mosaic Law, but only in answer to their Doubts, they commanded them only to
abstain from those things, which might not only create in the Jews a dislike of
the Gospel; but also very much scandalize those that were already Proselytes,
and disturb mutual Charity and Friendship in daily Converse and Society. For
the Jews would not Diet with those who eat things Sacrificed to Idols, or
strangled, nor the blood it self. From that time some of the Judaic Rites
prevailed as indifferent among most, who did not contend against Piety and
Christian Doctrine. Till at length by degrees they were either abrogated by the
Church, or worn out of Use. Nor had the most ancient Institutions of the
Christians any other Originals, as the Building of Churches, Plunging the whole
Body in Baptism, Two Fast Days in a Week, Festivals and the like. However
there were but few Ceremonies in the troublesome times of the Church; but in
the times of Peace, they increased to Infinity: and the worse the state of the
Church was, the more Ceremonies; insomuch that St. Austin complained in his
time, That the most wholesome Precepts of Divine Books were not so much regarded,
as the fictitious Comments and Inventions of Men upon them. The Church of Rome,
by how much more opulent and powerful than the rest; so much the more
sedulously and industriously it composed all things to Splendor and Pomp. The
Roman Pontiff being the sole Judge of all things, whether convenient, or not
commodious, and what he thought fit to Abrogate or Establish. But the Patriarch
of Alexandria, whom the Ethiopians obey as their High Pontiff, what with the
unhappy Contentions between the Melchites, and Jacobites, and the Persecutions
of the Saracens, has had enough to do to keep his own Station, not being at
leisure in the midst of so many Storms, to think of divulging new Ceremonies.
Nor would the Habessines out of their wonted simplicity and plain heartedness,
the best Preserver of ancient Custom, attempt to alter or abrogate any thing
without his leave or Command. Whence it comes to pass, that many of the most
ancient Customs of the Primitive times, in other places out of date or
abrogated, are still retained to this day among them. Which makes us hope that
our Labor will not be ungrateful to the Reader, curious of Ecclesiastic
Antiquity, if we compare the Old with the New. First, only their Churches are
briefly to be described, which formerly were sufficiently Magnificent, and by
King Ladibela hewn out of the Bodies of the Rocks themselves. Some were also
Built by the Succeeding Kings; but Grainus, out of his hatred to Christianity,
ruined the greatest part of them. There are yet remaining some Footsteps of
that famous Cathedral, which Helena, David's Grandmother Built: In which there
is more want of Light than of Gold or Silver. The Structure of most resembles
the Ancient Architecture. For the ancient Christians, when first they had
obtained the Opportunities of building Churches for Public Use, choosing rather
to imitate the Jews, than the Gentiles, Built them in imitation of the ancient
Temple of Jerusalem, or of the Jewish Synagogues; nor did they give them the
heathenish Names of Temples; but called them Ilyriacas, as it were dedicated to
God, or else Oratories, or Martyria, Places of Public Testimony. Now as the
Temple of Jerusalem being encompassed with a spacious Wall, consisted chiefly
of three parts; that is to say, (...) or the wide Porch, (...) or the body of
the Temple; and lastly, (...) or the Holy of Holies, so the Cathedrals of the
Ancients, had a Porch before the great Folding Doors surrounded with a Wall,
where the Excommunicated, and Penitents, and Novices were obliged to tarry,
till the latter more fully instructed in Christianity, were admitted to
Baptism; or the former brought forth the real fruits of Amendment. Then there
was the Body of the Church, in the middle of which was a secret Place, screen'd
with a Curtain, which was called the Sacrificatory, as also the Suggestum, or
place where the Pulpit stood, in Greek (...), which represented the Holy of
Holies. Such a Suggestum, or Place of Ascension is still to be seen in the
Jewish Synagogues, and called in imitation of the Greek word Bimah. But this
the Europeans afterward thought more convenient to remove to the farther end of
the Church: we call it now the Quire, for the most part separated with Iron
Lattices from the Body of the Structure. These Antique Forms of Building were
accommodated to the ancient Ceremonies. For as the Jews were admitted no
farther than the Doors, and the Priests only suffered to pass beyond the
Threshold, so here none but the Baptized were admitted as it were into the
Bosom of the Church, the rest, like the Gentiles among the Jews, prohibited
from approaching nearer than the Doors. The Quire none but the Ecclesiastical
Persons entered, which was so rigidly observed by the Ancients, that St.
Ambrose commanded the Emperor himself Theodosius, to withdraw; whereas the
Greek Church allowed that Privilege to their Emperors, and gave them Liberty
to enter the Sanctuary when they offered to the Sacred Table. After the same
manner, the more famous Churches of the Ethiopians were Built; and they have
also the same sort of Sanctuaries, which they call by the Hebrew Name, Heichel,
at the entry whereof the Layety stand and receive the Communion. Least
therefore their Nobility and their Children should be forced to stand among the
Vulgar Crowd, or they be constrained to break their Law and Custom, Prohibiting
the Layety to enter their Heichel, and participate of their Sacred Mysteries,
they have found out a new Evasion, by Creating the Nobility and their Children,
though never so young, or under Age, Deacons or Subdeacons; in that only
deviating from their ancient Simplicity. The King's Children assume that
Dignity of course, carrying a Cross, as a badge of their Deaconship, which they
never leave off when they come to the Crown. Which the Portugueses looking upon
as an Ornament of Priesthood, it gave them an occasion to give the Habessine
Emperor the Title of Presbyter John. There is also a little Chapel adjoining
to the Eastern part of the Church, in which the Bread and other Necessaries
belonging to the Eucharist are prepared. Such little Chapels or Rooms were
Built of old near to the great Church, where the Bishops were wont to put on
their Vestments: now they are small Apartments made within the Walls of the
Church, called by the Name of Vestries. They have no Seats in their Churches,
for they neither sit nor kneel, but always stand during Divine Service;
according to the ancient Canons, which the Greeks and Russes observe to this
day, as believing it more becoming the Reverence due to the Place, and more
proper for Attention than to sit. The next Age providing more kindly for
Infirmity, permitted sitting, least Attention should be tired by weariness. But
the Habessines have found out a way between both; that is to say, little
Crutches to lean and rest their Bodies, which when they go away, they leave in
the Church Porch. If there be any who out of weakness chance to sit upon the
Ground, they are in the midst of Prayers commanded by the Deacons to rise, in
these words, Eb Tarber, Tanse, You that sit, Rise. Nay, such is their Reverence
to their Churches, that tho at this day they are only poor low dark Buildings,
thatched with Straw or Reeds, yet when they approach near to any of them in
their Travels, they alight from their Mules, and walk a foot till they are past
them: They also put off their Shoes at the Door, and never spit upon the
Pavement. No Females are admitted during their Impurities, nor Wives that have
known their Husbands, all the day following. In this none more Rigid then the
Ancients, who only admonished such to Abstain from the Holy Communion.

Pictures they admit into their Churches; but as for Statues or Sculptures
Engraven or Cast, they abominate them, with the same antipathy as they do
Idols. Perhaps because they never had any in the Primitive times of the Church.
For it was the Saying of the Ancients, Why should Men go about to make any
likeness of God, when Man himself was his Image, and no better could be made?
And therefore it is a heinous Offense for any one to carry about them the
Picture of Christ Crucified. However the Clergy carry bare Crosses in their
hands, which they who meet them, reverence with a Kiss; thereby Professing
themselves Christians. For they often sign both themselves, and the things that
belong to them, with the Sign of the Cross, after the Custom of the most
ancient Christians; who were wont so to do.

We shall now proceed to the Sacred Ceremonies of the Habessines, beginning
with the first initiation into Christianity, Baptism. The Priest being to
Baptize a Person or Persons of full Age, which there many times happens, by
reason of the frequent Conversion of the Heathen, begins with the 52 Psalm,
then having Perfumed the Persons with a Censor of Frankincense, he enquires the
Names of them that are to be Baptized. Then after the Recital of certain
Prayers, the Deacon at the same time frequently Exhorting the Hearers to join
with the Priest, he Anoints several parts of the Body with the Holy Oil, and
lays his Hand upon the Neophyte's Head. Which done, the Neophytes, lifting up
their right Hands, and looking toward the West, abjure Satan, as the Prince of
Darkness. Then turning to the East, as to the Sun of Justice, and lifting up
again their Right hands, they make as it were a kind of Vow to Christ; which
don, they say over the Creed after the Priest, who putting the Question, They
answer, They do Believe. Which ended, the Parties again are anointed, and some
certain pieces of Chapters are read out of the Gospel of St. John, the Acts of
the Apostles, and the Epistles of St. Paul. At length the Oil is so poured into
the Water prepared for the Baptism, as to resemble in falling the Signature of
the Cross, and after the Rehearsal of several other Prayers, the Priest
descends into a certain Pool, made on purpose before the Doors of the Church,
whither the Persons being conducted by the Deacon, the Priest takes them, and
plunges them three times over Head and Ears, saying, I Baptize thee in the Name
of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. At the same time the Men have Men, the
Women Women to assist them, who lending their Hands and Arms to their Friends,
support them in going out of the Pool, and were therefore called Susceptores or
Upholders by the Ancients. Being thus washed, and once more anointed, they are
first clad with a White Under-garment, to signify the Purity of the Mind; and
over that, with a Red Vestment, in token of their Salvation purchased by the
Blood of Christ; and so introduced into the Church, where, being intermixed
with Christians, they are made Partakers of the Holy Communion. At their
departure they are presented with Milk and Honey, and so the Priest laying his
Hand upon their Heads, dismisses them with this Benediction, Sons of Baptism,
go in Peace. For the Habessines frequently call the Christians Velda Temqet,
Sons of Baptism. All which Circumstances are agreeable to the Rites of the
Ancients. Let us thrice be plunged, says Tertullian, and thence supported, let
us taste the Society of Milk and Honey. These are the Ceremonies observed toward
those of ripe years.

The Ceremonies of Baptizing Infants are much shorter. Males were formerly
never Baptized before the Fortieth day, Females before the Eightieth day,
unless upon imminent danger of Death. But now they hasten Baptism much sooner,
especially if the Infant be weak and sickly. The Godfathers and Godmothers make
answer to the Priest in their behalf. Nor are they plunged in the Water, but
only Sprinkled and Dipped, and that at the Entrance only of the Church; there
being no admittance for them into the Church before Baptism. Lastly, Because
the Holy Communion is given to those of riper years presently after Baptism,
therefore least Infants should be in a worse Condition, in former times they
dropped two or three drops out of the Sacred Cup, having crumbl'd a little piece
of the Holy Bread into it before: to show there was the same regard to be had
to them, as to those of riper Age. Which being long observed in the Latin
Church, the Ethiopians, together with the Armenians, observe the Custom to this
day. Gregory told me, That they did no more than only dip the top of one of
their Fingers in the Wine, and moisten the Child's tongue. Now that they use the
same form of words with us, Alvarez is Positive, that is to say, I Baptize thee
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Nor could I
apprehend any otherwise out of their own Liturgies.

Which makes it more to be admired, what the Fathers of the Society, making no
mention at all of this Form, have written into Europe, That several partly
unwonted, partly frivolous Forms, and quite altering the Essence of Baptism,
were made use of by the Habessine Clergy: For Example, I Baptize thee in the
Name of the most Holy Trinity; I Baptize thee in the Name of Christ; I Baptize
thee in the Name of the Holy Ghost only; I Baptize thee in the Water of Jordan;
The Lord baptize thee; Let God wash thee; Let Baptism wash thee; Blessed be the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, with several others of the same Nature.
For which reason they were constrained to Rebaptize many People, not permitted
by the Catholic Church, but upon extraordinary occasions. So that at length
they promiscuously Rebaptiz'd all the Habessinians, tho with this Condition,
That the first Baptism was not rightly performed, which drew upon them the
Hatred and Envy of the Habessinian Clergy.

Many Writers have believed, and reported, That the Ethiopians were branded
with a Mark after Baptism, in order to the fulfilling the words of St. John, He
that comes after me shall Baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire. But
Gregory himself denied any such Custom, nor do the Fathers of the Society make
any mention of it in their Writings. But this is certain, that the People of
Africa, as well Gentiles, as Mahumetans, do cauterize the Temple-Veins of
Children newly Born, to preserve them from Catarrhs. Which being perhaps done
by some of the Habessines to the same end, was by some ignorant Foreigners
taken for a Religious Ceremony. As having heard that formerly there were a sort
of silly Heretics, who misinterpreting the word Fire, properly so taken, and
wresting it to the Improper signification of Baptism, preferred the Caustic
Signature of Fire, before the Ceremony of washing in Water.

But now for what concerns their Anniversary Baptism, with which the Abessines
are so much reproached, we are to give this Light. Upon the XI. of January,
which with us is upon the Sixth, in the midst of their Summer, and the Feast
of the Epiphany, they keep a most joyful Festival in Commemoration of the
Baptism of our Savior, which with many of the Ancients, they certainly
believe, was performed upon that day. By the first Dawn of the Morning Light,
the Clergy begin the Solemnity with certain loud and cheerful Hymns. The King
with all the Nobility of the Court, the Metropolitan with the Clergy, Nobles
and Plebeians, Old and Young, before Sunrise, throng into the Rivers and
Ponds, and there delight themselves in the Water, plunging and diving over Head
and Ears. As they meet any of the Priests, they crave a Blessing from them, who
return them generally their desires in these words, God bless thee; or, God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost bless thee. Hence it was that many believed that
the Ethiopians renewed their Baptism every year. But as excess of Joy
frequently begets wantonness; so is it frequent for the Young men upon this day
to leap, and dance, and swim and duck one another; and by and by to fill the
neighboring Fields with Hoopings and Hallowings, the usual Consequences of
such kind of Sports. So that they make of it rather a day of Jollity, than a
Pious Christian Festival. All this I relate from Gregorie's own Lips. The
Relation of Alvarez is quite different, as if it were a real Baptism, and that
the Men and Women were at that time promiscuously rebaptiz'd. Whether they did
so, or whether Alvarez rightly understood the words of the Baptizer, I very
much question. And yet I cannot but very much wonder at what Tellez reports,
That at other times, and for slight causes, both Men and Women cause themselves
to be rebaptized, and that after a most indecent manner. For should such a
thing have been customary, King Basilides would never have upbraided the
Fathers with their reiteration of Baptism, so frequently as he did. For my
part, I never read or heard of any such thing. However, if any such thing were
ever practiced, it is to be attributed rather to the stupid ignorance of the
Priests, then to allowed Custom.

For in the last Century such was the most miserable Condition of the
Ecclesiastical Affairs in Habessinia, that nothing could be more deplorable: at
what time, by reason of the continual Invasions and Irruptions of the Gallans
and Adelans, the People were dispierc'd and scattered up and down the Mountains
and Rocks, like a Flock without a Shepherd, without Law, and almost without
either King or Metropolitan; all Sacred Worship ceased; their Clergy were
dissipated, and their Temples and Monasteries every where ruined and burnt.
What wonder then that Ignorance and Sloth should grow upon them? and that the
illiterate Priests, for want of Books, not to be supplied by Printing, and
through the scarcity of Learned Men, should rashly obtrude many things
altogether Foreign from the Rites of their Ancestors. For such Accidents
frequently happen in great Calamities, when Bishops and Princes cannot perform,
or else grow careless of their Offices; when little regarding their own Eternal
Salvation, they leave that to fate, or the pleasure of every private Person,
which should be their chief and principal care. Such was the Sluggishness that
overwhelmed all Greece, in the time of Maurice the Emperor; so that neither
Gregory understood Greek, nor any one at Constantinople could understand Latin,
such was the misery of that Age, in the Latin Church, as Baronius testifies,
when nothing but mere Barbarism and Ignorance Triumphed, when all Arts and
Virtuous Studies were Exiled, and only Vice prevailed in Church and State. At
that time there was a certain Priest, who neither like a Latinist, nor a
Christian, had Baptized several Infants in Nomine Patria, and Filia, and
Spiritual Sancta, which Baptism was however confirmed by Zacharias the Pope, by
reason of the good intention of the Baptizer.

That Sinners after Baptism are reconciled to God and the Church, they make no
Question: However they teach that there must be a Repentance for these Sins,
and that Repentance to be made known by Confession. But to enumerate all and
singular their particular Sins, with all their circumstances, they think it
neither commanded of God, nor at all necessary. And therefore, they only say in
general words to the Priest, Absan, Absan, we have Sinned, we have Sinned. So
that when the Roman Priests pressed them to particular Confession, they never
acknowledged any more than three, if they had been guilty, Homicide, Adultery,
and Theft. To confess any more they could not be induced without great
difficulty. The Offender is Absolved in very few words, together with some
gentle stripes upon the Side with an Olive twigg, which is thought sufficient
to deliver him from the Power of Satan. But as for them that have committed any
of those great Crimes before-named, they are not only chastised with severe
Reprehension and bitter Language, but many times also severely Scourged, to the
end they may not only hear, but be sensible of their Absolution. Tellez
reports, That the Metropolitan sometimes hears Confessions himself; and that
when he understands the heinousness of the Crime, he rises up, and after a
sharp rebuke of the Penitent, he cries out, Have thou done this? Do thou not
fear God? Go too, let him be Scourged thirty or forty times. Presently the
Executioners are ready, who straight prepare their Scourges, and give the
miserable Sinner six or seven cutting lashes; the rest being remitted at the
Intercession of the Standers by. There was one who to avoid so sharp an
Absolution of his Crime, requested of the Metropolitan sitting in his Seat of
Judicature, that he might make his Confession in Private; to whom the
Metropolitan, How! Shall not thy Sin be made manifest at the last day, before
all the World? Tell therefore, what it is? The unfortunate Offender believing
it his duty to obey, openly confessed, it was the stealing of Oxen. By chance
the Owner of the Oxen was there; who being glad that he had apprehended the
Thief, presently accused him, so that the poor Fellow being Convicted of the
Fact by his own Confession before so many Witnesses, was constrained to restore
the Oxen, and undergo a severe Punishment beside.

But as the Habessines are generally of a soft and mild Disposition, for the
most part, so soon as they have committed any notable Offense, they presently
run to their Confessors, and confessing they have sinned, desire to receive the
Communion for the quiet of their Consciences. But this they do not do, till
they come to be at least Five and twenty years of Age. For till then they
prolong their years of Indiscretion, pretending Childish Innocence. So that if
a Young man die before he be Twenty years old, they bewail him in these words,
Oh! let my Soul be like the Soul of this Innocent. So great a Confidence they
have in the honest Inclinations of their Youth.

The whole Divine Service of the Ethiopians is completed by the sole
Administration of the Sacrament, and reading some few broken parcels of
Chapters out of the New Testament: for they neither make use of Sacred Hymns
nor of Preaching. Which when we seemed to wonder at, Gregory asked me, Whether
we thought our Preachers could speak any thing better then what was written in
the Sacred Scripture, or the Homilies of the Fathers of the Primitive Church?
Whether we thought their Sayings more efficacious than the Word of God? Whether
we did not fear, lest those Preachers should utter something which might be
repugnant to our Faith and Salvation, which might prove of dangerous
Consequence, especially among the Plebeian and rustic sort of People? We
answered, That the Worship of God required it; and that the use and end of
Preaching was at large set forth in Scripture; to the end we might understand
the benefit of them. But the Ethiopians to supply this defect, have Composed
several Liturgies and Homilies, of which mention has been already made. To
these they add several Portions of Scripture usually appointed to be read,
which are fourfold, out of the Evangelists, the Acts, the Epistles of St. Paul,
and the rest of the Canonical Epistles; to which they give the Titles of
Wengel, the Evangils, Gheber, the Acts, Paulus, and Hawarja the Apostle. But in
the general Liturgy, which they call Canon Kedasi, the Canon of the Mass, there
are all their Ceremonies to be found, with all their Prayers accustomed to be
applied to the several Varieties of Duties to be performed; all their
Instruments and Vessels being sanctified by certain Prayers and Ejaculations.
For in the Sanctuary stands the Holy Table, which they call Kedesat Terphez,
vulgarly Manbar. It differs from their Common Tables, for that you may go round
about it, and place what you please upon it. Only it is covered with a Canopy,
sustained with four Pillars at each Corner. Upon this they place the Sacred
Vessels. First the Tabot, or Chest: A little Table so called; but the reason
why, I never yet could find; for that it has no resemblance of a Chest; it
being an Oblong Quadrangular Table, upon which the Dish and the Cup are set;
and therefore I must repair to conjecture, which I shall willingly submit to
the Judgment of the Learned.

The most ancient Christians, when for almost three Ages together, they could
not have the Opportunity of Administering or receiving the Communion in Public,
were constrained to take their Opportunities in Dens and Caves; but for the
most part in the Churchyards, in the silence of the Night. To which purpose,
they either carried the Bread, Wine, Cup, and other Utensils wrapped up in
Linen, or otherwise concealed to the place where the Congregation met. Whence
it seems very probable to me, that they might make use of the Coffins
themselves, or some Chest in the fashion of a Bier, to conveigh their Sacred
Utensils, under the pretense of carrying forth their Dead. Which Chest being
thus conveyed into the Churchyard or Cave where they met, served also
instead of a Table, about which the Communicants sat, and received in their
Order. If they found any Bones of the Holy Martyrs scattered about, they
gathered them up, and put them up in this Chest, which Custom in after Ages
became a Law. If they were driven from their Habitations, or constrained for
fear of Tyrannical fury to seek new abodes, this Chest was still carried from
place to place, where the Bishop or Presbyter resided, who was to perform the
Sacred Duty. And thus they came to be called either Chests by their proper
Names, or Tables in reference to their Use, the Name of Altar growing out of
Mind. For so Minutius Felix; Do You think, says he, that we conceal the Deity
whom we serve, because we have not Temples and Altars, properly so called?
Afterward they began in respect of the Oblations to be called Altars. But in
process of Time, when the Sacrament came to be Administered without control,
there happened a great Change. For that some thought it not lawful to perform
the Sacred Duty, otherwhere then at those wooden Chests, which long Custom had
now made Religious. And therefore being brought forth of the Caves where they
had been Consecrated, they were set apart for the Administration of the
Eucharist; and it is not unlikely, that in regard they were to be placed upon
low Tables, they were made the more plain, and the lesser, that they might be
more fit for use; till at length they came to be made like the Tables
themselves; so that now the form being changed, the name only appears among the
Ethiopians. But after that, when Christians began to rear great and stately
Fabrics, those Arks or Chests together with the Tables, were placed in the
Sanctuary; and in most Churches the Name of Table remained; but in Latin Church
the Name of Altar, as the more worthy and decent Appellation prevailed.

But this was an established Custom among the Ancients, That the Basis upon
which the Sacred Vessels were to be set, should be first consecrated. Whence it
came to pass, that the Tables or Altars themselves were consecrated; and so the
use of those Arks or Chests ceased. But where there were no Altars, or that the
question was, whether they were consecrated or no, there the Greeks had their
Antimensae, or little Crickets; the Latins, their Portalia or small Portative
Tables, which they set upon those Altars that were not consecrated. But for the
Ethiopians, they make use of their Chest and their Table both together; to the
end the Service may be the more fully and absolutely performed, and nothing
left undon. Now in regard these Chests were formerly made of Wood, it was not
material what sort of Wood. But after the Popes had commanded that the Altars
should be made of Parget, the little Portative Altar was also made of the same
matter, for that reason called Lapis Sacratus, or the Consecrated Stone. The
little Chest which the Ethiopians use, is generally of Wood, though they do not
Prohibit those that are made of Stone, or cast Metal. However the Fathers of
the Society would not permit them to make use of any but of Stone; the rest
they either burnt or melted down.

Now the better to support and give credit to Conjecture, and to show that the
Primitive Christians had besides their plain and fixed Tables, real Chests,
like Chests of Drawers, we shall produce a Marble Monument dug up in one of
the Christian Churchyards. Which, if you observe it, is like a Trunk or arched
Bier, covered with a Linen Cloth in folds, not a Half Moon Table like a C. as
Aringhus imagined. Neither am I apt to believe that they who sat about it were
celebrating their Love Feasts, but the Holy Communion. Which is plain from the
Sacred Loaves that are there represented, signed with a Saltir Cross, which the
Ethiopians still use in the Holy Communion. Thuanus, it seems, saw one of those
sort of Altars, when he came to Aux in the Province of Armagnac, and describes
them to be like certain Chests. Here, says he, we viewed the Temple of St.
Orentius, of most remote Antiquity, where we beheld several Altars placed up
and down in the Temple, being the Coffins of the Martyrs, round about which the
Christians formerly held their Meetings; not plain and level like our Tables,
but rising with a kind of Gibbosity, in the manner of a Trunk lidd: which were
marked with two Greek Letters, (chapterch.) representing the Name of Christ. With
Thuanus agrees Gabriel Biel, who discoursing of Wooden Altars, Nor is it
contradictory, says he, to what has bin said before, that there is a wooden
Altar in the Lateran Church, which Altar is preserved out of a particular
Reverence to the Prince of Apostles, and the preceding Holy Martyrs, who were
said to have Celebrated the Holy Communion upon that Altar. This Altar was
fixed by Bishop Silvester, to the end that no Person, unless the Pope himself
should presume to make use of it, for the Celebration of Divine Service. But
the rage of Persecution continuing from the time that the Prince of the
Apostles was Bishop, till the Pontificate of Silvester, there was no A MARBLE
COFFIN diggd up in a Church Yard nere the high way, called Priscillas Salter's
Way Representing the Communion of ye Ancients in a Cave. Book 3d Chap 6 P 296

a The Arc or Arched Bier Coverd with a Linen cloth in stead of a Table.

b. The holy Loaves Signd with the Cross

depiction of a marble sarcophagus lid depicting men at table eating bread, and
a male profile. fixed Episcopal See, So that they were forced to perform holy
Duties either in Caves or other private places upon a wooden Altar, in the form
of a hollow Chest, which was carried about by the Priests, wherever the Roman
Bishop kept his secret Habitation. Which is confirmed by Father Tellez, who
thus writes, where he Discourses concerning the Chest made use of by the
Ethiopians.

Moreover it is well known, that in the Infancy of the Catholic Church, the
Altars were of Wood, like little Chests, and there were no other Altars of
Stone, till the time that Silvester began to Consecrate Altars of kind. However
he left remaining in the Cathedral of St. Peter's, others say in St. John
Laterano, a little wooden Chest, which for so many years had bin the Altar
which so many Pious Popes had made use of, and upon which it is not lawful at
this day for any Person but the Pope himself to Celebrate.

Thus the Studious Reader may perceive frequent mention to have bin made of
these Chests; and if the little Chest of which Tellez has given us a Relation,
be still Extant at Rome, there can be no room left for any farther doubt
concerning the Matter or the Form: and our Conjecture concerning their Original
will stand good, till the Learned shall give us better Information. Now, that
the Martyrs Bones were anciently put into these Chests, we gather from the
Council of Carthage, which approves and confirms the Custom. For so runs the 14
Canon of the Fifth by Name, but Third in Order of Time. The Altars, In which
(he does not say above, nor under) there are no Relics of Martyrs, shall be
removed. Neither could those Bones be disposed of in Tables, nor in the Altars,
so called, of the Ancients. And in this we have bin the more prolix, to the end
the Original and Use of the Ethiopic Chest, appropriated to the Communion,
might be the better understood.

The other holy Vessels are Pahal, the Dish, Tzevae, the Cup, and Spoon for
distribution of the Wine, called Eref Maskel, the Spoon of the Cross; by reason
that the handle ends in a little Cross. Besides these, they have their
consecrated Urns and Censors, in regard they frequently fume with Frankincense,
which Necessity constrained them to do while they were forced to make use of
Caves and Subterraneal Places.

In the Administration of the Sacrament, they use a sort of leavened Bread (as
was done in the Latin Church for many Ages) Marked with a Cross, imprinted into
the Mass of the Loaf. This Bread they call Korban, and Bake it new every day,
admiring at the Latins for keeping their Holy Bread till the Morrow. But upon
the Fifth Holy Day of the great Week, in Memory of Christ's unleavened Loaves,
they also use unleavened Bread; pieces of which the Priest distributes to the
Communicants. For they all participate of one Loaf. The Wine is by the Deacon
given out of the Cup in a Spoon indifferently to all, as well Layety, as
Clergy. True it is, they want real Wine; the defect of which they supply by
steeping the bruised Stones of Raisins in Water, and then squeezing and
straining the Infusion, which makes a kind of Raisin Liquor. Yet not believing
it thus made to be small enough, the Subdeacon pours a Spoonful or two of Water
into the hollow of the Communicants hand, with which he first washes his mouth,
and after that, sups it up. Tellez will not allow this Liquor to be other then
mere Water; and for that reason laughs at the Habessines, for believing they
Communicate in both kinds, when they Communicate in neither; tho the Fathers of
the Society, for want of Wine, were forced to use the same Liquor in the former
Age. Which Sandovall calls a Holy and Provident Invention. Most certain it is
that many Countries, especially inhabited by barbarous People, and remote from
the Sea, are destitute of Wine; as the Copts in Egypt, and the Christians of
the Order of St. Thomas in India. Nay, some there were, who were put to harder
shifts than all this: having no other way but to dip a linen Cloth in Wine,
when they could come at it, and dry it again. This Cloth they kept very
charily, and when they had an occasion to Administer the Sacrament, they
moistened a part of the Cloth in water, and wrung the moisture out again with
their hands. Which water so relished and tinctured, they gave to the People.

These Shifts Pope Julius condemns, however in a case of Necessity, he permits
the cluster it self to be squeezed into the Cup, and the Liquor to be mixed
with water.

The time of receiving the Sacrament, is left to every man's liberty; some
receive every Week, some every Month; but always within the Church. For they
hold it a great Sin to carry the Holy Mysteries out of the Church into private
Houses: Neither does the King, nor the Metropolitan assume to themselves that
Privilege. They never spit, that day they have received. They also receive
Fasting, and toward the Evening too, if it be a fasting day.

But now to Administer the Sacrament in large and crowded Churches, and upon
Solemn days, it requires four or five Men at least. Bahen, the Priest; or
Kasis, the Presbyter. Nefek Kasis, the Sub-Presbyter; Daj-kan, the Deacon; and
Nefeh Dajkan, the Subdeacon. There are also present other Assistants, to hold
the Candles, and to attend upon the Priests. These every one taking his
particular part, perform the whole Duty, reading of several Prayers, as the
variety of Action, and the use of distinct Vessels require. Lastly, they
recommend both the Living and the Dead to God, which they call receiving the
Dapdukon, the Diptych, or Church Register; which among the Ancient Greeks,
consisted of two Tables, wherein the Name of those were written, who were to be
Prayed for in the Register. There are some that bring their Offerings to the
Holy Table, as Bread, Oil, Tithes, first Fruits, and the like; which at the
Conclusion of the Sacrament, are distributed to the Poor. Which I take to be
understood of that ancient Custom mentioned by Claudius, in his Confession of
Faith. Vangaber Bat Mesah, that day, meaning the Sabbath, we make a Charitable
Feast. These Holydaies they keep two days every Week; that is to say, upon the
Sabbath and the Lord's Day. That they call Sanbat Ejehude, which they say they
celebrate in commemoration of the professed Creation, and therefore they do not
keep it so solemnly as the Lord's Day. But upon the Lord's Day, which they call
Sanbat Ehad, or the Sabbath of the first Holyday; or Ehude, the first Holyday,
singly, or Sanbat Christejan, the Christians Sabbath, they keep after the
custom of the Catholic Church, and read over all the Offices and Services
required.

They have no Bells of Brass, or mixed Metal like ours; instead of which, they
only use a kind of hollow Vessels resembling Bells, made of Iron, Stone, or
Wood, more for Noise, than delightful to the Ear. Neither is their Church Music
any thing more pleasing. For besides that, the Voices of their Singing Priests,
whom they call Dabetra, are very harsh and ungrateful, the Instruments they
make use of after the Egyptian manner, such as Cimbals, Morris Bells, and
Kettle Drums, which the Grandees themselves think no dishonor to rattle upon
those Solemnities, are no way agreeable to the Harmony of Europe. With their
Music they use Skipping and Dancing, in imitation of David Dancing before the
Ark of the Covenant. At what time they make the Floor ring again after such a
rude manner, that you would believe them rather at a Wedding, than at a
Christian Solemnity. This they call exulting, rejoicing, and clapping hands to
the God of Jacob, as they are commanded in the Psalms; and this they call
Praising God upon the Harp and Organ, and with Cymbals, tho it cannot be said
they are so sweet sounding as those in David's Time may be imagined to be.
Which things tho they seem to us, not to correspond with the gravity of
Christian Worship, yet will not they much admire, who well know, that in some
places among the Latins, the Feast of the Body of God was solemnized with
Dancing; which as it could not be done without Music, there were others that
played in disguise before the Dancers upon Harps.

Fasting days are no where more exactly observed. Not that they abstain from
some Meats, and gluttonize upon others. For that they look upon as a mockery of
Fasting. For they keep themselves whole days without either Food or Drink,
even till Sunset of the third Evening. Others there are that abstain the two
Holydaies of the Passion Week. The Monks put themselves upon greater
Extremities than all this; by which means they not only mortify but destroy.
Besides all which they fast twice in seven days, upon the Fourth and Sixth
Holyday, like the rest of the Eastern Churches. The reason of which was by
Tzagazaab said to be, for that the Fourth day the Murder of Christ was
concluded upon, and the Sixth it was executed; according to what many of the
Ancients taught. But we believe that these two Fasting-days, as many other
things, were admitted and observed in imitation of the Jews by the Primitive
Christians, who were either Jews, or else had learned from the Jews, that this
Custom was introduced and used as a Duty both Pious and Necessary for these
times. For the Jews fasted twice in a Week; which is that which the Pharisee
boasted, I fast twice upon the Sabbath, that is within the two days in seven,
viz. upon the Second and Fifth Holyday; which the Christians, because they
would not fast upon the same day with the Jews, altered for the Fourth and
Sixth. Afterward Innocent, and Gregory the Seventh, abrogating the Fast of the
Fourth Holyday, imposed Abstinence from Flesh upon Sunday, not minding the
ancient Canon, If any Clergyman shall be known to Fast upon any Sabbath or
Lord's Day, one excepted, let him be suspended from his Office.

That one Sabbath is Easter Eve. Otherwise to fast upon the Lord's Day, the
Ethiopians account it Criminal, like the ancient Christians; as Tertullian
witnesses. Besides these, and other Fasts of the Eastern Church, they observe
in the first place, the Forty days Lent, which they make up Fifty. For it
begins Ten days before the Roman Lent; That is, upon the second Holyday after
Sexagesima Sunday. And this as a Command of God, they observe both healthy and
sick People, most exactly and religiously; only as we said before, upon Sundays
they eat Flesh. After Easter, they supply the pinching hardship and sobriety of
the past Weeks with the Jollity and Mirth of those that succeed. For during all
the time of Pentecost, so formerly was the interval of the Fifty days called,
(from the Feast of the Resurrection till the Feast of tending the Holy Ghost)
they spend their time in all manner of Feasting and Jocundry, suitable to the
Country. All that time, as of old with the Latins, so among the Ethiopians,
being still observed as one continued Festival. Gregory considering these
things, and admiring that the Protestants in Germany observed no other Fasts,
but what were commanded by their Princes in case of Public Calamity, was
answered out of St. Ambrose; we do not Fast because the Lord abides with us,
not only those Fifty days, but all the year long, nay as long as we live. Thus
Christ answered them, who objected to his Disciples.

Can the Sons of the Bridegroom mourn while the Bridegroom is among them. But
the time shall come, that the Bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then
they shall fast.

Therefore the ancient Christians, when those days came that Christ had
foretold, that is to say, the days of Persecution and Affliction, did well and
truly in that they frequently fasted. But we, in regard our Bridegroom is
returned with his favor and his Grace, and has restored Peace and Tranquillity
to his Church, have no need to observe set Fasts as necessary; but to say with
St. Ambrose, That true Fasting is an alienation from Incontinency of Language,
Suppression of wrath and ill Desires, and Abstinence from Slander and Reproach.
And with St. Austin, The Great and General Fasting is to abstain from Iniquity,
and the unlawful Pleasures of the Age, which is perfect Fasting.

Besides the Sabbath and Lord's Day, they observe all the chief and ancient
Festivals of the Catholic Church; The Annunciation, Nativity, Circumcision,
Baptism, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and the Descension of the Holy
Ghost, called Bagnab Arbgna, or the Feast of Forty days; as also that most
ancient Festival of the Primitive Church called Rakeb, in the Middle of the
Pentecost, by the Latins called Cantate, at what time the Bishops are commanded
to assemble a Synod, by the Canons commonly called Apostolical. As for the
other Festivals, which were introduced by the Kopts, Greeks or Latins, after
the Variances of the Council of Chalcedon, some they admit, some they receive,
according as they think most agreeable to their Religion.

They begin in the year from the Calends of September, with the Greeks,
Armenians, Russians, and other Oriental Christians. For they believe that the
World was created at the time of the Autumnal Equinoctial. They farther also
compute Five thousand and five hundred years to the Nativity, Eight years less
than the Greeks, and they who follow the Translation of the Seventy
Interpreters, from whence that Computation was made. The Supputation of the
Christians is the same, which Scaliger says was therefore don, because the
Christians believe the World to be less ancient by Eight years then the Greeks
do, but he does not apply his reason home. We are apt to believe it came to
pass through some erroneous Substraction of the years of the World. For that
finding perhaps that the Greeks, to perfect the Calculation of the Years of
Christ, had subtracted 5508 years of the World; they also did the same,
forgetting that those Eight years were already wanting; or else having settled
the years of Christ, according to the Greek Computation, and coming afterward
to reform the Age of the World, they found these Eight years to be over and
above. However it fall out, let any one year of Christ be granted by them,
Eight years must be added to their Computation, if you desire to know the
agreeing time of any certain Transaction.

Their year consists of Twelve Months, as among us; But each Month, as among
the Egyptians having but Thirty days; therefore to supply the Solar Year, to
every Three years they add Five days, to every Four years Six days; which by a
word borrowed from the Greek they call Pagomen. Hence it happens, that their
Feasts go according to the Julian Account, and fall upon the same days; yet are
otherwise numbered. For the Feast of the Nativity of Christ is celebrated the
same day with us, which happens among the Europeans using the Julian Account,
to be upon the 25 of December, but with them falls upon the 28 of December.
Neither did the Catholic Church in any part of the World ever observe it upon
any other days; So that it is to be admired that Scaliger should go about to
Translate it into Autumn. It is farther observable, that to the space of Four
years they give the Denomination of one of the Evangelists; it being the Custom
to finish the reading of one Evangelist quite through in that time. Which is
the reason that in some of their Chronological Computations, you shall find
added, in the days of Mark, in the days of John the Evangelist, etc.

As to what concerns their Nuptial Rites, most certain it is, that Polygamy is
not allowed by the Habessine Church, however it be tolerated by the Civil
Magistrate. For they that Marry more than one are not punished by the
Magistrates; yet they are prohibited from the Holy Sacrament: as being of those
sort of People, that do no injury to the Commonwealth, but only contradict the
Rules of Christian Sanctity; as if it were not the Office or Duty of Kings and
Princes, but of the Bishops of the Church to make Men Godly and Christianly
virtuous. This Alvarez asserts upon his own Knowledge: Whose Host at Dobarra
had Three Wives which had brought him Seven and thirty Children; for which
there was no other notice taken of him, but only that he was not admitted to
the Church, or to the Communion, until he at last put Two of them away. Here it
may not be improper to inquire how the Metropolitan behaves himself toward
their Kings, who have more Wives than one. For the Habessinian Kings, by virtue
of an old Ill custom, besides several Wives lawfully Married, are not ashamed
to keep several Concubines; as if they did it in imitation of Solomon, from
whom they boast their Descent. True it is, That the Fathers of the Society
would not grant Absolution to Susneus, before he had dismissed all his
Supernumerary Wives, retaining only the first. Indeed it is to me no small
wonder, that the Laws of the Church, and the Kingdom should no better agree;
that the one should be so loose in point of Marriages, the other so strict;
especially where the dispute arises, not so much as to the Matter, as to the
Name. Thus we find the Marriages of Kindred forbidden, even to distant degrees;
for that the Ethiopians wanting terms of distinction, call one another all by
the Names of Brothers and Sisters. Thus a Churchman may not Marry his
Brother's Wife, but a Lay Person may. However no Marriages but those that are
approved by Divine Authority, are honored with Sacerdotal Benediction; nor
those neither publicly in the Church, unless they be such Clergymen, to whom
the Hallelujah is Sung. Other People are Married either at home, or before the
Doors of the Church. However all Secular Persons have also this Privilege,
that they can throw off the Yoke when they please. For upon any slight
Difference between a Man and his Wife, if they cannot be reconciled, the King's
Judges presently dissolve the Marriage. But as for the Clergy, if it be their
desire to put away their Wives, or to Marry another, the first being Deceased,
they are obliged to renounce their Function. Whereby it happens, that their
Marriages are much more peaceful, and more durable.

To conclude with their Burials, the Dead Bodies being well washed and sum'd
with Incense, they wrap them up in proper Garments. If the Party deceased be of
Noble Extraction, he is laid upon the Bier, covered with a Bulls Hide; which
done, the Clergy carry him to the Grave, laden with Crosses, Censors, and
Holy Water; and that with a pace so swift, that it is a difficult matter to
follow them. The Body is for some time set down by the Grave, during the
reading of a certain Paragraph out of St. John's Gospel; after which, the Body,
being found and sprinkled with Holy Water, is not let down, but thrown into the
Sepulcher.

King Claudius being desirous to Solemnize the Exequies of Christopher Gomez,
upon the Anniversary Day, that he had lost his Life, for the Recovery of
Abassia, summoned together all the Priests, Canons, Monks, and all the
Neighboring Poor People; and to the first, being about Six hundred, he gave a
Royal Funeral Supper; to the last, being about Six thousand, he distributed a
large and noble Alms. They on the other side recited the whole Psalter quite
thorough, and made the Sky ring with innumerable Allelujahs, a Ceremony, that
serves alike as well upon sad, as joyful Occasions. Thus when Marcus, the
Eldest Son of Susneus, was Buried, they sounded forth, Marcus is Dead,
Hallelujah,
Marcus is Dead, Hallelujah.


And this they repeated so often and so loud, that the Fathers, but newly then
arrived in. Ethiopia, were astonished to hear such an unwonted cry; not being
able to tell, whether the Ethiopians rejoiced, or lamented. So strangely are
all Nations delighted with their own Customs.

CHAP. VII. Of the Constitution and Form of Ecclesiastical Government in
Ethiopia, as also of the Privileges of the Clergy.
The Clergy enjoy no immunity. Their Head or Abuna created by the Metropolitan
of Alexandria. His Place in Councils. The present State of the Alexandrian
Church deplorable. The Clergy ignorant, the Patriarch Illiterate. The Habessine
Metropolitans ordain the Clergy only. No Bishops, nor Archbishops. The Icegue
governs the Monks. They acknowledge but four Ecumenical Patriarchs. The
Catalogue of Metropolitans uncertain. They do not reck'n these sent by the
Pope. After Mendez, one called the Cophtit. His Successors. The Orders of
Deacon, Presbyter, and Sub-Presbyter. The Clergy Marry, but not twice.

WE have already declared, That the Supreme Power in Ecclesiastical Affairs, is
invested in the King. Therefore all Ecclesiastical Causes, except only in very
slight Matters, are all determined by the King's Judges. Neither do the Clergy
or Monks enjoy any sort of Ecclesiastical Immunity, or Privilege of Exemption.
Nor does the Canon, Siquis suadente diabolo, hujus Sacrilegii reatum
incurrerit, quod in Clericum vel Monachum violentas manus injecerit, etc. help
them at all, but that upon offenses committed they are punished, as Lay
Persons, by the Secular Judges: And many times they are sensible of the rough
and violent hands of wicked Men, without any fear of Excommunication. But as to
what concerns the Law of Order, or the Diocesan Law, those things are left to
the Clergy. Their Chief Head is called Papas, or Metropolitan. Tho the Title or
Surname of Abuna, that is to say, Our Father, be more frequently given him. He
by ancient Custom, at the King's desire, is Consecrated to that Dignity by the
Patriarch of Alexandria, and sent out of Egypt into Ethiopia. For they do not
think it fitting for the Patriarch to nominate any one out of their own Nation,
tho never so skilful in their Language, Laws and Customs. It being provided by
those Nicene Canons, extant in the Arabic Language, That the Ethiopians shall
not Elect or Create a Patriarch, but that their chief Chief Prelate shall be
under the Jurisdiction of Him that resides at Alexandria. And a little after,
That if the Council be held in Greece, and the Prelate of Ethiopia be present,
he shall have the seventh place, next the Prelate of Seleucia. For they are
very obstinate in maintaining their old Customs, tho it happen to be one of
their greatest Misfortunes. The State and Condition of the Alexandrian Church,
being quite different now from what it was formerly; that is to say, altogether
miserable and deplorable. For both the Patriarch and his Clergy, are a poor
sort of contemptible and rustic People, and void of all common Endowments. They
are as it were the Servants and Slaves of the Turks, whose continual vexations
so terrify them from undertaking Ecclesiastical Employment, that many times
they receive their Ordination by constraint, and with Tears in their Eyes;
which requires nothing more from them than to read Arabic.

For the Coptic, or ancient Egyptian Language, as it was spoken in the times of
the Grecian Kings, and as Athanasius Kirker has given a view of it to the
Europeans, is now almost buried in Oblivion. Their Churches are either all
destroyed, or very near to Ruin; the Turks not suffering them either to Rebuild
or Repair. The Patriarch, if he can but only read and write, and understand the
Scripture after an ordinary manner, is thought sufficiently worthy of St.
Mark's Chair. Hence it may be easily conjectured, what sort of Persons are sent
into Ethiopia for the Government of so many Churches. In the time of the
Fathers of the Society, there was sent such a sad Tool into Habessinia, to be
the Abuna, that being rejected for his Simplicity, he was forced to Grind Corn
for his living. To whom another Succeeding, not much better gifted, gave
occasion to the Courtiers to jest, and cry, We have a Miller still. Now as
these Patriarchs know very little, so they do as little, only in set forms of
Words, they ordain Under-Clercs, just as wise and learned as themselves.

For this reason the Fathers of the Society, little regarded the Ordinations of
the Abuna, but when any of the Abessine Priests came over to them, they
ordained them again after the Roman manner, not without the great resentment
and indignation of the rest.

In none of their Kingdoms or Provinces have they any Bishops or Archbishops.
So that unless the Icegue, with the assistance of his Monks, had taken some
care of the Church, all thought of Religion had fallen to the ground long e're
this.

This Abuna is by some, tho improperly called Patriarch, his truer Title being
that of Bik Papas, or Bik Papaste, Prince or Master of the Metropolitans; of
whom they acknowledge only Four to be of equal Power and Dignity among
themselves. Among these they reckon the Roman Patriarch to be the First, and
call him Bik Papaste Zaromeja, or the Roman Patriarch. For they have no higher
Title to give to any one who may be thought Superior to a Patriarch.

The first Metropolitan of Habessinia was Frumentius, the Ethiopic Apostle.
From him to Simeon, who died with Elius in defense of the Alexandrian Religion,
they reck'n in order Ninety five Metropolitans. We have not yet seen the
Catalogue, but in the Ethiopic Register, they are Numbered up in this Order.

Abuna Abba Matthew. Abba Salama. Abba Jacob. Abba Bartholomew. Abba Michael.
Abba Isaac. Abba John. Abba Mark, who was Metropolitan in the Time of David.
Abba Joseph,
In the Reign of Claudius was received into the Kingdom with great Pomp;
without any regard had to John Bermudes, whom the Pope had sent into Abessinia,
with the Titles of Patriarch of Alexandria and Ethiopia. As little respect did
the Habessines give to John Nonius Barret, and Andrew Ovieda, Portugueses,
dignified at Rome with the Titles of Patriarch, and sent into Ethiopia by the
King of Portugal. About the beginning of this last Century, one Peter, upheld
by the Factious Party, withstood Za-Denghel, who favored the Romanists. In the
Time of Susneus, Simeon, already mentioned, came into the Kingdom, who being
Slain, and the Miller deposed, Alphonsus Mendez was by the Pope at the Instance
of the Fathers of the Society, preferred, and by the Abessinians admitted to be
their Patriarch, tho not acknowledged under any other Title then that of Abuna
Zaromeja, or the Roman Abuna. But he, together with his Companions being soon
after expelled, another called the Cophtit was sent, in whose Company Peter
Heyling of Lubeck traveled to the Habessine Court. To him succeeded one John,
and about the year 1651. another called Mark, who being deposed for his vicious
life, Michael succeeded him. Lastly, about the year 1662. one Gabraxos was
ordered to supply his Decease.

As for the Cathedrals or Principal Churches, they have their chief Overseers,
which they call Komasat. Such a Komos was Peter the Ethiopian, whose
acquaintance was courted by Paulus Jovius. It is their Duty to take care of the
Secular Matters of the Churches, and to compose the differences between the
Clergymen, so far as their Jurisdiction extends. Over the Churches that belong
to the Camp, the Debtera Gueta Presides, as much as to say, the Ruler of the
Canons.

The Debterat, or Canons, being those Persons who are particularly employed in
those Offices that require the addition of Hymns and Sacred Melody. The Nebrat
seems to be their Dean. Next to whom in Dignity are the Kasis or Presbyter, and
the Nepheh Kasis, or Sub-Presbyter; the Dejakon or Deacon, and Nepheh Dejakon,
or Subdeacon. As for those Under-Ministers, which in the Primitive Church were
known by the Name of Readers, they are quite out of Use: as are also
Deaconesses, of which however they have the greatest need, by reason of the
frequent Baptizings of full-grown Women, to whom their assistance, while the
Ceremony of their Baptism requires them to be naked, is most necessary.

All Ecclesiastical Persons, when they walk publicly abroad, carry a Cross in
their hands, and offer it to all they meet to be Kissed, having hardly any
other note of Distinction from the Layety. The same sort of Cross the Seculars
also carry, who to the end they may be admitted into the Sanctuary, desire to
be ordained Deacons; as also most young Children.

All the Clergy, except the Monks, are permitted to Marry. Neither will any man
deny, but that it was Lawful for the Catholic Bishops of the Primitive Church,
the Presbyters and Deacons to do the same; which was also upon the Persuasion
and Arguments of Paphnutius a most Holy Man; allowed of and approved by the
Fathers of the Nicene Council, as both Socrates and Sozomenus testify: whose
Credit justified by all Antiquity, was never yet called in question; especially
being confirmed by the practice, and so many clear and undeniable Presidents of
the Primitive Church, till Siricius and Innocent the First, took upon them to
order it otherwise in the Latin Church.

Among the Eastern Churches, honest and lawful Matrimony was in much more high
esteem, than faithless Batchelorship, obnoxious to perpetual concupiscence.
Wherefore the Grecians, Armenians, Russians, but more especially our Ethiopians
not only permitted their Presbyters to Marry, but soonest prefer the Husbands
of Wives; insomuch that the nearest way to that Preferment is to Marry. For
they take the words of the Apostle, Let him be the Husband of one Wife, for a
Precept; yet understand it only so, as not to extend any farther, but to one
single Marriage. And therefore their Clergy never offer to covet repeated
Wedlocks, which even by the Seculars were not approved in the Eastern Churches.
The Novatians detested a second Wedlock after Baptism, as equal to the Crime of
Adultery. The Latin Fathers also gave it an Ignominious Character, reproaching
it with the Scandalous Title of honest Adultery. But in after Ages, the Matter
being more wisely considered, it was not thought material, whether the same
Person Married one or more Wives, after Death had once made the Separation, so
that the Matrimony were lawful; since there appeared no reason to the contrary.
For which was alleged the famous example of one Woman at Rome, that had
survived the Two and twentieth Wedlock. But the Habessines still observe their
ancient Laws: in regard that by the ancient Canons, they that Marry twice, are
accounted unworthy of Holy Orders.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Separation of the Habessines from the Greek Church, in the
Time of the Council of Chalcedon.
The Council of Chalcedon. Dioscurus Condemned. From thence the Melchites, and
Jacobites. The great Damage to the Church by that Schism. The Ethiopians defend
Dioscurus. The Ethiopians Condemn the Council of Chalcedon; and call Timotheus
and Eutyches Heretics. They acknowledge two Natures in Christ. The words
Essence, Substance, Person and Nature, ambiguous to the Abessines. A doubt
concerning the Disputations of the Fathers with the Abessines about the two
Natures. How they are to be Disputed with. The Jacobites abstain from the
Arabic word for Nature, which the Eutychians use. The Dissension deplored.

THE Alexandrian Church remained in Unity with it self, and with the Greek
Church, till the Council of Chalcedon, by us called the Fourth Universal
Council, which Marcian the Emperor Summoned, to appease the Discords and
Dissentions that were risen among the Bishops and Divines, by reason of the
Doctrine of Eutyches. This Eutyches, a Constantinopolitan Abbot asserted, That
both the Natures of Christ, the Divine and Human, upon his Incarnation,
immediately became one and the same; and that therefore there was but one
Nature, and one Will in Christ. For which reason, they that held this Opinion
were called Monothelites. Thereupon it was Decreed in this Council, That Christ
was of the same Substance with the Father, according to his Deity, but Sin
excepted; of the same Substance, and like to us in all things, according to his
Humanity. One and the same in two Natures united, yet without mixture,
mutation, division or distance, both Natures acting that which was proper to
it, by Communion with each other Dioscurus also, the Patriarch of Alexandria,
was condemned as a Heretic, and Defender of Eutyches; and not only so, but
being publicly whipped, he was sent into Exile, and another put up in his
room, who because he followed the Emperors or the Royal Religion, was therefore
called a Melchite, or Royalists according to the Arabic word. The Contradicters
of this Opinion were called Eutychians, afterward Jacobites from one Jacob, a
Syrian, who stoutly defended the Doctrine of Eutyches. Hence arose a most
fierce and outrageous Schism in the Church of Alexandria, defiled with Blood
and Slaughter, which was the reason that not only the greatest part of the
Alexandrian Church was rent and torn from the rest of the Catholic Church; but
that Egypt also, weakened with it is own civil Dissentions, became a Prey to the
Saracens, who taking advantage of the Discords of the Christians among
themselves, overcame and subjugated the upholders of both Opinions: so that now
there is little or nothing remaining of Christianity in Egypt. Thus our
Ecclesiastical Writers.

But the Ethiopians relate, that Dioscorus, his Successors, and their
Followers, heavily complained of the Injury done them: for that he never
followed Eutyches, nor ever denied nor confused the Divinity and Humanity
really existing in Christ; only he would not acknowledge the word Nature to be
common to the Divinity and Humanity of Christ: and that he only endeavored to
prevent the Asserting of two Persons in Christ, contrary to the Opinion of the
Catholic Church, and the Decrees of the Council of Ephesus; believing that
absurdity would follow, should we admit two Wills and Natures in Christ.
Lastly, That the word Nature, signifying something Born or Created, did no way
quadrate with Divinity, neither could two Wills in two Natures, united without
Division, Separation, or Distance be conceived by the understanding of Man:
That it was not to be thought that Human Nature exalted to a State of Glory,
would desire, act, or suffer, what is suffered, acted, or desired in the State
of Mortality; or that Humanity in a present State of Glory, should desire or be
sensible of that which Divinity was not sensible of or desired. Which Opinion
of his being heard and understood, it seemed an idle Question, a mere brangling
Dispute, that little deserved to be the occasion of so much Enmity among the
Christians; as being become rather a Quarrel to be decided by the Sword, and
not by Argument. And therefore these things considered, it was evident that
Dioscurus, was neither sufficiently heard nor rightly understood, but in his
absence condemned as an obstinate Heretic, rather out of Hatred and Envy then
by Law. These and such like things when I heard Gregory discoursing, I began to
apply my mind more particularly to this Affair, as being willing to know
whether he only expressed his own Thoughts, or according to the Opinions and
Writings of his own Country Doctors.

In the first place therefore I found it beyond all doubt, that the Habessines
do reject the Council of Calcedon, tho they understand not what was done
therein, as having never received or thought worthy of their Transcription the
Canons there made. Nevertheless they inveigh most bitterly against the Council,
and the Fathers there assembled, and load them with most injurious reproaches,
calling them Mahebar Abdan, a Convention of Fools, and Qualqedanowe jau,
reckoning the Chalcedonians among the worst of Heretics and Malefactors. In the
second place, I observed them fixed in this Error, as believing the Fathers of
the Council of Chalcedon went about to divide the Substance of Christ, and
contrary to the preceding Council of Ephesus, to make two Persons of one, which
they also attribute to the Latins. For this reason they condemn Pope Leo, and
extol Dioscurus to the Skies, as the Champion of the Orthodox Faith, as being
the Person, that out of a just and zealous Indignation, tore Leo's Diploma, as
soon as it was delivered to him; and reck'n him among the Number of Martyrs,
for suffering himself to be scourged, his Teeth struck out, and his Beard
pulled off, for standing to the Truth.

Peace to Dioscurus, that still reproached
The vain Opinions that the Melkites broached,
United God dividing into Two:
Then to confirm his Own in what was true,
His broken Teeth and Beard torn from his Chin,
Sends round the World to evince Chalcedon's spleen.
They also ascertain themselves of a great reward laid up for Him in Heaven, in
recompense of his so rigid Sufferings.

In the third place, I found that they expressly condemn Eutyches as a Heretic,
but on the other side applaud Timotheus, the Patriarch of Alexandria, (whom our
Writers affirm to have bin condemned in the Sixth general Council) by whose
Doctrine, the followers of Eutyches were convicted; for so the same Poet, tho
otherwise a cruel Enemy of the Chalcedonian Fathers writes of him.

They that believed the Heretical Doctrine of Eutyches, were burnt by the
Flames of his Expressions.

Tho Gregory being demanded what he knew concerning him, made answer,

That there were in Ethiopia, as well they who believed that Eutyches had made a
confusion of the two Natures of Christ, as they who believed he had not done it.

Whence it appears that Eutyches, not his Errors, is defended by some of the
Ethiopians.

Fourthly, it is apparent, That they acknowledge both Mabqot and Tesbet the
Divinity and Humanity to be both Abstractively and Conjunctively in Christ.
Which is as much as to allow two Natures together in Christ.

Fifthly, Tellez attests from the Relation of the Fathers of the Society, that
both Natures are to be found in their Books, and imputes it to their Contumacy,
that they will not acknowledge in words what they believe concerning the
Catholic Truth, when they teach the same thing in their Writings, That the
Catholic Habessines suffering Persecution from the Heretics, cried out, God
and Man, whereby they both asserted the Catholic Faith, and the two Natures in
Christ. But more then this, we have the Testimony of Susneus, in one of whose
Orations to his Soldiers, we find that all the Habessines confess, That Christ
is the true God, and true Man; and consequently, we must allow what the Fathers
of the Society relate, that they acknowledge two Natures in Christ.

Sixthly, we are to take notice, That the words which the Greeks use, and which
the Latins have made use of in these difficult questions of Faith, as Essence,
Substance or Subsistence, Person, Nature, among the Ethiopians are interpreted
by words Equivocal, from whence it is no wonder there should be such a spring
of Errors. For Helave, sometimes signifies Essence, sometimes Hypostasis or
Substance. Gregory also affirmed, That there were some who assert Qalet
Helwejet, two Essences, that is the Divinity and Humanity in Christ, and that
each Nature retains its proper Essence. Others for fear of falling into the
Nestorian Error, rather chose to make use of the word Bakreye, which properly
signifies a Pearl, affirming there are in Christ Qalit Bah reyat, two precious
Substances; in imitation of the Arabians, who use their own word, which
signifies a Pearl, by which to express the Divine Subsistence. Which others
again dislike, as being a word no less Equivocal, because it may be taken
either for Subsistence or Person; as when they of the Son, Zatwalda embaha reju
Baab, who was born of the Substance of the Father. Thus the Author of a certain
Manuscript called, The Ecclesiastical Computation concludes, Who were witness
of one Person of Christ, Synodius Patriarch of Alexandria, etc.

From whence we gather, that when we from the Council of Chalcedon dispute of
the Nature, they mean the Person. Now adays, when they speak of the Person,
they make use for the most part of the word Agal, as being less Equivocal; tho
sometime we shall meet with the word Gaz to signify Person, ill rendered when
taken for the Countenance or Face. Which Circumstances, when I read and
consider, I find all things to be perplexed and obscure; no certain State of
the Question; and the words themselves without limitation Equivocal. Perhaps
Eutyches himself could not explain what sort of Nature was meant, how it was
made out of the two? How it was called? or what the Qualities of it were? But
that he was so egregiously stupid, as to think the two Natures so mixed in
Christ, as Water with Wine, and that he had so many Wise and Learned Men to
follow him in that Opinion, is almost incredible. As for the Ethiopians, they
are most certainly not guilty of so sottish a Heresy. For which reason I
confess, I cannot apprehend what these frequent Disputations were, which the
Fathers of the Society had with the Habessines, wherein, they say, the
Ethiopians were always forced to submit, as being convicted out of their own
Books. Which is the more easy to believed, in regard they so willingly
acknowledge the Divinity and Humanity of Christ. But that they should out of
Contumacy and Heretical Pravity contradict the Fathers, and choose to suffer
Exilements, and other Punishments, or run the hazard of Civil Dissentions,
rather than forego their Opinion, is hardly to be credited. To me it seems
therefore more probable, that they could not agree about the words. For if a
man should first explain his meaning, and tell them, that by the two Natures in
Christ, we understand as well his Divinity as his Humanity, and then upon this
Explanation ask them, Which Nature was wanting in Christ, seeing they
acknowledge but one? Certainly they would answer, That neither his Divinity nor
his Humanity were wanting; but that both continue and endure for ever. And thus
it will appear, that they understand the word Nature far otherwise than we do,
and that the true state of the Question among the Habessines consists in this,
Whether by any, or by what name both the Abstract Natures (which undoubtedly
they admit) are to be called? Now therefore because Tellez does not say in what
Language they Disputed (for the Habessines understand neither Latin nor
Portuguese) how they expressed themselves when they mentioned the words
Essence, Person, and Nature, how they explained Equivocal words, or how the
Interpreters rendered them, whether they could not agree upon the common word,
or whether the word Substance displeased, as fearing that to grant two
Substances, would be to grant two Persons, I leave to farther enquiry. Nor can
I find out in so much Variety and Ambiguity of words, what word is most proper
to be used in our sense for the word Nature. For the Jacobites when they make
use of the Arabic Tabia, or the Ethiopic Tabaje, which answers to the Greek
word Physis, and by the Copts is called D Physis, apply it only to things
created, more especially to the Elements, but never to the Godhead: which the
Melkites and Greeks being destitute of any other, make no scruple to do. Hence
the Contention. For thus says Eutychius, Patriarch of Alexandria, a Melkite;
In Christ there are, Two Substances, a Substance of Divinity, and a Substance
of Humanity; but one Person. To every Substance there belongs a Nature; and so
two Substances, two Natures, but one Person.

For this reason, in Egypt, where this unhappy difference still remains, when
the Copts cry out in Arabic Mashiah Wahid, Tabiah Wahid, One Will, one Nature;
the Melkites answer, Mashiatan tabiahtan, Two Wills, two Natures.

In the year 1634. an European of great Quality residing in Egypt, and having
vievv'd and read the Books of the Copts, delivered his Opinion afterward,
That the difference and quarrel of the Parties proceeded more from a fear of
the Consequence, than from the Thing it self. For the Greeks are for the
Destruction of those Heretics that confuse and mix the Divinity and Humanity
of Christ. The Cophtites oppugn those that assert two Persons in Christ.

Which if it be so, that the Contention and Debate, either formerly, or now, is
only about the sense of words, What Tears and Lamentations can suffice to
bewail the sad Effects of such an Unfortunate Pedantic Brabble? What breast
that lodges a heart so hard, that can refrain from bemoaning the sad and
calamitous Contentions of those, to whom Christ has so earnestly recommended
the most strict Bonds of Charity by his own Example? Humanity one would think,
should not be so inhuman, for the sake of one word Nature misunderstood, to
tear up the foundations of Concord between those, whose Nature the Eternal Word
has assumed into his most Holy Subsistence. But as it is the Infirmity of our
most corrupted Nature, where Ambition, from Ambition Emulation, from Emulation
Envy, from Envy Hatred have taken root, that the Mind possessed with various
Passions and Affections, seeks no farther after Truth, hence it is that Men
with Ears obstructed, and blinded Eyes, pursue disputes to satisfy their
private Ends; not considering the true end of Arguing and Dispute.

CHAP. IX. Of the Differences which happened between the Habessines and the
Church of Rome, more especially the Fathers of the Society to the beginning of
this Century.
The Patriarch of the Melkites and Jacobites, which the Habessines following,
disunited themselves from the Greeks and Romans. They had Knowledge of the
Pope. Alexander the Third writes to the King of Ethiopia. An Embassy to
Eugenius the Fourth, and Clement the 7th. John Bermudes confirmed by Paul the
Third. Whence Hopes of subjecting the Habessines to the Sea of Rome. Barret and
Oviedo made Patriarchs. They send before to sound the King. They Dispute with
the King concerning Religion. The Portugueses suspected. Barret stays in India,
Oviedo kindly received. Claudius acts moderately. Grants Liberty to the Latins.
Oviedo desires more. The King delays. Moved with Oviedo's Epistle. Oviedo
Attempts Severity but in vain. To Claudius his Brother Succeeds. The Latins
Liberty revoked. Oviedo threatened. Melech Saghed milder to the Portugueses.
All their Priests Die.

THE Horrid flames of Discord being thus broken forth, all those Nations that
were Subject to the Alexandrian See, separated themselves into Parties almost
equal in Strength. And every Faction chose its particular Faction. The Grecian
Christians, who were in Subjection to the Constantinopolitan Emperor, adhered
to the Patriarch of the Melkites; The rest who inhabited the innermost Parts of
Africa, and among them the Axumites, followed the Patriarch of the Jacobites;
and thus being rent not only from the Greek, but Roman Church, they had little
or no knowledge of either. After this, the Power of the Saracens increasing,
and all Egypt being by them subdued, all Correspondence and Communication of
Arts and Knowledge ceased between Them, and the Christians of our part of the
World. Nevertheless some glimpses they had of the Roman Pontiffs, from the Acts
of the Ancient Councils, and reverenced them as Chief among the Oecunomical
Patriarchs. On the other side the Pope laying hold of the occasion, endeavored
to Re-establish the former Correspondence and Amity, not taking any notice of
their being Monothelites, or Favorers of the condemned Dioscurus. To this
purpose Baronius has set forth an Epistle taken out of Roger's English Annals,
written by Alexander the Third, with this Superscription. To our most dear Son
in Christ, the Illustrious and Magnificent King of the Indians, the most Holy
of Priests. Which Epistle he erroneously believes to have bin written to
Prester John, whose Dominions were then very large in Ethiopia. For that when
Baronius wrote, the King of the Habessines was reputed and commonly taken for
Prester John. But when Alexander the Third lived, the real Prester John was
then reigning in Asia. Neither is any thing to be gathered out of that whole
Epistle, that has any Relation to Africa, or Ethiopia, or the King of the
Habessines; nor are the Consequences of that Letter known to Baronius. Only
upon that occasion, he conjectures that the Church of St. Stephen, with the
Buildings behind St. Peter's Cathedral, were thereupon assigned to the
Habessinians; though he is not certain by whom that Assignation was made,
whether by Alexander or any other Succeeding Pope. Therefore, if the Epistle
were real, we rather think it was written to the Asiatic Prester John, then to
the King of the Ethiopians. Others there are, that believe there was an
Abessinian Embassy to Clement the Fifth, residing at Avignon. Nor is there any
doubt made of the Embassy which Zera-Jacob sent to Eugenius the Fourth, in the
year 1439. toward the Conclusion of the Council of Florence. Gregory had known
nothing of it, had he not seen the Ambassador and his Retinue painted at Rome,
and known his own Countrymen by their Habit.

In the former Century, Francis Alvarez, Priest to the Portugal Ambassadors
sent into Ethiopia, brought Letters from David to Clement the Seventh, which he
delivered to the Pope in a public Assembly of the Cardinals, Charles the Fifth
being there also present, promising Reverence and Obedience withal to the Holy
See, in the Name of the King of Ethiopia. It was a thing very grateful to the
Pope, that at a time when so many Northern Nations had revolted from the Roman
See, so many Kingdoms of the East and South, should voluntarily submit to his
Jurisdiction. For which reason, neither Alvarez's Credentials, nor the words of
the Epistle were over-nicely examined, nor any extraordinary Scrutiny made to
what Church, or what sort of Religion the King himself was inclined, to the end
that had it been needful, he might have bin absolved from the guilt of Heresy,
before his Admission into the Bosom of the Church. For as we shall afterward
declare, the Habessines made quite another Interpretation of their King's
Intention. In the mean time a certain form of Friendship long remained. For
when John Bermudes came to Rome to crave Assistance from the Europeans in the
behalf of David, so often vanquished by the Adelans; Paul the Third, hearing
that the said Bermudes was by Mark the Metropolitan, nominated his Successor,
and invested with Holy Orders, made no scruple to confirm him, and to ratify
the Ordination of a Schismatical Prelate. There were then residing certain
Habessines, very good Men, who Printed the New Testament with their Liturgies
in the Ethiopic Language, whom the Pope did not only tolerate, but assisted at
his own Expenses. In recompense of which Kindnesses, they extolled and
applauded the Benevolence of the Romans, the Munificence of the Chief Pontiff,
and his Spiritual Daughter Hyeronyma Farnesia, and acknowledged the Pope as the
Head and Supreme over all the Orthodox Christians. Pius the Fifth also in his
Letters to Menas, tho a professed Enemy to the Romans, called him his most dear
Son; whether he were ignorant of his hatred to the Latins, which was a wonder;
or whether he had hopes to reclaim him by flattering Titles, which Godignus
rather conjectures to be the Pope's true Intention. For this reason, some there
were who believed the Habessines to be Catholics in the highest perfection,
and subject to the Sea of Rome; tho Tellez deservedly taxes and derides their
Credulity. Nevertheless a vain hope had possessed the Minds of many of the more
Zealous sort, that that vast Kingdom, then looked upon to be four times as big
as really it was, might in a short time, with little difficulty, be annexed to
the Pontifical Jurisdiction. Among the rest, the Founder of the Society of
Jesus, Ignatius Loyola, bent all his Study to bring it to pass, and to that end
he showed a most Ardent desire to go himself, and win the honor of Converting
Ethiopia. Which tho Julius the Third would not grant him the liberty to do,
nevertheless he so far prevailed with him, that by the connivance of John the
Third King of Portugal, the Patriarchal Dignity was conferred upon John Nonius
Barret, one of his Companions, contrary to the Institutions of his Society, tho
Bermudes were then in Ethiopia already dignified with the same Title. With him
was joined Andrew Oviedo, a Bishop, that if Barret through Mortality should
miscarry, he might not want an immediate Successor. They, Embarking in several
Ships, sailed into India. In the mean time Claudius was become Successor to
David his Father, whose affection they thought it first expedient to sound,
before the Patriarch should expose himself to Casualties and Indignities.
Jacobus Dias was therefore sent before, together with Gonsales Rodriguez, and
Fulgentio Freyre, Jesuits; who toward the beginning of February setting Sail
from Goa, and a Month after arriving at the Port of Arkiko, were there
courteously received by the President of the Maritime Province, and within the
space of two Months brought to the King. Who understanding that the King of
Portugal was about to send Priests, and other Ecclesiastical Persons to teach
him and his People a new Religion, was very much perplexed in his Mind, and
long in Suspense what answer to return; for he neither thought it convenient to
admit them, neither was he willing to offend the King of Portugal. However he
ventured upon several Colloquies with the Envoys, the sum of which, managed for
the most part by Gonsalez, tended to this, That the Pope of Rome was Christ's
Vicar upon Earth, and the Supreme Head of all Christianity, and therefore if
the Habessines were desirous of Eternal Happiness, they should once more return
and join themselves to their Lawful Head; for that Christ himself had from his
own lips asserted, that his Church was but one Fold, and over that but one
Shepherd, etc. On the other side, the Habessines made answer, That an Affair
of so great Consequence was to be considered and consulted upon with the other
Patriarchs; for to abandon their ancient Rites and Ceremonies upon private
admonition, and receive new ones, was a thing full of danger and offense. At
length the King told them, That if those Persons whom the King of Portugal
should send, would take the pains to come to Matzua, he would order some Person
to be there, both to give them a befitting Reception, and Conduct them to his
Court. Besides all this, the King was no less fearful, least the Portugals, as
it had befallen several other Kings in India, should make him their Tributary,
and under the pretense of Religion, power into his Country a great force of
Soldiers, Armed and furnished with Firearms; Especially remembering what great
Exploits a small Number of Portugals had performed in his Kingdom but a few
years before. A Jealousy that not long after increased to that height, that
when King David had seriously negotiated with Roderigo Limez, the Portugal
Ambassador, about the Recovery and Fortification of Matzua, and Suaqena, and
had also offered assistance of Forces, Provision and Money, afterward the
Business was not only no farther mentioned, but also the Portuguese Aid, so
necessary, and so much desired was utterly refused; so that he chose rather to
leave the Port of Arkiko, with the Island adjoining, in the hands of the Turk,
then to give Admission to the Portugals. So prevalent is the fear of Foreign
Domination.

But now Claudius's answer being returned into India, strangely surpised the
Patriarch Barret, and his Associates, who imagined that all things would have
bin smooth and easy according to their wishes. Thereupon after long
deliberation, they came to this result, Lest the Patriarchal Dignity should be
hazarded with a Prince ill affected, which would be to the Detriment of the
Pontifical Authority, and a contempt of the King of Portugal, by whose
recommendation and favor they were sent, that the Patriarch should remain in
India with Melchior Caymero Bishop of Nice, and that Oviedo should go alone, to
the end he might take his measures by the Event of Oviedo 's Success. Oviedo
being thus dispatched away with Five more Associates, was kindly received by
Isaac at that time Bahrnagass, or Governor of the Seaports. The Common People
ignorant of their Errand, nor altogether averse to the Romish Ceremonies,
received the Bishop and his Associates with great testimonies of Kindness, even
to the kissing their hands. The Romanists laying hold upon the occasion,
resolved upon a Procession from their own to the Habessine Church, and were by
them beheld with mutual Charity, without the least upbrading or reproach of the
Novelty. The King also entertained them with great kindness; only he took it
ill that they should talk to him of yielding obedience to the Roman Pontiff.
Nevertheless as he was a most Prudent Person, and worthy the high Dignity he
enjoyed, he always carried himself with so great Moderation toward the Bishop,
that he still left him with some hopes of Success. In the mean time the Roman
Religion was every where freely exercised, and no man forbid who defir'd to
embrace it. But the Bishop not content with so much favor, began to press the
King more urgently, That at length without more delay, he would submit himself
to the Roman Pontiff. He replied, That his Ancestors had in sacred things given
their Obedience to none but the Successors of St. Mark; nor did he see any
cause why he should desire Innovation, and disturb his People well contented
with their Abuna? But the Bishop still continuing his Importunity, The King
told him, That since he was come to him from a Region so far distant upon so
honest a Negotiation, he would consult with his Friends and his Learned Men
upon a Matter of so great Importance. Oviedo understanding that the King did
nothing but spin out delays; and hearing withal, that the King's Mother, and
all the Blood Royal, together with the Nobility and greatest Doctors of the
Nation were utterly averse to any Alterations, wrote an Epistle to the King,
wherein he put him in Mind, That his Father had acknowledged the Pope of Rome
for the Vicar of Christ; that several of his Learned men had besought him; that
Claudius had wrote to the King of Portugal; and that his Father had Commanded,
that they should not desire an Abuna from any other place then from Rome: and
that He himself had publicly promised Obedience to thee See of Rome. That if
any doubt remained concerning any Articles of Faith, he should bring those
things to a Public Dispute, and hear the Arguments on both sides: it being but
just, that the Party that was foiled, should acknowledge and follow what the
other had maintained for Truth: and that the King should well consider whose
advice he took, or what Persons he consulted in so important an Affair. That
the Ends and Interest of Parents or Kindred were not to be regarded: That the
love of Christ was to be preferred before the love of Relations, who being
busied in Teaching his own Doctrine in the Temple of Jerusalem, would not make
use of his most Holy Mothers advice; by which he showed, that in the Cause of
God no Man is bound to Communicate his Intentions to his nearest Friends.
Whether the King made any Answer, or what it was, is not known. But Gregory
told me, That the sense of the King's Commands and Letters, was quite different
from the Expositions of Alvarez, Bermudes and others addicted to the Roman
Religion made of them at Rome: and that it could not be otherwise, in regard
that before the Reign of Susneus, the Habessines had never known what that
Obedience meant. Hour the King, that he might not seem to distrust the
strength of his own Cause, and the learning of his own Subjects, permitted
frequent Disputes, not yet made Public by the Fathers of the Society. From
this Tellez reports, That the Habessine Doctors appeared very ignorant and
illiterate in all their Disputes; as never having Studied Logic, Syllogisms,
nor Enthymemes, nor having any knowledge of the Subtleties of Scholastic
Divinity. From whence the Reader may readily Judge of the Progress and Events
of such Disputes. Tellez goes on, and says, That Claudius ^^ary of the
illiterateness of his own People, for the most part undertook the Discourse
himself, and gave Oviedo not a little Trouble. Moreover he complains, That the
Habessines, when they were worsted, would never acknowledge it, but always
boasted of the Victory, and so all those Disputes came to nothing. It was
therefore thought more convenient to betake themselves to writing. Nor did the
King decline the Combat, but answered them with other Writings, tho they have
not as yet bin permitted to visit the European Regions. Oviedo impatient of his
ill Success, and finding he could not bring the Ethiopic Prince to do as he
would have had him, resolved to a more severe but unseasonable course. And
therefore, to testify his Indignation, he left the Court, and published a
Writing, Where in he branded the Habessines with several Heresies, and exhorted
his Portugueses to have a care of them. Which did not a little offend Claudius.
For a mind free, and subject to none, when once it refuses the persuasion of
Argument, is the more exasperated by affront and reviling. Nor can it be
thought that any Prince will suffer himself and his Subjects to be traduced for
Heretics within his own Dominions.

Not long after Claudius was slain in a Battle against the Adelans; to whom, in
regard he died without Issue, his Brother Adamas-Saghed Succeeded, a Person
quite of another disposition, as one that retained nothing of his Moderation or
Clemency. For whatever Indulgencies Claudius had granted to Oviedo, and the
Embracers of his Doctrine, he recalled them all; nor would he so much as permit
that the Habessine Women, who were Married to the Portugueses, should exercise
the Religion of their Husbands; to which he added many other severe Edicts,
declaring openly, That his Brother was therefore punished by God, because he
did not persecute the Religion of the Franks; as it is frequent to attribute
Adversity or Prosperity to neglected or protected Religion. Nay, he proceeded
so far, that having sent for Oviedo, he threatened him with Death, if he
continued divulging and sowing Roman Paradoxes in his Dominions. Which when the
Bishop refused to consent to, saying, That God was to be obeyed, rather then
Man, he drew his Scymiter in a rage, and unless the Queen, and some of the
chief Nobility had prevented him, had undoubtedly dispatched the Bishop to the
other World. The Bishop therefore, in this desperate Condition of Affairs
retires to Fremona, where he lay concealed, thirty whole years together, and
assuming to himself, after the Death of Barret, the Title of Patriarch,
officiated among his own Portugueses, without any further molestation: in
regard that Melec-Saghed after his Father's violent Death, showed himself more
mild, and temperate to the Portugueses, who behaving themselves more modestly,
gave him no cause of Provocation. But at length all the Avenues into Habessinia
being shut-up by the Turk, and the Fathers that were sent thither being all
taken and slain, the State of Religion among the Portugueses was reduced to
that extremity, that all the Fathers being deceased, there was none remained
alive to officiate Divine Service. At length Melchior Silvanus an Indian, Vicar
of the Church of St. Anns in Goa, and for that reason disguised both by his
Language and Color, ventured into Ethiopia, and there officiated till the
Arrival of Peter Pays; after which he returned into India, leaving the said
Peter, as he had bin before, all alone in his office of Priesthood.

CHAP. X. Of the New Mission, and its Success, till the Coming of the Roman
Patriarch.
The Religion of the Portugueses very low in Habessinia. New Hopes upon the
arrival of Peter Pays. Who Taught School at Fremona with the admiration of all.
The King sends for him. Curiously receives him. And permits Obedience to the
Pope. He abrogates the Observation of the Sabbath. He obtains the King's
Friendship by the Pope's, and K. of Portugal's Letters. The King therefore
hated, and slain. Susneus Succeeds. He perceives the Ignorance of his own
Doctors, and applys to the Fathers. Several Disputes. The King's Brother
Embraces the Roman Faith. Susneus promises Obedience to the Pope. He causes a
public dispute concerning the two Natures in Christ. The Habessines confuted.
The King's Edict. A disobedient Monk punished. The Metropolitan complains. The
Event. The Edict renewed. The Alexandrinians provoked. They Excommunicate the
Romans. The King resists. Simeon replies. Thence a Rebellion. The
Metropolitan's Anathema. Elius the Head of the Conspirators slain. So is
Simeon. The Sabbath abrogated. The Effects. Jonael the Viceroy Revolts. The
King defends the Abrogation. Jonael hides himself. Slain by the Gallans. The
People of Damota Rebel. Vanquished. The King publicly Embraces the Roman
Faith. New Commotions by his Son Gabrael. He is slain.

THE Archbishop of Goa, and the Fathers of the Society were not ignorant of
the afflicted Condition of the Roman Worship in Habessinia. And therefore,
whereas before they had conceived vast hope of Total Conversion of Ethiopia,
now the case was so far altered, that they found themselves put to a Necessity
of providing for their own few Countrymen, least they should be utterly
destitute of Provision for the Salvation of their own Souls, as not having any
Priests to perform Religious Duties among them. Moved therefore by the
Instigation of Conscience, they took it into serious Consideration, least while
they were busyed about Subjecting Abassia to the Sea of Rome, that nothing
belonged to it, they should loose their own Countrymen, Professors of their own
Religion, who had reason enough to forsake those that forsook them. And
therefore they made it their whole study how to supply them with Priests, to
govern their Ecclesiastical Affairs. And indeed many had attempted the Journey,
but in vain. Till at length with the dawn of the new Century, new hopes began
to shine forth. For Peter Pays, after his first unfortunate Attempt, which had
exposed him to various Hazards, and a Captivity in Arabia, undertook a second
Journey into Ethiopia, wherein he prosperously Succeeded; being well skilled
both in the Countries, Customs and Foreign Languages, and able to endure the
temperature of those Climates. John Gabriel a famous Portuguese Colonel, had
given King Jacob then reigning, notice of his coming, and had so possessed the
young Prince with the worth of the Person, by the high Commendations which he
gave him, that so soon as the Winter was over, the King sent for him. But he
being soon after deposed, Zadenghel was advanced in his Room. Thereupon Peter
Pays kept himself still at Fremona; where, not believing his time could be
better spent than in instructing the Portuguese Children, he chose out some of
the riper Ingenuities, and in a short time so manured them, that they were able
to answer to any Question propounded to them concerning the Christian Faith. A
thing both unwonted and wonderful to the Habessines, to hear from Children what
they could hardly expect from Persons of years and Experience. But considering
the Person, he was not so much wonderful neither; for he was a Man of a quick
and ready Wit, that could fit himself to all Humors, of an affable and
complaisant Temper, and well skilled not only in the Liberal Sciences, but
Mechanic Arts. The fame of so acute and laborious a Person, and so happy in his
Instruction, being spread over the Neighboring Regions, in a short time
reached the young King's Ears; who being covetous to see such a Master and such
Scholars, by his Letters invited him to Court. Thereupon in the Month of April,
1604. accompanied with two Portuguese Youths arriving at Court, he was
honorably received by the King, as if he had bin one of the Nobles of his
Kingdom, not without great distaste taken by the Monks, whose Sloth compared to
Peter's Diligence and Industry, rendered them contemptible to most. The next
day several Disputes began about Controversies in Religion, which the King was
pleased both favorably and patiently to hear; Mass was also said after the
Roman manner, and a Sermon Preached; with which Zadenghel was so taken, that
having Communicated his Intentions to some of his intimate Friends, he resolved
to submit himself to the Pope. But in regard he durst not adventure to do it
publicly, he first conjured Peter not to reveal the Secret, and then told him,
That he was Convinced by his Arguments, that there was no other Universal
Pastor and Vicar of Christ upon Earth beside the Pope of Rome. That to deny it
to him, was to deny it to Christ; that whoever did not follow his Example, was
not of the true Church; and that therefore he had Decreed to request a
Patriarch and Fathers from Rome to instruct his People.

Although so sudden and so unexpected a Declaration of a King could not choose but
infuse a joy unspeakable into the heart of Peter, yet he contained himself;
only what his duty bound him to, he could not but highly extol the Pious
Intentions of the King. Nor did the King delay: The Secret with which he had
trusted Peter under Oath, he himself made Public, and presently set forth an
Edict, That no Person should any longer observe the Sabbath as a Holy day. And
indeed he was so forward, that Peter was fain to check his Celerity, and put a
stop to his Career. However Letters were written to Clement the VIII. and
Philip the Third, King of Spain and Portugal, and delivered to Peter's care,
for their safe and honorable conveyance. In these Letters he offered his
Friendship, his Soldiers, and his Workmen; and withal requested some of the
Fathers of the Society of Jesus to instruct his Subjects. These things were not
so privately carried, but that they were discovered by some of the chief
Nobility of the Kingdom, who were no way satisfied at these underminings of
their ancient Religion: wherefore they conspired against their Prince, and flew
him in Battle. Zadenghel being slain, all Peter's great Hopes vanished of a
sudden, not only through Zadenghel's fall, but by reason of the Civil Wars that
ensued between Jacob and Susneus, contending for the Royal Diadem. And so all
Promotion of the Roman Religion surceas'd, till Jacob being vanquished and
killed in the Field, Susneus became Lord of Habessinia. Who again kindly
received and entertained Peter together with his Companions, and to all his
Requests lent a most gracious Ear.

The Ecclesiastical Affairs of Habessinia, were then but in a Low Condition,
there not having bin any Peace in the Country for about Fourscore years: so
that perpetual Wars had almost extinguished the Studies of peaceful Arts; nor
were there enough to perform Religious Duties in their Churches, but less to
obviate the Encroachment of insinuating Errors and Abuses in Religion. The
Metropolitans, Persons for the most part the most ignorant that could be
imagined, took no more Cognizance of the Churches which they were appointed to
govern, then if they had bin under Foreign Jurisdiction, only they took up
their time in the Ordination of all sorts without any due Examination.
Therefore the King and his Nobility observing the Diligence of the Fathers in
instructing the Habessine Youth; their Zeal in the Conversion of the People;
their Eloquence in Preaching unheard of before, their Sanctity of living, so
necessary among Neophytes and Proselytes, were possessed with so much
Admiration and Affection toward them, that they could promise to themselves no
other way for restoring their decayed Ecclesiastical Worship, but by their
means. Therefore Letters were sent to the Pope and the King of Spain, to
request their Friendship, and the Assistance of the Portugueses. Peter Pays
enlarged upon the same Subject, and added much more concerning the King's
Affection to the Roman Religion. Frequent Disputations also were appointed, of
which the chief Theme was concerning the two Natures in Christ, which, being
easily demonstrable out of the Writings of the Habessines themselves, gave the
Fathers great Advantage over the Ethiopian Doctors.

The Chiefest of all the Nobility, Ras-Seelaxus the King's Brother by the
Mother's side, publicly professed the Roman Religion, and received the
Eucharist openly, according to the Roman Manner, whose example many of the
Great Commanders in the Army, both Colonels and Captains followed; especially
seeing the King's favor so constant toward the Fathers of the Society. At
length the King himself, having received the Answer of Paul the V. in a Letter
dated the 31 of January, 1623. Promised to yield him Obedience as Universal
Pastor of the Church, and that he would admit a Patriarch sent from Rome, so
that necessary Succors were sent him withal, without which, it was impossible
to accomplish a business of so much Difficulty and Importance. He also
signified his Intentions to send an Ambassador with Father Antonio Fernandez,
after another manner, and in another Equipage, then had yet bin usual. To say
truth, the King publicly favored the Roman Religion, without any opposition;
in regard that the Sword had cut off the greatest part of the stiffest and most
obstinate Defenders of the Alexandrian Worship. Only the Monks remained behind,
who were baffled still in all their Attempts of Dispute. Therefore the King, to
the end he might make it manifest to his whole Kingdom, that he had not rashly,
but upon Mature Deliberation, and as it were overcome by the force of Truth,
given way to a new Religion, appointed a Solemn Dispute, where he enjoined most
of the Nobility of his Kingdom to be present. The Subject of the Disputation
was again the repeated Question concerning the two Natures in Christ; as if
that had bin the utmost limit of all their Controversies. And no question it
might be true what Tellez has written, that the Habessines were vanquished upon
the first onset. For the reality of the thing supported by so many Authorities
and Reasons afforded an easy Victory. Nevertheless there was another Dispute
appointed some few days after, which proved no less successful than the former.
Wherefore the King, as if the War had now bin at an end, and that now Truth had
merited her Triumph, put forth an Edict, that all Persons for the future should
believe and hold, That there were two Natures in Christ, between themselves
really distinct, but united in one Divine Person. This Edict was little
regarded by one particular Monk, more wilful and stubborn than truly zealous,
who being for his Contumacy brought before the King, and speaking in his
presence more irreverently than became him, was severely Scourged for his
sawciness. Of the Pain and Anguish of which Chastisement, tho the Monk was only
sensible, yet the fear of it kept others in awe, who not understanding that he
was punished for his malapertness, thought he had bin so severely dealt with
for denying the two Natures.

These things being spread abroad, Simeon the Metropolitan, at that time
absent, hastens to the King with his Complaints, That unusual things had bin
done without his knowledge, and that Disputes about Religion had bin appointed
in his absence. The King well understanding how unable he was to grapple with
the Fathers in Dispute, made him answer, That since he was come, he would
appoint the same Disputations to be heard over again. To which Simeon had not a
word to say. And thus a second Victory being won from the Primate of Ethiopia
himself, a more severe Edict concerning the two Natures was published by the
Crier, making it Death for any Person to deny the contrary.

By this so sharp a Decree, as if it had bin the loud signal to Battle, it is
incredible to think how the minds of the People were incensed. As for the
Controversy it self, they did not think it of so high a Concernment, as to
engage divided Parties in Blood and Massacre about it. In regard that all
acknowledged both Divinity and Humanity in Christ; so that the Question was
only about a word. But let the Question be what it would, such a severe way of
proceeding was never heard of before in Ethiopia, as being altogether
contradictory to the mildness of Christ and his Apostles, and the Lenity of the
Primitive times. So then if Men were to be scourged and whipped, because they
could not apprehend two Natures in Christ, what must they expect if other
Questions should be started about Innovations of greater difficulty in the
Doctrine and Ceremonies of the Fathers?

Exasperated with these fair pretenses, Simeon the Metropolitan, together with
several of the Nobility; and among the rest Jamanaxus, alias Emana Christos,
another of the King's Brothers by the Mothers side; and lastly, almost all the
Interested Clergy and Monks met, and held Consultations together to prevent the
threatening Mischiefs; and lastly, combined to live and dye for the Defense of
their ancient and settled Religion. To this end Simeon, under pretense of
incumbent Duty, which was to be watchful over the Preservation of the
Constantinopolitan Religion, fixed an Excommunication Publicly upon the Doors
of the great Church belonging to the Camp, against all that embraced the
Religion of the Franks, or ventured to Dispute concerning it. The King, tho
highly offended with this unexpected boldness of the Metropolitan, durst not
adventure to revenge himself; However he Published another Edict, whereby
Liberty was granted to every Person that so pleased, to embrace and exercise
the Fathers Religion already established by fair Disputes and Arguments on
their side. Which so little terrified the undaunted Metropolitan, that he
thundered out his Anathema's against all that maintained two Natures in Christ.

The Moderate Party bewailed these Paper Skirmishes, which they foresaw would
break forth, and end in Slaughter and Misery, and that the King's Decrees would
never be established without the effusion of much Blood. Sensible of these
Fears, several of the great Personages of the Kingdom, together with the King's
Mother, Ite-Hamelmala, most earnestly besought the King, to desist from what he
had begun, and not to raise up implacable Seditions to the Ruin of himself and
his Kingdom. After which the Metropolitan, with many Monks and Nuns came to the
Camp, and implored the King, not to innovate any thing in Religion, otherwise
that they were prepared to lay down their lives for the Religion of their
Ancestors. At last the King referred the whole Business to another Colloquie,
which continued for Six days one after another, but without any Success: A
clear Testimony that Controversies in Religion are not to be decided by
Disputes. After that, all the Clergy throw themselves at the King's Feet, and
with Sighs and Tears beseech him, Not to change a Religion so quietly
Established in Ethiopia for so many Ages, by so many of their Emperors. But
nothing would prevail; the King remained inexorable and immovable; so that the
Petitioners departed full freighted with Exasperation and Rebellion.
Immediately, all hopes of Concord and Agreement being laid aside, the Sword
was next unsheathed, whence followed those terrible Commotions and Bloody Wars
that have almost ruined the most flourishing part of Ethiopia.

The Chief of the Conspirators were Jamanaxus, Aelius the King's Son in Law,
Viceroy of Tigra, the Eunuch Caflo, and several others. But to give the better
Color to their Rebellion, and Design of Killing the King, the Metropolitan,
caused a new and more severe Excommunication to be fixed upon the Chief Church
in the Camp, by which all the partakers of the Latin Religion were
Anathematized. In the mean time the Fathers of the Society relying upon the
King's Favor, hastened to get all things ready that might be of advantage to
Establish their Doctrine. To that end they translated Maldonatus upon the Four
Evangelists; Toletus upon St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans, Ribera upon the
Hebrews, and some others, into the Ethiopic Language, which some esteemed,
others by reason of the intermixture of Amharic words, contemned, as full of
Barbarisms and Soloecisms. But as for the Lord's Prayer, and the Salutation of
Mary, being nothing but the Latin written in Ethiopic Characters, they abhorred
'em, as looking upon them to be nothing but Magic Spells. On the other side,
the Alexandrians fell upon the Fathers with all the bitterest Invectives that
might be; those Paper Skirmishes being generally the forerunners of more
Bloody disputes. In pursuance of which, Aelius by an Edict, Commands all the
Franks to depart out of Tigra, and the Alexandrians to follow him: by which
means, having mustered up a complete Army, he openly Rebels. Simeon Curses the
Franks, but loads Aelius with his Blessings; upon which he no doubt relying,
resolved to fight his Father in Law, then upon his March against him with a
strong Force, notwithstanding all the Persuasions of his Wife to the contrary.
Fierce therefore, and in the heat of his young Blood, and over-confident of his
own Faction, not staying so much as to take his Breakfast, but as it were Drunk
with Fury and Rage, only with a small Troop about him, he leaps his Horse into
his Father's Camp, asking, Where the King was? and so what between the
astonishment of some, and the wonder of others what the Matter should be, he
rode up without any hurt to the King's Pavilion; where at length the Alarm
being taken, he was soon surrounded, Stoned and Stabbed to Death, and so dearly
paid for his rashness. The Captain thus Slain, the Soldiers betake themselves
to their heels; Simeon, between the Fugitives and the Pursuers, stood alone by
himself, like a man stupifyed, whether not at first observed, or neglected as a
Clergyman, but at length being known, he was Slain among the Crowd. Both their
Heads were sent about the Kingdom, and exposed as a Public Spectacle. The
Eunuch Caflo had his Head struck off: Jamanaxus was pardoned. Thus the Kindred
of Kings for the most part escape the Punishment of those Rebellions to which
they themselves have given Life and Encouragement.

The King who was never fearful, now more emboldened by his Victory, now
questions other Heads of Religion: and soon after by Public Edict prohibits the
Observation of the Sabbath, as Judaical, and Repugnant to Christianity. In
answer to this Edict, some Person without a Name, had written contemptuously of
the Roman Religion, reflecting severely upon the Fathers of the Society, whom
he called the Kindred of Pilate, as being a Roman, and withal sharply menacing
the King himself. Tellez reports, That it was stufft with places of Scripture,
but nothing to the purpose. The King more incensed by this Writing, renewed the
Edict about the Sabbath, and commanded the Husbandmen to Plough and Sow upon
that Day, adding as a Penalty upon the Offenders, for the first Fault the
Forfeiture of a weaved Vestment to the value of a Portugal Patack; for the
second, Confiscation of Goods, and that the said Offense should not be
prescribed to Seven years; a certain form usually inserted in their more severe
Decrees.

Certainly it must of necessity be true what Tellez reports of the Natural
Piety of the Habessines, since they were thus to be compelled to the Neglect of
the Sabbath by such Severe Laws, when we can hardly be induced by stricter
Penalties to observe the Lord's Day. Among the rest, one Bucus a stout and
famous Soldier, felt the utmost rigor of this Decree, for being accused to
have observed the Sabbath, he was made a most severe Example, that others of
less consequence might not think to expect any Mercy.

From thence Jonael Viceroy of Bagemdra took an occasion to Revolt, alluring
all to his Party who were displeased with the Edicts. Upon which News, many of
the chiefest of the Court, both Men and Women, of which several were near
allied to the King, with Tears in their Eyes besought him once more, not to
expose himself and the Kingdom to Calamity, but to take Pity upon so many poor
afflicted People, offending out of mere Simplicity and Ignorance, and not to
disturb the Minds of his People with such unseasonable Changes.

The King far from being moved with their Tears, but rather the more displeased
to see so many all of one Mind, that at once he might answer all, confirm the
wavering, and terrify the Headstrong, having summoned together the Chief
Nobles and Commanders of his Army that attended the Court, in a short, but
grave Oration, put them in mind of past Transactions, upbraiding them among the
rest, For that they had deprived Zadenghel both of his Life and Kingdom,
because he had forsaken the Alexandrian Religion to embrace the Roman Faith.
That for his part, after his Victory obtained against Jacob, he had bin severe
to none; but rather had pardoned all; nevertheless he was disturbed with daily
Seditions and Rebellions, under pretense of changing his Religion, when he only
reformed it. For that he acknowledged as much and the same that others did,
That Christ was true God, and true Man: but because he could not be Perfect
God, unless he had the Perfect Divine Nature, nor perfect Man without perfect
Humane Nature, it followed, that there were two Natures in Christ, united in
one Substance of the Eternal Word. Which was not to abandon but explain his
Religion. In the next place he had abrogated the Observation of the Sabbath
Day, because it became not Christians to observe the Jews Sabbath. These things
he did not believe in favor of the Portugueses; but because it was the Truth
it self determined in the Council of Chalcedon, founded upon Scripture, and
ever since the time of the Apostles delivered as it were from hand to hand; and
if there were occasion, he would lay down his life in defense of this Doctrine;
but they who denied it should first examine the Truth of it.

Having finished his Oration, a Letter was brought him from Jonael, containing
many haughty Demands, and among the rest the Expulsion of the Jesuits. The King
believing there would be no better way than to answer him in the Field,
Commanded the nimblest of his Armed Bands to March: of which the Rebel having
Intelligence, and not willing to abide his Fury fled for shelter among those
inaccessible Rocks, whither it was in vain to pursue him. Thereupon Susneus,
well-knowing that the Revolters would not be able long to endure the
Inconveniences, and Famine that lodged among those inaccessible places, blockt
him up at a Distance. So that Jonael at length, weakened by daily desertions,
fled to the Gallans, who being at variance among themselves, kept their
promised Faith but a short time; for being underhand tempted with Rewards by
the King; they at length turned their Protection into Treachery, and slew the
Unfortunate Implorer of their Security.

This Bad Success however did not terrify the Inhabitants of Damota,
inhabiting the Southern parts of Gojam, who upon the News of the Profanation
of the Sabbath, as they called it, with their Hermites that sculk'd in the
Deserts of that Province, ran to their Arms. Ras-Seelax, otherwise their Lord
and Patron in vain Exhorting them to continue their Obedience, whose kind
Messages of Peace and Pardon they refused, unless he would burn the Books
Translated out of Latin into the Habessine Language by the Fathers, and deliver
up the Fathers themselves to be Hanged upon the highest Trees they could find.
Thus despairing of Peace, Ras-Seelax set forward, tho deserted by the greatest
part of his Forces, who favored the Cause of their Countrymen; so that he had
hardly Seven Thousand Men that stook close to him, while the Enemies Body daily
increased. However he resolved to Fight them, knowing his Soldiers to be more
Experienced, and better Armed, besides that he had about Forty Portuguese
Musketeers in his Camp. When they came to blows, the Victory fell to the
King's Party, tho it cost dear; in regard that about Four hundred Monks, that
had as it were devoted themselves to die for their Religion, fought most
desperately: of which a Hundred and fourscore were Slain.

Hitherto the King had not made Public Profession of the Roman Religion,
partly out of fear of stirring up Popular Tumults against him; partly being
loath to dismiss his Supernumerary Wives, and Concubines; but at length
encouraged by so many Victories he laid all fear aside, and publicly
renounced the Alexandrian Worship, and confessing his Sins after the Roman
manner to Peter Pays, dismissed all his Wives and Concubines, only the first of
those to which he had bin lawfully Married. His Example convinced many others,
who were not ashamed to keep many Mistresses, but Adultresses also. Not long
after, the King signified his Conversion to the Roman Religion to his whole
Empire, by a Public Instrument, not without the Severe reproof of the
Alexandrian Patriarch. The sum of his Manifesto was, That having deserted the
Alexandrinian, he now reverenced only the Roman See; and had yielded his
Obedience to the Roman Pope, as the Successor of Peter, the Prince of the
Apostles; for that that See could never err either in Faith or good Manners,
and then he exhorted his Subjects to do as he had done. He also discoursed at
large concerning the two Natures in Christ, and taxed the Ethiopian Primates as
guilty of many Errors. But neither the King's Example, nor his Exhortation
wrought upon many. For at the same time his Son Gabriel began to study new
Contrivances, tho with no better Success than they who had taught him the way.
For when he had intelligence that Ras-Seelax was marching against him, finding
himself Inferior in Force, he betook himself to the inaccessible Rocks of
Shewa; from whence at last by the Craft of a certain wellbrib'd Gallan, he was
allured to come forth; who feigning himself to be highly offended with
Ras-Seelax, came to the unwary young Prince, and promised him the Assistance of
all his Friends; which while he was inveagled out to expect, in a neighboring
Wood, he was there surrounded by a select Party of the Enemy, and paid for his
rash belief with the loss of his Life.

CHAP. XI. Of the Coming of the Roman Patriarch into Habessinia, and how he
Managed his Affairs there.
Alphonsus Mendez made Patriarch of Ethiopia. His Inauguration and Journey to
Goa, etc. Their miserable Reception at first. His difficult Passage by Land.
Met by the Jesuits. He comes to Fremona, thence to the King. The King swears
Obedience to the Pope. So does the Court. Ras-Seelax's behavior blamed. The
Solemnity concluded with an Anathema. New Edicts in favor of the Romish
Worship. The Women Commanded to swear. The Patriarchal See. New Disturbances
occasioned by the new Computation. Baptism and Ordination reiterated: Sermons.
Visitation and Confirmation. A Countryman's Joke. A Seminary. Tecla-George
Revolts. Suppressed and Hanged. The Captain of the Guards excommunicated upon a
slight Occasion by the Patriarch; but Pardoned at the King's intercession.
Their Courtiers offended. Their Indignation increases, and why. A Witch
imprisoned by Command of the Patriarch: Which alienates the King's Affection
from him. His Authority decreases, through private Grudges, and an Act of Ras
Seelax. The Agawi Revolt. The King's ill Success. Ras-Seelax more Prosperous
against Luca-Marjam. Kebax killed and Teker-Egzi. These Mischiefs attributed to
the Romans. Melcax takes upon him the Regal Power. Ras Seelax accused; His
Goods confiscated. The Fathers rendered odious to the King. Their Indulgencies
laughed at. Serthax's unhappy Revolt. A New Expedition against the Lasti,
Prosperous at first, at last Unfortunate. The Fathers taxed. The King indulges
the Old Ceremonies. The Patriarch offended. Another more mild Edict; but too
late.

OF These prosperous Successes, the Fathers wrote presently to Rome, and into
Portugal. But very prudently, there was nothing rashly decreed at first, lest
the Design of another Patriarch, like that of Nonius Barret should come to
nothing. But when King Susneus himself, had by his own Letters requested a
Patriarch, and had made public Profession of the Romish Religion, the Conclave
then thought it not expedient to make any longer delays. And therefore, as if
they had bin to send into some Portuguese Province, upon the Nomination of
Philip the Fourth, then King of Portugal, as well as Spain, Alphonsus Mendez, a
Person of great Eminency, by Nativity a Portuguese, a Doctor in Theology, and
of the Society of Jesus, which claimed Ethiopia peculiarly to it self, as a
Province by them wholly converted to the Faith, was created Patriarch. Besides,
that it might have occasioned great Emulation, had a Person bin chosen out of
any other Nation or Society. Being inaugurated with the usual Ceremonies, at
Lisbon, in the Month of May 1624. he set Sail, and arrived at Goa, where
understanding that all things succeeded to the wishes of the Fathers, he
prepared for his farther Journey. In November of the same year he arrived at
Dios, hoping there to find some of the Bannian Vessels, to carry him into the
Red Sea: But they being the year before over-burthen'd by the covetous
Exactions of the Turks, and fearing the Arabian Pirates had left off Trading
into those Parts. While he stayed at Dio, he was seasonably forewarned by the
King's Letters, by no means to come near Suaqena or Matzua, but to make to
rights for Baylur a Port of Dancala. There he arrived the Third of April
following with six Companions, four Fathers; and two Friars.

The Fathers were, 1. John Velasco Castellano. 2. Hierome Lobo, or Wolph. Which
Name, lest the Ethiopians should take an occasion to turn to an ill Omen, they
made a shift to change for another. 3. Bruno de Santa Cruce. 4. Francesco
Marquese.


The Friars were, Emanuel Luis, Steward. John Martin.


Attendants he had Thirteen: One Servant. Five Musicians. Three Habessines. Two
Bricklayers, and their Apprentices; for the Building of Churches and Houses,
which the Ethiopic Fathers had desired him to bring with him.


The King had recommended him to the care of the Viceroy of Dancala, a
Mohammedan, but in Friendship with the Habessines. But the recommendation was so
early, and he came so late, that the Viceroy had forgot it. So that his
Reception there was very lamentable, there being little or no Provision, so
much as of Necessaries made for him. And their Hosts where they Lodged, were so
poor and covetous, that instead of receiving any Kindnesses from them, they
were forced to purchase their sorry Convenience with the continual Supplies of
their Avarice. They could not get Mules or Horses anow to carry themselves and
their Luggage; so that most of them were forced to travel over the rugged and
parched Earth in continual conflict with hunger, thirst, and intolerable heat.

Neither were they much better entertained for Sixteen days in the Court of the
Viceroy himself, all their Presents not sufficing to gratify the impatient
Appetite of his Avarice. Parting from thence, at the Mercy of those wicked and
covetous Varlets that were their Guides and Owners of their Carriage-Horses,
they traveled as they were led, in daily fear of the Gallans, over places where
Battles had bin fought, as it were Paved with the Skulls and Bones of the
Slain, till at last all these Difficulties and Dangers overcome, they were met
by Emanuel Barradas, with some other Portugueses and Habessines upon the
Confines of Tigra, who furnished them with Provisions, Carriages, and all other
things necessary. Upon the strength of which Refreshments, they began to ascend
the towering Mountains of Abassia, and the Fifth day after, through more gladsom
and verdant Fields, and more grateful opportunities of resting themselves, they
arrived at Fremona; where they stayed not only all the Winter, but all October
and November, being both unhealthy Months. In December they arrived at Gorgora,
where upon a day appointed, with a Noble Attendance, and great Applause, the
Patriarch entered the Camp, and after Mass said, was conducted into the King's
Pavillion, and there by the King Commanded to sit down by him in a little Chair
equal to his own. In which great Pomp and State, at length the Patriarch came
to the point, and agreed with the King, that upon the XI day of February, 1626.
he should publicly swear Obedience to the Pope.

Upon which day, together with the King and his Eldest Son Basilides, appeared
the King's Brothers, the Viceroys and Governors of Provinces, and all others
that were conspicuous for their Dignity and Quality. In the Room were two
little Chairs, but very rich, set one by the other; upon which the King sat
down on the right hand, and the Patriarch in his Pontifical habit upon the
left. Being so sat, the Patriarch made a most lofty Panegyric in Praise of the
Pope, not without some Reflections upon the Blindness of former Ages: then he
fell to commemorate what had been done of later Times, How, That the Emperors
of Habessinia had sent their Ambassadors formerly to Rome, and that lately one
of them had requested thence a Pastor, and Evangelical Preachers: that
therefore now the Time was come, wherein his Majesty was bound to satisfy the
desire of his Ancestors, and to submit himself and his Subjects to the Sea of
Rome. The King Commanded the Grand Chamberlain of his Household Melca Christos,
Prince of Samena to return an Answer; who after he had extolled the Merits of
the Portugueses, It is now the King's Intention, said he, to fulfill the
Promises of his Ancestors, by yielding Obedience to the Roman Pope; But as he
was going on, the King interrupted him, saying, That this was not the first day
of his Intention to surrender his submission to the Roman Pope, as having long
before promised it to the Superior Father of the Society of Jesus. Presently
the Patriarch after a short answer, unfolded a Book containing the four
Evangelists; and then the King falling upon his Knees, took his Oath after this
manner:

We Sultan-Saghed King of the Kings of Ethiopia, believe and confess, That St.
Pe^er, Prince of the Apostles was by Christ our Lord, Constituted Head of the
whole Christian Church, and that Principality and Power over the whole World
was given to him when he said, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build
my Church, and I will give to thee the Keys of Heaven; and at another Time when
he said to Him, Feed my Sheep. In like manner we believe, That the Pope of Rome
lawfully Elected, is the true Successor of St. Peter the Apostle, in his
Government, and that he has the same Power, Dignity, and Primacy of the whole
Church of Christ. Therefore we Promise, Offer, and Swear true Obedience, and
humbly submit our Person and our Empire, at the feet of our Holy Father Urban
the VIII. of that Name, by the Grace of God Pope, and our Lord, and to his
Successors in the Administration of the Church. So God help us, and these Holy
Evangils.

After the King had done, his Son Basilides, the King's Brothers, all the
Viceroys and Peers; as also all the Clergy and Monks then present took the same
Oath.

After this, Ras-Seelax, hastily Drawing forth his Scimiter, brake forth into
these passionate Expressions: What is done, let it be done; that is to say, Let
past things be forgotten; But whoever for the future shall not do it, since it
becomes every one so to do, shall feel the weight of this. An Act, which to
most that were present, seemed very severe, especially to those who had taken
part with Gabriel, at whom those words were construed to be principally
levelled. Moreover, he added an unusual Clause to his own Oath; That he also
swore Allegiance to Basilides as Heir and Successor to his Father; and that he
would also be his faithful Vassal, so that he would promise to Protect and
Defend the Holy Catholic Faith; otherwise that he would be the first and most
professed of his Enemies. As if it had bin lawful for a Subject to impose new
Conditions of his Subjection upon a most Absolute Prince and Monarch, not bound
by any Laws of Man, such as is the King of Habessinia. However the King said
nothing, nor durst Basilides, as being under the Tuition of his Father, take
notice of it. Nor indeed was this Condition added to his Oath, any advantage to
the Roman Church, but rather served to hasten the Ruin of Ras-Seelax. This
Solemnity concluded with an Anathema, after the Ethiopian manner, upon all
those that for the future should forget or break this Oath. Immediately after,
several Edicts were Published, That none for the future should say Mass, or
Exercise the Priestly Office, except such as were licensed by the Patriarch.
Thereupon, the Ordinations of the Alexandrian Metropolitan not being accounted
lawful, most of the Priests were constrained to receive new Ordinations from
the new Patriarch, upon this Condition, That they should all observe the Roman
Forms of Worship, and not give any succor or harbor to Rebels; who offended
in that Nature was to be severely punished. It was also farther enjoined that
in the Celebration of Easter, and Observation of Lent, the Canons of the Church
of Rome should be faithfully followed. There was also one thing more than usual
exacted by the Patriarch, who having a great mistrust of the Ladies of the
Royal Blood, caused a It is still a Proverb among the Ethiopians, Zaqon Qawino,
What is done, let it be done.
Decree to be made, that they also upon a prefixed day, as being more zealous
for the Alexandrian Opinions than the Men, should take the Sacred Oath of
Supremacy to the Pope, as if they had bin a distinct Body Politic from the Men.
But whether it were put in Execution, or how done I do not find.

In the next place, great care was taken for Building a Patriarchal Seat, and
for settling an Annual Revenue for support of the Dignity of the new Primate;
to which purpose a place was chosen out in the Confines of Bagemdra, and
Dembea, called Debsan; as also another in the Imperial Camp near Dancaz.
Residencies also for the Fathers were built in several Provinces of the Empire
to stock it with Jesuits.

Maiguagua or Fremona in Tigra. Ganeta Jesus, with a fair Church. Gorgora in
Dembea. Azazo. Enabeesse, vulgarly Nebesse. Hadash, by the Portugals Adaxa.
Kolala. Leda-Negas. Serca. Temhhua. Atthana in Bagemdra.
The same year also Lent was kept after the Roman manner, with all the
Solemnities of the Passion Week, as also Easter according to the Roman
Calendar. Which occasioned most violent Commotions over all the Empire, and
more especially among the Clergy and Monks. Who being ignorant of the
Computation and the Cause, thought it a high breach of the Canons of the Nicene
Council, and the Paschal Cycle therein prescribed. Neither could the Edict be
equally dispersed over so many far distant Regions for want of Printing.

In the mean time they were very busy in Baptizing the Converted, and
ordaining of Ecclesiastical Persons, many of which had bin already Baptized and
Ordained. Sermons were also Preached in several places after the manner of
Europe, wherein it was necessary for the Fathers to Cite many places of
Scripture, if they desired to be accounted Learned. Thus the Fathers of the
Society made a daily and very great Progress, insomuch that the Number of
Baptized and Converted to the Roman Religion amounted to many Thousands.

About two years after, the Patriarch made a Visitation assisted by some of the
Sodality, in which vast Numbers of People were some of them Rebaptiz'd, others
Confirmed; to the great good-liking and applause of the King and his Peers, who
had never seen such things performed by any of their Metropolitans before.
Others looked asquint upon these prosperous beginnings, seeking all Occasions
of new Disturbances. Some there were that openly resisted, and would not permit
any Priest under Roman Ordination to officiate in their Churches, nay some of
them they killed outright. As for the Country People, tho they were passively
Obedient to the King's Commands, yet they liked their own old way best. Among
the rest there was one, who having received the Cuff of Confirmation, as their
manner is, and being asked by his Neighbor how he did? Never worse, said He,
than I have bin since I received the Patriarch's Box of the ear.

More than all this, there was a Seminary set up, for the Education as well of
the Habessine as Portuguese Children: for the Encouragement of whom, and to
invite others, they caused some of the young Lads to Act a Comedy after the
European manner. But when they brought in Devils upon the Stage, as the Scene
required, some of the ignorant People, believing them real Hobgoblins, were so
terrified, that they flung out of the School, crying out, Wajelan, Wajelan,
Sajetanet ametzea: O Dear! O Dear! they have brought us Devils.

But the ensuing Tragedies more terrified the wiser sort. For Tecla-George,
another of the King's Sons in Law, for his Wives sake, at difference with his
Father, having drawn into the same Conspiracy with him two Noblemen,
Gebra-Marjam, and John Acayo, revolted openly, and by a Crier solemnly
proclaimed, That he renounced the Roman Worship, and would Protect the
Alexandrian by force of Arms. And that the world might believe he was in
Earnest, he caused all the Crucifixes, Rosaries, and other Ornaments of Popish
Superstition to be burnt in a public fire; and to the end there might be no
hopes of Reconciliation left for the Expectation of Confederates, he took his
Chaplain Abba Jacob; who officiated after the Roman manner, and after he had
dispoyl'd him of his Stole and Hood, put him to Death.

The King could not brook so great an Indignity, and therefore sent Kebax,
Viceroy of Tigra, with an Army against him, who used such extraordinary
Diligence, that he soon surpised the secure and unprovided Rebel, overthrew
his Army, and took him and his Sister Adera Prisoners: who, because they had so
furiously and contemptuously acted against the Roman Religion, were both hanged
upon a high Tree. Nor could all the Intercessions of the Queen, nor of all the
Noble Ladies could prevail, tho they pleaded hard the disgrace done to their
Sex, and that it was never before known in Ethiopia, that a Noblewoman was
Hanged: especially being called by the King to behold so sad and infamous a
Spectacle. For they did not pity her because they thought her Innocent, but for
the Ignominy of her Punishment.

After this followed several other Accidents, which as they brought a very
great Odium upon the Patriarch and the Fathers, so were they reckn'd to be the
Causes of the general aversness of the People to the Roman Religion. The
Patriarch, that he might exercise all his Authority in one single Act, and show
the full extent of his Power, having taken a pett against the Captain of the
King's Guards, for some frivolous Business that nothing belonged to his
Jurisdiction, publicly in the Church, in the presence of the whole Court,
thunders out an Anathema against him, and sent him Post to the Devil. It seems
he had taken Possession of certain Farms, which the Monks laid claim to, and
refused to restore them, notwithstanding all the Admonitions of the Patriarch.
The Nobleman, tho a Soldier, hearing such a most Dreadful Excommunication, by
virtue whereof he was sent packing to Hell, laden with all the Curses of Dathan
and Abiram, like one Thunder-strook, fell into a Sound, and lay for Dead. But
the Storm did not continue long: For presently the King stepped in to his relief,
by whose interposition, and the Mediation of several of the Nobility, he was
readmitted into the state of Grace. However it was an Act which the Nobility
took most heinously to heart; among whom there were some that frowned and
chafed out of mere Indignation, to see that their Church should be brought to
such a degree of Servitude, that a Foreign Priest should take upon him with so
much Arrogance to Excommunicate and Bequeath to Eternal Damnation, one of the
Chief Counselors of their Kingdom, an Ancient and Famous Personage, for the
sake of a Litigious Farm, which the King might take when he pleased from the
Monks themselves, if they were the Owners.

This Flame was fed by the addition of more fuel; For the Icegue or Chief Abbot
of the Monks being at that time lately Deceased, who as we have already said,
is the next in Dignity and Authority to the Abuna, he was Buried in a certain
Church, consecrated after the Roman manner, tho he had bin an obstinate Zealot
for the Alexandrian Religion. Thereupon the Patriarch, after he had soundly
reproved the Rector of the Church, Pronounced the Church profaned by the Burial
of a Heretic; and therefore that Mass could not be said in it. The Rector
dreading the fatal stroke of the same dismal Dathan and Abiram Thunderbolt,
that laid the Great Commander sprawling, without expecting any new Command,
causes the Carcass to be dug up again, and thrown by. This the Habessines
heavily exclaimed against, crying out, That the Franks exercised more cruel
Severities upon them, then their most exasperated Enemies ever practiced among
them, to deprive their Dead of decent Burial: now they might all see what the
Living were to expect. Tellez adds, That a certain old Woman was cast into
Prison, upon Suspicion of being a Witch, but was presently set at liberty,
because it gave distaste. For that the most Learned of the Habessines are of
Opinion, That there are now no more Magicians or Witches in the World; and
therefore that the Woman was unjustly wronged, who was thrown into Prison by
the Command of the Patriarch.

Thus the Minds of the People being generally incensed, the King himself began
to look upon these acts of separate Jurisdiction in the Patriarch, as
Diminutions of his Prerogative (the ancient Metropolitans never daring to
attempt such things), and consequently to alienate his Affections both from him
and from the Fathers, so that at length he gave ear to their Adversaries. Who
to bring down and curb the Excessive Power of the Patriarch, which seemed so
intolerable to them, more especially because they found him still inexorable in
Matrimonial Causes, prohibited by Divine and Canon Law; but chiefly in cases of
Polygamy and Divorce; they began their Addresses to him for those things, which
they knew he could not deny without bringing great mischief upon himself.
First, That they might have liberty to say Mass after the ancient Ethiopian
manner; for that the Patriarch might mend the ancient forms, where Necessity
required, without abrogating the whole. That the People hearing their ancient
Services, would be the more quiet, in regard they would not so much mind the
difference between the New and the Ancient form of Worship. The Patriarch gave
way to their desires, only mending the Ethiopic Mass, but with apparent
Detriment to his Authority. For now the ancient Liturgies were every day read
again without Contradiction; the Report running abroad that the Emperor was
returned to the Old Religion. The Patriarch's Power thus shaken, the Courtiers
still whispered in the King's Ears, That the Roman Religion was become odious
to all the People, and that his Person would be in great Danger, unless he also
forsook it himself.

These Insinuations were backed by an Accident, which tho ridiculous in it
self, gave a being to several Rumors and Reports. For one day an Enthusiast
came into the Palace, and cried out, That he was sent from God and the most
Holy Virgin, to declare in their own words to the King, that unless he
forthwith returned to the ancient Religion, he should within a Fortnight
undergo most severe Chastisements. The King made answer, That he would live and
die in the Roman Religion: and that the Messenger might the more speedily
return his answer, Commanded him to be Hanged. But at the Intercession of
several who asserted the poor Fellow to be Frantic, he only received a severe
drubbing, for the reward of his saucy Prophecy. Howevet tho he were laughed at
by the Courtiers, yet he so strangely stirred the minds of the Vulgar, that
they publicly reported, That an Angel had bin sent from Heaven, and that he
had admonished the King to return to the ancient Alexandrian Faith. In the mean
while the inbred hatred against the Fathers daily increasing, was greatly
augmented by the envy of the Courtiers. For they incensed the King and his
Eldest Son against Ras-Seelax, the Fathers chief Friend, and Patron of the
Portugueses, under pretense of their great care, admonshing the two Princes, To
take heed that he did not abuse the Renown he had won in War, and the favor of
the Portugueses, to invade the Royal Dignity. That which more heightened these
growing Jealousies, was a misinterpreted act of Ras-Seelax, who having ordered
one Lecanax to be apprehended for Calumnies and Scandalous Reports thrown upon
himself, caused him afterward to be put to Death, tho he had appealed to the
King. This they said was done by Seelax, not that the Person was guilty of the
Crimes which were laid to his Charge, but to remove out of the way one that
was Privy to the Treasons and Conspiracies of Seelax. Whereupon the King
deprived him instantly of great part of his Lands, removed him out of Gojam,
and took from him his Military Commands.

In the mean time, tho Tecla-George had suffered, and that the Heads of the
Rebellion were taken off, yet the Rebellion it self continued, and the strength
of it daily increased in such manner, that it became the Original of Dismal and
Diuturnal Commotions. For the Agawi, that inhabit the Mountains of Bagemdra,
had not yet laid down their Arms; but being, as they pretended, more and more
provoked by-the King, kept them in their hands to revenge their Injuries. And
the better to defend themselves, they called to their Aid, one Melcax, a young
Man of the Royal Blood, who had bin bred among the Gallans, and created him
their Leader. To him therefore, as to a Sanctuary, flocked all those that bare
any disaffection to the King, all that hated the Roman Religion, especially the
Monks; and lastly, several of the Villagers and Country People. All these thus
embodied, were called Lasteners, from Lasta, a most invincible Rock, and the
chief Seat of the Rebellion. And indeed it seemed a vast Torrent of War, ready
to break forth to the utter Extirpation of the Fathers, and all those of the
Roman Religion, if it proved so kind to spare the Royal Family it self. Against
these therefore the King, having raised an Army of Seven and twenty Thousand
Men, marches himself in Person, but with ill success at first. For the Country
People, defended by the Security of the place, as the Royalists came on, still
beat them off, by rolling down whole Quarries at a time of ponderous Stones
upon their heads, which having put the Royalists into great disorder, they came
down, and surrounded all the King's Left Wing, so that had not Kebax come to
their relief with 300 fresh Men, they had bin all cut to pieces. The Soldiers
being discouraged by this overthrow, the King who for that reason durst not
adventure any further for that time, left part of his Army to defend the
Borders, and hastening home, was forced to recall See-lax, lurking like an
Exile in Gojam. In the mean time the Tutelar Bands, whether for fear, or
finding themselves too weak, forsook their Posts, so that the Lastaneers
ravaged all the Country as they pleased, without Opposition, till Seelax being
got within their reach, drove them back into their former Holes.

While this Rebellion raged in Bagemdra, another broke out in Amhara; being
headed by Luca-Marjam, near in Blood to the Royal Family; but he being
prevented and surpised by the swift March of Ras-Seelax, ended his Days and
his Design together, by falling from the Precipice of a Rock.

But the same good Fortune did not attend Kebax, who impatient of delay, and
observing the Avenues more negligently guarded than they used to be, the bait
that betrayed him, conceived no less than that Opportunity it self had now
proffered him the Victory. So in he marches, finding all clear before him for
the present; but no sooner was he in, when those Mountaneers accustomed to
clamber their own Rocks, and used to the By-ways and concealed Passages of that
Rock, were all on a sudden before and behind him; so that after a great
Slaughter of his Men, deserted by the rest, he was himself after a matchless
defense, oppressed by Multitudes, and Slain.

His, and the Fall of Tegur-Egzi, which soon after followed, gave the Fathers
no cause of Thanksgivings, but afforded their Enemies great Opportunities, and
great Arguments to press the King to withdraw his Favors from them. For
observing their time, when they perceived him sad, and perplexed at so much ill
Success, and so many Revolts, Oh Sir, said they, What will be the Issue of all
these Combats and pernicious Wars? Those illiterate Swains understand not the
Mysteries of the Roman Worship, nor any other Service of God then what they
have bin bred and brought up to. They call us Turks and Mahumetans, because we
have abandoned our ancient Liturgies; for this reason they have taken Arms, and
chosen to themselves a King.

For Melcax, pufft up with the Success of his Affairs, was arrived at that
height of boldness, that nothing now would serve him but the assumed Title of a
King. He had distributed his Court-Employments after the manner of the Kings of
Ethiopia among his Friends; and daily increased in Number. For all that
abominated the Fathers, chiefly the Nobility of Tigra, privately gave him
Encouragements, and exhorted him, not to desist from what he had so
prosperously begun; and that then, neither the Affections of the People, nor
the Assistance of his Friends would be wanting. Elated with these golden
Promises, his Temerity carried him so far, as to send, as if he had now bin the
undoubted King of Ethiopia, a Viceroy into Tigra. To this Viceroy he allowed a
Select Band of Soldiers for his Convoy; but they, neglectful and careless of
their Military Duties, took their Pleasure so much, that at length surpised in
the midst of their Jollity by the Royalists, they were forced to leave Four
thousand of their Party behind them, Slain upon the Spot; while the shattered
Remainders speeded back, to lay the blame of their ill Success upon the unwary
Conduct of their Leaders. But the Lastaneers, intent upon revenge, had at
length the same advantage against the Royalists, who were straggling to destroy
the approaching Harvest, and paid them home with equal Slaughter for
Slaughter. Thus Fortune ballancing both sides, the Author of these Miscarriages
was inquired after, and as soon found by those that watched their
Opportunities. For presently Ras-Seelax was accused, as if he had bin negligent
in Executing the King's Orders, and had not sent timely Succors to the
overpowered Combatants. And his Enemies so far prevailed, that Articles were
framed against him, to which he was compelled to answer: which he did, and
justified himself so well, that in words indeed he was acquitted, but in Fact
condemned. For he was again degraded, and all his feudary Possessions and
Military Employments granted away to Basilides.

Thus Ras-Seelax being once more laid by, it was no difficult matter to
undermine the Patriarch and the Fathers. For against them the general Complaint
was made, That they had no other Design, but as they had subjected the Empire
in Ecclesiastical Affairs to the Roman Pope, so to bring it under the Dominion
of the King of Portugal in Seculars. To this end under the pretense of Temples
and Residencies they reared up Castles and Walls, from whence they could never
be expelled with Spears and Arrows. Many other things of the same Nature, they
suggested, which if the King now through Age more jealous, did not absolutely
believe, yet he hearkened to them with a more easy Attention. However
outwardly and public he showed the same Kindness and Affability to the Fathers
as before, and kindly received the Bishop sent from Rome to be a Coadjutor to
the Patriarch. But when he brought the Diploma's of the Jubilee opened at Rome
in the year 1625. and then granted to Ethiopia, he was derided by most Men, who
could not comprehend those great Virtues of Indulgencies which the Bishop
boasted of. For some began to Discourse among themselves like the Pharisees,
Who is this who also forgives Sins? Who can forgive Sins but only God? To which
the King made answer with a severe Countenance, That the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven were given to Peter, and that the use of those Keys belonged to the
Pope, for the Granting Indulgencies.

However the Habessines, as if those Indulgencies had afforded Materials for
Sin, bent themselves still more and more to Sedition and Tumult. For the Revolt
of the Lastaneers so well succeeding, Sertzazax, newly made Viceroy of Gojam,
so ill repaid the King for his new favors, that he not only revolted from him
himself; but which was more detestable to think, he would have drawn in the
young Basilides to have conspired with him against his own Father. And when he
could not prevail upon the young Prince, he endeavored to have advanced
another young Noble Gentleman of the Blood Royal, to the end he might have
reigned himself under his Name. But being overthrown and taken, he was drubb'd
to Death. Seven of his Accomplices lost their Heads. One of his chief Agents,
because he had vented horrid Blasphemies against the Sea of Rome, and
opprobrious words against the King, was hung up upon an Iron Hook driven into a
high Stake; upon which, after he had hung a whole Day, because he repeated the
same Provocations in the midst of his Torment, he was at length run thorough
the Body with several Spears; and so ended his miserable Life. So many, and
such lamentable Accidents as these pierced the very hearts of most People, and
the Lastaneers, dispairing of Pardon, hearing of such horrid Executions, were
the more resolute in their Rebellion.

Thereupon the King undertook a new Expedition with all his Forces against
them, and had taken the very Head and Ringleader of all the Rebels, had he not
with a small Retinue made a shift to Escape; yet he left behind him great store
of rich Plunder. But he could not be utterly Subdued, in regard that so many
Sculking Holes, so many wide and spacious Rocks, where those Savages lived and
hid themselves, like so many wild Beasts, could neither be assailed nor taken.
It happened therefore, that Fortune wheeling about, the Rebels overthrew a
Select Party of the King's Forces: and by and by with all their force lay
hovering about the King's Army, which they foresaw would in a short time want
Provision. The King therefore fearing to be closed up in those narrow
Streights, retired into Dembea, before the War was at an end. Which he did with
so much have more then it was thought he needed to have done, that as it
diminished his own fame, so it gave Courage to the Rebels.

And now the Fathers great Enemies beholding the King's Melancholy, redoubled
their Complaints. That there would never be peaceful Days in Ethiopia, so long
as the Roman Religion bare so much sway. That it was a very good Religion, but
above the Capacity of the People, who would still prefer the Worship of their
Ancestors, to which they had bin bred from their Infancy, before foreign
Innovations, which they understood not. For who should persuade them, That
Circumcision was evil, That the Holydaies of the Sabbath are not pleasing to
God; that the ancient Liturgy cannot be proved, That the Roman Calendar is
better then the Ethiopic; That the Fasts of the Fourth Holyday are less
acceptable to God, then the Fasts of the Seventh? How much more expedient and
profitable were it, to retain the ancient Ceremonies in such things as do not
contradict the Substance of Faith? But as for Ras-Seelax, and others that
endeavor the Contrary, it was apparent they did it merely to advance their own
Designs against the King and Kingdom.

With these and such like Expostulations, the King being overcome, especially
finding no other way of appeasing and quietting the Lasteneers, and that
Bagemdra was almost all in the Hands of the Enemy, and at the same time all his
Friends, especially the Ladies of Quality laying before him the Danger he would
be in, should he be deserted by his Soldiers, he at length pressed the
Patriarch, to remit whatever possibly might be remitted. He foreseeing a
terrible Storm, tho sore against his Will, thought 'twas high time to lower his
Sails, for fear of Losing all, while he hazarded the Saving of all. Whereupon
he submitted to the King's request; nevertheless upon Condition, That nothing
Decreed should be remitted by Public Acts, but only by a Tacit Connivance, and
that in the mean time there should be a Cessation of all Penalties, and Mulcts.

Upon this the King intending a Third Expedition against the Lasteneers, to
make his Soldiers the more steadfast and obedient, he put forth an Edict; by
which, in general words an Indulgence was granted for the Exercise of all
ancient Ceremonies, not repugnant to Faith. Thus every Person being left to his
particular Liberty, the Alexandrian Worship was again, to the great
Satisfaction of the People, freely exercised; but to the great grief of the
Portugueses, especially the Patriarch, who presently wrote to the King,
complaining, That contrary to his advice, a Lay Prince should publish an Edict
of that Nature in reference to spiritual Affairs: for that it belonged to him
to set forth such Decrees; putting him in mind of the words of Azariah the
High Priest to King Uzziah, and of the Punishment that followed, and
admonishing him to amend that Fault, by publishing some other Edict, which
should be proposed by the assistance of some one of the Fathers of the Society.
The King obeyed and propounded an Edict, which contained Three Articles.

1. That the Ancient Liturgy, but Corrected, should be read in the Mass. 2.
That the Festivals should be observed according to the ancient Computation of
Time, except Easter, and those other Festivals that depended upon it. 3. That
whosoever pleased, instead of the Sabbath, might fast upon the fourth Holyday.
And then as for answer to the Patriarchs Complaints, he made this reply, That
the Roman Religion was not introduced into his Dominions by the Preaching or
Miracles of the Fathers, but merely by his Edicts and Commands, not by the
assent of his People, but of his own free will, because he thought it better
then the Alexandrian. Therefore the Patriarch had no reason to Complain. But
these Concessions not being sufficient, and coming too late, proved altogether
ineffectual; not serving in the least to pacify the Lasteneers, or any other
of the Discontented Parties.
CHAP. XII. Of the Decrease of the Roman Religion, and the Restoration of the
Alexandrinian.
The Fathers ill Success. The King prepares to restore the Alexandrian
Religion. Over-perswaded by the Queen and his Son. The Decrees resolved on in
Council. The Patriarch makes a grave Speech to the contrary. Vpbraids him with
his Victories and threatens him. At length he Supplicates, but in vain. The
Edict passes. Signified to the Patriarch, who proposes a Medium. The Edict
published to the great Satisfaction of the People. The Ancient Ceremonies used.
An Invective Satyr against the Fathers. The sudden Change censured.

WE have hitherto seen the great Progress of the Roman Religion in Ethiopia;
the Authority of the Patriarch advanced to the utmost extent; the King and his
Brothers, together with a great many of the Nobility, some sincerely, some
feignedly favoring the Jesuits. For the Latin Worship was with great diligence
imposed and exercised all over several Provinces of the Kingdom. Many of the
Habessine Priests were Ordained by the Patriarch; and great diligence was used
for the building of Churches and Colleges. Already besides the Patriarch they
had increased their Number to One and twenty Companions, that is to say,
Nineteen Fathers, and Two Brothers of the Society, distributed into Thirteen
Residencies. Nor could the Fathers but be well pleased with so many Thousands
of Baptized and Converted People; for certainly the gaining of so many lost
Souls by Baptism was not to be despised. When on a sudden behold a sudden
Change, upon which the Banishment of the Fathers, and the Subversion of the
Roman Religion ensued.

For the Fathers believing that the opportunity of the time was not to be
neglected, made it their Business to abrogate all the Alexandrian Rites, even
those which were formerly tolerated under the Roman Bishops: on the other side,
the Common People Wedded to their Old Customs; but more especially the Monks
and Clergy, the chief Supporters of the old Religion, most stoutly opposed
their Proceedings. Besides them, several of the Nobility, either out of Hatred
of the Romans, or out of Ambition, frequently revolted, and through the
strength of their unaccessible Rocks easily eluded the King's more mighty
Power. A most remarkable Lesson to teach us, That that sort of Worship to which
the People are averse, is not easily to be introduced by the Prince; and that
it is no piece of Prudence or Policy to attempt the Liberty of those who are
well defended by the Situation of their Country.

Therefore the King, tho otherwise most addicted to the Fathers, wearied with
so many Exclamations of his own People, growing in years, utterly disliking the
present posture of Affairs, and fearful of what might ensue, tormented with the
continual Importunities of his Friends; his Jealousy of his Brother, the
Contumacy of the Lasteneers, the Diminution of his Prerogative, and the dread
of losing his Kingdom, at length began to think of abrogating the Roman, and
restoring the ancient Alexandrian Worship. And which was more to be admired, a
prosperous Fight with the Lasteneers, was that which settled his wavering
Thoughts. For making a fourth Expedition against them, he came upon them so
unlooked for, that he gave them a Total tout, Killing eight Thousand upon the
place, with several of the Leaders of the Faction, and chief Deserters of their
King and Country. The Portugueses rejoiced at the News, believing the Rebellion
quietted by this Victory; and that for the future nothing would presume so much
as to hiss against the Roman Religion. But it fell out quite otherwise. For
they who favored the the Alexandrian Religion, the next day carried the King
to view the Field of the Battle, and showing him the multitude of the Slain,
thus bespake him. Neither Ethnics nor Mahumetans were these, in whose Slaughter
we might have some reason to rejoice. No, Sir, they were Christians, once your
Subjects, and our dear Countrymen; and partly to your self, partly to us
related in Blood. How much more laudable would it have bin for these courageous
Breasts to have bin opposed against the most deadly of your Enemies? This is no
Victory, because obtained against your own Subjects. With the same Sword
wherewith you Slaughter them, you Stab your own Bowels: Certainly they bare no
hatred to us, whom we make War upon so cruelly. Only they are a verse to that
Worship to which you would compel them. How many have we already killed upon
this Change of Ceremonies? How many remain behind reserved for the same
Slaughter? When will these Bloody Conflicts end? Forbear, we beseech your
Majesty, to constrain them to Novelties, and Innovations, lest they renounce
their Allegiance: otherwise we shall never behold the Face of Peace again. We
are hated even by the Gallans and Ethnicks for abandoning our ancient
Ceremonies, and are therefore by them called Apostates. For it seems that the
King of Adel, having apprehended and put to Death two of the Fathers traveling
into Habessinia through his Country, in the account which he gave to Susneus of
what he had done, haughtily called him Apostate. Nor is it to be questioned but
that the Mahumetans and Neighboring Nations were much Scandalized at the
Alteration of the Habessinian into the Roman Religion; not out of any love to
the one, or hatred to the other; but for fear the Portugueses, strengthened by
the Habessines should become their Masters. The Turks also were mad that the
Metropolitan of Ethiopia was no more to be sent for out of Egypt; for by that
same Tie they held the Habessines fast, and liable to what Conditions they
pleased.

To these incessant Importunities, the Queen joined the powerful Charms of her
own Supplication, conjuring him by all the Obligations of Sacred Wedlock, and
common Pledges of their undoubted Offspring, To be well advised what he did;
and not to ruin his Kingdom, Himself, his Fortune, and his whole Family. With
the same importunity his Eldest Son Basilides, and his Brother by the Mothers
side Jamanax, hourly solicited his disturbed mind: and the better to
accomplish their ends, they underhand procured the Gallans that served the
King, to desire a dismission, as being unwilling to fight any longer against
the Habessines in a quarrel about a new Religion. Thus the King's rigor
mollify'd at length, Basilides, after he had summoned the Nobility and chiefest
of his Father's Counselors together, held a Council, wherein it was concluded,
That there was no other remedy to allay the Disorders of the Kingdom, but by
restoring the Alexandrian Religion. And the better to persuade those that were
of the Contrary Opinion, they gave it out that the Romanists and Alexandrians
were of the same Opinion in points of Faith; That both affirmed that God was
true Christ, and true Man. And as for the asserting One or Two Natures, they
were only words of little Moment, and not worth the Ruin of a Mighty Empire. So
that the King induced by these reasons, gave liberty to every one that pleased
to return to the Alexandrian Forms.

The Patriarch was not ignorant of these Transactions. Whereupon being
accompanied with his Coadjutor, and the chief of the Fathers, he desired
Audience of the King. Which being granted, after a short Pause, Sir, said He, I
had thought that we had lately bin the Victors, but now I see we are
Vanquished: On the other side the Lasteneers, being overthrown and put to
flight, have obtained their desires. Before the Battle was fought 'twas then a
time to Vow and Promise, but now to fulfill. The Victory was gained by the
Catholic and Portuguese Soldiers, the God of Hosts favoring the Catholic
Religion. These are therefore but ill returns to his Divinity; For I
understand, here has bin a Decree made, giving free toleration again of the
Alexandrian Religion. But this is not a place I see to advise with Bishops and
Religious Persons; the illiterate Vulgar, the Gallans and Mahumetans, Women
here give their Judgments in Matters of Religion. Consider how many Victories
you have gained from the Rebels, since you have embraced the Roman Religion:
Remember, that you embraced it, not compelled by force or fear, but of your own
free choice, as believing it the Truer. Neither did we come hither as
Intruders; we were sent hither, by the Pope and the King of Portugal at your
request. Neither did they ever design any other thing in their thoughts, but
only to unite your Empire to the Church of Rome. And therefore beware of
exciting their just Indignation. They are it is true far distant hence; but God
is at hand, and will require the Satisfaction which is due to them. You will
throw an indelible blemish upon the Lion of the Tribe of Juda, which you bear
for your Achievement; You will blur your own renown, and the Glory of your
Nation: Lastly, you will be the undoubted occasion of innumerable Sins by your
Apostasy; which that I may not see, nor feel the threatening revenge of the
Almighty, Command this Head of mine to be immediately strick'n off. This said,
with tears in their Eyes, the Patriarch and his Companions fell Prostrate at
the King's feet, in expectation of his Answer. The King not any way concerned,
replied in few words, That he had done as much as he could, but could do no
more, neither was a total alteration of Religion intended, but only a
Concession of some Ceremonies. To which the Patriarch answered, That he had
already tolerated some, and was ready to indulge more, which did not concern
the Substance of Faith: So that he would put forth another Edict, that all
things might remain as they were. To which he received no other reply, but That
the King would send certain Commissioners to Treat and Discourse with the
Fathers. Nor had they a better answer from the Prince, who being an Artist at
Dissimulation, sent them away unsatisfied, with ambiguous words.

Upon the 24th of June, The favorers of the Alexandrian Religion, to the end
they might get the Decree already mentioned put in Execution, Address
themselves to the Emperor, and choosing Abba-Athanasius for their Prolocutor,
beseech him, That he would by a Public Edict be pleased to give his Subjects
Liberty to return to the Religion of their Ancestors; that otherwise the
Kingdom would be utterly ruined. The King assented, and ordered certain
Commissioners to signify his Pleasure to the Patriarch. They presently fell
sharply to work with him, and upbraided him, with the frequent Rebellions of
the People; Aelius, Cabrael, Tecla-George, and Sertzac, and with the Slaughter
of so many Thousands as fell with them. That the Lasteneers were still in Arms
for their ancient Religion; that all ran to them, and deserted the King,
because all the Habessines pined after their ancient Religion. However, that
for the future it should be free for every one to be at his own choice which to
follow: for so from the Time of Claudius till lately, there had bin Peace and
Quietness between different Opinions, while the Portugueses exercised theirs,
the Habessines their own Religion.

After a short time of Deliberation, an Answer was carried back to the King by
Father Emanuel D' Almeyda; That the Patriarch understood that the Exercise of
both Religions would be free in his Kingdom. That for his part he had an equal
love for Ethiopia, as for his own Native Country; and therefore for his part he
was ready to grant whatsoever might be done, with safety to the Purity of sound
Doctrine. But that there was still a difference to be made between those who
had not yet embraced the Roman Religion, as the Lasteneers, for that they might
be connived at; but they who had positively embraced the Roman Faith, and had
bin admitted to Confession and the Sacraments, no indulgence could be granted
to them, without committing a great Sin, to return to the Alexandrian Schism.

By this Temperament the Patriarch designed to have put a Bar upon the King and
all the Court, which had already publicly made Profession of the Romish
Ceremonies. But the King, almost spent with Vexation and Grief, made no other
answer than this: How can this be done? I am now no more Lord of my own
Kingdom. So they were forced to depart as they came. Presently the Drums beat,
the Trumpets sounded, and Proclamation was made by the Voice of the Crier. O
yez, O yez; In the first place we propounded to ye, the Roman Religion,
esteeming it the best. But an innumerable multitude of Men, have perished
through dislike of it with Aelius, Cabriel, Tecla-George, Sertzac, and lastly,
with the Rustic Lastaneers. And therefore we grant you the free Exercise of
the Religion of your Ancestors. It shall be lawful for you henceforward to
frequent your own Churches, make use of your own Eucharistic Arks, and to read
the Liturgies after the old Custom. So farewell and Rejoice.

It is a thing almost impossible to be believed with what an Universal Joy this
Edict was received among the People. The whole Camp, as if they had had some
great Deliverance from the Enemy, rang with Shouts and Acclamations. The Monks
and Clergy, who had felt the greatest weight of the Fathers Hatred lifted up
their Thankful voices to Heaven. The promiscuous Multitude of Men and Women
danced and caper'd; The Soldiers wished all happiness to their Commanders: They
brake to pieces their own and the Rosaries of all they met, and some they
burnt. Crying out, that it was sufficient for them to believe, That Christ was
true God and true Man, without the unnecessary Disputes concerning the two
Natures. From thenceforward the old Ceremonies were made use of in the
Communion; Grapestone Liquor instead of Wine. And the Holy Name of Jesus
forbidden to be so frequent in their Mouths, after the Roman manner; and some
that did not observe this Caution, they ran through with their Lances. Some few
days after, a general Circumcision was appointed, not minding the pain of such
a piece of Vanity, so they might not be thought to have neglected any thing of
their ancient Rites in favor of the Fathers. Some there were also that used
the ancient manner of washing themselves upon the Festival of the Epiphany,
believing themselves thereby purified from the guilt of having admitted the
Roman Religion.

Others ran about Singing for joy that Ethiopia was delivered from the Western
Lions, Chanting forth the following Lines.

At length the Sheep of Ethiopia freed
From the Bold Lions of the West,
Securely in their Pastures feed,
St. Mark and Cyril's Doctrine have overcome
The Folly's of the Church of Rome.
Rejoice, rejoice, Sing Hallelujahs all,
No more the Western Wolves
Our Ethiopia shall enthrall.
And thus fell the whole Fabric of the Roman Religion, that had bin so long
rearing with so much Labor and Expense, and which had cost the Effusion of so
much Blood to pull it down. So vast and haughty Towers that have bin long time
Built, if once you undermine the Foundation, tumble in a moment. Some there
were who accused the Fathers of the Society, as if they had ruined the fair
Progress they had made by double Diligence, and overhasty Zeal. For most of
the Portugueses, and many of the Habessines themselves that were well affected
to the Roman Religion took it ill, that things should be so suddenly changed,
which might have bin longer let alone, without the least injury done to
fundamental Faith. For as tall Trees, that have taken deep root, are not easily
Eradicated, so inveterated Opinions, which we have as it were sucked in with
our Mother's Milk are not to be overcome but by length of time, great Lenity,
and much Patience. For Humane understanding, if compelled, puts on Obstinacy as
it were in revenge of injured Liberty. Nor did some that were the Fathers great
Friends make any Question, that had they left some things indifferent, which
the Pope himself many times freely tolerates, so it be acknowledged as the Act
of his Benignity and Dispensation, as the Computations of the holy Times, the
Communion under both Kinds, and some other things which the Primitive Church
without any Scandal tolerated and permitted, as the Marriage of Priests, the
Fast of the fourth Holyday, the Observation of the Sabbath, and some other
things which depended merely upon Custom, and not upon Divine Precept, and had
only minded in the mean time the Business of Conversion and Preaching, they had
gained not only the Habessines, but the Pagans themselves, and working by
degrees, had brought their design at length to perfection. But they relying
wholly upon the Favor and Successes of the King were presently for compelling
the Habessines to conform of a sudden in all things to a strange and uncouth
Innovation. The Latin Tongue must be used in their Public Sacred Worship, and
their daily Prayers, the Angelical Salutation, the Lord's Prayer and the
Apostolic Creed must be said in Latin, written in the Ethiopic Characters, in
which Eve Maria grazia Plena, etc. sounded strangely and odly to the
Habessinian Pronunciation. Which by degrees so alienated the Affections of the
Habessinians from such a sort of awkward Devotion, so that at length all the
Wars, Seditions, Pests of Locusts, Famine, and all the Calamities that
followed, and the severe Penalties that were inflicted upon the Alexandrians
were laid upon the Fathers; which begat them Hatred instead of Reverence, and
Banishment in the room of Favor and Affection.

From what has bin said, Men of Prudence will easily find the causes of so
great a Mutation. Nevertheless it will not be improper to add those other which
Tellez. has assigned.

First he says, That the strict Ties and Laws of Matrimony according to the
Catholic Faith, were not so well brook'd by the Habessinians, being allowed by
the Alexandrian Religion, to Marry one or more, and to Divorce, as they saw
good.

Secondly, That besides Incontinency, Avarice, Ambition, Envy, Hatred had got a
head among them, especially against Ras-Seelax, whose Power they could find no
better way to pull down, than by Persecuting the Fathers; for whom he had so
indear'd a Kindness.

Thirdly, That many were possessed of the Church Lands, of which they were
unwilling to make restitution.

Fourthly, That the Secular Judges complained that the Patriarch summoned all
Matrimonial Causes to his Tribunal.

Fifthly, That others were enraged to see Churches built with Lime and Stone;
for they called them Castles, not Churches, built by Ras-Seelax, to the end he
might make himself Master of Ethiopia.

Sixthly, That the Monks were incensed, to see the Fathers only in Esteem, and
themselves formerly so highly reverenced, afterward contemned and slighted; so
that as the other grew great, they should become nothing at all.

Seventhly, That the Habessines always appealed to the Manners and Rites of
their Ancestors, not believing it to be just, to condemn them of Error, who had
bin accounted Holy Men for so many Ages; or to hear and follow Innovations,
neglecting the Laws and Customs of their Forefathers. For through the
vitiousness of Humane Malignity, says Quintilian, Old things are always
applauded, Novelties held to be loathsome. So that although you overcome the
reason by Argument, you can never subdue the Will.

Eighthly, That the Devil had put it into the Heads of several Catholics to
make a corresponding Agreement between the Catholic and the Alexandrinian
Religion; asserting all to be Christians, as well Alexandrians as Romans. That
all believe in Christ; That Christ saves all; That there is little Difference
between both Religions; That both have Conveniences and Inconveniences, their
Truths and their Errors, but that the Wheat was to be separated from the Cockle.

Ninthly, That the Ecclesiastical Censures seemed very heavy to the Habessines;
especially when they heard the Patriarch name Dathan and Abiram in the
Excommunication.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Expulsion of the Patriarch, and the Exilement of the
Fathers of the Society.
The Alexandrians quarrel with the Fathers; who are accursed. Their Churches
taken from them. Susneus Dies. Ras-Seelax renouncing the Alexandrian Religion
is Overthrown and Banished. Others put to Death. The Fathers Dispossessed of
their Goods. Sent to Fremona. The Patriarch by Letters Demands of the King the
Causes of his Banishment, and a New Dispute. The King's Answer. The Fathers
depart for Fremona; Afterward quite thrown out of the Kingdom.

AFter the Publication of the King's Edict, the Alexandrians being now absolute
Victors, endeavored with all their industry to be quit with the Fathers, and
expel them quite out of Habessinia. To which purpose they omitted no occasion
of daily quarrel and contention: First accusing the Patriarch for endeavoring
by Seditious Sermons to stir up the People to Sedition, and to turn them from
the Alexandrian Religion; for that he had openly exhorted his Hearers to
Constancy. But understanding that Basilides was displeased, and gave out
threatening words, they thought it requisite to act more moderately. Soon after
the Fathers Churches were taken from them, believing that would be a means to
put a stop to the Roman Worship. And first they were constrained to quit their
Cathedral at Gorgora, a stately Structure after the European manner. At their
departure they carried with them all their Sacred Furniture, brake all the
Sculpture, and spoiled the Pictures, that they might not leave them to be the
sport of their Adversaries: doing that themselves, which they thought the
Habessines would do. And this Example they followed in all other places from
whence they were expelled. In the midst of these Transactions, Susneus's
Distemper increasing, and more and more augmented by his continual anguish of
Mind, he ended this Life the 16th day of December. 1632.

The King being Dead, the Fathers Adversaries set upon Ras-Seelax in the first
place, as the Principal Favourer and Protector of the Roman Religion: and first
of all they promise him all his former Dignities, all his Possessions and
Goods, upon Condition he would return to the Alexandrian Religion. Upon his
refusal, they bring him bound in Chains before the King, and pronounce him
guilty of Death. But the King declaring that he would not pollute his hands
with the Blood of his Uncle, commanded him to be carried to a certain remote
Place, near to Samenar, and sequestered his Goods. And as he was great, so was
he attended in his fall by several others, as Atzai-Tino, Secretary of State,
and the King's Historiographer, Walata Georgissa, the Queens Cousin. In short,
whoever had favored the Fathers, were all sent into Exile, and some put to
Death, perhaps because they had bin more bitter in their Expressions than
others against the Alexandrian Religion. For some had called it, a Religion for
Dogs. After all this the Enemies of the Fathers still insisted, That nothing
was yet done, so long as the Patriarch and the Fathers were suffered to abide
within the Confines of the Kingdom: Neither would the Lastaneers be quiet till
they heard the Fathers were all thrown out of Ethiopia, but would look upon all
things transacted for the re-establishment of the Alexandrian Religion as
fictitious Stories.

There needed not many words to press him that was already willing. First of
all therefore, their Goods and Possessions were taken from them; then all their
Arms, especially their Muskets and Firearms. But before that, they were sent
to Fremona, where, as we have already declared, Oviedo the Patriarch resided
for some time. But before their Departure, the Patriarch wrote a certain Letter
to the King, to this Effect:

I did not adventure to come into Habessinia with my Companions, of my own
accord, but by the Command of the Roman Pontiff, and the King of Portugal, at
the request of your Father, where having taken the King's Oath of Obedience, I
officiated the Office of Patriarch in the Name of the Roman Pontiff, and the
King of Portugal. Now because you Command me to depart, my humble request is,
that your Majesty would set down the Causes of my Exilement in Writing,
subscribed with your own, and the hands of some of your Counselors and Peers,
that all the World may know whether I am compelled to suffer for my Life and
Conversation, or for the sake of my Doctrine. I granted the Ceremonies desired
by your Father, except the Communion under both Kinds, which only the Pope
himself can dispute with. The same also I again offer, so that you and your
Subjects will yield Obedience to the Church of Rome as the head of all other
Churches. My last request is, That as the Matter was Debated at first, so it
may be referred to another Dispute; by which means the Truth of the whole
affair will more manifestly appear.

To this Writing the King thus replied, Whatever was done by me before, was
done by the Command of my Father, whom I was in Duty bound to Obey; so that I
was forced to wage War under his Conduct, both with Kindred and Subjects. But
after the last Battle of Wainadega the Learned and Unlearned Clergy and Layety,
Civil and Military, young and old, all sorts of Persons made their Addresses to
my Father, Crying out, How long shall we be perplexed and wearied with
unprofitable things? How long shall we encounter Brethren and Kindred, cutting
off the right hand with the left? How long shall we thrust our Swords into our
own Bowels? Especially since we learn nothing from the Roman Religion but what
we knew before. For what the Romans call the two Natures in Christ, his
Divinity and his Humanity, that we knew from the beginning to this time. For we
all believe that our Lord Christ is perfect God and perfect Man; perfect God in
his Divinity, and perfect Man in his Humanity. But in regard those Natures are
not separated nor divided; for neither of them subsist of its self, but both of
them conjoined the one with the other; therefore we do not say that they are
two things. For one is made two, yet so as the Natures are not mixed in their
Subsistence. This Controversy therefore among us is of little moment; neither
was it for this that there has bin so much Bloodshed among us, but chiefly
because the Blood was denied to the Layety, whereas Christ has said in his
Gospel, Unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, ye
shall not have life everlasting; and when he instituted the Holy Supper, he did
not say, The Blood is in my Body, which I have given to you alone; but take and
drink, and partake all. From that time the Disciples did as they were
commanded. The Intermission of the Fast of the fourth Holyday, which is
nevertheless enjoined by the Canons of the Holy Apostles: as also a various
manner of Fasting in the Time of Lent. Besides by altering the Order of the
whole Ecclesiastical Computation in reference to the Annual Festivals, and the
Permission of all Persons to enter into the Church, without any distinction of
clean or unclean; these are the things that gave offense to our People. But
they detested nothing more, than the reiteration of Baptism, as if we had bin
Heathens, before we had bin Baptized by the Fathers. They re-ordain'd our
Priests and Deacons, they burnt the wooden Chests of our Altars, and
Consecrated some Altars of their own, as if ours had not bin Consecrated
before. The Monks also complained, that their Institutions were abrogated.
These and others of the same Nature were the true Causes, that we abandoned the
Roman Faith, tho it was not we who gave it Protection but our Father. And
therefore, because the Alexandrian Abuna is now upon his Journey hither, and
has sent us word, that he cannot live or jointly act in the same Kingdom with
the Roman Patriarch, and the Fathers, we command you to hasten to Fremona.
Those things are offered now too late, which might have bin easily at first
allowed: For now there is no returning to that, which all the whole Nation
abhors and detests: for which reason, all farther Colloquies and Disputes will
be in vain.

The Patriarch relates in his Epistle to the King of Spain, That that same
Metropolitan, of whom the King makes mention, came some years before into
Ethiopia, but lay privately concealed in Enarea, where hearing of the disowning
and casting off the Patriarch, he brake out into this farther Expression, to
the King, That he could not officiate in his Office, unless the Patriarch and
the Fathers were either put to Death, or Banished to perpetuity. So that the
Patriarch and the Fathers were forced to obey the King's Command, not without a
long Dispute about their Guns, which they would willingly have kept for their
own Preservation; but they were forced to deliver them up, that they might be
of no use to the Portugals, who were coming, as it was feared and reported, to
their assistance. Thus the Patriarch with all the Fathers that were then in the
Country, were constrained to leave their warm Seats after an Enjoyment of Eight
years standing. In their return they met with various Misfortunes, and were
frequently infested with Thieves, before they could get to Fremona. But because
they foresaw, that would be no abiding place for'em of any long continuance,
they presently resolved to send away some of the Fathers before into India, to
give the Viceroy an account of the state of their affairs, and to desire some
remedy, that is to say, a good sufficient strength of Portuguesis. But before
they could obtain that, they received fresh Commands from the King (who it is
very probable smelt their Design) to remove from Fremona and be gone. But they
sang loath to depart a great while, and to spin out time, privately retired to
one John Akay, formerly an Enemy to the King, who not being able to defend
them, they were pulled out thence by the Ears, and in May 1634. delivered to
the Turks, and first carried to Arkiko and Matzua, after that to Suaqena, and
brought beore the Turkish Basha. And indeed there was nothing more that
provoked the Habessines, as Gregory told me, then that they should require aid
of the Military Power from India to establish their Religion: They might, said
he, have shaken the dust from their shoes at their departure, as the Apostles
were commanded; but they were for settling Religion with Swords and Guns. Which
was not done so secretly but it came to the Ears of the Habessines; for it
seems that some of their Train, vexed at some Misfortune or other, had
imprudently threatened it. Which was one reason among others that their
Churches built of Stone and Mortar, and their Guns were taken from them.

CHAP. XIV. Of what happened after the Departure of the Patriarch and the
Fathers out of Ethiopia.
The Condition of the Bishop and his Associates privately left behind. The
Patriarchs misery among the Turks. Peter Heyling a German Disputes with him.
Peter entertained by the King of Habessinia. Various reports concerning his
Death. The Patriarch redeems himself. He sends Hierom Lobo for Assistance, who
cannot speed. The favorers of the Fathers put to Death in Ethiopia. Now
admitted into Habessinia. Six Capuchins sent again; their ill success. Three
more sent after them; their sad Misfortune. Nogueira Hanged. Mendez dies in
India. After that no News from Habessinia.

NOtwithstanding the King's Commands to all in general, the Patriarch left
behind privately in several places Apollinaris Almeyda, Hiacynthos Francisco,
Ludovigo Cordeyra, Bruno Bruni and some others, who after they had lived
miserably for some time, lurking up and down, at last were most of them Hanged.
In the mean time he himself spent almost a whole year in great Vexation, and
full of sorrow among the Barbarous Turks in Suaqena, almost melted by the Sun.
But nothing more increased the anguish of his Mind, than the News of the New
Metropolitan's arrival out of Egypt, and that it should be his misfortune to be
constrained to behold him as he passed by. He had in his Train a certain
German, whose Name was Peter Heyling, a Native of Lubeck, a young Gentleman
eminent for Probity and Learning, a Professor of the Augustan, or Lutheran
Religion, and generally called by the Title of Muallim, that is in Arabic,
Doctor Peter. He being desirous to see the world, and learn the Arabic
Language, was arrived about that time in Egypt, and was very much esteemed for
his Piety and Modesty by the Coptites, and hearing that the Metropolitan was
going for Ethiopia, he obtained leave to go in his Train, and by that means met
the Patriarch Alphonsus at Suaqene. Presently he undertook to encounter him,
opposing several Opinions and Tenants of the Roman Church, and expounding in
Arabic to the standers by, whatever was said on both sides. The Patriarch in a
heat desired him to forbear that Explanation, because he did not understand the
Arabic. To which the other answered, That he Disputed, for others to hear as
well as himself. The Disputation being ended, The Patriarch, turning to his
Companions, sighing, told them, That if that Doctor went into Habessinia, he
would precipitate the whole Country into Heresy. He was no sooner arrived
there, but he became very acceptable to the King, who gave him a Tent, and all
things necessary. Concerning his Death, various Reports were spread abroad. For
some said, That being most graciously and kindly entertained by the King, he
died in Habessinia: Others, that being honorably dismissed by the King, he was
murdered by certain Arabian Thieves.

As for the Patriarch, after a long Captivity and very bad Usage from the
Turks, he was at length set at Liberty, after he had paid for himself and his
Companions a Ransom of 4000 German Dolars, and so at length got safe to Goa.
Where, tho he were advised to go himself into Portugual, and give an account of
the afflicted State of Ethiopia, he thought it the better way to send Jeronymo
Lobo, with order to desire the Aid of a sufficient Military Power, to restore
him to his lost See. Thereupon the diligent Jesuit, not only went into
Portugal, but also to Mantua to Philip the Fourth, and from thence to Rome. But
all his Negotiations proved ineffectual; whether it were that they did not
think it at that instant so Apostolical a way to propagate the Gospel by force
of Arms; or whether it were that they did not like the Charge of an Expedition,
from whence they could hope for little good, there being no considerable Party
in the Kingdom to give them footing, and the encouragement of Assistance. For
the King watchful over all casualties, put all to Death that favored the Roman
Fathers. Which occasioned the Ruin of many of the Nobility; among the rest
Tecla-Selax; and several Priests that had taken Roman Orders; and all the
Fathers, except Bernard Nogueyra, whom the Patriarch had created his Vicar. For
tho the Patriarch attempted afterward to send several other Fathers, yet all
their Endeavors were in vain; so that for a long time he could learn no News
concerning the State of Ecclesiastical Affairs in Habessinia. For the King
fearing lest the Portugueses should invade his Dominions in revenge of the
Fathers, had bribed the Turkish Basha's of Suaqena and Matzua, willing enough
to that of themselves, not to admit entrance to any of the Franks.

The News of which coming to Rome, the Minds of men were variously affected.
The greatest part were sorry that all their fair hopes of retaining Ethiopia in
Pontifical Obedience were quite cut off. Others blamed the Fathers of the
Society, that through their Arrogance and Imprudence in managing the Temper and
Disposition of the Habessines; they had ruined both themselves and the Roman
Religion; whereas they ought to have made it their Business to have acted
chiefly and in the first place for the Majesty, and Authority of the Pope over
the Universal Church, and willingly to have suffered all Miseries, and
Martyrdoms, rather than have quitted their Station. Tellez involves these
particulars in a general Relation, saying, That several Malevolent Reports were
spread about in Rome; and some there were who gave out, That the Fathers, out
of mere detestation of their Persons, and hatred of the whole Nation of
Portugal were ejected out of Habessinia: and that if other Preachers were sent,
the Habessines would willingly embrace both them and their Doctrine. Which was
a thing to be done with much less Expense, and more probable to come to effect
than Lobo's Project of sending an Army.

Therefore the Congregation for propagating the Faith, took another Course, and
sent Six Capuchin Friars, all Frenchmen, with Letters of Recommendation and
safe Conduct from the Emperor of the Turks himself, with Orders to try what
they could do in Habessinia. Two of these going by Sea, landed at Magadoso,
seated upon the Eastern Coast of Africa; but before they could get many Leagues
up into the Country, they were knocked of the head by the Cafers. Two of them
got as far as the Confines of Habessinia; but being discovered, they were
presently Commanded either to return back, or make Profession of the
Alexandrian Religion; and upon their refusal to do either, were presently
stoned to Death. Of which, when the other two that stayed at Matzua had notice,
they rather chose to return home again than suffer Martyrdom to no purpose.

Nevertheless Three other Capuchins, in hopes of better Fortune, resolved to
make one trial more; who when they arrived at Suaqena, I know not by what
advice, wrote Letters to the Abyssine King, as it were to Congratulate him upon
Book. 3. Chap. 14. P 369

Three Capuchins beheaded in the year 1648 by the Command of Basilides King of
the Habessines 1 The City and Island of Suaqin. 2. The red Sea. 3. The Turkish
Basha Governor of the Island 4. F. Felix de S. Severino 5. F. Antonio de Patra
Pagana 6. F. Joseph Tortulano


from the Italian Original.

depiction of the martyrdom of three Jesuit priests by beheading. their
arrival. But the King to retaliate their Kindness, wrote back not to them, but
to the Basha of Suaqena, to send him only their Heads; which the Basha in hopes
of a Reward, very readily did, with a more than ordinary Ceremony. For after he
had caused their Heads to be stricken off, he ordered the Skins to be flayed
off, and so sent them to the King, that by their Color he might know them to
be Franks, and by their Shaving to be Priests.

At length also Bernard Nogueira was apprehended, the last of all the Fathers,
and fairly Hanged. As for the Patriarch Mendez, he lived in India till the year
1656. Where in the 22d of his Exile, and the 77th of his Age he died upon the
29 day of January. He was endu'd with most accomplished gifts both of Body and
Mind, very Tall, and of a firm Constitution of Body, well read both in the
Greek and Latin, and every way fitted for his Employment. Neither had he wanted
Prudence, had not the King's Favor and Success which oftentimes intoxicate the
Wisest of Men, transported him out of the way to act with that violence and
severity where gentleness and caution were so requisite. By which means,
instead of gaining, he was forced to suffer the shameful detriment of that
Authority, which he had too far extended. Others, as Gregory told me, excused
him, for that upon his arrival he found things so far driven on by the
Missionaries, that he could not with Honor recede from what they had done.
Since the Death of the Patriarch we have had no certain Relations out of
Habessinia. In the year 1652. a new Metropolitan was sent into Ethiopia, who
had bin seen by many Europeans in Egypt, and was succeeded afterward by
several others, as we have gathered from certain Relation. From whence we may
infer, That the report of Tellez was a thing framed out of Envy; as if the King
of the Habessines had sent his Ambassadors into Arabia, to desire thence
Mohammedan Doctors, with an intention to embrace Turcism, which no man can think
probable, from what has bin already related. For how is it likely that he who
could not Protect the splendid Religion of the Romish Church, and the specious
Doctrines of the Fathers, because they were thought by the Habessines to be
repugnant to Scripture, and the Decrees of the Primitive Church, should be able
to admit of the Vanity and Absurdity of Mahumetism: the Original and Progress
of which is so well known to the Habessines already.

A Religion that did not prevail by suffering and well-doing like the Christian
Religion, but by force of Arms was obtruded upon Barbarous and Discording
Nations. The Clergy and Monks so wedded to their Alexandrian Religion would no
more endure it than they did the superstition of Susneus. So that should the
King and his Peers be so vain as to attempt a thing so detestable to his
People, he could not expect but to be more vigorously and generally opposed
than ever his Father was. But lastly, the King's Letters of the last Date to
the Governor of Batavia beginning with a Christian Preface sufficiently
demonstrate, that he was a Christian, when Tellez raised that report. However
if any thing of fresher intelligence shall come to our hands at any time, we
shall freely and truly impart it to Public view.

The End of the Third Book.
OF THE Private Affairs OF THE HABESSINIANS: More particularly of their
OECONOMIES. BOOK. IV.
CHAP. I. Of the Letters used by the Ethiopians.
They obtained the use of Letters with their Divine Worship. The Original of
the Greek and Latin Letters. The Ethiopic more agreeable with the Samaritan
then Hebrew Characters. The Inventor of theirs, ignorant both of the Hebrew and
Greek: The Letters ancient, but not all invented at the same time. The Amharic
Characters. The story of the Chaldaic and Holy Character refuted.

THat Learning and Divine Worship generally go together, we have hinted
already. For we see it has so happened among most Nations of Europe; which when
they gave the name to the Latin Church, entertained also its Letters, and most
of its words. Sometimes also New Letters have abolished the use of Old ones, as
we find by the Example of the They are called Runer in the North, and are to be
seen engraved upon Stones in several places. See Wormias's Runic Literature and
the Runic Lexicon Printed at Copenhagen.
Runic Letters of the Ancient Goths, in the time of Christianity. Thus the
Russians received their Letters, together with their Divine Worship from the
Greek Church. Over all the East, and the greatest part of Africa, the Arabic
Literature and Language crept in, together with Islamism, the Ancient Persian
being thrown out, and all other Nations, if there were any that used the Arabic
Letters before. And as for our own Native Characters, as we express them in
Writing, though they seem to differ very much from the Latin and Greek,
especially while the Letters are so varied and transformed with the strokes and
dashes of various hands as fancy and swiftness of Writing guides the Pen, yet
if we more accurately consider the old Characters, and those the same as they
appear in Printing, we shall find it no great difficulty to derive them from
the Ancient Latin.

It is the Ancient Opinion of the Learned, That Cadmus recommended the
Phenician Letters to the Greeks; and the Greeks to the Latins; and they to all
the rest of Europe; first by means of their Conquests, then of their Religion,
though there be every where a great difference in the shape of the Letters:
among those Nations also that use the Arabic Letters, there is a vast variety
of Writing. Not to speak of the Persians and Turks, but of the Moors, and
Western People of Africa, whose Letters, though Originally Arabic, you shall
hardly understand.

But as to what concerns our Ethiopic Letters, some of them indeed may
correspond in Name, but in shape there is not the least appearance of
similitude: so that if an Argument were to be drawn from the Letters, we might
say, that the Ethiopians received neither their Divine nor Civil Worship from
the Israelites. Nevertheless they seem to have some correspondence with the
Samaritan Characters, which many most Judicious Men acknowledge for the
Original and Genuine Letters of the Ancient Hebrews: and yet neit her will
these without a great deal of Labor, be brought to any Assimulation. We shall
give you a view of the two Alphabets both together.

Samar. Ethiop. Samar. Ethiop. Aleph ^ ^ Alf. Lamed ^ ^ Lawi. Beth ^ ^ Bet. Mem
^ ^ Maj. Gimel ^ ^ Geml. Nun ^ ^ Nahas. Daleph ^ ^ Dent. Samech ^ ^ Saat. He ^
^ Haut. Ain ^ ^ Ain. Wau ^ ^ Waw. Pe ^ ^ Af. Zajin ^ ^ Zaj. Trod ^ ^ Tzadai.
Cheth ^ ^ Hharm. Kuf. ^ ^ Kof. Teth ^ ^ Tait. Resh^ ^ Rees. Jod ^ ^ Jaman. Shin
^ ^ Saur. Caf. ^ ^ Caf. Tau ^ ^ Tawl.

In this Scheme, we have not followed any Samaritan Alphabet, but selected them
out of the several Figures, which the most Famous Walton has produced in his
preparation for the Polyglotton, which seemed more like our Ethiopians. For my
part I am not apt to believe, that the Inventor of the Ethiopic Letters who is
yet to me unknown, had any knowledge either of the Ancient Greek, or these
Samaritan Letters; or that he received them from any other for the certain use
of Religion, but that they were found and ordered by particular fancy, for the
use of the Ethiopic Pronunciation, which is manifest from the different
disposition of the Letters, the different Order of the Points, and manner of
Reading, contrary to the Custom of all the Eastern People, who begin from the
Left to the Right; and lastly from the Greek Numerical Characters. But that
they are very old, is apparent from hence, for that several Characters carry
the same Pronunciation, and are therefore by the Abessines promiscuously used
in their Writing. Formerly I am of Opinion, they had a different sound; for it
seems not probable that the first Inventor would accommodate two or three
Letters various in shape, to one pronunciation. Then again they were not
invented together, nor at the same time; for the Greek II or the P of the
Latins was wanting of old among the Ethiopians, and the other Oriental
Languages that were of the same Pedigree; Many Learned men make use of Dagesh
soft, instead of the invented Masoretick one; otherwise the Seventy
Interpreters, who themselves were Jews, had expressed the Initial Letter (...),
which we now pronounce Pe, by a a and not ph in the words (...) which the Jews
at this day utter Peleg, Paraoh.
instead of which, they used either their Foreign Pait, in pronouncing Peter
and Paul; or else the Letter Bet B. after the manner of the Arabians, who say
and write Beter, Baul, Ibraxis, or the Acts of the Apostles from the Greek Word
(...).

The Ancient Germans also wanted the Letter P, and therefore in Foreign, they
put forth the Letter F with a kind of straining.

Pfaff Papa. Pfeben A Melon. Pfaal A Lake. Pfund A Pound. Pfan A Peacock.
Pfrund A Prebendary.
Or else they used B, for P, as Babenburgh, now Bamburgh for Papenburgh,
Popes-Town. Bapst from the Greek Word Pappas. At length the Habessines also
received the Letter Pa, and placed it last in their Alphabet. But after the
Amharic Dialect took place of the Native Language, seven new Characters were to
be added, that so the casual Words of this Dialect might be expressed: besides
these, they have no other Letters either in Sacred or Profane Books. The Book
of Councils written Two hundred and forty Years ago, extant at Rome, has no
other Characters; so that I am constrained to admire, what those good honest
Habessinian Priests, living then at Rome, otherwise very ignorant, meant, by
talking to Athanasius Kircher, concerning a double Character; telling him, That
the Priests and more Learned sort made use of the Ancient Surian and Holy
Character; but that now all the Habessine promiscuously spoke the Vulgar and
Common Habessine. For where are any such Ethiopic Books extant, written in the
Surian or Chaldaic Characters? When, and where the Sacred Books began to be
Written in the Vulgar Character? There never was any such thing either written
or said by any Person of Credit.

CHAP. II. Of the Books and Learning of the Ethiopians.
Books not holy reckoned Ethiopic. Their Studies what? No written Laws.
Lamentable Physicians. Nor better Philosophers. Of the mixture of the Elements
in Humane Bodies. They hold two Souls. In Mathematics not absurd. They love
Poetry, but only Divine; all in Rhyme, various sorts. Riddles and Proverbs.
Desirous of the Latin: The Fathers would not teach them. Arabic frequent.
Their Epistolary Style.

BEsides Sacred Books, the Habessines have but very few others. For the Story
of Vrreta did not think worth while to tell so modest an untruth: The most
celebrated Libraries, says he, that ever had Renown, were nothing in respect
of Presbyter John's; the Books are without Number, richly and artificially
Bound: Many to which Solomon's, and the Patriarchs Names are Affixt. Godignus
explodes him, l. 1. c. 17. Yet Gallesius, in his late Discourse concerning
Libraries averrs the same: and adds, That Chancellor Seguiers Library contains
more Books than any Ethiopic Library.
Barratti, who chatters of a Library containing Ten Thousand Volumes, it is
altogether vain and frivolous. Some few we had an Account of. One called the
Glory of Kings already mentioned. I know not whether it be that of which Tellez
Writes, because it is of high Authority among the Habessines; and as it were a
Second Gospel, and preserved in the Palace of Axuma. In that is Recorded the
History of the Queen of Sheba and others, to which the Habessines give great
Credit. A Chronicle, cited by King Claudius in his Confession of Faith.

The Book of Philosophy, much esteemed in Ethiopia.

The Ladder, a Vocabulary; in that the most difficult words are Expounded in
Amharic, and Arabic, but very unfortunately and perversely: As the following
Example about Gemms will Testify: It was sent me by Gregory.

The Jasper in the Pentateuch, and Apocalypse, in the Arabic: the Color of it
is White and Red.

The Saphyr in the Pentateuch and Apocalypse in Arabic. -- The Color of it, is
like a burning Cole: he meant the Carbuncle, now called the Ruby.

They meddle with no Studies, but those of their own Learned Language, and
Sacred Matters. Most believe, they have enough, if they can but Read and Write:
and that either the Parents teach their Children to do, or else certain of
their Monks for a small stipend. They have no written Laws, Justice and Right
is determined by Custom, and the Examples of their Ancestors: and most
differences are ended by the Will of the Judge.

Their manner of Administering Physic is most Deplorable, They Cure Men by
cutting and burning, as they do Horses. They cure the Yellow Jaundies, by
applying a hot burning Iron in manner of a Semicircle, toward the upper end of
the Arm, laying a little Cotton upon the Wound, that the Humor may issue
forth, so long as the Disease remains. In most Distempers, every Person is his
own Physician, and uses such Herbs as he learnt were useful from his Parents.
Some are of Opinion, that it is not a Pin matter, whether they make use of
Physicians or Apothecaries or no, not believing it worth their while to be
recovered at so great Expenses. If the King be sick, they come to him, ask him,
as if it were out of pity, What he ails, and what is his Distemper? And if any
one have been ill of the same Distemper, he tells, what did him good, deeming
the same Remedies applicable to all Constitutions. If a Pestilence chance to
break out, they leave their Houses and Villages, and retire with their Herds
into the Mountains, putting all their Security in flying from the Contagion.
Tertian Agues they Cure, by applying the Cramp-fish to the Patient, which is an
unspeakable Torture. Wounds they Cure by the help of Myrrh, which is very
plentiful among them.

I have not as yet ever seen the Treatise of Philosophy, which I mentioned at
the beginning of the Chapter; but it appears by the Theological Disputations of
their Divines, that they are none of the Acutest Logicians; nor have they any
knowledge of Natural Philosophy, as is apparent to any one that reads their
Books, concerning the mixture of the Four Elements in the Creation of Man; as
also, concerning the Soul, the Author of the Organum gives this account.

God made a Miracle when he Created our Father Adam, and Formed him of the Four
Elements: he mixed the Elements, yet so that they should not disagree among
themselves; the First with the Second, and the Third with the Fourth: he mixed
the dry with the Moist, and the Hot with the Cold; the Visible with the
Invisible, the Palpable with the Impalpable: He made Two out of the Palpable
and Two out of the Impalpable: He made Three of the Dry, and One of the Moist:
He made Three out of the Visible, and One out of the Invisible. The great
Architect knew where the Inner Chamber was to be Seated, and placed the Corners
of the House in the Four Elements; and understanding that a vessel of Clay
could not move nor speak, without the mixture of a Spirit that must come from
Himself, therefore he Breathed upon his Face and made him Rational and
Self-moving; as says the most Holy Law. He Breathed into the Face of Adam, the
breathing place of Life; and he became Man by the Breath of Life. Therefore the
Soul dies not with the Body; for that proceeding out of the Mouth of the Lord,
it was mixed with the Body: as says our Lord in the Gospel, Fear not those who
kill the Body, but cannot kill the Soul. Now as to what he said, Thou shall not
kill the Soul; be spoke concerning the sensitive Soul: because there are two
Souls in Man; one the Spirit of Life, which proceeded out of the Mouth of God,
not reckoned among the Elements, and which never dies. The other is, the Blood
of the Body; that is to say, the Sensitive Soul, which has its Original from
the Elements, and that is Morral. Wherefore God said, Thou shall not eat the
Flesh with the Blood; because the Blood is the Sensitive Soul. But the Pillar
of the House of God, is the Spirit of Life. Now after the Spirit of Life is
departed, the Body becomes a Carcass; therefore the Law pronounced the Carcass
Unclean, because the Spirit of Life is departed from it. But among us, we
reckon the Dead Body of a Christian to be clean, because the Human Body was
mixed with the Blood of Divinity: besides that the Grace of Baptism departs not
from it: and concerning the Carcass of the Son of the Virgin, David said, They
cast away their Brother as an unclean Carcass. That is, they did not understand
it to be holy; because the Jews were his Brethren in respect of his Mother: and
by their Law the Carcass was reputed unclean.

It is to be wondered, that the Habessines, who cannot understand two Natures in
Christ united in one Existence, should find out two Souls in the body of Man.
And yet it is no wonder when we consider, that there are some, who imagine
Three Souls in Man; whereas they might feign a great many more, should they but
take every Animal Faculty for a Soul.

But these, and such like Conceptions admit of Excuse and Interpretation,
though what the vulgar believe concerning the Fabric of the World, are
altogether absurd, and not worth relating, viz. That the Earth is a round Globe
and pendent in the middle of the Air; this they look upon as a mere Fable. What
think ye, they would say, should any one teach them, that the Planets are
Animals, and instead of the Sun, that stands still, always walking the rounds
of the Heavens? Or assert the Antipodes to them, with their Feet upwards, and
their Heads downwards, and yet keeping a steady Motion? certainly they would
think, that such people would necessarily drop into Heaven; though as to this
we are not to deride their Ignorance, in regard several Holy and Grave Men have
denied the Antipodes: nevertheless, they most idly dream that when the Sun
rises and sets, he goes and comes again through a certain kind of Window; but
which way he gets under the Earth, they are not very sollicitous about: and yet
in this, they seem much wiser than Mahomet the great Prophet of the Mussel-men,
who fancied, That the Sun went to sleep in a Well; Gregory was taken for a very
great Philosopher in his Country, for that he had made a certain Unequal Model
of Pastboard, like the Arch of Heaven, to the inside of which, he fastened
several grains of Wheat, to represent the Stars of the First Magnitude, and
then turned the Concavity uppermost, to show how the Heavens moved about the
Earth, encompas'd about by the Air.

As to the Liberal Arts they love Poesy above all the rest, but only that
which is Divine: for Profane Verses they hate, which made Gregory extremely
wonder, that after the Worship of the Heathen Gods was quite taken away, and
the Temples of their Gods were wholly destroyed, that the Books and Verses
which Treated or were Dedicated to them, were not as utterly Abolished. For
that it was not fitting for Christians to read the Rude and Obscene Fables of
their feigned Divinities, much less to imitate them, and fetch from thence the
chief Ornaments of their Poems; seeing that the very Footsteps of Idolatry
ought to be an abomination to Christianity. These Verses of the Ethiopians
consist in mere Rithmes; if we may Assert Consonants of the same Order
differing in the Vowels, to be Rithmes. For beside those, there is no other
Matter to be observed: Of these they have several sorts, as we shall teach in
another Place. They are also very much delighted with abstruse Sayings and
Proverbs; as for Example, The Mountains of Kobol as with a burning-Glass and so
the prefixed time of Man, is consumed by the passing of his days.

They are extremely Covetous of Learning, and were extremely importunate with
the Jesuits to teach their Children the Latin Language. But they were more
eager in promoting the Latin Religion, then the Language; pretending the
difficulty of the Undertaking, and the vast difference between the Latin and
Amharic Pronounciation. Indeed, it cannot be denied, but that it is a most
difficult thing to teach a Person who never heard of Grammar, as I found by the
trial of Gregory. For the Habessines learn Languages only by Converse, more
especially the Arabic, which is frequently spoken by the neighboring
Merchants, the Mahometans who are subject to the King, and the Courtiers
themselves; and in this Language the King Writes his Letters to Foreign
Princes. On the otherside the Arabians themselves, as they are very much
inclined to propagate their Fables among the Christians, write them in the
Arabic Language, but make use of the Ethiopic Letters, that thereby they may
the more easily impose upon the simple people. Private persons seldom write
Letters, nor do they know the method of sending them. But if any one has a
desire to write, he goes to the Scribe of the Province, who is called, Pahafe
Hagare, and for a small Sum of Money causes him to Compose them an Epistle: and
you must know that the Exordiums of their Epistles are various in their Forms,
for that in the Elegancy of their first Addresses, they place the chiefest
ornament of their Complements.

CHAP. III. Of the Names of Men among the Habessinians.
Their proper Names are significative not to be expounded Appellatively, taken
most commonly from the Sacred names of the Trinity, Christ, Mary, etc. The
Heathenish Names detested. The Names of their Women, common with the Arabian
Appellations; some peculiar.

THe Native Names of the Habessinians, as well Men, as Women, which were not
first introduced with their Divine Worship from the Hebrew or Greek Languages,
or were not derived to them from the Copts or Arabians, as David, Jacob,
Andrew, Theodore, Gregory, are all Significative. And therefore they that take
them for Appellatives may thereby strangely disturb and confound the sense and
meaning of them: and therefore we thought it worth our while to expound some of
them, to the end that by that means the rest may be the more easily understood.
Those which have the Article Za affixed before them as a mark of the Genitive
Case, denote either some Devotion or Subjection: as for Example, Zaslasse, That
is, a Subject or Votary to the Holy Trinity. Zachristos: that is, devoted to
Christ. Zawalda Marjam, Of the Son of Marie. Servant or Subject. Za Marjam, Of
Mary. Servant or Subject. Zadenghel, Of the Virgin. Servant or Subject. Za
Michael, Of Michael. Servant or Subject. Tecla Slasse, The Plant of the
Trinity.


Many are compounded with the Name of Christ; as, Gabra Christos The Servant of
Christ. Sula Christos, The Image of Christ. Tzaga Christos, The Grace of
Christ. Acala Christos, The Substance of Christ. Tenssa Christos, Christ arose.


Which in speech are Contractedly pronounced thus, Gabraxos, Seelaxos,
Tzagaxos, Acalaxos, Tanseaxos.

Otherwise they are Compounded with the name of Mary or the Virgin; as, Habta
Marjam, The Gift Of Mary or the Virgin. Tecla Marjam, The Plant Of Mary or the
Virgin. Mahtzentza Marjam, The Gage Of Mary or the Virgin. Laica Marjam, The
Servant Of Mary or the Virgin. Atzfa Marjam, The Mantle Of Mary or the Virgin.
Serza Denghel, The Blossom Of Mary or the Virgin.


Other Names are framed out of other Divine and Sacred Words; as, Tzaga-zaab,
The Grace of the Father. Fekur-Egzi-e The Beloved of God. Jesus Moa, Christ
has overcome. Kesta-Wahed, The Portion of the only Son of God. Amda-Tzehon,
The Pillar of Sion. Tesfa Tzejon, The hope of Sion. Ber-a-Jacob The Seed of
Jacob. Zer-a-Johans The Seed of John. Bahaila Selus, By the Virtue of the
Trinity. Bahaila Michael By the Virtue of Michael.


For they think it not becoming Christians to give their Children Heathenish
Names; believing that their Children, by those Names which they bear, which
were formerly those of Famous and Pious Men, are to be put in mind of their
duties in matters of Religion and ordinary Converse: However the name of
Homodei, so well known in Italy is found among these People, by the Name of
Seb-Waamla which signifies Man and God.

The usual Names among the Women are, Malacotavit, Or Divine. Wangelawit, Or
Evangelical. Amataxos, The Handmaid of Christ. Romana Wark, The Golden
Pomgranat.


The Men have also several Names which are common with the Arabians and Copts:
as, Bazen. Abreha. Atzbeha.


They have also some other Names which are peculiar among themselves, as
Susnejos, or Susneus which are wonderfully corrupted and mistaken by our
European Authors: as when they write Sacinos, and Socignos, instead of Susneus.

CHAP. IV. Of the Domestic Oeconomie of the Habessines: Their Marriages, Diet,
Clothing, Habitations and Burials.
Their Marriages Christian. Polygamy lawful by the Civil Laws, not by the
Ecclesiastical. Divorces. Nuptial Ceremonies. Benediction Sacerdotal. Their
Diet raw Beef, or half boiled; and Herbs half concocted by the Cattle. What
Bread. Their way of making Butter. Their washing their Clothes. Their Drink.
Hydromel Ale. Their Clothing thin. Very Parsimonious, accustomed to go Naked.
They Curl and anoint their Hair with Butter. Mean Habitations. The Kings
Palaces. Their manner of bewailing the Dead. The Funeral Pomp of their Kings.

THe Habessines Marry with every one of their Wives after the Christian manner:
neither are they hindered by any Law of the Land from Marrying several, though
they are Prohibited by their Ecclesiastical Penalties, as being contrary to the
Sacred Canons and Institutions of the Christians: and therefore they that
Exercise Polygamie are not admitted to the Communion, as we have already said:
For they are of that Opinion, That whatever is not prejudicial to the Public,
or to the security and Tranquillity of private Persons is not to be Prosecuted
with secular Punishment; Neither are they scrupulous in suing out Divorces;
assuming the same liberty to put away as to marry their Wives.

As for the particulars of their Nuptial Ceremonies, they are not of that
importance as to Merit a Relation; nor are they the same in all Countries.
Those which Alvares recounts, of the Nuptial Bed being brought forth and placed
before the Doors of the House by Three of the Presbyters, and then walking
round it singing Hallelujas; or the cutting off the Locks of the Couple to be
Wedded, for each to make an exchange, they were altogether unknown to Gregory;
and that if it were the Custom any where so to do, it was only as he said, in
some parts of Tygra: but that the Sacerdotal Benediction was necessary to all
Weddings he absolutely granted.

Their Diet is not only very homely, but also far different from ours; for they
feed either upon raw Flesh, or half boiled. Alvares gives you an Example of the
Governor of Hangot, (Angot-Ras) who entertained Rodoric Limez at his Table
with no other sort of Junkets then such mean Fare, very loathsome to the
Portuguess Ambassador; for instead of Sauce they bring the Gall, which pleases
their vitiated Palates far better then Honey: but what is worse than all this,
they covet as a dainty, the half Concocted Grass and green Herbs which they
find in the Maws of the Beasts which they kill, and greedily devour those
morsels, having first seasoned them with Pepper and Salt, as if the Beasts
better understood what Herbs were most wholesome then themselves: a sort of Diet
which none of our Europeans will envy them. Their Bread they bake upon the
Embers, made in the fashion of thin Pancakes, which they call Apas.

We have already declared, That in some of the Ethiopian Territories, the
People live all upon Grazing; their Flocks and Herds are their only Riches,
they eat their Flesh, and drink their Milk. Thus that King and no King Jacob,
lurking in the recesses of the Rocks and Mountains, always carried his living
Kitchen and Cellar with him, which were only three or four Goats at a time.
Where the Air is temperate, they make excellent Butter and Cheese; but in the
violent hot Countries they want that Food, by reason that the Excessive Heats
hinder the Milk as well from thickning as turning. Also their manner of
Grinding is both very difficult and very laborious, for they put the Grain into
a dish, and rub it round about with a wodden Pestel till it be all bruised;
afterward they sift it, and make Bread of the Flower: this is properly the
Maids and the Women's work, so that you cannot compel the Servants to this sort
of Labor: but the Men wash their leathern, or woollen Clothes if they have any
themselves, for Linen is very scarce; and indeed the general Coverings of
their Nakedness, are the Skins of their own Beasts.

Their Drink is somewhat more dainty, and is the Glory and Consummation of all
their Feasts; for so far they still retain the Custom of many of the Ancients,
that as soon as the Table is cleared, they fall to drinking; having always this
Proverb in their mouths, That it is the usual way to Plant first, and then to
Water: they drink themselves up to a merry Pitch, and till their Tongues run
before their Wit, and never give off till the Drink be all out. They make
excellent Hydromel by reason of their plenty of Honey, which inebriates like
Wine, they call it Tzed; they make it smaller for their Families, mixing six
parts of Wine, with one of Water. Another sort of Liquor they have of their
Fruits; whether an Invention of their own, or that they learnt it from the
Egyptians, they call it Tzal; and it may be said to be a kind of Ale rather
than Beer; as being boiled without Hopps, and therefore it will not keep: it is
white, and sweet, insomuch that our Ale was much more bitter to Gregory's taste.

Their Apparel is no less mean and poor, only the Princes wear Silk; the Clergy
and richer sort make use of Cotton: the poorer sort half-naked, cover
themselves with Skins, that hardly hide their privy Parts; which is also common
among some of the Nobility and Priesthood: which by the Europeans would be
looked upon as a great Scandal, to appear in the Church or the Chancel without
Breeches. However the more noble sort wear a kind of Breeches, or rather
Trouses down to their heels, yet with such a frugality, that the King is not
ashamed of; for from the Waste to the Knees, so far as the cloak covers them,
they are only Linen or else of some courser stuff, and only that which appears
below is of Silk: nor are they concerned though the other be seen as they sit,
or Mount their Horses. The Boys and Girls go stark Naked, which the heat of the
Country may excuse, yet Poverty is the main occasion; till riper Years calls
upon them to hide their Shame; yet then having been so accustomed to go Naked,
they the less regard it. But what they want in decent Habit, they endeavor to
supply in the Ornament of their Hair, for you may safely say, it is a full year
before they Trim and Comb themselves. They not only curl their Hair which makes
it grow the streighter, but also anoint it, not with fragrant Balsoms, or Oils
of Amber or Musk, but with Butter; not considering that they who are forced to
turn their Noses from the stench of their Locks, have not the opportunity to
admire the luster of their Matted Tresses: yet lest an Ornament so slick and
glittering should be rumpl'd or squeezed in the Night, they by means of a most
exquisite Invention preserve it, resting their Necks in a forked stick, that so
their Heads may hang at liberty, preferring their Pride before Pain and Torture.

Nor does their Poverty less appear in their Houses, for they that belong to
the Camp, live all either in Tents, or in Hurts made up of Reeds and Rubbish,
daubed over with Clay or Lome, and covered with Straw or Sedge, which they
leave behind them when they remove their Camp with no damage, or condoling for
the loss of their Tenement, when they can as easily build another at the same
rate. Not much better are their Villages, scarce secure against the Incursions
of the Beasts of Prey. The Cafers like Wild Beasts lie without any other
Curtains or Canopie than that of Heaven, in the open Field, where Night
constrains them to rest. The Kings Houses are of two Fashions, the Longer which
are called Sakala; and the Rounder, which if they be bigger then ordinary, are
called Beta Negus, tho Kings Houses.

They bewail their Dead after a most doleful manner; for no sooner do they hear
of the Death of any great Personage, or any near Friend, but they prostrate
themselves upon the Ground, where they lie knocking and bruising their Heads
against it, with a cruelty very injurious to their Sculls. The Funeral of
Susneus as being most Remarkable, I shall here set down, to show their
solemnities in burying their Kings. The Body, being wrapped up and covered with a
most rich and costly Garment, was carried from Dancaza, where the Camp then
lay, to the Church called Ganeta -- Jesus. Before the Hearse the Banners and
Ensigns were born, not Reversed, as among us, but upright and displayed,
without any Impreses or Motto's, but only adorned with various Colors: the
Drums beat slow and mournfully: after them followed Three of the best Horses
which the King used to Ride, Magnificently caparison'd, as if it had been for
some Triumphal Pomp: next to them followed several of the Noblemens Sons,
carrying the Kings Royal Robes, and Ensigns of Regality, as his Diadem, his
Sword, his Belt, his Spear, his Buckler, etc. taking their turns, and by their
gestures and postures using all means to excite the People to Tears and
Lamentation. To the same End the Queen her self, following at a good distance
wore upon her Head her Husbands particular Diadem; accompanied with her
Daughters and all the Ladies and Virgins of Noble Extraction, all riding upon
Mules, and having their Tresses cut off: after them followed the Kings Son and
Successor, with his Brothers and all the Nobility, some on Horseback, and some
on Foot, in old tattered Habits, instead of Mourning: no Torches or Flambeaus
lighted them along in their Procession: no Tapers burning in the Church, nor
was any thing to be heard from one end to the other of it, but Groans and
Lamentations, till the Body was laid in the Tomb: only some few Monks standing
before the Doors of the Church, read some few of the Psalms of David. Next day
they returned to Dancaza; and then so soon as they came in sight of the place,
another sort of Pomp was ordered. For the Hearse being brought back again
empty, was carried first, by which rode a certain Horseman, adorned with the
Emperors Habit and Robes; and before him rode another upon a Horse richly
caparison'd, and armed with Helmet and Spear: in which manner after they had
proceeded a little way, some certain Bands of Armed Soldiers Marched forth of
the Camp to meet them, testifying their Sorrow, by their bitter Lamentations
and Howlings. Then the Princes of the Kingdom and chiefest Lords of the Court
entering the new Kings Pavillion, renewed their Moans with all expressions of
Sorrow, and concluded the Solemnity at length, with congratulations and
well-wishes for his happy Government, and prosperous success in all his
undertakings.

CHAP. V. Of their Mechanic Arts and Trades.
Very few Handicrafts. The Jews Weavers and Smiths. No Societies of Tradesmen.
Certain Families of Trumpeters. Architecture formerly known, now forgotten;
compared with the Ancient Germans. Churches and Colleges built by the Fathers
of the Society. The Kings Palace Built after the European manner, admired.
They are covetous of Learning and Sciences. What the King of Ethiopia chiefly
wants.

ALL this while, there is nothing of which they stand more in need then of
Handicraft Trades: for thereby they are destitute of so many conveniences of
Human Life, as we abound in by the help of our Arts and Sciences. The Jews are
almost the only persons that employ themselves among them in weaving of Cotton:
they also make the Heads of their Spears and several other pieces of
Workmanship in Iron, for they are excellent Smiths; a sort of Trade otherwise
abhorred by the Habessines; which Gregory confirmed with a smile; saying, That
the silly vulgar people could not endure Smiths, as being a sort of Mortals
that spit fire, and were bred up in Hell. As for other things, every one takes
Care to supply his own wants either by his own or the pains of his Servants,
which it is no hard matter to do; considering how little they have to use. And
for the great Men, they have particular men for all their particular
Employments: therefore there are no Guilds, or Fraternities of Tradesmen among
them, which are so frequent in all our Cities, who have their Bylaws contrived
by themselves, more for the good of themselves, than for the benefit of the
Commonweal: for amongst us, the skilful and unskilful, the just dealer and
unjust, are all alike; as being all under the same Bylaws; and they exercise a
kind of Monopoly of their Trade, so that their fellow Citizens are as it were
Forraigners among them, and compelled to obey their Injunctions. But in
Habessinia, what ever Art any one Professes, that he teaches his Children. The
Trumpeters and Horn-winders are all of the same Families, and have their
particular Country and Mansions by themselves. Formerly Architecture, as it was
in request, so it was an Art well known among them, as is evident by the Ruins
of the City of Axuma, and the Structures of Magnificent Temples cut out of the
Live Stone Rocks: but the Imperial Seat being removed into Amhara, it grew out
of date. For the Kings having deserted Axuma, by reason of their long and
frequent Marches being accustomed to their Camps, rather chose to abide in
Tents and Pavillions. Besides that, after the havocks of the Adelan Wars, and
the Invasions of the Gallans, found that the Caverns and Recesses of their
Inaccessible Mountains were far more safe and convenient and better shelter
then sumptuous Palaces. Therefore what Tacitus has written concerning our
Ancient Germans, may be rightly applied to the Habessines. It is sufficiently
known, that Cities are not inhabited by any of the Habessine People, neither do
they permit contiguous Buildings among them. They place their Villages not as
we do, building our Houses close one to another; but every one encompasses to
himself a space of ground peculiar to his Habitation, whether to prevent the
accidents of Fire, or whether it be their ignorance in the Art of Building.
They neither use Cement or Tiles, the whole composure of their Fabrics, being
all of rude and Course Materials, without the least appearance of Elegancy or
Ornament.

But the Fathers of the Societies, having designed their European Structures
before, carried an Architect with them out of India, and having found out Lime,
unknown to the Habessines for so many Ages, built their Churches and their
Colleges of Stone and Mortar, and encompassed them with High-walls, to the
amazement and dread of the Habessines, lest they should in time be made so many
Impregnable Forts and Castles. But there was nothing which they so much admired
as the Palace which they built for the King; of which the chief Architect was
Peter Pays, both Labourer and Work-master, both Surveyer, Carpenter, and Mason
himself, and Instructor of others. A Work which afterward the People from all
parts of Ethiopia, far and near flock't to see. However that the Habessines
have a great desire to learn all those Arts and Sciences which are necessary
both in Peace and War, is apparent by King David's Letter to John the Third
King of Portugal, Alvar. Tom. 2. Hispan. illustrat. p. 1297.
wherein he desires of the King to send him Printers, Armorers, Cutlers,
Physicians, Chirurgians, Architects, Carpenters, Goldsmiths, Miners,
Bricklayers, and Jewellers. Ernestus also, Duke of Saxony, demanding of
Gregory, What the King of Habessinia most desired out of Europe? made answer,
Tebebat, Arts and Handicraft Trades; well understanding, that neither
Merchandise nor any other Calling could well be followed without the help of
the Workmans Tool.

CHAP. VI. Of their Journies, and Traveling, as also an Account of the ways to
Habessinia.
Pilgrimages now rare. They Travel upon Mules. No Inns or Wagons. Their
Hospitality. The way into Ethiopia dangerous. An account of the several ways to
it.

HOwever in the midst of all this penury of Exotic Arts and Conveniences, the
Habessines of their own accord never care to stir out of their Native Country,
as being ignorant of Foreign Languages and Regions; nor can they distinguish
between the European Nations, which they believe to be all Franks, and their
Religion the Latin Worship; only they can tell the English from the Dutch
Merchants. Neither do they understand the way of Exchange, or keeping
Correspondence: Besides, they are deterred by their own Poverty from
undertaking such dangerous Journeys through so many uncouth Deserts.

Formerly indeed they frequently made their holy Pilgrimages to Jerusalem, and
so back again to Rome, when the Mamalucks were Lords of Egypt; their Government
being more gentle, and the ways then far less dangerous then afterward: but
the Covetousness of the Turks has quite altered the Case, for the Basha's and
Governors of the Islands of the Red Sea, and the upper Egypt, Men for the most
part of base and sordid Condition, having bought their Employments at Court
with Money, without any sense of Law or Equity, so torment and vex all sorts of
Travelers, and suck the Merchants Purses in such manner, though to the utter
impoverishing the Subject and utter decay of Trade, have ruined all Commerce
and Society with those Places: so that the Habessines now very rarely visit
Jerusalem; and more rarely go to abide there, as they were wont. For though
there, they are somewhat more free from the exactions of the Church, yet are
they more oppressed by want; in regard that the Revenues settled by the
Habessines Kings upon Pilgrims in those Parts, are in the hands of the Turks;
so that unless the Alms of the Place which are very sparing, God knows, support
them, hunger presently destroys them.

In their Traveling, they only make use of Mules; neither can any other
Creature perform that kindness to Man as they do, over so many craggie Rocks
and Mountains, where it is impossible for Wagons, Carts, or Coaches to pass.
Their Horses they preserve very charily for War, and Racing. Gregory wondered
when he saw our covered Wains: He called that wherein He and I traveled
together Bet, a House, and wished he had such a one to carry him into Ethiopia.
The Great Men and richer sort, carry all their Domestic Household Stuff along
with them upon their Mules; and where Night over-takes 'em, there they pitch
their Tents, and kindle Fires about them to skare the Wild Beasts. The poorer
sort; when they have occasion to Travel beg upon the Rode; for there is not an
Inn to be seen among them; and for Cooks Shops and Ordinaries, they know as
little what belongs to them. Upon which happened a pleasant accident at Rome.
Where the simple Habessines newly arrived out of the East, being walking in the
Suburbs, were invited by a Cook into his Shop. They believing all Invitations
to be made gratis, at first admired the Hospitallity of the Man; but then
considering, that it might be done out of Curiosity, to see and discourse with
strangers, went into the Shop, and very cheerfully accepted of what was set
before them: but at length, when they were going away, they consulted together
for Phrase and Language to return their thanks to so kind an Host for his
liberal Entertainment, which one among the rest, who best understood the
Language was to deliver to the Cook in the behalf of his Companions. The Cook
having listened a while to their Learned Speech, and not hearing a word of any
Money, without any respect to the smoothness of their Language, Gentlemen, said
he, who pays? The Habessines like Men Astonished made answer, That they came
not into his Shop of their own accord, but by his Invitation, without any
mention made of Expectancy of Payment; and that he, when he set his Wine and
his Meat before them, never bargained for any Money, for that was the very
thing they wanted. But all this would not satisfy the Cook, who forced them to
leave their Cloaks in Pawn, which were afterward redeemed at the Popes
Charity, which made the Courtiers not a little Merry.

However the Habessines themselves are not ignorant of Hospitality, for that in
their Villages they appoint the Chiefest of the Inhabitants for the Relief of
the Poor: and indeed the Exercise of Hospitallity is highly recommended by the
Apostolical Doctrine, for the Relief of poor People driven from their abodes by
the misfortunes of War, or other Calamities. Nor were our Ancestors defective
in their Christian Charity, as having founded several Magnificent Palaces, and
endowed them with ample Revenues, were they but employed according to the
Founders Design.

And here it may be very proper to set down the several ways that lead into
Ethiopia by Land, and where they that go by Sea are to put in for a Landing
Place.

The way from Egypt into Habessinia is most troublesome, difficult, and subject
to many dangers, as well by reason of the Extortions of the Turks, the
Robberies committed by several vagabond Nations, through which they are to
pass, and the unwholesomness of the Climates; though formerly when those
Kingdoms and Satrapies were under a stricter Government, the Passage was safe
enough, and more frequented. Nevertheless there are at this day several Troops
of Merchants, who setting out from Gran Caire, are carried up the Nile against
the Stream as far as Monfallot, and thence Traveling in Caravans, first come
to Sijut, and so in order to the following Towns.

Places. Days Journeys. Wach 3. Meks 2. Scheb 3. Sellim 3. Moschu 5. Dungala 5.

Which is accounted the Metropolis of Nubia: Then they come into the Kingdom of
Sennar under a Mahumetan Prince, now neighbor to the Habessines, and sometimes
also their Enemy, and therefore suspected by the Christians. From Dungala
therefore they Travel to Places Days Journeys. Kshabi 3. Korti 3. Trere 3.
Gerri 1. Helfage 1. Arbatg 3. Sennar. 4.

In Traveling from Wacha to Sennaar, the Merchants staying in many places
about the affairs of their Traffic, are wont to spend Three whole Months,
though it might be done in a far shorter time, without stop or let. From
Sennaar in Fourteen days time they arrive at the Confines of Habessinia. The
Entrance is called Tshelga; but the safest and shortest Cut is through the Red
Sea, so you can agree with the Turks; this Passage is Twofold, for either the
Merchants set out from Caire for Suesso a Port upon the Red Sea, from whence
they set Sail for Gidda another Port upon the same Sea; from thence they set
Sail again for Suaqena and Matzua; or if they cannot so long brook the Sea,
they mount against the Stream from Cairo to Girgea, then by Land they travel to
Gidda in Two days, thence to Alcossir in Four days, where they take Shipping
for Gidda, and so to Suaqena, etc. This way the Metropolitans use to take, as
did Abdelmesih in the Year 1662. with whom it is the safest Traveling, if any
of the Europeans are desirous to visit Abassia. Michael, the Habessinian
Ambassador to the Emperor of the Turks, told Thevenot, That a Man may reach
from Guendra to the Island of Suaqena in a Fortnight; and from hence, in forty
or fifty days to Grand Cairo by Land. So that to Travel from the Royal Camp to
Grand Cairo, will take up three Months. There is another way by Sea, round
about Africa; but then you put in to some Port of Africa, that so you may take
your opportunity to get into the Persian Gulf: Many would prefer this way as
most facile, tho tedious and troublesome had the Habessines any Sea Port at
their Command. They that have business at Moccha in Arabia, have the advantage
of crossing over to Matzua that lies over against it; and so from Arkiko the
Passage lies easy: nor do they amiss that make for Baylur a Sea Port belonging
to the King of Denkala, in Amity with the Habessines; only the Journey by Land
from thence is tedious and very much infested by the Robberies of the Gallans;
though they that can Travel with a good Band of Musketeers need little fear
them.

Zeyla a Port belonging to the Adelans is more Remote, and altogether unsafe,
because of the deadly hatred between them and the Habessines; as two of the
Fathers of the Society found true. For mistaking this Port, for that of Baylur,
they paid for their mistake with the loss of their Heads. The other more
Southern Ports as Melinda, Magodosh, etc. are too far distant from the
Habessines; besides the whole Region is Inhabited with none but wild and savage
People, whose petty Princes are in continual Wars one with another, and
exercise their Fury against all Strangers as Spies, nor are there any Guides to
be found.

CHAP. VII. Of the Merchandise, and Exchange of Merchandise in Habessinia.
The Arabians chiefly, next the Armenians the chief Merchants; all bargains by
Exchange, of Gold, Iron, Salt. What Goods Exported, what Imported.

FRom what has been said, it appears that the Ethiopians are no way addicted
or expert in the Art and Intreagues of Merchandising; for they that will not
Travel into Foreign Parts must yield their gains to others; for gain is to be
sought, not coming of it self. Therefore the Arabians who Inhabit the Ports of
the Red Sea; especially, the Mahumetans scattered over the Kingdom, are the
Chief Merchants in Habessinia, for being of the same Religion they have the
free liberty of all the Ports of the Red Sea: next to these the Armenians, not
much differing in their Form of Worship, from the Abessines, carry the greatest
Trade, as being great Dealers in all parts of the World. They Import sundry
sorts of Commodities, but carry out all the Gold; that it is no wonder the
Ethiopians should be so poor: for neither Gold nor Silver is imported into
their Country, but only an Exchange is made for Indian Wares. And then because
there is no Money coined in Ethiopia, the more silly and ignorant sort of
People, because they come easily by their Gold, as finding it among the Sand,
or at the Roots of Trees, let it go again at low Rates. For if the Merchant
deny it to be good, they exchange it for as much as they can get, never
questioning the Merchants exception. But the Nobility and more cunning sort,
carry a Touchstone always about 'em, with which they try their Gold, then
weigh it out, and pay it by the Ounce. The Ethiopic Vaket, or Ounce amounts, as
Gregory told me, to the value of the Spanish Patacoon, or our Imperial Dollar:
Therefore it is, that Exchange is far more frequent in Habessinia, then buying
and selling; which Exchange is made with Iron sometimes, but chiefly for Salt
hewn out of the Mountains; which in most Countries supplies the Place of Money,
with which you may purchase all things. In the more remote Parts of Ethiopia
you may buy a good Mule with two or three Bricks of that Salt. Formerly Pepper
had the same pre-eminence.

The Commodities Imported, are Babylonian Garments of all sorts, Velvet,
Silken; but chiefly Woollen and Fustian, which the great Men wear instead of
Purple, which at this day they have lost the skill of Dying. Spices, and
especially Pepper they covet to season their insipid Diet. Wares for
Exportation they have few, besides Gold, Skins, Hides, Wax, Honey, and Ivory:
scarce any thing else remarkable. Many more they certainly might have, did the
Habessinian Kings encourage Traffic and Merchandising, and if the Country were
more commodious for Carriage. The best Merchandise in Habessinia, and most
important for the Prince, were a more cultivated Ingenuity of the People;
together with a perfect knowledge of the Latin Language, together with
addition of our Arts, and Handicraft Trades, which would advance the Affairs of
those poor Christians to a more flourishing Estate, and weaken the strength of
the Barbarians.

The Almighty God stir up the Hearts of our Princes, to lend their Assistance
to this Ancient Christian Nation, which might prove so useful to Propagate
Christianity in those Remote Parts of the World; and so glorious to themselves
and their Posterity.

THE END.

