Evagoras, A ROMANCE.

By L. L. Gent.

Licensed, Roger L'Estrange. Nov. 28. 1676.

LONDON, Printed for Rob. Clavel at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard, and
Tho. More at the Maidenhead over against St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet.
1677.

The Preface, To the several humored READERS.
WEre it not more for ornament and fashion-sake than for any thing else, the
Devil-a-bit would I have treated you with an Epistle. For if you once damn a
thing, an Author must bite his Lips, and take it as patiently as a Quaker will
do a Cuff on the Ear. But for those that are modishly complaisant indeed, they
will use Evagoras as some do a Dose of Wine extraordinary, vomit him up again
with unwholsom Dregs brought from their own stomachs, I gad an English Tailor
is better to be endured than an English Author, two such damned unfashionable
Tools, that their Needles and Pens ought not to be suffered in a Commonwealth:
He has not that gaity, briskness, bell humeur which have Messeurs les beaux,
Esprits de France; he is even like an honest Woman worn clear out of esteem,
whilst your outlandish one is a Town Miss with her grand Tou'r displayed in
Curles, her Gold embroidered Bodice, three-quarters threadbare, and her Silk
Pettycoat Laced above -- the foulding of her upper. Booksellers are grown men
of mode too, they scorn any thing of this kind below an Originally in F -- in
the Title Page, with a Made English: which thing considering, discouraged me
before I had half finished this Work, insomuch that I was going to martyr it in
Flames, as judging that I was taking a great deal of pains in doing of nothing

Now for those among us that conceit themselves the only men of Business,
Sense, and Reason, I had almost said Wit too, that drudg and turmoil like
Kitchen-stuff Wenches for Grease, who think there is no ingenuity like creeping
on all four, like an Horse through thick and thin, in great sweat for
Provender; every one of those you may be sure are Critics, not that they can
give any reason why; nor that they will loose so much time as to read a
Romance: but their aim is to brand the Author with folly, for having spent so
many Golden Hours (as they will term them) in vain, however I wish some of them
would spend their busy hours a little better than I have done my vacant ones.
Others there are too, whom we may justly call the absolute Solomon's of the Age,
being a little more judicious than the former, they may think I might have made
choice of a more Grave Subject to treat upon; which I answer, I would have
done, did I not suppose Gravity in youth to be a little inconsistent with
nature, therefore what I here writ, as I am young, was to please my youthful
Fancy; had I been old then would I in the first place have picked out of the
Receipt Book of the family by way of Collection, diverse and sundry Receipts to
cure sore Eyes, stop Rhumes, and prevent coughings in the night, and then I
would have endeavored to invent a new, plain and easy way to walk upon
Crutches without shrinking up the Shoulders, to which should be adjoined a
Treatise condemning, and reproving the Follies of Youth, and a great many orher
things, which wild youth never thinks on, for want of Gravity.

The ensuing Story, as it is rather ancient than modern, is also more
fictitious than real, for I have not tied my self to the humor of any History,
but thought it better to use the scope of mine own Fancy. However I may not
only in one thing presume to say it is in some measure Modern, but that it has
likewise some resemblance of truth, especially in the Story of Theocles, which
is the reason I have been so particular in it, as to relate things which were
they not true might seem of little moment; her lying with her Lover when
disguised in her Name, Habit, and Sex, I thought not fitting to omit, though it
tends not much to the knitting together the Plot; nor her being persuaded when
in Company with some men, to bath with them in a Stream, and her unwillingness
to do it, for fear of revealing her Sex: all which and many more are so true,
that indeed to deal plainly I had no mind to leave them out: thus with the
parties permission, under covert names have I disclosed the Amors of some
particular Friends of mine.

The only reason why I call it ancient, is, because the whole Story is supposed
to have happened in the time of the Heathens, when they Worshipped their several
Gods; and resorted to Oracles. However let me tell you, you will find in it
nothing above the reach of probability, nothing which may seem either to be
impossible, or contradictory to sense, or Nature. I declare this, because I
would not put you in a fright beforehand. For you may think that I have given
you a Brother to Amadis de Gaul, or Knight of the Sun, with some Enchanted
Castle, stuffed full of Elves, Fairies, Scar-Crows, Hobgoblins, Giants, Imps,
and Pigmies. Which had I done, you would have had two or three fits of the Chollick
before you could have read the Story half out.

On EVAGORAS.
THink not my bashful Muse dares hope to raise
Your value higher with her Infant Praise;
Since no judicious Eye need farther look
For the Authors Praises, than in the Author's Book.
But only hopes she may her self commend
By purchasing the title of your friend:
And with officious hasty Zeal, does come
From such a stock of Fame, to borrow some.
A stouter Mars and fairer Venus here
Chastely Embrace, no Lemnian Fetters fear.
Thy Maiden Muse sores not to bombast strains,
Nor with her flagging Wings does sweep the Plains;
But in the middle way does even fly,
Follows the Dedalean Scudery.
When every Reader must this truth confess,
To Praise you more would be to make you less.
As if 'twere needful to defend your Cause,
Whose only value can command Applause.
N. Brady.

To his Worthy and Ingenious Friend the Author of EVAGORAS.
YOur Book I have perused, and find
You Mars and Venus have together joined.
The Sisters Nine agree to your demand;
Minerva too has lent her helping hand
To Increase your Glory, and this Piece Advance
Unto the title of a famed Romance.
This cannot fail, already it is decreed,
Nothing but Honor shall your Works succeed.
Good Language, Wit, rare Fancy, (and what not)
Concluding these with an excelling Plot.
But here is inserted, all combined to raise
To thee a Trophy of-deserved Praise.
In those endeavors thou art soared so high
They they severest Critics power defy,
Grounded on Reason, not on Fantacy:
And for those carping Momas it is their fate
To envy what they cannot imitate.
R. R.

To the Author upon his EVAGORAS.
HEre Love and Honor with the Muses join on purpose for to make up your design:
No Critic sure can your Endeavors blast,
Whose Virgin Laurels do grow green so fast;
Never fear, though Phoebus should write nowadays
They hardly would yield up to him the Bays.
You bravely dare the Age, and do requite
Whatever we do read for, with delight;
We know not whether Love intrudes upon
The private Pleasures of Chaste Hellicon,
Or whether th'Sacred Sisters do approve
Of Joys reciprocal within their Grove;
Their Maiden-Rules think Innocent-Love no Sin,
So Venus and the Muses are of Kin,
They Are equally concerned whilst you describe
Them both so well, beyond the common Tribe
That venture for to write, we cannot ghuess.
Whether your Lines more Love or Wit express:
And do not think your Youth will do you wrong.
Since that the Great Apollo too was young.
You Have done already well, but you think yet
You fail in the Olympic Games of Wit.
Should you refrain of Honor's worth to speak,
Without the which the others seem but weak;
For Love and Wit too for their Gallants are,
And must defended be with all the care
That Heroes ever dare to undertake,
Putting on Courage for their Ladies sake.
If we read on then we may easily find
What fits a Writer's, Lover's, Soldier's, mind;
For Venus and the Muses nothing do
Except they have Mars to hector for them too.
A. J.

Evagoras, A ROMANCE.
IN the famous Island of Cyprus, at that time of the day when the bright
Charioteer of Heaven had almost finished his Career, the Prince Evagoras, with
the Lord Coriander his faithful Friend, walked upon the Golden Sands by the
Seaside, between Paphos and Amathusia, and thus entertained one another with
their past Calamities: My dear Coriander, said Evagoras, what an unfortunate
Prince am I, thus to be deprived of my Kingdom, and to be constrained to live
unlike my self, that I might continue unknown to the Tyrant Aphistamenus? Whom
my Royal Father, in my absence, left at the Helm of Government? Alas, I too
soon in my Travels, heard the fatal news of the King my Fathers death. But you
know Coriander, what a spur it was to make me come homewards, when I heard that
Aphistamenus ruled in my absence; yet when I did come, was it not too late? Had
he not already made most of my Subjects believe I was dead? And with an
impudence not to be paralleled, did he not endeavor to face me out, that I was
not the true Evagoras; (...) that because I resembled him, I would usurp his
Name to raise my self to Kingly Power? Did he not infuse this into most of my
Subjects minds? who were so credulous as to believe him. Did I not strait raise
what Forces I could, to end this tumult, and let them know a true Prince from
an Usurper? Did not the too great multitudes of his men, in the last Battle we
fought, did they not force us to give back with much loss? And you also know,
that when I found my self incapable of raising new Armies, that I caused a
general rumor to be spread, that I was retired to Sicily. And in a disguise,
that may not discover us in our solitary abode here between Paphos and
Amathusia, we taste as much content as we might discontent at Court. Here
(Coriander) is no body to molest us; Ambition is a stranger here; and Honor,
the aim of haughty minds, has here no more than its Name left. Here we are
troubled with no daily fears, nor tow'ring-thoughts to enlarge our Empire, by
making new Conquests. A small spot of ground limits our high desires. But ah
Coriander, I could weep almost when I think, as I have since been informed,
that my Father when I was very young, having designed me to espouse the young
Princess of Sicily; I am almost ready to weep, I say, to think, that that
lovely Flower should fade before it had flourished three years. How agreeable
this alliance would have been to me, had Heavens spared her, its easy to
imagine; for we had been both of an age, and in probability, by the relation of
all that have seen her, she would have been the greatest prodigy of Beauty, as
ever nature framed; how great then would have been my felicity? While they were
thus seriously discoursing of their unhappy fate, Evagoras (who had disguised
his Name as well as Garb for his better concealment, by calling himself
Agenoris, and by giving his Friend Coriander the name of Clidamant) espied at
no small distance from the shore, something floating upon the Sea, which they
could not well descry what to be, till the Wind by little and little drove it
toward the Land; and then they saw it was a man, who by some sinister accident
had been exposed to the fury of that boisterous Element; at length by the help
of the Wind he reached the shore, with both his hands fast clinch'd to a
Casket, which alone seemed to befriend him, in this his desperate condition.
Though he was void of all symptoms of life, yet when these noble Companions had
both taken a more near survey of his person, which was extreme lovely and
beautiful; and after they had spent some time in admiration of him, which they
indeed esteemed worth their wonder, they soon (when they had endeavored by
lifting him up, and holding his head downward, to make the water which he had
swallowed run out of his body) caused him to be conveyed to the place of their
Residence, where he was scarce arrived before some signs of life appeared; and
by degrees he became sensible, insomuch, that at length by the help of some
Cordials wherewith they comforted him, he could walk; and after he had returned
them thanks suitable to the courtisie he received from them, and had been
informed of the Name of the Country wherein he was arrived, he begged the
favor of them, to furnish him with some dry attire to wear, which was ready
for him before he desired it. So leaving him to repose his wearied Limbs on a
Bed which they on purpose designed for him. The evening being most serene and
pleasant, calm and silent, the Sun making preparation to abscond his beautiful
visage behind the Western Hills, and bid adieu to the upper Hemisphere till his
new approach; they went to take a turn in the Grove of Venus, which for delight
and pleasure has not its like in the Universe. The Castle wherein these
illustrious Guests resided, is seated by the side of this Grove, the Trees
whereof are of Myrtle; a place truly ravishing, as well for the extent and
compass of it, as for those comfortable and refreshing shades with which it did
plentifully abound, for the Leaves and fair spreading Branches of the Trees are
naturally so united, and spread so curiously over the Valleys, that you seem to
walk under cheerful green Arbours. I know not whether it may be more the
Masterpiece of Art or Nature, but Art has so subtly imitated Nature, and
Nature has so sweetly played the Artist, that it would be something difficult
to judge; though in either it is truly admirable. In the midst of this Grove is
a stately Mount, as well for its height, as for the Trees which surround it,
which are the same with the rest, but do grow in such manner, that it makes it
in form of a Labyrinth; for in every green Valley you enter, you continue still
ascending till you have reached the top, but with such pretty turnings and
windings, that it is an object both of wonder and pleasure. On the top is a
Lodge encompassed with Cyprus Trees, in manner of a Circle, from whence your Eye
has a full and free prospect over the whole Wood to the Sea; which cannot
choose but be a lively Landscape of Nature. Near this Lodge it was, where Agenoris
and Clidamant were walking, when a Voice exceeding delectable approached their
unprepared Ears, and seemed to proceed from the Lodge, where as yet they were
not arrived; they made a stop, that they might hear it with more freedom, and
never did any thing surprise their Senses in the like manner; it was such
incomparable Vocal Music, that it seemed rather to be caused by some Heavenly
Object, than by any thing that was Earthly. And by reason of the shrilness of
the Voice, they could give no other judgment, but if the party was of Nature's
forming, it could be no other than a Woman; though she seemed to be endued with
most Divine perfections. The more willing attention their Ears gave to it, the
more willing were they to continue a patient Ear. Agenoris appeared to be in
such a rapture, that he imagined his Senses would deprive him of any further
pleasure, by their readiness to forsake him. Such was the supernatural power
and charming efficacy of this Celestial Nimph's Voice. Agenoris was unable to
contain himself, till he had blessed his sight with what he undoubtedly judged
to be most miraculous; concluding her Person to be as Divine as was her Voice:
But yet like one enchanted, he could not move till he had heard her make an end
of what she had just begun; which were the words following, sung beyond
expression.

Song.
NEar the Courts of great Princes we scorn to abide,
Since securely we live, free from Causes of Pride.
In a Sun-shiny Day,
With our Lambs we can play;
And triumphantly sing, by a shady Woods side.
The Ambition we seek, is on Hills and high Rocks,
Where we sit, and we govern our milkey white Flocks.
What some may call Beauty, we often display,
To be kissed by the Sun, in a scorching hot Day.
We do think it a Sin,
A new Conquest to win;
By endeavoring to cherish, what soon flies away.
The Ambition we seek, is on Hills and high Rocks,
Where we sit, and we govern our milkey white Flocks.
Of Intrigues and Amors we have often heard speak;
But to know their true meaning, we yet are to seek.
In pure Innocence we,
With our Sheep do live free,
From all noise, like a Bark that lies safe in a Creek.
The Ambition we, etc.
Scarce was the Song ended, but Agenoris peeped through the Trees, to get a
sight of the Singer; which he did, for her Face was opposite to that part
wherein they were; and there being but a single Row of Trees between, he might
with ease behold her; which when he had done, O Gods, cried he to Clidamant,
see yonder, the sweetest object that ever mortal beheld! what blushing Roses
and lovely Lillies dwell in that amiable Face! Sure she is some Goddess,
descended from the upper Regions, to delight her self in these cooler shades.
It is impossible but she must be more than humane; her Beauty is beyond all
that can be called Common. Ah Clidamant, in that sparkling Eye such Majesty is
seated, as does add a glorious luster to the rest of her numberless number of
perfections. Clidamant, I must, I can find no repose till I am nearer her
person, that from her own Lips I may know, if a Goddess she be, as she really
seems; after what manner she desires to be adored, that I may so do it, as to
render Adoration acceptable to her; to that end, let us endeavor to enter the
Lodge where she now is. Clidamant soon consented to the desire of Agenoris, and
went round about into the Lodge, where they expected to have found this fair
unknown one; but alas it was too late, for before they could come to her, she
was gone from thence by another turning; which when Agenoris saw, he turned
pale, and looked as if he was going to breath out his life. I could wish, said
he to Clidamant, in a faint note, that I had seen her once more, for I find my
desire as yet has found no limits; but why, I cannot tell, except it be to
discover new perfections; though I confess I am too curious in that, because
that what I have already seen, has left an impression deep enough in me.
Should it now turn to Love, in what a miserable condition am I? who knows not
so much as where to find the object loved. I fear I am past cure already; and
now I wish I had not gazed on her so much; and yet methinks I wish I could see
her once more. How restless am I grown of a sudden. Is it the Original of a
growing Passion? or is it only a curious desire of seeing again what Fate has
denied me, that renders me thus impatient? Surely something above the nature of
Curiosity has seized me? or else I should never have found so great an
alteration in me. Methinks the Divine Idea of this pretty Nymph has taken so
sure a dwelling in my mind, that for my life I cannot wipe her out. And
something I feel to sting my heart, which does both pain and delight me; for
sometimes the pleasure is counterballanced by an excessive pain, and the pain
again is eased by a sensible pleasure; and then it is subject to such violent
Pantings, as if it would force a passage through my body. Have you ever been in
Love Clidamant? If you have, pray acquaint me how this passion rules us, and
whether what I now tell you, does bear resemblance with it; for I do not
remember, that ever I felt the like agony before. No, replied Clidamant, I
never yet did love, and I hope I never shall submit to what is so destructive
to repose, and the most noble part of man, the Soul: But by what I have been
informed, by those that have tasted the bitterness of it, I find I have too
much reason to fear, that the sight of this unknown one has (Heaven grant it
has not) seduced your reason; and if so, think of the frailty and inconstancy
of that Sex, think I say of Woman; and if you judge right, which you will if you
place your Reason in the same place it was, you will scorn to love so mean a
thing as Woman, but will aspire to something more Heroic and Noble. What you
call Love, if you summon but your Reason to appear, and make use of your
Judgment to discern the truth, you will find, that you have abused that Name
for something as much inferior to it, as a Peeble to a Diamond. Unkind
Clidamant, said Agenoris; not only unkind, but unjust, thus to profane that
sweet Emblem of Heaven. Had you called them destroyers of poor men, nay had you
called them Murderers, I could better have endured to have heard it, than to
hear them named Frail, Inconstant, and Mean; and thus to abuse a Passion that
is as spotless as Innocence, innocent as Virtue, virtuous as Humility, and as
pure as Chastity it self. And since I find I must cherish the fore that pains
me, my comfort is, that it was occasioned by so splendid and transcendently
beautiful an object. You, replied Clidamant, who have often conversed with the
fairest Ladies in Asia, both at home and abroad; you who in the Field have
smiled when Blood and Death has encompassed you, will you stoop to the soft
Enchantments of a Woman; remember, great Sir, that now it is the worst of times
to submit to Love. You must cast away the Banner of Venus, and bravely put on
that of Mars. Now is the time, because the present state of affairs requires
it. Appear once more in the Field, Sir, and let Aphistamenus see, how much your
great heart disdains him. This, and much more he said, to cause that rising
Flame to cease, that had already possessed him; but it was all unavailable, for
it did but make it burn the fiercer. After they had entertained each other,
with these and the like Discourses for some time, they thought upon the
Stranger, and went strait toward the Castle, and entered both into his Chamber,
whom they found awake; they first made an apology for their long absence from
him, and afterward asked him, if he had found any refreshment since they left
him. His answers were so exceeding courteous and obliging to what they
demanded, that he even charmed Agenoris and Clidamant, with the sweetness of
his behavior; Agenoris had already so great an esteem for him, and Clidamant
thought he saw something so singular in him, that he could not forbear
acquainting him, how desirous he was to be ranked among the number of his
choicest friends; wherefore with much humility he begged the favor, to know how
he should call-what he so dearly esteemed. Sir, replied he, I cannot but be
very sensible how much your noble Friendship exceeds my poor deserts, who am no
other than a Stranger to you both; however since you have conferred the honor
of your Friendship on me, I find my inclination not undisposed to embrace so
great a happiness; unless it be because I know my self as yet not to have
merited it. He seemed to have a special amity for Clidamant, and no small
respect for Agenoris, though his Eye was ever fixed on the first, with a more
than ordinary outward show of tenderness; and in truth it may be said, that
Friendship never appeared to be more sincere than it did afterward between
Clidamant and this pretty Youth. They desired at length of him the knowledge of
his late misfortune; whereto he gave them some satisfaction, though but small;
and they were loath to press him too much, because they perceived by the
measures he used, that he had some most urgent reason to conceal the greatest
part of his adventures from them; notwithstanding he told them, that if they
pleased they might call him by the name of Theocles, and that his Father was
Governor of a Town in the neighboring Island called Creet; and that his
occasions calling him to sail for Lydia, the Ship wherein he was being, driven
upon the Cyprian Coasts by contrary winds and foul weather, it chanced to run
with great violence against a Rock, where it split all to pieces; and that when
he found himself exposed to the merciless Seas, that it was his lucky fate to
lay hold of a small Box, which he believed the Mariners had cast overboard
with many other Goods to lighten the Vessel, and which he now perceived to be
his own; by the aid whereof it appeared that he was carried above the water
toward the shore, where they had found him: And now, said he, how sensible I
am of those courtesies I have received from you, nothing but my own grief can
express, for not knowing in what manner to repay them; and indeed they do far
exceed whatever can be offered. They both of them in the most obliging
language they could, were paying him their acknowledgments for what he had now
related to them, when they judged it time to retire, by reason the night was
pretty well wasted away; and therefore after the usual Ceremonies in such
cases, they left him to his repose to seek their own. But before the Sun had
drunk up the Morning-dew, they arose with an intention to entertain him, and
were scarce entered his Chamber when Agenoris espied his fair Kinswoman Emilia,
already performing the Office he designed to do a person endued with all the
choicest Gifts of Nature. I need not make a particular description of her
Perfections, since it is but guessing what might be thought most worthy of
admiration to judge of her. In the time the Court flourished, she was thought by
all that beheld her, to outshine the brightest Star there. She followed her
Kinsman Agenoris wherever his destiny led him, and was now an Inhabitant with
him in his solitude; as were also two Illustrious Gentlemen who were her
faithful Adorers; they both equally admired her, whereby they forsook the
former friendship in which they lived, and became Rivals, and by consequence
enemies one of another. They neither of them yet had revealed their griefs to
her, but by their sighs and eyes, of which she did ever seem to take little
notice. The name of the one was Periander, who indeed was of an age that could
add no great luster to Love. The other was called Orontus, a person endued with
great Merit, and one whose Youth did seem to argue on his behalf, what the
wasted years of the former seemed to oppose.

Agenoris with his Friend and Kinswoman, after very pleasant discourses of
Gallantry ( Theocles not being in a condition to make up the number to help to
pass away the time) all unanimously agreed to take a walk in the Plain that
fronted the Grove; wherefore all retiring to a private corner of the Chamber
till Theocles was dressed, which was not very long, they went to execute this
their design with very much content and pleasure; only there appeared a small
alteration in the brow of Agenoris ever since he had seen the unknown Lady,
insomuch that he found some difficulty to suit himself to the cheerful humors
of the rest of the company. They had not walked far under the tuition of a
pretty row of Trees, that elevated their ambitious branches over the middle of
the Plain, but they were surprised with a clashing of Swords which they heard
on the other side. Agenoris and Clidamant were presently so curious, as to the
hazard of themselves, to discover who they might be; and to their no small
trouble, they found it was Orontus and Periander, and with ease presently
imagined the original cause of this Combat, and did not unjustly attribute it
to Emilia: they had scarce spied Agenoris, but more out of respect to him, than
a good will to themselves, they desisted fighting. After he had embraced, and
solicitated them to be friends, he brought them to the rest of the company;
where, when he came, he revealed it all to Emilia, who had long suspected what
she then knew. Agenoris therefore conjured her to decide the controversy, since
it was she, and none but she could do it; and withal desired to know of them
whether they would willingly submit to her judgment, since they must not both
expect to be equally loved by her: to which they with much seeming willingness
answered affirmatively. Thereupon Emilia bid Orontus hope, but not so much as
should make him presumptuous: and she desired Periander neither to despair nor
hope, but to content himself with a mean between both. They would have replied
to her speech, which they reckoned dubious, had she not beckned to them to be
silent; and then she proceeded, and desired them to urge her to say no more
upon that subject, and to let their minds rest satisfied with it; and withal
gave them a severe check for quarrelling, and a strict command to abstain from
the same for the future, under the penalty of being utterly banished from her
presence: And she farther said, if you both love me as you pretend you do, you
will be mindful of the last injunction I have laid on you. By their silence
they seemed to acknowledge themselves guilty, and to manifest how much they
dreaded to offend her. Agenoris was something displeased with Emilia, and did
even almost chide her for giving them so little satisfaction: however, what she
had now said, she would neither revoke nor enlarge upon.

When they had fetched two or three turns in the Plain, they deserted it, to
resort again to the Castle, which was their only House of Pleasure; though
Agenoris enjoyed but little in it, since his heart was first filled with Love;
and as the hours, minutes and days increased, so did a deep melancholy in the
spirit of Agenoris, to the great affliction of all his Illustrious Friends, who
never omitted any thing that might tend to his diversion. One day, among
others, to pleasure him, Clidamant, Orontus, and the rest consulted, because
the heat of the weather made it not unseasonable, to go and bath themselves in
a pure Cristal-stream, which was privately seated near the wood, and shaded
with many goodly Sicamore-trees; the very place did seem to invite them to it;
they went and took Theocles with them, who would have excused himself upon
pretense of staying at home to entertain Emilia and some other Ladies of her
Train during their absence; but they would admit of no excuse, because they
desiree Periander to perform that office. Orontus would fain have accompanied
him, if the Company would have permitted him, but they absolutely refused it;
so that he was constrained to give them an unwilling obedience, and to be one
among them. When they were arrived at the place where they were going, they all
began to discharge themselves of their apparel, except Theocles, who would by
no means be persuaded to uncase him; no arguments were strong enough to make
him condescend to it; the water, he said, did not agree with him, and that he
could promise himself no great pleasure by it: However, at length, after many
entreaties, and because he would not be less Complaisant than the rest of the
Company, he willingly pulled off his lower attire of shoes and stockings, but
would go no further; insomuch, that holding up his breeches a little above the
knee, he thus entered the water; and Clidamant, whose eyes were always fixed
upon him, seemed struck with admiratlon at the extreme whiteness of his skin,
which was truly lovely, for no Snow could be compared to it. Sure Theocles,
said he to him smiling, Nature has not framed you with these common
ingredients with which she has the rest of Mankind, for to the color of those
delicate Limbs, the purest Ivory looks black. He blushing replied, that he saw
he could exercise his wit, though it were upon never so mean a subject; I have
seen men (said he) Clidamant, whose skins are far whiter than what you are
pleased to say of mine; however, I find you have only a mind to rally, for you
your self I suppose know, that a white skin is no such rarity in men, though it
be so common in women. Clidamant made no reply, because they were all preparing
to come forth again; which when they were, they rallied upon Theocles, for not
doing as they had done, telling him, that he seemed to have more of the Woman
in him than Man, by reason of his excellent shape, composure and complexion;
and that if he was what those tokens did outwardly intimate, he ought to have
been excused. Theocles replied, he hoped they would not unman him, by cheating
themselves into that unlikely belief; and he who had pulled off the least of
his apparel, was the first that was ready, which when they were all, they
walked to the Castle with much cheerfulness: the Moon beginning to elevate her
hornedface above the Horizon, and from behind a foggy-cloud to dispel the
darkness of the night, every one was glad to seek their repose till the dawning
of the daylight; and no sooner was Aurora adorned in her Scarlet-robe to
beautify the welcome morning, nor no sooner were the little Birds in every
Grove warbling their good-morrows in cheerful notes to the glorious day, but
this Illustrious Family had all forsaken their places of repose; especially
Agenoris, whose love to the Beautiful stranger did every day rather increase
than diminish; and as it is usual for those that are in love to be deprived of
their rest, Agenoris his lovesick mind would afford him none during the whole
night, but forced him to forsake his pillow something early. Periander
likewise, whose discontent increased more and more ever since Emilia gave him,
as he thought, so much cause to despair, and his Rival, Orontus, so much reason
to hope, as by the sense of her last words he imagined, she too plainly
manifested; he departed at that early hour into the Fields and Woods, there to
endeavor, if it were possible, by his complaints, to extract pity from the
Marble-rocks, the hollow Echoes, and the darksome Groves. Orontus, on the
other side, who imagined Periander the happy man in the eye of his Mistress,
and himself the only miserable, was likewise infected with the same malady with
his Rival; and, as is customary for those that are in love, especially such who
imagine themselves the subject of their Mistress's scorn, to seek privacy and
solitariness to utter forth their lamentations, without any other witnesses
than insensible objects: Even so the oppressed Orontus sought the same manner
of solitude as did Periander, and not only so, but, as it happened, they met
together in one and the same place: I need not tell you after what manner they
beheld one another, nor the manner of their salutation, which was cold enough;
but in the end, notwithstanding the Charge given them by their Mistress,
Periander began first with expressions of sweetness to win Orontus to resign up
his right in Emilia; which way of proceeding beging ineffectual, he continued
with threats; but Orontus being one whose Love was too firm to forsake him, and
whose Heart was too courageous to be daunted, told him, he would rather resign
up his Life than his Mistress. Then replied Periander, you must; the place
wherein we are, is private enough, and it is fit that either you should fall or
I, since we cannot both enjoy her; the Prize does well enough merit our
dispute: Therefore Orontus draw, for I am resolved to end this dispute on equal
terms. Orontus at first seemed very unwilling to act so rashly; and withal
asked him, if he had forgot the Command she laid on them. Periander gave little
heed to his words; so jealous was he of loosing so great a Treasure; but swore
by all the Gods, if he did not defend himself, he would then kill him as he
stood; and to make good his word, proceeded to make a Pass at him. Then Orontus
drawing his Sword, cried out, The Gods be Witnesses with what constraint I do
this thing; Dearest Emilia, forgive me. After which words, he took no farther
care, but to stand upon his Guard, and with what dexterity he could to put by
the Passes of his Adversary; and though several opportunities lay open to him
to take his advantage of Periander, yet would he make no use of them, but stood
only upon the defensive part. Periander observed it, and grew the more enraged,
insomuch that redoubling his thrusts, he fell on like Lightning, and making an
Home-pass at Orontus his breast, he skilfully put it by, though not so well, but
that it coming with great force, gave him a slight hurt in the shoulder, which
he soon perceiving, did then begin to deal some thrusts, and presently gave him
another in the left-arm, and immediately closing with him, disarmed him.
Agenoris and Clidamant, who at a distance had seen the latter end of the
Combat, were just come to them to learn the occasion of their Quarrel. And as
there was nothing they would conceal from him, they revealed to him the
occasion of their Combat, after they had counseled them to renew their
friendship with all the winning Arguments imaginable, and had constrained them
to make an unwilling Embrace of each other, Agenoris desired Clidamant to
conduct them to the Castle, and to see their wounds dressed, while he enjoyed
himself in the Fields; they all obeyed, and being gone, Agenoris wandered from
one solitary place to another, entertaining his mind with his ill-destiny in
the sad loss of what he found he so much admired, till at length he approached
the side of a silent Wood, where sitting down upon a Flowry-Bank, by a sweet
musical Stream, he endeavored to give his sorrow vent, by singing what
follows: Song.
HOW wretched is Love,
And how cruel the flame!
When in vain it has strove
Our grief to remove,
And to cure or to sweeten the same.
That Nymph is severe
That for Love gives disdain,
And makes an Heart bear
So great a despair
Till it bursts with its sorrow and pain.
But I suffer more, and in torture remain,
For loving the Nymph I may never see again.


After which he breathed Sighs which were capable of moving Compassion in the
very Trees themselves. Ah! how happy are those, said he, that are slighted by
the Fair-Ones they adore! their Sighs and their Moanings may nourish them with
the hope of causing Compassion to make way for Love: But I lament, and she to
whose Ears it should arrive, is altogether ignorant of my sufferings; naught
but the dumb objects of Woods, Rocks, and Valeys, are witnesses of my
Complaints; sometimes some flattering Echo does seem to send me Comfort, and
as soon deprive me of it again; the little Birds do sometimes lament me, and
then again, as if they took delight to displease me, in malicious Notes of joy,
they seem to make a mock of my miseries; the very leaves too of these Trees, in
their silent whisperings, do likewise seem to conspire against me, and some
objects I meet with that intermingle pleasure with my pain; but those are soon
vanished again, and overswayed by a burdensome grief, to admire her I once saw,
and to be deprived of her sight; I now admire to receive the tender impression
of Love with so much joy? when my eyes were first made happy with her sight,
and to cherish the wound with that eagerness as I then did, and do still, and
to be thus bereft of the only pleasure I hoped to enjoy of her presence. Unkind
Fates! why did you let me see her, if I must no more? Ye Gods, be favorable to
me in my search of her: and Love, be thou my fortunate Guide; no Grove nor
Thicket, no wild-Forest, nor craggy-Mountain will I leave unsearched till I
have found her I love, and, were it possible, I would search even in Paradise
it self, a place not unlikely to harbor a Composition so Celestial; could I
but see her once more, though she would not admit a Cure, her Pity would at
least lessen my sufferings, and her Presence would make the Pain more pleasing:
In saying this, he advanced some steps upon the Green that lay before the Wood,
where looking toward his left hand, upon a lively and flowery rising of the
ground, he espied a Flock of Sheep nibbing on the grass, and on the top of all,
under the fair spreading-branches of a comely Tree, still approaching toward
that place, he might discern one attired like a Shepherdess, with a Crook in
her hand, in long dishevelled Locks, and in a careless Garb, though not so
careless, but the Party it enclosed did make it appear to be very graceful; her
Apparel was more plain than rich, yet not so plain, but Majesty seemed
inthroned in what was most plain; her Head was graced with an hat, or rather
her Head graced the Hat, which, though the materials wherewith it was composed
were but homely straw, that hindered it not from being extreme pretty. No sooner
had Agenoris with great astonishment viewed these things at an indifferent
distance, but he heard the noise of an Horn as from behind the Wood, and
immediately there presented to his sight a furious wild-Boar, which was running
with much celerity directly toward the place where he saw the Shepherdess; he,
without much consultation with his thoughts, drew his Sword, and made what have
he could after it, he came just as he had rent her Vesture, and was going to
devour that fair One, where Agenoris joining Courage to his dexterity, made it
appear, that if Nature had rendered him knowing in the one, Art had not made him
less experienced in the other; for approaching the Boar, and making two Passes
at him, he run him in at his Shoulder, and it came out again at his Neck, upon
which he fell down; but the Furious Monster feeling himself wounded, and, as if
he had gathered new strength in his fall, gets up again, and leaps at his
Adversary, and now it seemed as though Agenoris must expect inevitable ruin by
a lamentable death; the Pretty Shepherdess trembled, and looked pale for fear
of this Stranger, lest his too great Courage should undo him: But Agenoris, who
thinks no Laurels greener than those that are reaped in the midst of dangers,
stands firm upon his Guard against his furious Attacks, and taking his time,
runs him in again in the Flanck, insomuch that at length, in an heavy groan,
his life left him; then was it that laying down his Bloody Sword, he approached
the Nymph; but, good God, how was he astonished! how great was his joy when he
knew her to be that Fair One that first assaulted his heart in the Wood, and
though she had appeared most excellently Beautiful there, yet here she appeared
so incomparable Fair, that she did even lay a new Siege to the place that was
already surrendered; in the Grove he thought he saw but one Beauty, but by the
perfect survey his eyes now made, he perceived thousands in one face, and in
the same moment his eyes making a more near enquiry, discovered something in
her that made a show of Greatness and Majesty, and therefore with a most
Reverend Zeal he Accosted her in these words;

Beauteous Nymph, how careful the Gods are of what is most Heavenly, they
having made me the happy Instrument of protecting you from the fury of this
Monster, does witness so great a wonder of Beauty so near a resemblance, of
what is most Divine, could never be destined to be a Prey to that rude Animal:
The Gods themselves, had they not used me, would doubtless by some more secret
Power have restrained his fury; nay, had the Monster himself beheld your
Charms, he would gently have lain down, and fawned upon what he purposed to
have destroyed.

Most Noble Sir, replied the Shepherdess, I must confess my Thanks are too poor
a Recompense for so large a Service, yet, as it is not in the Sphere of my
power to make a Return suitable to the Act: I hope you will accept of them as
the best, and as the greatest Return I can make. But after you have thus been
the Protector of a poor Maids life, be pleased to neglect those Praises, which
are due to none but Persons of Honorable Extraction, but not to me, alas;
whose mean Birth dare not claim them. If your eye makes you think me Fair, as
your tongue expresses, believe it to be deluded; for the knowledge of my self
teaches me the contrary. The Sun (replied Agenoris) that gives light to, and
beholds all the objects of Nature, yet can it not behold it self: Even so,
Rare Virgin, the Gods were not the Authors of that lovely Face to make it
admire it self, but to raise admiration in others; and what though you are
pleased to think your Birth mean, the greatness of your Soul, and the Charms
that dwell in that Face, do say your Birth is more than Noble. Much more his
passion caused his lips to utter, to which she as readily replied; and among
many other things he demanded of her, he presumed to enquire whether she was
Born in this Island, to which she answered affirmatively; and whether her
Parents were alive, and how he might call them? Mother (said she) I have none,
for my Fate has deprived me of her; but my Father is a poor Shepherd of this
Country, and lives in a small Cottage on the backside of the Wood, where I am
told I was Born. My Father is called Melintus, and I am known among the
Shepherds and Shepherdesses of this Island by the Name of Mellissa. Agenoris
paid her his thanks with much submission, for the satisfaction she had given
him, and then with much discretion revealed his passion to her; and if it may
be said that ever any Virgins heart was inclined to pity at the recital of a
Lovers flame, surely hers was: He gave her a full relation of his having seen
her in the Wood, and how he designed to come to the speech of her, and touching
the miserable condition he has remained in ever since, for not knowing where
to find her. To all which she seemed to lissen with much attention; and in
truth it may be said, the present joy of Agenoris, to see her heart was not of
Marble, made him be forgetful of his past afflictions: And now (said he to her)
since Fortune has been so kind to let me enjoy that happiness I least
expected, I hope you will not kill me, but let me live in your esteem. Here
Mellissa interrupted him, saying, What can you expect, Sir, from a Shepherds
Daughter? to be your Bride will dishonor you; and though I have no Riches, I
have so great an esteem for Virtue, that I Will rather lose my Life than taint my
Reputation; in retaining which, I enjoy a Wealth not to be exchanged for that
of Croesus; and though Honor is thought to inhabit nowhere but in Princes
Palaces, yet is there a sort of Honor in the Cottages of Shepherds, (though
but an homely Dwelling, you will say, for Honor;) but such is it, that Virtue
her self is ever cherishing and defending it from false allurements, and unjust
pretenses. You say you love me, Sir, do not endeavor to cheat my Innocence,
for if it be as you say, you do love me for some end or other: If you design to
make me your Bride, your proceeding to me thereby will seem just, but to you
dishonorable, because of my mean condition. If your design be to abuse my
Chastity, Virtue, that glorious Guard of Honor, bids me tell you, that you
must never dare to see me more. The Gods themselves, replied Agenoris, are
witnesses that my flame is too pure to wrong so much Innocence, and too
innocent to abuse so much Virtue: I should wrong Heaven it self, were I but
guilty of such an unjust thought! I only beg you would receive an unfeigned
Heart that loves you, and that you would pronounce me in some measure either
miserable or happy! Pity, pity this poor Heart that lives only by you, and
seeks no other dwelling but your dear Breast. Alas! replied Mellissa, suppose I
should love you? and indeed I find I have little reason not to esteem you; I I
should love you too well to undo a Person of your Worth. However, live Sir, and
live in my esteem, but never live to enjoy a miserable Maid like me; except
Fortune had raised me to a degree of Bliss, whereby I might have deserved you.
Ah cruel Mellissa! (said he) you give Agenoris life by commanding him to live,
and in your esteem; yet seem to kill him again by that heartbreaking word
[never!] he must never enjoy thee! Alas! thou art too deserving for me already,
thou art rich enough in natural Riches; thou art able to make Princes happy!
Adorable Mellissa! dart down then a Ray of Comfort upon thy comfortless
Agenoris, and revive his Heart with the warmth of thy Love, which must
otherwise break. If Modesty be a Virtue, said Mellissa, so is likewise
Gratitude; if it be Immodesty then to grant a modest Requital to him that has
hazarded his own Life to save mine, I may then be said to abuse that
commendable Virtue: but since the World does not use such unjust constructions,
I will pass a grant upon what you ask me. It is Love, you say; come, you have
it, Agenoris; and though a Fort does seldom surrender at the first Artack, yet
to you, Agenoris, you see it does; the Service you even now did, may make me
excusable, and does make me sensible of what I owe to a Person like you: but
though you have my Love, my cruel Fate will not permit me to give you that
Requital you may merit, and as I could wish; for as you seem to be a Person of
Honor, I am, you see, but a poor, gentle, harmless Shepherdess, one that would
not willingly wrong her self, nor have any body wronged by her; especially you,
who are my Life's Preserver: therefore if ever you loved to grant the desire of
her you say you love, let me entreat you not to endeavor the hastening to your
dishonor, by the enjoyment of miserable Me, but rest contented with the
knowledge that I love you; yet if Fortune should change her Face toward me,
which seems not likely, on lawful and honorable terms make me yours; if not,
think it never can be; yet this consolation I will afford you, Agenoris, that
no body shall reap what by you was not obtained, and for your sake I Will die as
innocent as I was born. Since, said Agenoris, your Decree is such, I must
submit, and will live, if it be but to gaze upon those sparkling Eyes, and in
gazing I Will enjoy what I so dearly love. That sweet concordance of Colors in
that lovely Face does almost seem to ask me, if desire is not limited;
therefore what can be more desirable than to behold a sight so glorious? Much
Discourse to the same effect, which was very charming and passionate, passed
between them; till being inquisitive how and where he might enjoy the happiness
he now did, once more? she gave him to understand, that in the same place where
she now was, he might every pleasant Evening find her attending on her Flocks;
and that as his Birth seemed honorable, she hoped his Actions would speak him
no less, and therefore should not be against that freedom he desired, since he
looked like one who would make no ill use of it. After he had paid her his
Devoirs for the good opinion she seemed to have of him, he for that time took
his leave of her, but with an intent to renew his Addresses to her the next
day, which he accordingly did, taking Clidamant with him; and when they came,
they found that Melintus her Father was with her, who showed them a Respect
almost equal to what their Qualities required: and having been informed by
Mellissa how the brave Agenoris had been the Protector of her Life, it is not
to be imagined with what kindness they were received by Melintus, which was not
ill rerurned by Agenoris; who after some indifferent Discourse with him, did
earnestly solicit him and his Daughter, whom he highly respected, to be his
beloved Guests, and to forsake their Sheep to accompany him to the Castle,
where he resided: Many Arguments, as well Clidamant as Agenoris used, before
they could prevail with them to leave that sort of life wherein they found so
much content: But at length, what by the force of very rich Presents that they
presented to Melintus, and offered to Mellissa, though she would except of
none; and what by most tender expressions of Love and Good Will, they in the
end persuaded him and his Daughter to accept of a Lodging far different from
what she then had: so giving the Charge of his Sheep to another Swain, they
guided their steps to their place of Habitation; and having acquainted his
other Guests of those he had newly received, who did all of them extremely
admire the Beauty of Mellissa, and did not unjustly imagine that she designed
more than to be a Shepherdess, and thereupon gave her a Reception suitable to
her Merit, and not to what her Quality seemed to speak her; and a Chamber was
provided for her, with a Maid to attend on her Person, to the great joy and
comfort of Melintus, who knevv that Agenoris had an heart full of Honor, and
was not so abject as to do her any violence; he likewise knevv his Daughter's
to be proof against all enticements, and therefore was not a little glad of
the occasion; and though the Presents hehad given him by Agenoris were
sufficient to make him forsake the Title of a Shepherd, yet the peace and
quietness he found in that life, would not permit him to leave the svveetness
of it; insomuch, that though he had changed his Cottage for a sort of Palace,
he would still each day frequent the Plains, as would also Mellissa, to guard
the harmless Lambs: Agenoris himself too, for her sake, would not scruple to
take up the Sheephook to attend on her; where, as he sat on the green Hillocks
by her side, he would divert her with the Stories of unhappy Lovers, and
pulling out his Flute, would beguile the time with its Melody, as she would
with her vvell-tuned Voice. He would never permit her to resort alone to the
Plains, neither would he be ever satisfied but when he was in her presence:
and on the other side it was evident that she found not his passion
displeasing to her, nor was she incapable of receiving the svveet sting of
Love; how agreeable were his Sighs to her, and how charming the expressions
of his Love! But let us leave these avvhile, to endeavor to ease our other
Lovers; and first let us learn the immediate cause of their several sufferings,
which could not be with more case guessed at, than by an Adventure vuhich
happened one day, to the general amazement of all the Company: It was after
Agenoris was returned from attending on his Mellissa in the Plains, when
being entered the Castle, and into a lovver Room, where Emilia, Theocles, and
others of the Company were, he saw Clidamant with much eagerness, as the
Company all imagined, Courting of the Fair Emilla; while Theocles walked
chafingly about the Room, as though something had given him cause of offense.
Agenoris addressed himself to him, and perceiving him to look discontentedly,
asked him the cause? Ah Agenoris! said he, if ever you did bear any Respect to
my Friend Clidamant, or me; or if ever you knew what true Friendship was, I
conjure you by those Tears which you see trickle down my Cheeks, by whatever
you hope for of Happiness, and by the Love you bear to Clidamant, to desire him
to desist from Courting of that Lady; something I could tell you, that might
perhaps move your heart to do the thing I desire of you, if what I have already
said would not; but several Reasons oblige me to conceal it, till such time as
it makes a voluntary appearance of it self; besides, I have made an Oath not to
do it: by that strong Argument then, though unknown to you, and whatever it be,
let me implore of you to fulfill my will in this. You know, I suppose, with what
sincerity Emilia is already Adored by the two Rivals, Orontus and Periander;
suffer not Clidamant then to obstruct their Progress, for I question not but
she may one day smile on one of them; consider then seriously of what I say,
and without asking me any other Reasons than what I have told you, for my being
thus urgent in this Affair; use your uttermost power to put a stay to his
proceedings. Agenoris was something surprised at this Discourse, and told him,
that if his desire aimed at his Friends good Fortune, he should rot contemn the
present Actings of Clidamant, since the Lady he seemed to love, was both Fair,
Honorable, and Young; for which Reason he should rather rejoice at it, than
seem to be confused and troubled. O never! never propose this thing to me, said
Theocles, if you do you kill me! Agenoris then seeing him so eager in his
entreaty, though he was not able to discern the occasion of it, promised him to
make use of all the power he had to prevent it; and withal. desired him to rest
satisfied till he had effected it. Theocles had no sooner paid him his
Acknowledgments for the promise he had now made him: but Agenoris left him, and
went strait toward Clidamant and Emilia, to the end he might break off their
Discourse, if it were of Love, as he could think no otherwise: after then some
indifferent Discourses with them both awhile, he took Clidamant aside, who was
ever his trusty Confident, to ease his distressed mind, by entertaining him
concerning his Beloved Shepherdess. Ah Clidamant! (said he) had you but seen
and heard with what a Grace she pronounced that which must be the cause of my
future Hope, or present Despair, your surprizal would have been great; and then
gave him to understand what progress he thought he had made in that Fair-One's
heart; and Clidamant could not choose but contribute with him in his joy,
though for his own part he found but little cause; for having received a wound
from the Eyes of the Fair Emilia, and imploring her relief, her Rigor had
almost made him desperate; for in stead of finding Love, he found her Hate:
Agenoris then dissuaded him from loving Emilia, and showed him how unjust it
was to seek to deprive Orontus and Periander of that Happiness they laid claim
to before him, for which they but now would have sacrificed eath others Lives:
All his Arguments were in vain; it was enough to know he loved to apprehend he
was obstinate; for which cause Agenoris said not much more to him, but induced
him to accompany him to see the two Rivals wounds, which were not very
considerable; and afterward, because it was late, to their several Apartments,
and so to their rest. But when daylight had conquered darkness, every body
with much willingness left their Beds, especially Orontus and Periander, whose
wounds being pretty well again, were both of them upon going to give a Visit to
Emilia; but with what face to do it, since they had both been regardless of her
last Commands, they knew not: However, Orontus imagined himself to be less
Criminal than his Rival, because he was provoked to do what he did in defense
of himself; with this assurance then, though seized with a certain awful fear
of some just punishment from her, for what she thought him guilty, he saw her
first, and in humble kneeling told her, that he was come to sue a Pardon of
her, for a thing, which though in her Eyes might make him seem altogether
Criminal, yet when she should know what provocation occasioned it, and the
necessity he was in either to die upon the point of his Rival's Sword, or to
use his own in defense of that Life he was every minute ready to sacrifice for
her sake, he hoped she would in some measure lessen the severity of that Decree
he saw she was every moment ready to pronounce against him; and though this
last Action of his might bear the outward form of negligence, yet was his Will
altogether obedience. But, Madam, said he, (rising up) if what I have done does
make me black with guilt before you, let me receive my punishment from your
Fair Hands: when he had said this, he opened his Breast, drew his Sword, and
offering it to her, said, here Madam, give your disobedient Servant that which
he has justly deserved, and let him be blessed with Death from your Fair Self,
which will be so welcome a Favor, that in dying he shall think you have been
kind, because you will then deprive him of a Life which would have been worser
than ten thousand Deaths to me, should I have lived in your Hate! Here Madam,
(proceeded he, in opening his Broa^^ wider) let out this guilty blood! strike,
Madam and strike home! But she only turning her Face aside, and bidding him put
up his Sword, told him, no; that though the Crime of which he was guilty, had
given her a just cause of offense, yet was not her aim at his Life; for you may
live, said she in a saint note, -- but not to love me; you may find enough,
whose Deserts and Beauties are far more powerful to inspire Love, than any
thing you can see in me. I shall not banish you my sight for what you have
done, because I see something in your Face that speaks a silent penetence; but
yet I must conjure you never to speak more of Love to me, one word of it
hereafter condemns you to an everlasting Exile. She had scarce pronounced this
heavy Sentence on poor Orontus, but Periander entered, and at her Feet was going
to speak his submissions, when she prevented him, in saying, she wondered how he
dare intrude himself into her Presence after what he had done! adding withal,
that it was in vain for him to speak, for she would hear nothing he should
alledg in his Vindication: Madam, said he, trembling, I come not here to plead
Innocence, but like a Prisoner at the Bar, I wait for that punishment I merit:
and, Fair Judge, as it is you only that must pronounce the Sentence, it is you
only that must inflict the severity of your Indignation. Since it is so,
Periander, said she, I charge you never to see me more! and without one word
more of Reply, rising up from the ground, making a low Bow with the Tears in
his Eyes, and a down-east Look; Madam, said he, you shall be obeyed, and
Farewell for ever! yet let not my Memory be odious to you, though my Person be:
so saying no more, he went dejectedly out of the Room, followed by Orontus, and
instantly, with all imaginable privacy, he departed from the Castle, to the no
small wonder of Agenoris and Clidamant when they missed him; they both had a
particular kindness for him, and were therefore the more afflicted at his
unexpected absence: that he would betray them to the Tyrant, they had too long
experienced his Fidelity to judge so ill of him; but that which most perplexed
them, was, the knowing themselves ignorant of the cause of his departure.
Orontus, who though he had not so much cause to despair as Periander, yet was
his heart seized with a deep sorrow, because she had forbid him the very naming
of Love to her; and what she would not hear him name, he knew she would less
suffer in him; how to ease his heart of this confused grief, he knew not, his
Reason was too far gone to be recalled to subdue his Passion, and banish her
from his mind: many thoughts disturbed his Fancy, which would make him
sometimes resolved to do one thing, whilst others again did as soon cancel that
resolution to introduce one more new. By these means he would endeavor a
prevention of despair, till one thought seeming of more force than the rest,
gave him some hope and encouragement to put it in execution: with this in his
mind then, he found out Theocles, to whom he related how ill his Mistress
requited his Love, likewise telling him, that never any served a Lady so cruel
and rigorous! Theocles extremely lamented his misfortune, and with all the
tender words a compassionate heart is able to manifest on such an occasion, did
thoroughly express his inward sorrow; for which Orontus gave him thanks, and
told him, that since he did endeavor to comfort him in his distress, he hoped
he would use his uttermost power to lift him out of that miserable Gulf in
which her cruelty had unhappily cast him, and that then he should not be
altogether overcome with that despair, which will otherwise put an end to his
Lise; and that if he would grant what he was going to demand of him, it would
be so great a comfort to his restless thoughts, and so great a joy to his heavy
heart, that it would infuse new life in him! Theocles answered him, that he
might be sure he would not be backward to perform any service he should command
him, more especially what tended to his satisfaction and welfare; and therefore
desired him to give him to understand what it was he requested? and that if he
was capable of doing it, his endeavor therein should manifest the truth of his
Friendship. Then was it that Orontus told him, in a manner which did plainly
demonstrate his inward grief, that his only Request to him was, to find out
Emilia, and to use all the means and expressions that Love can dictate to her,
to induce her to lessen her Severity toward him; and, if it were possible, to
persuade her to revoke that rigid Sentence. Theocles bid him be assured that he
would compass what he desired of him, and to expect good news in a short time;
for he would hunt this Cruel-Fair so often, and would use such means, that if
nothing else would, his importunities alone should make her submit to what
tended to the contentment of his mind. It was not to be feared that Theocles
would in the least decline from performing what he had promised him: his
aversion being so great to see Clidamant Court her, it is to be imagined that he
was glad of the opportunity, and therefore without any farther delay he went to
make good his word.

There happened one day an Adventure which we must not here omit, no less strange
than pleasant, and occasioned by Agenoris, who had left his own Chamber, and
nesigned it to Mellissa the first night of her Arrival; and though Clidamant
had been his former Bedfellow, yet being at this time desirous to repose alone,
that he might enjoy himself and his thoughts more freely, he entreated
Clidamant to lie with Theocles, who had hitherto lain by himself: Clidamant
went immediately to him to let him know who was to be his Night-Companion;
which when Theocles heard, he seemed to startle, and his Color, like the
ebbing and flowing of the Tide, ascended into his Face, and vanished away again
two or three times, as if it had proceeded both from shame and anger; but for
what it is unknown: However, his present surprizal being something over, he
faintly told Clidamant, that he was but a troublesome Bedfellow, and that he
was given so to tumble in the night, that he was certain he could enjoy no
Repose with him: but all his Reasons were misunderstood by Clidamant, who would
lie with him notwithstanding his refusal. Theocles seeing he could not prevail
with him, and that he would give no Ear to his excuses, seemed very much
perplexed; and among the rest of the confused Speeches he uttered; Well, (said
he) Clidamant, will you admit of no denial then? if not, know that I am -- Here
he made a pause, as if he was thinking of what he was going to say: But (said
Clidamant to him) what are you, Theocles, content, -- answered he? To do what,
replied Clidamant? not to lie, said Theocles, in some kind of confusion, and
making another pause; with me, said Clidamant; without you, said Theocles, --
and with a seeming willingness he lay with him, and they went to Bed together
at the same time that the rest of the Family retired, who did all enjoy their
Repose in a plentiful manner, except Orontus, whose unkind usage from Emilia
would not permit him to close his eyes; he was therefore the first that got up
in the morning, and was very curious to know how Theocles would succeed in what
he had promised him; Clidamant did second him, and had been as restless as he,
by reason Emilia was as great a torment to him as she had been to the other:
Being dressed, and in a readiness to quit the Chamber, he perceived Theocles to
be awake, because the light that came from the Window darted upon the Bed, he
savv it being pretty broad, that he was crept as far toward the other side
as he could possible be; it is no great sign (said Clidamant to him) that you
are a troublesome Bedfellow, as you told me last night; for at that distance
which I am certain you lay from me all night, you could not well be as you
said; and of all the men that I have lain with, never did I meet with one that
lay more still and quiet than your self; and to speak the truth, I almost
doubted at midnight whether I had you in bed with me or no; for though I
endeavored to give my self that satisfaction by feeling for you under the
Bed-clothes, yet could I not reap it, for you were not to be found. In saying
this, and without staying for his Reply, which he was going to make, he gave
him the Good Morrow, and then went forth of the Room to find Agenoris, who had
been up very early to walk out some-whether with his Dear Mellissa, as it was
supposed, to divert themselves, they had appointed it the foregoing night.
Agenoris and Clidamant resorted to her Chamber, and knocking at the door, to
demand of the Maid that was set to wait upon her, permission of her Mistress to
visit her, she prevented them by coming to the door her self to bid them enter,
and after the usual Ceremonies on such occasions, they were going to do what
was designed by them, and to walk out in the fresh Air; but because they would
do it privately, they urged Clidamant to stay behind, who would otherwise have
waited on them; they told him that in two hours time they hoped to return,
because the heat of the day would be unpleasant to them, that Paphos should
limit their intended Walk. Agenoris would have taken the Coach, had not
Mellissa pressed him to the contrary, because she imagined it would be more
delightful for them to go on Foot, and likewise considering the little way they
had to go. Agenoris believed it would be unnecessary to take any of his
Attendance with them; the Morning was fair, and so early was it, that the Sun
had not as yet given them a smiling Salutation by his appearance; they departed
then, and not so much as a Page with them, only Agenoris carried with him a
small Casket full of the richest Jewels he had, with an intent to Present it
and them to his Mellissa: They had not been long gone before all the Family had
with much eagerness quitted their Beds, and with much earnestness made their
enquiries after Agenoris and Mellissa's welfare, more especially Emilia, who
was disturbed with a dream that did make her Repose altogether bitter and
unpleasant, imagining it to be a Portent of some unlucky Adventure that might
happen upon those whom it most concerned, and could not refrain from being
struck with a sudden grief; the cause whereof she related to Clidamant, who
took but little notice of it, and made answer, that Dreams were but imaginary
Realities, occasioned by the rising of Vapors into the Head, when Sleep does
sway as Emperor of the Night; but when we wake we find those Images all vanish,
and then we come to know that it is only the continual, employment of the
unwearied Spirits, which are too Aetherial to sleep like the Body, that stamps
those Images into our minds. It was reported of a man, Fair Emilia, said he,
who being fastened in Irons, and in a strong Prison, yet when he slept would his
flattering Dreams create him King over many Rich Nations, thereby giving him as
well an universal Power as Liberty, yet when he waked, those joys were all
vanished, and he found himself still in Fetters. The Miser likewise dreams he
finds heaps of Treasures, continues very unsatisfied when he wakes, and then
comes to know that it was but his deluded Fancy. I my self, Charming Emilia,
have often dreamed I have seen you smile on me! but alas, I could say it was
but a Dream too. Judge then whether you may have any cause to fear, from any
thing you have dteamed this night? I know not, replied Emilia, but I am in a
strange apprehension of something: If the Company will be pleased to give
attention, they shall hear the Original cause of that which occasions my
trouble: the Company who were present entreated her to do as she said, which
she very obligingly did, in these words; If Agenoris and Mellissa are well,
said she, it is a great folly to judge a Dream ominous, but if they are not, I
have much reason to imagine the contrary, by this Nights Vision; for I was no
sooner asleep, but Agenoris, Mellissa, and my self, methought, were walking in
a pleasant Green-Meadow by the Seaside, where leaving them to go another way,
when I was at a certain distance from them, chancing to look behind me, I
perceived about a dozen Tigers that issued out of a dark Den hard-by, who ran
with open-mouth upon them to destroy them; and fancying that I had heard
Mellissa give a grievous shrick, the fright of it waked me! Now the Gods grant,
said she, that no harm may betide them. If, said Theocles, I were curious to
regard Dreams, I might perhaps be equally concerned with you; for I likewise
dreamed that Agenoris and Mellissa were both taken by Aphistaminus the Usurper
of this Island; and that imagining Agenoris to be Evagoras, the true Heir to
this Crown, who is reported to be gone to Sicily, he laid him in a dark
Dungeon, and had loaded him with as many Chains as his Body could well bear,
and that he had kept Mellissa in a private Chamber with an intent to Ravish
her: But just as I was about dreaming that he was giving order to a Ruffian to
murder him, I awaked. Clidamant's Color changed extremely while he was
relating this Dream, and by his eyes might be discerned some inward perplexity;
he went presently to Orontus and Emilia, and told them whispering, that he
could not choose but be something moved at it; if it were only that Theocles,
who knew him not to be a Prince, should dream of him as one, and should dream
that he was made a Prey to Aphistaminus, who would doubtless make him suffer
more than his Dream specified, could he find him: And now was it that Clidamant
repented that the Prince did not leave the Kingdom to have avoided these
dangers; he could not rest till he had sent some of his Servants to make
enquiry after him, for now more than two hours were slid away since he first
departed. He immediately went and ordered some to go toward Paphos, some to
the sood, and some to the Seaside. And while Clidamant was thus employed,
Theocles being desirous to perform what he had promised to Orontus, found out
Emilia to Accost her on his behalf: I have a Suit to you, Madam, said he, what
is it, Theocles? answered she. Madam, said he, I dare not let it arrive to your
knowledge, except you will first promise to hear it savourably, and afterward
to grant it; it is no trifle, Madam, said he, since it concerns life, What is it
you demand? said she; let me know on whose behalf you plead? if what you ask of
me does not exceed the Rules of Civility and Honor, perhaps I shall not refuse
what you desire. Then, Madam, replied he, Mercy conducing much to your Honor,
I hope you will now let it shine as brightly among the rest of your
Perfections, and appear with as glorious a Luster as does a Diamond among a
number of other precious Stones; that you may save the Life of miserable
Orontus, lessen then your severity: Periander is no more to be heard of, you
have condemned him to Exile; come, you must love Orontus, I must not be denied,
nay, I told him I would not be denied; pray smile upon him, and do not wish him
harm. I wish him none (said she) Theocles, with a sigh, but I must not love
him, nay, I cannot; since you can plead so well for your Friend, (said she
smiling,) what a becoming Orator would you be for your self, if you had
occasion? but pray desist from speaking any more in his behalf, for fear my
weakness should make me submit not to deny you. Ah Madam! added he, did you but
know how sincere his Love is! did you but know how little he enjoys himself!
and did you but know what deep-fetched sighs he breaths for your sake,
certainly your Pity would introduce Love! Pity him I do, (replied she,
blushing,) because I cannot love him; and that is all he may hope for from me;
yet tell him I would have him live. She spoke this in a kind of distracted
manner, and with a faultering speech, and a look extremely wild; and fain would
she have revoked her words, but that she thought it too late, because they were
already uttered. Theocles rejoiced exceedingly for having obtained thus much of
her on his Friend's part, and therefore with many thanks to her for the same,
he left her, to carry the poor Lover the cheerful News; which he had no sooner
told him, but it seemed to him almost incredible. And does Emilia bid me live!
said he; can she then pity her languishing Lover? As Storms at Sea do for the
present make the despairing Seamen prepare for unwelcome Death, yet when by
some miraculous Fate the roaring Winds suddenly cease, and the briny Ocean does
once again wear a smiling Calm, it does in such manner cheer up the Heart of
the mournful Mariner, that his present joy causes him to forget his past
misery: Even so this unexpected Blessing which Emilia has conferred upon me,
does so revive my drooping Spirits, which were once perishing in the frightful
Sea of Despair, occasioned by her storms of Cruelty, that the desire I once had
to die, to be eased of my sad pain, is changed into a pleasant desire I have to
live: Since it is likewise by her command, brave Sir! said he to Theocles, in
embracing him; the remembrance of that singular Favor you have now done me, is
too great not to be acknowledged, which I am sorry I can no otherwise do, than
by bearing the unfeigned Title of your Obliged Servant; too small a Requital
for so noble a Courtesy. Theocles returned his Complements after a very
gallant manner, and then left him to search for Clidamant, to learn of him
whether he had yet heard any news of Agenoris and Mellissa, who sorrowfully
told him that the Servants were returned, but could hear nothing of them,
except it was those that took their way toward Paphos, who informed him, that
after enquiry made there after two such persons, they had been seen in the
Temple of Venus: Clidamant seeing all his endeavors to find them were
unprofitable, was sensibly grieved, as was likewise Old Melintus, as well for
the absence of Agenoris, as for the loss of his Daughter: But much more were
all their sorrovvs increased, when now they had vvaited with longing
expectation to learn Nevvs of them, till the Sun had half finished his Course
through the twelve Heavenly Signs, and yet naught could be heard of them: then
was it that all Hope began to forsake them; then was it that their Tears did
once more manifest how much they suffered by such a loss; but time at length
made them consider, that since there was no other Remedy, they must be
constrained to rest unwillingly contented. And indeed Clidamant, however
sorrowful he was for the absence of the Prince, yet was he not in the least
neglectful of paying his Devoirs to Emilia, which in the same moment did seem
very much to perplex Theocles, though Clidamant perceived it not; his small
success in his Application to her gave him great displeasure, and small
encouragement to proceed, though Love perhaps might be of force to make him
endeavor to resist his Fate; notwithstanding which, his trrouble was apparent
enough; for he would sometimes seem to rave, and in his ordinary Discourse
would often breath out Emilia at unawares! how to heal his mind he knew not,
till on a certain day a sudden thought possessed him, and he resolved to visit
the Temple of Venus at Paphos, and thence to learn his Destiny, and to know
whether he might ever obtain the happiness he aspired at, he soon prosecuted
his design; where saluting the Priest, and deolaring the occasion of his
coming, he found admittance into the Temple; and being silent till the usual
Ceremonies to the Goddess were performed, formed, he, by the instigation of the
Priest, did kneel down, and made the ensuing Prayer.

Great Goddess! thou who art not only the Governess of poor Mortals present
Fate, but likewise of their future: Thou, who alone, can make Lovers happy,
and art the only Ruler of our Affections: Thou who can trace the unbeaten
Paths of the Soul; and art the true Uniter of all pleasing desires; grant the
Humble Supplication of a Lovesick Mortal, and reveal to him whether he may
extract any thing of Sweetness from what does appear to be most Cruel? or
whether Cruelty may continue to Reign in what does bear the outward form of
much Sweetness? whether the Heart of her he affects has any room to
entertain Love? or whether Love may make him hope for a Return from the Heart
by him affected?

Having ended his Prayer, the Altar before which they were planted, seemed to
give a deep-groan, and the hollow and retired Vaults of the Temple, like
distant Thunder in loud whisperings, to presage that the Oracle was going to
speak; which in a faint, though plain Voice, it did in these following words:
The Oracle.
Thou do to Love pretend, but love not well;
And art not loved, yet there is none can excel:
A Love so true, as is for thee in store,
In Venus Grove the Gods will tell thee more.
Neglect not then to embrace that courteous offer
The Gods themselves will thee that moment proffer.


Scarce was the Oracle silent, but Clidamant departed with much distraction in
his thoughts, and discontent in his looks; for he found himself as much
unsatisfied as he was before, in vain therefore did he often endeavor to
unravel the sense of what he had heard; it seemed all along to him so palpable
a contradiction, that the more he studied, the more he found his thoughts
encumbered, though he imagined the latter end did plainly seem to flatter him;
but yet for two or three days he continued very melancholy, keeping his
Chamber, and deserting Company in so strange a manner, that it raised an
astonishment in all that knew him, although those who knew him well, attributed
it to the absence of Agenoris: the third day he seemed not altogether so
sorrowful, nor was he yet in the least danted at the several Repulses his
Mistress gave him, but renewed his Suit to her with as much, or rather more
eagerness than he had done formerly, which in the same instant did raise many
Clouds in the Brow of Theocles, who with a troubled Countenance immediately
departed the Room; though Clidamant, who was otherwise employed, took no notice
of him, and still continued to endeavor to sosten the heart of Emilia; but alas
it was in vain, for she persisted to be more rigorous to him than ever. Orontus
on the other side faired better, since Theocles had spoke to her in favor of
him; she would not now be displeased, or at least not seem so, when she heard
the name of Love pronounced by him; notwithstanding which his doubts were not
cleared, and which way her inclinations did tend he could not tell; he found
but little reason to think himself an inhabitant in her thoughts, because she
took so little notice of his pain; for meeting her once in the Garden in one of
the Terras-walks, and with much difficulty finding an opportunity to entertain
her; Madam, said he, (after some other Disdourse,) long have I loved you! long
have I sighed for you* and every moment am I dying for you* yet have I been so
far from obtaining your Love, that I perceive you have no room left for Pl^ty,
that may nourish me with Hope, but your Contempt feeds me with Despair* How can
Cruelty have so fair a Dwelling* is your resolution fixed? do you resolve to
kill the most Faithful of your Adorers? If so, Deal Madam, vouchsafe, me the
Grace to let me know it, and you shall soon be deprived of one whose Life is
hateful to himself, if it be to you: She made no answer all this while, but
seemed to be in a profound study, which made Orontus with the tears in his eyes
thus to proceed again. Madam, you are regardless of my misery, and seem deaf to
my complaints* You who are the Directress of my Destiny, can you be the cause
of my Ruin? You who are the Bright Star by which I may steer to the Haven of
Bliss, can you take pleasure to make a Faithful Lover desperate? What was it
Orontus said? replied she, as if she had been newly rouzed from the Region of
the Dead, or from a busy Slumber. I say, Madam, continued he, that your cruelty
has killed the most faithful Lover that ever was, though the power of a smile
from you raises him again, that fair visage methinks appears too innocent to
the view, to give the heart encouragement to harbor Cruelty; those eyes are
too bright to cause despair, and that Mouth too pretty to pronounce the
Sentence of Death. Alas Orontus, answered she, I was thinking of the Prince --
and did not well understand what you were saying; but what I told you, when
Agenoris was inquisitive with me to end the difference between you and
Periander, is my answer now; with which I would desire you to rest so well
contented, that you will importune me no more in this affair, especially now
when I would be private. Orontus, whose only desire was to please her, did
readily show his obedience, and in an humble manner took his leave of her, he
himself imagining his company at that time to be a trouble to her, because her
desire was to be alone; where we will leave her to her privacy, and return to
Clidamant, whom we lately left entertaining the same Lady, but being treated by
her more like one she hated than one she loved, he likewise left the room
immediately after. Theocles and his heart being stuffed with the fumes of an
excessive Melancholy; he went by himself into the Grove of Venus, their to
consult his thoughts what he had best to do, where it would sometimes come into
his mind to desist loving a Mistress that so ill requited his love, and
presently after he would think it lay not in his power. Thus did he continue
walking under the shady trees with his thoughts always in motion, though
irresolute and wavering, when as Fate would have it, casting his eye toward a
pleasing shady Ally on his right hand, he espied Theocles walking in a posture
not unlike himself, looking downwards, his hat over his eyes, and his Arms
cross his breast, Clidamant drew near him; tho he this while saw him not till
he came very near him, and then his voice at first startled him; for said
Clidamant to him, dear Theocles, why in this dispairing posture? what is it
disturbs your mind? you ask me what I may demand of you, replied Theocles, (in
a very indifferent manner) were it not that I know you court the fair Emilia --
what (added he) has she withstood your addresses? will she not be kind
Clidamant? has she given you a repulse? can you not work a smile from her. You
deride me Theocles, answered he, in my misfortunes, which is not like a Friend;
and though she makes it her glory to laugh at what she causes me to suffer,
methinks you that pretend to be my Friend should rather afford me some pity.
But said he again, I Will give you no more cause to rally me, for I am resolved to
subdue this stubborn passion, and to triumph over her charms, that I may taste
more sweetness in my life then now I do. Clidamant replied Theocles, that I
more than pretend friendship to you, here is a heart can surely testify, and
thee steem I have for you is greater than you believe it is; for in laughing at
your present suffering, as you call them, I do more like a friend than if I
should chearish you in your proceedings; but No, No, Clidamant, make love to a
stock or stone, or to any other insensible object, and then judge whether you
may not find as much sweetness there, as in your tyranical Mistress. I shall
not go to lay before you how unlikely your love to this Lady is to prove
effectual, because the experience you already have had has I suppose now made
you something sensible of it; then putting on a more serious Countenance, but
do you think it possible said he to do as you say? can you shake off the
unprofitable Chains of that fair one? if you can tell me, I do resolve to
endeavor, answered Clidamant, and am in hopes of being successful; suppose
then said Theocles, that I should beg permission of you, to choose you a
Mistress whom you might perhaps not think unhandsome, and whose love to you
should exceed the formers hatred, would you not think this change too equitable
and be more desirous to free your heart from the imperious captivity of so
cruel a Conqueror, to bestovv it on one who would endeavor to pity your
sufferings, and apply remedies: Alas said Clidamant, these are vain
suggestions, deceitful dreams, and mere delusions; but were it so, and the Lady
you thus proposed to me fair, virtuous, and endowed with all the accomplishment
of Emilia, except her cruelty; I am apt to think that her Fetters would of
themselves drop off to receive softer and milder from such a one as you speak
of. Since then said Theocles you have thus revealed your thonghts to me, and
have given me a positive answer to the thing I demanded of you; Wonder not, if
I now tell you, that since my arrival into this Island I have obtained a
singular accquaintance with a Lady between this and Paphos, who by my
procurement has often seen you, though unseen by you, perhaps she is not
altogether destitute of those qualities you desire in a Lady, you would pretend
to: such esteem she may have for you, which when you thoroughly come to know,
you will find you have reason to chearish; if I have revealed more to you, than
her own modesty would suffer were she here, if ever you know her, as you are a
Gentleman, I doubt not but you will give such a favorable construction of her
behavior as she most deserves. Its the general discourse of them that know us
both, to report her to be extremely like me, and indeed nature has made her
features so concordant with mine, that we have often been taken for fister and
brother: Now if you will promise me utterly to reject Emilia, and to take no
Wife but what I shall choose, you may sometimes see her. Let the Gods witness,
replied Clidamant, I do faithfully promise it; though Emilia still may Iodg in
a corner of my heart and mind, yet I doubt not but the sight of this beautiful
Lady you speak of, and the remembrance of the formers cruelty will expel her
quite; it is impossible that any Lady can smile on me, did I not know thee
Theocles to be a real friend, I should not believe thee, I am so astonished at
it, that I do almost think my fancy deluded; yet said he again to himself
softly, this must be the proffer I was advised too by the Gods: I must not, nay
I find I cannot refuse it, the place I am in is Venus Grove, and then said he
more loud I do resolve to embrace this happiness, and do here absolutely
promise to take no Wife but she you shall choose for me; if she be like you
Theocles, I shall in truth think her not unhandsom; I have often wished that
the transmutation of Sexes were real, that you might immediately commence
Woman; for whereas now being a man, though the esteem I have for you is not
small, were you a Woman, my Love to you would be boundless. But when? said he,
very eagerly, where? and how shall I see this sweet Creature? Soft, said
Theocles, I have not yet done; you shall see her presently; so putting his hand
in his Pocket, he pulled out a Picture in a Case of Gold, embellished with
Precious Stones, and gave it to Clidamant; here, said he, take a view of this,
and keep it till you have seen the Original, which in a proper time you may
likewise. Clidamant observed this Picture as one that had been altogether
deprived of sense, he had not so much as the power to move a step forwards, but
stood still to take a strict view of all the parts of it. Gods! said he to
Theocles, this does far exceed all that I could imagine to be most Beautiful!
and how far does this Face excel the description you made of her? if her Idea
or Copy then be so excellent, doubtless her Person must be Incomparable; for
the Painter could not be so cunning sure, but he has missed some of the best
Features; and though he has represented a Skin whiter than Alabaster, yet I am
apt to fancy he has not brought it to the clearness of hers: then, said he,
first looking upon the Picture, and then upon Theocles, in truth this has a
near resemblance of your Features; and yet methinks I see something in you that
seems to exceed some Perfections in this Face: however, this is the resemblance
of a Treasure worthy of our wonder; and now I find I have no more love for
Emilia, than just as much as may make me say I do not hate her. A Star of the
first Magnitude is glorious, so is Emilia; but as the Beauty of the Sun does
far exceed that, so does this dazzling Beauty out-shiue the Brightness of hers;
and though my eyes were never blessed with the sight of this Fair Object; yet
may I safely say, that never any had a love in store for those they never saw,
like that which lies concealed in my Breast for her.

Thus they discoursed while they walked, he admiring what he saw, and Theocles
giving him encouragement to continue his admiration, till they came to a
solitary place in the Grove, where the thickness of the Trees combined
together, to make a thicker shade than in the other parts of the Wood; which,
though lonely, was exceeding delightful: Thither were they no sooner arrived,
but they were surprised with a mournful note, as it were of complainings
issuing from the thickest parts of those Trees near which they were; they stood
some time a little still to listen, and thought they should know the Voice; and
softly approaching a little nearer, they could distinguish what he said; which
was very pitiful, and much after this manner;

Ye Powers! why have you deprived me of the only comfort I had of my Life, and
let me live? No, no, my only joy! now is the time! now is the time! I must
follow thee! when my Soul in Airy-mists, pure and white as the Love I bear
thee, shall ascend and meet thee in the middle Region; where sitting on a
Golden-Cloud, I Will fly into thy Downy Bosom, whose softning Charms shall melt
me into Dew; when being ready to drop down upon the Flowers here below, thy
powerful Beauty shall (like the Sun) raise me up again; then in each others
Arms we will gently fly from that lower part through a more refined Air, till
we have reached the Starry-Orb; and in the Milky-way we will spend some time in
chaste Embraces, and undefiling Kisses; and to the Harmony of the Heavenly
Sphere we will dance our way into Elysium, where we will obtain all pleasing
Satisfaction; where we will be Crowned with everlasting Love; and where we will
triumph over Death, and obtain leave of the Gods to make it our perpetual
abode. I am coming, Mellissa! said he, I am coming! Pretty Nymph! when he said
this, Clidamant chanced to get a sight of him through the Trees; when he was
just going to fall upon his Sword, they both rushed in, and prevented him, and
were not a little glad of it, because they first heard, and then saw that it
was the lost Agenoris, so long mourned for by all that knew him. He was a
little astonished at their sudden coming upon him; but being come to himself,
said he to them, endeavoring to get from them, when I was here before, I took
you both for my Friends, but this action of yours does now make me believe
otherwise: If you had a respect for me, you would suffer me to do what I would
with my self, since what I do is for my own ease, and future happiness. Do you
think I must outlive Mellissa? nay, do you think I can? these eyes, said he,
these wretched eyes were witness of her cruel death! I will therefore deprive
them of sight by mine! they would not consent to what was so injurious to
himself. After they had given him some comfort, they persuaded him to go with
them to the Castle; where, when he was come, he was welcomed with all the joy
they were capable of expressing, which did plainly evidence how generally he
was beloved by them all; yet when they saw his humor so altered, and melancholy
so predominant in him, we are not able to think how great their trouble was.
Emilia was discontented, and Clidamant, notwithstanding his late cause of joy
was sad. Theocles was very much interessed, they were all unsatisfied till they
could know the Original cause of Agenoris his affliction, and which they
believed they should never know till they could find him in a condition to
relate his Adventures, that they likewise might know where he had been all this
time; they were silent for six or seven days, but afterward they presumed to
entreat him; and though he knew it would but renew his sorrow to relate his
sufferings. Yet since nothing could lessen it but the sight of Mellissa living,
and since they were his Friends that importuned him; he one day began his Story
in this manner.

The Adventures of Agenoris and Mellissa.
IF there be any body under Heaven that have cause to complain, I believe it is
only I, to whom Fortune has given the most occasions; for whatsoever I can say
touching my miserable Condition, my Sufferings surpass the number of my words:
and if I should go to make a relation of all the dangers I have run, and the
diverse accidents that happened to me since my departure from hence; the Sun that
now begins to rise in a smile, will sooner finish his ordinary course, than I
can make an end: But as briefly as I can you shall have it; When we departed
hence we went to Paphos, to the Temple of Venus, where we both desired to learn
whether or no our Loves should ever be Crowned with Marriage-Rites; the
Priest had no sooner made his Prayer to the Goddess, touching what we
demanded, but the Lamps went immediately all out, of themselves, and left us in
the horror of a dismal Darkness! long did we not continue so, for soon after
they were all lighted again, to our great amazement! Then did we behold the
Divine Statue to tremble, sweat, and to vveep in such a manner, that we could
discern the Tears in Pearly-drops glide down her Cheeks. The Goddess, said the
Priest, is not a little moved at something; these are deep Prodigies! He had no
sooner said these words, but her Tears seemed to be dried up again; and then
she smiled in an excessive manner: the Lamps also which in the time of her
weeping did burn but dimly, when she began to smile, gave a more glorious and
brightshining light than they had done before! All which things moved a
general vvonder in the hearts of us all; and the Priest, which was likewise a
little terrified, went strait behind the Altar, to understand the mind of the
Goddess, and coming forth again, with a strong and plain Voice he declared her
Mystery, in these following words: Oracle.

WHen the threatening Danger is gone and past, and Death has triumphed over
both; till then, and not before, your Loves shall pleasing be to us; and a
Shepherdess shall be thought worthy of a Crown.



After this had been said, we left the Temple to return homevvards; both of us
very much confused at what we had seen, and heard; and the more, because it
promised us no happiness till death: We continued still vvalking till we came
to some Trees, under whose cooler shades we designed to sit avvhile for our
refreshment, though we soon found it to cost us dear; for we were scarce set
down, but we savv our selves environed with five or six men, whose hideous
postures, and outrageous words, gave us not the least hopes of escaping from
them. They were Armed with long Cimeters, and large straight Bucklers; and
they had every one by his side a short Dagger. But whether they had met with
no Prey lately at Sea, (for they came as from thence) to be so desperate as to
land, and seek some on the Shore of this Isle, a thing never known before; or
whether it was their nature that rendered them thus furious, nothing can be
imagined to appear more barbarous than their grim looks: sparks of fire seemed
to issue from their eyes; and the rage with which they fell upon us raised
such fear in the Heart of Mellissa, that she svvooned away; and I was in the
extremity of either losing my life, or generously preserving it by contemning
of death. I would have been content to have fallen into their hands alive, if
Mellissa might but escape. I put my self then into a posture of Defense, and
presented my self before these Inhumane Tigers, with my Svvord in my hand; and
making use of all what either Art or Nature had given me of Perfection and
Agility, I throwed my self among the midst of my Enemies, giving some Blows,
and receiving others, and made a sign to Mellissa to take her flight while
opportunity presented. Three of them I had no sooner dispatched, but I saw six
more coming toward us, three of which seeing Mellissa endeavor to escape, run
after her, and the rest came upon me; I put my self in a posture to receive
them, but they came upon me so strongly, and I being already almost spent with
the length of my Combat, that I was constrained to give way to force. I
desired them, that if they had not altogether banished Humanity from among
them, that they would treat my Sister (meaning Mellissa) with Civility; and if
you have any design upon my life, let her that fled live by my death. The
confused language of these Villains, and the anger which they bore on their
Faces, made me lose the hope of ever softning their hearts: they bound us
together, and loading us with chains of Iron, they blinded our eyes, and pushed
us before them with all the rigor imaginable, till we came to the Seaside;
where having a Boat in readiness for them, in it we were thrown, and carried on
Board of a Ship that lay scouting upon the Coasts for their return. Being on
Board, they unblinded our eyes, and put us into the Hold; we had not sailed
above four days and nights before they blinded us again, and carried us on
Shore: where I understood by a great noise when we landed, a whole Troop lay
ready to attend them: they set us Horseback, our (eyes being still blinded) and
carried us, as we understood afterward, upon the side of Mount Taurus; where,
unblinding us again, they dragged us into an obscure Cave, under the hollow of
the Mountains, where they fastened us in two diverse places, to the end we should
have no discourse one with another. It is impossible to express the complaints
and mournings with which we filled the black dwellings of this Cavern. We had
no other hopes but to serve as Victims to the most cruel and ungoverned People
in the World. About midnight, when the whole Fabric of Nature seemed to sleep,
and the Stars themselves, the Centuries of Heaven, were covered with gloomy
Clouds, as it were to take their rest; one of the most Eminent of those that
had brought us into this place, removed a great Stone that was at the mouth of
the Cave, and with a Torch in his hand entered, and spoke to me in this sort;

Whatsoever thou art, said he, it shall be made appear in this very moment,
that I dwell in the World to do those People a pleasure whose Merits may claim
it: You doubt not but you are in the Custody of the most Barbarous Company that
ever was under Heaven; there is but one way then left for you to save your
life, which you must quickly resolve on, or to morrow will be the day of your
death. That Young Virgin whom you call your Sister, and who as taken with you,
has so Charmed me with her Beauty, that it has been impossible for me ever
since I first saw her, to find a moment of Repose: I must either be delivered
from this amorous Passion by my death, or I must enjoy her. If thou will
condescend to the last, and that I may do it by her consent, I will grant thee
all sorts of Favors in these desolate places, and will make thee Captain of
our Band.

Ah Sir! replied I, what do you tell me? bring me rather the sentence of my
death, than to let me hear this dismal News; I am capable of paying a
sufficient Ransom for my Liberty, but I will sooner leave my Life, than my
Sister in your hands; our Fortunes are too nearly interessed together, to
forsake one another at the first shock: and if death triumphs over one, the
other must needs perish. Mellissa (who was at the other end of the Cave) heard
the last words I pronounced; and by the raising of my Voice, she perceived that
I began to speak angerly to the Tyrant, which made her not know what to resolve
upon.

He nevertheless still persisted to importune me, and by his promises to
endeavor to corrupt me, and make me a Companion in his Crime. But seeing it was
all ineffectual, he gave me a great Blow with his Cimeter on my shoulder, and
had he not struck the Chain with which I was fastened, and with the weight of
the Blow broke it, I never could have removed out of the place. This Blow
stunned me so, that I fell down; and because I feared he would redouble it, I
feigned my self dead; whereupon he immediately left me, believing me to be as I
seemed, and went strait where Mellissa was; before whom he fell on his knees,
conjuring her with all he was able to feign of humility and sweetness, to have
pity on a poor Lover, whose desire was to save her life, and that he was not
come to offer her any violence; but rather by a contraction of friendship with
her, to deliver her from that danger, which otherwise she must necessarily fall
into.

This Lamentable Virgin not hearing me speak any more, (as being persuaded that
I was murdered,) wept, complained, and sought all the means she could to
bereve her self of life, rather than to suffer the Tyrant to approach her.
What, said she, Inhuman Villain! hait thou the boldness (after thou have killed
my Brother) to importune me with thy shameful Addrsses! No, no, my life is in
your power, you may strike boldly, and you shall be requited with thanks for
it. What, does a too-late repentance seize you? has compassion found out an
habitation it never had before, that you stand thus, and dare not strike? Come,
give me the Dagger, and let me execute with my own hands, what thy cruelty does
not refuse me. Ye Gods! what an apprehension was I in then? when I heard her
pronounce these words, I had no more the knowledge of my self! the confusion and
horror of those dark-dwellings had so possessed my heart, that I had forgot I
was that Agenoris that lived once in Cyprus. Nevertheless, when I heard her
pitiful Cries, I roused, as from a profound sleep, and endeavored to arm my
hands with Stones to cast at this Cyclops, but I perceived I was fastened on the
left-leg with another Chain; insomuch that I thought despair would have made me
run mad. The Villain told her, seeing he could not prevail, that since death
would be so singular a favor to her, in that she should not be humoured; but
however she should be taught to consent to his desire: and strait lays hold of
her, and drags her by her delicate dishevelled Locks, with her eyes bathed in
Tears; and whether the place imprinted in him something of horror, or whether
he found a surprizal in the act he would not stain that obscure dwelling with a
double Crime; (for he thought he had killed me) but with many rude Blows drove
her before him! I, who found one of my Feet fastened, thereby not being in a
capacity to fight, and defend my self, nor to use my endeavors to get at
liberty, I laid my self down, to the end he might think me dead: but it was an
excessive trouble to Mellissa when she saw me lie in that posture; and not
being able to conquer her anguish, she fell down; and I believed she had died
with sorrow, if the Gods had not miraculously preserved her! at length by
little and little she got up, and, in rising, said she, At least, Infamous
Viper, give me leave to bestow one Kiss on the cold Lips of him you have
killed; and though he be dead, let me whisper my last Farewell in his Ear! the
favor is but small I ask of you, and nevertheless it shall be an obligation
I Will owe to thy Cruelty, (if it be possible to oblige such a Person.) No, no,
replied this Monster, this is no time to interrupt my design; you must go with
me to learn what Hatred can do, where Love could find no place. In saying these
words, he dragged her out by her dainty Hair, (too too precious for such cruel
touches;) and the Torch that had lighted them to the most retired part of the
Cave, went out it self, as if it had been ashamed to give light to an act so
wicked and detestable as he was now going about. I continued cold, as if all my
veins were filld with Ice! and whoever had seen me then, would truly have
judged that there was little difference between my face and that of a dead
man's: The horror to see Mellissa ravished away in this manner, without my being
able to help her, or run after her, and the darkness of the place in which I
was, all alone, depriving me of the use of my senss, I fell down once more, not
being able to breath sighs to ease me, nor words to mourn out my disaster. The
silence and darkness of th night feemed to favor the design of him that
carried away Mellissa, and the Stars seemed ashamed at so much violence! for
the whole Region of Air, were the thick and obscure clothing of Clouds, and
added another night to the very night it self! Sometimes I could hear the
grievous Cries of this miserable Fair-One, and could distinguish some of her
words from among the threatenings of the Tyrant that thus handled her! Insomuch,
that as many times as I heard her Shrieks, as many sharp Daggers did I feel,
that seemed to pierce my very heart! In vain did I try to break to Chain that
held me, to follow and help her; for I had no Instrument to make use of to
unloosen me; and besides, the horrors of Darkness were so great, that I knew
not what art to use to find a way out; despair was all the remedy I found! and
I prepared my self to endure all the calamities that Fortune was capable of
laying upon me. Nevertheless, as I was knocking my slf against the Wall, and
seeking all the means I could to bereave my self of Life; one of the Chains by
which I was fastened, loosned; which having perceived, I took up the first Stone
I could find at my Feet, and began to knock with it upon the Irons, with such
force, that at length I found a way to disengage my self thoroughly; and I
presently endeavored with my hands to find the way out of the Cave; and after
I had wandered about the obscure turnings of this mournful dwelling, I
discovered the way out, by which Mellissa was carried, and tried to follow her
footsteps. But although the bright Rays of the Sun darted themselves from the
Orient, and discovered me the way, and the place where I was; the fear
nevertheless that seized me, not knowing which way to go, put me into a greater
confusion than before: however, I followed the first tract my instinct inspired
me with, and crossed shady Woods, and fertile Valleys, but not knowing where to
seek Mellissa! I sought her in all places where my passion directed me:
Sometimes would I call her, but could not hear of her, unless it were by the
repetition of her Name, by some neighboring Echo, which did but renew my
sorrow; and the farther I went, the less I heard of her. At length I sought
another path, to see whether Fortune would be more savourable: but into
whatsoever place of Solitude I went, and whatever Desert I passed, I saw
nothing but the image of night, and silence. After I had long wandered in this
manner, I entered into a small Wood, not far from the Cave out of which I came;
where the first thing that presented it self to my view, was the dead Corpse of
him that had carried away Mellissa, which lay stretched on the ground, wounded
in three several places; his arms were scattered in diverse parts hard by, and
the very grass was red with his Blood. I considered this Spectacle as an action
indifferent; but when I took more particular notice of his Face, and thereby
came to know who it was, I stood so astonished and confused, as if I had been
suddenly struck with thunder. Gods! said I to my self, what strange Reincounter
is this? here is the Ravisher, but where is she that is Ravished? whre was
Mellissa during this Combat? can this man be dead, and she alive? In saying
this, I looked round about me, to consider whether it might be possible for me
to discover the original of this accident: As I was thus contemplating this
disaster, I perceived in a little Bush that was very thick, a small Box covered
with a piece of white linen; curiosity made me approach nearer to it, that I
might take a more full view of it, and, to my great misfortune, I found that it
was the little Box of Jewels I had presented to Mellissa a little after my
departure from thence: and then fear had so possessed my senses, that I was
even ready every moment to expire; for it made me infallibly judge that she was
murdered. I took them both up, and kissed them with many unfeigned kisses; and
breathing a long and hearty sigh, why am I not permitted, said I, Bright
Mellissa! to know where this Inhuman Tiger has cast thy precious Body? to the
end I may render thee the last Devoir a Lover is capable of manifesting to her
he loves: and that I may Erect a Tomb over it in these silent Deserts, on which
each minute I will drop a mournful Tear; and the last drops shall be my self
into thy Grave, that one Sepulcher may serve us both. But alas! in vain! in
vain do I thus moan! since what I mourn for, is not to be found. Yea
Divinities! who bear Rule both in Heaven, and upon Earth; are ye insensible at
such cruel Injustice? have you no Thunderbolts left to revenge this barbarous
Act? you have executed a part of your Vengeance; but the same Weapon that
killed her, must kill me: I could die to have Mellissa living; but I cannot
live aftr her death. Then rturning toward the dead Carcass, and arming my
hands with his Sword, It is thou, perfideous Tyrant, said I, that has ravished
from me this precious Treasure, and that has thus miserably massacred her! had
thy cruelty such power over thy barbarous heart, as to deprive her of life that
gave it to others! and to snatch the light from those sparkling eyes, whose
splendour could once invert the course of Nature, by forcing day to appear in
the very midst of night and darkness! whereby the Earth could boast she had her
Sun, as well as the Heavens! But what do I say? I defer my death too long; the
same Weapon must pierce the Body of Agenoris, that took away the life of
Mellissa: and would to the Gods, that he that did it, had yet some sign of
life, that he might feel the effects of my just revenge; and that his own Arms
might expiate his Crime.

In saying this, I saw three men covered with the skins of Bears and Lions,
armed with very long and broad Cimeters; who having heard the noise of my
Complaints, without comprehending the Subject, flew upon me so, that having
only time to shut the Box I had found, I drew my Sword, and defended my self
with what dexterity and courage I could, against their blows, (for the desire I
had to die, deprived me from fearing any danger I might meet with.) But when
they knew him that lay at my feet, and had seen that it was their Captain;
after they had sent forth a Cry, capable to make the very Heavens tremble, and
fright the very Gods themselves! their Eyes flaming with choler, and their
Faces covered with blood! they came upon me with such force, that having
deprived me of my Sword, one of them was going to cleave down my head with his
Cimeter; if the other, who came to him before the blow with his hand had not
prevented him, by telling him that they must make an exemplary revenge of my
Crime, and that a common death would not be sufficient to content the Ghost of
Cleobulus, (for so was the Name of this cruel Tyrant.) They presently fettered
me with Irons; and whilst two of them carried away the dead Body, the other
drove me before them. It availed m not to call the Gods to witness of my
innocence! and to swear to them by what was most holy in the Heavens that I was
not culpable; but what greater proof could they have, than to find me by the
dead Body, armed with his own Sword, and in a posture of giving him an hundred
wounds more, had there appeared any sign of Life in him? The affliction they
had on one side, for the death of their Master; and the joy they had on the
other, for a prize so important, soon gathered them companions; for I saw them
come round me as from all parts, like so many Wolves to devour me; for my part,
I knew not how I was; for wheresoever I turned my eyes, although the present
danger might have given me some apprehension, the memory of Mellissa's disaster
left no room in me to deplore my own misfortune. If those that led me, had but
taken notice of my Tears, it was not possible that their Rage could have
continued; for it seemed as though the Heavens, the Woods, and all things that
Nature had made insensible, had compassion on me! the Heavens were sad, and
distilled themselves in tears; the Air and Earth sounded with my sighs, and the
Valleys through which I passed, with my complaints! Nevertheless, the further
we advanced in our way, the greater was the insolence of thost Villains; till
having perceived the Walls of Latronia, the principal City of their Retreat,
where there is a Magazin of Arms, and an innumerable quantity of all sorts of
Robbers, whose power is equal to that of those Kings and Princes that border
upon them. Presently there came out to meet us above five hundred men in Arms,
as if they would conduct me in triumph; for they believed there was some of
their Enemies, according to the report that was spread abroad, that an Army was
coming against them: Scarce was I got into the middle of their Crew, but I
found my self saluted with new reproaches, especially when they exposed the
Body of Cleobulus to the view of the public; for his Wife, who was in the
Town, being advertized of his pretended Murder, breaks through the Guards, and
tears me from the hand of him that held me fast. What, says she, is this the
man that deprived me of a Husband? and the Town of Latronia of a Captain? his
death shall be dearly bought; for I my self will be the Executioner. I Will take
away his life, and tear him in a thousand pieces! She had scarce ended those
words, when she fell upon me, and threw me down, imprinting the fury of her
nails and anger in my Face. But those who had taken me, seeing that this Megara
continued to persecute me in that manner, and for fear the little life I had
remaining, might not serve to sustain that vengeance and cruelty to which I was
destined; took me from her, put me in Prison, consulting in the mean time what
manner of torment I was to suffer, (for there is no manner of Justice in this
Town:) and when they take any stranger, they consider not amongst themselves
whether he ought to die or no, but what sort of death must make an end of him.
About eleven of the Clock at night, that being the time they make their
Sacrifices, because the Adoration they paid, was to the Infernal Gods; such as
Pluto, Proserpine, with the Furies themselves: about that time, I say, a
general noise was heard all over the Town, and the Streets were filled in an
instant with lighted Torches: for soon after our arrival, the Wife of Cleobulus
was making preparation for the Interment of her Husband, whose Body lay in the
Temple of Proserpine, till they could Bury him in the Sepulcher of his
Ancestors, according to their Custom; insomuch that the Priests of the Goddess
judging that it was time to depart, sent to give notice to the Chiefest of
Latronia to assist at his Burial; they had in the mean time concluded that I
should be burned alive for the Murder I was accusd of. At the same moment,
being weary with the hardship I endured the precedent day and night, I began
(notwithstanding all the apprehensions that troubled my mind) to take some
repose; when two men came in, and clothing me in a black Robe, commanded me to
follow them.

This Ceremony at first seemed strange to me, for I knew nothing yet concerning
what they had determined against me in Council; nevertheless I put on this
mourning Robe; and after they had fasthed me in Irons of the same color, they
conducted me to the Temple, where the people were all ready assembled in
Mourning Habits, having every one in his hand a Torch: I was no sooner come,
but all the Funeral Pomp marched in order: I brought up the Rear, being covered
with Chains, and guarded with the greatest part of the Army; we went about half
a mile from the Town, and entered into a spacious Field, where the Citizens of
Latronia were accustomed to be Buried. The Priests having opened the Tomb,
stood upon a piece of ground something higher than the rest, and began to read
the Sentence of my Death, much to this effect:

That for the Murder committed on the person of Cleobulus, I was condemned to
be burned alive, before the place of the Sepulcher, and my Ashes to be cast
into the Wind, that the memory of my Name might be dissipated with the rest of
my Body. I was nothing startled at this pitiful Sentence; neither was I
concerned at the manner of my death, for death was a thing could never strike
terror in me; I had a Soul far greater than my misfortunes. Casting my eye upon
the stake where I was to be consumed, I considered it as a place where I should
enjoy that I desired, and as my only road to the all-pleasing Elizinm; when I
also considered in my self, that Mellissa was dead, and that to live longer was
to consume my life away in perpetual anguish, I mattered not to dye; and it
seemed as though the Flames of Love, which are divine, would render the matrial
less sensible. Whilst I was about meditating what I had best to do, and as my
mind was employed on other things than to search out artifices to deliver me
from a danger that was so near; they buried Cleobulus in the Sepulcher of his
Ancestors, and all the people thronged about the stake to see me burned; in the
same instant the Priests made me mount upon the pile of Wood. When I saw my
self in that pitiful condition; (the Wife of Cleobulus holding a Torch in her
hand to put Fire to the Wood) I could not forbear to mourn out my disaster in
these words; Agenoris, mourn the day that ever thou did see Mellissa; for
there, there was the beginning of thy disaster; but alas what do I say fair
Mellissa? pardon these words, caused by an excess of my grief; and if yet thou
have any thing of life remaining, or if old Charon, concerned at my misery,
will cause his Boat to stay, go not alone to the Elizian Shades, let my Soul
accompany thee, and as Love united our Hearts, so now let Death reunite our
Souls.

Whilst I was breathing forth these words toward the Heavens, they that led me
fastened me with Cords, which was no sooner done, but the Wife of Cleobulus set
fire to the Wood, which was presently in a flame, the Smoke having almost
choked me, not so much as giving me the leisure to brathe, and my Senses
failed me; and what could fortune have done more to me, than to cause me to be
fastened to a stake in that manner, and ready to be swallowed up by the Flames
among the most detestable Crew that live under Heaven. Could l be in a mor
miserable condition, and nevertheless you shall hear how the Gods would not
suffer my innocence to be oppressed, and how they do not begin to succor
Mortals before all other helps fail: Know then, that this Troop of Robbers and
Pirates increasd in Process of tim by a number of Vagabonds, Slaves, and
Fugitives, who seeing they could not live under the severity of the Laws of the
Prince of Cappadocia and other Neighboring Provinces, had taken refuge upon
Mount Taurus, as in an approved Fortress, where they might defend themselves
against the Incursions and Power of their Enemies; the King of Lasonia; as most
interessed in this affair, and being the nearest Neighbor to these Robbers,
had often endeavored to put them all to the Sword; ut this Mountain was so
strong, and the approaches of their Latronia so difficult, that it was
impossible for them to overcome them, for Cleobulus permitted them to commit
all manner of crimes, and there was no wickedness under Heaven but found a
recompense among them. No body dare come near them; they would come in Arms
even to the adjoining Frontiers, and would sometimes take and destroy whole
Towns, as I have since understood: but Cleobulus was the cause of their general
Defeat; for Polecrates King of the Pisidians having a little before sent his
Son against this Rabble, with an Army of eight thousand men for to rout them:
He engaging his Person a little too far in the Combat, was killed by the hand
of Clobulus himself, and all his Troops cut to pieces: Polycrates justly
concerned at such a loss, conjured all his Allies, and begged of them to
succor him against those barbarous villains, so that in a little time there
was an Army of 25000 men raised for the Enterprise.

In so much that as it pleases the Gods to bring all things to the point to
which they are destined, King Polycrates having brought his Troops to the top
of Mount Taurus, that separateth all Asia, it was even a wonder, for contrary
to the Opinion of the most prudent men, his Vanguard was at the Gates of
Latronia at the same time that I was going to be consumed, a Confusion flies
presently into the middle of the Assembly, and fear having scattered them into
all places, the Enemy entered pelmell into the Town, and seized upon the Gates.
The Wife of Cleobulus, who yet held the Torch in her hand to set fire to those
parts of the Wood, that were not yet lighted, was one of the first that left
the Sacrifice and ran away. I knew not what to think of this new Accident, and
believed that Fortune, not being satisfied to see my Body reduced to Ashes,
prepared a more cruel Death for me. But contrary to my exprectation, Captain
Dyonisius, Son to the great Priest, who commanded in this Vanguard, perceiving
m in that condition, ready to give up the Ghost, and half stifled with the
Smoke, whether it was not of pity, or whether he would reserve me for a
greater pain, caused me to be taken down; I rendered him thanks for the favor
he did me, and told him briefly the Reasons why they intended to sacrifice me,
that truly I had not killed Cleobulus as they all imagined; but that if he had
not been dead when I saw him in the Wood, no body had more reason to kill him
then I had. I reserved the rest of the Discourse for another time, for he was
too busy, and too eager in the pursuit of the Enemies. He put me then to be
guardd by one of his own men, and turns his Troops against th Inhabitants of
Latronia, who still continued to make a resistance, and who were got into the
Fortress that was in the Town: in the mean time the whole body of the Army
followed, which came pouring upon these barbarous wretches, turned their Town
topsey turvey, and fired it in all parts, to the end, that in the deepest
darkness of the Night their very houses might serve them, as Torches, to
Massacre them: the Streets were filled with nothing but dead Bodies, and
bleeding Carcasses; never was the Alarm so furious in the Town of Troy, when
the Greeks revenged the injury done to Hellin, for wherever you turned your
eyes, you could see nothing but Blood and Death. But pray observe the extent of
Choler, when it has got the sole government over Reason and the rest of the
Passions; Some Soldiers of Dyonisius his Army coming luckily to know that
Cleobulus was newly buried, they surrounded his Tomb, with horrible noises and
out-crys, as if they would pull his very soul out of Hell, to make him suffer
that pain which they would inflict upon his insensible Body, taking him then
out of his Coffin, they tore his Winding Sheet in a thousand pieces: and after
they had cut off all the parts appertaining thereunto, the Nose, Ears, Fingers,
and all other Members, they run him in a hundred times with their Swords and
Halberts; and upon the first approach of day light, they carried him before the
Fortress, where they fastened him to a Gibbet that he himself had built not for
Criminals, for they remained all unpunished; but for those that commit not
Robberies and wickedness enough: then thy cut him in five or six pieces, and
for Trophy of their Victory, dragged him along the Streets, with all the
Calumnies and Indignities that the unbridled Multitude are capable to invent,
if one can commit any Indignity to such a noted Rogue. His Wife who had taken
shelter in the Fortress with the most eminent persons of Latronia, could not
see this Spectacle without testifying her resentment; she tore her Hair, and
made her Face swell with Blood; and after she had vomited an infinity of
Blasphemies and injuries against Heaven, and against Dyonsius, she went to the
top of all the principal Tower, and cast her self down; all the place was
covered with her Brains, and with thick lumps of Blood that came out of her
Head. After that the Town of Latronia was sacked, and that there was nothing of
their Fortresses remaining but a smoaky Vapor and thick Cloud that rose from
the burning of the Houses, part of the Army went to Mount Taurus, to
exterminate the remainder of these Vagabonds; and the rest returned to their
first Quarters, under the Conduct of Dyonisius, who seemed to have a particular
care of my life, he causEd a Chamber to be provided for me just over his, and
because the last nights labor had wearyed me, I cast my self down upon a Bed,
to take some rest, but just as sleep was going to steal upon me, I heard a
faint Voice, like complaining in the next Chamber, which seemed to accuse the
Stars, for having conspired to make them unhappy; Ought thou, O Love, said she,
to deprive me in a moment of my Lovers presence? where art thou, dear hope of
my Life? if my Fate was so cruel to me, as to create me too low in Birth, to
make me not presume to think of becoming thy Bride, if I did not promise to
render thee and me happy, yet methinks thy presnce, thy dear presence! will
give me that satisfaction, I am now destitute off: that I love thee tenderly,
let Heaven witness, but it was a Love so pure, that thy very presence did seem
to give bounds to my desires; if I loved thee, I loved thy sight and company;
what unhappy influence has thus separated us? The whole Army of Dyonisius
tryumphs over the defeat of Cleobulus, but I amongst all these Joys must wear
mourning, to deplore thy Misfortune: O lamentable Trophy's, and melancholy
Spoils! But since I have no other hope remaining, I Will bereave my self of this
wretched Life, to accompany the silent shadow of my Agenoris.

At these words, an universal confusion seized upon my senses; I knew it was
Mellissa's Voice, but yet the sound of it was so faint and weak, that I could
think it to be no other thing but her Ghost, that called me to come where she
was.

Pardon me, said I, (then bright soul) if I have so long delayed to follow
thee, I have sought all occasions to sacrifice my life for the expiation of the
Crime which I have committed in unhappily conducting thee from thy innocent
Flocks: but however, my own hands shall punish me, and make thee an Offering of
my Life, for a certain assurance of that sincere Affection I bear thee.

Scarce had I ended these words, but there was a great noise in the Chamber
from whence the Voice came. I gave attention to this Busle, for amidst the
consusion of words, I heard a clashing of Arms, which made me belive that some
body was ravishing away Mellissa again. At length whether she heard my
Complaint, or whether she knew my Voice, I heard her bid me Adieu, saying, She
would remember her Vows, and likewise entreated m to retain some remmbrance of
her; then I felt a fresh assault upon my Heart, and as if a cold Ice were
melted in all my Veins, it was encompassed with a general apprehension; I rose
from my Bed, looked out at the Window, and in the obscurity of the Night,
amongst the lighted Torches, I descerned four of those Soldiers that I had seen
to follow Dyonisius, that were carrying away this miserable Virgin: Gods! what
tears and sighs did I then spend to see those fair Eyes again eclipsed from my
presence? the remainder of the Night seemed a whole Age to me, and if the Day
had not restored that Light to the World, which the Night had taken from it, I
had thought to my self to have been no other than a shadow, I inquired of those
that were near Dyonisius, what Maid that was, that they carried away in the
Night? all the answer I could receive was, That she had been taken away by
force from five or six Soldiers, that had left their Colors to do mischief in
the Fields and Roads; and that they were now conducting her to Pisidia, there
to be sacrificed to the Gods, because of the Victory that King Arcon had newly
obtained over his Enemies.

This News loaded me with a new grief, for now I doubted not but it was
Mellissa, for having heard the complaints she made, and having seen so many
particulars, but dare not to discover my self, for fear of engendring some kind
of suspicion in the mind of Dyonifius. I often did endeavor to escape from the
Army, to follow her I loved, but I was guarded so closely, that all my
Enterprises were unprofitable: and in find, I had intelligence, from a Slave,
they had a design upon my Life; and that all the kindness I daily received from
Dyonisius tended to no other end, but to render me the more agreeable to the
Gods. I began then to be sad, and to change my form of Life; I was not sorry to
dye, but I was troubled that the Army tarryed so long before it returned, lest
Mellissa were sacrificed in Pisidia, before I might enjoy the happiness of
seeing her. In fine, we were carried to the City of Antioch, where the King,
after he had recompensed his Captains, and divided the Spoil that he had taken
in Latronia, disbanded his Army, and returned in Triumph to his Palace, where
the Queen expected him. The Father of Dyonisius the great Priest came to him,
to let him know, That after so glorious a Victory, he ought to make Sacrifice
to the Gods; that the ordinary Victims not being sufficient for what the Gods
had done for him, the lives of Men were only capable of an acknowledgment of
their favors; and since what they required should be pure and unpolluted, that
it was reasonable to offer them a Sacrifice of the first Spoils that the Army
met with in entering Latronia.

Dyonisius, who was present at the Speech, caused me to be called, and told
King Arcon, That he had reserved me on purpose to serve for the Victim, because
I was the first he had met in entering the Town; he also asked his Father,
whether he had not received a Maid that he had sent him? who answered, Yes. By
the Kings command they began to prepare for the Sacrifice against the next
Morning: and then I began to hope, if there be any content in hoping for death,
that I should see Mellissa once again, before I dyed. But the expectation of
such a happiness was soon followed with other News much more sad, for as the
King was asking for the Virgin that should be sacrificed, News was brought,
That Philander, the younger Brother of Dyonisius, and Son to the great Priest,
was extremely in love with her, and had carried her away, no body knowing to
what part. It is impossible to express the grief which I received from these
words, for I was in the King presence when this News was brought to him, who
took it as an ill Omen, that the Son of his Priest should hinder him from
rendering the Gods thanks, and presently caused 200 Horse to be sent throughout
Pisidia, to find out where Philander was retired; and the Sacrifice was put off
to another day. I seeing that no News could be heard of Mellissa, and that they
intended to put me to Death, did underhand deal with my Keepers, by a sum of
Money, for to get away, for besides the Box I had found of Mellissa's, which
was very full of rich Jewels, I had much more about me, which I had at the time
of my departure from hence; my design succeeding then, as heart could wish, I
took my way where my design guided me, and persuading my self, that Philander
was gone toward Caria, because that those the King sent after him had taken
that way, in a disguise, that they might not know me again, I followed them at
a distance, but I was not got fifty Miles from Antioch, before a Courier from
the King came to give notice, that the Sacrifice was done, and that it was not
necessary for them to go any further. Then was I in new apprehensions, I knew
not whether I had best return back again to Dionisius, and present my self a
Victim, or go into Caria, where I had some acquaintance. The death of Mellissa
bereft me of any desire I might have to survive her; and when I saw that they
were not permitted to go any further, I easily believed that she was found, and
that King Arcon had sacrificed her to the Gods; Can any one concevie themselves
to be more miserable than I? When I reflected upon all these cross accidents,
truly I then believed that Fortune had done all she could to me.

I went into Caria and came into the Town Heracleus near Latmos, where Reigns
the King Polidor, I continued in that Court for sometime, where my friends were
troubled to see so much grief in my countenance; The Price was very civil to
me, and would make me use all manner of Diversions, to endeavor to drive away
my Melancholy, sometimes would be carry me to hunt upon Mount Latmos, but
nothing could dissipate that Melancholy that consumed me. In fine, after I had
took my leave of this Prince, and returned him thanks answerable to the favors
I had received of him, I had a desire to return and end my days here in Cyprus,
I embarked at the Haven Mileta and sailed by the Isle of Rhodes, but it was but
to render me more miserable, for I was taken by Pirates who robbed me of my
money, and of the Box I had that belonged to Mellissa; nevertheless, as I was
fastened in the Cabben all alone as they were consulting upon my life, there
came two great Vessels sailing upon us, and stuck so closely to us, that we
were constrained to change our Master, as if the Gods would punish the
injustice of the first by the wickedness of the other. This new change filled
me with new fears; for wishing for nothing more than death, and not being
capable of receiving it, it was to dye as often as they gave me hope of life;
the Merchandise of our Vessel, and all the Prisoners being put into the Ships
of the Conquerors, I saw the most cruel and bloody spectacle that fortune could
make me see, I perceived Melllissa upon the shore of the Island of Rhodes, on
that side of it where it advances it point into the Ocean, (for we were not
very far off from it) who was fastened and bound with chains, followed by an
infinite number of Corsaryes, and a Priest that held in his hand a knife to cut
her throat, I could not well see her face, for a long vail covered her head,
but I knew her clothes, her port, her Actions, and what I had formerly took
notice of in her that was most remarkable, the Vessel wherein I was threw out
her Anchor to stay and see the ceremony, for there was an Altar erected on the
shore, upon which the Incense did already smoke, and all preparations were made
for the sacrifice, I took notice of this prodigy a great while. Is it possible,
said I to my self, that Mellissa is not yet dead? Is that her Ghost, or is that
which I see true? I know her apparel, and if my eyes deceive me not I see the
very features of her face; O Gods said I, if it be so, plunge me in the bottom
of the Sea, to the end I may not see so horrible a massacre, the Pilot who saw
me in those transports, not knowing the cause of such a sudden motion, laid
hold on me for I was just going to cast my self into the water, for my eyes
(alas must that word be pronounced) saw the knife stuck in the throat of that
Divine Beauty, I was grieved I could not give her the last adieu, nor know the
cause of this barbarous action; the Captain of our Vessel straight hoysted his
sayls, and we were carried into the main Sea, having no other objects; to
behold but Air and Water; I enquired of those that were prisoners with me what
ceremony it was we had seen uon the shore, they answered me that all that
Country was peopled with naught but vagabonds and Pirates, who before they
sailed upon any enter-prize, had a custom to cast lots amongst their slaves,
for which of them should be sacrificed to the Divinities of the Sea.

Scarce were we lanched into the Ocean when the rising of a mighty tempest made
large foulds upon the waters, and the fury of the wind was so great that our
Vessel was split all to pieces, nevertheless as if I could not meet death in
the middle of so many dangers, I saved my self upon a broken table, and meeting
as fortune would have it, a ship that was sailing for Pamphilia, I got into it,
and arrived safe at the Haven where the Gods darted on me a ray of their favor,
in giving me the knowledge of a Merchant I had once seen in Syria, when I
traveled thither; who after he had favorably received me into his house, made
me take of him as much money as I would to relieve my train, but I who desired
to have no body with me took up as much money as I thought would bear my charges
to Cyprus, when imbarking in the first ship that was bound thither, I happily
arrived at Paphos, where after I was landed, I was about to sacrifice my life
in the Grove of Venus, to follow my Dear Mellissa, when you Theocles and
Clidamant did too soon prevent me. Pardon me dear soul continued he. If I have
not rendered thee tat duty, I ought to have done, my life I know is a present
thou must expect, and I ask nothing more of the Gods than a glorious death,
that I may bear thee company in the Elizian shades. In saying these words, the
tears trickled down his cheeks like Orient pearls, and his grief would let him
say no more; Clidamant acknowledged love to be very powerful when he is master
of all the other passions, of which opinion they were all, and said whatsoever
they were able, to comfort him and give him hopes of a better fortune for the
time to come; it now begininng to grow late, they all but Clidamant departed
the room; who knows (said Clidamant to him when the rest were gone) but the
Gods expressly caused Mellissa to dye, to make you the happier man hereafter, an
to the end, that a Prince of your greatness should not debase his blood and
parts, by espousing one that was so much beneath him, a poor young
Shepherddess; can she deserve to be the bride of a private Gentleman, if she
cannot, much less can she to be a Queen. I much confess, fair she is, and fair
enough to be beloved by you, but not to be dignified with Royalty. Hold these
balsphemies, said Agnoris except you would make me esteem you for ever as my
enemy; I am a Prince it is true, but where is my Kingdom, I have only the name
remaining, and for Mellissa had I not seen something in her face and behavior
that was extraordinary, had I not seem something in her that distinguished her
from other people of her condition, which made me almost suspect that she was
beyond what she seemed to be; And had I not seen those perfections that dwelt
in her pretty face, and those eyes whose sparkling luster were capable of
making the strongest man to yield, (but alas she is now no more to be seen, her
eyes are closed, her rosey cheeks have lost their color and now look pale, she
is no more the same, she is gone, she is gone from me for ever) however, I say,
had I not seen what I have now told you, and that the graces of her mind did
equallize her outward perfections; and had I not likewise took notice of a
Virtue in her very difficult to be found in any other, I must confess I had not
loved her; she consented to love me but in a manner so pure that a Brother
might love a Sister with the like love; she would not agree to marry me,
because she said, her poverty and low Birth would dishonor me, and had you but
heard how prettily she pleaded against all dishonorable designs and desires,
you would have been astonished at so much virtue in one that was so young, and
that appeared (by being a Shepherds Daughter) to have had so little Education:
you would not have her be my Bride you say, but yet I may love her, and I
believe you mean, enjoy her; but could you your self Clidamant have been so
wicked as to wrong so much virtue?

I must confess, said Clidamant, I have my self admired at many things in her
which are not common, and have likewise thought, when I have looked steadfastly
upon her, that I saw something in her Face that might almost make her deserve
you; she had a cast with her Eye methought, and a look which did extremely
counterfeit Majesty; but when I considered again that she was no other than a
Shepherds Daughter, could not think her a Match for so great a person your
self; and I could have wishect, that from among all those beautiful Princesses
that are in Asia, that you had made choice of some object more answerable to
your greatness. What Princess, replied Agenoris, would look upon a dissolate
Prince, bereaved of his Kingdom, and exposed to all the injuries of Fortuen, as
I am? and if they would, what State would consent to this Alliance? True,
replied Clidamant, but times may alter, and then those that now think you are
not in being will covet your Alliance. Times, said Agenoris, do not so suddenly
change, and whether they do or no, I am indifferent, for time and fortune have
now done all they can do; they have deprived me of my Kingdom, they have made
me Spectator of the Death of her I loved, and they have deprived me of the
means of obtaining that Death I now desire; are not these Afflictions grievous?
are they not intolerable?

Clidamant seeing him so overcome with melancholy, did now, without scruple,
begin to comply with him in every thing, and used all the friendly expressions
imaginable to give him comfort, and after begging his pardon, if he had said
any thing that had moved him, which he said was the effects of his Love. He
desired him to endeavor to take some repose, which he had sacrce done since
his arrival into Cyprus; Clidamant who was his Bedfellow all that time, did
likewise not forsake him now.

The End of the First Book.
Evagoras.
BOOK II.
THe light of the Sun had scarce dissipated the thick mists of Darkness, when
most of his Illustrious Family had left their Beds again: Theocles was the
first to whom the brightness of the Morning gave an invitation to walk into the
Garden adjoining to the House; he was seconded by a Lady that waited on Emilia,
whose name was Livia, and who was the best beloved by her Mistress of any of
her Attendance; she was carressed by one Theobaldus, a Servant that waited upon
Theocles, and to whom she gave little cause of despair, for her inclination
seemed to tend much toward him; but he on the contary (as most young Lovers
do) after they have loved a little while, seemed much colder in his purpose to
her than he was before, which made her think he began to grow weary of loving
her, and that loving Novelty better, he had made choice of a new object, to
bestow there what he had taken from her. This, as we must needs think, raised
some disturbance in her mind, which made her, at that time, desire to be
private, that she might consult her thoughts with more leisure in what she had
best to do. After she had set her self down then in the midst of the Garden, by
the side of a Fountain, where her Eyes were fixed upon the spouting of the
Water out of a Dolphins mouth, upon which, by the reflection of the Sun, from
its cleerness as it came forth, might be discovered a perfect Rainbow, with
all those colors as are to be seen in the heavenly one. After she had spent
some of her thoughts in this delightful place, she walked from thence through a
middle Walk that led her under a close and fresh Arbor, which was above in a
Terras walk, it was very private and solitary, and the Terras walk is separated
from the place wherein she was by a thick Hedge, cut on the top smooth, and
like a square, about the middle of which, toward the other end of the Garden,
are six stone Steps, whereby you ascend up into the Walk, and directly at the
other end is another Arbor, made after the same manner as this; she stayed
there not long but something employed her mind otherways, for she thought she
heard somebody talk in the Arbor, and giving near notice to it, it seemed to
be the voice of one complaining, which saluted her ears, much after this
manner: I love, and I likewise find I may have hope of being beloved again, yet
he whose love I crave, knows me not; he seems to respect me as his friend,
but do I desire nothing more sensible? and yet methinks I am unjust to blame
him for what he does not know, for in the disguise I am in, how can I expect he
should know what I would have him? yet how dare I reveal it to him? is there
not a kind of modesty that restrains me, from giving my tongue that liberty?
Alas! I can but think if I should go about it, how imperfectly and with what
faltring Speech I should acquit my self of it; nay my very Blushes would
manifest my weakness to him. Ah Clidamant, what way shall I make use of then to
discover to thee that secret thou least dreamest of? Ah Clarinda, thou art
clearly lost, happy had thou been if thou had never left Creet; but why do
I say so, when I account all my happiness to be in Cyprus? Should I tell him
what I am, and that I love him? can I think it would not be the way to make me
lose his favor, and by imagining my humor to be light by such a declaration?
can I imagine too that he would not reject my generous proffer? But stay -- I
think I have begun a way already wherein, if I proceed, I may accomplish my
design with prudence: that picture I gave him may help me much in it, Courage
then Clarinda.

After these words were spoke, Livia ran to the stone Steps to get to the
Arbor to see who this Clarinda was, where when she came she found it to be
Theocles, at which, being at first not a little amazed, it made him suspect
that she had heard his discourse; wherefore to prevent her from speaking, and
with a troubled countenance; he said, I doubt not Livia but your Ears were
witnesses of some foolish Discourses I made but even now to my self, but I
imagine you are too discreet to believe them, or if you do, you are too prudent
to publish them, especially to those from whom they ought to be most concealed:
What I have heard, replied Livia, I have too long suspected not to believe: now
confess then Theocles, confess to me, that you are a woman; if I can be
serviceable to you in your Love-commerce, you may make use of one that will not
betray you. Know then, Livia, replied he, that I am a Woman, I am called
Clarinda, and not to dissemble with you, I must not disown I love Clidamant,
and that this Island was the first place of my Captivity; I think I may not
enjoin your secrecy, since it were to suspect ill of you, for if my eyes
deceive me not, you have a countenance that bears marks of more honesty and
good nature. She would have proceeded, had not Livia told her how great the
obligations were she owed her for those good Sentiments she had of her, and
that she might be sure she would endeavor to conserve her self in her good
opinion by keeping that concealed which was now discovered to her. Theocles
then took his leave of her to go in to the rest of the company, because his too
long stay might not raise some suspicion in them. Livia continued still in the
Garden, where, after she had fetched a great many turns, she chanced to come
near the other Arbor in the Terras-walk that was opposite to this, where she
had heard Theocles, and there she heard a noise, much after the same nature she
had heard in the former, and listening more attentively to it, she thought it
resembled the voice of Emilia her Mistress, which made her half suspect the
Garden was Enchanted; she was resolved to hear what it was she said, because
she had had a suspicion a great while, that she was in Love, by reason she was
more retired and melancholy than she was wont to be, but with whom she could
not divine, for she knew that Orontus was slighted by her, wherefore she had
the patience to hear these words:

I find I am unjust for being so cruel to Orontus, but alas had it not been for
Theocles, I could not have given my self these reproaches: yet when I think
with what an indifferent Eye he looks upon me, it sometimes causes me to say
to my self, Thou have deserved to be thus treated, Emilia, for rejecting true
Love for indifferency: but then Theocles knows not who loves him, if he did,
perhaps he would carry himself with more complaisance toward me. Alas, these
are but suppositions too, for how could he choose but take notice of thy looks,
Emilia, when thou were in his presence; what man is so stupid that cannot read
love in a woman's face, when her eyes sparkle and dart pleasing glances upon the
object beloved? when a blush intermixed with a smile and a languishing look upon
her lover, does show with what constraint she would conceal her weakness. Then
proceeded she: Perhaps this Letter I have writ may not make me altogether
despair, and though he may thereby think me bold, yet since I shall not be
present to blush before him, it will not so much confound me; besides, I know
he is too generous to give a bad construction on what a Lady sends him. In
saying this she went forth of the Arbor into the Terras-walk, and Livia
retched a turn another way; nevertheless in a small time after Emilia spied
her, and beckoned her to come to her, and accordingly she obeyed: Livia, said
she, the experience I have had of thy fidelity, does not make me scruple to
tell thee of the most inward passages of my heart; If I tell thee then that I
love Theocles, I hope thou will not condemn me since thou art guilty of the
same crime (if it be a crime) by loving Theobaldus. Follow the instructions
that I shall give thee; touching my intrigue with Theocles, and as thou have
been true to me hitherto, continue so for the future, and I do promise thee, I
will bring it about, that Theobaldus shall be thy Husband, nay and more than
that, I will give thee thy Wedding-Gown when thou marryest him. Livia smiled at
these words, and modestly seemed to thank her: But (said Emilia, proceeding in
her Discourse, and holding a Letter in her hand) this Letter, Livia, I Will
recommend to thy care, it is for Theocles, do not give it him thy self, but
leave it to Orontus, and tell him from me, that if he hopes for any favor from
me, he must give it to Theocles with his own hand; and withal, let him know,
that in it I have fully expressed my mind to his friend, concerning the
resolution I Will take. Livia told her, That she might assure her self, that she
would acquit her self of this Commission, as she desired. Whereupon Livia left
her to effect her commands; but when she was gone from her, how greatly did she
wonder at the strangeness of this adventure, at least she thought it so; and
had it not been that she had promised secrecy to Theocles, she had told Emilia
that he was in a woman: these things could not choose but seem odd to her,
Theocles is in love with Clidamant, who takes Theocles for a man, and Clidamant
is in love with a Picture, the original of which, he believes, he never saw,
when he sees the true one every day: Emilia on the other side loves Theocles,
whom she know not to be a woman, and rejects the love of Orontus, who long had
been her constant adorer: upon all which circumstances, when Livia reflected,
it was both a trouble and a pastime to her; she would not deliver Emilia's
Letter presently to Orontus, but stayed two or three days to find out an
opportunity, in which time she did, and gave the Letter to him, with the
Instructions she had received from her Mistress; he seemed very glad of it, but
could not deliver it presently to Theocles, because of the pleasant Comedy that
was passing between him and Clidamant, and seeing them in in discourse
together, as he thought, about some private affair, he out of civility retired.
Being gone, I must confess, Theocles, said Clidamant, that the oftener I look
upon the Picture I received from you, I every time discover things that are
more remarkable in it than I did before; I find in the Face now wonders, which
does every minute even add more fuel to make that fire burn the fiercer that
consumes me; I confess I once loved Emilia, and to all outward appearance, most
tenderly; yet I find the love I have for this Idaea, does manifest that it is
possible to be endued with a love more tender than ever that was; and as my
love to this unknown fair one does daily increase, so does likewise my
curiosity to see the person whom this Piece resembles. Then with a look that
almost spoke what he desired; It is now a great while, Theocles, said he, since
you promised me a sight of this beautiful Creature; when must be the time then,
that I must see what I never yet did, but ever shall love? when must my eyes
enjoy a happiness that does doubtless surpass all beautiful objects I ever yet
saw? and when, Theocles, when shall I with an awe, that shall evidence as much
the fear I have to offend, as the desire my love inspires me with to please
her, let her know by whom she is adored and admired, and who it is her shadow
only has made a Captive?

Are you resolved then, replied Theocles, to make choice of no Woman but the
choice I have already made for you? you have the Picture of her I have pitched
upon for you, and now it shall not be long before you have seen the party it
was drawn for. Now you are kind, Theocles, said Clidamant, the choice which you
have made for me, I like so well, that if I would, yet would not my inclination
permit me to love any other; therefore it is she that must give me either Life
or Death, and I have some glimps of hope, by what you have told me of her, that
her pity may cause her to be inclined to the first rather than to the latter.
Then, said Theocles smiling, I perceive you think to make an easy conquest of
her, before you have seen her: In truth your humor is pleasant; you have so
good an opinion of her I see, that you think she loves no delays by a tedious
courtship: in that perhaps too she may agree with you, for she may think them
superfluous; yet let me tell you, Clidamont, that though she does not love
superfluities, she is so prudent that she loves to try her pretendets, before
she will let them know her mind, and then whoever she thinks most worthy, them
to be sure she will gratify. Suppose me, Clidamant, to be that Lady, whom you
pretend to love, and whom that Picture represents, and let me see after what
gallant manner you will Court me, to make me increase the good opinion I have
of you. Agreed, answered Clidamant, it is but a frolic, and however you shall
see that I Will behave my self before you, as if I were in her presence; then
making a low obeisance to Theocles, he thus began; Madam, I need not tell you
how much I was your admirer before I saw you, for that were to say, that Nature
had not framed you more perfect than the Painter has done, but when I tell you
that his Workmanship did first inspire my heart with love, I hope, Madam, you
will with reason believe that the works of Nature being more fair and perfect
than their representations, that if I loved you then, I love you more now than
ever; I believed I could love any, and as the Painters in their Land-skips of
Woods, Rocks, Meadows, and every thing else that is made to please the eye and
fancy, cannot in picturing the the Heavens draw the Sun with that splendor it
therein appears, but only by some faint strokes represent the beams it sends
forth a little before its rising, or sometime after its setting, so show what
they would do, if they could: even so, doubtless, Lady, he could do no other by
you, some shining rays he has adormed you with, to let the beholder see, that
what he imitated was extraordinary, and that he would fain have done more, if
his cunning could have accomplished it. -- He was proceeding, when his
seemingly pretended Lady prevented him, saying, You are very expert, Clidamant,
at your subtle flattering expressions, to steal a Ladys heart away when she is
farthest from suspecting of any such thing; but alas, you Gallants are all
alike, you will swear by Heaven, and all that is most Holy therein; and by that
which you flatteringly term Beauty, that you adore your Mistresses with such a
resolute constancy, as cannot be parallelled; and yet a new object
extinguisheth those desires you had for the first, to be rekindled in your mind
for the second, insomuch that all your pretended constancy consists in being
constantly inconstant; which quality, if a Lady knows a Gentleman to be endowed
with, can you think (if she be wise) that she will give him any encouragement
in his pretensions to her? I understood, Clidamant, by a friend of mine, that
your humor does not much differ from this, and that you once loved a fair
Lady, whose Beauty, I am sure, deserves not to be slighted by you, for the
sight of any new face whatsoever; yet because you love not to Love too long
forsooth in one place, you have forsook her to deceive another in the same
kind. Ah Madam, said he passionately, call you that inconstancy, when the cruel
rigor of her you speak of, forced me to that I should otherwise never have
done, had I received that favor from her I most desired, I mean her Love, and
after this obligation, had I ingratefully forsaken her, then might I have been
termed inconstant, and then might she have said, False Man, is this my
recompense? have I deserved this for making my tongue and heart agree? But
since her greatest desire was to be freed from my importunities, and since the
greatest kindness I could do her, was to be seldom in her presence, which did
plainly testify the aversion she had toward me; what should I have done,
Madam, since I could never so much as hope for what I desired? did I not make
use of the best means, by courageously conquering this sullen passion? and
truly, Madam, it is none but you I must render thanks for taking me out of this
Captivity, to bring me, I hope, to one so pleasing to me, that thereby I may
fancy my self to be at more liberty, by wearing your chains, and to taste more
sweetness than ever my life did afford me, when I thought my self at the very
height of freedom: give me then that love the rigor of my first Mistress
refused me, and by my constancy you will find how lasting and true mine is: I
shall then likewise enjoy those sweets I before mentioned, and which I hitherto
did never find. Here Theocles sighed, and then said, Well Clidamant, I Will try
how faithful you will be to her you love. But Lord, what do I say, proceeded
she, I have made a promise to my self to love no body, that promise is unjust;
No body? said Clidamant: but Clidamant, answered she; and in speaking that, she
blushed so extremely, that if she had not cunningly, upon some pretense turned
her face another way, she would doubtless have betrayed her self: this then
made her resolve to break off this discourse, which though perhaps she thought
not very unpleasant, however she imagined it might reveal a weakness in her,
which she had, as yet, no mind to have discovered. After then she had rallied
with him, upon what had passed between them, their discourses were concerning
matters altogether indifferent, in which interim Orontus entered, and whispering
Theocles in the ear, told him, he had something to deliver him from Emilia;
Clidamant thinking it not decency to remain there any longer, departed the
Room, and scarce was he gone, when Orontus produced the Letter, and delivered
it to Theocles, telling him that Emilia had certified him in that Letter,
concerning the resolution she would take touching himself. Theocles opened it,
and with much amazement read these words: Emilia to Theocles.

I Know not whether these Lines may obtain their wished-for success, as well
because I expose my self to your censure, by doing what so ill suits with our
Sex, as because I never found you in the least inclined to what I could desire
you were: If for saying I love you, your unkindness can reach to that extent as
to hate me for saying so, I must then prepare to suffer an indignity,
occasioned by my imprudence. I never before endeavored to seek, and I must
confess, had I not seen something in you not common in other Men, I had not
blushed by writing these Lines: keep that concealed then from Orontus, which I
would have no body to know but your self; and let me know whether it lies in
your power to oblige

Emilia.



Orontus asked Theocles after he had read the Letter, whether there was any
comfort in it for him? Theocles looks then began to be troubled, but clearing
them up again as well as he could, not to make Orontus suspect what he had most
reason to fear; and having thought what to answer, bid him take courage, for it
was all so favorable on his behalf, that if he saw it he would scarce believe
it: and to that end therefore she had in it forbid him to let him see it,
because she had no desire to let him too soon know that which would so much
please him. If, said Theocles, I have told you what perhaps you should not
know, I doubt not but you are so discreet, as to behave your self so before
her, as if you knew it not; and however cruel she seems to you, let not that
cause your trouble, because I tell you she has here expressed her self more
favorably perhaps then you could think: and after he had begged his pardon of
him, for not showing him the Letter, poor Orontus departed the Chamber with a
very joyful heart, little thinking after what manner he was deceived. When he
was gone, Theocles was at a stand to know what he should do in this intricate
business; but he continued so not long, because he thought he had found out a
way to help Orontus to what in all likelihood he was so far distant from: which
this design in his head then he quitted the Chamber, with an intention to visit
Emilia, whom he happily found in her own apartment, seeming to be very
melancholy, for there was no body with her but Livia, at his first entering into
the Chamber she turned her face away to conceal some blushes from him, which
she had no mind he should see: by which modest bashfulness Theocles
nevertheless might perceive, that she was inclined to a constrained repentance,
for sending that favorable Letter. Therefore said he to her (because, as yet,
he had no desire to let her know what he was) Madam, though your beauty be
capable to charm the very Gods themselves, and to make them forsake their
heaven, for one more delightful here below; though all the graces that dwell in
that face, and the pure carnation which nature has spread in those cheeks that
dart forth such powerful influences, as to make all those that behold you
become your Captives: and Madam, though I am one among the rest, the love of
you must kill, but not permit me to pretend to what will make me undeserving of
those high favors you have conferred upon me, which indeed have been so great,
that by giving you a denial, I may appear to you in some sort ungrateful, yet I
hope, Madam, when you shall consider that on the other side, I shall be not
only ungrateful but perfidious, by betraying my friend, who entrusted me with
his hearts most secret passages, and who not only did that, but employed me to
endeavor to obtain that from you, which he himself could never do; you cannot
be so unjust as to suffer it: Shall I then betray poor Orontus that loves you,
and puts his confidence in me? Shall I do that, Madam, which I, when I have
done, you will with justice esteem me unworthy of what I wish I could tell how
to accept or receive otherwise? Besides, he that will be unfaithful to his
friend, will certainly be so to any other; may not you with reason fear then
Madam, (after such an action) that I would be so to you?

Am I then slighted by you Theocles? replied Emilia, ungrateful Man! are Ladys
so prodigal of such favors as I have thrown upon you, as this ought to be
esteemed of so? No, no, proceeded she, I did not expect this requital: thy
baseness, unworthy man, shall now banish thee from my mind for ever; I Will
conquer that which has made me endanger my honor, and which I only have done
by saying, I loved thee; yet this poor refusal from thee is returned me,
instead of affection, and though my love was honorable (as I imagine; if you
know me, you think no otherwise) I see you prize a Friend more than a Mistress,
the tender love of which does far better deserve that name than the other; love
and friendship are there so linked together, that such a one deserves to be
called the friend of friends. But notwithstanding, all this disdain and scorn
must be the effect of your ill-bred Gallantry.

I beseech you forbear these injuries, Madam, (said Theocles, in interrupting)
her when I tell you that you have overcome; I may with reason call them so; and
though I never yet loved woman, I find your eyes are inducements too persuasive
to make me be still in love with freedom; and yet methinks I wish I could not
love you, that you might love despairing Orontus, whom you will doubtless kill.
But alas, I find (said he, with a counterfeit sigh) that my love is too great,
to let my Rival have what I would solely have to my self. I could likewise
wish, said Emilia, that I could love Orontus his person, I confess it is not
unhandsom, neither are his parts unanswerable to it; but yet if I may say so,
Theocles, I find I know not what in you, which I cannot see in Orontus; I find
something so worthy of my affection, that my very reason does seem to say to
me, fix thy love there, Emilia: and now since you have begun to deserve what I
doubt not but I have worthily placed, let me see how constant you will prove.

You shall find I shall not be unconstant, replied Theocles; but Madam, as a
mark of that love you are pleased to bestow upon your unworthy servant, may I
presume to ask you to grant a request, I am going to demand of you? What is it
Theocles? said she: But a promise, (Madam, answered he) of no great importance.
It Is granted already, what ever it be, said she; therefore pray let me hear it.
Only, proceeded he, that if ever it should happen, that you refuse to make me
your Bridegroom, you would confer that happiness on Orontus, with the love you
bear me. If that be all, said she, I do once again confirm my promise; for
should I ever refuse you, it would be me you might first tax with inconstancy;
but that I am certain will never come to pass. I wish the thing you made me
promise had been of greater consequence, added she, for I find I can deny you
nothing that is decent. Then Madam, said Theocles, (because he would partake of
some Mirth) I Will be bold to beg another favor of you. You shall likewise have
it, said she, therefore let me know your desire. My desire is only, Madam, said
he, smiling, That you would let me seal the Covenant, that was now made between
us. How do you mean Theocles? replied she: Upon those cherry Lips, Madam, said
he. Whereupon he presently saluted her, which made the Roses of her Cheeks wear
a deeper dye then they did before: and Orontus entered the Chamber in the same
instant, and saw him do that which did not a little displease him. During his
stay there, Theocles read an anger in his countenance, which he feared would
too soon break out; yet he smiled in himself, to think how causless his anger
was, if he knew all. the more cruel his Mistress seemed to him, the more did
his trouble seem to increase; and had it not been for the respect of her, in
whose presence he was, he had doubtless made an open manifestation of his
displeasure on Theocles; who, because he would give him no further occasion,
went forth of the room. Orontus imagined Emilia to be far more rigorous to him
than she had been yet, and therefore his suspicion that Theocles had done him a
discourtesie increased the more: he seeing then that all his protestations, all
his vows to her of the faithfulness of his love, and all his unfeigned sighs,
did seem but the more to harden that heart he endeavored to soften, took his
leave of her soon after Theocles, even with the tears in his eyes, and scarce
was he got out of the chamber door, but he found a piece of Paper handsomely
wrapped up like a Letter, which it seems Theocles had chanced to drop out of
his Pocket; Orontus had no sooner found it, but looking upon it, there it was
he saw Emilia to Theocles: he had both the curiosity and patience to see what
it contained, which when he understood, you must needs think the latter left
him to give way to rage, and the first continued to find out Theocles, whom he
swore he would kill, wheresoever he met him; he raved, stamped, and poured
forth all the imprecations he could invent against poor Theocles; he called him
whatever can be thought most vile; and not long after finding him by chance, by
the Seaside, he thus accosted him, with his naked Sword in one hand and
Emilia's Letter in the other.

Insolent Traitor, can thou think to breath in this innocent Air, after thy
perfidious, false and unworthy Action? was it this Letter gave thee
encouragement, to behave thy self with that baseness? and she, O cruel Woman!
does she hate me, to love this Traitor? but my Sword, said he, flourishing of
it in his hand, shall chastise thee, therefore defend thy self, if thy guilt
will permit thee to fight in so bad a cause.

Hold Orontus, said theocles, trembling, because he never had been used to such
Weapons, whose very glittering struck terror into him; I am no Traitor
Orontus, as you believe me to be, but on the contrary, you will find that I
have done you service. Bold affronter! replied Orontus, what do thou deride
me after thy treacheries? did I not with these eyes see what thou did to
abuse me, when I came into her Chamber? did you not also deceive me, by telling
me what she never writ? wherefore I will not believe any thing you shall say
more.

He was going to bid him draw, when Agenoris and Clidamant were come toward
them, and having asked Orontus the meaning of the posture they saw him in, he
excused it with a Joak, which was likewise forwarded by Theocles, for they were
not so near them, as to hear what they spoke. Orontus then for the present
dissembled his trouble, and they both accompanied Agenoris, whom Clidamant had
persuaded to walk out, to divert himself, for grief had so changed him, and
melancholy was so predominant in him, ever since his return home, for the loss
of her he so dearly loved, that it was to be feared it would kill him, if they
did not try to prevent it, by causing him sometime to take the Air, and to use
all manner of noble and heroic exercises, to expel that tormenting Grief, the
chiefest of which was Hunting; but alas, he took little pleasure in it, for
sometimes would he stray from the rest of his company, and retiring to some
solitary place, there would he to the Trees, and to the senceless Flowers, that
embellished the Grass, give a pretty, though mournful account, of his present
sufferings, and from the yearly droppings of the Dew from their fragrant tops,
would he sometimes extract comfort, because they seemed to be his companions in
sorrow, and to weep with him. All those that did for the most part accompany
him, did labor by all the Pastimes, Exercises, and Diversions they could
invent, to dissipate those foggy smoaks of sorrow; but they might as well
endeavor to stop the course of a Ship in a furious storm, or call back time,
and they would both have come to the same effect; for alas, nothing but
Mellissa had that virtue, reason was too weak with him to overcome his grief;
the absence and death of his Love made it the more excessive, the thoughts of
greatness and Majesty were forgot to think of his dead Shepherdess.

After they had fetched two or three turns upon the Seashore, all the company
but Theocles returned to the Castle, whither they were scarce come, but with a
common consent they went into Emilia's Chamber, to entertain her, the subject
of their discourse was for the most part indifferent, till at length, coming to
discourse of Love, especially of the sincerity with which Agenoris loved;
Verily, said Clidamant, we must be forced to confess, by the sad experience we
have now had of Loves dire effects, that the little stripling is not to be
mocked at, for on my word, we are all witnesses, nay, and some of us know that
he does generally stick his Arrows very deep, he is almost like Death, though
not so terrible, he makes no distinction between Monarchs and others. Lord! how
unruly, how restless is a lovesick heart? our desires continue always
dissatisfied, till we have got what we most desired, and then our pain is
somewhat eased.

Love (though by some dull fools it is termed the most slavish of Passions) yet
ought it to be esteemed the most Noble: Anger does oftentimes make a man forget
his Honor, and do those things which are always ended with a deep repentance:
Love on the contrary raises a man's thoughts to something more sublime, and
causes a man to seek Honor, to appear so in the eyes of her he loves; and the
end of Love is joy and satisfaction. Fear there are several sorts of, there is
fear in Love, a fear of offending the object loved, not a cowardly slavish
fear, but a heroic and meritorious fear.

That servile passion that makes a man fear his own shadow is here not meant,
nor that which makes men tremble at the sight of Warlike Instruments, nor that
which some have of Death, for a true Lover will sacrifice his Life on any
occasion for his Mistress: these are the fears which Lovers seldom or never
have, by what they have not, you may with ease guess what that pure fear is
they have, or should have, for Love is not Love without it, nay it cannot
subsist. Some are so rigid and moross, as to make no distinction between Love
and Lust, but it must be confessed that these are those that never knew what
the first was, though by having acquaintance with the latter, they would seem
to force the World into a belief, that their Vices are general, and that a man
may also love with constancy and purity, and yet not be a Platonic lover; it
is so certain, that I think it a folly to dispute it.

How deeply I love the memory of my Shepherdess, said Agenoris, though fate
has too soon deprived me of her, and how purely I loved her before she was
snatched from my presence, notwithstanding she gave me no hopes I should ever
taste the sensible pleasures of Love; how I loved, I say, you can all witness,
which Love I suppose you can find no reason to call Lust; had I endeavored to
seduce her, and make her submit to my unlawful desires (but Heaven knows my
desires were limited, I may in a manner say by her sight and company) my care
would then have extended no further than to have compassed my vicious aims; but
since I did not, it makes me find a clear distinction between Love and Lust;
there is sweetness to be found in the first, but bitterness in the last; the
first is clean and spotless, the latter is filthy and black: yet is not my Love
Platonical neither, though it inspired me with a desire of obtaining what I
loved.

What I am going to tell you, said Clidamant, may perhaps seem strange to you,
though it agree well with what you say (so pulling out his Picture, that
Theocles had given him) and showing it to Agenoris and the rest of the company:
This Picture, added he, I am in love with, whether the party it resembles be in
being or no, or whether the Painter has gone no further here than his own
fancy told him, I know not, but I had it from Theocles; and so he related to
them all that Theocles had told him concerning this Lady, and the promise
Theocles had caused him to make, touching the Mistress he was to choose him:
they were mightily surprised at the beauty of the face, and did acknowledge it
to be truly admirable: they had not discoursed above four hours, when Livia,
who had been out of the Chamber a great while entered it again, followed by a
young Lady in the most glorious Apparel, and with the most majestical presence
that eyes ever saw, or heart ever admired; her head was covered with a Vail,
whereby the most beautiful part, her face was like the Sun, when shadowed by
some interposing Cloud unseen; her Apparel was blue Satin, and covered so
thick with flowers of Gold, intermingled with precious Stones, that wherever
she came her sparkling presence seemed to create a new day; her Train was held
up by a Rage, and on the left hand of her, walked a grave old man in Apparel
suitable to his years. The eyes of the company were all not only fixed upon
this prodigious object, but all of them wondered who it should be, and to what
her coming thither tended: but Livia soon made their wonder cease, when leading
her before them, and pulling up her Vail, Behold here, said she, in directing
her speech to Agenoris, the lost Mellissa. No sooner had she ended these words,
but Ageneris having discovered it to be indeed that Mellissa he thought was no
more, he would scarce believe what he with his eyes saw, nay, he thought they
were deluded, and that it was only the strength of his imagination, that made
him conceive, what he in all likelihood believed to be impossible. His wonder
was not unaccompanied, for the rest were in as great admiration as he. He sat
still a while, making use of no other Language but his eyes, which were
intentively fixed upon this charming Nymph, and beholding her both with fear
and joy, she continuing silent. Do I dream? said he, if I do, may I thus dream
for ever. Or is it possible, beauteous Angel, that the Gods have yet reserved
thee to shine here below? Miracle of Miracles! I must confess thou would have
graced the Heavens with a new Star, the brightness of whose beams, would, like
the Sun, have obscured all other lights. But who knows but they have done it
for the good of us Mortals, that we may have our Sun here below, as they have
thiers in their Heaven. Bright Queen of beauty, thou pretty reviver of
disconsolate hearts, for without thee I had been without my self; without thee
I had been a walking shadow, a mere nothing, a mere lump of Snow, melting away
without pity under the Sun beams. I know thou did remember there was an
Agenoris in the world that loved thee, and to doubt that thou sometimes gave
him a gentle entertainment in thy thoughts, were to reproach thee of what thou
can not be guilty of. Here Livia beckoned him to be a while silent, because
Mellissa gave him no answer, therefore she spoke to him in this sort:

How much you are deceived, Agenoris, I cannot forbear to interrupt you, that I
may undeceive you as well as the rest of this company. Now you have been all so
credulous to believe me, when I told you this was Mellissa, what will you say,
when I tell you it is not Mellissa, -- although it once was she, but alas, she
is now changed. --

Gods! said Agenoris, What is it I hear, it cannot be? speak not the rest, for
fear I should believe the Heavens to be without Gods, and so become Infidel,
for as soon may that be, as she be taxed with unconstancy. Yet speak what you
have more to say, for I can hear, though not believe, I am so well acquainted
with her Virtues.

Know then, said Livia, that she has changed her condition.

Ah! worse and worse! said he, pray Heaven my fears augment not; but since I
have begun to know my doom, I am resolved now to hear the utmost; and still
methinks my mind gives me, that Mellissa's soul cannot be black, sure she
cannot. Must I attribute this her silence, to be a confirmation of Livia's
discourse, or may it be her modesty that I wrong, in supposing it to be guilty?
be it what it will, I must know.

Then said he to Livia, Is she espoused? Yes my Lord, replied Livia. Now my
fears are out, said he, unkind and hard hearted Maid: Was it for this, I have
been always dying, since the time I parted from thee? Mellissa made no reply,
but held down her head. And then said he to Livia, To whom is she espoused? To
a better Fate, said Livia. I am still in the dark, replied Agenoris, prithee,
Livia, explain thy self more at large, for my heart does almost seem to check
my tongue, for calling her unkind, though by all thou have hitherto told me, I
do seem to say justly, therefore pray rid me from this trouble and confusion.

My Lord, I am going to obey you, said Livia, and shall draw a shady cloud from
before your eyes, that in clearing all your doubts and fears, will
notwithstanding raise a new subject of wonder among you all. Look upon this
Lady then, said she, in pointing to Mellissa, no more as Mellissa, who was a
Shepherdess, poor in every thing but her Virtues and Beauty, but behold her to
be the divine Alcandra, Princess of Sicily; she that was supposed to dye before
she was three years old, she who is endued with all the excellencies that are
capable of adorning Majesty; she who when she was supposed a Shepherdess, had
even then the port and grace of what her Birth has really made her. I shall
not endeavor to persuade you to believe what I say, because, said she,
pointing to the ancient Gentleman, that Lord will produce those proofs that
will make it plain enough.

They were all so transported with amazement at these unexpected tidings, that
they knew not in a manner what to think or say; they all complemented her in
the best manner they could, and Agenoris was the first, with one Knee on the
ground, that kissed her hand, whom all the rest did imitate, which they had
scarce done, when she addressed her Speech to Agenoris in this manner?

I am now come to make good my word with you, Agenoris, fortune has now,
beyond my expectation, shined favorably upon me; you know what I promised you,
and now I can with my Love bestow a Crown upon you, which I would entreat you
to accept of, as a debt due to your noble constancy. You, that are a Gentleman,
did cast down a look upon me, when I was no other than a Shepherdess; and I,
whom fate has seemed to raise above you, in placing me in a Throne, should be
indeed ungrateful, to forget my Vows to Agenoris, after such tokens of
generosity. If upon my first approach to you, you perceived me to be silent,
and if Livia, likewise, gave you doubtful answers to your demands, according to
the order I gave her, imagine it to be, because I was curious to know whether
Age oris had not forgot his Mellissa, for by this trial, I believed, I could
find out how you would brook my separation from you, by my pretended
inconstancy. The Oracle, Agenoris, is now explained, your own eyes seemed to be
witnesses of my Death, when mine did likewise behold the like Spectacle of
yours; the approaching danger the Gods foretold is now over, wherefore we must
expect our fill of happiness.

Pardon me, divine Madam, said Agenoris, if the Gods have not accomplished all
they foretold; I must acknowledge I am of Princely Blood, but fortune has not
so enriched me with her bounties, as to make me deserve such large ones as you
are pleased to express. Alas, I have no Kingdom to bestow, Madam, I have
nothing that may make me seem worthy in your eyes, if you will give me leave to
say to my self, I love you (and truly I love more than I can say) that is all I
do presume to ask. Yet, Madam, the same promise your goodness once made me, the
same will I here confirm to you, if fortune should hereafter chance to smile,
then, Madam, I Will beg that you would too. I am sorry that fate will not let me
hope for what I must love, and in the state I am in, it is a grace too too
great, that you would give me leave to say so.

My noble Lord, replied Alcandra, ever since I first saw you, I have discerned
some marks of greatness in your countenance, which indeed did ever make me
believe what you have now told me; it is not possessions that create deserts,
for then the most undeserving persons would be endued with merit; besides, my
love is not so poor as to descend to things so abject as you mention; my flame
is more noble, to love you only for what you do possess (except it be your
Virtues and Merit) it were to love you impurely, or rather it were not to love
you, therefore cancel your rash promise. --

Agenoris was just going to answer, had it not been for another Lady that came
into the Chamber at that instant, who having first made a low obeissance to
Agenoris and the rest of the company, who all beheld her with great
astonishment, especially Clidamant, who thought she somewhat resembled the
Picture he had, yet he could not believe it to be she, for whom it was drawn,
because the Picture was not so beautiful: but much more were they surprised
when she told them that they all once knew her as Theocles, a man, but never
yet as Clarinda, a woman. I shall not need to defire you to call me the latter,
said she, because you see my Sex not only requires it, but it is also a name
that is real, whereas the first was feigned. They remained all of them some
time silent, they were so confounded, and they beheld her with admiration, for
if when she seemed to be a man, she made one so handsome, that she was without
comparison; now she was a woman she was so extremely fair and pretty, that no
Sun could outshine her. Clidamant blessed himself a thousand times, for that
the Gods had been so favorable to him; what her Picture only excited in his
soul, her presence did make it double: his ecstasy was so great, that he wanted
words to utter his transports; but after he had a while silently admired at
what he saw; Heavens! (said he to himself) what a divine Lady is here? whoever
sees her without a heart enflamed, he either loves not, or does not know the
sweet delights of Love.

Emilia was going to speak, when Clarinda proceeded in her discourse. There are
several things I know, said she, that may seem incredible to this Illustrious
Company, if I should not explain them; one I know is my continuance in this
disguise all this time; the other is the strangeness of my arival to this
Island. As to the first, to speak truth, I had a desire to have my Sex
concealed, but all that I shall say now, for to excuse my discovery, is only to
entreat Emilia to remember her promise. However, said she, smiling, if she
thinks me a fit Bridegroom for her, I am content.

Well, I see, replied Emilia, that notwithstanding all my strong resolutions to
the contrary, I must refuse you now; I think I was guilty of no crime in loving
you, since never any man was seen with a face so lovely, and though I loved you
before, imagining you to be the wonder of the Male Sex, my love must not
forsake you now, because I must still love you as my dear friend.

However, said Clarinda, going to Orontus, and making him conduct her, or
rather she him, Here said she, Orontus, causing Emilia to give him her hand,
Now enjoy fair weather, after all this foul, she is yours, Orontus, she will be
no more cruel now for my sake, the love she bore me, she now bestows on you:
see, said she, that blush does now confirm what she promised me.

Then, said Emilia, (in a low note, after she had composed her countenance,
which was a little disordered) since Promises should never be broke, and since
Fate has thus unexpectedly ordered things, I do not so much think, Orontus,
said she, that you deserve to have a place here (laying her hand upon her
heart) but also that your constancy and your long service may more than have
deserved it; therefore to conser the love I had for Theocles on you, is the
least I can do, but the most I am inclined to.

Then was it that Orontus saluted her hand, but with the greatest Rapture
imaginable, and replied, I am so over-joyed, Madam, at this fullness of bliss,
that I want words to thank you for it. And then directing his Speech to
Clarinda; Can you pardon, Madam, the rudeness I lately committed against you, I
must confess it was ignorance made me guilty of it, but I hope you are so good,
that since now I know my fault, and am grown a penitent, you will forgive me;
the obligation likewise I owe you, for this days happiness does even stupifie
my senses, when I think how little I have deserved this from you.

Clainda returned his complements in as gallant a manner as could be, when
Emilia going toward Clidamant, whose eyes were steadfastly fixed upon the fair
Clarinda, told her, That as she had been the occasion of extracting the
performance of a promise from her, on the behalf of Orontus, she did now
likewise expect, that she should do the like on the behalf of Clidamant: For,
said Emilia to her, I know who it was you promised to bestow on Clidamant, nay,
and he has deserved her, I Will assure you, since he loved her so tenderly
before he saw her. Perhaps, (replied Clarinda, in a faint voice) he may not
with justice do what he promised, because it is not unlikely that he has found
out some fair Lady, whose merits are far greater, wherefore I shall not urge
him to perform what he has promised. Ye Gods, said Clidamant, running to her,
and saluting her fair hand with much eagerness, can I hear this, and not die?
fair Jewel, said he, either suffer me to perform the promise I made to your
dear self (for if you were once Theocles, it was to no other) and grant I may
obtain what I have so long humbly sued for, or with the wound those shining
eyes have given my heart, give me that which may end my days, for any thing
(whatever it be) fair sweetness, if it come from you, it can be no other than
welcome. Do you think I can kill you then, Clidamant? said she, no; here, now
take your Clarinda, if you die with any thing from me, it must be the excess of
my love must kill you. Kind Love, I thank thee, said Clidamant, for affording
me such heavenly Joys, thy Deity shall be adored by me, and thy Altars ever
loaded with my Victims; and thou kind Nymph, who have thus crowned my hopes
with comfort, shall find so true a love in this poor heart enclosed, that shall
almost make thee think it worthy of thy acceptance. Here Agenoris interrupted
him: This is a day, said he, that has been filled with nothing but wonders, it
ought to be solemnized for having produced such Miracles. Now, said he, you are
all happy -- But I, who am, and yet must not and who may, and yet dare not. Ye
Gods, how just are you, thus to allay my happiness? Divine Princess, said he,
in directing his Speech to Alcandra, I do adore you, but it is an adoration
that nothing equalleth, but that I pay to the Gods themselves. The Princess was
going to answer him, when Clarinda prevented him, by telling him, that
doubtless what the Gods had done already, they would complete, and therefore
bid him not refuse what they offered him: so after a small pause; I am now
going to let you understand, said she, the occasion of my being at Sea.

My Father, as I told you before, is Governor of a Town in Creet, on whom King
Porus has conferred many other Offices, by which you may perceive, he was not
a little beloved by that Prince, but one Polianor had insinuated himself into
the Kings favor, to that pitch, that he seemed among all the other Favorites
at Court to be the best beloved, and being therefore one of no mean power,
after he hd long courted me, under specious pretenses of Honor, to marry me,
although by my cold entertaining him, he might have discerned the aversion of
my mind toward him, being one as deformed in Body, as low spirited in Soul,
and one the baseness of whose extraction did seem to dwell in his Physiognomy,
his Birth being so far from Noble, that the meanest slave in Creet had more
reason to brag of his extraction than he, because he was raised merely by the
Kings favor; all his actions, which were seldom good, were winked at by the
rest of the Nobility, although it did not a little trouble them, to have a
person so far beneath them, take place of them, with so much haughtiness as he
did. This Villain, I say, when he saw that I was deaf to his Courtship, when he
seemed to caress me under the mask of Honor, provoked by an infamous desire,
came at length to solicit me unlawfully, as if because I would not submit to
him on virtuous terms, as he pretended, he should think that I would abandon my
Honor, and after a passion, painted and colored with sighs, he called his
presents to his asistance, but he saw it did but make me more soornful, and he
had no sooner, on a certain day made some offers to me, that were indeed
extremely rich, but I, in a fury, left him by himself, and from that time it
was he began to conspire my ruin, and to seek to get by force, what he could
not obtain by merit; Lust not Love provoking him to attempt what honor and his
own spirit, had it any thing of generosity in it, would never let him rest till
he had extinguishes a desire so abominable; but alas such noble thoughts could
never invade the mind of one whose Heart was like his Birth, filthy; for he was
not only descended from the dregs of the People, but he was likewise unlawfully
begotten: my Father had notice of his design, sometime before he endeavored to
put it in execution, and almost too late to have prevented it; for I being one
day in a small Wilderness situated in the midst of my Fathers Garden;
Polianor, who had continually his spies ready, being informed where I was,
being as he thought a very fit place for him to execute his black design in,
was preparing to come in to me, having procured a Key to the Door, which he had
caused to be made on purpose; to execute with the more ease his detestable
Enterprise: but my Father being just before informed by some special Friend of
what he intended, came presently to me, and caused me to come into the House;
where being come, he gave me a Drink to frustrate the intent of Polianor, who
had been in the Garden to search for me, but not finding me, went out again
very unsatisfied; and being come into the Town, was there informed by the
Rumor my Politic Father spread, that I was dead; for the Virtue of what I
drank, procured me so great a sleep, that it seemed to all Spectators, as no
other than the Sleep of Death. Polianor being somewhat rerrified at this sad
News, came to behold it painted on my Face, and then a strange remorse
quarreled with his lust, and his despair, or rather rage, armed him to kill
himself; but whilst his Soul was troubled here withal, I was (being by Friends
first dressed up in Man's Apparel, as you saw, for my better concealment)
conveyed secretly into a Barck, and scarce had I finished my sleep, but at my
first awaking, I found my self upon the Sea; which I did not so much wonder at,
as at my strange Metamorphosis from a Woman to a Man: but a Friend of my
Fathers, whom he entrusted to take care of me, and who was on board, soon
helped me out of that trouble; and after he had told me that we were sailing
toward Lydia, he related to me the whole Adventure, with the secret Imposture
of my fained Death; when suddenly a storm broke the Discourse, and Horror and
Death marched upon the Waters, and as I before told you, drove us upon a Rock,
and split our Vessel all to pieces, not far from these Coasts: I doubt the
Friend that was in the Bark with me, is drowned, I my self, as you see, having
miraculously escaped.

I know not which of the Gods took care of me, but I cannot forbear to
acknowledge how much I am indebted to Agenoris and Clidamont, for preserving my
Life. My Father, who has had no News of me since my Arrival here, I fear does
imagine, as justly he may, that I am drowned; and I was fearful to send, least
some unlucky accident or other might have brought my Letters into the Hands of
Nearchus; who doubtless if he knew where I was, would make a general search for
me; that likewise was one reason that made me continue in this disguise: but
now since other Mysteries far stranger than these are revealed, and since
Clidamont has sworn himself mine, it were a vain thing for me to have
concealed my self longer: Having ended her Relation, they all, after they had
returned her those thanks, and given her those praises, her Wit deserved,
departed one from another to take their Rests, because Night already began to
spread her Sable Curtains over them.

The next morning, when the singing of the Birds had rowsed them up with their
pretty Notes, they all agreed, both the Ladies and the Gentlemen, to walk to
the Grove of Venus, there to entertain one another in the Lodge, that was on
the top of the Labarinth; where they had not long enjoyed themselves, by taking
notice of the pleasure of the Prospect that was discerned from that place, but
Agenoris told the Princess Alcandra, that he knew his mind did not disagree
with the rest of the Company; for being desirous to know how she came to escape
all those dangers in which she was, and that since the place was pleasant
wherein they were (he seconded by the rest of the Company) beseeched her to
relate her Adventures, which without much intrearies she did to this effect.

The Adventures of Alcandra.
HAd I all the Languages of the Gods, and had Eloquence to choose out my Voice
to manifest her self to Men, it is unpossible to express the hundredth part of
my sufferings, when I was taken by Cleobalus, Captain of the Vagabonds of
Latronia, and when I saw Agenoris lie dead in the Cave wherein we were locked;
then was it that I began to think the Oracle was near fulfilled; for being in
the power of the greatest Savages in the Universt, in the midst of Rocks and
Deserts, and having seen him slain, whom I may now say, I loved dearer than my
own Life; it is not to be doubted that my grief could admit of any comparison
with common miseries. I filled the Air and Forests with my Cries, and although
death was the most assured remedy I could choose, I was loath to die by the hand
of so cruel a Monster: he many times would importune me with his unlawful Suit;
but seeing he could gain nothing from my constancy, and that I was resolved
rather to lose my Life than my Honor, he dragged me through retired and lonely
places, into solitary Deserts, imagining by therein to take by force, what he
could not obtain by entreaty; but the Gods did not forsake me in distress, for
the King of Pysidia coming then with a powerful Army upon the Town of Latronia,
Captain Decius, Kinsman to Dyonisius, came with Twenty or Thirty Horsemen that
way, just at the time when he was going to put in practice his pernicious
enterprise; when I saw this Troop coming directly toward us, I began to hope
for Death, to put a period to my miseries, or to change my Master. Cleobalus,
who took them to be some of his own gang, advances toward them; and very
boldly asked them whither they went? But Decius imagining him to be one of
those that King Arcon had set upon, not knowing him to be the Governor of
Latronia, approached him, and encompassed him so close, that he had only the
leisure to quit me, and draw his Sword.

During this Combat, I stole away from the Crowd, because the little Casket I
brought with me from Cyprus, wherein were a great many Rich Jewels that were
presented to me by Agenoris, kept me from running; I hid it in a little thick
Bush, and covered it with some White Linen, to the end I might know it again
if I escaped. In the same instant I took my flight, but I had scarce got thirty
paces from thence, when five or six Soldiers of King Arcons Army, that were
there in the Field, laid hold on me, and were going to evil use me; but Decius
took me out of their Hands, and said aloud, Since I was the first spoil that
was taken, that they must reserve me to be made a Victim to the Gods.

They carried me then to the Lodgings of Dyonisius, who commanded the
Vant-guard of the Army, and shut me in a Chamber till the taking of Latronia;
here it was I heard of the Death and Name of Cleobalus: from this place I was
carried to Pisidia, to be sacrificed at the Temple of Jupiter; to mention my
Complaints and Lamentations the whole length of my Journey, having left
Agenoris without a Sepulcher in a Cave, I should never find an end to my
Discourse (for I thought him dead, and although the same night that I was
carried away by Dyonisius I heard in the next Chamber to mine, a Voice that
resembled his, I rather believed it to be his Ghost than him to be alive) let
it suffice to tell you that I did but change my misfortune in changing of
place, and it seemed as though Fate would preserve me from one disaster, to
make me fall into a greater; for scarce had I been a day at the House of
Dyonisius the Priest of Pysidia, but Philander, who was his youngest Son, broke
open the Gates where I was enclosed, and carried me away from his Fathers
House, accompanied with three more Youths besides himself: promising that if I
would consent to marry him, to render me the happiest Person in the World, and
to preserve my Life; all his promises were unavailable to me, the Visage of
Agenoris had so deep an impression on my Soul, that to extinguish the least
Character of him, was to take away my Life; and whosoever could make me love
any other Object, must cause me to be born again, and enrich me with a new
Heart.

Philander thought nevertheless, that time might sweeten this Natural Obstinacy
that seemed to be in me, and that at length Love might softly steal upon me;
with this hope he carried me away to Pamphilia, where he had some acquaintance;
but as we were passing along through a large Forest, to go to the Town of
Pezga, which is near the Sea; we saw our selves encompassed by Ten of the Kings
Guard, who were then pursuing a Syrian Gentleman (as I know since) who had
secret Intelligence in Foreign parts, and would endeavor to stir up the
People to rebel against their Legitimate Sovereign; and because Philander, as
they told us since, did much resemble him, they seized upon us, and carried us
to the King; but when they had examined him more nearly, they sent him again
into his own Country without any farther trouble, and the Queen of Pamphilia
stayed me in spite of him; having secretly understood that I was stolen away
by him. I remained sometime in this Kingdom, and can without vanity say, that
there was neither Cavallier nor Lady at the Court, but thought the sight of me
a favor: I must confess, I was ashamed of receiving what I believed I so
little deserved in a Prince's Palace, not only because I knew nothing in me,
that could make me worthy of the least Favor they showed me in a Place of that
Splendour; but because I knew how mean my Birth was; and though I had Apparel,
and every thing else allowed me, that was truly Magnificent, yet I thought my
self still in my Shepherdess Weed: and though I also sometimes sat on Cloth of
Gold, I thought my self as it were seated on a Swelling Bank of cheerful Green;
still keeping my homely Flocks. But when I likewise thought on the Death of
Agenoris (for I could not be persuaded that he was alive) I was no more capable
of any Contentment; I passed my days in perpetual Languishings, and every
Object I saw offended my sight.

I entreated the Queen, then to permit me to go and end my days in Cyprus;
there was then a Pilot in the Port of Necopolis, that was going toward
Famagusta; he put me under his protection, but it was to engage me in new
misfortunes; for we were scarce got Forty Leagues from the Port, but a Pirate
took our Vessel and sunk her, after he had taken all the Merchandise, and all
those that were in her out of her: I was carried Captive to the Island of
Rhodes, and I escaped narrowly losing my Life there; for these Pirates have a
Custom to Sacrifice a Virgin to the God Neptune every time they go to make some
Voyage, and as bad luck would have it, the lot fell upon me: but as if Fate
would seem to contadict it self, the Priest became deeply in Love with me; he
hid me in the most retired place of his Lodgings, and changed my Habit, taking
away every thing that he thought might render me remarkable; and when the day
of the Sacrifice came, he took out of the Prison a young Grecian Virgin, who
had been taken about Ephesus, and for whom they were in hopes of a great
Ransom; he Apparelled her in my Clothes and brought her to the Sea side,
where she was Sacrificed in my place.

During the Ceremony, and knowing that every Body was gone to see the
Spectacle, and that no Body could hinder me from going forth, I took a
Resolution to run away, to deliver me from the slavery of so many Corsares; the
effect did happily answer my expectations, I got clear of the Isle of Rhodes,
by favor of the Pirates themselves, who seeing me in an ill Habit and
Equipage, for I disguised my self purposely, and did use all the Art I could,
to make me seem homely and deformed; I got then to a Town in Lycia, where I
consulted the Oracle, and understood that Agenoris was alive, and moreover,
that my Extraction was from Kings, and that the Birth of Agenoris, was not in
the least despicable: I likewise understood, that I should find him in an
Island very Famous, situated in the Eastern Parts of the Mediterranean Sea.
These words gave me both Joy and Grief, I was glad of this happy News, but I
knew not what Island the Oracle meant; I was nevertheless resolved to sail into
Creet, as one of the most Flourishing Kingdoms in the Mediterranean; but not
learning any News there of what I sought, I embarked from the Town of
Beau-port, to sail here into Cyprus; but to augument our Disaster, we were by a
Tempest cast upon the Coasts of Syria, where the Pirate Martius concluded to
render us miserable, in robbing and depriving us of the richest things in the
Ship where I ws embarked.

This Priate, who was one of the Principal Agents of General Goudolo: seeing me
as he thought a Beauty that did not displease him, became in love with me; and
after he had caused me to be dressed in the Richest Robes he had in the Vessel,
to obtain my Favor, he presented me with a little Casket full of precious
Stones: I was very much astonished and confused when I saw this present, for I
knew it to be the same Box that I had formerly hid on Mount Taurus, when
Cleobalus was preserved by Decius; the same I mean, Agenoris, that you was
pleased to honor me with, when I was so far from being a Princess, that I was
below the scorn of the meanest subjects I have in Sicily; not being willing
then to refuse so precious a Gift, I began to seem compliant to his addresses,
and to show him some friendship; as if I had esteemed my self happy in having
fallen into his hands: I came likewise to know that he had taken those Riches
from a Sea-rover, near the Island of Rhodes; and how he had taken Agenoris, and
of the storm that had broke teir Vessels, and how that of all that he then
possessed, he had only saved that Box.

I continued a while with him, and by reason he hoped to Marry me, he used all
the Caresses and showed me all the Civilities in the World. Notwithstanding I
lived in a continual fear, for I could not be persuaded that Agenoris had
escaped so fierce a Tempest; he presently seeing Melancholy in my Countenance,
to divert me, put me under the Tuition of his Nephew, while he pursued a
Cyprian Vessel, which he knew would strait imbark from Cilicia for Cyprus; he
commanded us to land in a small Island that lies very near Tripoly, which by
reason of the multitude of Green Shady Woods, that therein elevate their close
Branches, thereby causing therein a certain agreeable Solitude, does bear the
name of Desert; I remained there the space of two days, during which time I
enjoyed all the content that could be obtained by hunting; for the place being
but very little frequented, whatsoever way I looked, I found subjects enough
whereon to bestow mine Arrows; but however fair I carrid my self to the Nephew
of Martius, I always endeavored to wander to the Sea side, to try if I could
discover any Vessels wherein I might cast my self to go to Cyprus; for I
imagined that Agenoris could be in no other part. In fine, while our Mariners
were passing their times in debaucheries and drunkenness in their Tents, I at a
distance discerned a Vessel that came directly to the Island; it was the same
Prize they expected from Cilicia, which notwithstanding the Artifices of
Goudolo and Martius, did not omit to proceed in her Voyage. I presently forsook
their company, faining my self to go a hunting, and came to the Sea side, just
as those of the Vessel were landing; the Captain of the Vessel, who thought not
that Martius was so near him, was willing to remain there and refresh himself:
I recounted to him a part of my misfortunes, and begged of him, if he had any
compassion of my miseries, to retire me from this dangerous Labarinth, because
that the Pirates would not fail to pursue him; the Captain who thought himself
to be in safety in this Island, began to think on what he had best to do, and
pressed his chief Mate on board, and hoised up Sails, and so steered away to
our intended Port. We had not got far to Sea, but we saw our selves pursued by
Martius with three Brigantines; notwithstanding we at length out sailed and
lost sight of them, and arrived happily at Amathussa; where I was scarce landed
(and having hired a youth to carry my things for me) but I overtook a Grave
Ancient Man, the same that is now in our presence; who presently asked me, if I
had lived long in this Island? I told him yes, and that I thought I was born
here; Then pray Mad, am said he, since you are acquainted with the Country,
let me implore the favor of you, to direct me to the place I should go to (I
remember I was once here before, but it is some years since, which is the
greatest cause that I cannot find my way; for time has bred in me
forgetfulness:) I am newly come from Sicily, near to a place called Regium in
Italy; and because I would not forget the Man's Name I came to seek, I have
written it down; which is Melintus. Here I interrupted him, and told him, it
was the Old Shepherd Melintus he meant; I knew very well where he lived, for I
called him Father: Pray Lady, said he, what may I term your Name? I am called,
Mellissa said I; then answered he, pulling off his Hat, and standing bare, with
the Page that waited on him, which I must confess did a little confuse me; My
business is of greater weight to you than him, the Gods have favored me beyond
my expectation, by my thus happily meeting of you. Know then, proceeded he, and
be not surprised, that you are no more a Shepherds Daughter, but a Princess,
and of one of the greatest Islands in these Seas, which is the place from
whence I came; I mean Sicily: I am come to establish you in your Throne, and to
desire you to receive the Joys and Acclamations of your Subjects, who do as
much long to see you, as they have been grieved to hear of your supposed Death.
Thus far, added Mellissa, I have told you of my Adventures, the rest I will
leave to Cleonidus, meaning the Ancient stranger, for that was his name: Then
did Cleonidus, after a low obeisance, proceed after this manner

It were a folly, worthy Gentlemen, for me to go to prove by Arguments, that
the Royal Alcandra is a Princess, since it is but observing her well, to find
marks enough in her of greatness to reveal and prove what I now say: Give me
leave to tell you, that she was Daughter to the Brave Prince Hermicleus, King
of Sicily, his only Child which he had by his Queen Selindra; who taking her
farewell of the World, after she had left him this dear Pledge, he was about
contracting an Alliance with the Sardinians, by the Marriage of their Princess;
but before it could be concluded, he sickened, and was every moment in
expectation of death; on his deathbed, then Carista, his Sister-in-law, being
with him, he made her Queen Regent, till Alcandra might be of an Age to sway
the Scepter her self, and entreated her with the tears in his eyes to see her
well educated in all the Virtues, Accomplishments and Qualities of a highborn
Princess; and after he had sent for his chief Counselors, and had upon their
Allegiance charged them to obey Carista as Queen Regent, he peaceably in a deep
sigh departed; long had he not been dead, before the Queen Regent, whose
towering thoughts could not brook a Co-partner with her in the Kingdom, and by
whose Actions, she seemed little to have regarded the dying Kings Words, as
well by her Tyrannical Impositions, as by her Imperious Outrages on the
Subject, she was generally hated by all of them, who were several times about
to revolt, had it not been for the consideration they had for the tender
Princess; of whose innocent Life, she several times did endeavor to bereave
her, but by some strange fate she was always prevented; more particularly once,
when by some wicked caitiff she had hired, a cup of Poison was presented to the
Royal Babe, and the presenter by some accident, having let it fall before it
came to her Lips, a Dog being in the Room and licking it up, immediately after
swelled and died. I was a beholder of this cruelty, and did not doubt but I
also knew who was the Author; yet did I not dare to speak my thoughts to any
Body. The party that presented the Poison to the Young Princess (for the Queen
Regent was soon informed of it) though it were by her consent, yet to take off
any suspicion that might be of her, she caused her to be publicly killed as a
Traitor, seeming her self to detest the deed and abhor the Actor: seeing then,
that hitherto her wicked designs was spoiled, she hatched one more new, no less
to be abhorred than the former; for having made me her favorite, an honor
truly which I was not very ambitious of; She would often be more free with me
than with any in the Court besides; I mean, as to the publishing of her
thoughts; insomuch that once, first with Money, joined with all the Rhetorical
Persuasions that Art can possibly manifest, to move the will and passions, did
she endeavor to seduce me to murder the Princess; and having first made me to
swear secrecy, which I did, I likewise told her, that it was an affair that
required some time of consideration before it was performed; and therefore
begged the permission of her to grant me three days time to consult upon it,
which she immediately did: but also failed not to put me in mind of my Oath of
secrecy, which I also seemed to remember. Having had this time of
consultation, I soon took a resolution in what I had to do, my design being in
opposition to hers; to that end therefore I resolved to seem to comply with her
desires, as if I had purposed to destroy the Princess; who now wanted near six
months of being three years of age: I visited the Queen Regent then a second
time, after three days were expired; but before I could have time to open my
mouth to tell her my resolution, she prevented me, by making larger promises to
me than yet she had done, if I would but execute what she desired; I told her,
I had deliberated with my self to obey her commands, and therefore would
undertake to execute them; but I desired to know of her in what manner she
should have it done, whether by Poison, Steel, or Water? She told me she had
found out a way whereby I might do it without any danger, which was by Water:
You must, Cleonidus, said she, hire a Barck, and privately take the Child,
which I will procure you, and at no very small distance from the shore, taking
a lump of Lead and tying it to her Neck, you must cast her into the Sea; and
when you bring me the news that you have obeyed me in every circumstance, since
I am the only Successor to the Crown after her decease, to gratify you, you
shall by Marrying me, not only obtain the Name and Title of a King, but have
also sole command and power in this Island as a King: I seemed very submissive
to the promise of so large a gratification, and told her she should find me
faithful; not to her I meant, but to this Illustrious Princess: I therefore
took her privately, and went away to the Seaside, imbarking in a Vessel bound
for Cyprus; having first taken some of the richest Jewels that belonged to the
Princess's Mother, with all other things requisite for such a Voyage; where I
was no sooner landed, but I espied this Shepherd Melintus, who was keeping his
sheep.

I carried the Child to him, and at length with Gold and fair words I made him
receive it; which he did with much gladness, by reason of the great quantity of
Gold I gave him: the Jewels I desired him to lay up, and seeing him to be a
little ignorant, I gave them another name, pretending to slight their worth and
value; he took them then, but was pleased more with his Gold: I went with him
to his Cabin, noted down his Name, and desired him to let the Child go for his
Daughter, and to give her the Name of Mellissa: I also left a Mantle with him,
which was extreme costly, and wherein I had wrapped her up; that alone is
enough to witness that the party to whom it belonged, was not to be esteemed
common. After then I had remained two or three years longer in this Kingdom,
and had began to take notice of those Revolutions which were then beginning,
and which did afterward happen, by means of that insinuating Favorite
Aphistaminus, who after the Prince Evagoras's absence and his Royal Fathers
Decease, did unjustly possess himself more by force than favor, of this
Island; causing rumors to be spread abroad that Evagoras was drowned at Sea.
After, I say, I had with grief taken particular notice of all these things, and
had given an express order to Melintus to see the supposed Mellissa well
educated, and having supplied him with more money to do the same, after eight
or ten years travel longer into other foreign parts, I chanced to hear in
Pamphilia that the Queen Regent of Sicily was dead; which immediately caused me
to hasten thither: where when I was come, I found it to be true; but to my
great amazement, after I came to Court I was laid hold on and clapped in Fetters:
when I was brought to examination, glad was I to know the reason of it, which
was, that the Queen Regent on her Deathbed (the Gods having struck her with a
sense of her wickedness), confessed that she had hired me to murder the young
Princess; which she said she believed I had done: and withal told them that
were about her, that she had several times her self attempted it, but was
always strangely prevented. After I had been informed of all these particulars,
before the chiefest of the Nation (who were all assembled together, in order to
my Trial) I making a Speech to them, told them, that all she had acquainted
them with was true; but the Murder she accused me of, of which indeed I was not
guilty, though her intent made her appear to be so; and that abhorring her
detestable Design, I had not executed her commands, but on the contrary had
preserved the Princess alive; who I told them I had conveyed to Cyprus: where
she was at present with an ancient Shepherd in quality of his Daughter. After I
had made a Speech to them much after this sort, no soul is able to express the
tokens of Joy they manifested at this News; they all immediately, instead of
proceeding in my Trial, with the tears in their eyes, came and embraced me with
all the love and tenderness that joyful hearts are capable of expressing. They
presently gave order for a Ship to convey me thither, that I might bring the
Princess to them; they would have sent out a whole Fleet, but that they thought
it more prudence to have her brought privately: and therefore they as yet kept
it from being divulged among the vulgar people. I asked them how it came they
did not miss the Princess when I was gone? They answered and told me, that
Carista, sometime after my departure, had caused a rumor to be spread that the
young Princess was dead of a Feavor; and having subtly caused a resemblance
of her to be cast in Wax, she had exposed that to the view of most of the
Nobles, and had caused it to be buried in a most royal manner, and as became
the Daughter of so great a Prince; to the general grief of the whole Nation:
and that she her self, like a treacherous dissembling Crocadile, did bear more
outward shows of sorrow than any; all which having indeed prevented them from
suspecting what they had most reason, she was raised to the Throne.

Thus have I informed you of all I know, but as to the further confirmation,
when you shall arrive at the Castle, I shall send for Melintus, who is the only
person that can do it here; and now I desire only to execute my Commission, in
carrying her to her Loyal Subjects. Here the Princess interrupted him, and told
him she would first stay here two or three months, to the end she might put her
self in an Equipage suitable to her quality; to which Cleonidus consented.
Then, said she, addressing her self to Agenoris, It is to Theocles I am
obliged, for bringing me to your presence, who immediately after Cleonidus had
overtook me, met us together; where after he had with much joy welcomed me,
being also surprised to find me in this habit; which is the same bestowed me by
the last Pirate that took me. He told me, that I must no more call him Theocles
but Clarinda, for that was her Name; and withal related the Story of her love
to me; how she was intended to surprise them, by appearing before them all in
that habit that suited best with her sex; being resolved to live in disguise no
longer: she desired me also to permit me to conduct her privately to the
Castle, that we might both of us appear together. Agenoris and all the rest
that were present, were extremely pleased at the recital of all these
Adventures, yet in the midst of all this cause of joy, a sullen cloud seemed to
dwell on the brow of Agenoris, which did indeed lessen a great part of it; he
whispered to Clidamant, and told him, that now he should lose his Divine
Princess, on whom he dare not look; since though he was a Prince, yet had he
nothing to show for it, but an empty Title. Ah Gods, why was I born, to be
reduced to this misery; yet what you have done is just, since you may have
designed so admirably fair a Creature for one more worthy of her than my self.
Clidamant used all the expressions he could to comfort him, but it did put him
the more in mind of his misfortune.

Now they thought it was time for them to retire to the Castle, which they did,
Agenoris conducting the Princess, Clidamant handing Clarinda, and Orontus
Emilia; many days they all spent there with much diversion, except Agenoris,
who could not dissemble his sorrow: they were all concerned for him, Alcandra
her self seemed interessed in it, but nothing could be available, since he
thought himself so far beneath so great a Princess.

On a certain day, when all the Company were assembled together in one of those
delighful Green Arbors that are in the Tarras-walk in the Garden, Cleonidus
sent a Page for Melintus; who since he had lost his supposed Daughter, he very
sorrowfully retired from the Castle to his own Cottage in the Valley; where he
spent his time with less content than he had done when she was with him: for
though he knew her not to be his Daughter, it may with truth be spoken, that no
Parent ever showed a more natural affection to their Child, than he did to this
fair Princess, all the time she was with him; and was as much grieved for her
supposed loss.

Melintus came to the Castle immediately with the Messenger that was sent for
him; where when he came into the Arbor, and beheld a sight which appeared so
glorious to him, it raised a very deep astonishment in him; and the poor man
had still continued in it, had not Cleonidus come to him, and held this
Discourse, Friend, said he, do you not remember that ever you saw a man like
me? To which Melintus answered, after he had looked wishfully upon him, That
the question he asked he could not well answer; because he was doubtful whether
he did or no: yet he did suppose that he did some years ago see one that did
very much resemble him; but it being so long since, he could not well retain it
in his memory. Then said Cleonidus to him again, Had not you a Daughter? Yes,
replied he, I had one that called me Father; and then proceeding and fetching a
deep sigh, But what? said Cleonidus. She is no more, said Melintus. Is she then
dead? said the other. I fear it, said he, for now the Sun has finished and
began anew his Orbicular Progress, since I last saw her. Upon this Cleonidus,
by some tokens he gave him, caused him to call him to mind; and withal taxed
him with negligence, in taking so little care for her: and at the length told
him, that she was a Princess, and that he must either presently produce her or
die. All the poor man's prayers and entreaties were in vain, to the
seemingly-cruel Cleonidus; which having his Sword drawn in his hand, ready as
it were to pierce him to the heart with it. The fair Alcandra, who was seated
upon a Bank of Flowers, rose strait up, and approaching the amazed Melintus,
bad him be of good cheer; and told him he should not die: and commanding
Cleonidus to hold back his hand, bid the affrighted Melintus look upon her, and
see if he could know her. He had no sooner cast up his eyes, but by some token
he found her to be his supposed Daughter; and with tears of joy cast himself at
her feet, which he embraced. After they had a little rallied upon the Old man
for being thus concerned, Cleonidus with much sweetness desired him to fetch
the Jewels and the Mantle he had left with him, when he put the young Princess
into his custody; telling him he should have Gold in exchange for them. He
failed not in all haste to go for them, and was not long before he returned:
which when he had showed them to Agenoris and the rest that were there, they
were even dazzled at the magnificence and richness of them: there was a Diamond
among the other Jewels, which for the largeness and goodness, the world could
not produce one to compare with it. Cleonidus having performed his promise to
Melintus, by giving him money in exchange for them, he went away with a very
joyful heart; blessing the day that ever he had had such a Daughter as his
supposed Mellissa was. I could not hear whether he betook himself to his old
Vocation of keeping of Sheep, but certain I am, that the Old man was now rich
enough to live without it. Scarce was he gone, when a Page comes to the Arbor
to demand for Agenoris; who going to him, he with much submission delivered him
a Letter: which having hastily opened, he was much surprised to find it contain
thus: SIR,
I Doubt not but my abrupt departure, and my concealment so long from you, may
cause you to esteem me unexcusable; but when you know that it was occasioned by
the Cruelty of Emilia, whose rigor banished me her presence; you will I hope be
less severe in your censure of me: but thanks to my kind fate, that my love
has inspired me with warlike enterprises; thereby to seek a noble death, to
avoid the trouble of an uncomfortable life: ^nce to live and not to be esteemed
by her I love, will make it no less. I have underhand raised an Army of Twelve
thousand men to your assistance, all of them your faithful Subjects; and who,
by the information I gave them, are well satisfied that you are living; being
likewise the more encouraged, because that I told them that within these two
days they should see you at the head of them: We lie encamped upon the plain of
Massara, and hear by our Scouts that Aphistaminus is coming against us with a
Body of Twenty thousand men; though ours are not in the least discouraged at
it, but are every moment ready to receive them with a courage that does plainly
evidence the justice of our Cause; and which your presence will make boundless:
Wherefore I question nor but you will come, since you are to fight for no less
than a Kingdom, and your own right; which shall be also maintained to Death it
self by

Your Loyal Subject PERIANDER.




When Agenoris had perused the Letter, he failed not to bid the messenger tell
his Master that he would not miss being with him at the time mentioned, who
made all the haste he could away, and afterward Agenoris returned again to the
Ladies and Gentlemen he had left in the Arbor, extremely pleased at the happy
news; he soon called Clidamant aside, and informed him of it, whose joys was so
excessive, that he scarce knew how to bear it, and desired Agenoris to let him
wait upon him, and serve him in this great work: Agenoris at first seemed
backward to give his consent, but Clidamant pressed him so much, and so
passionately, that he could at length not deny him; though he was loath to let
him hazzardhis Life with him. Clidamant told him, that as he hitherto had
accompanied him in his solitude and sufferings, he hoped he would not now cause
him to forsake him. Many more obliging expressions passed between them to the
same effect, and then they joined again with the rest of the company in the
Arbor, who were all very curious to partake with Agenoris in the Joy they saw
in his Face, when he first approaching Orontus, and then Emilia, told them the
real truth of what had happened; and then betaking himself to his place again,
told them all aloud, that he had received an express Order from Evagoras, who
had raised another Army, and who was now in Cyprus, and not dead, as the Tyrant
had reported, to attend him in the Battle he was going to fight against the
Rebels, in the plain of Massara; and so desired them all to be patient, till he
came back again, for he doubted not but to return Victorious: they all were
troubled to hear that he must again hazard his Life, more especially Alcandra;
who, though she then spoke but indifferently against his going (as the rest of
the company) yet by the grief that appeared in her Visage, her Heart seemed to
be not a little interessed.

Clarinda, who helped to make up the assembly, and who told the company, that
she had heard very much spoken in commendation of that Prince in Creet, and had
heard there something of his misfortunes, though but obscurely: as also
concerning the Tyrant, now reigning in Cyprus; but that she never yet could
hear by what means he came to possess the Throne, and therefore told them, if
any of them could satisfy her curiosity in what she now desired, she would
take it as a singular Favor. Clidamant, who was ever ready to perform any
command enjoined by her, after a few Complements, which are usual on the like
occasions, began his Relation much after this sort:

The late King of Cyprus, and Father to the present Evagoras, Indubitable Heir
to the Crown, was a Person of a Disposition very mild and sweet, and beloved
even by his very enemies; his Son, the present Prince, not as then arrived to
the third year of his Age, was by his Royal Father, designed, when he should
arrive to more mature years, to have him matched with the Princess of Sicily,
which he supposed death sometime afterward put a period to: I need not speak
in praise, neither of her outward or inward Beauty, since with one only look
upon her, as she now Graces the Company, they may be sufficiently convinced,
that the first is more than Angelical; and by the long experience we even all
have had of her Conversation, we cannot not but know, that the later is Divine
indeed. Here a deep Carnation, like the Sky, when painted with the bright beams
of smiling Phoebus in a Summers morn, overspread the glorious Face of this
Princess; when Clidamant still proceeded, saying, It being then generally
believed that this Princess was dead indeed, Evagoras being almost arrived to
these years, his Father expected, after he had caused him to learn all things
necessary for a Prince, as well the managing the Horse, breaking of the Lance,
as other Souldierly Exercises, he wanted nothing now but Travel to render him
exactly accomplished; though it cannot but be confessed that he seemed to want
that the least of any thing: and whatever he studied, he always arrived to
that height, as even to outdo his very Tutors themselves; so active and
forwards was he to learn great things, when things indifferently mean, at his
age, might have been esteemed incomparable: What his Father designed, he soon
put in execution; wherefore he took his last farewell of him at Nicosia (last
indeed, since it was the last time he saw him) and imbarking at Famagusta,
first sailed toward Syria, thence to Cilicia, Pamphilia, Lydia, Morea, and
other Countries: He had not long been gone, when Aphistamenus, who fled from
Silicia sometime before, for aspiring higher than became him, and whom Evagoras
knew not to be a little favored by his Father, obtained of him by his subtle
insinuations, that since he had no Successor but Evagoras to the Crown, that
after his decease and his Sons, he would establish him in the Cyprian Throne;
and for the same purpose caused him to confirm it with his Great Signet: which
he did, as judging he could not bestow a Crown on one whom he loved more than
this Ingrate. Some small time after, during the absence of the Prince, his Son,
he died; charging his Nobles to establish Aphistamenus Protector of the Crown,
till his Son returned: which he at first managed with much seeming mildness,
till a report was spread, by means of the Tyrant himself, that Evagoras was
cast away in the Straight of Charibdes: and then he swayed the Scepter with
much Rigor and Tyranny, and caused himself to be proclaimed as King; proving
himself, by means of the Great Seal and Writing he had from the late King, to
be justly established; and thus reigned with much seeming quietness, till the
news reached the ears of Evagoras; who failed not with all speed to come to
Cyprus; though he was no sooner come, but he found all things in combustion;
the Tyrant having raised forces to withstand his Arrival, because he had made
those that were his true Subjects, believe him to be an Impostor and a
Counterfeit Evagoras; and one whose aim was ambition: upon which ensued several
bloody Battles between this Prince and the Tyrant; though the fate of War,
which every body knows to be uncertain, did always, by reason of his numbers,
render the Tyrant more fortunate; insomuch that in the last Battle the Prince
fought, who though he behaved himself very gallantly, and like one that
contemned Death for Glory. The too great numbers of the Tyrants men,
constrained him to retreat; and at length finding it difficult to raise more
forces, he retired, as they reported, into Sicily; where he is forced to remain
deprived of his Kingdom by one his Father loved. Then said he, addressing
himself to Clarinda, Thus Madam, has my willing obedience to this small
command, made you, I hope, in some measure sensible how much I should think my
self honored to receive greater from you. Clarinda answered his Complements
wittily enough, and could not forbear to lament the miserable fate of this
Prince. Orontus proffered his service to Agenoris, but he would by no means let
him go; telling him that he had permitted Clidamant to go with him: and that he
must remain behind, to entertain the Ladies in their absence; who would
otherwise take it as a disobligement, to deprive them of all their company.
Emilia, who at first began to be concerned at what Orontus had demanded, was
now sensibly pleased, when she understood that Agenoris would not grant his
request. But Clarinda was struck with a damp that had like to have made her
swound away, when she heard she must lose the presence of her Clidamant, she
imagined she should never see him again; but when he was dead: however there
could be no other Remedy found for her but patience. At length when they were
preparing to leave the Garden, to walk into the House, Agenoris singled out the
Princess, and walking with her into a little Wilderness of Sycamore Trees, that
was at one side of the Garden; he first unscaled his Lips to her in this manner:

Illustrious Madam, I am now going to leave the only object I love in the
World. Pardon, Divine Lady, that word, that escaped my Lips at unawares; for
not being in a capacity to deserve you, you may with justice esteem me a
Criminal for pronouncing it: Let me carry with me then but the esteem and
well-wishes of your Royal Self in exchange, and I am made the happiest of men.
I dare not crave more, though I desire more; I shall likewise then question not
but to return more than Conqueror. You may imagine, Madam; that my Birth is
mean (too mean, I confess, now to merit your love) yet I may boldly say that it
is almost equal with yours; for he that now speaks to you, he that has lived
thus long in private, is that disconsolate Prince Evagoras, robbed of his
Kingdom, abused by an Impostor, and believed by his subjects to have no living.
Being it is I, Madam, then, that am going to obtain what may make me more
deserving of you than I am at present; You have a flourishing Kingdom under
your power, but alas! I am disabled from presenting you with this small Island,
which was once under my Fathers; and till I am in possession of it, I dare not
Madam presume to think I love you. Your Discourse, said Alcandra, though it be
surpizing, surprizeth me but little; since I have been every moment ready to
suspect what you tell me: for I ever thought you could be no less than a Prince
by your obliging Actions and Behavior. Let me likewise tell you, That Love
founds so pleasingly in your mouth, that I could never be weary of hearing you
pronounce it. I have not loved you so long, as to disown it now; more
especially when I find your Birth not to be inferior to mine: I were
ungrateful if I should. Love then, Noble Sir, and love for ever her, whose
constant love to you, Time never shall extinguish.

But then proceeded she, with a lamentable languishing look, and pressing his
hand with a Lovers ecstasy, Must you, must you leave me? ah! Can you leave me,
that loves you as I do? hard Fate! What comfort do you think I can find in your
absence, and when I know you to be exposed to all the perils that sharp pointed
Swords, murdering Lances, and consuming Arrows, are like to make you endure;
ah! said she, putting her Handkerchief before her Eyes; I shall sink beneath
the weight of such a loss.

Madam, said Evagoras, These sweet expressions have revived my drooping heart,
and having you on my side, I do not question Victory. Dearest Princess, were it
not more for my Honor, and the Love I bear you, than for my Right, I would
not, nay I could not leave you.

Generous Sir, said Alcandra, since I see you to be resolute then in your
purpose, go, and may you return Victorious, may all things answer my wishes to
complete your happiness, and may the Gods prosper you; but added she, speaking
more low, however, forget not her you have left behind in the midst of dangers;
blot not Alcandra out of your mind.

No, said he, with a deep sigh, the thought of her will spur me on to Victory,
which I hope will be speedy, that I may hasten my return; too morrow then
Madam, I will take my farewell of you, till then I shall not; so taking the
freedom of a salute, which she did not in the least refuse him; they both
returned to the Castle.

Many tender expressions of the like nature passed between Clidamant and
Clarinda, whose eyes were all in tears at the thoughts of it. Clidamant
revealed his right name to her, and told her how he was a Lord that lived in
the Court of Cyprus, and had followed the Prince Evagoras in his misfortunes;
and that she must no more esteem Agenoris as a private Gentleman, but as that
Prince he spoke of not long since; because it is really him. Clarinda was much
astonished at this news, though she said he had not carried himself so like a
private Gentleman, but that there were some marks of greatness in him that were
visible.

Evagoras and Coriander, for so we must now call them, having fitted themselves
with Armor and all other necessaries for their Heroic Enterprise, they were
preparing on the morrow to go; but when Evagoras was taking his leave of the
Princess, she wept so bitterly, that her excess of grief would scarce give her
tongue the freedom of pronouncing the word Adieu; and Clarinda instead of
speaking to Coriander, swounded away, and was carried in by her Attendants.
They both being well mounted on two incomparable Horses, Evagoras first having
kissed the lips of his dearly beloved Princess, gallopp'd away (having each of
them an Esquire to attend them) with an excellent grace. To have seen with what
a resolution they departed, it would even have moved pity and astonishment; the
first to have observed how ready they were to sacrifice themselves on Honors
Shrine, the other to remark the greatness of their courage. It is to be
imagined that in all the time of their absence the two Lovers Alcandra and
Clarinda, had but very little enjoyment of themselves. Often did the Prince
write to Alcandra, and as often did Clarinda hear from Coriander; which in the
midst of this cruel affliction, afforded them some comfort. The last Letter
they received, was that the two Armies were going to engage; and that as soon
as the Battle should be ended, they would make all possible speed to return to
them again.

The first seemed to pierce their very hear^s for the apprehension they were in
for those they loved; yet their hope for the second was as a salve to heal the
wound their fear occasioned. Insomuch that the two passions of hope and fear
seemed wholly to occupy them during the absence of Evagoras and Coriander.
Emilia, who though she was touched with some regret for the absence of them
both, yet the presence of her Orontus overpowered all; for her countenance was
more cheerful, her behavior more jovial, and her heart more light than the
rest: and indeed her alacrity and cheerfulness would sometimes banish those
sullen thoughts which over-ballanced the minds of the other two Ladies. She
would endeavor to infuse into them the Cordial of Comfort, and to that end
would cause them sometimes to take the Air with her in the Fields: Especially
one day the three Ladies being in a Coach, and Orontus on Horseback (which was
some considerable time after the departure of Evagoras and Coriander) when
passing through a desolate Forest, they espied a Horse running very fast cross
it, with a man that lay on the ground all in blood as if he was dead; they were
presently curious to see this Spectacle, and therefore all the Ladies presently
descended from the Coach, and Alcandra, who approached it first, saw that he
was indeed dead. Orontus, who had a desire to know the original cause of this
Massacre, advances a little forward, and at a distance he faw three men
fighting very desperately with a young Lord; who although he defended himself
with much courage and valor, yet did they press him with so much advantage,
that he was to expect nothing but Death. Orontus presently hollowing,
immediately drew his Sword, and gallopped directly toward them; but he came
not time enough to preserve the Lord from two wounds he received, the one in
his left Arm, the other a little beneath the right Shoulder; Emilia and the
other Ladies (there being nothing more timorous than this Sex) fearing least
some misfortune might happen to Orontus, endeavored to call him back as loud
as they were able: but as they came near to the dead body, and saw him lie in
that manner, Alcandra, whether she suspected something, or whether she was
desirous to see his face, out of curiosity lifted up his Helmet (for he was in
Armor) and finding it to be Evagoras, O gods, said she, what dismal spectacle
do I see here? Is it then thou Dear Life of my Soul? May the day thou departed
from us be for ever accursed: May the Sun on that day never show its glorious
Light; and may it be for ever blotted out of the yearly Register. Oh my heart,
why do thou not break? that I may go with my Evagoras to the Celestial
Paradise. Must I stay behind when he is gone? No, my Dear, in shining rays of
light we'll meet each other; and since we could not here enjoy the fullness of
Love, we'll intermingle souls in the other world, and enjoy more sweets in our
Etherial Beings, than dull heavy Mortals can ever comprehend: There will our
lives be never crossed by fears, nor into black despair our hopes shall never
turn; through the warm smiling beams of the bright Sun we'll gently glide, and
therein amorously sport and play; till on a sudden we find our selves wrapped in
the heavenly Mansions. Then addressing her self to the Corpse, But art thou then
dead Evagoras? Must thy Eyes be for ever shut? It is Alcandra that calls thee,
it is Alcandra that bemoans thee; and who, if thou art now not dead, will
before thou die render thee eternal testimonies of her Love. At the name of
Alcandra, Evagoras, who was in a swound, by reason he had lost much blood; and
because of the blows he had received, as well in the Battle as in this
rencounter (for his Armor was pierced in several places) wakes, as from a dead
sleep; and opening his Eyes, which the sleep of Death still kept half shut; and
beholding Alcandra, Is it thou then, my Divine Princess, that thus did call me?
said he, Thou lovely fair, give me then thy precious hand to kiss; which has
so often touched mine. O happy Destiny, what Divinity am I now obliged to for
this favor? Now I find my wounds are not so bad (except it be that pleasing one
which your eyes have given my heart:) since fortune has reserved me in my
distress for so happy a rencounter. By this time the two Combatants were come
back again with Victory (for two of the Ruffians they killed, and the other ran
away) but both of them grievously wounded, especially the young Lord, who was
Coriander; which did very much afflict Clarinda, and doubtless had it not been
for Orontus, Coriander would never have escaped their fury; for they would have
murdered him. The wounded Gentlemen were all put into the Coach, except
Orontus, whose wounds were not so dangerous as those they had received.
Evagoras and Coriander then being in the Coach with the Ladies, Alcandra
permitted the first to lay his head in her bosom, while she tore her delicate
hair and apparel to cover his wounds till she came to the Castle. Coriander
laid his head in his Clarinda's lap, who did the like for him. Being arrived at
their journeys end, the first thing they did to them, was to let them blood
immediately; to the end they might by the incision of a Vein stanch the blood
that came from their wounds: and then applying to them all requisite remedies,
they let them repose till the next morning; when they found strong symptoms in
them of a speedy recovery. Coriander was first healed, and whether Nature were
more powerful, or whether the presence of Alcandra, was the particular remedy,
which was likely enough, Evagoras, by the help of his Chyrurgeons, was healed
beyond common expectation.

Being all now in good health, well and free from all the dangers they were in,
Alcandra was desirous to know of them the occasion of this last accident, and
how fortune had favored them in their first design? As we could desire, said
Coriander, for heaven has blessed us with Victory; though it has cost
something dear. Had you but seen with what a courage the brave Evagoras fought,
you would have thought him more than humane; for his very looks terrified the
enemies wherever he appeared: I, who had the command of the left Wing, which
consisted in about Two thousand Horse, my men some ran away, and the rest stood
still, to be killed like Sheep by my side; the fury of the enemy having amazed
them so, that they could deal no blows: in so much that the left Wing was
almost routed, when the brave Evagoras, who had soon notice of it, came but
with four hundred Horse, and poured upon them so courageously, that in a short
time he put a whole Body of Five thousand men to the rout, with but a handful;
though at the first he changed horses no less than three times, for so often
were they killed under him: I must attribute that more to your prudence and
conduct, said Evagoras, than to any thing you can call courage in me: but alas
what you have done, does surpass all you can say of me: Did you not, when I was
surrounded and ready to be slain or taken by the Usurpers men, did you not like
Lightning breaking down, and clearing all those that stood to oppose you,
rescue me from them with a great slaughter of their men: That was a thing, said
Coriander, which not only my duty obliged me to do, but it was wrought by the
power of the Gods, who considered the Justice of our Cause; they are ever the
Protectors of Princes who are Earthly Gods, as they themselves are Heavenly;
however it was to your great courage we owe this Victory, since it was by you
only it was achieved; therefore, Royal Sir, let us confess that the glory of
the day was wholly due to you: And now Madam, said he, in directing his speech
to the Princess, we may presume to think him worthy of your Illustrious self;
he has since often confessed to me that the thoughts of you it was that
inspired him with that courage, and in fine, Madam, we have completed what we
went for; for so soon as Aphistamenus began to see himself worsted, he betook
himself to flight with no more than a hundred Horse; for besides what were
killed on the Enemies side, the rest when they saw themselves in the condition
they were in, begged quarter of our Royal General, and came over to our side;
we left Periander in pursuit of him, and we have since heard, that he has
blocked him up in a little Town which is not well fortified, and where I am
certain he cannot well escape: whereupon having commanded him to take the
Tyrant either dead or alive, we left him, and desired him afterward to come to
us as speedily as he could, when he had settled all things in order, and to
publish an Act of Pardon in the Name of the Prince for what had passed; but in
our way through yonder Forest, we found our selves beset by an Ambuscade of
Rogues, whose designs was to trepan us as we came from the Army; they were some
of the Enemies Party, who having notice of our coming that way, determined to
kill both the Prince and us; and there Evagoras had like to have lost his life,
after the danger he had run in the Battle, till the brave Orontus luckily came
to our assistance: Is the lost Periander found then? said Emilia; Yes Madam,
said Coriander, though not cured of his love; for when he went from hence, as
he told me himself; being a thousand times ready to kill himself for your
cruelty toward him, he thought of a more Noble way to lose his life, which was
by redeeming his Prince and Country from the insupportable Yoke of an Usurper:
And Madam, I believe he has performed his promise to himself, for his wounds
are so dangerous, that nothing but death will cure them; he bad me tell you,
that he hoped you have not banished your Friendship from him, though you have
your Love; and that if you will bestow on him the first, he will, if his wounds
will let him live so long, come and have the satisfaction to die in your
presence. This, Madam, he bid me tell you, and Evagoras has given order to a
great many ^^pert Chyrurgions to take care of him; Hate him, I did not, said
Emilia, and love him. I could not, yet I had that Friendship for him, that I
wish he may live: I wish no harm to my very Enemies, added she, and I have less
reason to rejoice at his death who has thus served his Prince and Country;
and truly, to have him die for my sake, would grieve me.

Old Cleonidus, who understood all these transactions, was extremely pleased at
the surprising news of Agenoris being a Prince, and that he adored the Princess
Alcandra; and much more was he satisfied, when he understood how near he was
being established in the Cyprian Throne; he thought that this would raise both
joy and admiration in the hearts of the Sicilians, and that this Alliance could
not choose but be agreeable to them: wherefore he presently dispatched Letters
to the Nobility and Council, wherein he at large laid open to them the
advantages that would accrue to that Island by this happy Marriage. We must
imagine it did not displease them; many days were spent in the Castle with much
diversion; there were Balls, Plays, Dances, and every thing else that could be
grateful to the Senses; and now Evagoras began to think on nothing more than
the Celebration of their Nuptials; he was resolved they should all contribute
to the joys of that happy day: But notwithstanding, he imagined it necessary to
wait the arrival of Periander, who he doubted would not live to see their joys
completed, which grieved him excessively, for he had a particular love for
him; nay, not only he, but all the rest of the Company (who were at that time
altogether in an upper Room, where the Windows faced the Myrtle Grove)
expressed their sorrow for the loss of so brave a man, they were thus pitying
him for the desperate wounds he received in the Battle, when a glorious sound
of Trumpets surprised them so, that they were in great apprehension what it
might mean; when the Prince Evagoras running to the Window to see who they
were, immediately called the Princess, and the other Ladies, to see something
curious, which was eight Trumpeters representing the Zephiry; for they were in
Close-bodied Coats of Flesh-colour'd Satin, and Wings on their Shoulders,
being all mounted on Horses clothed in green Velvet, and bespangled with Gold;
having each of them in their hand a Silver Trumpet: They had not looked on them
much longer, but they also espied a great body of Horse, that planted
themselves between the Trumpets and the Wood in Battle Array: soon after that
they espied a Litter, which made up to the Castle; and then the Trumpeters
ceasing to sound, there was a great shout heard from among those Horsemen that
were in a body, and the Trumpeters, which was plainly understood to be, Long
live Evagoras, King of Cyprus; they never ceased crying, but always redoubled
it with the greatest expression of joy imaginable, throwing up their Hats and
claping their Hands. After this they heard a noise as if some body was coming
up the stairs, but they came so softly as if they despaired to reach the top of
them; at length they espied Periander, lead in by a couple of Commanders, who
by means of the loss of Blood, and the multiplicity of his Wounds, was reduced
to the condition of not being capable to stand upon his Limbs without some
help; being entered the Room, they caused a seat to be brought to him to repose
on, and they were all grievously afflicted to see him so dangerously wounded;
but at length, as well as he was able, he told the Prince, that now he had done
his duty, he should die contented; for die said he, I shall, and of these
Wounds, my Chyrurgeons have given me over; I am glad said he, bowing to the
Prince, to hear of the choice you have made of this Illustrious Princess, and
said he, I have left all things in very good order at Nicotia, for the
reception of you both, and have brought here five hundred Horse with me, to
conduct you to the plain of Massara, where will meet you no less then twenty
thousand joyful Nicotians to welcome you to your own: I have also employed all
the ingenious Artists that I could hear of far and near, to make all manner of
things to divert you with, when you shall arrive thither.

For Aphistamenus, I have blocked him up in a place of little strength, with
about 8000 men, he having with him not above four hundred, when he sent me word
that he would deliver himself up upon these terms, That I would spare his life,
and not put him in Irons; having a while considered on what he proposed, I sent
him word, I would agree to the Article; which I did, for as soon as I had him
in my power, not to break my word with him, I caused him to be bound in Chains
of Silver, where he lies in a Dungeon in Nicotia, and where he is to expect the
sentence you will pronounce upon him; I shall not, said Evagoras, break the
promise you made him, which was to spare his life; but shall send him over
Captive into Syria.

Periander had not been many days at the Castle, but he grew still worse and
worse, all the Arts the Chyrurgeons used to cure him were not able, but they
told Evagoras, that he was a dead man, and that it lay not in their power to do
him any good; but they would continue with him as long as he had life. Evagoras
told them, That if they cured him, whatsoever they asked of him, upon the word
of a Prince, they should have; but nothing would do, since now that fatal hour
was come: The Prince wept bitterly, their excess of joy was changed into excess
of sorrow, nothing but wringing of hands, and mourning was the product of his
death; he told Emilia, who was present when he died, as were the rest of the
Ladies and Gallants, That since she had refused him her love, when he was
living he beseeched her not to deny him her friendship now he was dying. Emilia
told him, No, he had it and should have had more when he lived, had it lain in
her power to bestow it. Thus, and much after this sort, they discoursed with
him, till he surrendered what he was indebted to Nature; his Body was soon sent
to Nicotia, there to remain till the King and Queen should make their public
entrance, which they soon after did: The five hundred Horse which was commanded
by Orontus, attended on them to the plain of Massera, where they joined with
Twenty thousand Nicotians, who had notice of their coming, and who brought with
them a Chair, for the King and Queen to make their public entrance into the
City: It was four square, and drawn by eight White Horses, and garnished with
Golden Trophies; on the sides upon the Pedestal, were twelve Columns that
supported two Crowns of Gold, and at the upper end sat the King and Queen;
which were the greatest Ornaments there, for the people were ravished with
beholding them, especially the Queen, whose Beauty and smiling Innocence, drew
not only their amazed eyes on her, but their hearts to honor and respect her
as a Princess worthy of their love; the throng was not small to come to a sight
of her; they that could enjoy that happiness, they thought they enjoyed a
blessing, that none but the Gods themselves were capable of bestowing on them.

Something lower than them sat a Venus, holding in one hand a lighted Torch,
and in the other a Bow and Arrows of Cupid; beneath her two little Children,
and something lower two Cupids at a great distance; before the Chariot marched
twelve Horses, every one led by two Slaves; the Horses were harnessed with
Orange-coloured Satin, edged with Silver; the Slaves were habited in Cloth of
Silver, the Livery of the Persians: Then followed six Pages in Orange-colour'd
Satin, imbroidered with Silver, mounted on Horses covered with the same: Then
followed Orontus at the Head of his five hundred men, who separated from the
Nicotians when they entered the City, because they planted themselves on both
sides the Streets to honor their entrance; he having led up his five hundred
men; then followed this Chariot, on both sides of which rode six of the
chiefest Nobility: Then appeared Coriander at the Head of four hundred more of
the Nobility in bright glittering Armor, which by the reflection of the Sun
beams upon them, was a most glorious object to behold: I am not able to paint
out the Magnificence of this day, equal to what it was; being arrived at the
Palace-Royal with the joyful Acclamations of Long live Evagoras and Alcandra,
King and Queen of Cyprus and Sicily. Evagoras thought it requisite before the
Celebration of his Nuptials and Coronation, to have the Body of Periander
interred with that Magnificence he had deserved when he lived, which was also
accordingly done, with no mean cost and splendor; after which they began to
think of Celebrating their Nuptials, which was likewise some days afterward
performed with all the glory that can be imagined, and to the no mean
satisfaction of all these Lovers. This day was of far greater splendor than
the day of the Princes entrance into the City, for there were Tilts and
Tournaments, breaking of Lances, and every thing else that might conduce to the
pleasure of such a day. There were likewise already many Ambassadors arrived
from several parts beyond the Seas, to complement Evagoras from Foreign
Princes, touching his happy arrival to his long lost Throne: Among the rest,
there came several of the Sycilian Nobility to acknowledge Evagoras their King,
by reason of the Marriage to the Princess Alcandra, and who blessed the Gods
for bestowing on them so excellent a Prince as was Evagoras. There was an other
strange Ambassador at Court among the rest, who was always looking very
earnestly on Clarinda, who took as much notice of him till once approaching
her: Pray Madam, said he, vouchsafe me the favor of your Name, for if my eyes
deceive me not, I should know you: My Name Sir, said she, looking wistly upon
him, is Clarinda; then cried he out, running to her, and embracing her with the
tears in his eyes, Oh my dear Daughter, have I found thee! Oh happiness beyond
expectation! Gods, said Clarinda, in as great a Rapture as he, I think it is my
dear Father Meander, who I forsook in Creet by the unhappy means of Polianor.
Being both come to themselves, Meander told her he believed she was drowned,
but that to his unexpressible joy he now found to the contrary: and then she
begged his pardon for marrying without his consent, and told him to whom she
was now a Bride; which redoubled the old man's joy: Pardon, said he, it is I
must beg your pardon for exposing you to these dangers you now have escaped;
and withal told her, that Polianor died mad; and now, said he, my gray hairs
will receive new vigor: Heavens prosper you my dear Daughter in your happy
choice (said he.) This Meander was Father to the pretended Theocles, who being
a Favorite of the King of Creet, was also sent over as an Ambassador to
complement Evagoras. The Forenoon was spent in Tilts, Tournaments, and such like
Heroic Exercises; the Afternoon they diverted themselves in the Palace-yard,
which was all surrounded with Scaffolds for the Spectators, at the upper end
whereof was that where the King, Queen, Orontus, Emilia, Coriander, and
Clarinda stood: Next to them, on the right hand were placed all the Foreign
Ambassadors, on the left hand was some of the Cyprian Nobility; and thus was
the Palace-yard silled all round about with all sorts of people: in the midst
of the Yard was built a stately Palace, which was termed the Palace of
Happiness; it was flanked with four square Towers, and with one something
longer than the rest in the middle, upon which was built another less, having
eight Angles; the Gate was adorned with four Pillars, upon the front of which
was carved this Motto, To the joy of the Public: At the Gate were represented
the four Cardinal Virtues, and a little higher Castor and Pollux, for an Emblem
of the Union of these two Crowns: upon the four faces of the Tower, in the
middle, was figured four great Images; the first was Felicity, the second
Hercules, the other Horcuis, the God of Oaths, and the last Fidius, the God of
Fidelity; on the two Towers, to the right hand, was placed four others; that is
to say, Peace, Concord, Truth and Hymen: All the Spectators being then ranged
in order to behold the glorious sight, some behind the Regiment who were
planted round the place with their Pikes, and others upon Scaffolds, and some
at the Windows of the Palace; the Magnificence began by a Consort of Trumpets,
Hoe-boys, and other excellent Music, when the first thing that entered, was a
Rock containing fifteen Grottoes, which seemed to be drawn by the Lyre and
Voice of an Amphion; on the top of all was a Tree, whose branches seemed to
touch an azured Heaven bespangled with Golden Stars, and it was followed by
thirty Pages on Hors-back, Armed with Lances: A little after this entered a
Triumphant Chariot, representing Glory, drawn by eight White Steeds, with Wings
on their Backs; in the middle was erected a Pyramid of Silver, whose point
touches a Sphere of Gold, upon which was wrote this Motto (Here I am limited)
to show that Glory reaches as far as the Heavens; but can no further; this
Pyramid was embraced by a young Virgin, Clothed in Cloth of Silver, with a
Circle of Gold upon her head to figure Glory; on each side of her was two other
Images, that on her right hand representing Victory, that on the other Renown:
This was also attended by an infinite number of Pages, Heralds at Arms, and
others; when these were gone, then appeared the Chariot of the Sun, drawn by
eight Horses clothed in Gold-colour'd Satin; covered with Suns and Roses,
conducted by Phaeton as Coachman; at one end was represented Aurora, and within
it the four seasons of the Year, and the twelve hours of the day; all those
that followed it were dressed in Clothes and Liveries suitable to their
qualities. When this was gone, the next that appeared was the Mountain Menelaus
full of lively green Trees, Grass, Fountains and Birds, drove by the god Pan,
as if he were going in search of the Nymph Syringna and those that belonged to
Diana; the last that came was a Chariot drawn by twelve horses clothed in
Orange-colour'd Satin and Blew Embroidred with Gold and Silver, conducted by
six Men in Satin Robes of the same Color Embroidered; on the Top of all sat
an Ancient Woman, full of Wrincles and Gray Hairs, figuring a Magician; at her
Feet were a company of Young Men, with several musical Instruments in their
Hands, and behind the Chariot was a Mountain. When it stood still before the
Scaffold where the King and Queen were, and the Music beginning to play, the
Magician, making many Circles with a Rod she held in her Hand, commantled the
Mountain to open, which it suddenly did; producing in a moment diverse Birds of
several kinds, who flew all out of it into the open Air: but at length Night
put a stop to all, and our Lovers must leave the pleasures of this day to taste
others; which though of an other nature, yet I doubt not but they found them to
be more pleasing, after what they had suffered. Imagine then the Princess to be
conducted to her Appartment, and so to her Bed; where like the smiling Morn she
lay in expectation of what had been so long deferred: but it is supposed the
Royal Bridegroom stayed not long behind her. Neither must we forget the fair
Clarinda, who strived to hide her blushes from her Coriander, under the
spiteful Bed-cloaths: but he soon caused the Taper to be extinguished, that the
Sables of the night might ease her of that trouble, and do him that injurious
Office. Him we will leave then in his Loves embraces, to observe the fair
Emilia, whose modesty (which at that time did something ill become her) did
clearly evidence how between willingness and unwillingness, she received the
first transports of her Orontus. Let this suffice, and let us not be too
curious in our farther search, nor pry into the privacy of Lovers, but leave
them to the care of Hymen; who no doubt will accomplish their desires.

FINIS.
ERRATA
PAge 174, line 17, for Chair read Chariot; page 176, l. 32, for wistly r.
wishly.


