LICENSED,

March 16. 1686.
SOME DIALOGUES between Mr. G. and others: WITH REFLECTIONS Upon a Book called
PAX VOBIS.

LONDON; Printed for Randall Tailor, near Stationers' Hall, 1687.

THE PREFACE*
IN these following Dialogues, I have not pretended to inquire whether the
Author of Pax Vobis, has in his Dialogues fairly represented those of the
Reformation; being resolved to see where the mighty strength of that piece of
Reasoning lay, upon supposition that all the Sayings and Matters of Fact, which
he charges upon Protestants, were just as he has reported them. I fancy it will
come into some bodies head or other, to take a little pains about that. But be
it so or not, I am apt to think it will be allowed by every unprejudiced
Person, That a sufficient Reply is here given to the great design and business
of that Book; and that for the future, it is not likely to impose upon any, who
are not very weak in their Understandings, or something that is much worse.

As to the different Opinions amongst those of the Reformation, it cannot be
more objected against us by our Adversaries, than it is lamented amongst our
selves: but we cannot but wonder to hear them make that an Objection against
us, of which it is so manifest, themselves have been so great a Cause.

We are much obliged to them, for their being so sollicitous to render us less
liable to Mistakes, than according to our own Principles it seems we are, and
are very ready to embrace any Directions which may be helpful to us in our
Inquiries after Truth; but we think they take a most preposterous way to bring
us to the knowledge thereof, who, because we and others may be deceived, go
about to persuade us, that we shall always necessarily be so, unless we submit
to the Direction of such Guides, which without giving us any assurance of what
they pretend, that they neither will nor can deceive us, they are pleased to
recommend unto us.

As if because among those who walk through London-Streets in the daytime,
some happen to stumble, others to fall into the dirt, others to lose their way,
that therefore it is the most prudent course which any Man can take, to come
out in the Night, and according to the Direction of those who confidently
assure him, that they will bring him safe to his Journeys end, having put his
Neck into an Halier, to suffer himself to be dragged through thick and thin,
until he is almost choked, and instead of being brought to the place whither
he designed to go, finds himself at last thrown into a Ditch with his Pockets
picked.

None can be more ready than we should be to submit to the Guidance of an
infallible Directer did we know where to find him; but of this we despair,
especially since one of the best Arguments to persuade us to inquire after him,
is nothing else but an Objection against Human Nature, and a Reflection upon
God Almighty for having made us such Creatures as we find our selves to be.

Because some in the use of their Reason are, and may be deceived, that
therefore all must, is a Consequence which any one might be apt to think would
seem ridiculous to all Mankind.

And therefore it is easy to guess of what Spirit and Temper they are, who, by
such weak Motives, are tempted to leave our Communion.

Especially since we cannot but take notice, that even amongst those whose
Conversations, to our great grief, have not discovered that prevailing Sense of
Religion, which might be expected from Men professing the pure and sincere
Doctrine of Christianity, there are but very few, who by much more powerful
Arguments have been prevailed with to forsake it.

Who the Author of Pax Vobis is, we are not inquisitive to know, but some are
inclinable to believe him a Convert, both from his being so well acquainted
with the Scripture, and from the profane use which he now thinks fit to make of
it.

To apply these [Stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free,
Gal. 5.1. -- Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is Liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17. In
my Father's House are many Mansions; Joh. 14.2.] and such like places after
such a manner, as to make them import a Liberty given by Christ, to believe and
act as we please, is an excellent way to ridicule the Bible. And the Church of
R. does very well to forbid the free use thereof, if they of her Communion are
so apt to abuse it as this Author has done.

The Controversy between us and our Adversaries, has been hitherto managed
with as little Reflection as the Cause would bear; but if in these Dialogues we
do not behave our selves so very gravely toward them as we have done formerly,
they who gave the occasion are to be blamed for it.

For they have no just Reason to be angry with us if (as long as we keep within
the bounds of Decency, Truth, and Loyalty) we are by them provoked to express
our selves after a different manner than we had otherwise intended.

The First Dialogue between Mr. G. and his Clerk.

The Second and The Third Dialogues between Mr. G. and Esquire T.

REFLECTIONS Upon a Book called PAX VOBIS.
First Dialogue Between Mr. G. and his Clerk.
Cl. GOD save you Master; You are welcome home.


Mr. G. I thank you John. How do all my Neighbors?


Cl. Very well, Sir, God be praised.


Mr. G. I am glad to hear it: But what makes you stare more at me now, than you
were wont to do formerly? You wonder, I warrant, to see me wear a Sword and
Crevat.


Cl. Indeed, Master, so I do: I never saw you in this Garb before.


Mr. G. There are great Alterations in the World, and it ought to seem no
strange thing if I am somewhat altered from what I was.


Cl. There are great Alterations indeed Master, but I cannot understand why
they should make you leave off your Gown and Cassock. I hope you do not intend,
Sir, to preach in your Sword and Crevat.


Mr. G. You need not fear it, Man, for I do not intend to preach at all: I must
leave that to others who have better Authority to do it than I have.


Cl. Better Authority? I am sure you are a Minister, Sir, and I have heard my
Father, who was a Clergyman, and died in the beginning of the great Rebellion,
often say, That once a Minister, and always a Minister; and that a Man's Orders
could never be taken from him.


Mr. G. That is true, if a Man has such Orders as he ought to have; but I never
was so happy as to have any such.


Cl. I beg your Pardon, Sir, I now guess what you mean, and truly, Sir, it has
been a great trouble to the whole Parish to hear that you was turned. But pray,
Master (if I may be so bold) how could you officiate as a Minister, if you had
no Orders? Or have you only since his present Majesty came to the Crown,
discovered that you have none?


Mr. G. I knew it a long time before that happened.


Cl. I am sorry to hear you say so, Master; because there are some ill Men in
the Parish, who, if this be once known, will clamor against you, as if you
were a Man of no Conscience, in that although you knew your self to be no
Minister, you have officiated as one, and although you knew the Church of England
to be in the wrong, yet you instructed all your People to live and die in the
Communion of it.


Mr. G. Whatever I may have done heretofore, I intend to do so no longer.


Cl. Shall we then lose you, Sir, presently?


Mr. G. I do not intend to officiate any longer amongst you, but I will send
you a very good Curat.


Cl. And take the Profits your self, as you did formerly?


Mr. G. Ay John, Why should I not?


Cl. O, Master, it would be better to resign your Living: for, if he be
satisfied in his Mind (will those ill Men say) that he is no Minister, why does
he pretend to take care of our Souls? Nay, if he thinks no Man can be saved in
the Communion of the Church of England, and therefore has himself left it, what
a wicked thing is it for him to contribute still to our being educated in the
same Errors, and to take Money for deceiving us by his Curat after the same
manner, as he for several Years has deceived us himself. Excuse my Boldness,
Master, I only tell you what Mr. G. and Mr. H. who never loved you heartily,
will say of you.


Mr. G. You know John, I always liked your freedom. Mr. G. and Mr. H. may say
what they please, but perhaps it will not be long before I return to my Cure my
self.


Cl. To tell you the Truth, Master, the whole Parish is very much against
Popery; but if they must have a Popish Minister, I am very confident, that the
generality of them would rather have you, with whom they are acquainted, than
any Stranger whatsoever.


Mr. G. I am much beholden to them: Pray remember me to Esquire F. and to every
body else. Farewell John.


Cl. Farewell Master.


Second Dialogue Betwixt Esquire F. and Mr. G.
Esquire F. PArson, Father, Lay-Brother, What shall I call you? You are welcome
home. Indeed you have served us a fine trick, to desert us when we stand in
most need of you.


Mr. G. Sir, I am your most humble Servant: Pray, how does your Lady, and the
rest of your good Family?


Esquire F. We are all, God be thanked, in good Health, but not a little concerned
to hear that our Spiritual Pastor is become a Wanderer.


Mr. G. That Name rather belonged to me before my return to my true Mother,
who, with open Arms, has been pleased to receive her truly penitent Prodigal
Son.


Esquire F. She is very kind to Prodigals, for to my knowledge, she has received,
with open Arms, many of that Character; but I do not think that Name to belong
to thee, unless upon the account of Conscience, and of that, I fear, thou have
been as Prodigal as the best of them all.


Mr. G. However prodigal I may seem to be of it, nothing but Conscience could
have caused this Change in me. I should never have forsaken the Communion of
the Church of England, if I could with a safe Conscience have lived in it.


Esquire F. I am ashamed to hear thee talk of Conscience. Was it Conscience for
thee to educate us and our Children for several Years, according to the Rules
of that Church, in whose Communion thou did not believe either us or thy self
to be safe? Or, is it now Conscience in Thee to receive 120 l. per Annum, and
to barter with some young Fellow for 30 l. to do that among us, which thou
believe to be a Sin in him, and what will help to keep us still in a state of
Damnation?


Mr. G. My Clerk told me indeed, that I must expect to be severely censured by
some of the Parish; but I did hope to have met with better Usage from Esquire F.


Esquire F. What honest Man can forbear to be a little concerned, when he sees such
doings amongst those who pretend to teach others their Duty.


Mr. G. The Apostles themselves were reviled, and a many ill things were
reported of them, and I ought not to expect to fare otherwise, who am gone over
to a persecuted Church.


Esquire F. This is mere Cant, as thou very well know: But I would have Thee take
care, lest thy Conversion prove not the occasion of a sort of lesser
Persecution, even from those of thy own Religion. For to live in the Communion
of one Church, and to be all the while of another, is so scandalous a Practice,
that it deserves a seven Year's Mortification; and were I to be thy Confessor,
I would swinge you with a vengeance, before I gave you Absolution. Pray tell me
one thing, Have you received Orders from the Church of Rome, or not?


Mr. G. I have not.


Esquire F. Nor will be permitted I suppose, in haste, before you have made some
better Satisfaction to the Church for the Scandal you have given it by your
double-dealing. Let us see you set out a Narrative of your Conversion, with a
cloud of Witnesses to justify it. Let us see you answer some of those
troublesome Papers which the Heretics at London daily set forth, and then
perhaps you shall be put into a Capacity of enjoying a Living, not your own,
for that is Meat for your Masters, but some smaller one of 30 or 40 l. per An.
which is a good Competency for one that durst not declare till the other day, who
must not expect to feed upon such Delicacies, as belong only to those who have
deserved well all their Lifetime in the Service of the Catholic Cause.


Mr. G. What I have done has not been with a prospect of any present Advantage.
It is my greatest Reward and Comfort* that I am in the right way to Heaven; and
I hope that it will not be long before your self and others are persuaded to
forsake their Errors, as I have done.


Esquire F. You must then produce better Arguments than the World has yet seen; for
certainly no Cause was ever more bafled than yours of late has been.


Mr. G. I wonder why you should say so, since it is built upon an infallible
Foundation: Whilst the Reformation relies wholly upon the uncertain Reasonings
of every particular Person, and gives liberty to every one to believe what he
pleases.


Esquire F. What you call an infallible Foundation, has been sufficiently shown to
be but a sandy one. But what you mean by the uncertain Reasonings of every
particular Person, and by giving leave to believe what a Man pleases, I do not
well understand.


Mr. G. My meaning in short is this. That the Rule of Faith of the Reformation
being Scripture, as each Person of sound Judgment in the Church understands it,
whatever any particular Person judges to be the meaning of Scripture, will be
to him his Rule of Faith; and therefore since different Persons do put
different Interpretations upon the Scripture; nay, since the same Persons do
interpret it at one time one way, and at another time another, it must
necessarily follow, that the Principle, upon which the Reformation is built, is
very uncertain. For one Man may be of one Persuasion, another of another, a
third of one different from both. Nay, the same Person may change his
Persuasion twice or thrice in a day, and yet continue still a true Son of the
Reformation.


Esquire F. I do now guess what you would be at, and perceive that you are well
acquainted with a Book called Pax Vobis.


Mr. G. That is a notable Book.


Esquire F. I allow it to have a great deal of Wit, more of Malice, but nothing of
Argument.


Mr. G. The Book has sold wonderfully, which is a sign that it has Argument in
it.


Esquire F. It is no sign amongst us of the Reformation, for we read Books of all
sorts, and are pleased with every thing that is well done in its kind, whether
with Argument or without it, whether written by an Enemy or a Friend. And this
is such a freedom, that I would not part with it for all the World. So that if
I had no other Argument against your Religion, this to me would seem
sufficient, that, if I had once embraced it, and such a sort of Book as Pax
Vobis should come out against it, I should not dare, without a License, to peep
into it but should think it a Book as much to be avoided as Chillingworth, Dr.
Stillingfleet's Rational Grounds of the Protestant Religion, or the Bible it
self.


Mr. G. Nay, the Reformation gives you freedom enough; for it allows you not
only to read any Books, but to be of any Persuasion, if you judge it to be
agreeable to Scripture.


Esquire F. You have expressed in short the whole design of that Book, in which,
although there are seven Dialogues, yet is there no more said in all of them to
prove his Conclusion, than in any one of them.


Mr. G. May not a Man use different Arguments to prove the same thing?


Esquire F. Yes, he may: But this Author has not done it; for to prove his
Conclusion, he makes use of the same Argument in every Dialogue, with variety
of Reflections upon several Persons and Things.


Mr. G. Is he not to be commended for it?


Esquire F. He is to be commended for his variety of Reflections; for this makes
his Book pleasant. But when he would pretend to make out so material an
Objection against the Reformation, it cannot sure be so very commendable, to
make use of the same Argument over and over again.

But this seems to be an allowed Practice amongst you: for although all your most
considerable Objections have been answered an hundred times; yet are we daily
troubled with them, as if they had never been heard of before; and almost every
Fortnight out comes that astonishing Question, Where was your Church before
Luther?


Mr. G. If he makes use but of one Argument, it is however such an Argument as
ought to persuade every honest Man to forsake the Reformation, which is founded
upon a Principle that gives a Man leave to be in England a Protestant, in
Germany a Lutheran, in Hungary a Socinian; and to change his Religion as often
as he pleases.


Esquire F. This is all out of Pax Vobis: But how does it appear that a Man may
thus change his Religion from that Principle, That the Scriptures, as any Man
of sound Judgment interprets them, are the Rule of Faith?


Mr. G. Because a Man may alter his Judgment, and interpret Scripture otherwise
than he did; and since he may lawfully stick to that Interpretation which he
himself puts upon it, he may change his Religion as often as he thinks fit to
alter his Judgment.


Esquire, F. That does not always follow: for a Man may perhaps think fit to
profess an alteration of his Judgment without any just Reason, or without
having made any inquiry, whether he may safely do it or no; and if he does so,
the alteration of his Judgment is so far from being a Reason why he should
change his Religion, that it is in it self a great fault.


Mr. G. But suppose he does find Reason to alter his Judgment, may he not then
change his Religion?


Esquire F. Yes, he is bound to do it, although he should change Truth for Error.


Mr. G. And so he may turn from one thing unto another, until he has turned as
often as there are Points in the Compass, and be a true Child of the
Reformation all the while.


Esquire F. He is bound to alter his Persuasion as often as he meets with sufficien^
Arguments to convince him that he ought to do so. But there is a great deal of
difference between what is Truth, and what a Man believes to be so. A Man is
bound to act according to an erroneous Conscience, until he is better informed;
but it does not therefore follow, that his Conscience is not erroneous; or that
if he has had opportunities of undeceiving himself, he is not in a very
dangerours Condition. Now the Author of Pax Vobis would insinuate that those of
the Reformation do believe that to be true, which any Church, or particular
Persons judge to be so, and that there is a Liberty allowed amongst them to
profess, or deny any Tenets whatsoever.


Mr. G. How can it be otherwise, since there are such different Opinions
amongst them, (...) some of them have so often changed their minds, and yet
have still continued true Members of the Reformation?


Esquire F. The Reformation is a word which denotes all those, whether Churches or
Persons, which have left the Communion of the Church of Rome. Now it may happen
that some of those which have left that Communion, may separate from it by
degrees, others all at once; that some of them may maintain some of that
Church's Errors, and others may maintain Errors as bad as any which she holds.
But does it therefore follow, because all these are styled Members of the
Reformation upon the account of their not living in Communion with the Church
of Rome, that they are all in the right, and that a man may lawfully hold
whatever is maintained by any of them?


Mr. G. They all pretend to soundness of judgment; and their common Rule of
Faith is, Scripture as interpreted by men of sound judgment.


Esquire F. The Rule is good, but their pretenses are not. For a man may think his
judgment to be sound, when it really is not; and although he is bound to adhere
to that interpretation, which for want of soundness of judgment he puts upon
Scripture, yet the interpretation is not therefore at all the truer, nor can it
be an indifferent thing for me or any one else to approve or not to approve of
it.


Mr. G. One would think that it were an indifferent thing, when there are and
have been so many great men amongst you who maintain Opinions contrary the one
to the other, and yet all pretend to truth, and to be true Members of the
Reformation.


E. F. I tell thee once again, That a man is said to be a true Member of the
Reformation by being supposed to have left the Communion of the Church of Rome;
but yet that every one who has left that Communion, may not in all respects
maintain what is Truth, although he may pretend to it. And therefore a man that
has left that Communion, is still obliged to make a strict inquiry whether it
be lawful for him to embrace the terms of that other Communion into which he
has admitted himself; and after he has done so, not to desert it without good
reason.


Mr. G. Does not every Member of the Reformation pretend to have reason on his
side?


Esquire F. But the great question is, whether he has reason or no.

Sir, I cannot stay with you at present any longer; but before I go, I will
leave with you one familiar instance, which seems to me to be a sufficient
confutation of that whole Book which we have discoursed of.


Mr. G. I long to hear it.


Esquire F. Suppose the Emperor of the Turks should turn Christian.


Mr. G. I wish he would.


Esquire F. You mean Roman Catholic.


Mr. G. Unless he turns Roman Catholic, he might as well never turn Christian.


Esquire F. We will let that alone at present. You may well think that after his
conversion he will be very desirous to have his people turn, as well as
himself; and you must needs allow it to be very reasonable for the whole Empire
to do it.


Mr. G. Nothing can be more reasonable.


Esquire F. Now suppose one man turns, because thoroughly convinced of the
Excellency of the Christian Religion; Another retains his wonted kindness for
his old Mahumetan way of Worship, but yet for fear of losing by it, turns too.
A third, to gain somewhat by it, which he knows not otherwise how to get, turns
Christian, although his sentiments are the same with those of the second. A
fourth has some high flying hopes, and although he does not turn at present,
yet he is ready to do it when ever it is required of him. It is therefore
lawful to turn Christian, or to be ready to turn, to save by it, or to get by
it, or in hopes of getting, for this reason, or for that reason, or for any
other reason whatsoever.


Mr. G. You are pleasant, Sir; but I do not perceive the consequence of this
Discourse.


Esquire F. Think on it, and you will find it to be as good a consequence, as that
which your Author so much insists upon.

But I can stay no longer, Parson, Farewell, I should be glad to see you at my
House.


Mr. G. I shall not forget to wait upon you.


Esquire F. You must forgive me for calling you Parson, still. I protest I cannot
forget my old Compellation.


Mr. G. Sir, I am your Servant.


The Third Dialogue.
Esquire F. SIR, your humble Servant. This is kindly done. I find you Catholics
have more Charity than some would make you to have.


Mr. G. I am always true to my word, Sir.


Esquire F. In lesser matters you mean.


Mr. G. Nay in the greatest.


Esquire F. We will not dispute that Point. You are heartily welcome, although I
must frankly tell you, Not so welcome as you were wont to be. Pray will you sit
down.


Mr. G. I fear I shall disturb you, Sir.


Esquire F. Not in the least; I was diverting my self with the famous Pamphlet
which we talked of when we were last together; and am glad you are come, that
we may have a little more chat about it.


M. G. I do not doubt, but that you have read it over long before now: Pray
Sir, what do you think of it?


Esquire F. I have read it over twice or thrice, and think of it, as I told you
when I was with you; viz. That the Book is a pleasant Book, but that there is
little of Argument in it; and that which it has, does not at all prove the
Conclusion.


Mr. G. The men of the Reformation, I suppose, do not much like the Conclusion.


Esquire F. I know not what others like; I, for my part, like every thing that is
well proved.

Let me entreat you to take the Book, and as you turn over the leaves to give
me the Contents of every Dialogue, and let us consider together, with what
strength he proves, That, according to the Principles of the Reformation, a man
may change his Religion as often as he pleases; and that it is an indifferent
thing, what opinions a man holds.


Mr. G. Does he not in his first Dialogue show you the facility of such a
change, p. 5.? And give you instances of those who have made it, p. 7.?

Does he not tell you how readily they of different persuasions, join together
in the same Worship, p. 8?

That the Synod of Charenton has allowed it, p. 9?

Does he not instance in the several Changes which have been made here in
England, p. 10?

And in the Opinions of several Doctors who have allowed Heretics to be
members of the Church?

In his second Dialogue he makes mention of great differences amongst those of
the Reformation, concerning their Rule of Faith; but that it is resolved at
last into the judgment of every particular person.

He then quotes several gross opinions of Calvin and others, which he declares
to be the Doctrine of the Reformation, and that they may be believed by any man
whatsoever.


Esquire F. Pray go on, Sir.


Mr. G. In his Third he shows, That every Woman and Cobbler, according to the
Doctrine of the Reformation, may preach and instruct others, and hold several
Blasphemous Tenets, which he there gives an account of.

In his Fourth he relates other wicked Tenets of the Reformation, especially
such as encourage looseness of manners.

In his fifth, Such as have respect to Christ's having established a Church; to
the truth of what he and the Apostles taught; to the disagreement about the
Canon of Scripture; to the changing of Scripture; to the Doctrines of
Justifying Faith, of Works, of Gods Grace, of the keeping his Commandments; all
which wicked Tenets he makes it appear, that several of the Reformers have
held, and therefore that they are the Doctrines of the Reformation, and may
lawfully be held by any Member thereof, if he will adhere to his own Principles.


Esquire F. We shall see that by and by: Pray give me the sense of the two last
Dialogues.


Mr. G. In the beginning of the sixth he inveighs against the Church of
England, for pretending to impose upon her Members, her Interpretations of
Scripture, which is no more than what is done by the Papists, and is directly
contrary to the Doctrine of the Reformation. In the latter end thereof, and in
the beginning of the seventh, he shows, that according to the Principles of the
Reformation, a man may believe all the Doctrines of the Popery; that several of
the Reformers have believed several of them; and that the only difference
betwixt the Papists and the Reformers in this case, is, That the former believe
their Doctrines to be true, upon the Authority of the Church; the latter,
because they judge them to be agreeable to Scriptures.

He avers in his Conclusion, That according to the Principles of the
Reformation, no Doctrine or Tenet whatsoever can be wicked or blasphemous, but
that all are sacred and solid Judgments; and reflects very sharply upon Dr.
Still. for making Jupiter to be the Supreme God.


Esquire F. He is very witty upon the Doctor, and would fain persuade him to turn
Pagan; and I believe if the Doctor would be ruled by him, he could teach him
how to do it, without ever turning from being a Christian.

But since you have given a brief account of this Book, pray let us reckon what
the whole thereof amounts to.

As far as I can perceive, the sum of all is no more than this, That several of
the Reformers have changed from one thing to another, and that some of them
have held most gross and scandalous Tenets; and therefore since every man is
bound to follow his own Judgment, he may according to the Principles of the
Reformation lawfully embrace any Opinion or Doctrine whatsoever.


Mr. G. That is indeed the Sum of what he has said, and to what the Reformation
will never be able to give any satisfactory answer.


Esquire F. Be not too hasty, good Sir, in your Inferences. Because men are of
different opinions, and will be so as long as the World endures, does it
therefore follow that every one allows all opinions lawful, and that it is the
same thing what opinion a man holds.


Mr. G. Any man would think so; since they allow it to be lawful to change
their opinions as often as they in their own judgments shall think it reasonable
so to do, and every man believes all the while his opinion to be true.


Esquire F. Does every one who believes his opinion to be true, believe the opinion
of others, which is contrary thereunto, to be true also?


Mr. G. By no means; for as this Author tells you, p. 2. Each particular
Congregation constrains as much as it can, all people to believe its own
Tenets; Protestancy would have us all be Protestants, and would root Lutherans
out of the World, as well as Popery; Lutherans would, if they could, draw all
to their own net; Presbytery esteems it self to be the best of all, and would
crush Protestancy if it could; but that if we look upon the whole body of the
Reformation, as it includes all Reformed Congregations distinct from Popery,
there is a holy extension of Spirit and Liberty for to be either Lutherans,
Presbyterians, Protestants, and any thing but Popery.


Esquire F. Those words, and what follows, make a certain sound in a man's ears, but
I do not perceive any great matter to be in them. They rather imply a
Contradiction, than any thing else.

For if the several parts of the Reformation believe their own opinions to be
true, and would have all others to embrace them; how can the whole Body, which
consists of the parts, be truly said to allow a liberty of believing what every
man pleases?

They may not only allow a liberty, but may assert it to be necessary that
every one should follow his own judgment, although he be never so much
mistaken. But where do they allow it to be an indifferent thing whether he be
mistaken or no?


Mr. G. What think you of the Synod of Charenton in France, held about the year
1634, which expressly says, that for your Salvation, it is all alike whether you
be a Calvinist, Lutheran, or of any other Congregation?


Esquire F. To cut you short in this matter; It is not to be supposed that I who am
a Layman should understand what Synods have determined, or what are the
Opinions of particular Learned men in these and such like cases, and therefore
cannot tell whether this Author has rightly represented matters or no.


Mr. G. Why should you think otherwise?


Esquire F. Because there are some people in the World who give themselves a great
liberty of representing things either truly or falsely, as they judge it to be
most expedient for their present purpose.


Mr. G. Why do you suppose this Author to have done so?


Esquire. F. He may have done so for ought that I can tell; but I do not suppose
that he has, but rather choose to allow all his Representations to be true; and
yet I cannot see what other effect his Book can have upon the mind of any
judicious man, than the giving him some little sensual pleasure in the reading
of it.


Mr. G. It has had good effect amongst some people; and a certain man of
Authority in a certain University, publicly owns himself in all companies to
have been converted by it.


Esquire F. Every man, in every place of Authority there, is not always the wisest
or the honestest man in the University; but whatever your certain man may say,
I am of opinion, That if this Book makes no more Converts any where else, than
it is likely to make in an University; there has been no small pains taken to
little purpose.


Mr. G. You will allow, I suppose, that this Author may have said enough to
convince any man in the University, or out of it, of the absurd Opinions of
several Reformers.


Esquire F. He may do that indeed, if all the Stories which he tells, are true.

But how do these men's Errors concern me? or what will it avail to persuade me
to relinquish my Opinion, (which is the great design of this Book) that others
are, or have been mistaken?

My Business is to to enquire, Whether the Terms of that Communion to which I
belong, are just and equitable; and since, God be thanked, I find them to be
so, I do not intend to forsake that Communion, because others are not, or have
not been of my mind.


Mr. G. But the Synod of Charenton tells you, that you may, if you please.


Esquire F. I am not certain, whether the Synod of Charenton tells me so, or no;
but if it does, it will not weigh at all with me, since the Church of England
tells me no such thing; but having prescribed such terms of Communion, as are
Just and Orthodox, declares those Members to be guilty of Schism, which depart
from her.


Mr. G. She would, I know, arbitrarily impose her Rules and Interpretations of
Scripture upon her Members; and what is this else, but a Spice of Popery, for
which she nevertheless pretends to have so great an aversation?


Esquire F. This indeed your Author objects several times; and if it be a Spice of
Popery, I heartily wish that Popery had nothing worse in it; but you are both
under a great mistake, to fancy any agreement betwixt Popery and the Church of
England in this matter; for Popery requires an entire Submission, without any
previous Trial or Examination; you must believe and practice what the Church
prescribes, because she requires it. Whereas the Church of England gives you
leave, nay desires you to examine the truth of her Doctrines, and the
lawfulness of her prudential provisions and orders, and so depends not upon her
own bare Authority, but is ready to justify to every one of her Members the
reasonableness of her commands, which is plain and honest dealing, and ought to
give great satisfaction to every wise and honest man.


Mr. G. I wonder why you should so magnify the Church of England, which has as
much established this liberty of believing what we please, as any other part of
the Reformation, having in a few years changed and established different
Religions by public Acts of Parliament, as this Author has made out, p. 10.


E. F. It never troubles my head, what Changes and Alterations have been made,
or how they have been made. That which I am concerned to know is, Whether the
present settlement is contrived to promote Virtue and Goodness, as it ought to
do, and whether it contains nothing contrary to the Word of God.


Mr. G. Pray, Sir, is it lawful to settle one thing at one time, and the quite
contrary at another?


Esquire F. I do not say so: They who at any time settle what is destructive of
good Manners, or contrary to the Word of God, do amiss. There is no such thing
at present settled in the Church of England, and therefore what care I how
things were heretofore, or by what steps and degtees they came to be so well
settled as they are.

Great alterations cannot be completed in a moment; and it required some time
to bring men out of that darkness in which they had so long sat; and if we were
to be brought back again to that condition in which we then were, thirty or
forty years might well be allowed to effect it in; for how hasty soever some
folk may be, it is not so easy a work to convert millions on the sudden: And
besides, when men are blind, they are much more willing to have their sight
restored, than when they see very well, to suffer their eyes to be put out.


Mr. G. I had thought that all Religious Congregations, and Pretenders to
Piety, had at their first beginning been in the height of their perfection.


Esquire F. That is one of the most silly things which your Author insists upon, p.
39. for Truth, after it has been obscured for a great while in any Nation,
cannot be made immediately to recover its wonted brightness; and when great
opposition is made against it, it is very well, if at first it gets any ground
at all.

And therefore although a certain Gentleman has taken a great deal of pains to
show how indecent and improper it is to call King Hen. VIII. the Postilion of
the Reformation; yet does that expression very well declare his Courage and
Resolution in first undertaking so hazardous an Enterprise, as well as the
Effects thereof; his dashing all that were near and about him, as well as his
receiving some dirt himself.

And although but little then was done in comparison of what was done
afterward, yet was it well for us that so much was done; and I had much rather
have lived in the lattter end of his Reign, than in the days of our King John,
when his Holiness was pleased to shut up our Church-doors, and would not be
prevailed with to open them until the King upon his knees had resigned his
Crown unto his Legate Pandulphus.

After the Reign of King Edw. 6. the Reformation came to no true Settlement
until the days of Queen Elizabeth, since which time the alterations have been
very inconsiderable; neither do I see what occasion we have for any more. But
if any should happen, as long as nothing were established contrary to the Word
of God, I could freely comply with them.


Mr. G. That is according to the Principles of several Reformers, who complied
with the several Changes as fast as they were made.


Esquire F. If their compliance was after the manner of honest Mr. Chillingworth,
who when he was in the right way suspected he was in the wrong, and thereupon
went out of it; but upon the discovery of his mistake, returned immediately
into it again, they were to be commended for it. But if they turned out of
interest, what do you tell me of them? If they were Knaves and Hypocrites, I do
not intend to increase their number.


Mr. G. Is it not a scandal upon the Reformation, that such men should be of
it, who give themselves the liberty of doing whatever seems best in their own
eyes?


Esquire F. The Reformation, as I once before told you, is a word, and signifies no
more than the forsaking the Church of Rome; and what objection is it against
any man's leaving the Communion of that Church, That amongst those who have left
it, there are as bad, if not worse, than those who continue in it.

What if amongst the Reformers, there be found a Vicar of Bray, or an A. P. in
an University, must it needs follow that you and some others will do as they
did, if there were occasion? Think of that a little, because some men are
always turning when it is convenient so to do; will you allow their Carriage to
be an objection against all Converts?


Mr. G. Well Sir, it is a very wicked thing, that they who style themselves
Reformers, should be guilty of such practices, and hold such Blasphemous Tenets
as this Book assures you they have done.


Esquire F. Do thou think that I value any man barely because he is a Reformer,
if his Faith be Erroneous, or his Life scandalous? For instance, if you could
make me believe that one of the Reformation drinks, till he drinks Healths to
the P -- though perhaps when time was he would have drunk it the other way; that
a second Reformer is so indifferent in his Religion, that he cares not to
defend his own Church to be a true Church. And that a third outswears the
boldest Colonel in the King of Polands Army, and drinks confusion to all
Religions, till at last he drinks an Health to the D -- I think you cannot
desire more liberal Suppositions against our selves, than these are. Nay, I
make no question but you may find some mere Time-servers, some Drunkards, and
common Swearers, and very scandalous debauched persons, not only in the
Reformation at large, but even in the Communion of the Church of England. Pray
Sir, mark what I say, and make your best on it; our Doctrine is pure, and so is
our Form of Worship; but alas! the actions and lives of many of us are not so.
But must not I therefore respect those worthy Gentlemen whose lives are
unblamable, and who by their Writings and prudent demeanor have given such
reputation to the Christian Profession, and to that Excellent Church of which
they are Members?


Mr. G. Why, Sir, you are very free indeed with your own Communion, some of
which you care not, if they be thought as bad as any of those Doctors which the
Author of Pax Vobis makes mention of.


Esquire F. What if they be? Is it a sin to leave the Communion of the Church of
Rome, because there are such as these out of it?

As there are a great many bad men amongst those of the Reformation (and if
there be any who hold it lawful for every man to believe and practice what he
pleases, I reckon those to be the worst of all) so there are a great many good
men too. As there is error amongst some of them, so is there truth amongst
others; and if any part of the Reformation ever had the latter, I am sure the
present Church of England has. And therefore although I do very much suspect
that the Author of Pax Vobis has not done fairly by the Reformers, yet granting
all that he has said to be true, I am firmly resolved (and I have great reason
to be so) notwithstanding all the different and perhaps Blasphemous Opinions of
others; Notwithstanding the various changes and alterations which have been
made by our forefathers, To continue firm to the present establishment, and so
I believe will all the considering people that are in the whole Nation.

Come, Sir, we will talk no more about these matters.

Only let me add one thing before we go: That you of the Church of Rome have at
this time the least reason to find fault with the Heresies, Schisms, and
extravagant Tenets of some of the Reformation, since it is so visible that they
are like to do you better service than your best Arguments.


FINIS.

