THE ANSWER OF THE CHANCELLOR, MASTERS AND SCHOLARS of the University of
OXFORD, TO The Petition, Articles of Grievance, and Reasons of the City of OXON.

Presented to the Honorable Committee for Regulating the UNIVERSITY of OXFORD
the 24. of July 1649.

OXFORD, Printed by H. Hall Printer to the University. 1649.

April 6. 1649.
To the Supreme Authority of the Nation, the Commons in Parliament Assembled.
The Humble Petition of the Major, Aldermen, Bailiffs, and Commonaltie of the
City of Oxon, in the County of Oxon.
Humbly shows,

THat they taking notice of the late memorable Acts of Parliament, made for
regulating of the Privy Council, and for taking away of the Court of
Star Chamber, the high Commission Court, and others of the like nature; and
being thereby made sensible of your worthy intentions to disinslave the
free^borne People of this Nation from all manner of Arbitrary Judicature or
Power, and enable them to live like Freemen under the known Laws of this Land;
are thereby at this present emboldned to make known unto you, the most
intolerable sufferings and oppressions, which they for a long time past, and
yet by an Arbitrary and unlimited power exercised over them by the University
o^ Oxon, have under-gone, and at this time suffer, as by particulars hereunto
annexed may appear;

And for redress whereof your distressed Petitioners h^mbly impl^re your
gracious assistance.

And whereas your Petitioners at this present, partly through decay of trading,
and partly through the long and daily payments, taxes, and quartering of
Soldiers are very much impoverished, and their City abounding with such
multitudes of poor people, that they are not able to relieve them without
provision of a convenient stock wherewithal to set them on work; for the
raising whereof, there is a certain large piece of ground, called Portmeade,
lying near the said City, wherein your, Petitioners have the Inheritance and
the Village of Woolvercot only Common of pasture therein by reason of vicinage
which being enclosed and leased out for certain years would raise a convenient
stock for the relief and setting on work of the said poor. The which your
Petitioners are very desirous, and have much endeavored to effect, but have
been, and still are hindered in these their pious, and good intentions, by the
Inhabitants of Woolvercot aforesaid; Albeit your Petitioners have been, and are
willing to allow them a proportionable quantity of ground, to be allotted them
out of the said ground in lieu of their said Common.

Your Petitioners likewise humbly pray, that they be enabled by Authority of
this present Parliament, to enclose, and demise for some competent number of
years, the said ground called Portmeade, for the use aforesaid, leaving a
proportionable quantity of ground, or otherwise allowing some sufficient
recompense unto the said Inhabitants of Woolvercot in lieu thereof,

All which we refer to the wisdom and judgment of this Honorable House, humbly
desiring your serious and speedy considerations, and resolutions herein, and to
make such order for your Petitioners relief, touching the premises, as you in
your grave wisdoms shall think meet and expedient.

And we shall ever pray, etc.

A Schedule of the Cities Grievances claimed, and at several times put in
execution against them by the University.
1. THe University claims power to determine all controversies whatsoever,
between any persons whatsoever, if one of the parties be a privileged person
(except in cases of main felony and freehold) and they claim allowance of their
privileges in all other Courts, without pleading of them, and without fee; and
to try matters of fact without Jury, or without open examination of the
witnesses in the case, but only in private, before a Register; and proceed in
an Ecclesiastical way, by citation, excommunication, and the like, contrary to
the course of the Common Laws; and their sentences are not grounded upon any
certain Law, either Civil, Canon, Statute, or Common Law, but secundu^ equu^
and bonu^, and merely Arbitrary, at the will of the Vice Chancellor, or his
Vice Chancellor against whose sentence, how unreasonable soever, no Writ of
Error will be by them allowed, or other red^ess admitted, but only by appeal
before themselves, in their Convocation or Congregation, in which particular,
the Citizens find themselves much grieved, being by those proceedings not only
delayed, but oftentimes defeated of their just debts, without any redress at
all.

2. Without any lawful power they take upon them to make Proclamations,
thereby imposing not only penary mu^cts, but also imprisonment upon such
persons as shall not obey their matters contained in such Proclamations, and
this not only upon Citizens, but likewise upon all others, dwelling within five
miles of Oxon.

3. They claim and exercise a power over the Citizens, to impose 40 ^. upon any
Citizen, being found out of his house after 9 of the clo^k, albeit it be in the
summer time; and albeit they be Constable in their search for Fellons, upon
persuit of (...) and cry; or Alde^men of the City, or Justices of the Peace, in
conveying of Malefactors to the Goal, or the like; and for default of present
payment of the 40 s. to send them to prison, there to continue until
satisfaction made to the Proctors.

4. They claim the sole power of Licensing of Alehouses, Brewers, and
Maulsters, and usually take for the making of Licenses for Brewers to Brew, and
for Maulsters to make Malt 17 s. 8 d. and take Recognizances, of the
Ale-housekeepers, but never return any of them to the Quarter Sessions.

5. They have challenged to have powers, and de facto have exercised a power,
to pull down the Citizens houses of Habitation; and some of the Butchers
Shambles within the City.

6. They take upon them power to dis-common Citizens at their pleasure, and to
inhibite all privileged persons, to have any commerce or trading with them;
which power they have also exercised upon diverse Citizens.

7 They exact from the Mayor and sixty two Citizens, an Oath for the
maintenance of the University Privileges; whereas many of their pretended
Privileges are mere Usurpations and Encroachments upon the Liberties of the
City, which the Citizens by their Oath^ are bound to preserve.

8. They claim and exercise a power to enforce the Major, and sixty two
Burgesses of the City, to come yearly to Saint Mary's Church on the tenth of
February (called by them Scholastims day) to make an Oblation at the High
Altar, of sixty three pence for the slaughter of sixty three Scholars, tempore
Ed. 3. to procure a Mas^ for the souls of the sixty three slaughtered persons;
for the nonperformance whereof, they give forth, That they will put a bond in
suit^ which the City in those days entered into to the University.

9. They claim a power to make Bylaws, thereby to bind the Inhabitants of the
City, which are mere strangers, and were never called to the making of them.

10. They take upon them power to make new Officers, as Tole takers of Corn,
and the like; and they constitute Coroners, which Office of Right belongs to
the City by their ancient Charters, and Usage, time out of mind.

11. They claim Fellons Goods, and Deodans, by their new Charter, albeit the
City time out of memory has enjoyed, and has right unto them by their ancient
Charters, as they conceive; and albeit, the City be at the charge of keeping of
Fellons, and of the delivery of them.

12. The Market, the Soil, and the Streets belong to the Citizens, together
with Toll, Stallage, and Picage, yet the University claims all these; and
diverse times by Proclamation alter the Market days, whereas the University have
only the Clarkship of the Market, and the perquisites, and profit thereof,
belong to the City toward their Fee-farm Rent.

13. They set up diverse Taverns in Oxon, and will not permit the City to set up
any, contrary to the true intent of the Statute of 7. Ed. 6.

14. They claim power to set up Trades within the City, and to authorize
Forraigners to exercise any trade there, as fully as a Freeman of the City; and
that albeit such Forraigner never served as an Apprentice.

15. In case the City punishes any irregular Freeman for misdemeanour, or make
any By-law for regulating of such misdemeanor, they presently become servant to
some Master of Art^, or else to be an under Gardner to some College, or Hall,
and thereby exercise their Trades, in contempt of the City, and their Bylaws,
and refuse to pay any payments with the City, except such as shall be
warrantable under the S^al of the University^

April. 30. 1649.
A Particular of the Grievances of the City of Oxon against the Universitie of
Oxon, together with the reasons thereof exhibited unto the Honorable Committee
for the regulating the said University, according to the directions of an Order
of the said Committee of the 26. of this instant April. 1649.

1. Greevance
THat Scholars and Privileged persons draw Townsmen in suit into the
Vicechancellors Court for any matters whatsoever (except Mayhem, Felony, and
Free hold) as well in cases where they are Plaintiffs, as where they are
Defendants: in which particulers, the Citizens conceive they have just cause
of complaint for diverse reasons.

Hen. 1. Hen. Hen. 2. Edw. 3. and diverse other subsequent Charters confirmed by
act of Parliament and allowed by Justyces in Air and in the Courts at
Westminster, they ought not to be impleaded out of their own Court, but to have
their trial in their own Court according to the Customs and usages of London,
for that they are by their Charters to enjoy the same libertyes and customs,
and the Perquisites and Profits of their Court are parcel of their Fee-farme
which would be left or at least wise lessened in case that their suit^ and
trials should be in the Chancellours Court, as well where a privileged person
is Plaintiff^ as Defendant: (there being at this present near about a third
part of the Householders within the City privileged by the University as in
conceived.

Viis and Modis, Libell, Excommunication, and the like, and the sentences of
the Chancellor, or his Vicechancellor, or Commissarye not confined or tied to
any certain Law, either Civil, Cannon, or Common Law. But either according
to any of these, or according to the Customs and statutes of the Universitye
heretofore used or h^reafter to be ordained, or according to his and their best
discretion, notwithstanding any statute whatsoever either made or to be made,
against whose sentence (be the same just or unjust) there is no remedy either
by removing the cause to any of the Courts of Westminster either of Law or
equity or otherwise then before themselves.

Thirdly, for that diverse Citizens have commenced several

Fourthly for that (as the Citizens conceive) that Court Oxon, but all others
who shall have any commerce or dealing with a Scholar or a Privileged Person.

The University claims a power to imprison, ^ Greevance
and to impose a mulct of 40^. upon any Citizen being out of his house after
nine a clock at night without such reasonable cause as the Procters or
Vicechancellor shall allow of^ the Procter having the benefit of the Mulct,
and this has been exercised not only upon private Citizens but upon the
public Magistrates and Officers of the City, as Bailiffes, Constables, and
the like being in the execution of their offices to preserve the peace, to
pursue Hue and Cries to keep watch and ward, Convey offenders to prison by
virtue of the Justice of peace warrants, to prevent escapes from the Jail,
whereof the Bailiff^s have the chardge and the like, which the Citizens
conceive to be a great Greevance contrary to the great Charter and other laws
to their Native and just liberties, the rather for that the fyve Aldermen and
eight Assistants of the City, besides what the Law of the Land requires are by
their Ancient Charters and by their Oaths bound to search for and apprehend
Malefactors within the City as well by night as by day. Nevertheless the said
Citizens can desire no less, but that if the Major or any Officer of the
City find any privileged person disorderly and irregular they may have power
and liberty to secure them until they may be sent to the Vicechancellor or
Proctor, and they to deal in like manner with the cittyzens. But that the
Vniversitye should impose such a mulct and inslict imprisonment for Non payment
upon a Citizen that is abroad after such a time about his lawful occasions,
and to make the Proctor judge in his own cause whether it was a lawful
occasion or no^, he being to have the 40^. And for a civil man to go to the
Vicechancellor for leave to be out of his house after nine of the clock or not
to stir abroad before 4 of the clock in the morning is conceived by us to be
a greater tyranny then is fi^ for any freeman to bear,

3 Greevance
That the Vniversitye have heretofore restrained all Bakers and Brewers within
the precincts of the City and Suburbs thereof to bake or brew within the
City, except they first take a License from the University, for which they
challenge 17^. 8^, and also enforces them to take an oath to observe such
assize as the Vicechancellor from time to time shall appoint, the which the
Citizens conceive to be a Greevance and a burden both in respect of the money
extorted from them there being no such sum of money due by the Laws of this
Land for such license, a^ also for that they conceive it most proper and
peculier for the City to set up and order Trades within the City where they
served as Apprentice, and for other re^sons hereafter mentioned in the
Greevance concerning Trades being contrary to the Liberty of the People^ and
privil^dge no ways suitable or proper (as the Ci^tizens co^ceive) for
Scholars to pretend unto.

4 Greevance
The Vice Chancellor heretofore has by power pulled down some Citizens houses
of habitation for which there as yet has no satisfaction been made either to
the Tenant or ^enants in possessi^n, or to the Ci^iz^ns who ^^d the i^heritance
thereof^ as namely in particular the house of one Tredwell, then worth 10 l.
per annum, and the house of one Master Chambers worth 6 l. per^ annum, for
which it i^ conceived the University ought to make satisfaction both to the
Tenants and the City.

The Citizens conceive it to be a great pressure and inconsistent with the
Principles of charity, or the liberties of the people, or the laws of the Land
to inhibit all the Members or privileged persons of the University to have any
commerce^ trade, or dealing with such Citizens as the Vice Chancellor or
Proctor at their liberty shall dislike, it being a means to breed enmity
between neighbor and neighbor; and to hinder mutual amitye between friend
and friend, as also tending to a Monopoly of Trading, and done for the
maintaining of some private interest, of mere will and power against the
public interest of the Cities Liberties. And also to the utter ruin and
destruction at their pleasure of any Citizen and his family in their Trade^

Touching the Oath that the University demands of the Ma^or and of the
Citizens.

The Citizens take it as a grievance and burden to their

The Citizens find themselves very much agreeved that Mary's yearly upon the
tenth day of Februarye to make an oblation there at the high Altar of 63 pence
for the souls of 63 scholars or Privileged persons slain in the time of
Edw. 3^. This in the Original being gross ^uperstition and the memory and
continuance of it to be totally abolished without any memorial thereof to be
observed. And therefore hope and desire that one Inden^ture and one obligation
of the penalty of 1000 marks entered into by the City unto the University in
these days of superstition, for the continuance of that superstitious
anniversary, may be delivered up to the Citizens to be cancelled, and the
obloquie put upon the Citizens by reason of this Ceremonye quite abolished, And
whereas the University now says that they will be content with the 5s. 3d per
annum and dispense with the superstitious Ceremonye^ the Citizens desire by
the wisdom and Authority of Parliament they shallbee excused from any such
acknowledgment of that servile and superstitious nature, Not that we would
contend with the University for such small matters (toward whom we ever have,
and shall respectively Comport our selves) but that we may not part with our
liberties at any rate nor bear witness against the truth.



Vniversitye to have all the profit, and such persiquites (besides for the
reasons aforesaid) may seem not very proper nor convenient for scholars to
trouble themselves withal.

The University inhibiteth the City from setting up any Tavernes within the
City, or the selling of Wine by retaile, the which the Citizens conceive to
be against the true meaning of the Stat. 7. Edw. 6. And against diverse of the
aun^ient Charters of the City, and therefore desire that this grievance
likewise may be redressed.

The University assumeth power to set up Trades within

The Citizens are willing that the University may enjoy and continue all just
and due Privileges, which either make for the advancement o^ Learning, or are
fit for them to enjoy, but any privilege or practice, which exalts it self
above the power of the Civil Magistrate, which i^ founded upon superstition or
Tyranny, or which is inconsistent with the freedom and just Immunities of a
subject or free Cittyzen, they hope and earnestly pray may be by the wisdom
and goodness of this Parliament qui^e abolished.

JULY 24. 1649. THE ANSWER OF THE CHANCELLOR, MASTERS, and Scholars of the
University of OXFORD, to the Petition, Articles of Grievance, and Reasons of
the City of OXON. According to the directions of an Order of the Honorable
Committee, 21. of June 1649.
To the Petition.
WHereas the Petitioners charge the University with the exercise of an
Arbitrary and unlimited power over them to their most intolerable sufferings
and oppressions, which they pretend they have for a long time undergone, and at
this time suffer, (although the Petitioners by their Council at several times
before this Honorable Committee have a^quitted the present Governors of the
University from any such charge, and a^though the University for many years now
lat^ past have suffered g^^^t w^on^s, and diminu^ions of their just and ancient
(...) by the P^titioner^, who h^ve ta^^n upon them (...) ^^^^ossesse them of
some ^f them before com(...) of others while ^^eir complaint is yet de^^ (...))

We answer and say, That the University neither has exercised, nor does
challenge the exercise of any Arbitr^ry power or jurisdoction over the
Citizens; But only such just Power as they are by Law and Custom confirmed
by Act of Parliament warranted unto.

Concerning Port-mead.
1. We answer and deny that the Petitioners have the inheritance of the said
Meadow, but only a right of Common; and that diverse Colleges in the University,
and their Tenants, and other men, are (as we conceive) equally interessed^ with
the Petitioners in a right of Common in that Meadow.

2. That the number of poor People, both now and heretofore abounding in the
City, is very much occasioned by the Petitioners illegal erecting of
multitudes of Cottages upon the Town wall and Ditch, which they rent out to
such poor people, and thereby much enhance their own Revenues to the prejudice
and impoverishing of the University, by whose Free and charitable Contributions
those poor are exceedingly relieved and maintained.

3. That if all the Charitable donations given to maintain the Poor of Oxford
by several Members of the University were rightly employed by the Petitioners
to that end for which they were given, they could not want a convenient stock
wherewithal to set them on work, as we conceive.

4. That the improvement desired by the enclosure of Portmead would not be only
to the prejudice of the right of several Colleges and their Tenants in
respect of their said right of Common therein, but to the general
impoverishment of the Poor inhabitants of the City, who claim and use a like
right of Common in the said ground, which has been, and is a great support to
them, and therefore when the like design of enclosure has heretofore been
attempted by the richer Citizens, it has been mainely opposed and hindered by
the Poor inhabitants of Oxon; and so (we conceive) they do oppose it at
present. And it is to be considered that the Piece of ground which they desire
to enclose contains by estimation eight hundred Acres of rich Meadow.

5. If the City have the inheritance of Port-meadow, and that it shall be
thought fit to give way to such an enclosure as is desired for the ends by them
proposed, the University will not oppose, so as their interest in the
disposing, and the right of the Colleges and their respective Tenants be
preserved, or a valuable consideration given them in recompense of their said
Common in the said Meadow.

To the first Article of the Cities pretended Grievances.
1. WE answer and say. That the University has, time out of mind, (and are
warranted so to do by diverse Charters confirmed by Act of Parliament)
exercised Power and Jurisdiction in all Causes m^ntioned in this Article^
whereof or wherein a Priviledg^d person is one party.

2. We do claim Allowa^ce of our Privilege for such Persons justly
p^ivile^ged, as the Chancellor shall under the Common seal certify to any
Court to be so privil^dged; and we have had it without the formalitie or charge
of long pleading, paying only a fee for the allowance of the Certificat.

3. We have ever proceeded according to the course of the Civil Laws, and
after witnesses have been openly produced in Court and sworn, their
examinations are taken in writing by the Judge and Register, and then published
that all parties may have Copies of them, according to the course of the Civil
Law, the High Court of Chancery, and the Admiralty.

4. We do not proceed in an Ecclesiastical way, but in Causes Ecclesiastical.

5. Sometimes heretofore we have used the censure of Excommunication against
our own Members at the instance and for the benefit of the Citizens; but not
so these fifteen or sixteen years, and that course being now in effect
abolished by Act of Parliament, it cannot be matter of present or future
Grievance to the Petitioners.

6. We do^ use Summons or Citations at first, before we grant out an Arrest
against persons of quality, and such as are likely to abide and continue within
the jurisdiction: But against Strangers that have no abiding there, and against
such as are like to ^ly we do grant Arrests without any previous Citation.

7. That our Sentences are (as the Petitioners untruly suggest) merely
arbitra^y and grounded upon no Law, but at the will of the I^dge, we deny^ For
in his Sentences the Judge follows the Justice and Equity of the Civil Law,
and Common Law, and the Statutes of the Land, against which he cannot nor does
not judge.

8. If the Judge be thought to have judged erroniously or unjustly, Writs of
Error are not brought to our Court, because the manner of proceedings there are
not as at the Common Law, but the party grieved may either appeal, or
complain of a nullity, and have redress. And if it be appealed in the
University there are there appointed yearly four or ^ive Doctors, and some
Masters from the Congregation and Convocation to hear the complaint, and from
their judgments there lies an Appeal to the Supreme Power in Chancery, where
the Juges of the Land and other learned Lawyers both Common and Civil have
usually been nominated Judges Delegates, as in the Admiralty and Prerogative
Court.

To the Third.
The University does claim the Night-walke, and by Custom confirmed by Act of
Parliament has exercised the same time beyond the memory of man; and that if
any man be found by the Proctors abroad in the night without a reasonable
cause, by the same Custom he is liable to pay forty shillings for his
Noctivagation; and this extends as well to Townsmen as Scholars or Strangers.
But for barely being abroad about a man's own private, or any other public
occasions, such as are specified in this Article, we absolutely deny.

2. We further affirm, that if any man be taken in the Night he may put in
Bail and show a reasonable cause of such his being abroad the next day, or as
soon as he can; and upon his so doing he is to be dismissed without any
payment.

3. If any P^octor have at any time tran^gressed the just bounds of their
power, the University does not avow them in it, the party greived may take his
course against him.

To the Fourth.
The University time out of mind has used the sole power of admitting or
Licensing Common Brewers.

To the Fifth.
The University never did challenge or exercise any such power as is mentioned
in this Article.

To the Sixth.
The University does not take upon them to Discommon any man at pleasure; but
only upon very great cause and wrong to the University after monition and due
proceedings, and that by common consent in Convocation.

To the Seventh.
The Vniver^ity by several Charters confirmed by Act of Parliament does
require an Oath of the Major and sixty two Citizens, to maintain their
lawful Priviledges^ and so it is expressed in the Oath.

To the Eight.
The University does challenge by Agreement and Indenture under the common
Seal of the Towne-Corporation the offering of sixty three pence yearly by the
Major and sixty two Burgeses: But without any relation to the High^Altar, or
Mass, or the Souls of so many persons slain.

To the Ninth.
The University by Custom confirmed by Act of Parliament does claim a power
to make By-Lawes, for the good government of the University and the Peace of
the Place, in such things as belong solely to the jurisdiction of the
University; whereby the Towns men as well as others are obliged in order to
the peace and good government of the University: But in things that belong to
the government of the City we meddle not.

To the eleventh.
The University claims Felons Goods and Deodands by an ancient Charter
confirmed by Act of Parliament; and we deny that the City has any right to them
at all.

To the Thirteenth.
The University does license Tavernes in Oxford, according to the true intent
of the Statute 70 Edw. 6ti and the persons so licensed are, and may be
Townsmen as well as Privileged persons. And the City has no right to set up
any.

To the Fowerteenth.
The University by ancient Custom and several Charters confirmed by Act of
Parliament, and special Compositions with the City does claim, that
Privilege persons may exercise Trades according to the Law, as far forth as
any Townsmen: But against the Law (as not having served as an Apprentice in
such Trades where the Law requires it) we neither challenge nor exercise any
more power then the Citizens themselves.

To the Second, Tenth, Twelfth, and Fifteenth, and part of the Fourth we have
forborne to answer, in regard the Petitioners have omitted them in their last
paper of Grievan^es o^ the 10th of April; and by their Council in the
Audience of this Committee upon the 21 of June did openly declare they would
not insist upon them.

To the Paper of Reasons exhibited by the Petitioners April 30. 1649.
1. To the Reasons of their first Grievance.
1. TO the first Reason of their first Grievance We answer, and deny it to be
true that they have any such Charter allowed in ^yre, or any such Custom as is
pretended, viz. Not to be sued out of their own Court; Nor ought to have for
the reasons following.

1. For that the University Court and the jurisdiction thereof, is of a higher
antiquity then any Charter of the Citizens legally confirmed concerning their
Court. 2. For that in the most and principal Charters of the City, as also in
such Acts of Parliament as tend to the confirmation of them, there is an
express saving of all the Rights and Privileges of the University. 3. For
that it appears by common practice that the Citizens mutually sue one another
in the Courts at Westminster and elsewhere, both by original Suits commenced
in those Courts, and by removing their Suits out of their own Court by Writs of
Habeas Corpus, Certiorari, and Writt^ of Error. 4. For that they are ordinarily
sued by Strangers both in the Courts at Westminster, and in other Courts; and
we cannot ^ind that ever they pleaded any such Charters of Exemption; or if
they did, that any such Plea was ever allowed to them; Whereas the Universities
Privilege has been frequently pleaded and in all ages allowed.
Whereas the Petitioners claim by their Charters the same Liberties and
Customs with London. We answer.
1. The Petitioners have not made it appear, nor so much as asserted, that
London has any such Liberty or Custom, whereby They may not sue and be sued
out of their own Courts.

2. That supposing They have such a Liberty or Custom as present, yet the
Petitioners have not made it appear, or so much as asserted that London had
any such Liberty at or before the time of the Grant of those surmised Charters
to the City of Oxford.

3. That diverse other Cities and Boroughs in England have by their respective
Charters like Grants of the same Libe^^ies with London and Oxon, who yet are
not exempted from suing and being sued out of their own Courts.

4. That it will appear that the most ancien^ Charter which the City of Oxon
can pretend to, in r^lation to the liberti^s of London, is u^t^^ly repugnant to
it self as to the principal of those Liberties.

5. That Custom is the work of time, and grow^ without Charter, and therefore
can not be granted by Charter.

6. That the Customs of London are of great variety to some of which
(notwithstanding their Charter be general for all) the Citizens of Oxon do
not pretend; and to other some when they have laid claim by suits at common
Law, by petition to the Lord Major and Aldermen of London, by petition in
Parliament, and by pleadings in Air, their claim has not been allowed.

3. Whereas the Petitioners suggest that their Fee Farm would be either lost
or lessened in case their suits and trials should be in the Chancellors Court,
We answer.
1. That ever since the Borough of Oxon was first rented out to that
Corporation in Fee Farm, they have continually fallen in their Rent, but
enhanced their Reven^es by challenging and taking several particulars as
belonging to their Fee Farm which in truth are no parts of it.

2. That granting the perquisites of their Co^rt from the proper Suitors to be
part of their Fee Farm, yet their suing and being sued in the University
Court, where a Scholar or privileged person is one party, would nothing
impair the just perquisites of their Court or Fee Farm, in regard it was
never otherwise since they had either Court or Fee Farm in Oxon.

4. Whereas the Petitioners conceive there are at this present near about a
third part of the householders within the City Privileged by the University,
We answer.
1. That we conceive a tenth part of the Householders within the City and
Suburbs are not privileged persons; And that as the benefit of their
privilege by the daily growing oppressions and vexations of the Petitioners is
in a manner wholly destroyed^ so the number of privileged persons is much less
then ever it was heretofore within the memory of man.

2. That if it were true which the Petitioners suggest, it thence follows,
that the Petitioners by desiring (as they do in their last Article) to
restrain All Privileged persons from exercising any Trade within the City,
do thereby desire to expose a rhird part of the Householders within the City
as (being privileged, as they say) to want and beggary.

To the second Reason We answer.
That it proceeds wholly upon mistakes of the manner and rules of proceeding in
the University Court which we conceive we have sufficiently cleared in our
former Answer to their First Article of Grievances.

To the Third Reason We Reply.
That there is as quick expedition in our Court as in any other Courts, and
they may as well object That diverse persons commenced several Suits in the
Courts at Westminster for just debts due unto them by bond and for injuries
committed against them, and yet (it may be for want of good proof by witness
or otherwise, as for want of able Council, or careful Atturneies to look well
to their pleadings and executions, or for want of ability in the par^ies sued)
after long and tedious suits and much expense have been destitute of any
redress; and therefore this manner of reasoning is not at all concludent,
being an argument drawn a non causa ut Causa, which if it were of any force,
we might easily turn the edge of it upon the Petitioners, by giving instance
in a Privileged person who has a Cause now or lately depending in the Town
Court, werein he sites diverse Citizens for a just debt upon bond, and though
his debt and bond were well proved or ready to be proved by sufficient
witnesses, and no defect in his Council or Attorney, nor any disability in the
Defendants, yet could he not get his money in that Court, after a long and
tedious suit near two years, and much expense. Yet is not the Court to be
blamed, but the dilatorie cunning of the Defendants; and we cannot think it
reasonable to charge the faylings of men, or other intervening casualties, upon
the Law or the Court, either theirs or ours; the due proceedings of which later
are in themselves, as compendious as of any other ordinary Court whatsoever.

To the Fowerth and last Reason, We answer.
1. That such Courts as ours have been found by long experience to consist very
well with the most flourishing Commonwealths that ever were or are in the
world, and with the liberty of those people who had or have no other order or
manner of proceedings in their Courts then such as is objected to ours.

2. That (as we humbly conceive) the wisdom of this State in former ages
thought it fit that our Ancestors should use the practice of the Civil Laws
in our Court, the better to train up young Student^ in the knowledge of them,
that they might thereby be made more serviceable to the Commonwealth in
affairs at home and abroad.

3. That our University Court is of such antiquity that the Common Law Books,
and some very ancient, take frequent notice of it, the proceeding^ thereof
being always allowed by the Common Law. And the Lord Chief Justice Cook in
his Book Of the Jurisdiction of Courts in England (lately published by
authority of the Honorable House of Commons) makes honorable mention of the
Courts in both the Universities.

4. That if the Citizens be plaintiffes (as most commonly they are) besides
the expedition which they may find there, They may have the benefit of the
Defendants Oath to ease them in their proof; They may have good sureties put
into Court not only to bring in the Defendants but also to pay the Judgment
and Costs of Suit, They may arrest not only the Body of any Privileged person,
but also his goods, debts, and things in Action.

5. That though this particular (if it were a grievance) does not only concern
the Citizens of Oxon, but all others who shall have any commerce or dealing
with Scholars or Privileged persons, yet have no others complained of our
Court, and the Petitioners of all others have least cause.

6. That we do not challenge or exercise any other jurisdiction over the
Petitioners or others in the University Court then the Citizens of Oxon
themselves, and all or most other Cities and Boroughs in England do claim
and daily practice without contradiction over all other freeborn people of
the Land; to wit, to Arrest and compel them to answer in their respective
Courts, if they can be there legally attached to Answer.

7. That we do not claim or exercise any greater or other Privilege in this
particular then (as we conceive) is granted to and used by other Universities
in Europe as well as ours; to wit, to sue and be sued before their own Judge, a
Privilege indulged to them and us in favor of Learning; That Scholars may
not be called abroad to answer Suits, to the great neglect of their studies,
and expense of their time and money.

8. That in mixed Suites where one party is of the Privilege of the University,
and the other of the City since it cannot be otherwise, but such Causes must
be heard and determined either in our Court, or the Town Court, or both must
be subject to a foreign jurisdiction (which would be equally repugnant to the
Privileges of both Bodies, no way advantageous unto them, and extremely
inconvenient for us) we cannot but conceive it more consonant to justice, and
withal more convenient that the Privilege of the University should herein
take place of theirs, 1. Because this Privilege has been anciently granted to
us, and we have been many hundred years in possession of it, and it is also
confirmed unto us by Act of Parliament. 2. Because the Judges in the University
Court, having no interest in the particular Suits brought before them, cannot
be thought other then indifferent; Whereas if Scholars should be Sued in the
Towne^ Court where the Major and Bayliffes, Judges and Jury, are all Tradesmen,
it is very much to be feared it would go hard with the poor Scholars. 3.
Because (as we humbly conceive) the University is still (as it has always been
reputed) the more noble Corporation, more Serviceable in the public, and in
which the whole Nation has a greater interest then in the City or Citizens;
who for the most part are beholding to the University for much of their
livelihood and subsist^nce (as themselves in the fifth Article do imply)
whereas we have no dependence upon them, but only wares for our money at dear
r^tes. 4. Lastly Because (as we likewise conceive) if the Petitioners should
prove so unfortunately successful in their desires as to obtain the liberty
of Suing Scholars in their Town Court, it would prove in the end very
prejudicial to themselves; for besides that it would minister occasions of
discontent and continual quarrels betwixt the Bodies, it would deter
Scholars from having any dealing or commerce with their new Judges the
Citizens.


II. To the Reasons of their second Grievance, made up with diverse specious
instances to cast aspersions upon the Universities Right and Privilege of the
Night-walke, We Answer.
1. That this Right and Custom is so ancient, so strengthened by confi^mation
of Parliament, and the benefit thereof so great to all inhabitants by the
careful practice and exercise of it, and the continuance of it so absolutely
necessary for the good government of the University, (especially for securing
younger Scholars against the many temptations to lewdness and looseness,
which they ordinarily are exposed to by means of such Townsmen as make their
own advantage out of the others luxury and deboystnesse) that no man of any
civil conversation, Stranger, Sojourner, Citizen, or other, has ever
expressed the least reluctance against it: As for such disorderly walkers, who
are of a contrary disposition, it is used only to reduce them to civility; and
the Proctors exercise the like power over them, which the Constables and
Magistrates in other places are allowed by the Laws of the land, to preserve
the quiet of the place, and to punish the misdemeanors of such as are
disorderly.

2. W^ do not know that any Proctors ever exercised such power over the
Public Magistrates of the City in the due execution of their offices as is
charged in this Article: Or if any did the parties grieved might have their
remedy against them the University does not claim any such power.

3. We answer and deny That the City have any such ancient Charters concerning
five Aldermen and eight Assistants of the City as is pretended in this Article.

4. We likewise deny that in the case of Noctivagation the Proctors are any
judges at all, but only Relators of the Offenders; nor are they to have the
forty shillings, but only the half in case of legal conviction, as in all
other cases of mulcts.

5. As for what the Petitioners have proposed as an expedient in this point,
That the Town Officer ^ may have as much power over us, as the University
Officers over them, we conceive it would be neither just nor safe for them to
endeavor or us to consent to the divideing that power with them which by Law
and practice is wholly ours, and which is so absolutely necessary to the well
governing of the University. Besides, we conceive That if both parties should
walk in the Night it would breed occasion of quarrels and tumults if not
bloodshed. And how little cause the Petitioners have to complain of Tyranny
in the exe^cise of this power, we d^re appeal, to the consciences of the best
and gravest Cittizens^ whether they h^ve not enjoyed both quiet and profit by
the vigilant care of the Proctors in the Night watch: To the knowledge of such
oth^^s of their Body, whose disorders made them justly obnoxious to that power,
whether they have not usually been much more favo^ably dealt with then the
members of our own Body^ Lastly, To the Testimony of many other civil
Gentlemen both of our own and foreign Nations, who in times of peace did use
to come and so^ourne in Oxford; whether they did conceive it any Greivance to
them to be subject to this and other rules of government of the University,
which the Petitioners are pleased to traduce as arbitrary and Tyrannical.

III. To the Reasons of the Third Greivance, We answer.
1. That the University having the undoubted Assize of Bread and Beer (and the
Oath for the observing that Assize being a necessary consequent depending on
it) the right and c^stome of admitting and Licenceing of common Brewers and
Bakers in Oxon is not only ancient, but for the fitness thereof has also
received and had confirmation by Act of Parliament. Neither is it without
examples of like nature in the Book-cases, where time has indulged the like
custom to persons of quality in other places. And this particular right of
the University has not many years since been declared by the free and
voluntary acknowledgment of the Brewers of Oxon themselves, as in due time will
be showed in writing.

2. As for the Fees of such Licenses or admissions, we answer, They have been
anciently paid to several Officers of the University for their pains about
that business, and are (as we conceive) in themselves but moderate, far
short of such Fees as are required by the City, and their members in other
like cases. But the University claims no Fee to their Body for any such Grant
or License.

3. We further conceive it is not improper for the University to have this
right, which (in all probability) would be worse practiced and with greater
prejudice to the public, if exercised by the City; whose chief Magistrates
are for the most part men of the same Trades, and who by several Acts of
Parliament are prohibited from entermedling with the Assizing and Correction of
victuals, or the defaults therein.

IIII. To the Reasons of the fowerth Grievance We answer.
1. The University never challenges, nor did any Vicechancellor ever exercise
any such power of pulling down, or abating, Townsmen houses.

2. As to the two instances, we say, Those houses were both erected by the
City and those who derive from their Title with ^such prejudice to the common
passages adjoining that they were presented at the Lee^ as Nusances, whereupon
they were ordered to be abated, viz. so much of the first of them as might
enlarge the passage at Smithgate (which had been obstructed by that
encroachment) to the convenience of a Coach or Cart-way, and what was done by
the Vicechancellor herein, was upon the request of the City, expressed in
their letters to the Lords of the Privy Council the 17. of April, 1634. by
whose Order thereupon made the oversight of doing thereof was referred to the
then Vicechancellor, as entrusted with the Care and Custody of the Streets
there: The second, totally to be demolished, as being most notoriously disliked
and complained of by the whole Country and all passengers, to whose great
danger it was in their travel over East Bridge, whereupon it was newly
erected, Upon the doing thereof the Lords then directed that convenient
recompense should be made to the Owners of those houses by those that did abate
the^; which was in truth the City themselves, and not the University or
Vicechancellor.

V. To the Reasons of the Fifth Greivance, We answer.
1. That the matter here intimated by the Petitioners (for it bears not any
direct charge of Discommuning) is an ancient Privilege of the University,
albeit rarely practiced and not but upon great provo^ation, to which the
University has recourse as to their last refuge against the professed
Adversaries of the public rights, peace, and good government thereof, and that
only by their joint and general consent in Convocation, wherein we conceive
our proceedings justifiable, 1. For that of common right trading is free for
all persons, where and with whom they please; and the same measure we do
herein mete to the Citizens, they may, and we are content (if they see just
cause) they shall mete to us again. 2. For that the Petitioners do the like
themselves not only toward the University and Privileged persons, but even to
members of their own Body.


2. We further answer, That this practice of the University cannot in congruity
be construed as tending to a Monopoly of Trading, in the intentions of those
that use it; who are neither so ignorant of their own interest, nor so much
enemies to it, as to desire any thing more then an universal Freedom of
Trade; which as it is most consonant to the native liberty of every Free man
and to the Common Law of the Land; so would it be more beneficial to Scollers
then any other persons, they living wholly upon the penny, buying all
commodities, but having nothing to sell^ But whether the Petitioners
themselves, be not in an high measure guilty of that crime, which they here
object to the University we desire may be considered, for that they have got,
by purchase or otherwise, into their hands several ancient Fayres, and Markets
heretofore used to be kept in Oxon, and sometimes belonging to some Colleges,
and have suppressed them to make way for their own sole Trading in that place;
and have of late without any (...) warrant, erected new Corporations of
particular Trades, and by color thereof engrosse such Trades amongst
themselves, to the great prejudice of other Tradesmen, and the enhansing of
prices upon all manner of buyers.

VI. To the Reasons of the sixth Grievance, We Answer,
1. That the Oath complained of by the Petitioners, as to the form of it, has
been approved and settled upon solemn debate in Parliament above four hundred
years ago.

2. Whereas they object against it that it is conceived in General terms; We
reply, So are all those Oaths which are required by the City of Oxon and
other places of all their Free men, when they are first enfranchised, to
preserve the Liberties of their respective Corporations.

3. Whereas they pretend ignorance of our Privileges, and thereby insinuate
how unjust it is they should Swear to preserve them, We answer, That neither
this Oath which we require, nor any other of that kind which is conceived in
General terms does, by intendment of Law, bind the takers to any farther
observance of the particulars comprehended within that generality, then as they
shall come To their knowledge; And we farther say; That this reason (if it be
of any force) is much more pregnant against that Oath, which is usually imposed
upon all the Freemen of Oxon at their first admittance, to maintain and keep
all the Franchises, Liberties, and Customs of the City, to which many of them
are altogether strangers at the time of their taking that Oath; Whereas none
are required or admitted to swear to maintain the Liberties of the Vniversi^y
but a few Citizens of the Graver sort, to whom by reason of vicinity and long
coversation amongst us, the Custome^ and Liberties of the University are
sufficiently known.

4. Though we do confess all privileges to be just which we claim, yet we
neither pretend to be our own Judges to determine, in point of Controversy,
which are just; neither do we pretend that the Major or any Citizen is bound
to swear, or if he do swear is bound to maintain all or any Privileges
barely claimed by the University as just, unless they be so in themselves, and
have been lawfully used by the University, And therefore since (as is clear by
the words of the Oath) we do not claim that the Major and Citizens ought to
swear to maintain any other then the lawful Privileges of the University,
And that it is acknowledged by the Petitioners, that the Major is bound by his
Oath (and known by common practice, that every Freeman is in like manner bound)
to maintain all the Liberties of the City, and that many of those do clash
and stand in opposition to diverse of those which the University so claim, It
must follow, that all such pretended liberties of the City as do clash with
those Liberties of the University which the Major and Citizens are required by
Oath to maintain, must be in themselves unlawful.

5. Lastly, we crave leave to observe a very preposterous course taken up by
the Citizens of latter times to overthrow the just and ancient Rights of the
University, by the new forged Engines of their City Oaths; for first they
frame an Oath contrary to our Privileges, and then complain of our
Privileges for being contrary to their Oath.

VII. To the Reasons of the seventh Grievance We Answer,
That for the great loss sustained by the University in Edward the thirds time
by the cruel and bloody outrage of the Townsmen against the persons and goods
of many thousands of innocent Scholars, the Major Bayliffes and Commonalty
then entered into two Bonds, one of five hundred pounds, and the other of a
hundred marks yearly to the University; the former was given up upon the
payment of fifty pounds only, (no way answerable to that loss) the second was
suspended by an Indenture of Composition so long as the Major and sixty two
such Townsmen as had been sworn that year to preserve the Privileges of the
University, should yearly upon Scholastica's day repair to St Mari^s Church,
and be there present at such Service as was suitable to those times, and should
then and there offer sixty three pence^ which was to be distributed two parts
to the poor, and a third to the Minister of the Parish. Upon the Reformation
in Queen Elizabeth's time, by consent of both Corporations, that Service was
changed into a Sermon or Communion, but the Offering was agreed to be
continued; which if the City will redeem the University expects First
recompense for the remainder of the Money abated upon that first agreement,
Secondly a reparation for the Scandal of this Article and Grievance, there
being none more abhorring of Superstition then they who are herein charged with
an endeavor of continuing it.

VIII. To the Reasons of the eight Grievance We Answer,
1. That the University, by ancient Custom confirmed by Act of Parliament,
have used to make By-lawes for the better ordering and government of the
University and Scholars therein; which By-lawes bind not only Scholars but
Tradesmen also in relation to the Ordering and Government of Scholars and not
otherwise^ And this power is adjudged in diverse Booke-cases to be binding unto
strangers in the like cases, albeit they never actually consented by themselves
or any immediate Representatives to the making of such By-Lawes.

2. That the Petitioners themselves in other cases, do both claim and
exercise a like power over the Estates and Persons of diverse Inhabitants in
Oxon not of their Corporation, nor any ways privy or consenting to their
Orders either by themselves or any Representatives.

3. As to the instance concerning Tailors, we answer as before, That we have
not made any By-lawes concerning them but in relation to the Government of
Scholars; and we conceive it in convenient that it should be in the power of
Tailors to inveagle young Gentlemen into new and chargeable fashions in
Apparel, contrary to the desires of their Parents, the direction of their
Tutors, and the public Discipline and Order of the University, merely to
enhanse their own prices in the making, and the Mercers gains in the selling,
of such dear but unnecessary trimmings as this instance relates unto: And we
say farther, That we know none more guilty of the Grievance here objected to
the University then the Tailors of Oxford themselves are.

IX. To the Reasons of the ninth Grievance, We Answer,
1. That the particulars here in Question are merely matter of Law, to which of
the two Corporations, Felons Goods and Deodanes do of right belong; The
University claims them as granted to us in express words by an Ancient
Charter (the only way by which they can be granted) and this Charter is
confirmed by Act of Parliament; and we deny that the City have any such
Charter precedent to ours that does grant them to the City, and upon this we
are ready to submit to a Trial at Law.

2. That if the Petitioners have no good Charter for them, then their having
the Custody and Charge of the Jail, and the power to try the Prisoners when
they purchase such a Commission, and their being liable to Escapes, will not
entitle them to the Goods of Felons (much less to Deodands) nothing being more
known and ordinary then for several Lords of Franchises to have the Goods of
such Felons as were their Tenants, who yet are not kept or tried at their
charges.

3. We say though the City have one Jail with the custody whereof they are
charged, yet there is another within the Liberties of the City and used by the
County, to which the University does commit most of their Prisoners, and may
do so by all.

4. Though they by charged with their Jail and Prisoners, yet is it very
little charges to them: such Prisoners as have where-withall being maintained
out of their own goods; and such as have not, by Alms, especially of the
University and Colleges; the Jailer in the mean time making a good advantage
of his place by Fees and otherwise.

5. What charges they voluntarily put themselves to in the trials of Felons,
is more then they need to do; for if the Felons be of the body of the
University, they may be tried before our Steward at our charges if we please.
And if they be not of our Body, they may and have been tried before the Judges
of Assise and Jail delivery for the County.

6. Why such Perquisites as are merely matter of profit should be thought by
the Citizens so improper for Scholars to enjoy, we do not understand; nor
do we know how they do or can engage Scholars in such trouble as is
surmised^ which the University do receive by the hands of their Bailiffs and
may (if they please) rent them out to any other person.

7. All the pretentions of the Petitioners in point of convenience do nothing
respect either Deodands the goods of Fugitives, Treasure Trove, and other
particulars which are in like manner challenged both by the University and
City upon the same titles as F^lons Goods are.

X. To the Reasons of the tenth Greivance,
1. We answer and deny that the City has any power by Charter or otherwise to
set up Taverns or to License the selling of Wine by retaile in Oxon; nor does
the Statute of 7o. Edw. 6ti cap. 5to. by letter or Equity enable them so to
do. But the University both at the time and long before the making of that
Statute had and used the privilege of Licensing and suppressing of Tavernes in
Oxon. And this our Privilege is saved unto us, by an express Proviso in that
Statute, by virtue whereof we do justify the inhibiting the City to erect
Tavernes, or License the sale of Wine by retaile in Oxon.

2. We further say, that in respect of that power which we claim and exercise
over Vintners, Brewers, Bakers, and other Victualers, and in the Market, and
for those small perquisites we receive thence, the Citizens are yearly
abated, and the University was anciently charged with a considerable part of
their Fee Farm rent^ whereas we do not receive any considerable benefit this
way proportionable to what the City has, or claims to have, as belonging to
their Fee Farm other ways.

XI. To the Reasons of the Eleaventh Greivance
We answer. 1. That it is one of the most ancient Liberties of the University
that the Privileged persons thereof may use any Trade and exercise any
Merchandise in Oxford, or the Suburbs thereof as freely as any Citizen; and
this has been confirmed anto us not only by Act of Parliament, and Judgment
in Parliament, but also by Indentures of Composition between the two Bodies,
whereby the Privileged persons have been ascertained that should exercise such
trade and Merchandise; who in that regard are to be talliable by scot and lot
and other charges with the Freemen of the City.

2. We do not otherwise then according to this privilege assume power to set
up Trades within the City; nor do we authorize Foreigners to exercise Trades
in Oxon, other then such as by the Law of the Land and Privilege of the
University are and ought to be allowed, however some of them have of late
years been unjustly molested by the Citizens for so doing.

3. We deny that the City has any Charter so confirmed as is pretended to
exclude Privileged privileged persons from exercising lawful Trades and
selling by retaile within the City, though they be not of their Guild; no such
Charter having hitherto been produced upon former Hearings when this point has
been in debate betwixt us.

4. Lastly we humbly conceive this Liberty cannot in equity and good
conscience be taken from Privileged persons, who are many of them Butlers and
Manciples, or other Officers and Servants to the University and the Colleges
and Halls therein, having Wives and Children to maintain, which they cannot
otherwise do then by Exercising lawful Trades; their small wages and
allowances which they receive by their respective places being scarce
sufficient to maintain them in meat and clothes and other necessaries, if
they were single persons and had no other charge.

To the Conclusion.
By what has been said on either party we suppose it does sufficiently appear
that some of the particulars in controversy betwixt us (which the University
claims as their just and ancient Privileges, and the City complain of as
Grievances) do concern merely matter of profit and interest^ to which i^ our
Title be good in Law, we hope they will not be thought inconvenient for us to
enjoy, though the City desire to strip us of them; And because a full hearing
and exact discussion of all their and our Charters and Pretensions would
occasion much trouble to this Honorable Committee, we therefore humbly pray
that we may be left to a trial at Law for all such things as are me^rely
matter of Title, and not be disturbed in our possession till we shall be
evicted by Law.

As for other Particulars which concern matter of Power and Jurisdiction we
likewise h^mbly desire, That our Right may be cleared and acknowledged first,
and then the matter of Convenience taken into consideration; whereby we hope it
will appear, that as those Privileges are just and legal, so they are no way
unfit, but absolutely necessary for us to enjoy; as tending to the advancement
of Piety, Civility, and Learning, no way derogatory to the Power of the
Civill^Magistra^e, not founded upon Supers^ition or Tyranny, nor inconsistent
with the just freedom and immunities of the Citizens. Wherein we d^^^^e it
may be considered, That many large immunities and Privileges have been granted
and are enjoyed by the City in respect of the University: That their
principal Benefactors have been members of the University: That they receive
an ample benefit by our continual commerce and trading with them, all or most
of our Revenue coming in from abroad, but expended amongst them: That their
Children receive a liberal education and preferment amongst us beyond the
proportion of other places: That, if it were not for the University, the City
of Oxford would be but of mean consideration: That there are many other
Cities, but only one more University in the Land, and those two as famous as
any in the World: That the Universities are the public Nurseries of Religion,
Piety, Learning, and Civility, and therefore have ever been the great Care of
Parliaments and the Glory of the Nation: That though some of the Powers claimed
and exercised by the University over the Citizens may seem Grievous to the
Citizens, yet are they Necessary for us, without which it would be impossible
to give a good account of that great trust which is committed to us for the
training up of youth, upon whose education not only their own welfare, but the
flourishing condition of the Commonwealth (next under God) does very much
depend.

We therefore humbly desire and pray, That the Golden reigns of that ancient
Discipline, by which both the University and City have for so many hundred of
years stood and flourished together, may not be let loose, to the certain
debauching of both Bodies, for the enriching and advantage of one; nor be
committed to other hands^ which would (we fear) engage the members of both
Bodies in continual quarrels, and open a gap to such sad consequents, as we
shall be sorry to see but unable to prevent^

FINIS.

